Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

The Authorized Biography of Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti-prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:    ★★★★★

Tags: The Authorized Biography of Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti-
prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī

The Authorized Biography of Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti-prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmīttt



* * *




* * *




Ācārya Kesarī Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
— His Life and Teachings



By Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Published by Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights
Reserved.

Content in this book is licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-No Derivative Works 3.0 Unported
License.

To view a copy of this license, visit
http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/
Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

For further information, free downloads of all titles,
world tour lectures, and more, please visit:
www.purebhakti.com, www.purebhakti.tv or
www.backtobhakti.com




Contents


                           1
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

Introduction to the English Edition

Introduction to the Hindi Edition



First Part

Bhāgavata Guru-paramparā

Appearance

Childhood

Student-life, protection of the zamindārī (land
holdings) and the beginning of spiritual life

Taking darśana of Śrīla Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja and receiving his blessings



Second Part

Leaving home

Receiving dīkṣa and guru-mantra

Ideal maṭha-life

By the order of Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī Vinoda-bihārī defends
the property of his previous āśrama, his family
zamindarī

Hospitality

Sevā of the bṛhad mṛdaṅga

Sevā of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura

Ideal guru-sevā

A special contribution to the establishment of Bāgbāzār
Gauḍīya Maṭha

A Vedāntic explanation of the word paramānanda

Śrī Vinodabihārī and the Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda Institute

The title of ‘Kṛtiratna’

Bhagavata-sevā through court-case proceedings

Ideal Vaiṣṇava life

First meeting with Pūjyapāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja

Prabhupāda’s opinion of an ideal guru-sevaka

The transfer of Śrīla Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja’s samādhi

Preaching of śuddha-bhakti


                             2
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

Interest in tattva philosophy

Śrī mahā-mantra and kīrtana

Decorated with the title ‘Upadeśaka’

His Highness Sir John Anderson, Governor of Bengal,
visits Śrīdhāma Māyāpura

The inauguration of Śrī Mandira and the Deities at
Yogapīṭha

Māyāvāda kī Jīvanī

Śrīla Prabhupāda enters aprakaṭa-līlā



Third Part

General superintendent of the Gauḍīya Maṭha and mission

Obtaining the mercy of Śrīla Vaṁśīdāsa Bābājī Mahārāja

Foundation of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti

Complete dependence on Bhagavān

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisarvasva Giri Mahārāja

Accepting sannyāsa

Preaching in various places of Bengal

Re-establishment of Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa parikramā

Manifestation of ācārya-līlā

Śrī Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s Snāna-yātrā and Ratha-yātrā in
Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha, Chuṅchuṛā

Preaching and Vraja-maṇḍala parikrama in 1944

84-kosa Kṣetra-maṇḍala parikramā

Parental affection for his disciples

Śrāddha ceremony according to vaiṣṇava rites in
Kalyāṇapura

Preaching in Bihār

Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā celebration

The departure of Śrīla Narahari Sevāvigraha Prabhu

The decision to establish a maṭha in Jagannātha Purī and
the publishing of a monthly transcendental magazine

Preaching in Medinīpura and Sundarvana

The self-manifestation of Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā on the
occasion of Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and Śrī Gaura-
Janmotsava

                              3
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017


Śrī Ayodhyādhāma, Naimiṣāraṇya parikramā and ūrjā vrata

Śrī Setubandha Rāmeśvara parikramā and ūrjā-vrata

Śrīla Prabhupāda’s viraha-utsava in Ānandapāḍā

Preaching sanātana-dharma in Vasīrahāṭa and the reply to
Śrī Chaṭṭopādhyāya Mahāśaya’s protest

Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā, Śrī Gaura-Janmotsava and
Śrī Vigraha’s inauguration of Their newly constructed
residence

Śrīpada Trigunātita Brahmacārī Prabhu’s veśāśraya

Preaching of śuddha-bhakti in different places

The collecting and publishing of Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā-paddhati

Awarding aṣṭottara-śata-nāmi tridaṇḍa-sannyāsa

Preaching śuddha-bhakti in various places of Assam

Darśana of Śrī Śrī Jagannāthajī’s Ratha-yātrā in Śrī
Jagannātha Purī

Śrī Janmāṣṭamī Vrata and Śrī Nandotsava in Chuṅchuṛā
Maṭha

Parikramā of Śrī Badrikāśrama and Kedārnātha

Śrī Puruṣottama vrata

Re-establishing the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhi

Parikramā of Śrī Avantikā (Ujjayinī) and Nāsik

Preaching sanātana-dharma in Śrī Rāmapura, Hoogly

Preaching śuddha-bhakti in various places in Caubīs
Parganā and Medinīpura

Lecture at the eminent Sanskrit conference in Chuṅchuṛā

Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā festival in Viṣṇupura Kamārpotā of
Medinīpura

Preaching sanātana-dharma at various places in Assam

Establishing Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā and
publishing Śrī Bhāgavat Patrikā

Installation of the Deities and Annakūṭa festival in Śrī
Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha, Mathurā

Preaching the words of Śrī Caitanya in various places of
Assam

Śrī Vyāsa-pūja festival in Begunābāḍī

A protest against the law controlling Hindu sādhus and
sannyāsīs


                           4
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Inauguration of Śrī Golokgaṅja Gauḍīya Maṭha (Assam)

Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā celebration in Śrī Golokgaṅja Gauḍīya
Maṭha

Śrī Ācārya Kesarī in the ‘All-Bengal Vaiṣṇava
Conference’

Observing upavāsa (fasting) on Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī

Vyāsa-pūjā at Śrī Gauravāṇī-Vinoda Āśrama in Khaḍagpura

Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti and Akṣaya Tṛtīyā

Preaching in Golokgaṅja, Assam

Establishing a primary school and the method of teaching
in Pichladā

The installation of the Deities in Śrī Golokgaṅja
Gauḍīya Maṭha

Vyāsa-pūjā and inauguration of Śrī Vigraha in the newly
constructed mandira in Śrī Gauravāṇī-Vinoda-Āśrama in
Khaḍagpura

Protest against Vaiṣṇava Darśana composed by Śrī Rādhā
Govindanātha

Śrīla Ācāryadeva in different places of Assam

Pichladā Gauḍīya Maṭha and installation of the Deities

A philosophical assembly in Keśavapura

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s disappearance festival in
Chuṅchuṛā

Śrī Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s ratha-yātrā

Celebration of Śrī Janmāṣṭamī and Śrī Nandotsava at Śrī
Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha, Mathurā

Observing kārtika-vrata in Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha

Śrīla Prabhupāda’s viraha-utsava in Chuṅchuṛā Maṭha

62 lectures of Śrī Ācārya Kesarī in 66 days

Śrīla Ācāryadeva in Murśidābāda region

Preaching of śuddha-bhakti in Sundarvana region of
Bengal

Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā celebration in Chuṅchuṛā Maṭha

An extensive religious conference in Valāgaḍa

Preaching in Assam, Sundaravana and other places

Ratha-yātrā and Jhūlana-yātrā celebrations in Śrī
Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha

Parikramā under Śrīla Gurudeva’s shelter of all the

                           5
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Indian tīrthas

Śrīla Ācāryadeva in Jaipur

Establishing a preaching centre of the Samiti in Orissa

Preaching of śuddha-bhakti in Jaipur town

The auspicious desire of Śrīla Ācāryadeva regarding Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī managed by Śrī Samiti

The opinion of the ṭola supervisor regarding Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī

Establishment of Śrī Gauḍīya Charity Clinic

Installation festival of Śrī Vigraha in the newly built
śrī mandira during Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and Śrī
Gaura-Janmotsava

Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and Śrī Gaura-Janmotsava

Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha

Argument in the discussion regarding ‘touched and
untouched’ (bhoga) in Śrī Jagannātha Mandira

Preaching in Siliguḍi and in various places in Bihār

Śrīla Ācāryadeva preaching śuddha-bhakti in Calcutta and
Medinīpura

Preaching śuddha-bhakti in Śrī Mathurā, Vṛndāvana,
Lukhnow and Kaśī

Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī in Śrī Caitanya Gauḍīya Maṭha,
Calcutta

Inauguration of Śrī Vāsudeva Gauḍīya Maṭha in Vāsugrāma,
Assam

Lecture in the law court library and district library of
Siūḍī

Entering aprakaṭa-līlā



Fourth Part

a) A hint of his internal identity (siddha-svarūpa)

b) The inferiority of direct perception

c) Discussion with the Communist Samyavādī, Jyoti Bābū.

d) Śrī Gurudeva and bhikṣā-dravya (donated commodities)

e) Śrīla Gurudeva and the svarūpa of the jīva

f) The charm and superiority of the bhāgavata-paramparā

g) The rasika and bhāvuka bhāgavata


                              6
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

h) Service to the sampradāya

i) The distinction between the smārta and the vaiṣṇava
conceptions

j) A subtle distinction between the ideas of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura

k) Śrīla Gurupādapadma’s supramundane character and guru
niṣṭhā



Fifth Part

The siddhānta proclaimed by Śrīla Gurudeva

a) Pramāṇa-tattva

b) The self-evident Veda is the crest-jewel of evidence

c) Only Kṛṣṇa is parama-tattva

d) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is sarva-śaktimān

e) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is akhihla-rasāmṛta-sindu (the ocean of all
ambrosial mellows)

f) Jīva is the vibhinnāṁśa-tattva of Śrī Hari

g) Deliberation on the jīva who is under the influence
of māyā in the conditioned stage on account of his
marginal nature

h) The jīva is free from māyā in the liberated state

i) The ideology of inconceivable difference and non-
difference

j) Deliberation on śuddha-bhakti

k) Love for Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate objective of the jīva



Sixth Part

Protecting the Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya Sampradāya

a) Refutation of kevlādvaita-vāda

b) The protection of his sapradāya

i) The Śrī Gauḍīya vaiṣṇava sampradāya is in the line of
Śrī Madhava

c) Refutation of the doctrines of the smārta opponents
of bhakti

d) Eligibility for sering Śrī Śālagrāma

e) Śrīla Gurupādpadma and śrī vigraha-tattva

f) Refutation of 'yata mata tata patha'

                           7
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


g) Refutation of the sahajiyā doctrine

h) Bheka-praṇālī and siddha-praṇālī

i) Bheka-dhāraṇa (the system of the bāvājī-veśa)

ii) Siddha-praṇālī



Seventh Part

Śrīla Gurudeva and vaiṣṇava literature

‘The life history of māyāvāda’ or ‘The victory of
vaiṣṇavism’

a) What is māyāvāda?

b) Is this world false?

c) The means of liberation

d) The history of māyāvāda

e) Advaita-vāda in Satya-yuga

f) The evolution of nirviśeṣa advaita-vāda in Treta-yuga

g) Advaita-vāda and its transformations in Dvarpa-yuga

h) Advaita-vāda or māyāvāda in Kali-yuga

i) Liberation is a false concept

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Vinodabihārī tattvāṣṭakam

Śrī Maṅgala-ārati

Śrīla Prabhupāda’s ārati

Śrī Tulasī parikramā and ārati

Śrī Caitanya Pañjikā (Śrī Māyāpura Pañjikā)

Statement about Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā

Literature on śuddha-bhakti compiled, published, written
and edited by Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja



Eighth Part

The disciples of Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja to whom he bestowed tridaṇḍa-
sannyāsa and bābājī-veṣa

Parikramās organised by Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī

Preaching centres of śuddha-bhakti established by Śrīla
Ācārya Kesarī

                             8
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja's
Upadeśāvalī




Introduction to the first English edition



This book is unique and very significant. It presents
for Western readers the life and teachings of a recent
ācārya in a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava (rather than a Western)
environment. Here we directly see the activities and
interactions of deeply realized vaiṣṇavas within an
authentic Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava culture. We are also
privileged to witness the guru-disciple relationship in
a line of empowered ācāryas, and to see a variety of
expressions of guru-niṣṭha.

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has presented
an overview of essential Gauḍīya siddhānta. He has shown
practically how an ācārya preaches and teaches, from the
‘jungle-cutting’ challenges to māyāvāda and the threats
of apasampradāyas and apasiddhānta, to the prayojana of
Vraja bhakti. This present volume therefore has a very
important role in the protection of our sampradāya, both
in dispelling illusion and in establishing the real
goal.

This is a more or less literal translation of Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s Hindi biography of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī. We request the
reader to be patient with our efforts. The English
language is not capable of conveying the deep
significance of one mahā-bhāgavata’s statements about
another mahā-bhāgavata. In addition, the patterns of
speech in Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s
eloquent, literary Hindi are quite different from those
in conventional written English, and it is impossible to
translate one into the other. Over and above that, our
incompetence and inexperience must necessarily give rise
to all sorts of imperfection, inaccuracy and
inconsistency.

We have tried not to burden the Western reader with many
unnecessary Sanskrit words and terms. However, we cannot
appreciate or understand the Gauḍīya presentation of
tattva and rasa without becoming familiar with many
Sanskrit words and terms for which there are no exact
English equaivalents. We have tried to introduce these
in a systematic and reader-friendly way, using
translations in the body of the text and in footnotes.

This book has been produced by the combined efforts of
many disciples and followers of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. The list of the names who helped is
far too long to publish.

Śrīla Mahārāja has glorified his Guru Mahārāja, saying
that he accepts the very insignificant service of his
servants as being very great. We pray that Śrīla

                           9
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Mahārāja will show us the same mercy, but in much
greater measure, because of our deep and real lack of
qualification. He has accepted so much trouble and
disturbance in trying to help his Western disciples and
followers, who find no other shelter at the present
time. We do not yet know what guru-sevā actually is, but
we helplessly pray to him that he will kindly continue
to help and inspire us to become free from our deep
attachment to māyā-vāsanā, and to dive deep into the
ocean of Śrī Rūpānuga Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava siddhānta and
sādhana-bhajana.

It is said that the grandfather is much more
affectionate than the father. We surrender at the lotus
feet of Ācārya Kesarī Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, whose preaching has helped to save us
from a dark destiny and to bring us towards the light.
We humbly pray that he will bless our very feeble
efforts to serve his beloved disciple Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, his dear Godbrother and
sannyāsa disciple Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja, and our whole Gauḍīya vaiṣṇava paramparā.

We pray at the lotus feet of Jagadguru Śrila
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarsvatī Prabhupāda for a particle of
service to his disciples and successor ācāryas, who are
kindly and boldly continuing his mission and protecting
his sampradāya.

On the occasion of the disappearance day of

Śrī Śrila Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja,

Śarada Purṇimā, Samvat 2055 (October 24th, 1999)

The publishers.



Introduction

(to the Hindi edition)

Today I am most pleased that we have published the
biography of Paramārādhya Nityalīlāpraviṣṭa Oṁ Viṣṇupāda
Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī,
combined with his tattva-siddhānta and teachings. The
absence of this important scripture had been causing
unease for a long time.

The preaching of harināma-saṅkīrtana is increasing
every-where today by the effort of the disciples and
grand-disciples of Jagadguru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. He is the mahā-puruṣa who
is mainly responsible for preaching Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s viśuddha bhakti and harināma-saṇkīrtana
throughout the entire world. This was predicted by the
Seventh Gosvāmī, Śrīla Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura. As Bhagīratha brought down Bhāgīrathī Gaṅgā, so
Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda re-established the flow of
Bhāgīrathībhakti. That is to say, Śrīla Ṭhākura again
established the long-lost desire of Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari, who is the most magnanimous form of
Vrajendranandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, resplendent with the bhāva

                           10
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

of Śrī Rādhā. My most worshipful Śrīla Gurupādapadma,
who is Śrīla Prabhupāda’s intimate follower, has
especially made the fulfillment of Śrīla Prabhu-pāda’s
innermost desire the sole duty of his life. In this
regard he had all kinds of help from many of his
Godbrothers, amongst whom Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja is prominent. Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī’s causeless compassion and inspiration
encouraged Śrīla Svāmī Mahārāja in his preaching, and I
(the author) am also making some slight endeavour to
fulfill his innermost desire. Any success I am achieving
in this endeavour is only due to his special mercy.

Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī is the
sannyāsa-guru of Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja,
who is the outstanding preacher of śuddha bhakti and
nāma-saṅkīrtana throughout the entire world in modern
times. I am an insignificant person in all respects, but
by his transcendental and causeless mercy I am also very
successfully preaching the teachings of Gaurasundara
everywhere in the world to fulfill his innermost desire.
Seeing this, all faithful people at home and abroad are
very eager to learn about this transcendental mahā-
puruṣa’s supramundane character, his life-story and the
speciality of his conceptions. These people have
repeatedly requested me to publish his biography. Many
of my respectable Godbrothers have also made the same
request. However, I had to postpone the project because
I was busy with other services, and also had some
problems with my health.

13 years ago, in 1985, my Godbrother Pūjyapāda
Parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja, who is the President and Ācārya of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti, and a follower of transcendental
knowledge, compiled Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī, which is an account his life, tattva-siddhānta
and teachings. This book is written in Bengali, and is
based on Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurupāda-padma’s
articles, essays, poems and writings which have been
published in the daily Nadiyā-prakāśa, and the weekly
and monthly Śrī Gauḍīya and Śrī Gauḍīya-patrikā. In this
book he has very briefly described Śrīla Gurupādapadma’s
supramundane life-story and the speciality of his
conceptions. This is extremely beneficial for those who
speak Bengali, but not for the vast numbers of faithful
people who speak Hindi. This lack has been causing
unease for a long time. I pray at the lotus feet of my
Godbrothers and especially at the lotus feet of Śrīla
Gurupāda-padma, who is the ocean of compassion, to
install power in my heart to be able to fulfill this
task of making his life-story available in Hindi.

I had the good opportunity to stay with Śrīla Gurupāda-
padma personally and perform all kinds of sevā from 1945
until he entered aprakaṭa-līlā in 1968. I stayed close
to him, hearing his lectures, his scriptural debates
with opposing parties, and his discussions and questions
and answers at different places. During this whole time
I took notes in my note book. Sometimes I could not stay
quiet near him, and with great humility I enquired from
about deep and confidential subjects, and I also had
discussions with him. I wrote all these subject matters
in my note book, and they also became inscribed in my

                           11
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

heart. These discussions and interactions with Śrīla
Gurudeva proved very useful for me.

While we were living in Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha in
Chuṅchuṛā, we repeatedly requested Śrīla Gurudeva’s
younger brother, Śrī Pulina Vihārī Guhaṭhākurtā, to
write a booklet about Śrīla Gurudeva’s life beginning
with his childhood until the time that he joined the
maṭha. This he did, and on the request of our
Godbrothers, Śrī Yāminīkānta Dāsa (M.E.B.T.), Jīraṭa
High School’s very able principal, wrote Śrīla
Gurudeva’s biography in Bengali poetry based on this
booklet. In addition to the topics covered in Pulina
Bihārī Guhaṭhākurtā’s booklet, Śrī Yāminīkānta Dāsa also
incorporated some details about Śrīla Gurudeva’s life in
Caitanya Maṭha and the later inauguration of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti. Pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārājajī took help
from this for his biography on Śrīla Gurudeva. The
primary materials for this present edition are Śrī
Yāminīkānta Dāsa’s book, together with my own note book
and memories. I personally heard from Śrīla Gurudeva’s
mouth the many incidents from his own life and from the
lives of Śrīla Prabhupāda, Śrīla Gaurakiśora Dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja and Śrī Vaṁśīdāsa Bābājī Mahārāja.

I have divided Śrīla Gurudeva’s biography into eight
parts. The faithful readers may carefully read the
different subject matters in this book, and judge the
results for themselves.

Śrīmān Haripriya Brahmacārī and Śrīmān Navīnkṛṣṇa
Brahmacārī ‘Vidyālaṅkara’ have worked very hard to
prepare the manuscript for this book. The service
endeavours of Śrīmatī Śānti Devī Dāsī and Śrīmān
Purandara Brahmacārī in composing and correcting this
book are notable. In addition to this, the efforts of
Śrī Omprakāśa Vrajavāsī (M.A., L.L.B.) ‘Sāhityaratna’
Śrīmān Śubhānanda Brahmacārī ‘Bhāgavata-bhūṣaṇa’ Śrīmān
Premānanda Brahmacārī ‘Sevāratna’ Śrīmān Parameśvarī
Brahmacārī, Śrīmān Puṇḍarīka Brahmacārī and others in
proof-reading and performing other tasks in connection
with this book are extremely praiseworthy. My humble
prayer at Śrīla Gurupādapadma’s lotus feet is that he
may shower abundant kindness upon them and may engage
them in his desired service.



On the occasion of the appearance day of

Śrī Śrila Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja,

Samvat 2055 (February 3, 1999)

An aspirant for a particle of mercy

of Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas,



Tridaṇḍi Bhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa

Life and Teachings of


                           12
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Śri Śrimad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī




First Part




Bhāgavata Guru-paramparā

In accordance with the needs of the times and for the
welfare of the world, the supremely merciful Śrī
Bhagavān and His dear associates descend, bringing the
gifts of their instructions. They drive far away all
godless persons, whose atheistic thoughts are averse to
dharma, and they establish sanātana dharma in the form
of śuddha-bhakti, which is the means for the eternal
welfare of the jīvas. In the present yuga with its
powerful influence of Kali, Śrī Gaurasundara, the
munificent incarnation of Kali-yuga, saves the fallen
souls by bestowing prema (love of God) which had not
been given previously. His followers, who are themselves
in the line of Śrī Svarūpa Damodara and Rūpa Gosvāmī,
have appeared on this earth as Śrī Gaurasundara’s
potencies in the form of ācāryas. They appear in order
to immerse the ignorant jīvas, who are intoxicated by
materialism, in śuddha prema-dharma (pure love of God).

By the desire of Śrī Bhagavān, these ācāryas use
infallible scriptural evidence and irrefutable logic to
demolish and utterly destroy the non-vedic doctrine of
Ācārya Śrī Śaṅkara. This philosophy, which is known as
brahma-vāda, describes Para-brahman1 as nirviśeṣa2 and
niḥśaktik3. It is a concealed form of bauddha-vāda
(Buddhism), advaita-vāda (monism) or māyāvāda
philosophy. Having accomplished this, the ācāryas have
established the authentic and transcendental bhagavat-
tattva, which establishes Parabrahman as saviśeṣa4,
sarvaśaktimān5, and rasa-svarūpa6. Among these followers
of Śrī Gaurasundara, the most worshipable Ācārya Kesarī
Pāṣaṇḍa-gajaika-siṁha Oṁ Viṣṇu-pāda Aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja is the
foremost.

Śacīnandana Gaurahari, who is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself,
possessing all the specialities of the previous
incarnations and radiant with the mood and luster of
Śrīmatī Rādhika, appeared 500 years ago together with
His own associates. In a very short time, through the
process of nāma-saṅkīrtana, Śrī Gaurahari spread bhakti-
rasa, the mellows of pure love of God, throughout the
entire world. In order to fulfill the Lord’s innermost
desire, His dear associate, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
established śuddha bhakti rasa in his Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi and other
literature. Recently, Jagad-vareṇya7 Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, the
crown jewel of the ācāryas in the line of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, powerfully inundated the whole world with the
wave of pure bhakti. Amongst the mahā-puruṣas who
sincerely and selflessly contributed to spread the

                           13
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

teachings of Śrīla Prabhupāda, Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī is the foremost.

Real knowledge of transcendental matters can never be
obtained through the material senses, for Bhagavān,
bhakti and the bhakta are all beyond the purview of
sense perception. In this world one may be able to
describe the character of literary, historic, political,
munificent or moral personalities, along with their
identity and circumstances of birth. However, it is not
possible to describe the character of a bhakta of Śrī
Bhagavān through the material senses, for bhaktas are
perceived purely by their own mercy. We can only
understand something about the extraordinary
transcendental character of the bhaktas of Bhagavān
when, by their grace, they display their character in
the pure heart of a person devoted to the service of
Bhagavān (sevonmukha).

yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tatha gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.23)

“All the hidden meanings of the śrutis are revealed only
in the heart of that great soul who has the highest
transcendental devotion towards Śrī Bhagavān and also
His representative, Śrī Gurudeva.”

Transcendental objects have no birth and death and no
father and mother; this is true of Vaiṣṇavas as well.
They are not subject to birth and death, nor do they
have worldly family, caste, or āśrama. In this material
world the Vaiṣṇavas’ material situations are only a
performance of prakaṭa (manifested) and aprakaṭa
(unmanifested) pastimes. By the desire of Śrī Bhagavān,
Vaiṣṇavas, or bhaktas appear in this world in some
family or lineage, but the śāstras forbid us to think
that they have a material origin.

arcye viṣṇau śīladhīr-guruṣu naramatir vaiṣṇave jāti-
buddhir-

viṣṇor-vā vaiṣṇavānāṁ kalimala-mathane pāda-tīrthe ‘mbu-
buddhiḥ

śrī-viṣṇor-nāmni mantre sakala-kaluṣahe śabda-sāmānya-
buddhir-

viṣṇau sarveśvareśe tad-itara-samadhīr-yasya vā nārakī
saḥ

(Padma Purāṇa)

“One becomes a resident of hell if he thinks the Deity
to be mere stone; Gurudeva to be an ordinary human
being; the Vaiṣṇavas to belong to some caste; the water
which has washed the lotus feet of Viṣṇu or the
Vaiṣṇavas to be ordinary water; the mantra and holy
names of Viṣṇu, which destroy all sins, to be ordinary
sounds; and the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu to be equal to the
demi-gods.”


                           14
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

Therefore, according to the transcendental scriptures,
those who attempt to determine a Vaiṣṇava’s birth,
family, caste, etc. in the material world are fools,
hypocrites and offenders to that Vaiṣṇava. Na karma-
bandhanaṁ janma vaiṣṇavānāṁ ca vidyate (Padma Purāṇa):
“Vaiṣṇavas are not under the jurisdiction of birth and
karma. Sātvata śāstras prohibit considerations of
material birth, family, caste and so forth for
Vaiṣṇavas.”

Transcendental knowledge which is received through the
bhāgavata guru-paramparā is the real identity of the
Vaiṣṇavas. Śruti8, smṛti9 and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the
spotless purāṇa, are the indisputable methods for
defining the Vaiṣṇava family lineage. Paramārādhyatama
Śrīla Gurupādapadma Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja has personally described his own
Vaiṣṇava family succession in Gauḍīya-gīti-guccha, which
he compiled and edited. He describes it as follows,
following in the footsteps of Śrī Kavi Karṇapūra, Śrī
Baladeva Vidyā-bhūṣaṇa and Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura.

śrī kṛṣṇa-brahma-devarṣi bādarāyaṇa-saṁjñakān

śrīmadhva-śrīpadmanābha-śrīmannṛhari-mādhavān

akṣobhya-jayatīrtha-śrījñānasindhu dayānidhīn

śrīvidyānidhi-rājendra-jayadharmān kramādvayam

puruṣottama-brahmaṇya-vyāsatīrthāśca saṁstumaḥ

tato lakṣmīpatiṁśrīmanmādhavendrañca bhaktitaḥ

tacchiṣyān śrīśvarādvaitanityānandān jagadgurūn

devamīśvaraśiṣyaṁ śrīcaitanyañca bhajāmahe

śrīkṛṣṇapremadānena yena nistāritaṁ jagat

mahāprabhu-svarūpa-śrīdāmodaraḥ priyaṁ karaḥ

rūpasanātanau dvau ca gosvāmi pravarau prabhu

śrījīvo raghunāthaśca rūpapriyo mahāmatiḥ

tatpriyaḥ kavirāja-śrīkṛṣṇadāsa-prabhurmataḥ

tasya priyottamaḥ śrīlaḥ sevāparo narottamaḥ

tadanugatabhaktaḥ śrīviśvanāthaḥ saduttamaḥ

tadāsaktaśca gauḍīyavedāntācāryabhūṣaṇam

vidyābhūṣaṇapādaśrībaladevasadā śrayaḥ

vaiṣṇavasārvabhaumaḥ śrījagannātha prabhustathā

śrīmāyāpuradhāmnastu nirdeṣṭā sajjanapriyaḥ

śuddhabhaktipracārasya mūlībhūta ihottamaḥ

śrībhakativinodo devastat priyatvena viśrutaḥ

                           15
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017


tadabhinnasuhṛdavaryo mahābhāgavatottamaḥ

śrīgaurakiśoraḥ sākṣād vairāgyaṁ vigrahāśritam

māyāvādi-kusiddhānta-dhvāntarāśi-nirāsakaḥ

viśuddhabhaktisiddhāntaiḥ svāntaḥ padmavikāśakaḥ

devo’sau paramo haṁso mattaḥ śrīgaurakīrttane

pracārācārakaryeṣu nirantaraṁ mahotsukaḥ

haripriyajanairgamya oṁ viṣṇupādapūrvakaḥ

śrīpādo bhaktisiddhānta sarasvatī mahodayaḥ

sarve te gauravaṁśyaśca paramahaṁsavigrahāḥ

vayañca praṇatā dāsāstaducchiṣṭa grahāgrahāḥ

Bhāgavata paramparā—

kṛṣṇa haite caturmukha, haya kṛṣṇa sevonmukha,

brahmā haite nāradera mati

nārada haite vyāsa, madhva kahe vyāsadāsa,

pūrṇaprajña padmanābha gati

nṛhari mādhava vaṁśe, akṣobhya-paramahaṁse,

śiṣya bali’ aṅgīkāra kare

akṣobyera śiṣya jaya- tīrtha nāme paricaya,

tāṅra dāsye jñānasindhu tare

tāhā haite dayānidhi, tāṅra dāsa vidyānidhi,

rājendra haila tāṅhā haite

tāṅhāra kiṅkara jaya- dharma nāme paricaya,

paramparā jāna bhāla mate

jayadharma-dāsye khyāti, śrīpuruṣottama yati,

tāhā ha’te brahmaṅyatīrtha sūri

vyāsatīrtha tāṅra dāsa, lakṣmīpati vyāsadāsa,

tāhā ha’te madhavendra purī

mādhavendra purīvara, śiṣyavara śrī īśvara,

nityānanda śrī advaita vibhu

īśvarapurīke dhanya, karilena śrīcaitanya,

jagadguru gauramahāprabhu

mahāprabhu śrīcaitanya, rādhā kṛṣṇa nahe anya,

                              16
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017


rūpānuga janera jīvana

viśvambhara priyaṅkara, śrī svarūpa dāmodara,

śrīgosvāmī rūpasanātana

rūpa priya mahājana, jīva raghunātha hana,

tāṅra priya kavi kṛṣṇadāsa

kṛṣṇadāsa priyavara, narottama sevāpara,

jāṅra pada viśvanātha āśa

viśvanātha bhaktasātha, baladeva jagannātha,

tāṅra priya śrībhakati vinoda

mahābhāgavatavara, śrīgaurakiśoravara,

hari bhajanete jāṅra moda

śrivārṣabhanavīvarā, sadā sevyasevāparā,

tāṅhāra dayitadāsa nāma

ei saba harijana, gaurāṅgera nijajana,

tāṅdera ucchiṣṭe mora kāma

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original jagadguru of the Śrī Brahma-
Mādhva-Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava guru-paramparā. It was He who
transmitted the science of śuddha-bhakti to the heart of
Caturmukha Śrī Brahmā. Śrī Brahmājī, in turn bestowed
this knowledge on Śrī Nārada, who gave it to Śrī
Vedavyāsa. Vedavyāsajī accordingly passed on the
knowledge in the line of paramparā to Śrī Madhvācārya.
It was then imparted from guru to disciple in this
order: Śrī Padmanābha, Śrī Nṛhari, Śrī Mādhava, Śrī
Akṣobhya, Śrī Jayatīrtha, Śrī Jñānasindhu, Śrī
Dayānidhi, Śrī Vidyānidhi, Śrī Rājendra, Śrī Jayadharma,
Śrī Puruṣottama Tīrtha, Śrī Brahmaṇya Tīrtha, Śrī Vyāsa
Tīrtha and Śrī Lakṣmīpati Tīrtha Ācārya, who was the
guru of Śrī Mādhavendra Purī. Śrī Mādhavendra Purī’s
disciples were Śrī Īśvara Purī, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu
and Śrī Advaita Ācārya. Jagadguru Śrī Gaurāṅga
Mahāprabhu made Śrī Īśvara Purī very fortunate by
accepting the shelter of his lotus feet. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s beloved Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara followed in
the line, and was succeeded by His dear Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrī
Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī accepted the shelter of Śrī
Rūpa’s lotus feet. The object of mercy of these two was
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī. Śrīla Kavirāja
Gosvāmī’s beloved disciple was Narottama, and Narottama
dāsa Ṭhākura’s disciple was Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura. Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s object of mercy was
Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, who was followed in line by
Sārvabhauma Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura accepted the shelter of Śrī
Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī’s lotus feet. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s dearmost disciple was Mahā-bhāgavata Śrī Gaura
Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī. Śrī Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī’s

                             17
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

object of love was Śrī Vārṣabhānavī Dayita Dāsa
Jagadguru Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākurajī, who flooded the entire universe with the flow
of prema-bhakti, as it was practised and taught by Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Amongst Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s beloved
disciples, the foremost is Jagadguru Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. These Vaiṣṇavas are
all Śrī Hari Gaura-sundara’s dear associates and it is
our desire to honour their remnants.” This bhāgavata
guru-paramparā, beginning from Jagatpitā Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
extending to Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Prabhupāda, is Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s only family
lineage.

Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva humbly revealed his own
identity during the Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā of 1948.
Grief-stricken and crying in great separation at the
samādhi of Jagadguru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda in Māyāpura, Śrīla Gurudeva said, “Svayaṁ
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is supremely merciful. Śrī
Gaurasundara, non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is also
supremely merciful. Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu is the Deity
of mercy personified. And Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
associates, the Six Gosvāmīs, are also causelessly
merciful. These things I have heard. Without doubt I was
present in one form or another during their time, but no
one bestowed mercy upon me, because they knew me to be
extremely heinous and sinful. But Śrīla Prabhupāda
pulled me up by my hair. I am such a fallen wretch, such
a great materialist with an uncontrolled nature, but he
has made me a dust particle at his lotus feet. He who,
due to his causeless mercy, is even more exalted then
the Lord Himself, has today made me his own.”

In this speech Paramārādhya Śrī Gurudeva described his
own family by referring to his relationship with
Jagatpitā Śrī Kṛṣṇa; Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari; the
akhaṇḍa guru-tattva Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, who is non-
different from Baladeva Prabhu; and Their dearmost
associate, Jagadguru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda. Nowhere did he mention his material family
lineage.



Appearance

Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja appeared on January 24th, 1898, Māghī Kṛṣṇa
Tṛtīyā. He took birth in a respected and wealthy
Vaiṣṇava family in the renowned village of Vānarīpāḍā
within the Variśāla district of East Bengal (presently
Baṅgladeśa). Śrī Gurudeva appeared in the form of a
remarkable divine child, illuminating all the directions
with light.

Many eminent Vaiṣṇava saints, prominent scientists,
government officials and scholars have appeared in Śrī
Gurudeva’s family, the celebrated Guhaṭhākurtā dynasty
of Eastern Bengal. His father’s name was Śrīyut
Śaratcandra Guhaṭhākurtā and his mother’s name was
Śrīyutā Bhuvanamohinī Devī. Śrīyut Śaratcandra
Guhaṭhākurtā was religious, truthful, munificent, humble
and, above all, a bhakta of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He had a gentle

                           18
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

disposition and never became angry. Although he held a
high government post in the law courts, throughout his
life he never accepted a bribe. His qualities charmed
everyone in the courts, from the highest to the lowest.

Śrī Guhaṭhākurtāji was an initiated disciple of the
well-known saint, Śrī Vijaya Kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī of the
Advaita parivāra. Śrī Vijaya Kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī had formerly
been a renowned siddha yogi, but after hearing about
śuddha-bhakti as preached and practised by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, he became attracted and was converted to
vaiṣṇavism. Thus Śrī Guhaṭhākurtā was also a staunch
follower of vaiṣṇavism. He regularly studied Śrīmad
Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta and other devotional literature, and he daily
practised the various aspects of bhakti such as harināma
kīrtana, japa, pūjā, and meditation. Municipal
magistrates, judges, eminent lawyers and respected and
learned persons in the community came to his home to
hear his commentaries on the Gītā and other religious
literature.

Śrī Gurudeva’s mother, Śrīyutā Bhuvanamohinī Devī,
belonged to a family of landholders. She was respected
as a wealthy and highly learned woman who was dedicated
to morality, and was very serious and thoughtful. She
was skilled in all kinds of work, and in her father-in-
law’s house she was responsible for housekeeping and
also for all the tasks related to the land. On the one
hand, Bhuvanamohinī Devī was a veritable deity of
motherly affection and compassion. On the other hand,
she was a strict matriarch for her sons and
subordinates. She would use her great expertise to
smooth out and solve all the extremely complicated
problems related to the land.

Everyone became happy when the transcendental infant
mahā-puruṣa (great soul) appeared in the home of this
virtuous and prosperous couple. The newly-born child had
effulgent eyes and a beautiful physique endowed with all
auspicious signs. This vision of his beauty enchanted
the elder men and women of the neighborhood, inspiring
them to praise and bless both the parents and the child.
Seeing the baby’s golden-toned limbs and splendorous,
fair, moon-like face, people started to call him ‘Jonā’
which is short for ‘jyotsnā’ (moonbeam).

The renowned astrologers of the area were amazed upon
seeing the auspicious astrological configurations,
zodiac sign, nakṣatra, tithi, particular day and numbers
in the chart, for the time of birth of this child. With
great attention they advised Śrī Śarat Bābū to take
special care of the child’s upbringing. They prophesised
to Śrī Gurudeva’s father, “Some day in the future this
boy will be famous as a transcendental and brilliant
mahā-puruṣa. According to his horoscope, this boy will
become bhakti-prajñāna, an eminent scholar of bhakti
scriptures. He will also be a brahmacārī-sannyāsī and an
ācārya. He will be brave, wealthy, renounced, a
conqueror of the senses, tolerant, steady-minded,
munificent and a topmost religious mahā-puruṣa. He will
have a tall, beautiful body possessing exquisite
qualities.”


                           19
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Years later, the predictions of those astrologers were
supported by Śrī Vaikuṇṭhanātha Mahodaya, the famous
astrologer of Narmā, a village within the Medinīpura
district. He was astonished to see Śrī Gurudeva’s
horoscope and with delight he wrote, “This person took
birth at the moment when all auspicious yogas were
present. Additionally, the inner state of Jupiter is
present in the middle part, which will begin to give
good results from the age of 4 years and 3 months. After
that, a rājayoga is indicated which denotes
inexhaustible, miraculous service to Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the controller of Vidhātā (Brahmā) who controls the
destiny of the jīvas. This signifies that the flow of
inconceivable śakti of śuddha Vaiṣṇavas will through him
bring inner realizations to the bewildered jīvas. This
day will come soon. Additional reflections are not
required. In a short time countless śuddha Vaiṣṇavas
will come together to praise the limitless glory of the
unparalleled Jagadguru Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda.”

The paṇḍits and astrologers named the baby
Śailendranātha Guhaṭhākurtā, but he was popularly known
as Jonā. The respected Śrī Śarat Bābū called his dear
son Janārdana. Later on the boy became known as
Vinodabihārī. Seeing the astonishing transcendental
beauty of her son and thinking it too good to be true,
Śrīyutā Bhuvanamohinī was constantly fearful that the
boy would not remain alive for long. She always prayed
intensely to the Lord to grant her son a long life.



Childhood

There is a proverb: “Coming events cast their shadows
before them,” and even from early childhood remarkable
events occurred in Śrī Gurudeva’s life. Once, his
affectionate mother was visiting Dūdhal, her father’s
village. She gave the baby a full-body oil massage, put
him to sleep in the morning sunshine in the courtyard,
and then busied herself nearby with household chores.
Suddenly, a big eagle caught the tiny baby in its talons
and flew into the sky. Seeing this, the mother screamed,
neighbors started shouting, and everyone began to chase
the eagle. Near the village was a pond in which large
pieces of betelnut bark were floating like little boats.
For some reason—who can tell why?—the eagle flew down
and slowly placed the child on the boat-like bark.
Seeing this, the people came running, lifted the boy
from the water, and put him in his mother’s lap. The
mother, who was almost unconscious with terror, again
returned to life. Everyone felt that this was not an
ordinary child and that Bhagavān had sent him for some
special purpose.

In the future this child would become the Founder Ācārya
of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti and would fulfil the
Lord’s and His devotees’ innermost desire. He would
become renowned all throughout the world as Śrī Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, a preacher of the pure
vaiṣṇava-dharma and śuddha-bhakti which was practised
and taught by Śrīman Mahāprabhu.

From his childhood the boy Vinodabihārī began to attract

                           20
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

everyone with his transcendental qualities. Women, men,
young and old all loved him dearly. Śrī Śaratcandra
Mahodaya took his son to temples, āśramas, religious
assemblies and wherever discourses on Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or the Gītā were being
held. Śrī Śarat Bābū was the object of love for all of
Vijaya Kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī’s disciples in the village of
Vānarīpāḍā. He had the qualities of a sādhu and was
extremely good-natured. Bhuvanamohinī Devī was an ideal
religious and learned woman. In this way, the boy’s
upbringing began in an atmosphere of loving support and
religious life.

By the time Vinodabihārī was eight years old, his family
had moved to the district of Noyākhali and his father
was employed in the Court of Lakṣmīpura. It was at this
time that Śrī Śarat Bābū left this world. He had made
suitable arrangements for his three sons’ education
while he was present, but after he passed away,
Bhuvanamohinī Devī had to face the entire responsibility
of the children’s upbringing and education.

While his father was alive, Vinodabihārī had studied at
the National School in Noyākhalī, which offered both
academic education and vocational training. In addition
to his textbook studies, Vinodabihārī took a great
interest in craftsmanship. The bench, stool and table he
made in school were used in his home for a long time.
Some time after his father’s demise, he returned to his
paternal village of Vānarīpāḍā and enrolled at the local
secondary school. During this period, the foundation
stone was laid for the development of his learning and
multifarious talents.

During those days, social service was acknowledged as an
essential element in the building of character in a
student’s life, its ultimate aim being human welfare
through ethical endeavours. Vinodabihārī was an
exceptionally brilliant student with an incomparable
ability for organization. Because of his character and
training, his managerial skills always reflected high
standards of religion, justice, and morality. At that
time the community had no organization to help the poor
and sick. Together with many enthusiastic youths,
Vinodabihārī established an organization which cared for
the poor, the sick , and even those with contagious
diseases, free of charge. Destitute people were offered
various forms of aid, including food and clothes. The
young men involved were generous and compassionate
towards the wretched and distressed, and their
organization quickly became quite famous.

One day Vinoda returned home from school late in the
evening. His anxious mother was standing at the entrance
of the house with a stick in her hand. Bhuvanamohinī
Devī, the forceful daughter of zamindars (land barons),
was strict with her children. As soon as Vinodabihārī
entered the house, she grabbed his hand and angrily
demanded, “Where have you been? Tell me! You are
becoming independent, wandering around here and there at
night in the company of street children. I don’t want
this. Where were you? Speak up!” The boy stood calm and
silent, completely without fear. When his mother again
demanded an answer, he replied in a serene voice, “Some

                           21
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

of us students have established a charitable
organization which serves the destitute, helpless and
sick people in various kinds of ways. I use the money
you give me for snacks to help these people. We also go
from house to house begging food and clothing for them.
Today a destitute, childless woman was suffering from
cholera. After collecting money we arranged for her to
get a good diet and medical treatment. I have been
engaged like this all day until this evening, and I
haven’t even bathed or eaten. Now this old woman is
somewhat healthy. That’s how I have been engaged until
just now.” As soon as his mother heard this, the stick
fell from her hands and her eyes filled with tears.
Unable to utter a word, she embraced her son with both
arms. She promised that in the future she would never
again try to discipline him. What mother would not feel
herself successful after giving birth to such a child?
In the future that same boy, seeing the jīvas caught in
the grip of māyā, would accept sannyāsa and make a
promise to free the jīvas from that bondage.



Student-life, protection of the zamindārī (land
holdings) and the beginning of spiritual life

Vinodabihārī’s mother made him entirely responsible for
dealing with their tenants while he was only in the
eighth grade. Expertise in legal matters and
administration is not usually apparent in one so young.
However, Vinodabihārī was honoured and renowned amongst
the tenants for his intelligence, generosity,
mercifulness and refined consideration of justice.

In high school Śrī Vinodabihārī studied statistics, and
then went on to study science in college. He was skilled
in sports, especially football, and was the captain of
the football team and other teams and clubs. While he
was in college, Vinodabihārī was rewarded every year for
outstanding social welfare work. The headmaster of the
college, observing the young man’s organizational
ability and outstanding character, as well as his record
of social welfare work, kept him in his own house and
personally tutored him with affection.

During this period, Vinodabihārī worked with other
students to establish the monthly magazine, ‘Prasūna’.
Everyone, students and teachers alike, praised his poems
and essays. Along with other intelligent and influential
fellow students, he also established a society for the
protection of religious values. It was then that Śrī
Vinodabihārī proclaimed that he would remain a
brahmacārī throughout his life.

At that time India was striving under Mahātmā Gāndhī’s
leadership for freedom from British rule. Not caring for
their own lives, people all over India were joining the
struggle for independence, either through non-violent
civil disobedience or through armed revolution. The
student community was also involved and Vinodabihārī,
who was still in high school, became a revolutionary
leader. Hiding in forests and jungles, he took part in
preparing a revolt against the British rule. The police
were unable to apprehend him.

                           22
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Even while this was going on, Vinodabihārī still passed
the entrance examinations for Uttarapāḍā College, near
Calcutta. After studying there for one year, he shifted
to Daulatapura College. There he astonished the
principal and professors of the college with his
explanations of the difficult and complicated
philosophical verses of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.
Sometimes he would argue with atheistic professors about
transcendental subject matters, rendering them
speechless with his irrefutable arguments and śāstric
conclusions.

Vinodabihārī was now developing a taste for hearing the
Gītā, Bhāgavatam and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and for
serving Śrī Bhagavān and the bhaktas. At the same time
he was becoming less involved in the engagements of
atheistic society, and was losing his attraction for the
atheistic university education and for receiving his
degree. He became extremely eager to understand the real
nature of the Supreme Truth. A verse from Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Ādi 9.41) gave a shocking jolt to his heart.

bhārata bhūmite haila manuṣya janma jāra

janma sārthaka kari kara para-upakāra

“One who has taken birth as a human being in the land of
Bhārata (India) should make his life successful and work
for the benefit of all other people.”

What is the nature of the ātmā (soul) and Paramātmā
(Supersoul)? How is it possible to have success in human
life? Now he began to conduct research into these
transcendental subject matters.

While Śrī Vinodabihārī was living in Vānarīpāḍā, he had
become close to his two learned and religious paternal
aunts, Śrīyutā Sarojavāsinī and Priyatamā devī. They
were respectively the first and second women disciples
of the world-renowned Jagadguru Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvati Gosvāmī Prabhu-pāda. Both women were well-
versed in bhakti-śāstra and were accomplished poets and
authors, and their personal devotional life and their
teachings on bhakti had a great influence on their
nephew.

In 1915, Vinodabihārī went with his two aunts for a
darśana of Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhupāda at the time of Śrī
Gaura Pūrṇimā. Vinodabihārī was drawn to Śrīla
Prabhupāda from the very first time he saw him and heard
his brilliant teachings. On that occasion Vinodabihārī
took a firm vow that he would follow in the footsteps of
this mahā-puruṣa for the rest of his life and would
spend all his time in his service. After taking part in
the nine-day Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and after
hearing hari-kathā on Śrī Gaura Purṇimā day, he offered
himself completely at the lotus feet of Śrīla
Prabhupāda. Prabhupāda, understanding him to be worthy,
accepted him and gave harināma to this dear disciple.
Now the life of Vinod became exclusively religious.

A few days after Śrī Gaura Purṇimā, when most of the
pilgrims had departed, Śrīla Prabhupāda gave brilliant

                           23
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

lectures to the remaining group of devotees. It was then
that he expressed his resolve to establish maṭhas on
each of the nine islands of Śrī Navadvīpa dhāma; to
establish other Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭhas and centres for
preaching śuddha-bhakti in the prominent cities of
Bengal and throughout India; and to establish a printing
press for the printing and distribution of
transcendental periodicals which would propagate the
siddhānta of śuddha-bhakti everywhere, in all the Indian
languages.

Hearing about this desire of her Gurudeva, Śrī Yutā
Sarojavāsinī devī became happy at heart, but she
inquired from Śrīla Prabhupāda, “Right now, here at
Yogapīṭha, there are not even enough brahmacārīs to play
the gongs and ring the bells at āratī. How will so many
maṭhas be taken care of?” At that time the boy
Vinodabihārī was sitting nearby, listening with full
concentration to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s hari-kathā. Śrīla
Prabhupāda pointed to him and said, “Vinodabihārī will
manage all the maṭhas and preachingcentres.” Later this
prediction came true. By Śrīla Prabhupāda’s blessings,
years later Vinodabihārī became the Maṭha Superintendent
of the main Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha and all the branch maṭhas,
and managed them all with great expertise. Furthermore,
after Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disappearance from this world,
Vinodabihārī established the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti
with Gauḍīya Maṭhas and preaching centres throughout
India and around the world and thus preached śuddha-
bhakti everywhere.



Taking darśana of Śrīla Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja and receiving his blessings

In those days, Śrīla Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja
was renowned throughout Vraja-maṇḍala, Gauḍa-maṇḍala and
Kṣetra-maṇḍala as a siddha bābājī. He had appeared in a
village in East Bengal, but early in his childhood he
left his family and went to Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana to
perform bhagavad-bhajana. There at Sūrya Kuṇḍa, where
his sādhana-bhajana was strengthened by his strict
renunciation, he would hear hari-kathā in the
association of Vaiṣṇava Sārvabhauma Śrī Jagannātha dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja, a disciple of Śrī Madhusūdana dāsa
Bābājī. Śrīla Gaura Kiśora’s renunciation was so severe
that from time to time when he felt hungry, he would eat
mud from Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa or the Yamunā River. As a
result, he became partially blind. Like the Six
Gosvāmīs, he would reside in one place for only a few
days—sometimes in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, in Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana, in
Varsāna, in Nandagrāma, in Bhāṇḍīrvana, or any of the
other places associated with Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. He
lamented intensely in feelings of great separation from
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and would sing in a loud voice,

koṭhāya go premamayī rādhe! rādhe!

rādhe rādhe go, jaya rādhe rādhe

dekhā diye prāṇa rākha rādhe rādhe

tomār kāṅgāl tomāy ḍāke rādhe rādhe

                           24
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


rādhe vṛndāvana-vilāsinī rādhe rādhe

rādhe kānumanomohinī rādhe rādhe

rādhe aṣṭasakhīra śiromaṇi rādhe rādhe

rādhe vṛṣabhānunandinī rādhe rādhe

(gosāī) niyama kare sadāi ḍāke rādhe rādhe

(gosāī) ekbār ḍāke keśīghāṭe

ābār ḍāke vaṁśīvaṭe rādhe rādhe

(gosāī) ekbār ḍāke nidhuvane

ābār ḍāke kuñjavane rādhe rādhe

(gosāī) ekbār ḍāke rādhā kuṇḍe

ābār ḍāke śyāmakuṇḍe rādhe rādhe

(gosāī) ekbār ḍāke kusumvane

ābār ḍāke govardhane rādhe rādhe

(gosāī) ekbār ḍāke tālavane

ābār ḍāke tamāla vane rādhe rādhe

(gosāī) malin basan diye gāya

vrajer dhūlāya gaḍāgaḍī jāya rādhe rādhe

(gosāī) mukhe rādhā rādhā bale

bhāse nayanera jale rādhe rādhe

(gosāī) vṛndāvane kuli kuli keṅde beḍāya

rādhā bali rādhe rādhe

(gosāī) chapānna daṇḍa rātri dine

jāne nā rādhā-govinda bine rādhe rādhe

tāra para cāri daṇḍa suti thāke

svapane rādhā-govinda dekhe rādhe rādhe

When he could no longer tolerate the separation from his
worshipful Deity, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, he traveled from
Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana to Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa.

According to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, it is possible to
commit aparādha (offences) against Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s name and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dhāma (abode). Without
being free from aparādha, one cannot have the genuine
mercy of these three and obtain Vraja prema, pure love
of God in the mood of the inhabitants of Vraja. However,
Śrī Gaura, Śrī Gaura’s name and Śrī Gauranga’s dhāma are
causelessly merciful, and do not accept any offence. If
one so desires, one can easily obtain Vraja prema by

                              25
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

taking the names of Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda in Gaura Dhāma,

kṛṣṇa nāma kare aparādhera vicāra

nāma laile aparādhīra na haya vikāra

bahu janma kare yadi śravaṇa kīrtana

tabhu ta na pāya kṛṣṇa pade prema dhana

caitanya-nityānande nāī ei saba vicāra

nāma laile prema deya bahe aśrudhāra

(Caitanya-caritāmṛta Adi 8.24, 16, 31)

For this very reason, Śrī Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja and other eminent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava mahājanas
came from Vṛndāvana and performed bhajana in Śrī Gauḍa-
bhūmi. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura confirms this
siddhānta,

gauḍa-maṇḍala bhūmi yevā jāne cintāmaṇi

tāṅra hoya braja bhūmevāsa

gaura prema rasārṇave se taraṅge yevā ḍūbe

se jaya vrajendrasuta pāsa

“Those people who recognize the land of Śrī Gauḍa-
maṇḍala as cintāmaṇi, or spiritual touchstone, and who
reside there with great faith, quickly obtain residence
in Vraja-bhūmi. Those who are immersed in the great
ocean of love of Sacīnandana Śrī Gaurahari obtain the
loving service of the lotus feet of akhila-rasāmṛta
mūrti10 Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. This is the supreme
mystery.”

Considering these conclusions, Śrī Gaura Kiśora Dāsa
Bābāji Mahārāja began to perform bhajana in the town of
Kuliyā (presently known as Navadvīpa town). Bābāji
Mahārāja’s renunciation was of an extremely high
quality, similar to that of Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa
Gosvāmī. Eminent mahātmās and bhajanānandis understood
that their lives became successful simply by having his
darśana. The most exalted mahātmā, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda, chose this mahā-puruṣa as his
guru. Like Śrila Lokanātha Gosvāmī, Bābājī Mahārāja was
fully immersed in the bliss of internal worship of the
Lord. By this absorption, he was able to distance
himself from worldly entanglements, non-devotional
materialists and religious hypocrites. Like the Six
Gosvāmīs, he spent twenty-four hours a day doing bhajana
and, like them, he effortlessly maintained his life by
madhukarī bhikṣā, begging from householders to obtain
just enough to survive.

It must be remembered that at that time Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura, the appearance place of Śrī Gaura, had not yet
been completely developed. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
was performing bhajana in a mood of deep separation on
the bank of the Gaṅgā in Śrī Godrumadvīpa, not far from
Śrīdhāma Māyāpura. Śrī Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābāji Mahārāja

                             26
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

often crossed the Gaṅgā from the town of Kuliyā to
obtain the association of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura,
who was known as the Seventh Gosvāmī. In Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s bhajana kutīra they would discuss the
magnanimous and sweet pastimes of Śrī Gaura-sundara and
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

On one occasion, Śrīla Gaura Kiśora, weary of
materialistic company, locked himself in the latrine of
a public dharma-śāla (rest-house) in Kuliyā and began to
perform bhajana. He found this stinking place conducive
for bhajana, as he preferred the stench of the toilet to
the association of materialists. People wondered where
the Bābājī had gone. After two or three days, the
sweeper-woman arrived. As she was cleaning the stool
underneath the latrine, she heard a tender voice filled
with intense longing, chanting, “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma,
Hare Hare.” Glancing upwards, she was astonished to see
Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja fully absorbed in chanting
harināma. He was not aware of his body or of the bad
smell. The sweeper-woman immediately told the chairman
of the municipality, and the news soon reached the ears
of the district authorities, the police superintendent
and others. Everyone came to Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja and
repeatedly requested him to come out of the latrine.
“Bābājī Mahārāja!” they pleaded, “we have arranged a
bhajana kuṭīra for you on the banks of Bhāgavatī Gaṅgā.
Please go there and perform bhajana.” But Bābājī
Mahārāja did not pay any attention to their talk and
went on with his ceaseless chanting of harināma. To the
incessant requests of the high officials, Śrīla Bābājī
Mahārāja only replied in a feeble voice, “I am
unhealthy. I am not able to open the door.” The defeated
officials finally left.

A short time later, on the instructions of Śrīla
Prabhupāda, Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī came from
Māyāpura with Sarojinī devī, Priyatamā devī and Śrī
Gauragovinda Vidyābhūṣaṇa (later, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktigabhasti Nemi Mahārāja) to have the darśana
of Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja. However, despite their
repeated requests, Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja still gave the
same excuse and would not open the door. Śrī
Gauragovinda Prabhu then said in a very humble voice,
“Oh, Bābājī Mahārāja! Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura mercifully
accepted us as his disciples. We have come here on his
instruction in the great hope of having your darśana. We
will be very disheartened if we cannot obtain your
darśana.” When he heard this, Śrīla Gaura Kiśora became
happy and replied with extreme affection, “You are the
object of Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s affection. Come in.” Then
he quickly opened the door.

Śrīla Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja now gave these
devotees his darśana. They saw that he was completely
absorbed in chanting his harināma on a harināma-mālā
made of a piece of cloth with knots. Śrīla Bābājī
Mahārāja observed Śrī Vinoda-bihārī Brahmacārī’s
extremely beautiful youthful form, his sincere desire to
perform bhajana, his yukta-vairāgya (appropriate
renunciation), and above all his guru-niṣṭhā, firm faith
in his guru. Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja blessed him, saying,
“I have taken all the disasters and obstacles of your

                           27
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

life. You should be quite fearless in performing bhajana
and spreading the words of Śrīman Mahāprabhu all over
the world.” Hearing this blessing, Śrī Vinodabihārī’s
eyes overflowed with tears. Falling at Bābājī Mahārāja’s
lotus feet, he took his foot dust on his head. After
hearing hari-kathā for some time and worshipping Bābājī
Mahārāja’s lotus feet, they departed for Śrī Māyāpura.

Years later, when Śrīla Gurupādapadma told us about the
blessing of Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja, he became restless
and started to cry, saying, “By the causeless mercy of
Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja, we are today fearlessly preaching
śuddha-bhakti in the world. In the course of our
preaching, we have met with such hardship and so many
obstacles and even danger to our life. But by the mercy
of Śrīla Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, our strength
has never became diminished, and the clouds of hardship
have been quickly dispelled.”

Thus ends the First Part of The Life and Teachings of
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī by Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.




Second Part




Leaving home

After Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī received harināma
initiation from Śrīla Prabhupāda, he returned home and
began his studies at Daulatpura College. From time to
time he went to the lotus feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda at
Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, and there he listened to Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s powerful hari-kathā with faith and full
concentration.

In those days, the college syllabus included a study of
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. The teacher would try to
explain the Bengali and Sanskrit verses of Caitanya-
caritāmṛta in class, but he could not really fathom the
complex text with its difficult philosophical points and
elevated devotional sentiments. Śrī Vinodabihārī,
however, understood the profound and complicated ideas
of Caitanya-caritāmṛta and he readily explained them so
that others could also understand. His erudition
fascinated the other students as well as their teacher.

One day during the study of Caitanya-caritāmṛta, they
were discussing Śrī Sanātana-śikṣā, the teachings of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu to Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, and read
the verse:

kṛṣṇera svarūpa-vicāra śuna sanātana

advayajñāna-tattva vraje vrajendranandana

(Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 20.152)


                           28
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

“O Sanātana, please hear about the eternal form of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. He is the Absolute Truth, devoid of duality, and
He is present in Vṛndāvana as the son of Nanda
Mahāraja.”

The teacher began to explain this śloka according to the
doctrine of kevalādvaita-vāda. This impersonal
philosophy, which is quite opposed to the vaiṣṇava
philosophy, states that the parama-tattva, or the
Supreme Truth, is brahma-tattva, or the impersonal,
undifferentiated aspect of the Absolute. This brahma-
tattva is jñāna-svarūpa, or the form or knowledge. It is
also nirviśeṣa, without variety; nirañjana, beyond the
spell of māyā, or illusion; niḥśaktik, without power;
nirguṇa, without attributes or qualities; and nirākāra,
without form. Apart from this there is no other reality.

According to the philosophy of kevalādvaita-vāda, it is
due to indescribable māyā that this parama-tattva is
seen in the form of Īśvara or Bhagavān, the Supreme Lord
who is endowed with personal attributes. The jīva
(living being) is also Brahman but understands itself to
be a jīva because it is covered by ignorance. The jīva
can only unite with Brahman (or in other words, become
Brahman), when it removes itself from ignorance and
illusion. Yogīs perceive this advaya-jñāna nirviśeṣa-
vastu (the supreme non-dual, non-variegated substance)
as Īśvara or Paramātmā, the Supersoul. Bhakti-yogīs see
it as Bhagavān, who is endowed with all attributes.

When Śrī Vinodabihārī heard his teacher’s
interpretation, he firmly contradicted it with a sharp
rebuttal. He explained that this understanding is
completely imaginary, and that it also contradicts the
teachings of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
and Vedānta-sūtra. He then gave a beautiful explanation
of the śloka in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta with evidence
from the Vedas, the Upaniṣads and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Śrī Vinodabihārī explained that Śrī Caturmukha Brahmā,
Nārada, Śāṇḍilya, Parāśara, Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana Vedavyāsa
and other great sages are tattva-darśī; they have seen
the Absolute Truth. They have explained that there is
only one tattva, or truth, and that is advaya-jñāna
para-tattva, the non-dual Absolute Truth. Although it is
non-dual, it is realized in three apparently different
aspects. Dry jñānis (empiric philosophers) use the
process of nirviśeṣa-jñāna, or impersonal knowledge, to
understand the Absolute Truth as nirviśeṣa Brahman, the
impersonal, featureless Absolute. Yogīs realize it as
Paramātmā (the Supersoul within the heart), and śuddha-
bhaktas (pure devotees) realize that same para-tattva as
Vrajendra-nandana Bhagavān by their practice of bhakti-
yoga. So the non-dual Absolute is realised first as
Brahman, secondly as Paramātmā and thirdly as Bhagavān.

He continued that the meaning of advaya-jñāna, or non-
dual reality, is that this Absolute Truth possess
acintya-śakti, an inconceivable potency by which the
impossible is made possible (aghaṭana-ghaṭana paṭīyasī).
The parā-śakti (supreme, trans-cendental potency) of the
parama-tattva is manifest in three aspects. The first of
these is cit-śakti (the spiritual potency) which, by the
desire of para-tattva Śrī Kṛṣṇa, manifests Vaikuṇṭha,

                           29
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Goloka Vṛndāvana, the other dhāmas and everything within
them. The second is jīva-śakti (marginal potency) which
manifests innumerable jīvas. The third aspect, māyā
śakti (material, external potency), manifests millions
upon millions of material universes. The jīva, being
manifested by jīva śakti, has minute consciousness and
can be covered by māyā. There is an eternal relationship
between on the one hand śaktimān (the possessor of the
potencies) and on the other hand śakti (the potency) and
the transformations of the potency, namely the jīvas and
the material world. This relationship is acintya-
bhedābheda. That is to say, śakti, the jīvas and matter
are simultaneously and inconceivably one with and
different from the Supreme Absolute Truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Without Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the Absolute
Truth and the source of all energies, neither the jīva
nor the creation can exist. Thus, Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is called advaya-jñāna para-tattva, the Absolute
Truth without duality.

This Absolute Truth is not nirākara1, niḥśaktik2,
nirguṇa3, and so on. Bhaktas anoint their eyes with the
salve of prema (pure love) and take darśana of advaya-
jñāna para-tattva in the form of Vrajendra-nandana. The
nirviśeṣa, nirguṇa, nirākara Brahman which the
impersonal jñānis perceive is only the bodily luster of
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. According to Bhagavad-gītā,
the impersonal, undifferentiated aspect of the Absolute
(which is the brahma-tattva of the impersonalists) is
not para-tattva because it is neither supreme nor
independent. It is dependent on Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham amṛtasyāvyayasya ca

śāśvatasya ca dharmasya sukhasyaikāntiksya ca

(Bhagavad-gītā 14.27)

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa says: “In My form as nirguṇa-
saviśeṣa-tattva, I have no material characteristics, but
I am full of spiritual attributes, and I am indeed the
shelter of Brahman, which is the ultimate goal of the
jñānis. My svarūpa in the form of nirguṇa-saviśeṣa-
tattva is the support of immortality, imperishability,
eternality, prema (that love of God which is the nitya-
dharma, or eternal religion of the jīvas) and vraja-
rasa, the form of complete happiness.”

Śrī Vinodabihārī elaborated with further scriptural
references:

yasya prabhā prabhavato jagadaṇḍa koṭi

koṭīṣv aśeṣa vasudhādi vibhūti bhinnam

tad brahma niśkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam adi puruṣaṁ tamahaṁ bhajāmi

(Brahma-saṁhitā 5.40)

“I worship the original person, Govinda, whose
effulgence is the source of the nirviśeṣa Brahman which

                           30
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

is mentioned in the Upaniṣads, which is differentiated
from the infinity of glories of the mundane universe and
which appears as the indivisible, infinite, limitless
truth. Millions and millions of universes emanate from
this Brahman effulgence.”

It is important to note that the word Brahman can only
be modified with adjectives such as parama when Brahman
refers to Svayaṁ Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana (as in
scriptural references to Paramabrahman). Therefore,
Paramabrahman Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is superior to
Brahman. Accordingly, the advaya-jñāna para-tattva4 is
Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is sarva-śaktimān5 and akhila-rasāmṛta-
mūrti6 together with all His associates, jīvas and
jagat.

The śakti of Bhagavān is described in the Vedas and its
supplementary literature:

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate svābhāvikī jñāna bala
kriyā ca

(Śvetāṣvatara Upaniṣad 6.8)

“The parā-śakti is perceivable in different forms.”

viṣṇu śaktiḥ parā proktā kṣetrajñākhyā tathā parā

avidyā karmasaṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate

(Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.7.61)

“Viṣṇu śakti is of three kinds—parā (transcendental),
kṣetrajñā (the living entity) and avidyā (nescience).
Viṣṇu's parā śakti is called cit-śakti, kṣetrajñā is
called jīva-śakti, and avidyā is māyā-śakti.”

It is also confirmed in Vedānta Sūtra, śakti-śaktimator-
abhedaḥ: “There is no difference between the potency
(śakti) and the possessor of the potency (śaktimān).”

In this way, Śrī Vinodabihārī established before his
class at Daulatpura that Vrajendra-nandana Śyamasundara
is both the limit and the direct manifest form of the
advaya-jñāna para-tattva.

On another occasion, the teacher chose the Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta verse Madhya-līlā 20.108 for the class
discussion.

jīvera svarūpa haya kṛṣṇera nitya dāsa

kṛṣṇera ‘taṭasthā śakti’ bhedābheda prakāśa

“The living entity’s constitutional position is as
eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. As a manifestation of Kṛṣṇa’s
marginal energy he is simultaneously one with Kṛṣṇa and
different from Him.”

This time too, Śrī Vinodabihārī pointed out that the
teacher’s commentary was contrary to the scriptures. The
teacher said that the jīva is actually Brahman; Brahman
only appears to be the jīva, as a rope falsely appears
to be a snake or as an oyster shell appears like ivory.

                              31
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

He did not accept that the jīvas are the śakti of
Brahman or that the jīvas and the material world are
transformation of śakti.

Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī used simple examples to
explain that it is the nature of the jīva to be an
eternal servant of Bhagavān, the Supreme Lord. According
to Bhagavad-gītā (15.7), mamaivāṁśo jīvaloke jīvabhūtaḥ
sanātana: “The jīva is a transformation of the marginal
potency (taṭasthā-śakti) of sarva-śaktimān Parabrahman,
the Supreme Lord Who possess all potencies.”

Although one cannot find perfect examples in this world
to describe transcendental matters, analogies are often
useful. Śrī Vinodabihārī used two analogies to explain
the nature of the jīva: the relation of the sun’s rays
to the sun and the connection of the sparks to the
blazing fire. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is like the sun, and the
shimmering particles of light in the rays of the sun can
be compared to the infinitesimal jīvas. Just as Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is complete cit-tattva, full in all knowledge, so
the jīvas are minute cit-tattva. However, although
Bhagavān is the master of māyā and other śaktis, the
jīvas are under the control of māyā. This is because
Bhagavān is the basis of all transcendental qualities;
He is the actual doer, the enjoyer, and the ego, and He
possesses these qualities in full, whereas the jīva only
possesses them to a minute degree. The natural
relationship of the jīva—indeed his very constitution—is
to be connected with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, just as the rays of the
sun are connected to the sun. However, the pure nature
of the jīva is covered by a subtle and gross material
body made of māyā, because he has forgotten Bhagavān.
Therefore the jīva aspires to be the doer and enjoyer
because, while recognising his qualities, he forgets his
minuteness. It is only by the causeless mercy of a pure
transcendental guru or of Bhagavān Himself that the jīva
can adopt bhakti-yoga and re-establish his svarūpa, or
true spiritual form.

The other example is that of a blazing fire and its
sparks. Innumerable, minute conscious jīvas manifest
from the taṭasthā śakti (the marginal potency) like
uncountable sparks from a blazing fire. Because the
jīvas are minute by nature, their consciousness can be
covered by māyā-śakti. Jīva-śakti is also known as
taṭasthā-śakti. Because of their marginal nature, the
jīvas are qualified to go either to the spiritual world
(Vaikuṇṭha), or to the material world. When they gain
the strength of cit-śakti (the spiritual potency), they
can serve Bhagavān in Vaikuṇṭha. Conversely, when they
are opposed to Bhagavān, they wander around the illusory
material world. This is the profound purport of this
verse.

Hearing Śrī Vinodabihārī’s explanation which was based
on bhakti everyone in his class was struck with wonder
that their classmate could understand tattva so deeply.

One day Śrī Vinodabihārī became absorbed in
contemplating the verses of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. He
reflected that this human form of life is extremely
rare. Only human beings can obtain bhagavat-tattva,
knowledge of the Absolute Truth; it is not possible for

                           32
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

other forms of life, such as birdsÇ animals or trees. “I
am so fortunate that I have attained this human body by
the mercy of the Lord, but I do not know when death will
suddenly come. Therefore I must depend on bhakti-yoga to
make my life successful before death comes. That means
that there is no need for an atheistic education. I have
received exclusive shelter at the lotus feet of the
supremely merciful and omniscient Śrī Gurudeva
Prabhupāda, and my supreme duty is to perform hari-
bhajana.” Thinking like this, Śrī Vinodabihārī
Brahmacārī left college without taking his final exam.
In 1919, he came to the lotus feet of Śrī Guru, leaving
the ties of love of his affectionate mother and
completely giving up everything related to land and
home.

His devoted mother wept and said, “I knew that we would
not be able to keep Jonā at home. My heart trembled with
fear at the astounding incidents in his life. He was no
ordinary child. Seeing Jonā’s astounding courage and his
dedication to truth and altruism, it was easy to imagine
his future. Of all my sons, I loved him most. No one is
able to understand how much I loved him. When I watched
his transcendental behavior and character, and saw his
friends and companions, I was always afraid he would
become a sannyāsī and renounce the material world.
Whatever he did was good, but I cannot stay alive
without seeing him.” She was beside herself with grief
as she said this.



Receiving dīkṣa and guru-mantra

When Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī came to the lotus feet
of Śrī Gurudeva in Śridhāma Māyāpura, Śrīla Prabhupāda
was very pleased to see that he had given up all the
illusory affection for his mother and family, and that
he was firmly resolved to perform hari-bhajana. At that
time Śrī Gaura-Janmotsava was approaching and the
arrangements for the huge Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā
were under way. Śrīla Prabhupāda appointed his dear
servant to be responsible for various tasks in the
preparation of the Śrīdhāma parikramā.

The word Navadvīpa means ‘nine islands.’ The flow of the
Gaṅgā, also known as the Bhagavatī Bhāgīrathī, has
divided Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s dhāma into an irregular
pattern. The Bhāgirāthī proceeds in a zigzag course
because she cannot bear to leave the dhāma, and that is
why the dhāma is divided into nine parts. Antardvīpa
Māyāpura is situated in the middle of these islands on
the east bank of the patita-pāvanī Gaṅgā, who saves the
fallen souls. Here Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared
in the form of Śacīnandana Gaurahari, accepting the
inner moods and bodily lustre of Śrīmatī Radhika. Here
Śri Gaurahari performed His transcendental childhood and
kiśora pastimes until He was twenty-four. With Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura in the middle, the other eight islands are as
follows: on the east side of the Gaṅgā are Sīmantadvīpa,
Godrumadvīpa, and Madhyadvīpa. On the western side are
Koladvīpa, Ṛtudvīpa, Jahnudvīpa, Modadruma-dvīpa and
Rudradvīpa. Due to the Gaṅgā’s meandering flow, part of
Śrī Rudradvīpa is presently situated on her west bank

                           33
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

and part on her east bank.

After Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s disappearance, Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu, Who is non-different from Śrī
Baladeva, took Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī on parikramā of these
nine islands. Some time later Īśāna Ṭhākura took
Śrīnivāsa Ācārya on Śrīdhāma parikramā. Since then,
Gaurasundara’s dear devotees have been performing dhāma-
parikramā with great faith. In Śrī Bhakti-ratnākara, Śrī
Narahari Sarkāra Ṭhākura has described the parikramā in
detail. However, for various reasons, the practice of
Gaura Dhāma parikramā was discontinued in the course of
time. By the power of māyā, even the birthplace of Śrī
Gaura, Māyāpura Dhāma, became covered under the rule of
the Muslims, who changed the name of Māyāpura to
Miyāṁpur and destroyed all memories of the dhāma.

It was the Seventh Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura,
who re-discovered Māyāpura Dhāma. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
composed Navadvīpa dhāma parikramā and Navadvīpa-bhava-
taraṅga, poetic works glorifying the land of Navadvīpa.
In addition, he bought property at the site of the
birthplace of Śrīman Mahāprabhu and in a small, straw-
thatched temple established Deities of Gaura-Viṣṇupriyā,
Śacī-Jagannātha-Nimāī and Pañca-tattva. Thereafter, he
entrusted the whole responsibility of this undertaking
to Jagadguru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. From that
time, Śrīla Prabhupāda started dhāma-parikramā again
under Śrīla Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda’s guidance. Since then,
the parikramā of Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma has been performed
annually with great celebrations.

That year, 1919, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda gave dikṣā initiation to Vinodabihārī at
Yogapīṭha on Śrī Gaura Pūrṇimā evening after the
completion of the parikramā. After the dikṣā ceremony
was over, Vinodabihārī very humbly requested at his
Guru’s lotus feet that he should give him the guru-
mantra. Until then Śrīla Prabhupāda had not given the
guru-mantra to anyone. When Śrīla Prabhupāda heard
Vinodabihārī’s earnest request he became silent and
began to reflect. Seeing him silent, brahmacārījī asked
again with ardent desire, “Is it necessary to obtain the
guru-mantra and instructions on guru-sevā from some
other guru?” Hearing this, Śrīla Prabhupāda began to
smile, and gave Vinodabihārī the guru-mantra very
affectionately. After this, Śrīla Prabhupāda started to
give the guru-mantra to others as well.

Śrīla Prabhupāda had a transcendental rule that when
anyone offered him praṇāma, he offered his greetings
back by folding his hands and saying, dāso ‘smi: “I am
your servant.” Seeing such humble behaviour on the part
of his Gurudeva, Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī always hid
while offering him his praṇāma. Śrīla Prabhupāda had
another transcendental practice: he always addressed his
disciples and others using the honorific ‘āp’ (you). But
because he was so satisfied with Śrī Vinodabihārī’s
intimate service he would use ‘tū’, ‘tuī’ (the most
informal way of saying ‘you’) and other loving words to
address him. Very few amongst Prabhupāda’s disciples
received such good fortune.



                             34
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Ideal maṭha-life

In the house of his guru, Śrī Vinodabihārī became
absorbed in his sādhana-bhajana, in studying devotional
literature, and in his service in the maṭha. Even though
he had come from an educated and respected family, he
was completely without pride. His life was an example of
the same strict vairāgya (renunciation) that was
practised by Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī. For the
service of Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas he performed even
the most insignificant tasks in the maṭha with great
enthusiasm. In bhakti-sādhana it is absolutely essential
to perform all endeavours for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa and
to give up all enjoyment for His satisfaction. His life
perfectly illustrates these two considerations.

In the early days of the Śrī Caitanya Maṭha, the maṭha
residents were performing sādhana-bhajana, but due to
the lack of funds, they were sustaining themselves with
great difficulty. At that time Śrī Vinodabihārī was the
maṭha manager. One day there was only 200 grams of rice
in the maṭha, so they cooked all the rice and prepared
the leaves of the sahijana tree as sāg (a green
vegetable) and offered it to Ṭhākurajī. There were four
brahmacārīs at the time. After the offering, the four
performed prasāda-sevā. Śrīla Prabhupāda happened to
come by and saw that the prasāda that his disciples were
honouring consisted of a large amount of sāg with only a
handful of rice. There were also no leaf-plates to eat
from in the maṭha. Seeing this, Prabhupāda became very
unhappy and asked, “Is there no rice in the storeroom?”
To avoid making Śrī Gurudeva anxious, they humbly
answered, “Gurudeva, we are just learning vairāgya.” But
Prabhupāda understood everything.

When Śrī Vinodabihārī accepted prasāda, he would never
say anything if the vegetable or dāl had too much or too
little salt, or if the taste was good or bad. He
performed his prasāda-sevā with great faith and
affection, knowing that mahā-prasāda is non-different
from the Lord Himself. While honouring prasāda he never
engaged in useless conversation, and never criticised
anyone or took part in any other discussion. Seeing this
exemplary vaiṣṇava behavior, all the maṭha residents
revered him.



By the order of Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī Vinoda-bihārī defends
the property of his previous āśrama, his family
zamindarī

After Vinodabihārī left home, the state of his former
household became unsteady. His mother’s health began to
fail through separation from her dear son, and the
condition of the property also deteriorated because
Vinod was not there to manage things. There had been an
uprising of the tenants and they were not paying their
rent. Śrīla Prabhupāda mercifully sent Vinodabihārī to
his previous home for some time to put the management of
the land back in order. News of his coming spread
everywhere. With great expertise he pacified the tenants
and soon everyone began to pay their rent regularly as

                           35
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

before. After everything was settled, he took his
mother’s permission and again returned to his Guru’s
house.

After some time a letter came from Vinoda's home
addressed to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Vinoda’s mother was
dying. Grief-stricken and longing for her son, his
mother desperately wanted to see him in her last days,
and she beseeched Prabhupāda to send Vinoda to her
quickly. Upon reading the letter, Śrīla Prabhupāda
called for Vinodabihārī and ordered him to go to his
mother. After listening to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
instruction, Vinoda returned to his bhajana kuṭīra and
did not come out for the whole day. The next day Śrīla
Prabhupāda called a brahmacārī and asked, “I told
Vinodabihārī to go to his home. Did he go or not? I have
not seen him.”

The brahmacārī answered, “Vinodabihārī hasn't left. He
is staying in his bhajana-kuṭīra chanting harināma.”

Śrīla Prabhupāda then called for Vinodabihārī and asked,
“I told you to go to your home. You haven't left yet?”

Vinodabihārī answered, “Prabhu! I have not gone home.”

“Why not?” Prabhupāda demanded.

Humbly Vinodabihārī replied, “My mother loves me so
much, and that is why I have not gone. If on her
deathbed she tells me, ‘My son, this is my last
instruction: return home and take care of the household’
then how can I disobey her last request? But then my
human birth will become unsuccessful. My guru-sevā, my
hearing hari-kathā, and my sādhana-bhajana will all be
ruined. Hari-bhajana is the ultimate duty in life. This
duty is only possible in human life. You have said that
human birth is very rare. Moreover, to meet a sad-guru
like you in any human birth is extremely rare,

sakala janme mātā-pītā sabe pāya

kṛṣṇa guru nāhi mile, bhajaha hiyāya

(Caitanya Maṅgala, Madhya-khaṇḍa)

“You have said that a person who is engaged in sevā to
guru and Bhagavān Mukunda is not indebted to his
parents, ancestors, demi-gods or others. He is freed
from all kinds of debts.”

Śrīla Prabhupāda’s eyes filled with tears when he heard
these words, and he did not say anything more. The
brahmacārīs living in the maṭha were amazed at Śrī
Vinodabihārī’s devotion for Śrī Gurudeva and for
bhajana.



Hospitality

From the time that Śrī Caitanya Maṭha was established,
the maṭha residents had great difficulty in maintaining
themselves and performing guru-sevā, bhagavat-sevā and

                           36
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

all the other services required. From time to time they
were subsisting only on sāka-sabjī. In those days it was
common to sleep on the ground, and to eat off leaves
instead of metal plates. Sometimes they didn’t even have
leaves, and had to perform prasāda-sevā with great faith
right on the cement floor. But, despite the difficulties
the maṭha residents were quite happy with this mode of
life because they were devoted to bhajana and sevā.

One day at noon two guests came to have darśana of
Māyāpura Dhāma. Their names were Atulacandra
Bandopādhyāya and Atulakṛṣṇa Datta, and they were both
highly placed officials in the Indian Railway. When the
guests arrived, they were hungry and thirsty from the
midday heat of Jeṣṭha (May-June), the hottest month of
the year, but the maṭha residents had already finished
their prasāda-sevā. As the men walked in, Vinodabihārī
Brahmacārī, the manager of the maṭha, was sitting under
a jackfruit tree, overseeing the management of the maṭha
property. Seeing the guests’ dry lips, he understood how
hot they were, so he sent them both to a nearby kuṇḍa to
take bath. By the time they returned from their bath,
delicious varieties of mahā-prasada were ready, and the
two guests performed mahāprasada-sevā with faith and
relish. The guests were lavish in their praise of the
maṭha residents’ service mood.

Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī then took both of the men to
have darśana of Śrīla Prabhupāda. They were deeply
impressed by his powerful hari-kathā, and expressed a
desire to contribute five rupees a month for maṭha-sevā.
When they returned home, they both remembered their
promise and started sending five rupees every month.
Gradually they developed such a desire to hear hari-
kathā that they began to come to the maṭha as their work
permitted. After some time, Atulacandra Bandopādhyāya
surrendered to Śrīla Prabhupāda, completely renouncing
home, wife, sons, family and everything. However, this
troubled the maṭha residents because their budget was so
tight that his monthly donation of five rupees had
covered most of the expenses of the maṭha. How would
they manage now? Atulacandra told them not to worry.

After harināma dikṣā, Atulacandra became Atulacandra
Bandopādhyāya Bhaktisāraṅga. He began to raise funds
among pious, wealthy merchants in Calcutta, Delhi,
Bombay and other major cities. Once they heard his
harikathā, these people would send truckloads of rice,
dāl, and vegetables for maṭha-sevā. In addition, he
established preaching centres and āśramas in those
cities, and was also editor of the weekly magazine
Gauḍīya. After Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disappearance he took
sannyāsa and his name became Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisāraṅga
Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Until his death he had great faith in
our most worshipable Gurupādapadma and considered him
his intimate friend. It was Śrīla Bhaktisāraṅga Mahārāja
who decorated Śrīla Prabhupāda’s intimate and most
beloved Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja
with the title Pāṣaṇḍa-gajaika-siṁha. This title
compares Paramārādhya Gurupādapadma to a lion which
tears to pieces the elephant-like false doctrines of
māyāvāda, smārta, sahajiyā and other atheistic schools
of thought which are opposed to bhakti. He used
scriptural proof and irrefutable arguments to destroy

                           37
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

the view of anyone who said anything against Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s philosophy of bhakti.

The other gentleman, Atulakṛṣṇa Dattajī, also gave up
his government service and came with his family to
Caitanya Maṭha. After receiving harināma-dīkṣā
initiation from Śrīla Prabhupāda, he began to perform
ekāntīkabhajana (exclusive worship of the Lord). He
compiled Śrī Gauḍīya Kaṇṭhahāra (‘The Necklace of the
Gauḍīya bhaktas’). This excellent book contains a
collection of verses from the Vedas, Upaniṣads, and
other śāstras which establish the siddhānta of śuddha-
bhakti.



Sevā of the bṛhad mṛdaṅga

In April 1913, Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhupāda established
Bhāgavat Press in Sawnagar Lane in Kālīghāṭa, Calcutta,
and began to publish Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Bhagavad-
gītā with the commentary of Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura and
other literature. After Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
entered nitya-līlā, the press was brought first to
Māyāpura and then to Kṛṣṇanagar. There Śrīla Prabhupāda
began to publish Sajjana-toṣaṇī, the weekly Gauḍīya and
other devotional works. Śrīla Prabhupāda observed Śrī
Vinodabihārī’s literary and philosophical inclination,
and in 1922 appointed him manager of the press, as well
as printer and publisher of the Gauḍīya. Śrī Atulacandra
Bandopādhyāya Bhaktisāraṅga and Śrī Haripada Vidyāratna
(M.A., B.L.) were the editors of the magazine, which
consisted of siddhāntic essays.

Later that year, Śrīla Prabhupāda called for his
intimate associate Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī to come
to Śrīdhāma Māyāpura and there he appointed him manager
of Caitanya Maṭha. Śrī Vinodabihārī took care of
everything but especially concentrated on managing the
property of the maṭha, which he did with great
expertise. Yogapīṭha in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura and ākara
maṭharāja Śrī Caitanya Maṭha, the original Gauḍīya
Maṭha, began to develop in all respects due to his
skillful administration.



Sevā of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura

After Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu entered aprakaṭa līlā and
His līlās became unmanifest, the Bhagavatī Gaṅgā changed
course many times. Places that had once been in Māyāpura
were relocated to the relatively high ground of the west
bank. The extensive town of Nadiyā (Navadvīpa), which
had previously been on the east bank, became situated on
the Gaṅgā’s west bank, and the east bank became a
deserted, desolate place. During the reign of the
yavanas (Muslims), all the sacred places of the Hindus
were destroyed, temples were demolished and the names of
the places of Mahāprabhu’s pastimes were changed. The
temples at the birthplaces of Śrī Rāma in Ayodhyā and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Mathurā were razed, and mosques were
erected on their foundations. Their names were changed
to Phaijābād and Momīnābād. Similarly, the Muslims

                            38
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

changed the name of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s birthplace from
Māyāpura to Miyāṁpur. Later, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
discovered Jagannātha Miśra Bhavan, the birth place of
Śrī Gaura, and again called it Śrīdhāma Māyāpura. In
this way the name Śrīdhāma Māyāpura once more became
known to the world.

Besides changing the name of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, the
Muslims had also made a graveyard on the huge courtyard
of Candraśekhara Bhavan, which was very close to
Jagannātha Miśra Bhavan, and this was still there when
Śrī Vinodabihārī became manager of Śrī Caitanya Maṭha.
He could not tolerate this atrocity and acted fearlessly
and boldly. One night, while all were asleep, he had all
the graves in the graveyard dug up and placed elsewhere.
In their place he had large, beautiful trees and foliage
planted and overnight he made a beautiful park with a
wall all around it for protection. The next morning
everyone was astounded at what had taken place. The
local Muslims reported it to the police and filed a case
in court. But police officials and governmental
investigators could not find any trace of the graveyard;
they saw only an old garden. In this way the devotees
reclaimed Candraśekhara Bhavan and no one was able to
stop them. For this pious act the name of Śrī
Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī will be written in golden
letters in the history of India.



Ideal guru-sevā

Jagadguru Śrī Siddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda was a
brilliant Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācārya. In a short time he
spread the holy name of Bhagavān and Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s śuddha-bhakti over the length and breadth
of India, and throughout the whole world as well.
Fearlessly he declared that a brāhmaṇa is not a brāhmaṇa
if he does not worship the complete Brahman, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Anyone in our sampradāya who is not performing bhajana
in the footsteps of the Six Gosvāmis, headed by Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī—with body, mind and words—and is not following
the siddhānta of bhakti is not a jāti-gosvāmī, temple
pujārī, gosvāmī or bhakta. Śrīla Sarasvatī Thākura
preached that the arrangement of society in varṇas is
based on the different qualities of the people, rather
than on their family lineage. This is the verdict of the
Vedas, Upaniṣad, Bhagavad-gītā and other scriptures. The
following verses offer irrefutable evidence of this
conclusion:

(a) catur varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa karma vibhāgaśaḥ
(Bhagavad-gītā 4.13)

(b) yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ puṁso varṇabhivyañjakam
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.11.35).

People became attracted by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s fearless
and truthful preaching. However, his teachings about the
real nature of eligibility agitated certain corrupt and
polluted brahmaṇas and caste gosvāmīs, who were devoid
of knowledge and civilised behaviour. Unable to
counteract his arguments, they had been repeatedly
defeated in doctrinal debates in religious assemblies,

                           39
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

and now wanted to kill Śrī Siddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.

In 1925, as in previous years, the sixteen kosa Śrī
Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā was held on the occasion of
Śrī Gaura Janmotsava. Thousands of devoted pilgrims
performed parikramā in an enormous saṅkīrtana party.
Śrīla Prabhupāda went on foot in the parikramā while the
Deities of Śrī Śrī Guru-Gauraṅga and Gāndharvikā-
Giridhārī were borne on the back of a large elephant. At
one point, the parikramā party gathered in front of the
temple of Prauḍhā Māyā in Kuliyā Dvīpa and the devotees
listened to Śrīla Prabhupāda relating the glories of Śrī
Navadvīpa Dhāma. Just then, the so-called brāhmaṇas and
caste gosvāmīs of Kuliyā Navadvīpa attacked. They hurled
bricks, stones, hot water and soda bottles, and their
assault caused pandemonium everywhere. The pilgrims were
running here and there to protect their lives, and no
one cared for anyone else. The violent mob was searching
for Śrīla Prabhupāda in order to kill him, but Śrī
Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī immediately took him to a nearby
bhakta’s house for protection. There, Śrī Vinodabihārī
quickly put on Śrīla Prabhupāda’s sannyāsa dress and
took his daṇḍa, giving his own white clothes to Śrīla
Prabhupāda to wear. After that, he sent Śrīla Prabhupāda
to Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, and the mob did not recognize
Prabhu-pāda in his disguise. Meanwhile, the police
arrived. Some time later, Śrī Vinodabihārī reached
Māyāpura safely, still dressed as a sannyāsī. The
corrupt police suppressed news of this event, but the
famous magazine Ānanda Bāzāra published an account of
the atrocity. The educated and respectable people of
Bengal were shocked to hear and read about this outrage.

All the Vaiṣṇavas were amazed at Śrī Vinodabihārī
Brahmacārī’s remarkable guru-niṣṭhā (his fixed service
to his guru), and the incident was discussed everywhere.
This is how Śrī Vinodabihārī reacted fearlessly when
some injustice or atrocity threatened Śrīla Prabhupāda
or challenged Śrīla Prabhupāda’s views.

Śrī Vinodabihārī’s behaviour in this incident calls to
mind the gurusevā of Śrī Rāmānujācārya’s dear disciple
Śrī Kureśa. Long ago, the Śaivite sampradāya dominated
South India. When Śrī Rāmānujācārya used scriptural
evidence to refute their inaccurate siddhānta, evil-
minded Śaivaites became inflamed. The Śaivite king
invited Śrī Rāmānujācārya to a philosophical debate at
Śrī Raṅgam, but this was really an excuse to kill him.
Kureśa, who was devoted to his Guru, heard a rumour of
the plot. He exchanged clothes with his Gurujī and
arrived in the town escorted by the king’s soldiers,
wearing Śrī Rāmānujācārya’s saffron dress and bearing
his tridaṇḍa. The king and the people assumed that
Kureśa was Rāmānujācārya. Kureśa stood alone against
hundreds of learned Śaivites on the other side. A
tumultuous debate ensued, in which the Śaivites were
defeated. Nevertheless, the king used a cunning device
to proclaim Kureśa’s defeat. He punished Kureśa by
removing both of his eyes, and then banished him. Kureśa
did not utter even a single word. Wandering about, he
reached a village far from that kingdom where, by good
fortune, Śrī Rāmānujācārya was also present with his
disciples. An extraordinary meeting took place between
guru and disciple. Kureśa, the ideal guru-sevaka

                           40
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

(disciple), threw himself at the lotus feet of his Guru
and by Śrī Guru’s mercy his eyesight was restored. As he
lay in the lap of his Gurudeva crying out of love,
Gurujī wiped Kureśa’s tears with his own outer cloth and
with the other hand blessed him to be free from fear.
This same Kureśa later became the famous Kureśācārya. He
was a śruti-dhara (one who remembers whatever he hears
from the scriptures), and an ācārya expert in Śrī
Rāmānujācārya’s bhaktisiddhānta.

Similarly, guru-sevaka Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī, the
foremost amongst the disciples of Śrīla Prabhupāda,
later became well-known by the name Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti-prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and he
preached the words of Śrī Gaurasundara all over the
world, fulfilling Śrīla Prabhupāda’s manobhīṣṭa (inner
desire). (Some Vaiṣṇavas say that the incident at Kuliyā
was an excuse for Śrīla Prabhupāda to give his dear
disciple the tridaṇḍa sannyāsa dress, even though his
sannyāsa ceremony was held later in Kaṭvā, after Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s disappearance.) For such guru-sevā, Śrī
Vinoda-bihārī Brahmacārī’s name will be written in gold
in the annals of the Sārasvata Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

In March 1928, during Śrī Gaura Janmotsava, the 34th
yearly session of the Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma Śrīdhāma
Pracāriṇī Sabhā (a devotional assembly) was held, with
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda as the
chairman. Selected people were praised in this meeting
for their different services in the Śrī Maṭha, for their
preaching of bhakti or for other tasks. At this time Śrī
Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī was honoured for protecting the
property of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, for the all-round
development of Śrī Caitanya Maṭha, for his unwearying
hard work and endeavour, and for his intimate sevā in
fulfilling Śrīla Prabhupāda’s innermost desire.

As manager of Śrī Caitanya Maṭha, Śrī Vinodabihārī
Brahmacārī had two horses of excellent breed, which he
used to ride while he was managing the land. In this way
he created a splendid impression when he traveled for
the service of the maṭha. In the midst of his devotional
practices, he was also linked to many social welfare
organizations. He was a member of the Nadiyā District
Board, the Education and Finance Committee, the
Kṛṣṇanagar Local Board, and the Union Board and Bench
Court, and he was also the chairman of the Ṭhākura
Bhaktivinoda Institute. He gave advice to the Divisional
Commissioner, the District Judge and other highly posted
persons on various matters. Everyone, from the highest
to the lowest, had special respect for him.



A special contribution to the establishment of Bāgbāzār
Gauḍīya Maṭha

Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura established Bāgbāzār
Gauḍīya Maṭha and the foundation of the śrī mandira in
the city of Calcutta on the September 26, 1928. Śrī
Jagadbandhu, a wealthy patron of Calcutta, donated the
land for this and later he also met all the expenses of
the sevaka-khaṇḍa (the sevakas’ quarters), śrī mandīra,
and the nāṭya-mandira (assembly hall). Śrī Vinodabihārī

                           41
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

was instrumental in bringing this to pass, and this is
how it happened.

Śrī Jagadbandhu was originally a resident of the village
of Vānarīpāḍā in the Variśāla district of East Bengal.
Later he started a business in Calcutta and became very
wealthy. In Calcutta he lived in Bāgbāzār on the bank of
the Gaṅgā in a gorgeous, palatial house. It so happened
that Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārījī and his godbrother
Mukundavinoda Bābājī Mahārāja were performing bhikṣā and
preaching in that area one day for guru-sevā. When they
arrived at Śrī Jagadbandhujī’s home, they saw on the
door a plaque with the inscription, ‘The bhavan of Śrī
Jagadbandhu dāsa of Variśāla’. Vinodabihārī suddenly
remembered that the man was a subject of his family’s
protectorate. He told the gatekeeper to say that
Vinodabihārī from Vānarīpāḍā wanted to see Śrī
Jagadbandhu dāsa. When Jagadbandhujī heard this, he
immediately ran barefoot to meet Vinodabihārī.
Recognizing the brahmacārījī as his landlord, he knelt
down and offered praṇāmas. With great respect, he seated
both of his guests on chairs and began to listen to
their bhagavat-kathā. He became very pleased as he
listened to their discourse about the Supreme Lord, and
his delight and faith increased even more when he heard
that Vinodabihārī had now left home and was engaged in
various kinds of sevā to Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhupāda.
Jagadbandhujī then said that he also wanted to perform
sevā for the maṭha. He revealed that he had previously
resolved to donate land to the Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha but
now, having heard Śrī Vinodabihārī’s hari-kathā, he had
decided to do more. “Is it right for one person to give
a plate and someone else to serve food on it? That will
not do. I shall carry the entire financial
responsibility for the construction of both the maṭha
and mandira.” This actually came to pass. In 1930, Śrī
Śrī Gaura-Vinodānandajī were installed in Their enormous
śrī mandira with harī-nāma saṅkīrtana and much pomp and
grandeur. That is how the great endeavour of Parama
Niṣkiñcana7 Śrī Vinodabihārī, who was completely
dedicated to the lotus feet of his guru, became the
foundation of the establishment of the Bāgbāzār Śrī
Gauḍīya Maṭha.



A Vedāntic explanation of the word paramānanda

Every year at Śrī Gaura Janmotsava, a session of
Śrīdhāma Pracāriṇī Sabhā was held at Śrī Māyāpura
Yogapīṭha. During these meetings, Śrīla Prabhupāda would
request the maṭha residents to praise and glorify one
another. In 1929, Śrīla Prabhupāda asked Śrī
Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī to glorify Śrī Paramānanda
Brahmacārī ‘Vidyāratna.’ Śrī Paramānanda Brahmacārī, an
intimate and ekaniṣṭha (single-minded) servant of Śrīla
Prabhupāda, was a close friend of Śrī Vinodabihārījī.
They lived together—eating, drinking, sleeping and
performing sevā for Śrīla Prabhupāda.

When Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārījī received this order,
he stood up and first offered praise to his Guru,
saying,


                           42
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

mūkhaṁ karoti vācālaṁ paṅguṁ laṅghayate girim

yat kṛpā tam ahaṁ vande paramānanda-mādhavam

“I worship Mādhava, the embodiment of paramānanda, whose
mercy turns the dumb into eloquent speakers and enables
the lame to cross mountains.”

Śrī Vinodabihārījī then began to describe all the good
qualities of Paramānanda Prabhu. “The single-minded
guru-sevā of Śrī Paramānanda Prabhu is the ideal for
guru-sevakas. He is always with Śrīla Prabhupāda like a
shadow, performing tasks such as cooking, cleaning his
clothes, managing arrangements for travel, and massaging
Prabhupāda’s feet at bedtime. Sometimes Paramānanda
Prabhu returns to the maṭha late when Śrīla Prabhupāda
is taking rest. But even if it is midnight he will knock
on the door and call, ‘Prabhupāda! Prabhupāda!’ for
Prabhupāda to open the door. At that time Śrīla
Prabhupāda himself will open the door of his bhajana
kuṭīra for him. Paramānanda Prabhu is exceptionally
expert in constructing temples and maṭhas, in operating
the printing press, and in all aspects of running a
maṭha. He cannot stay alive without Prabhupāda’s sevā.
It is not possible to perform service to Śrī Guru and
Gauraṅga without the mercy of Śrī Paramānanda Prabhu,
who has such exclusive guru-niṣṭha. All glories to Śrī
Paramānanda Prabhu!

prasīda paramānanda! prasīda parameśvara!

ādhi-vyādhi-bhujaṅgena daṣṭaṁ māmuddhara prabho

(Gopāla-tāpanī)

“Have mercy upon me, Paramānanda! Have mercy upon me,
Parameśvara! I am bitten by the serpent of material
miseries. Prabhu, please save me.”

“In the Vedānta the concept of cultivation of
paramānanda, or supreme bliss, is also mentioned:
ānandamayo ‘bhyāsāt (Brahma Sūtra 1.1.12). The deep
meaning of the practice of paramānanda is to engage
completely and constantly in the pursuit of the form of
paramānanda, Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, with body,
mind and words. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who established the
mission to fulfil Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s innermost
desire, has instructed us how to cultivate this
paramānanda. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā:
“Uttamā bhakti is favourable and uninterrupted
cultivation of service for Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure with body,
mind, and words.” Unless we cultivate paramānanda
favourably—that is unless we practise the process of
uttamā bhakti—we will not obtain paramānanda. Therefore
in the conclusion of the Brahma-sūtra it is said,
anāvṛtti śabdāt anāvṛtti śabdāt.’ In the sūtra ‘anāvṛtti
śabdāt’, ‘śabda’ refers to śabda-brahma, transcendental
sound vibration and paramānanda-svarūpa Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name
is that very transcendental śabda-brahma.

nāmaś cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ-śuddho nitya-mukto’bhinnatvān nāma nāminoḥ


                           43
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

“The name of paramānanda-svarūpa Kṛṣṇa is in all respect
a transcendental wish-fulfilling gem. Because the name
of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa Himself are non-different, it is the
personification of transcendental rasa, complete, beyond
māyā, and eternal.”

“Furthermore, in the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.7) it is
said, raso vai saḥ, rasaṁ hy evāyaṁ labdhvānandī
bhavati, ko hy evanyāt kaḥ prāṇyāt yadeṣa ākāśa ānando
na syāt, eṣa hy evānandayati: “Paramānanda para-tattva
(the supremely blissful Supreme Truth) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
personification of rasa (transcendental mellows). The
jīva can become blissful only by obtaining Him. If
parama-tattva paramānanda-svarūpa Śrī Kṛṣṇa did not
exist, then who could maintain his life? Who would try
to protect his life? Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is Brahman, the
personification of paramānanda filled with rasa, gives
ānanda (bliss) to everyone.”

We also see this established in Caturveda Śikhā:

naivete jāyante naiteṣāmajñāna-bandho na muktiḥ sarva
eṣa hy ete pūrṇā ajarā amṛtāḥ paramāḥparamānanda iti.

“The name of Bhagavān (which is śabda-brahman), Bhagavān
Himself and all His incarnations are not conditioned
like the jīvas, nor do they take birth like them. They
are complete, unchanging, immortal, and the
personification of paramānanda (supreme bliss).”

“The meaning of the word anāvṛtti in the sūtra ‘anāvṛtti
ṣabdāt’ is ‘prevention of rebirth in this material
world.’ Therefore it is only by cultivating this
paramānanda rasa-svarūpa śabda-brahman, that is to say,
only by saṅkīrtana of the name of Bhagavān, that we can
stop our rebirth forever.

“The pūrva-pakṣaÇ or first objection, to this statement,
is this: ‘The meaning of paramānanda (highest bliss) is
only bhāva, or sentiment, so how is it possible that
this paramānanda can have shape or form?’ Therefore the
sūtra, arūpavad eva hi tat pradhānatvāt in Brahma-sūtra
is cited. Parama-puruṣa (Supreme Person), parama-tattva
(Supreme Truth) or Brahman is na-rūpavat, in other words
‘not like a form.’ He does not take form; everyone else
takes form from Him. The Supreme Truth is Himself form,
of whom it is possible to have darśana. Therefore the
next sūtra says, api saṁrādhane pratyakṣānumānābhyāṁ:
“Through worship one can certainly have darśana in the
heart and directly of the Supreme Truth.”

“In the śrutis and Vedānta-sūtra this paramānanda
puruṣa, or the supremely blissful Person is called
ānandaṁ brahman (blissful Brahman). Ānanda is a synonym
of prīti. All jīvas are actually striving to attain
paramānanda. One who wants mukti will search for mokṣa,
thinking that that is paramānanda. A sense-enjoyer runs
after enjoyment of the senses, considering that to be
ānanda. The bhaktas strive for sevā of Kṛṣṇa because
they think that is paramānanda. In other words, everyone
is simply searching for paramānanda. However, bhagavad-
bhakti is the only personification of paramānanda, and
therefore it is only through bhakti that one can only
attain paramānanda-svarūpa Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa,

                           44
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

who is the personification of supreme bliss.”

The audience was fascinated by Śrī Vinodabihārī’s
lecture. Śrīla Prabhupāda was especially pleased with
his vedāntic deliberations and gave Śrī Vinodabihārī
Brahmacārī all his books on Vedānta. “Study this
literature with full concentration,” he said. “I have
not seen such taste for Vedānta in anyone else. General
people say that the term Vedānta refers to nirviśeṣa-
jñāna, but Vedānta is really bhakti literature. You
should preach from it.”

After accepting tridaṇḍi sannyāsa, Śrī Vinodabihārī
thoroughly fulfilled this innermost desire of Śrīla
Prabhupāda. Establishing Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, he
bestowed the dress of tridaṇḍi sannyāsa on qualified
members of the Samiti and added the title
‘Bhaktivedānta’ to the names of initiates such as
Vāmana, Nārāyaṇa, Trivikrama and others. He always
preached śuddha-bhakti, the main subject of the Vedānta,
and instructed others to do the same. This is the unique
distinction of his life.



Śrī Vinodabihārī and the Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda Institute

In April 1931, Śrīla Prabhupāda established the Ṭhākura
Bhaktivinoda Institute in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura for
education in transcendental subject matters. Śrīla
Prabhupāda was the chairman of the managing committee of
the school, Śrīmad Bhaktipradīpatīrtha Mahārāja was the
headmaster, and among the other members of the committee
Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī was appointed the director.
Śrī Vinodabihārī changed the then prevalent English
rules for holidays. He announced that the school would
have breaks on paṅcamī and ekādaśī instead of Sundays,
and a half-day vacation on caturthī and daśamī instead
of Saturday. Ekādaśī was chosen because it is called
mādhava-tithi, the mother of śuddha-bhakti. Paṅcamī-
tithi is the appearance tithi of Sarasvatī, the goddess
of learning, and also of Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda.
Previously the holiday was on Sundays, due to worship in
the churches. In addition, Śrī Vinodabihārī also
established holidays on the different appearance and
disappearance days of distinctive Vaiṣṇava ācāryas.
Religious teaching was compulsory in this school.
Students who failed the exams in the religious subjects
were not allowed to enter the next grade, even if they
had passed the exams in all the other subjects. Śrī
Vinodabihārī defended his emphasis on religious ethics
with the argument that the welfare of society is not
possible through atheistic education. For this work he
received special commendation and praise from the
Navadvipa Dhāma Pracāriṇī Sabhā.



The title of ‘Kṛtiratna’

In 1932, at the 38th annual session of the Śrī Navadvīpa
Pracāriṇī Sabhā, the chairman, Śrīla Prabhupāda,
bestowed the title ‘Kṛtiratna’ (the crown-jewel of all
actions) on Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī. Kṛtiratna

                           45
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

indicates bhakti and the title was an embodiment of a
blessing from Śrī Gaura. The letter read as follows:

śrī śrī māyāpura candro vijayatetamām

śrī śrī navadvīpa dhāma pracāriṇī sabhāyāḥ

śrī śrī gaurāśīrvād-patram

śrī mahāprabhu sevārthaṁ śrīdhāmni-bhūmi rakṣakaḥ

prajāpālanadakṣo yaḥ śrī caitanya-maṭhāśritaḥ

śrī vinoda-vihāyārkhya brahmacāri-varāya ca

prabhupādāntaraṅgāya sarva-sad-guṇa-śāline

dhāma-pracāriṇī-saṁsatsabhyaistamai pradīyate

‘kṛtiratna’ iti khyātum-upādhi-bhūṣaṇaṁ mudā

gaṅgā-pūrvatṭastha-śrīnavadvīpa-sthale pare

śrī māyāpura-dhāmastha-yoga-pīṭha-mahattame

guṇeṣu vā suśubhraṁśu-śakābde’smin śubhāśraye

phālguṇa pūrṇimāyāṁ śrī gaurāvirbhāva-vāsare

Signed, Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, Chairman

“Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārījī, the servitor of the Śrī
Caitanya Maṭha, has protected the land of Śrīdhāma
Māyapura for the service of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and
is expert in protecting his dependants in every way. He
is Śrīla Prabhupāda’s intimate servant and is adorned
with all the good qualities of a Vaiṣṇava. At the
auspicious time of the appearance of Śrī Gaura on
Phalguna Pūrṇima year 1853 Śakābda Era, the eminent
members of the Śrīdhāma Pracāriṇī Sabhā have joyfully
decorated him with the title ‘Kṛtiratna’ at Yogapīṭha,
the top-most place of Śrī Māyāpura Dhāma in Śrī
Navadvīpa, situated on the east bank of the Gaṅgā.”



Bhagavata-sevā through court-case proceedings

Once Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī attended a religious
assembly in Kṛṣṇanagar, at which attorneys, barristers,
a retired judge and other eminent learned and respected
people were present. Many of them gave sincere and
thoughtful speeches, and one in particular spoke with
great humility and regret. “I have uselessly wasted my
whole life in court proceedings,” he began. “My birth
has become unsuccessful because I have not performed
hari-bhajana, the worship of Lord Hari. Human life can
become successful only through hari-bhakti, but I have
distanced myself from it. Now in old age my senses are
becoming weak, I can not understand anything and death
is imminent.” Speaking in this way he prayed at the
lotus feet of the Vaiṣṇavas and Bhagavān for bhagavad-
bhakti.


                             46
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

At the end of the meeting the respected chairman asked
Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī Kṛtiratna Prabhu if he would
please say something. He stood up and began to speak
simply and naturally, but with very powerful language.
“The hidden purport of all śāstras is bhagavad-bhakti.
Of all forms of bhagavad-bhakti, the prema-mayī bhakti
(bhakti imbued with prema) of the associates of
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja is topmost.
Therefore Vaiṣṇava Ācārya Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura has
said,

ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas-tad-dhāma vṛndāvanaṁ

ramyā kācid-upāsanā vraja-vadhū vargeṇa yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ pramāṇam amalaṁ premā pumartho mahān

śrī caitanya mahāprabhor matam idaṁ tatrādaro naḥ paraḥ

‘Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the supreme worshipful
Deity. Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma is worshipful like Kṛṣṇa,
because it is the place of His pastimes. Amongst all
forms of worship, the gopīs’ worship of Kṛṣṇa is
supreme. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam offers the supreme, flawless
evidence of this truth. This is the teaching of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu.’

“In the śāstras there are also examples of court-
proceedings. I think that the performance of court-
proceedings is the best sādhana in hari-bhakti. Besides,
court-proceedings are actually hari-bhakti; it is just
that people do not understand how to perform them. For
those unfortunate souls the opportunity to attain
bhagavad-bhakti is very remote.

“We are in the party of the most worshipful Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and our special sevā is to arrange for Her
meeting with Kṛṣṇa. On one occasion, Śrī Kṛṣṇa went to
meet with Candrāvalī in her kuñja. Rādhā’s sakhīs made
up some excuse to extricate Him from there, and they
brought Him to Śrī Rādhājī’s kuñja at Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa.
There, in front of Kuñjeśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā He was
made to write, ‘I am the servant of Rādhājī. I will
never leave Rādhājī and go elsewhere.’ Then He had to
sign this declaration. A few days later, though, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, compelled by His nature, neglected His promise
and again went to Candrāvalī’s kuñja. Rādhā’s sakhīs,
seeing that Śrī Kṛṣṇa was so opposed to Śrī
Vṛndāvaneśvarī Rādhikā, filed a court-case against Him.
Rādhājī’s sakhis won this court-case against Kṛṣṇa, who
was not at that time present in Her court, and they
issued a court decree with which He was bound to comply.
In this way they arranged His sweet meeting with Śrīmatī
Rādhikā by means of a warrant.”

The lawyers, the judge and all the other people were
pleased and impressed with Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu’s sweet
speech, which was filled with scriptural siddhānta. His
philosophical lecture made a deep impression in
everyone’s heart and made them realise that the most
important achievement in the human form of life is to
attain the service of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, and nothing
else. He then explained that birth in a high family,
beauty, education, wealth, etc. are not required for śrī

                           47
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-bhajana. On the contrary, Kṛṣṇa bhajana is the
qualification and birthright of every human being. Thus,
it is necessary for all of us to perform hari-bhajana.



Ideal Vaiṣṇava life

Even though Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī was from an
educated and respected ruling family, he did not feel
any pride. In his maṭha life he was tolerant, liberal
and soft-spoken, and he would always help the poor and
distressed. The vow and purpose of his life was:

bhāla na khāibe āra bhāla na paribe

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa sevā mānase karibe

“Do not eat very palatable food and do not dress very
nicely. Rather, always perform sevā of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
in Vṛndāvana within your mind.”

Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu’s sādhana was to do anything to
please Kṛṣṇa and to give up all kinds of enjoyment for
himself. With great love he honoured whatever
Ṭhākurajīmahā-prasāda was served. He never had the
desire to eat anything delicious and throughout his life
he never mentioned that there was too little salt in the
mahā-prasāda or that it was not tasty enough. When he
was the manager of Caitanya Maṭha in the maṭha’s early
days, he and the other brahmacārīs were living and
performing their sādhana-bhajana with great difficulty
because of the maṭha’s impoverished condition.
Nonetheless, they were completely satisfied with such a
life, and their dealings with each other were very
affectionate.



First meeting with Pūjyapāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja

Once after Navadvīpa parikramā, I (Śrī Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa) and a few brahmacārīs went to Śrī Caitanya-
Sārasvata Gauḍīya Maṭha in Koleragaṅja, Navadvīpa, to
have darśana of Paramapūjyapāda Parivrājakācārya-varya
Śrīmad Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara Gosvāmī Mahārāja8. We will
never forget his description of his first sight of
Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva.

“While I was a student in the last year of law school, I
went to have darśana of Māyāpura. First, I took darśana
of the Deities in the mandira at Yogapīṭha, and then
Śrīvāsa Āṅgana, Advaita Bhavan, Gadādhara Bhavan and
other places. While I was taking darśana at ākara
maṭharāja Śrī Caitanya Maṭha, I witnessed an astonishing
scene. A beautiful young brahmacārī in a very nice white
dhotī and kurtā was sitting on a chair beneath a
jackfruit tree. He was resting his legs on a table in
front of him, the left leg on top of the right, and was
slowly swinging on the chair. Both his eyes were closed
and it seemed that he was immersed in deep thought.
Various residents of the maṭha were coming before him.
All of them—whether young or old, wearing white or
saffron—bowed their heads to the ground and offered

                           48
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

praṇāma to that brahmacārī with great respect, and then
went on to carry out their services and tasks. At one
point, a well-built, grave sannyāsī came, offered his
praṇāma and stood in front of him. Hearing some noise,
the brahmacārī opened his eyes, sat up and looked at the
sannyāsī. The sannyāsī asked something with great
humility, the brahmacārījī gave some answer and then the
sannyāsī again paid his praṇāma and went away.”

Pūjyapāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja continued, “I watched all
this very attentively, and wondered, ‘Everyone is
respectfully paying praṇāma to this young man and even
important sannyāsis come to get advice and instructions
from him. Who is he?’ I asked a maṭha resident standing
nearby about this brahmacārī who had such an exceptional
personality. He told me that his name was Śrī
Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī Kṛtiratna, and that he was the
manager of the matha. The man said, ‘He is the foremost
among the intimate servants of Śrīla Prabhupāda.
Although he appears common, he is actually deeply
philosophical and learned in bhaktisiddhānta. He has
done much towards the development of Śrī Caitanya Maṭha,
Yogapīṭha, and Śrīdhāma Māyāpura and is prominent on the
managing commitee of the Bhaktivinoda Institute.’ I was
very impressed by this person.

“Shortly thereafter, I went to have darśana of Śrīla
Prabhupāda. I was completely overcome by Prabhupāda’s
grave personality and powerful speech. At that time I
vowed that now I would also leave the perishable world
and perform hari-bhajana, because without it, life is
useless. Śrīla Prabhupāda recited one śloka from the
Bhāgavatam that made an indelible imprint in my heart.

labdhvā sudurlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte

mānuṣyam artha-dam anityam apīha dhīraḥ

tūrṇaṁ yateta na pated anu-mṛtyu yāvat

niḥśreyasāya viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.9.29)

“ ‘This human birth is extremely rare and is only
obtained after many births. But although this birth is
temporary, it can give spiritual life. Therefore an
intelligent person does not delay even for a moment to
endeavour for the ultimate auspiciousness before death.’

“After that I returned to my home, but very soon I gave
up my home and household for the rest of my life, and
came to Prabhupāda’s lotus feet. As a maṭha-vāsī, I had
great affection for Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī, and we
were close friends. We used to discuss vedānticsiddhānta
and the deep concepts of bhakti together, and everyone
would faithfully listen to our discussions.”



Prabhupāda’s opinion of an ideal guru-sevaka

When Śrī Caitanya Maṭha was well established, Śrī
Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī was sole manager of the

                              49
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

property. For the service of the maṭha and mandira he
would have go to the civil court from time to time and
meet with influential administrators, and his life style
appeared comfortable and opulent. Seeing this external
aspecet of his life, some ignorant maṭha residents
concluded that Śrī Vinodabihārī did not have any special
feeling for bhakti and was only expert in material
matters. They concluded that he could not have time to
follow the different limbs of bhakti, because he was
always engrossed in the guidance of subordinates, in
court proceedings and in other disciplinary measures,
and because he was well known in the community at large.
The issue did not stop at the Māyāpura maṭha; some
brahmacāris in the Delhi Gauḍīya Maṭha wrote Śrīla
Prabhupāda an extensive letter about Śrī Vinodabihārī.

When Śrīla Prabhupāda received this letter, he became
very displeased. He wrote back, forcefully defending
Vinodabihārī, saying that Vinodabihārī was an
extraordinary and ideal Vaiṣṇava with exceptional guru-
niṣṭhā. “He is fully learned in the difficult siddhānta
of bhakti,” Śrīla Prabhupāda told the brahmacāris, “and
in particular, he has penetrated the deep concepts of
Vedānta. He is extremely enthusiastic to perform
bhajana, he is exclusively endeavouring to please Śrī
Hari, Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas, and he has captured the
mood of renunciation. Besides, he is affectionate and
compassionate and a competent leader with excellent
organizational and managerial capabilities. Those who do
not consider Vinoda to be a Vaiṣṇava are themselves not
Vaiṣṇavas at all. No one can prevent the destruction of
those who who offend Vaiṣṇavas because they do not
understand their inner heart. Their destruction is
inevitable.”

Śrīpāda Narottamānanda Brahmacārī was one of the
prominent sevakas in the Delhi Gauḍīya Maṭha at that
time. He was a famous speaker of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and
had deep faith in Śrīla Prabhupāda. By good fortune he
read Śrīla Prabhupāda’s letter, which gave him strong
confidence in Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī. After Śrīla
Prabhupāda entered aprakaṭa-līlā, Śrī Narottamānanda
left Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha and went to Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa
together with his Godbrothers, Śrī Vinodabihārī
Kṛtiratna Prabhu, Śrī Narahari Sevāvigraha Prabhu and
others. He performed sādhana-bhajana at Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti and travelled around India, preaching
śuddha-bhakti. While at the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, he
revealed to our worshipful Gurupādapadma the contents of
the letter written by Śrīla Prabhupāda to the
brahmacārīs of the Delhi Gauḍīya Maṭha.



The transfer of Śrīla Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja’s samādhi

In the year 1932, the Bhagavatī Bhāgīrathī innundated
the countryside, and there was water everywhere, in all
directions. The Gaṅgā’s strong current had cut the west
bank, which was fast disappearing into the flood. On
that west bank was located the samādhi of Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s most beloved Śrī Gurudeva, Śrīla Gaura
Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. Śrīla Prabhupāda had given

                           50
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Śrīla Gaura Kiśora samādhi with his own hands in 1915 on
Utthāna Ekādaśī. Now, when Śrīla Prabhupāda found out
that the samādhi of his Śrī Gurudeva was about to be
carried away by the flow of the Gaṅgā, he instructed his
intimate servant Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī to rescue
the complete samādhi by some means or other, and to re-
establish it on the bank of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa in Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura.

After some days and nights of intense and ceaseless
labour, Śrī Vinodabihārī Prabhu and his dear Godbrother
and friend Śrīpād Narahari Sevāvigraha Prabhu were able
to save the samādhi with the help of other guru-sevakas.
Accompanied by saṅkīrtana, they brought it well
protected and in its complete form to Śrī Caitanya
Maṭha. Śrīla Prabhupāda was very pleased, and with his
own hands he began to dig the foundation for the samādhi
on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. In this work he was helped
by his prominent sevakas Śrīpād Kuñjabihārī
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, Śrī Aprākṛta Bhaktisāraṅga Gosvāmī, Śrī
Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja, Śrī Narahari
Sevāvigraha Prabhu and Śrī Vinodabihārī Kṛtiratna
Prabhu. Upon completing the samādhi, Śrīla Prabhupāda
became overwhelmed by the pain of separation from his
Gurudeva. When his intimate servants had darśana of
Prabhupāda’s face, overcome as he was with feelings of
separation, tears began to flow like streams from their
own eyes. Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī sat close to the lotus
feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and washed those feet with his
own tears.

When Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Śrī Gurudeva, Śrīla Gaura Kiśora
dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, entered aprakaṭa-līlā and
Prabhupāda gave him samādhi, the licentious and sinful
bābājīs of Kuliyā created various obstacles and
difficulties. However, in the end they could not do
anything and Śrīla Prabhupāda gave him samādhi in Kuliyā
on the bank of the Gaṅgā. Now, when the samādhi was
being transferred to Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, the bābājīs
again caused extreme opposition and put up many
obstacles. When they were unable to stop the transfer,
they filed a case in the Kṛṣṇanagar court, naming Śrī
Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī as the main defendant in the
removal of the samādhi.

The case was presented in the court of a scrupulous
Christian judge, who deliberated on it very seriously.
According to precedent in English law of the period, it
was a criminal offence to move a tomb from its original
site, and this violation was subject to a severe penalty
in the West. When the judge had heard the arguments from
both sides, he decided to pronounce a harsh judgement on
the accused. Considering this, brahmacārījī gravely told
the judge, “Respected Sir, you should know that we are
not followers of Christianity. We are pure Vaiṣṇavas
following the Indian Vedic tradition and rules.
According to vaiṣṇava religion, one is allowed to
transfer a samādhi when there are special reasons
constituting extraordinary circumstances. There are
thousands of cases of this.” When the judge heard this,
he reversed his decision and passed judgement in Śrī
Vinodabihārī’s favour, declaring, “The defendant is
released without charge.” The lawyers and other
officials were greatly impressed by Śrī Vinodabihārī’s

                           51
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

argument, and they lavished praise on his diverse
talents. Śrīla Prabhupāda was also very pleased, and
entrusted Kṛtiratna Prabhu with all the court
proceedings of the Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha mission. It would
have been very difficult for an ordinary person to
accomplish what Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī achieved in
his service to Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Preaching of śuddha-bhakti

In the beginning of 1933, Vinodabihārī and a few
brahmacāris went to Śrīdhāma Purī, Kaṭaka and various
places in Orissa to fulfil Śrīla Prabhupāda’s desire to
spread Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s preaching and practice
of śuddha-bhakti. First they went to Puruṣottama Maṭha
in Śrīdhāma Purī. There Śrī Vinodabihārī lectured on
various topics to the devotees in the maṭha and then
they preached at different places in Purī. He also took
care of many complicated problems at Puruṣottama Maṭha.

From there Śrī Vinodabihārī went to Śrī Saccidānanda
Maṭha in Kaṭaka. Besides helping to resolve problems in
the maṭha, he gave a significant lecture entitled,
‘Transcendental sound in the Vedānta’. Hundreds of
students, teachers and very educated and respectable
listeners attended the lecture, which was given in the
courtyard of a college. Years later, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja
recounted this lecture to his disciples. “One can only
acquire initial knowledge of a thing through the ear,
that is, through the sense of hearing. Therefore hearing
(śravaṇa) has a special significance in the Vaiṣṇava
sampradāya. The only means of śravaṇa is through the
ear, and not by any other knowledge-acquiring sense
(jñānendriya). At the same time, the ear has no access
to the experience of the other senses. The eyes can see
a ripe mango, the tongue can taste it, the nose can
experience its delicious fragrance, and the skin can
determine its softness or hardness, but the ears have no
relation with the mango. However, the ear can comprehend
that which the other senses are unable to see, hear,
taste, or touch.

“For this reason, the sad-guru (bona-fide spiritual
master) first bestows transcendental sound vibration, or
śabda-brahman, through the ear of the sat-śiṣya
(qualified disciple). In the line of śrī guru-paramparā,
both the transcendental name of Bhagavān and the mantras
are called śabda-brahman. One cannot be a sad-guru
unless he has realized śabda-brahman, has become learned
in the topics of the śrutis, which are the manifestation
of śabda-brahman, and is detached from the attraction of
material sense objects. When ordinary people say the
name Bhagavān it is an ordinary sound and does not have
the same transcendental power as the śabda-brahman
uttered by mahā-puruṣas.

“The inner mood of the original speaker of the Veda-
vedānta, Gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is concealed in the
mantras, ślokas and words of the scriptures, and we
cannot experience or understand this inner mood unless
we hear from the ācāryas or Vaiṣṇavas in the guru-
paramparā. This is because it is only through the śiṣya-

                             52
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

paramparā (disciplic succession) that one can understand
the mood of the original speaker, whether he be Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Nārada, Śrī Vyāsa or someone
else. One cannot take this mood to heart through
independent intelligence.

sampradāya vihīnā ye mantrās te viphalā matāḥ

ataḥ kalau bhaviṣyanti cat-vāraḥ sampradāyinaḥ

(Padma Purāṇa)

“ ‘A mantra is useless unless it is received through a
sampradāya, and therefore there are four Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāyas in Kali-yuga.’

“One special consideration is as follows. The meaning of
the words in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures
depends on the original speaker’s accent and
pronunciation. For example, there can be many meanings
of the sentence, ‘Rāma, where did you go?’ depending on
the tone and emphasis with which it is pronounced. The
tone of the original speaker, which conveys the real
meaning of his speech, can be understood only through
the guru-paramparā. Consequently there is a special
relationship on the transcendental platform between the
spiritual sound vibration śabda-brahman, the ear and the
original receiver of śabda-brahman.”



Interest in tattva philosophy

Sometimes Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī had to go on long
journeys in the course of managing the branch Gauḍīya
maṭhas or for preaching. At those times he invariably
kept with him Jaiva Dharma, special issues of the Śrī
Gauḍīya, Tattva-sandarbha and other philosophical works.
He especially absorbed himself in studying these books
during train trips. At that time, novice maṭha residents
were prohibited from reading and studying Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī’s Sandarbhas, Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s
Govinda-bhāṣya, Bhāṣya-pīṭhaka and other literature. It
was also considered inappropriate for neophytes to study
the Tenth Canto of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Only those few
devotees who possessed the ability to understand tattva-
jñāna (knowledge of reality) were permitted to study
these books with a qualified Vaiṣṇava. One day, Śrī
Ananta Vāsudeva Prabhu9 was searching for Śrīpād
Kṛtiratna Prabhu, and unexpectedly arrived at his
bhajana kuṭīra where he was deeply absorbed in studying
Tattva-sandarbha. Śrī Vāsudeva Prabhu was at that time
acknowledged among Prabhupāda’s disciples as a prominent
authority on bhakti siddhānta, and everyone faithfully
accepted his words and conclusions.

Śrī Ananta Vāsudeva immediately took the Tattva-
sandarbha from Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu’s hands. “Vinoda!”
he exclaimed, “You are studying Tattva-sandarbha! Do you
understand anything of what you are reading or are you
just moving the pages around? Don’t you know that it
contains deep philosophical siddhānta? Even great
scholars can hardly understand this book.” Śrī Kṛtiratna
Prabhu remained calm and sober, and stood without making

                           53
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

any reply. Śrī Vāsudeva Prabhu then demanded, “Why don’t
you speak? Do you understand anything or not?” Śrī
Vinodabihārī answered gravely, “You can ask any question
from the book.” Śrīpād Vāsudeva Prabhu then asked
extremely difficult questions on pramāṇa-tattva,
prameya-tattva, sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana-
tattva, and Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu answered all his
questions in simple language which was easy to
understand.

Śrī Vāsudeva Prabhu had until then considered Kṛtiratna
Prabhu to be an ordinary (though diligent) young
brahmacāri who lacked tattva-jñāna. He never imagined
that Vinoda would ever be able to answer such profound
philosophical questions. Now he was amazed. This
incident inspired in him a mood of respect and honour
towards Vinoda. He became even more wonder-struck when
he read Vinoda’s essays and articles. Vinoda’s literary
style was extremely deep and his refined language was
decorated with all kinds of ornaments. After Śrī
Vāsudeva Prabhu became ācārya, he told his eminent
writers and scholarly disciples to learn the art of
literary composition from Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī.



Śrī mahā-mantra and kīrtana

In 1933 Śrīla Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s
virahotsava (disappearance day observance) was held at
his samādhi-mandira at Svānanda-sukhada Kuñja in Śrī
Godruma. Śrīla Prabhupāda was present at this
virahotsava with his disciples, including his intimate
servant Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī. Pre-eminent
Vaiṣṇavas from all of Bengal assembled at the
virahotsava and Śrīla Prabhupāda gave his dear Vinod the
responsibility of attending to the special guests.

The honourable Śrī Sītānāth Bhaktitīrtha, a disciple of
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, also arrived at that utsava,
and was given a room with great honour and respect. He
was considered a prominent kīrtaniyā in Bengal and was
expert in all kinds of rāga-raginīs, rhythms, tunes,
modulations of the voice, etc. He was also a master of
harmonium, esarāj, vīṇā, mṛdaṅga, tablā and other
instruments.

After the viraha celebration, Bhaktitīrtha Prabhu seated
Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī near him with great
affection and started to perform kīrtana. He began to
sing srī mahā-mantra on the harmonium in various rāga-
raginīs. As he did this, he modulated his voice in such
a way that it took him ten or fifteen minutes to sing
the sixteen words of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra from the
first ‘Hare’ to the last ‘Hare.’ In addition, he was
trying to display bhāva (spiritual emotion) by gesturing
excessively with his hands and arms.

Some time later, when Śrī Vinodabihārījī came to Śrīla
Prabhupāda, Prabhupādajī chided, “Did you listen to the
kīrtana? You could have performed kīrtana of the whole
mahā-mantra fifty times during the time it took him to
pronounce ‘Hare Kṛṣṇa’ only once.” He further instructed
Śrī Vinodabihārī, “Those who have no taste for śrī nāma

                              54
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

and their iṣṭadeva are only attached to tauryātrika
kīrtana with different melodious tunes for the happiness
of their senses. I call these people the tāl-ṭhokā
sampradāya (persons who are only interested in rhythm
and not in inner moods). We can cast out inertia,
laziness and all kinds of anarthas by faithfully
performing kīrtana of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra in a
loud voice. All our desires will be fulfilled when we
become absorbed in this kīrtana. Members of the tāl-
ṭhokā sampradāya are completely entangled in material
gain, adoration and fame. Śuddha Vaiṣṇavas always
distance themselves from this and perform the sādhana of
kṛṣṇa-nāma by being faithfully absorbed in saṅkīrtana.
The transcendental form, quality, and pastimes of nāmī
prabhu (the Supreme Lord who is addressed by the name)
manifest in the hearts of those who perform nāma-kīrtana
in this way. Bhagavata-prema only develops through the
chanting of such śuddha-nāma.” Through this incident,
Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhupāda taught his qualified disciple
about nāma-bhajana.

Once Śrī Sītānātha Bhaktitīrtha Mahodaya stayed for some
time at Yogapīṭha in Māyāpura. One day at dawn he
started to sing, ‘rāī jāgo rāī jāgo’ in a very sweet
voice, accompanying himself on the harmonium. Śrīla
Prabhupāda heard about this and stopped the singing.
“First wake up yourself,” he said. “That means you
should first be established in your eternal svarūpa
(spiritual form). Then it is proper to wake up Rāī
(Śrīmatī Rādhikājī).” Śrīla Prabhupāda told his
disciples that kīrtana with very esoteric verses about
unnata-ujjvala-rasa (the most elevated relationship of
divine conjugal love) should not be performed here and
there—in shops, markets, on the street, or before
unqualified persons.



Decorated with the title ‘Upadeśaka’

After the Śrī Gaura Janmotsava in 1934, the Śrī
Navadvīpa Pracāriṇī Sabhā held its 40th annual session
in the avidyā-haraṇa (ignorance-destroying) nāṭya-
mandira of Śrī Caitanya Maṭha. That year the chairman,
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda, adorned
Śrīpād Vinodabihārī Kṛtiratna Mahāśaya with the title
‘upadeśaka’ (advisor).

śrī śrī māyāpurcandro vijayatetamām

śrī śrī navadvīpadhāma-pracāriṇyāḥ sabhāyāḥ

śrī śrī gaurāśīrvād-patram

sarvātmanā śrīguru-gaursevāsampādkaḥ śuddhamatirnayajñaḥ

sadāśayaḥ satyapathaikarāgī gurupriyo’yaṁ
kṛtiratnavaryaḥ

śrīvinodvihāryākhyā brahmacārivaro mudā

upadeśaka ityetadupanāmnā vimaṇḍitaḥ

gaṅgāpūrvataṭastha śrīnavadvīpasthalottame

                             55
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


śrīmāyāpuradhāmasthe yogpīṭhāśraye pare

vāneṣuvasuśubhrāṁśu-śakābde maṅgalālaye

phālguṇa-pūrṇimāyāṁ śrīgaurāvirbhāvavāsare

Signed, Śrī Siddhānta Sarasvatī, Chairman

“Kṛtiratna Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī is pure-hearted,
devoted to ethical values, magnanimous and attached to
the path of truth. He performs all kinds of service to
Śrī Guru, and is extremely dear to Śrī Gurudeva. On this
sacred day of the appearance of Śrī Gaurāsundara on
Phālgunī Pūrṇimā, year 1855 Śakābda Era, the members of
the Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma Pracāriṇī Sabhā joyfully
decorate him with the title, ‘Upadeśaka’ at the
auspicious Śrī Yogapīṭha, the topmost place of Śrī
Māyāpura, the pinnacle of Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, situated
on the eastern bank of the Bhagavatī Bhāgīrthī.”

On the second day of this same occasion the Viśva
Vaiṣṇava Rājasabhā also praised Śrī Kṛtiratna Pabhu for
accomplishing Śrī Gaurasundara’s innermost desire:

“Upadeśaka Śrīpāda Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī Kṛtiratna
Mahāśaya has shown that he is a worthy recipient of the
affection of Śrī Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga by performing
activities protecting the affairs of Śrīman Mahāprabhu;
by engaging himself in various services for Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura, Śrī Caitanya Maṭha and all its associate
branch maṭhas; and especially by very expertly managing
the present year Śrīdhāma parikramā. His lectures, which
are filled with siddhānta, are also extremely
praiseworthy.”



His Highness Sir John Anderson, Governor of Bengal,
visits Śrīdhāma Māyāpura

Due to the preaching of Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhupāda and
his very qualified disciples, many faithful persons
began to come from all over India to have darśana of
Śrīdhāma Māyāpura. Prominent officials in the Indian
government also came with faith and eagerness. When news
about Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, the birthplace of Śrī
Gaurasundara, reached the ears of His Highness Sir John
Anderson, then the Governor of BengalÇ he also developed
a desire in his heart to have darśana of the sacred
place. On the 13th of January 1935, he was called on
special business to the District Headquarters in
Kṛṣṇanagar. By the desire of Śrīla Prabhupāda, Paṇḍita
Śrīpād Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī ‘Upadeśak’ ‘Kṛtiratna’
went with Paṇḍita Śrī Atulacandra Bandopādhyāya
Bhaktisāraṅga Gosvāmī to Kṛṣṇanagar to meet the Governor
and to invite him, on behalf of Śrī Caitanya Maṭha and
Viśva Vaiṣṇava Rājasabhā, to come to Śrīdhāma Māyāpura.
Sir John Anderson respectfully accepted the invitation,
and arrived at Śrīdhāma Māyāpura the next day with an
army of followers and supporters. The Governor was
welcomed at the entrance gate to Yogapīṭha by Śrīyuta
Rāmagopāla Vidyābhūṣaṇa, M.A. from the Dhāma Pracāriṇī
Sabhā, and by Śrīpād Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī Kṛtiratna,

                           56
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

who was the secretary of the Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda
Institute. Kṛtiratna Prabhu and Śrīpād Bhaktisāraṅga
Gosvāmī Prabhu then took the Governor to meet with Śrīla
Prabhupāda, after which there was a welcoming ceremony
in the assembly hall. At Śrīla Prabhupāda’s behest, Śrī
Vinodabihārījī arranged the Governor’s tour of Māyāpura
and also took care of providing mahā-prasāda for the
guests. After having had darśana of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura,
the Governor expressed his heartfelt pleasure and said,
“My long-cherished desire has been fulfilled today. I
will be very pleased to arrange some governmental
service for the development of this sacred place.”
Later, Śrīla Prabhupāda bid farewell to the Governor
with royal honour.



The inauguration of Śrī Mandira and the Deities at
Yogapīṭha

While Śrīpād Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī Kṛtiratna was the
manager of the zamīndārī of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, he found
several letters which provided clear evidence that Śrī
Jagannātha Miśra’s residence was indeed in Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura, and that Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari appeared
under a neem tree there. In those articles of proof the
name of the birthplace of Gaurasundara was written under
section 399 and the residence was mentioned in section
265.

When Vinodabihārījī first came to Māyāpura, it was
simply a forest of tulasī. The Muslims had tried to grow
crops there, but no matter what seeds they sowed, only
tulasī plants appeared. Earlier, while Śrī Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura was performing bhajana at night in Godrumadvīpa,
he had seen a divine light near a palm tree in Māyāpura.
Later Śrīla Bhaktivinoda brought Vaiṣṇava Sārvabhauma
Śrī Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja to that place.
Bābājī Mahārāja was extremely renowned in Gauḍa-maṇḍala,
Kṣetra-maṇḍala and Vraja-maṇḍala. At the time he was
over a hundred years old, but when he arrived at the
place he jumped up and started to dance wildly and
energetically with upraised arms. “This land is the
appearance place of our Śacīnandana Gauracandra!” he
exclaimed.

Later on, Śrī Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī also used to come
to this uncultivated land. Sometimes he arrived at
midnight, and no one could understand how he got there.
When asked, he would reply, “I met some young cowherd
boy on the road. He caught me and brought me here. But
when we arrived here, I couldn’t find that cowherd boy
anywhere.”

In March 1934, Śrīla Prabhupāda laid the foundation for
the construction of a mandira at Śrī Yogapīṭha,
Māyāpura. The major responsibility for the construction
was entrusted to Śrīpāda Kṛtiratna Prabhu. While the
workers were digging the foundation for the mandira,
they found an astonishingly beautiful Caturbhuja Deity.
When Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī heard this news, he
immediately went there with Śrīpāda Narahari Prabhu and
other leading maṭha residents, and they were elated to
see the extraordinary Deity. When Śrīla Prabhupāda came

                           57
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

some time later, he was also very pleased to see the
Deity. He declared that this was the Deity of Adhokṣaja
that had been served by Śrī Jagannātha Miśra and Śrī
Śacīdevī. Today this Deity is being worshipped in the
tall mandira at Yogapīṭha.

Sakhīcaraṇa Rāya ‘Bhaktivijaya’ a disciple of Śrīla
Prabhupāda and a well-known businessman in Calcutta,
carried the entire expense of the grand and gorgeous
mandira. The magnificent mandira, which is so high that
it seems to kiss the sky, was constructed in a very
short time under the supervision of Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu
and Śrī Revatīramaṇa Brahmacārī. The ruler of
independent Tripura, Śrīmad Vīrvikrama Kiśordeva Śarmā
Māṇikya Bahādura Dharmadhurandhara Mahodaya performed
the inauguration of the mandira together with Śrīla
Prabhupāda on Śrī Gaura-Janmotsava day, 1935. For the
great service of building this mandira, Śrīla Prabhupāda
adorned Sakhīcaraṇa Rāya with the title of ‘Śreṣṭa Ārya'
(the topmost Aryan).



Māyāvāda kī Jīvanī

One day, when Ācārya Kesarī Śrī Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja was sitting with his disciples, he told
us about a book that he had written called Māyāvāda kī
Jīvanī. “Śrīla Prabhupāda felt that Śaṅkara’s philosophy
would create many obstacles for the preaching of śuddha-
bhakti as long as it remained prevalent in this world.
It is therefore extremely important to eradicate this
philosophy. The philosophy of kevalādvaita-vāda (monism)
is refuted by literatures such as Śrīman Madhvācārya’s
Anubhāṣya, Anuvyākhyān and Sūtrabhāṣya, Śrī Jayatīrtha’s
Nyāyasudhā and Śrī Vyāsatīrtha’s Nyāyāmṛta, which are
great weapons like the sudarśana cakra.

“These conclusions of Prabhupāda strongly influenced my
heart. In addition to these treatises I collected ten or
twelve more books on the Vedānta philosophy, and studied
them all from beginning to end with great concentration.
These books show very clearly that the nirākāra,
nirviśeṣa, nirguṇa brahma-vāda or māyāvāda of the modern
Śaṅkara differs in all respects from the concepts of
Śrīla Vedavyāsa, who wrote Śrī Brahma-sūtra (the
commentary on Vedānta) and its natural commentary,
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Nowhere in the 550 sutras of Brahma-
sūtra do we find words like jñāna, nirākāra, nirviśeṣa,
or nirguṇa, which are the very basis of Śaṅkara’s
commentary. Nirguṇa Brahman is not worthy of worship
because it has no compassion. The Brahman of māyāvāda is
false and only imaginary; it can never be real Brahman.
Consequently, Śrī Śaṅkarācārya’s imaginary nirviśeṣa
brahma-vāda or māyāvāda can never be one and the same as
Śrī Vedavyāsa’s saviśeṣa brahma-vāda. In Śāṇḍilya-sūtra,
Śāṇḍilya Ṛṣi says, brahmakāṇḍaṁ tu bhaktau
tasyānujñānāya sāmānyāt: “The Brahma-kāṇḍa (Brahma-
sūtra) specifically expounds bhakti, not jñāna.” In his
Bhakti-sūtra, Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi also refers to Vedavyāsa,
who compiled Brahma-sūtra, and to Śrī Śāṇḍilya Ṛṣi as
authors of literature on bhakti, and he very clearly
states that Vyāsa-sūtra (Brahma-sūtra) is a treatise on
bhakti.

                           58
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


“When I was living in Māyāpura, Śrī Vidyābhūṣaṇa and Śrī
Vidyāvinoda, who were the editors of the weekly magazine
Gauḍīya, once came to me. They insisted that I should
write an essay on māyāvāda for a special issue of the
Gauḍīya. Accordingly, I quickly wrote the essay Māyāvāda
kī Jīvanī and presented it to them. Later on I found out
that the essay was too long for the special issue, but
that Prabhupāda had been extremely pleased to read it
and wanted it to be published quickly as a small book.
Subsequently the essay was lost during the confusion
after Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disappearance. Fortunately it
was found in 1942 in the house of Śrīyutā Uṣālatā Devī,
a follower of Śrīla Prabhupāda in the village of
Caṁpāhāṭī. It will be published soon.”

Later on it was published in the Bengali monthly, Śrī
Gauḍīya Patrikā, and in the Hindi monthly, Śrī Bhāgavat
Patrika, and it has also been published as a book both
in Bengali and in Hindi. The seventh part of this
present book contains a special summary of the contents
of Māyāvāda kī Jīvanī.



Śrīla Prabhupāda enters aprakaṭa-līlā

Śrīla Prabhupāda traveled all over India and preached
with painstaking diligence until the year 1936. He gave
tridaṇḍi-sannyāsa to exceptionally qualified brahmacārīs
and maṭha residents, and through them started to preach
śuddha-bhakti through kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana everywhere.
He first established Śrī Caitanya Maṭha in Māyāpura, and
after that nine maṭhas on the nine islands of Navadvīpa,
and approximately sixty-four preaching-centres all over
India. He published the daily newspaper Nadīyā Prakāśa
and the weekly magazine Gauḍīya in Bengali, The
Harmonist in English, Bhāgavat in Hindi, and other
transcendental magazines as well. He also published the
books Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Srīmad-Bhāgavatam and
other devotional literature. Śrīla Prabhupāda sent his
expert disciples Tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrīmad Bhaktihṛdaya Bon
Mahārāja and Bhaktipradīpa Tīrtha Mahārāja to the West.
They preached the words of Śrī Gaura in England, France,
Germany and other countries. After they returned,
Aprākṛt Bhaktisāraṅga Prabhu was sent to the Western
countries to preach again. In this way, the preaching of
śuddha-bhakti began everywhere with great enthusiasm.

In the midst of this, in the beginning of 1936, Śrīla
Prabhupāda began to display his līlā of ill health.
Despite that, during that year he inaugurated a
transcendental exibihition in Prayāg, spoke hari-kathā
abundantly at Śrīvāsa Aṅgan in Māyāpura on the occasion
of Śrī Vyāsapūjā, established Suvarṇa-vihāra Maṭha and
śrī vigraha in Śrī Suvarṇavihāra, showered hari-kathā on
Śrī Brahma Gauḍīya Maṭha in Alālanātha on the occasion
of Śrī Nṛsiṁha Caturdaśī, and observed puruṣottama-vrata
in Puruṣottama Dhāma. Then he returned to the Calcutta
Gauḍīya Maṭha. During this period he often told
everyone, “All of you should perform bhajana sincerely;
there are not many days left now.” Early in the morning
of the day that he entered aprakaṭa-līlā, he gave the
order to Tridaṇḍīsvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara

                           59
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Mahārāja to sing the kīrtana, ‘śrī rūpa mañjarī pada.’
Śrīla Prabhupāda praised Śrīpād Narahari Brahmacārī
Sevāvigraha Prabhu, and told all his disciples that they
should be honest like him, and that they should perform
hari-bhajana without other ambitions. He then gave his
last instruction to the disciples present:

“I have encouraged everyone to perform bhajana and to be
indifferent to everything else. For this reason, some
people are dissatisfied with me. But one day they will
surely understand that I have said this only for the
welfare of the world. All of you should with great
enthusiasm preach together the mano’bhiṣṭa hari-kathā of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī (that
hari-kathā which embodies their innermost desire). Our
objective and final aspiration is the dust of the lotus
feet of the Vaiṣṇavas in the line of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī.
You should stay together under the guidance of the
āśraya-vigraha (Gurudeva) to please the transcendental
senses of advaya-jñāna-para-tattva Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala. You should proceed on the path of hari-bhajana
with determination, and maintain your life in this
material world only for the purpose of hari-kathā. Never
give up hari-bhajana even in the most difficult
circumstances of slander and countless calamities and
insults. Do not become discouraged to see that most
people of the world do not accept the idea of pure
service to Kṛṣṇa. Never give up your bhajana, your
hearing and chanting of kṛṣṇa-kathā, which is your
everything. Always continue to perform hari-kīrtana,
being tṛṇād-api sunīca, more humble than a blade of
grass and more tolerant than a tree.”

Having delivered these last instructions, Vārṣabhānavī-
dayita dāsa Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī
Prabhupāda, the best of the followers of Svarūpa
Damodāra and Rūpa Gosvāmī, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
Nayanamaṇi, entered the niśānta-līlā of Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda in the last part of the night on December 31st,
1936.

The news of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s entering aprakaṭa-līlā
(unmanifest pastimes) quickly spread throughout Bengal
and the whole of India. His initiated disciples started
to lament loudly in the profound grief of separation.
People assembled at Bāgbāzār Gauḍīya Maṭha from every
direction, tormented by separation. Some supposedly very
dear disciples of Śrīla Prabhupāda wanted to cremate him
at the Nīmtalā cremation ghāṭa in Calcutta. However, Śrī
Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī, who was learned in bhakti-
siddhānta, strongly opposed this proposal and said, “Let
me see who has the power to cremate the transcendental
body of our Prabhu! Śrīla Prabhupāda has clearly
instructed us that he should be given samādhi in his own
dear Dhāma, Śrī Māyāpura, at Śrī Caitanya Maṭha, which
is non-different from Govardhana.” When those present
heard his words, they unanimously approved of his
judgement, and Śrīla Prabhupāda’s transcendental body
was brought to Śrī Caitanya Maṭha in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura
on a special train. There, on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa,
Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī and others selected the
place of the samādhi and then gave him samādhi according
to the rules of Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā, the sātvata
vaiṣṇava-smṛti. When the sacred rites of samādhi were

                           60
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

completed, Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī, grief-stricken
and weeping in separation from Śrīla Prabhupāda,
fainted. Gradually his Godbrothers were able to help him
regain some degree of composure.

After this some of Śrīla Prabhupāda's disciples wanted
to perform his śrāddha-saṁskāra according to the smārta
tradition. Again, Kṛtiratna Prabhu vehemently opposed
this proposal. “According to the smārta doctrine,” he
said, “everyone becomes a ghost (preta) when they die.
It is to deliver people from this ghostly condition that
one has to perform their preta-śrāddha. However,
according to vaiṣṇava doctrine, the sins of a person who
chants nāmābhāsa are destroyed, and he goes beyond birth
and death, as we see from the examples of Ajāmila and
others. Apart from that, śāstra opposes the performance
of preta-śrāddha for Vaiṣṇavas who have been devoted to
ekāntikī (single-focused) kṛṣṇa-bhakti, and who have
chanted śuddha-nāma for their whole life.

“Śrīla Prabhupāda, the crown jewel of liberated souls,
is a nitya-siddha parikāra of Kṛṣṇa (an eternal
associate of the Lord). Not only that, he is Kṛṣṇapriyā
Śrī Vārṣabhānavī’s most beloved. Who will dare perform
his preta-śrāddha? There is a fundamental difference
between the sātvata-śrāddha of the Vaiṣṇavas and the
preta-śrāddha of the smārtas. According to the Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa, Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā and other vaiṣṇava-
smṛti, the only sātvata śrāddha for Vaiṣṇavas is the
offering of bhagavata-mahā-prasāda. The observance of
viraha-mahotsava for Vaiṣṇava ācāryas has been going on
since ancient times, and accordingly we will present our
śrāddha-puṣpāṅjali to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s lotus feet.”

All of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disciples were stunned when
they heard his lion-like voice. In the end, everyone
unanimously approved of his views and completed the
viraha-mahotsava in the manner which he proposed. The
following is a portion of Kṛtiratna Prabhu’s lecture at
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s viraha-sabhā.

“Bhagavān has no birth or death, and similarly His
associates, the liberated mahā-purūṣas, also have no
birth or death. Their bodies are sac-cid-ānanda-maya
(composed of eternity, knowledge and bliss), and there
is no difference between their body and their soul.
Hence, their apparent appearance and disappearance is
only for the welfare of the world. However, people who
are ignorant of tattva cannot realize this. Jagadguru
Śrīla Prabhupāda is an eternal associate of the Lord in
kṛṣṇa-līlā and he has appeared here only for the welfare
of the world. In a short time he preached śuddha-bhakti
throughout the whole world for the welfare of all. Now
he has entered the eternal niśānta-līlā of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
and, being present in aprakaṭa-līlā, he is still
bringing abundant welfare to the world. Only those who
are endowed with gross intelligence and who are shackled
by ritual can imagine performing the worldly smārta-
śrāddha of such a mahā-puruṣa. The disappearance of the
associates of Bhagavān has the same meaning as their
appearance. Because of this, we can remember separation
from the mahā-puruṣas on their appearance days and
celebrate meeting on their disappearance days.


                           61
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

“Some want to install Śrīla Prabhupāda’s śrī vigraha in
śrī mandira according to the pāñcarātrika system, and
others have different proposals. They are all right
according to their own qualifications. But for the
servants who have the topmost guru-niṣṭha, the best
service is to preach the innermost desire of Śrī
Gurupādapadma. Mahāprabhu’s innermost desire, which is
also Śrīla Prabhupāda’s, is to preach Vaikuṇṭha nāma and
Vaikuṇṭha kathā everywhere in the world.

“The śrī vigraha of Śrīla Prabhupāda is sac-cid-ānanda-
maya. His birth, death, etc. are only a play on the
worldly stage for our gross vision, and his eternal form
remains intact and unchanged throughout. If there is no
meeting, the intense and dire suffering of separation
will not end. Therefore, after Śrīla Prabhupāda entered
aprakaṭa-līlā, he instantly displayed prakaṭa-līlā to
bestow mercy on his dependent disciples and to console
the bhaktas who were grief-stricken in separation from
him. How did he do this? After a short time, being
decorated with various kinds of flowers, garlands,
candana etc., as one of the most beloved of Śrī Rādhā-
Madana-mohana, he became eternally present in samādhi in
Sevā Kuñja on the banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa in Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura to give instructions on serving the Divine
Couple under his guidance.”

At this viraha sabhā, the devotees discussed many
subjects, such as Śrīla Prabhupāda’s aprākṛta body, the
reasons for his entering aprakaṭa-līlā, the ācārya’s
bhakta-vātsalya (showing a parental kindness to the
devotees) and the appearance of the ācārya in the Śrī
Dhāma.

Thus ends the Second Part of The Life and Teachings of
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī by Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.




Third Part




General superintendent of the Gauḍīya Maṭha and mission

After Śrīla Prabhupāda entered aprakaṭa līlā, a
governing committee was formed to oversee the Śrī
Gauḍīya Maṭha and mission. Mahopadeśaka Śrīpāda Nārāyaṇa
Dāsādhikārī Bhakti-sudhākara Bhaktiśāstrī was appointed
the committee secretary and Śrīpāda Vinodabihārī
Brahmacārī Kṛtiratna the general superintendent. For
some time all the duties of the maṭha and mission were
carried out enthusiastically, and the preaching of
śuddha-bhakti continued everywhere, as had been the case
earlier. However, after some time the chairman of the
governing committee, who was also the ācārya, abandoned
the behaviour and ethics of the rūpānugas, the followers
of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and engaged unrestrictedly in
practices unfavourable to bhakti. This deviation led to
chaos throughout the mission. It was a dark period for

                           62
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

the Sārasvata Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. Some maṭha residents
returned to their gṛhastha life. Many left Śrī Gauḍīya
Maṭha to make their own āśramas, maṭhas, and so forth,
and began to perform sādhana-bhajana there instead. The
publishing of bhakti literature, including the daily,
weekly, and monthly magazines in different languages,
stopped. Gradually preaching activities such as the Śrī
Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā, kārtika-vrata, śrī vyāsapūjā
and other observances also stopped.

Under these circumstances, Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī
Kṛtiratna Prabhu left Māyāpura for the town of Navadvīpa
with some of his Godbrothers, such as Pūjyapāda Śrīla
Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Narahari
Brahmacārī Sevāvigraha, Śrī Mahānanda Brahmacārī
Sevāniketana, Śrī Vīracanda Brahmacārī and Śrī
Narottamānanda Brahmacārī Bhaktikamala Prabhu. There, in
the neighbourhood of Tegharīpāḍā, they rented a house
and established Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha. From that
base, they began to preach śuddha-bhakti.



Obtaining the mercy of Śrīla Vaṁśīdāsa Bābājī Mahārāja

In those days, Bhajanānandī Śrīla Vaṁśīdāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja was performing bhajana in a solitary place on
the bank of the sacred Śrī Gaṅgā Devi on the island of
Koladvīpa near Navadvīpa. Bābājī Mahārāja was always
absorbed in serving Śrī Rādhā-Govinda with bhāva-laden
moods. He also performed bhāvamayī sevā of his Śrī Śrī
Gaura-Nityānanda Deities. From time to time he had
loving quarrels (premakalaha) with Their Lordships. It
is extremely difficult even for great mahātmās to
understand Śrīla Vaṁśīdāsa’s unusual character, which
was full of bhāva. Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda was
acquainted with this mahātmā through Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura.

Śrīla Vaṁśīdāsa Bābājī Mahārāja used to chase away many
people who sought darśana by insulting them with abusive
language. From time to time he would keep fish bones and
other dirty things near his bhajana-kuṭīra so that the
public would think he was fallen. In this way he kept
bad association at a distance. Common people were thus
deprived of his darśana and pure harikathā, but to the
faithful who practiced bhajana and were averse to
worldly things, he gave instructions on bhajana with
great affection.

Once Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī Kṛtiratna Prabhu went
to the bhajana kuṭīra of Śrī Bābājī, who seated Vinoda
next to himself with great respect. Śrī Bābājī had a
special affection towards the disciples of his intimate
friend and best of Godbrothers, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda. Śrī Kṛtiratna
Prabhu noticed that Bābājī was frying eggplant on a
griddle and turning the pieces over with his hand. When
he asked Bābājī if a spatula shouldn’t be used, Bābājī
gave the answer, “Let me see what Nitāī-Gaura are
doing?” His renunciation and uncommon activities
astonished everyone.

Sometimes, to deceive the public, Bābājī would prepare a

                           63
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

hukka (water pipe) with tobacco and say, “Today no fire,
today no tobacco.” Nonetheless, he used to keep the
hukka in front of his Deities of Śrī Gaura-Nitāī and ask
Them to make it prasāda. Then he would immediately say,
“My Gaura-Nitāī do not smoke tobacco.” It is extremely
difficult for ordinary people to understand when bhāva
is arising in the heart of a transcendental mahājana and
what are the characteristics of those spiritual
emotions.

One day Kṛtiratna Prabhu brought his intimate friend Śrī
Narahari Prabhu to have darśana of Bābājī. They saw that
the distribution of tea prasāda was going on. Śrī
Kṛtiratna Prabhu told Śrī Narahari Prabhu, “If we take
this prasāda, we will go to hell. Bābājī Mahārāja is
like Nīlakaṇṭha Mahādeva (Lord Śiva); only he can digest
this. Tejīyaṣāṁ na doṣāya vahneḥ sarvabhujo yathā
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.29). We ordinary people will
die if we take this. It is not advisable for common
people to imitate mahāpuruṣas who are endowed with
transcendental power. Our duty is the constant practice
of their instructions, which bring auspiciousness to the
jīvas.”

Another day Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu saw that Bābājī
Mahārāja was performing bhajana with great concentration
in his bhajana-kuṭīra. Many bhaktas who were taking his
darśana were also offering donations, and one of them
started to gather up the coins. Bābābjī at once
restrained him, saying, tho, paisa tho. Jekhānakāra
paisā sekhana tho. Utpāter kauḍī citpāte jāya: “Don’t
touch money. Leave it wherever it is. Corrupt money is
the reason one falls down.” All the actions of a mahā-
puruṣa are for the welfare of the world and their
instructions are extremely important for true
practitioners of bhakti. Those who act according to
their instructions will gradually progress in bhajana.
Their lives will become blissful and they will attain
success in sādhana-bhajana.

On one occasion a new tridaṇḍī-sannyāsī arrived to have
Bābājī’s darśana. Seeing him offering his praṇāma,
Bābājī said, vāṁskī kaṁcī: “Young bamboo wrapped in
cloth does not make a daṇḍa, and one does not become a
tridaṇḍī by bearing it. The significance of carrying a
tridaṇḍa is to utilise the body, mind and words
completely in the sevā of Bhagavān.” The new sannyāsī
was unsophisticated and could extract the essence of the
instruction. He became very happy when he heard Bābājī’s
words and said: ki kāj sannyāse, mora prema—prayojana,
dāsa kari’ vetana mora deha premadhana (Caitanya
Bhāgavata): “I have nothing to do with sannyāsa; my goal
is to achieve prema. Please make me your servant and
give me the wealth of prema as my salary.”

Another time some bhaktas came to Śrīla Bābājī
Mahārāja’s bhajana-kuṭīra for his darśana. They offered
reverential praṇāmas at his lotus feet, and with great
respect started singing, je ānila premadhana karuṇā
pracur, a song composed by Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura.
At the end of the song they repeated the last lines
again and again: pāṣāṇo kuṭība māthā anale paśiba,
gauraṅga guṇera nidhi kothā gele pāba. This viraha
kīrtana is filled with lamentation, and the purport is:

                           64
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

“Where has Śacīnandana Śrī Gaurahari gone, He who by His
causeless mercy freely and indiscriminately distributed
here on earth kṛṣṇa-prema, which is difficult even for
Brahmā and Śiva to attain? Where are His associates
Śrīla Advaita Ācārya, Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda,
Śrī Rūpa, and Śrī Raghunātha? Without them I cannot stay
alive. Where will I go? Where will I obtain the dust
from their lotus feet? If I cannot get their darśana, I
will smash my head on a stone, or enter into burning
fire.”

After listening to this kīrtana, Bābājī Mahārāja told
the kīrtanīyas, “You only sang a song. Whose heart is
torn apart? You have nothing to do with this. When the
author wrote this kīrtana, he was deeply experiencing
the pain of separation. Have you endeavoured to attain
that? How can the feelings of viraha or vipralambha,
separation, come before union? Has sambandha-jñāna
appeared in your heart?” It cannot be said whether or
not the bhaktas performing the kīrtana understood the
significance of Śrī Bābājī’s words, but the purport was
exalted.



Foundation of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti

After establishing Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in Śrī
Navadvīpa Dhāma, Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu began to consider
what would be the best way to re-establish the
mano’bhīṣṭa sevā (service to the innermost desire) of
his most worshipful Śrīla Prabhupāda. He reflected that
the mano’bhīṣṭa sevā of Prabhupāda is the publishing of
the transcendental magazines and devotional literature
which he, Śrīla Prabhupāda, established. Without that
the welfare of the world is impossible. Śrī Kṛtiratna
Prabhu thought, “The bhaktas dependent on Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s lotus feet are now roaming here and there,
uncertain of what to do because they have no place in
Caitanya Maṭha. Our sole duty is to organise them and
again preach Śrīla Prabhupāda’s instructions far and
wide with the same enthusiasm as before.” With this aim
in mind, he rented a house at 32/2 Bospāḍā Lane, in
Bāgbāzār, Calcutta, and also bought a small press. After
a short time, Śrī Triguṇanātha Mukharjī Mahodaya donated
his business, Gaurāṅga Printing Works, to him.
Encouraged by this, Kṛtiratna Prabhu began printing
devotional literature. Unfortunately, when an early
publication, Śikṣā-daśamūlam, was composed, the complete
manuscript was stolen. Despite the setback, Śrī
Kṛtiratna Prabhu did not become discouraged.

Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu and his associate Godbrothers
established Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti in that rented
house in Bāgbāzār on the auspicious day of Akṣaya Tṛtiyā
in the month of Vaiśākha (April) 1940. Amongst the
Godbrothers who were present were Śrī Abhayacaraṇa
Bhaktivedānta Prabhu (later Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja)1 , Śrī Nṛsiṁhānanda Brahmacārī and Śrī
Sajjansevaka Brahmacārī (Śrīla Guru-pādapadma’s dikṣa
disciple, now Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja,
the present Ācārya and President of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti).


                           65
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

Śrī Gurupādapadma often mentioned in his lectures his
internal mood when he named the Samiti. It reflected his
understanding that when we develop transcendental life,
it is absolutely necessary to adopt the pure teachings
of the mahājanas. These pure teachings were presented by
Śrī Vedavyāsajī, who compiled Vedānta-sūtra for the
ultimate welfare of the jīvas. The Vedānta is the
distillation of the Upaniṣads, which are in turn the
essence of the Vedas. There are more than 1100
Upaniṣads, and their established subject is the worship
of sarva-śaktiman, the possessor of all potencies and
the shelter of all transcendental qualities, who is the
blissful Parabrahman. In other words, the Upaniṣads
teach the practice of bhakti. Only through this practice
can the jīva become forever free from birth, death and
the threefold miseries, and attain the loving service of
the supremely blissful pūrṇa-brahman Śrī Kṛṣṇa. All the
mantras or clauses really have one meaning, although
there are a few which are apparently contradictory. Śrī
Vedavyāsa composed 550 sūtras, or codes, to clarify the
very deep and difficult philosophical conclusions of the
Upaniṣads. These sūtras are variously known as Brahma-
sūtra, Vedānta-sūtra, or Śārīraka-sūtra. Another name is
Bhakti-sūtra.

Our Indian ācāryas have written commentaries on Vedānta-
sūtra according to their particular bias, in order to
strengthen their own doctrines. The omniscient Vedavyāsa
understood that this would happen in the future.
Accordingly, he wrote his own commentary on these
sūtras, and this is known as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He has
clearly confirmed this in his Purāṇas.

artho ‘yaṁ brahmasūtrāṇāṁ bhāratārthavinirṇayaḥ

gāyatrībhāṣyarūpo ‘sau vedārthaparivṛṅhitaḥ

(Garuḍa Purāṇa)

“Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam explains the meaning of Brahma-sūtra,
and is the purpose of Māhabhārata. It is the commentary
on gāyatrī and the essence and explanation of all the
Vedas.”

Further,

sarvavedāntasāraṁ hi śrīmadbhāgavatamiṣyate

tadrasāmṛtatṛptasya nānyatra syādratiḥ kvacit

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 12.13.15)

“The essence of all the Vedas is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
Whoever has tasted the nectar of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is
fully satiated and cannot be attracted to any other
Purāṇa or śāstra.”

In Vedānta-sūtra, Śrī Vedavyāsa has clearly established
bhagavad-bhakti, loving service to the Lord, through
sūtras such as ānandamayo ‘bhyāsāt, api saṁrādhane
pratyakṣānumānābhyāṁ, anāvṛtti śabdāt anāvṛtti śabdāt
and others. Additionally, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is
the commentary on Vedānta, bhakti is established through
verses such as: sa vai puṁsaṁ paro dharmo yato

                           66
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

bhaktiradhokṣaje (1.2.6), mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām
amṛtatvāya kalpate (10.82.44), yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ
kṛṣṇo paramapuruṣe, bhaktir utpadyate (1.7.7),
bhaktyāhamekayā grāhya (11.14.21), and others.
Vedāntavid Cūḍāmaṇi Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, the crown jewel of
those learned in Vedānta, and Gauḍīya Vedāntācārya Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu have used scriptural
evidence and irrefutable arguments to prove that the
subject and truth established in Vedānta-sūtra is bhakti
and only bhakti.

Modern learned persons have tried to prove that Vedānta
establishes jñāna and mukti, but this attempt is based
on pure imagination. Actually, the words jñāna and mukti
are not mentioned anywhere in the 550 sūtras of Vedānta-
sūtra. Ācārya Śaṅkara introduced the impersonalist
understanding of Vedānta using the terms jñāna and
mukti, but he is actually an expansion of Śivajī, who is
the supreme Vaiṣṇava, as stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(12.13.16): vaiṣṇavāṇāṁ yathā śambho. However, for a
special reason Śaṅkara Ācārya preached kevalādvaita-vāda
or māyāvāda, a false doctrine which is opposed to
śāstra.

This society was named ‘Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti’ in
order that it should everywhere in the world strongly
preach this deep secret regarding bhakti and for the
welfare of all the jīvas.



Complete dependence on Bhagavān

Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu was a completely akiñcana and
niṣkiñcana Vaiṣṇava, who had fully renounced all his
material possessions. Throughout his life he only acted
for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa, and never collected one paisā
for his own happiness or self-interest; he had full
faith in Śrī Gurudeva and his worshipful Lord. When he
left Śrīdhāma Māyāpura and the turmoil in Śrī Gauḍīya
Maṭha, he was empty-handed. Many Godbrothers joined him
in the new maṭha of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti at
Vospāḍā Lane, but they were also completely penniless.
However, they were devoted to sādhana-bhajana, and
somehow maintained their life by the mercy of Bhagavān.

One Ekādaśī morning, Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu was chanting
śrī harināma, his grave face revealing his absorption in
a deep mood. Just then, a brahmacārī brought the news
that Śrīpāda Nārāyaṇa Mukharjī had come to meet with
him. Śrīpāda Nārāyaṇa Mukharjī was his Godbrother, and
Śrīla Gurudeva instructed that their guest should be
seated respectfully. It was natural for Kṛtiratna Prabhu
to treat guests respectfully, but today he did not even
have a paisā for the service of his Godbrother, and this
disturbed him. Just then, by divine desire, he noticed a
chirping sparrow flying here and there, from the house
to its nest and back again. Suddenly, the bird dropped
from its beak a small packet, which hit the ground with
a clanking sound close to Kṛtiratna Prabhu. Out of
curiosity he opened the small packet and found 6 1/2
anna in it. He became very happy. With this money he was
able to buy fruits and sweets, offer them to Bhagavān,
and serve his Godbrother. Śrīpāda Nārāyaṇa Mukharjī was

                           67
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

very satisfied by the affectionate behaviour of his
Godbrother, and soon a discussion on prema-mayī hari-
kathā started between them.

Thereafter, the postman brought Śrī Vinodbhihārī Prabhu
a money order for 100 rupees from his Godbrother and
good friend Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisarvasva Giri
Mahārāja of Kānpura. Kṛtiratna Prabhu’s eyes overflowed
with tears as he recognized the causeless mercy of Śrī
Gurudeva and Bhagavān. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa says in Gītā
that He will Himself carry the burden of the maintenance
and protection of that ekaniṣṭha bhakta who exclusively
meditates upon His transcendental svarūpa, and who
worships Him with bhakti-bhāva.

ananyāś cintayanto māṁ ye janāḥ paryupāsate

teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yoga kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham

(Bhavagad-gītā 9.22)

Why, then, will Śrī Bhagavān not fulfil the desire of a
bhakta who is completely dependent on Him, loving
towards guests, protective of dependents and endowed
with ideal guru-niṣṭhā? Can Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the ocean of
compassion, not make His name ‘Bhakta-vatsala’ (loving
towards His devotees) meaningful by sending money
through a small bird?



Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisarvasva Giri Mahārāja

It will not be out of place to introduce Śrīmad
Bhaktisarvasva Giri Mahārāja at this point. He was one
of the foremost of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s dīkṣa and sannyāsī
disciples. A brahmacārī from boyhood, he was soft-
spoken, simple, honest, and endowed with other qualities
befitting a Vaiṣṇava. Notably, he was an influential
speaker in Hindi, Bengali and English. He impressed
everyone, common men as well as educated and respectable
people, including Governors and Chief Ministers from
many states. One of his main strengths was his ability
to create śraddhā towards śrī harināma and bhakti in the
community at large by cultivating friendly
relationships. He preached bhakti in Mumbai, Poona,
Kolhāpura, Kānpura and other prominent cities of India,
as well as outside India in Rangoon, Burma, and other
places. In accordance with Śrīla Prabhupāda’s desire,
during a special session of the Navadvīpa Dhāma
Pracāriṇī Sabhā, Śrīmad Bhaktisarvasva Giri Mahārāja was
praised for his outstanding Vaiṣṇava qualities.



Accepting sannyāsa

After the establishment of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti,
Vedāntika Paṇḍita Mahopadeśaka Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu
started to travel throughout Bengal and prominent cities
of India to preach śuddha-bhakti and śrī nāma. Śrī
Śyāmāmananda Gauḍīya Maṭha in Medinīpura (Bengal) was
established on Śrī Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī, 1940. Leading
sannyāsis present included Śrīpāda Bhaktirakṣaka

                           68
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Śrīdhara Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Bhaktivicāra Yāyāvara
Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Aprākṛta Bhaktisāraṇga Gosvāmī,
Śrīpāda Vinodabihārī Kṛtiratna Prabhu, Mahopadeśaka
Śrīpāda Hayagrīva Brahmacārī, Śrīpāda Svādhikārānanda
Brahmacārī, Śrīpāda Bhūtabhṛta Brahmacārī, and Śrīpāda
Rādhāramaṇa Brahmacārī (later, Śrīmad Bhaktikumuda Santa
Mahārāja). Many brahmacāris and hundreds of maṭha
residents participated in the celebration, and ten
thousand pious people attended the festival. At this
gathering a plan was presented to protect the future
preaching of bhakti in Śrīla Prabhupāda’s lineage. In
addition, it was announced that there would be a Vraja-
maṇḍala parikramā on foot during the observance of the
kārtika vow the following year. After this Janmāṣṭamī
festival, Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu started to preach in
Uttar Pradesh and in areas of Eastern Bengal.

At this time, while Śrī Kṛtiratna was sleeping during
the last part of the night, he dreamed that Śrīla
Prabhupāda laid his hand on his right shoulder, and
spoke to him in a grave voice, saying, “Until now you
have not taken sannyāsa. Today I am giving you
sannyāsa.” In his dream, the complete sannyāsa ceremony
took place, and when the ceremony was over Śrīla
Prabhupāda instructed Śrīmad Bhaktisāraṅga Gosvāmī
Mahārāja to call out “Śrī Keśava Mahārāja ki jaya!” The
jaya dhvani was so loud that Kṛtiratna Prabhu woke up.
He told his senior Godbrothers about the dream and they
were elated to find ‘Keśava’ among the 108 sannyāsa
names.

When Śrīla Prabhupāda had been personally present, he
had on several occasions expressed his desire to give
sannyāsa to his intimate servant, Śrī Vinodabihārī
Brahmacārī. He used to say, “Vinoda is sannyāsī by body,
mind and words. It only remains to change his outer
dress.” On one occasion, Śrīla Prabhupāda had planned to
give Śrī Vinodabihārīsannyāsa. Dor-kaupin (loin-cloth),
daṇḍa and all the requirements had been prepared and all
the arrangements were completed, but Śrīpāda Kuñjabihārī
Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu, who was the secretary of the
Gauḍīya Mission, made a humble submission at the lotus
feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda: “If Śrī Vinodabihārī is given
sannyāsa now, it will jeopardize the protection of the
maṭha and mission. Please, postpone his sannyāsa.”
Because of that intervention, Śrī Vinodabihārī was not
given sannyāsa. On another occasion, the arrangement for
Vinodabihārī’s sannyāsa was made again in the Bāgbāzār
Gauḍīya Maṭha. This time it was due to the special
petition of Bhāgavatratna Prabhu that Śrīla Prabhupāda
did not award sannyāsa. On a third occasion, Śrīla
Prabhupāda ordered Vinodabihārī in a dream to take
sannyāsa, saying, “Vinoda, because you have not taken
sannyāsa until now, my entire preaching work is being
ruined.” Finally, on the fourth occasion, hearing Śrīla
Prabhupāda instructing him to take sannyāsa, and
actually seeing himself accepting sannyāsa from Śrīla
Prabhupāda in the dream, Kṛtiratna Prabhu took this
matter very seriously and vowed to accept sannyāsa on
the upcoming holy day of Bhādra Purṇimā in Kaṭvā, where
Śrīman Mahāprabhu accepted sannyāsa.

Accordingly, on Pūrṇimā Śrī Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī
accepted sannyāsa in Kaṭvā, by the pāñcarātric method of

                           69
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Saṁskāra-dīpikā, from Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda’s dear disciple, Śrīla Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara
Gosvāmī, the transcendental writer, poet and
philosopher. His sannyāsa name was announced to be
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja. Pūjyapāda Śrīmad Bhaktibhūdeva Śrautī Mahārāja
performed the priestly duties of the ceremony and
instructed the brahmacārī how to put on kaupīn and the
outer cloth. Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja recited the
sannyāsa-mantra. Thus the sannyāsa dress and sannyāsa
name given by Śrīla Prabhupāda in the dream became a
complete reality.

Many of Śrīla Gurudeva’s sannyāsī and brahmacārī God-
brothers were present for the ceremony on that day. The
entire responsibility for the expenses of the great
festival was borne by Śrī Vinayabhūṣaṇa Banarjī
Bhaktiniketana Mahodaya, a disciple of Śrīla Prabhupāda.
In the evening everyone returned to Śrī Devānanda
Gauḍīya Maṭha.



Preaching in various places of Bengal

When the personification of mercy, Śacīnandana Śrī
Gaurahari, sent Śrīla Rūpa and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīs
to Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana, He instructed them to fulfil His
innermost desires by composing bhakti literature; by
explaining the regulations for vaiṣṇava procedures and
conduct (vaiṣṇava-smṛti); by restoring lost tīrthas
(pastime places) of Kṛṣṇa in Vraja; and by establishing
service of Deities of the Lord.

Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana and the other Gosvāmīs completely
fulfilled Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s inner desire. They
composed Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu, Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, ±aḍ-sandarbhas and other
authentic literature on bhakti. They also composed
vaiṣṇava smṛtis like Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa,
Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā, Saṁskāra-dīpikā and other
literature regarding vaiṣṇava sāttvata sadācār (proper
conduct among Vaiṣṇavas). They re-established all the
places of Kṛṣṇa līlā in the twelve primary forests,
secondary forests and other forests. They established
temples for Śrī Madanmohana, Śrī Govindajī, Śrī
Gopīnāthajī, Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇajī, Śrī Gopeśvara Mahādeva,
Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara and Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda in Śrīdhāma
Vṛndāvana and Kāmeśvar Mahādeva in Kāmyavan and for
other Deities as well. These are the ways in which the
Gosvāmīs fulfilled Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s innermost desire.

In the same way, Jagadguru Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda fulfilled the innermost
desire of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. He established a
printing-press (bṛhat-mṛdaṅga) for publishing and
distributing bhakti literature to spread the message of
Śrī Gaurasundara. He revived Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma
parikramā and restored lost places of pilgrimage. He
also protected and encouraged proper conduct in bhakti.
Thus by these and other projects he fulfilled his
Gurudeva’s innermost desire.

After him, Tridaṇḍī Yati Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava

                           70
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Gosvāmī Mahārāja, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s dear and intimate
disciple, fulfilled Śrīla Prabhupāda’s innermost
desires. After Śrīla Prabhupāda’s departure from this
world, Śrī Navadvīpa dhāma parikramā, the publishing of
bhakti literature, the accepting of tridaṇḍa sannyāsa
and other activities in this line almost disappeared.
But Ācārya Kesarī Śrī Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja
again propagated bhakti throughout the world with his
varied expertise and strong preaching.

With irrepressible enthusiasm, the new sannyāsī, Oṁ
Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, devoted himself to the sevā of Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s innermost desire—to preach Śrī
Gaurasundara’s message of śuddha-bhakti everywhere. He
began by arranging big religious assemblies with
discourses, lectures, the reading of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
and so forth in Candan Nagar, Vaidyavāṭī, Sevaḍāphulī,
Śrī Rāmapur and other nearby towns on the holy banks of
the Bhagavatī Bhāgīrathī. The chairmen of the
municipality, well-known lawyers, judges, and respected
members of the community in those towns started to co-
operate with great respect. After hearing Śrīla
Gurudeva’s speeches and lectures attentively and with
great veneration, these people became so impressed they
asked him to establish Śrī Gauḍīya maṭhas in their
towns.

In Chuṅchuṛā, a town very close to Calcutta, faithful
local gentlemen strongly desired that Śrīla Gurudeva
should establish a Gauḍīya maṭha in a temple named
‘Śrīvāsa-Mahāprabhur Vāṭī’, which they were willing to
donate without terms and conditions. The ancient Deities
of that temple had once been worshiped by Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita, an associate of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Śrīla Gurudeva could not turn down this offer. In April
1943 he accepted this temple and established Śrī
Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha. Even today the worship of those
Deities is continuing according to vaiṣṇava tradition.
The main office of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, as well
as the Gauḍīya Printing Press were relocated to this
maṭha from Vospāḍā Lane. Śrīla Gurupādapadma based
himself at the Chuṅchuṛā maṭha along with some of his
Godbrothers and brahmacāris and from there began
travelling extensively to preach śuddha-bhakti.



Re-establishment of Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa parikramā

Due to the expansive preaching of bhakti, an increasing
number of faithful and virtuous people were now becoming
attracted to Ācārya Kesarī. Many gṛhastha disciples of
Śrīla Prabhupāda had been disturbed by the bad behaviour
and impious activities of the managers of the Gauḍīya
Maṭha at that time and had distanced themselves from the
mission. Gradually, many of them became drawn by Ācārya
Kesarī Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
sweet manner and his strong preaching of śuddha-bhakti.
They started to perform bhajana again with new
enthusiasm. Aiming at this resurgence of interest, in
1942 Śrīla Gurudeva again started the weeklong Śrī
Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and festival to commemorate

                           71
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

the appearance of Śrī Gaurasundara. The enthusiasm of
the members of the Samiti was amplified by the
participation of many pious people, renunciates,
brahmacārīs, sannyāsīs and gṛhastha-vaiṣṇavas.

The main purpose of festivals such as Śrī Navadvīpa
Dhāma parikramā is to give an opportunity for the
inhabitants of the world to obtain śuddha sat-saṅga, the
pure association of saintly people. Through this sat-
saṅga one has a golden opportunity to nourish various
aspects of bhakti. These include hearing śuddha hari-
kathā (pure topics pertaining to the Lord); abstaining
from alcohol, meat and other prohibited food; having
darśana of the Deity of Śrī Bhagavān and of His pastime
places; and hearing and chanting the glories of those
places in good association. In addition one is afforded
an extraordinary opportunity to serve Śrī Harī, Guru and
Vaiṣṇavas. In Dhāma-māhātmya, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
writes that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu fulfill all the cherished desires and give
permanent engagement in premamayī sevā, the loving
service of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala, to those who complete
the 16-kosa Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and take
darśana of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura under the guidance of
Vaiṣṇavas.



Manifestation of ācārya-līlā

A year later, in March 1943, the weeklong Śrīdhāma
parikramā and Śrī Śrī Gaura Janmotsava culminated in
huge celebrations at Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in
Navadvīpa. The number of sannyāsīs, brahmacārīs and
gṛhastha-bhaktas had increased considerably since the
previous year. The Śrīdhāma parikramā ended with
wonderful enthusiasm as the palanquin of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu returned with a splendid saṅkīrtana festival.
This time, on repeated requests from his Godbrothers,
Ācārya Kesarī manifested his ācārya-līlā on the day of
Śrī Gaura Janmotsava by giving harināma initiation to
Śrī Rādhānātha Kumāra, Śrīmatī Mānadā Sundarī (of
Variśāla), and Śrīmatī Hemāṅginī Devī. Later, after Śrī
Rādhānātha Kumāra accepted sannyāsa, he was to become
known as Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja.

After Śrīdhāma parikramā Śrīla Gurudeva travelled and
preached śuddha-bhakti. He observed dāmodara-vrata (vows
undertaken in the month of Kārtika) in Śrī Uddhāraṇa
Gauḍīya Maṭha, Chuṅchuṛā. Then he spent some time at the
Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha. This was followed by a tour
of East Bengal, where he preached along with Dr.
Kṛṣṇapada Vrajavāsī, Sajjanasevaka Brahmacārī and other
maṭha residents.



Śrī Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s Snāna-yātrā and Ratha-yātrā in
Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha, Chuṅchuṛā

Tuesday, June 6th, 1944: The Snāna-yātra of Śrī Śrī
Jagannātha-deva took place in Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya
Maṭha in Chuṅchuṛā. Śrīla Gurudeva was personally
present at this great festival. In an exultant

                           72
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

atmosphere resounding with saṅkīrtana and the blowing of
conchshells, Śrī Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s abhiṣeka (sacred
bath) was performed with 108 earthen pots full of
scented water sanctified by mantras. At the assembly in
the evening, Śrīla Gurudeva explained the underlying
meaning and glories of the snāna-yātrā, as explained in
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.

The ten-day festival of Śrī Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s Ratha-
yātrā began on June 20, 1944. Hundreds of gṛhastha-
bhaktas from Khulnā, Medinīpura, Vaiṁchī, Velaghariyā
and many other places participated. On the first day of
the festival, which was the disappearance day of Śrīla
Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla Gurudeva gave a
profound address on the philosophy of viraha
(separation) as understood in vaiṣṇava literature. The
essence of that lecture is as follows.

“The meaning of the word viraha is ‘vi’ special and
‘raha’ meeting, in other words ‘a special meeting.’
Śacīnandana Śrī Gaurahari is the personification of
vipralambha-rasa (the mellow of separation). The
pastimes which Śrī Gaurahari exhibited when He lived in
the Gambhīrā in Śrī Jagannātha Purī are a brilliant
example of viraha (also known as vipralambha). In the
loneliness of the night, Mahāprabhu tasted with His
intimate associates, Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya
Rāmānandajī, the different kinds of bhāvas in separation
from Kṛṣṇa. In His internal state of consciousness, He
was deeply absorbed in the mood of viraha which Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, the embodiment of mahābhāva, felt after Kṛṣṇa
left for Mathurā. Absorbed in this mood, Śrī Gaurahari
would lament bitterly and lose external consciousness.
Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāyā Rāmānanda would try to console
Him, singing verses favourable to His moods. At times
they would sing verses from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and at
other times from Gīta-Govinda or Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta, or
they would sing the verses of Vidyāpati, Caṇḍīdāsa and
others. Sometime Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu would faint,
absorbed in Rādhābhāva, remembering in His heart a
particular pastime of Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. This deep
absorption of Caitanya Mahāprabhu in remembrance of
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is called vipralambha or viraha.

“On the viraha-tithi (disappearance day) of the guru or
previous ācāryas, the sat-śiṣya (true disciple)
meditates upon the transcendental qualities of these
mahā-puruṣas and vows to employ their instructions in
his life as far as possible. If there is no such
contemplation, for example, if one is only busy with
arranging for different kinds of nice mahā-prasāda, then
it is not a pure viraha-mahotsava.

“After the victory of Laṅkā, Śrī Rāmacandrajī ruled
Ayodhyā for a long time. For a special reason, He
renounced his consort, Sītājī, 11,000 years after
ascending the throne. Vālmīki Ṛṣi found Sītājī grieving
in the forest and gave her shelter in his āśrama. There
Sītā and Rāma’s twin sons Lava and Kuśa were born and
grew to boyhood. The boys were expert singers and sang
Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa in the assembly of Śrī Rāma. Through
Vālmīki, Śrī Rāma then called Sītājī to the royal
assembly in order that she should prove her purity. At
that time Sītājī lamented and called her mother, Pṛthvī

                           73
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

devī, ‘O Pṛthvī devī! If I am pure, and if no thought of
any man other than Śrī Rāma has ever touched my inner
heart, then split open and take me on your lap.’ Hearing
this prayer, the earth split open and Pṛthvī devī
appeared. She took Sītājī on her lap and again entered
Pātāla. Rāma Himself, His brothers, His mothers, and all
the people in the assembly started to cry.

“At some theatre the play, ‘Sītā Entering Pātāla’ was
performed. The next day, the play changed venues and
opened at another location, and there was a bigger crowd
on the second day than on the first day. If there is
only a feeling of sorrow in separation, why did such a
large number of people gather? To experience pain?
Clearly there is also a feeling of transcendental
happiness in the feeling of separation. Śrī Bhagavān and
His associates are sac-cid-ānanda (full of eternity,
knowledge and bliss) so it is not possible that Their
birth, death and apparent suffering are worldly.
Therefore, even though externally there may be a feeling
of sorrow in separation from the ārādhyadeva (worshipful
Deity) or the bhaktas of Bhagavān, simultaneously there
is an internal feeling of divine and inexpressible
happiness. This is the hidden secret of viraha.
Therefore, in vaiṣṇava literature it is known as viraha-
utsava. Utsava means a festival or celebration that
gives happiness.”

Listening to this deep exposition, the entire audience
was captivated and became speechless. Śrīla Gurudeva’s
lecture was praised everywhere, and śuddha-bhaktas wove
it into a garland to wear around their necks.

On Thursday, June 21st, according to the tradition in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī, the Guṇḍicā Mandira mārjana-līlā
was observed. Under Śrīla Gurudeva’s guidance, everyone
went to Śrī Śyāmasundara Mandira some distance away with
glorious saṅkīrtana, carrying brooms and earthen water-
pots. The temple was swept and washed clean for Śrī
Jagannāthadeva. Śrī Gurudeva then told everyone the
story of Guṇḍicāmārjana from Caitanya-caritāmṛta.

The inner meaning of Śrī Guṇḍicāmārjana is that it
represents the sādhaka removing different types of
anarthas (unwanted things), aparādhas and worldly
attachments from his heart, to establish his ārādhyadeva
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda there. If the sādhaka does not
make any effort to throw out the dirt which is opposed
to bhakti, pure love for Bhagavān will not appear in
such an impure heart, even if he performs śravaṇa and
kīrtana for a long time. Such śravaṇa-kīrtana is
sometimes ābhāsa (a mere semblance) and is always based
on aparādha. Therefore, sādhakas should try very
carefully to remove these anarthas. That is the purport
of the cleaning of the Guṇḍicā Mandira.

The third day of the festival was the day of Ratha-
yātrā. Under Śrī Gurudeva’s guidance, Śrī Jagannāthadeva
was seated splendidly on His cart, and taken to Śrī
Śyāmasundara Mandira. Śrī Śyāmasundara Mandira
represented Sundarācala, and Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha
represented Nīlācala. After this, the devotees performed
nagara-saṇkīrtana through the different streets of
Chuṅchuṛā. From that day until the return yātrā,

                           74
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Jagannāthajī resided in Śrī Śyāmasundara Mandira. During
this time, Śrī Gurudeva explained the stories of Ratha-
yātrā from Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta every evening. On the
day of Herā Paṅcamī, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja also revealed
the secrets of the deeply hidden philosophical truths of
this festival.

On Friday, July 1st, Śrī Jagannāthajī returned from
Sundarācala (Śrī Śyāmasundara Mandira) to Nīlācala (Śrī
Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha). Once again, the procession was
accompanied by nagar-saṅkīrtana. On the day of the
return yātrā, Śrīla Gurudeva explained from the point of
view of the rūpānuga Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, seī ta parāna
nātha pāinū, jāhā lāgi madane-dahane jhurī genu (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 13.113) and kṛṣṇa lana vraje
jai: “We are returning to Vṛndāvana with our prāṇanātha,
the Lord of our life, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” This is the hidden
secret of Ratha-yātrā. On the evening of this last day
there was a grand festival and wonderful mahā-prasāda
was distributed to all the local people.



Preaching and Vraja-maṇḍala parikrama in 1944

Because of Śrīla Gurudeva’s itinerant preaching, Śrī
Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā, and other programs, the
number of maṭha residents gradually increased.
Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva now entrusted individual
maṭha residents with the responsibility of travelling
and preaching. These included Śrīmad Bhaktikuśala
Nārasiṁha Mahārāja, Śripāda Narottamānanda Brahmacārī
Bhaktikamala, Śrī Dīnārtihara Brahmacārī, Śrī Rādhānātha
Dāsa and Śrī Viṣṇupāda. These devotees began to preach
in Bhāgalpura and various parts of Bihār. Śrīla Gurudeva
himself went with Mukunda Gopāla Vrajavāsī Bhaktimadhu,
Śrī Sajjansevaka Brahmacārī and Bhakta Anil, and
preached śuddha-bhakti in Jayanagar, Majilapur,
Viṣṇupur, Kṛṣṇacandra-pura, Ambulinga, Cakratīrtha and
other places in West Bengal. Then they returned to
Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa.

In 1944, Śrīla Gurudeva organized the 84-kosa Vraja-
maṇḍala parikramā during śrī niyama-sevā kārtika-vrata
(the vows and regulations observed during the month of
Kārtika). Tridaṇḍisvāmī Bhaktikuśala Nārasiṁha Mahārāja,
Śrīmad Bhaktisarvasva Giri Mahārāja, Śrīmad
Bhaktiprakāśa Araṇya Mahārāja, Śrī Narottamānanda
Brahmacārī Bhaktikamala and other leading sannyāsīs and
brahmacārīs participated in this parikramā. Many
palanquins were provided for the convenience of the
pilgrims while they travelled through the forest. There
was daily worship of Śrīman Mahāprabhu as well as
offerings of bhoga, kīrtana and the narration of the
glories of the places of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. The
parikramā was completed in about 40 days and everyone
returned to their respective places fully satisfied.



84-kosa Kṣetra-maṇḍala parikramā

After the Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā in 1945, Śrīla
Gurudeva travelled with Śrī Dīnadayāla Brahmacārī,

                           75
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Sajjana-sevaka Brahmacārī, Anaṅga Mohan Brahmacārī and
others to different places in Orissa to preach śuddha-
bhakti and to plan a Śrī Kṣetra-maṇḍala parikramā. They
visited Bāleśvara, Śrī Jagannātha Purī, Kaṭaka,
Bāsulīśāhī, Ālālanātha, Vorkudī on the banks of the
Cilkā Hrada, Kālūpāḍā Ghāṭa, Raṇpurgaṛha State, Sonāvalī
(a site of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s foot-prints),
Nayaragaṛha, Khaṇḍapāḍā, Kaṅṭīlā (Śrī Nīlamādhava),
Narsiṁhapur, Khudrā Road and various other places.
Śrīman Mahāprabhu passed through all these places when
He went to South India. Ekaniṣṭha (single-minded)
bhaktas of Śrīman Mahāprabhu have the heart-felt desire
to travel to all those places which He and His
associates visited, while overwhelmed in bhāva. Śrīla
Gurudeva wanted to do parikramā of those places along
with śuddha-bhaktas to awaken the memory of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. After preparing the outline for the future
parikramā, he returned to Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha in
Chuṅchuṛā.

On October 16th, 1945, when all the arrangements had
been completed, Śrīla Gurudeva started the journey from
Howraha Station to Śrī Purī Dhāma in a reserved railway
coach, accompanied by pilgrims, sannyāsīs and
brahmacārīs from all over India. The party reached Purī
the next day, and rested there. Then, under the shelter
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s vijaya-vigraha (the small
Deity which is taken out on parikramā), they had darśana
of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s appearance place and Śrī
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura's bhajana-kuṭīra (place of
bhajana). They also visited Siddha Bakula, Śrīla
Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s place of bhajana; Śrīla Haridāsa
Ṭhākura’s samādhi; Puruṣottama Maṭha; Ṭoṭā Gopīnātha;
and Śrī Jagannātha Mandira. At Śrī Jagannātha Mandira,
they had darśana of Śrī Jagannātha, Baladeva and
Subhadrā.

In the evening Śrīla Guru Mahārāja narrated the glories
of the dhāma. He said that Puruṣottama Kṣetra is not
limited to the city of Jagannātha Purī, which is 5
kosas. Rather, its circumference is 10 yojanas
(approximately 80 miles) and the kṣetra, which is 84
kosas in area, has the shape of a conchshell. If anyone
within these 84 kosas leaves his body thinking of
Jagannātha, he will not take birth in the womb of a
mother again, but will attain Vaikuṇṭha. One Satya-yuga,
Indradyumna Mahārāja came here with his wife and
subjects. He constructed a huge mandira here and,
pleasing Śrī Nīlamādhava by his worship, he installed
Śrī Nīlamādhava in the form of the four vigrahas, Śrī
Śrī Jagannātha, Baladeva, Subhadrā and Sudarśana. The
arrangements made by him for offering bhoga are followed
even to this day. After Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu took
sannyāsa, He resided in the Gambhīrā in Jagannātha Purī
at his mother's request. There He fulfilled His three
inner desires with His intimate associates. Those who
are fortunate get the opportunity to travel to the
places marked by Śrī Gaurasundara’s lotus feet, and have
their darśana.

The next day the parikramā party had darśana of Caṭaka
Parvata, Ṭoṭā Gopīnātha, Yameśvara Ṭoṭā, Lokanātha Śiva,
Purī Gosvāmī’s well, Mārkaṇḍeya Sarovara, Narendra
Sarovara, Indradyumna Sarovara, Guṇḍicā Mandira,

                           76
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Cakratīrtha and Svargadvāra.

On the third day, the parikramā party arrived at the
celebrated abode of Alālanātha, after having darśana of
Govardhana Maṭha, which had been established by Śrī
Śaṅkarācārya; Sātalahariyā Maṭha established by Śrī
Rāmānuja; Jagannātha Vāṭikā; and other various famous
places. The Deity at Alālanātha is named Śrī Alvaranātha
because He is served by the alvārs of the Śrīsampradāya.
Śrīman Mahāprabhu would go there when He was feeling
separation from Śrī Jagannātha during anavasara, the
time after snāna-yātrā when one is not able to have
Jagannātha’s darśana. When Mahāprabhu offered sāṣṭāṅga
praṇāma (prostrate obeisances) in the temple in this
state of separation, the stones under Him melted and an
impression of His entire body was left in them. The
impression of His body is present on one stone to this
day. The parikramā pilgrims had darśana of Śrī
Alālanātha, and worshipped that śila with great faith.
In a village nearby are the houses and bhajana-kuṭīras
of Mahāprabhu’s associates, Śrī Rāyarāmānanda,
Śikhimāhīti and his sister Mādhavī. These places are
worth visiting even today.

On the banks of Cilkā Hrada there is a village where the
footprints of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu can be seen. This
village has a famous history. It had been arranged that
Puruṣottama Jānā, the father of Mahārāja Pratāparudra,
would marry the daughter of the king of Vidyānagara
here. However, when the king of Vidyānagara came to know
that Jānā swept the street in front of Śrī Jagannātha’s
cart during Ratha-yātrā, he postponed the wedding.
Puruṣottama Jānā attacked Vidyānagara with his army, but
returned badly defeated. Very upset by the turn of
events, he prayed to Śrī Jagannātha and Śrī Baladevajī
for victory in the next war. He received an auspicious
indication from Śrī Jagannāthajī that his prayer was
accepted and therefore proceeded with great enthusiasm
with his entire army.

To help Their dear servant, Śrī Jagannātha and Śrī
Baladeva went ahead dressed as young soldiers riding on
two horses, one red and one white. On the way, They met
an old woman carrying a pot of yogurt on her head. Being
thirsty, They asked the woman to give Them a drink of
the yogurt. When the old woman asked for money, one of
the horsemen gave His golden ring to her and said, “We
are the king’s soldiers. He is coming behind with the
army. Show him this ring and he will give you money.”
Saying this, They again went ahead. A short while later,
when the young king came with his army, the old lady
showed him the ring and asked for money for her yogurt.
On that ring, which the king had himself offered to Śrī
Jagannātha, were marked the words ‘Śrī Jagannātha.’ The
king’s eyes overflowed with tears, and he became
convinced that his ārādhyadeva, Jagannātha and Baladeva,
were in the forefront of his army to help him in the
war, which, indeed, he won. The king gave the old lady
ownership of a whole village, and even today her
descendants are enjoying that zamīndārī.

From there the parikramā party reached Vorākudī on one
side of Cilkā Hrada. The natural beauty of this place is
very lovely. Then the pilgrims crossed Cilkā Hrada on

                           77
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

many boats and reached Raṇapuragaṛha. All of these
places of pilgrimage in Orissa were surrounded by deep,
thick jungle, where tigers and other dangerous animals
were a very real threat. The pilgrims were under
protection, but still they went by foot with great care.
In spite of the dangers, worship of the Deity, offerings
of bhoga, discourses and lectures went on daily as a
matter of course.

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa appeared in a village near
Cilkā Hrada. One evening before the assembled Vaiṣṇavas,
Śrīla Gurudeva explained about Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s
transcendental qualities. This is the story he told the
audience.

From his boyhood,Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was a brilliant
person,who was endowed with transcendental intelligence.
After becoming expert in Sanskrit he went for special
education to Uḍūpī, Śrīla Madhvācārya’s place in South
India. There he made a special study of Aṇubhāṣya,
Madhvācārya’s commentary on Vedānta-sūtra, as well as
other well-known literature of the Madhva sampradāya. He
also studied Śrī Rāmānuja’s Śrī Bhāṣya. Years later, in
Purī, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa met Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara
Gosvāmī, a follower of Nayanānanda in the paramparā of
Śrī Śyāmānanda. Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was so impressed
by Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Gosvāmī's teachings that he took
dīkṣā initiation from him. He then travelled to Śrīdhāma
Vṛndāvana, where he met the learned and topmost rasika
Vaiṣṇava Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, who taught
him how to enter into the philosophical conclusions of
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa spent the remaining part of
his life dedicated to the service of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura, studying the literature of the Six
Gosvāmis and other famous vaiṣṇava treatises. Seeing his
qualification, Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura sent him to the
philosophical assembly of Galtā Gaddī in Jaipura. There
he defeated Rāmānandīs and other scholars who were
opposed to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, and he established the
Gauḍīya siddhānta. It was at this time that he wrote
Govinda-bhāṣya, his commentary on Brahma-sūtra. The
Gauḍīya sampradāya became established everywhere on the
strength of this important literary classic.

Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu is a solid pillar of
the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya and a prominent ācārya
amongst the Rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava ācāryas. Nowadays some
modern, so-called Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas do not accept him as
a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Ācārya. That is their great
misfortune. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura calls such
ignorant people the spies of Kali.

Śrīla Gurudeva also explained that the sūtra ‘ekam
evādvitīyam’: “The absolute truth is one without a
second” (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.2.1) does not refer to a
nirākāra nirviśeṣa Brahman (Brahman without any form and
qualities). The word ‘advitīya’ here means the
perception amongst many of one unparallelled, supreme
tattva. We do not perceive one or the number 1 in the
word ‘ekam’ because the word ‘one’ has three letters,
and when we write the number 1, it is composed of lakhs
of dots. The ‘one’ mentioned in this sūtra refers to an

                           78
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

all-inclusive one Brahman which is second to none. In
other words, it can be called ‘unity in diversity.’
Bhagavān is seen as one in His feature of sarva-
śaktimān2, together with the special features of His śrī
nāma3, guṇa4, līlā5 and parikāra6.

To illustrate this ‘unity in diversity’ we can give two
examples. The first is that of the human body, which is
made up of a conglomeration of limbs and parts. If even
one part is omitted, the body cannot be accepted as
complete. In this body the eyes, nose, ears, tongue and
other parts have special features. For example, the left
and right eyes are not the same, and they act
differently. An eye also has many different parts, such
as the eyelids and eyelashes. The inner eye, too, has a
pupil and many component parts. In the same way, the
other parts of the body have individual distinctive
features, and all of these are seen as a body when they
are combined and working together.

The second example is that of a mile post. One mile is
made up of eight furlongs, and roads are marked with
seven posts indicating distances from one to seven
furlongs, after which a milestone appears. Then there
are seven more posts at one-furlong intervals, and then
a second milestone is seen. One can think that a mile
comes after six or seven furlongs, but really it is
eight furlongs which make one mile. The important point
is that the idea of ‘eight furlongs’ does not exist
separately; it is relevant only in that it is equal to
one mile. Similarly, līlā-puruṣottama Śrī Bhagavān is
One when He is together with all the variety of His
transcendental and eternal pastimes (cit-līlās). In this
variegated world of transcendental līlās there is no
other well-wisher and friend like Him. The sūtra ‘ekam
evādvitīyam’ is used to explain this siddhānta.

From Raṇapuragaḍha, the parikramā party reached the
Nayāgaḍha district, where the pilgrims were given a
royal welcome. Śrī Govardhana-pūjā and Annakūṭa festival
were performed there. The king of that area, Rājā
Bahādura, participated in the Annakūṭa festival along
with his family. Then the parikramā party went to
Kaṅṭīlā (Nīlamādhava) via Khaṇḍapārā. There, on top of
the mountain, they had darśana of Nīlamādhava. The
Purāṇas tell the following story about Nīlamādhava.

Long ago, in Satya-yuga, Indradyumna, the king of
Avantī, heard from some pilgrims about the glories of
Śrī Nīlamādhava, the Deity who presided in the area
adjacent to Nīlasamudra. He was quite impressed and sent
his special envoys to find the exact location of Śrī
Nīlamādhava.

One of the envoys was Vidyāpati, the son of his priest.
In the course of the young brāhmaṇa’s search, he reached
the banks of Mahāsāgar, which was close to Śrī
Nīlamādhava’s mountain. One evening he came upon the
house of the chief of the village, a man named
Viśvāvasu, who was of the śabara caste. After some
investigation, Vidyāpati guessed that this Viśvāsu was
Nīlamādhava's pujārī. Vidyāpati then married Viśvāsu’s
young daughter. Some time later, to confirm his
suspicions about Nīlamādhava, he asked his wife where

                           79
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

her father went, and whose pūjā he was performing. He
appealed to her to arrange that he might have darśana of
those Deities.

Viśvāvasu consented to his daughter’s wishes, and
fulfilled the desire of Vidyāpati. He covered
Vidyāpati’s eyes with a strip of black cloth and did not
remove it until they had reached Śrī Nīlamādhava’s
temple on top of the mountains. While there, Viśvāvasu
went to the temple garden to pick flowers. At that time
Vidyāpati then saw an astonishing incident. A drowsy
crow was sitting on a branch of a tree, which hung over
a lake in front of the temple. As Vidyāpati watched, the
crow fell into the water and drowned. The crow’s soul
immediately took a four-armed, spiritual form, mounted a
transcendental airplane and departed for Vaikuṇṭha. When
Vidyāpati saw this scene, he also wanted to jump in the
lake, but a grave voice from the sky announced, “You
have many things to do. Now you must wait.” Later,
Vidyāpati had darśana of the incomparable Nīlamādhava
and then went home with Viśvāvasu. Thereafter, Vidyāpati
returned to his king in the town of Avanti with the news
of Śrī Nīlamādhava.

Upon hearing that the Lord had been located, Mahārāja
Indradyumna departed with his family members and his
entire army to obtain the darśana of Śrī Nīlamadhava.
But when he arrived at the spot, he only saw a sand
mountain; Nīla-mādhava’s whereabouts were not to be
known. Feeling utterly helpless, the king went to the
shore of the ocean to perform worship in order to attain
Nīlamādhava’s darśana. There Śrī Nīlamādhava bestowed
His darśana and said, “O King, at this time I will not
take this form of Nīlamādhava. Instead, I will appear as
Śrī Jagannātha, Baladeva, Subhadrā and Sudarśana, to
accept your service and give darśana to the people of
the world.”

From Kaṅṭīlā, Śrīla Gurudeva and the parikramā party
returned to Purī Dhāma, the abode of Śrī Jagannātha,
Baladeva, Subhadrā and Sudarśana. Along the way, they
had darśana of Kaṭaka, Bhuvaneśvara and other sacred
places.

Bhuvaneśvara, also known as Ekāmra Kānana, is one of the
principal places of pilgrimage in India, and is situated
within the maṇḍala of Śrī Kṣetra. In ancient times,
Pārvatījī heard all about the glories of Śrī Jagannātha
Kṣetra, and performed rigid tapasyā in Ekāmra Kānana to
obtain darśana of Bhagavān. Because of her devotion,
Bhagavān Śrī Hari appeared before her in the form of
Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa. Seeing Pārvatī’s austere worship, one
teardrop (bindu) fell from His eyes, and this formed a
huge lake (sarovara), which became known as Bindu
Sarovara. It is said that the word Hindu, signifying the
Āryan inhabitants of the area between the Himālayas in
the north and Bindu Sarovara in the south, comes from
the first syllable ‘hi’ in Himālaya and the last
syllable ‘ndu’ of bindu.

In Bhuvaneśvara is a huge Śiva liṅga, which is famous as
Bhuvaneśvara, and from whom the city takes its name.
Nearby is the temple of Śrī Ananta Vāsudeva. Formerly,
the bhoga offered in this Vāsudeva mandira was offered

                           80
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

as mahā-prasāda to Bhuvaneśvara Mahādeva, and Vaiṣṇavas
accepted the prasāda from Śrī Bhuvaneśvara, although
they do not accept the prasāda from Śrī Mahādeva
anywhere else. Unfortunately, this custom of first
offering bhoga to Viṣṇu has been stopped, and now
Vaiṣṇavas no longer accept Śrī Mahādeva’s mahāprasāda;
they only accept it from the temple of Ananta Vāsudeva.

On November 19th, the parikramā of Puruṣottama Kṣetra
was completed and everyone returned to their respective
places.



Parental affection for his disciples

To observe the month-long kārtika urjāvrata-niyama sevā
in 1946, our most worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva performed
bṛhat (great) parikramā and pañca-kosī parikramā of Kāśī
Dhāma together with many sannyāsīs, brahmacārīs and
gṛhastha-bhaktas. As in previous years, śrī nāma-
saṅkīrtana, lectures, readings of bhakti literature and
other activities took place regularly. After this, Śrīla
Gurudeva returned to Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in
Navadvīpa. From there he travelled with Śrī
Sajjanasevaka Brahmacārī, Śrī Anaṅgamohana Brahmacārī
and other brahmacāris and preached śuddha-bhakti
throughout Medinīpura, Pūrvacaka, Begunāvāḍī,
Kalyāṇapura and other places.

In Kalyāṇapura, Śrī Anaṅgamohana Brahmacārī suddenly
became ill. Śrī Anaṅgamohana was an ekaniṣṭha guru-
sevaka. His voice was very sweet and he used to sing
beautifully in kīrtana. He was also expert in playing
mṛdaṅga. In addition, he was extraordinarily skilful in
cooking offerings, and in the personal service of
Gurudeva. Because of his excellent vaiṣṇava qualities,
everyone had great affection for him.

After Anaṅgamohana became ill, Śrīla Gurudeva returned
with him to Calcutta. There he started homeopathic
treatment with the famous vaidya Captain D.L. Sarkar.
Following Dr. Sarkar’s advice, Śrī Anaṅgamohana
Brahmacārī went to Sidhāvāḍī, an isolated but charming
and healthy place on the border of Bengal and Bihār, and
Śrīla Gurudeva personally went with him. When the
brahmacārījī’s health did not improve, Śrīla Guru
Mahārāja took him to Devaghara in Vaidyanātha Dhāma
which was reputed to be good for health. They went there
with Triguṇātīta dāsa Brahmacārī, Śrī Gaura-Nārāyaṇa
Dāsādhikārī, Śrī Sajjanasevaka Brahmacārī, Śrī
Govardhana Brahmacārī and others. However, Śrī
Anaṅgamohana’s health did not improve there either. The
brahmacārījī was then brought back to Sidhāvāḍī, and he
was finally admitted in the Ṭambaram T.B. senatorium in
Madrās. After making all arrangements for Anaṅgamohana’s
treatment and nursing, Gurudeva returned to the maṭha in
Calcutta, leaving Śrī Triguṇātīta Brahmacārī and Gaura-
Nārāyaṇa Dāsādhikārī to take care of the sick brahmacārī
in the Ṭambaram hospital. But in spite of all these
arrangements Śrī Anaṅgamohana could not be saved and he
left this world on March 2nd, 1950.

I (the author) was with Śrī Anaṅgamohana when he left

                           81
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

this world. While I was there, I never saw his face
disturbed. During the whole period of his stay in the
hospital, he happily chanted the names of Bhagavān or he
listened lovingly to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, which we read to him regularly. All the
doctors, young and old, were very attracted by his
gentle behaviour. On the day of his passing, he suddenly
said, “Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are calling me to Vṛndāvana. Jaya
Śrī Rādhe! Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa! He Gauracandra! He Nityānanda
Prabhu! He Gurudeva!” With folded hands, I requested
him, “Prabhu! Please bestow your mercy upon me and in
Vṛndāvana call me also.”

Upon learning that Śrī Anaṅgamohana was to depart, the
whole team of doctors arrived and started to examine
him. He hinted to us with a gesture that the women
should be removed from the assembly. He took his last
breath saying, “Ha Rādhe! Ha Kṛṣṇa!” All the doctors and
visitors were struck with wonder.

I meditated on this incident very seriously. Ajāmila
became free from the sufferings of birth and death and
attained Vaikuṇṭha Dhāma simply by the performance of
nāmābhāsa when he uttered the name ‘Nārāyaṇa’ to call
his son. What then can be said of someone who has
supreme faith in his guru and who is always chanting the
name of Kṛṣṇa, free from aparādha and with sambandha-
jñāna? In his last moment he was in such good
consciousness, chanting, “He Rādhe! He Kṛṣṇa!” and
telling us, “Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are calling me to
Vṛndāvana.” What will be the destiny of such a high-
class guru-sevaka? Surely he will attain Vraja Dhāma. We
were never able to imagine the glories of this bhakta
earlier. His life is blessed; his guru sevā is
meaningful. I understood that this was possible only by
the causeless mercy of Śrī Gurudeva, and not by any
special sādhana-bhajana. My faith in our worshipful Śrī
Gurudeva was intensifiedÇ and when I returned from
Ṭambaram, I devoted myself to his sevā very faithfully.

Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva established Siddhāvāṭī
Gauḍīya Maṭha in Sidhāvāḍī in the memory of his dear
servant Anaṅgamohana Brahmacārī. Even today, daily
worship of the Deity as well as lecture and kīrtana are
going on, and every year a viraha utsava is held in
memory of the brahmacārī.



Śrāddha ceremony according to vaiṣṇava rites in
Kalyāṇapura

Śrī Rāsavihārī Dāsādhikārī Bhaktiśāstrī Bhiṣagratna
Mahāśaya, an inhabitant of Kalyāṇapur (Medinīpura),
zealously endeavoured to invite Śrīla Gurudeva to
participate in the observance of the śrāddha ceremony of
his mother. To please him, Śrīla Gurudeva attended the
program with many of his associates. The priestly duties
at this ceremony were performed by Pūjyapāda Śrī
Bhaktibhūdeva Śrautī Mahārāja, who had a close
relationship with Śrīla Guru Mahārāja. He was a special
preacher who was expert in Sanskrit, Bengali, Hindi,
English and other languages, and had preached śuddha-
bhakti in Kāśī, Prayāg, Paṭnā, Medinīpura and other

                           82
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

regions under the guidance of Śrīla Prabhupāda. He had
also managed the monthly Hindi magazine Bhāgavat Patrikā
during Śrīla Prabhupāda’s time.

Here it must be particularly noted that Śrīla Gurudeva
was very firm in the philosophical conclusions of bhakti
and spoke the impartial truth fearlessly. He was never
reluctant to speak the siddhānta of bhakti, regardless
of whether his words pleased or displeased others.
Although Pūjyapāda Śrautī Mahārāja was his Godbrother
and best friend, Śrīla Gurudeva still strongly objected
to the errors in this vaiṣṇava-śrāddha ceremony which
Srila Śrautī Mahārāja conducted. He has made a signed
statement to this effect in his notebook. The following
points are taken from his notes.

(1) Śrīla Śrautī Mahārāja chose Brahmā as the object of
worship in this vaiṣṇava śrāddha. Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa,
Śrīmān Mahāprabhu and Śrī Gurudeva were not chosen as
the upāsya, worshipful object. Śrīla Śrautī Mahārāja
said that it is proper to worship Brahmā in vaiṣṇava-
śrāddha, because Śrī Vaikhānas Mahārāja has written this
in his paddhati. However, the arrangement of choosing
the upāsya is given in Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā, Śrī
Haribhakti-vilāsa and other smṛtis.

(2) In this ceremony unboiled paddy rice (arva rice)
with ghee was sanctified by mantras and given to a
smārta brāhmaṇa (Śrī Rāsabihārī’s family guru) first,
and tridaṇḍī-sannyāsis were given donations after this.
This custom is also contrary to vaiṣṇava smṛti which
state that substances offered to Bhagavān should be
given to Śrī Gurudeva and Vaiṣṇavas.

(3) In regards to establishing the brāhmaṇa (the
headpriest) Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja stated that
establishing of brāhmaṇa is not a duty, because
Satkriyāsāra-dīpika mentions establishing a murti of
brāhmaṇa made of kuśa in the absence of a vaiṣṇava
brāhmaṇa, a qualified headpriest. He also said that
Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā was composed by Vaikuṇṭha Vacaspati,
and not by Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, but this is not true.
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura collected an old copy by Śrī
Gopāla Bhaṭṭa from the famous royal library in Jaipur
and published it, and the Gosvāmis of Śrī Rādhāramaṇa
still have an old copy of a manuscript by Śrī Gopala
Bhaṭṭa.

(4) Adhivāsa (preliminary rites) was performed with some
smārta mantras, rather than according to the view of
Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā.

(5) At this ceremony, giving of charity was performed
first, instead of after vaiṣṇava-homa, as stipulated in
Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja called the above-mentioned
smārta guru brāhmaṇa inside the sthaṇḍila (sacrificial
altar) and gave a begging bowl, eating plate, wooden
shoes, umbrella, bedding and other things in charity to
him. This custom is completely opposed to Hari-bhakti-
vilāsa, where it is clearly written:

svabhāvasthaiḥ karmajaḍān vañcayan draviṇādibhiḥ

                           83
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017


harernaivedya-sambhārān vaiṣṇavebhyaḥ samarpayet

(Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 9.103)

“One should trick the non-devotees or those who are
grossly envolved in karma by giving them unoffered items
or wealth, but one should give the vaiṣṇavas the items
which have been offered to Bhagavān.”

(6) There was no performance of achidravācana, the
chanting of mantras to allay faults as described in
Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā for the defects in the prāyaṣcitta
homa. (Uddicya, concluding activities were also left
out).

(7) In the vaiṣṇava sacrifice, no sacrifice was
performed to guru-paramparā.

(8) Some portion of the ghee of the vaiṣṇava-homa was
offered in the fire for each personality’s name and a
portion was kept in a separate pot, which was mixed with
mahā-prasāda and was given as piṇḍa at the time of
offering piṇḍa. This has not been mentioned in any
vaiṣṇava-smṛti.

(9) Unoffered uncooked rice, dāl, salt, potatoes, green
bananas and ghee were kept in two separate pots, and
both were offered in the name of the expired mother of
Rāsabihārī. One of these was given directly to the
smārta-brāhmaṇa, the family guru, who accepted it
sitting on a separate āsana in the sthaṇḍil (sacrificial
altar). This is improper in every respect.

(10) In this ceremony there was no worship even of Śrī
Vāsudeva as presented in Satkriyāsāra-dīpkā.

(11) Śānti-homa, circumambulation and other vaiṣṇava
customs were omitted in this ceremony.

(12) Offering of piṇḍa and offering of bhoga was also
not done according to the rules.

(13) It seems that the mantras used in this ceremony
were also different from those in vaiṣṇava-smṛti.

(14) Ācamana etc. was also not performed.

(15) Prasāda was given facing south. This is not proper.
(Please see page 133 in the Hindi edition of
Satkriyāsāra-dīpika.)

Signed, B.P. Keshab

10.11.47



Preaching in Bihār

In 1945, Śrīla Gurudeva sent Pūjyapāda Bhaktikuśala
Nārasiṁha Mahārāja, Śrī Narottamānanda Bhaktikamala, Śrī
Rādhānātha Dāsādhikārī, Premprayojana Brahmacārī and
others to preach śuddha-bhakti in the area of Dumkā,

                             84
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Sāhibaganja, Rājmahal and Bhāgalpur in the State of
Bihār. While Śrī Narottamānanda Bhaktikamala was
preaching in Sāhibaganja, he became acquainted with the
author, then Śrīman Nārāyaṇa Tivārī, who was working in
the office of the police station. Upon hearing
brahmacārījī's extremely sweet hari-kathā, Śrīman
Nārāyaṇa became eager to renounce this material world.
Nonetheless, he remained in his service for some time.
However, in December 1946, he retired from the police
service, and left home to join Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha in
Navadvīpa Dhāma. The following year, 1947, on the day of
Gaura Janmotsava after the Navadvīpa dhāma parikramā,
Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva gave him śrī harināma
and dīkṣā initiation. Now he became known by the name
Śrī Gaura-Nārāyaṇa ‘Bhakta-bāndhava’.



Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā celebration

February 27th, 1948: Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā was celebrated at
Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha to commemorate fifty years
from the day Śrī Gurupādapadma appeared. On the first
day of this occasion there was an elaborate observation
of Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā, including the pūjā of kṛṣṇa-pañcaka,
vyāsa-pañcaka, ācārya-pañcaka of Śrī Brahmā and others,
sanakādi-pañcaka, śrī guru-pañcaka, upāsya-pañcaka and
tattva-pañcaka. Then puṣpāñjali and fire sacrifice
concluded the morning ceremony. In the evening program,
Śrīla Gurudeva lectured from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
explained the episode in which Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana Vedavyāsa
obtains realization of the Absolute Truth during his
samādhi. On the third day of the festival, on Jagadguru
Śrīla Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s auspicious
avirbhāva-tithi (appearance day), Śrīla Gurudeva
worshipped the beautiful decorated mūrti of Śrīla
Prabhupāda. Ārati took place while singing ‘Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s ārati’ the song composed by Śrīla Gurudeva,
and then puṣpāñjali was offered to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
lotus feet. Every year after that Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti observed Śrī Vyāsapūjā in this elaborate way.




The departure of Śrīla Narahari Sevāvigraha Prabhu


On January 30th, 1948, Nāthūrāma Goḍase shot Mahātma
Gāndhījī at the Delhi prayer assembly. On that very same
day, Ajātaśatru Pūjyapāda Śrī Narahari Brahmacārī
Sevāvigraha Prabhu disappeared from this world in Śrī
Navadvīpa Dhāma, during the brahma-muhūrta hour. At that
time Śrīla Gurudeva was preaching in the Medinīpura
area. When he returned to Chuṅchuṛā on February 1st, he
received a telegram from Śrī Mahānanda Brahmacārī with
this heartbreaking news, and became stunned like a stone
statue. When his external consciousness returned a short
time later, he began to cry, overwhelmed by the piercing
separation.

Śrī Sevāvigraha Prabhu was one of the foremost disciples
and intimate servants of Jagadguru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta

                             85
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. Our most worshipful Śrīla
Gurupādapadma had a very close friendship with him; they
lived together for a long time and served Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura in countless ways. Śrīla Prabhupāda turned over
the entire responsibility for Śrīdhāma Māyāpura to this
dear servant and could then preach śuddha-bhakti
everywhere with a peaceful mind. After Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s disappearance, both Śrī Sevāvigraha Prabhu
and Śrīla Gurudeva left the Gauḍīya Maṭha together and
established Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in Śrīdhāma
Navadvīpa. Like Śrīla Prabhupāda, Śrīla Gurudeva
entrusted the whole responsibility of Śrī Devānanda
Gauḍīya Maṭha to Śrī Sevāvigraha Prabhu and could thus
preach peacefully everywhere.

In the first issue of Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā (the main
magazine of the Samiti), Śrīla Gurudeva wrote an essay
entitled, ‘Virahamāṅgalya’, about Sevāvigraha Prabhu.

“Afflicted with the agony of separation, my pen
quivering in my hand and progressing very slowly, I will
try to pacify the pain of not seeing Śrīla Gurupādapadma
and his eka-niṣṭha servant, Ṭhākura Narahari Sevāvigraha
Prabhu.

“Śrīla Prabhupāda was very pleased to discover his
intimate servitor, Paramapūjyapāda Śrī Narahari
Brahmacārī Sevāvigraha. He handed over the whole
responsibility of his beloved maṭha-rāja, Śrī Caitanya
Maṭha, to him and happily went to far distant places to
preach śuddha-bhakti with full concentration.

“O Naraharidā! Your uninterrupted sevā of Hari, Guru and
Vaiṣṇavas will manifest of its own accord in the memory
of anyone who takes your auspicious name. You are the
embodiment of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s dearmost Śrī Caitanya
Maṭha; when we lived near you, we all thought that we
were living in the Caitanya Maṭha. You have performed
the ideal service in a way which is supremely blissful
and free from anger. This is the sole aim and objective
of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti.”

Śrīla Gurudeva also glorified his best friend, Śrīla
Narahari Ṭhākura, in his preface to Prabandhāvali, which
was presented on Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s
disappearance day. There he described him as a brilliant
star of the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, who is eternally
immersed in the flow of nectar coming from Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.

Śrīla Narahari Sevāvigraha Prabhu appeared in the famous
Vasu dynasty of the village of Deyāḍā in the Yaśohar
district of East Bengal. In his early life he and his
family were initiated with the Śakti mantra. However, he
and the majority of his family members were later
influenced by Vaiṣṇava association, were initiated into
the Kṛṣṇa mantra, and all began to perform sādhana-
bhajana. When his elder brother left this world, Śrī
Narahari renounced his family and this material world,
and took shelter at the lotus feet of Jagadguru Oṁ
Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda. Śrīla Prabhupāda was pleased with Śrī
Narahari’s versatile abilities and service mentality,
and appointed him manager of Śrī Caitanya Maṭha.

                           86
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Śrī Narahari was like a mother in nurturing the young
boys who lived in the maṭha. His daily sevā was to wake
them up, feed them and take care of them. Because of
this sweet, affectionate behaviour, the maṭha residents
referred to him as ‘the mother of the Gauḍīya maṭha’.
But everyone, young and old, addressed him as
‘Naraharidā’. He was always chanting śrī harināma and
was totally absorbed in the various services of the
maṭha. No one knew when he slept and when he woke.
Sometimes in the deep night, when everyone else was
sleeping, he would sit in his secluded bhajana-kuṭīra
and chant śrī harinām with vipralambha-bhāva (feelings
of separation from Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣna). We have heard
that he sometimes used to tie his sikha to a wooden
handle high on the wall to force himself to stay awake
while he chanted harināma. No maṭha resident ever saw
him become angry. Even if someone needed to be scolded
for some special reason, he would give them a sweet
scolding, smiling, and with great affection.

The following incident took place when I (the author)
was new in the maṭha. I was young then, and very
energetic. During the morning, the local farmers were
bringing vegetables, milk and other products from their
neighborhoods to the vegetable market on the street just
outside the maṭha. Śrī Sevāvigraha Prabhu and Śrīla
Narottamānanda Brahmacārī went outside on the side of
the road, and began to bargain for vegetables for the
maṭha. The farmers were an unruly lot, and they began to
quarrel about everything. Somehow, one of them struck
Śrī Narottamānanda Prabhu on the head, drawing blood.
Hearing the tumult, I came out, and when I saw the blood
on Prabhujī’s head, I lost all self-control. I took a
piece of bamboo from the courtyard of the maṭha and hit
that insolent farmer on his back so hard that the bamboo
broke and the farmer fell to the ground. In a moment,
hundreds of farmers assembled, and began to create an
uproar, threatening to attack the maṭha. However,
Pūjyapāda Śrīmān Sevāvigraha Prabhu calmly and
peacefully settled this difficult situation with great
expertise. First, he caught me and locked me up in a
room in the maṭha. Then he confronted the crowd alone,
and pacified them all with his affectionate behavior and
vaiṣṇava qualities.

Sevāvigraha Prabhu had a very affectionate behavior. He
went to everyone’s home and spoke hari-kathā. He took an
interest in people’s happiness and distress, and they
endured their difficulties because of his sweet words.

Śrīla Gurudeva could never forget his dear Godbrother.
Whenever he remembered Śrī Sevāvigraha Prabhu, he became
overwhelmed by feelings of separation. Śrīla Gurudeva
named the huge entrance gate of Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya
Maṭha ‘Śrī Narahari Toraṇa’ in Śrī Sevāvigraha’s memory.
This can still be seen today.



The decision to establish a maṭha in Jagannātha Purī and
the publishing of a monthly transcendental magazine

After the Śrī Kṣetra-maṇḍala parikramā, Khuṭiyājī the

                           87
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

respected paṇḍa of Purī, as well as many Godbrothers,
implored Śrīla Gurudeva to establish a branch maṭha of
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti in Śrī Jagannātha Purī. Śrīla
Gurudeva liked the idea. In 1948, after the week-long
Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and the Gaura Janmotsava
festival, the prominent members of the Samiti made these
decisions at an assembly in the Calcutta maṭha:

(1) Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti will establish a branch maṭha
in Śrī Jagannātha Purī.

(2) Śrī Dvārakā dhāma parikramā will be performed in the
upcoming month of kārtika.

(3) A transcendental monthly magazine, Śrī Gauḍīya
Patrikā, will be published for the next Gaura Pūrṇimā,
and this will be the main magazine of the Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti.

That very day Śrīla Gurudeva began to work to fulfil the
above-mentioned resolves. He gave instructions to
collect a block, a rubber stamp, a three-colored picture
of Śrīla Prabhupāda, a sign board for the Gauḍīya
Patrikā’s office and other things.

During ūrja-vrata niyama-sevā approximately 150
pilgrims, sannyāsīs, brahmacārīs and gṛhastha-bhaktas
participated in the pilgrimage to Dvārakā. The parikramā
party first took darśana of the pastime places in
Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, then of Śrī Govinda, Gopinātha,
Madana-mohana in Jaipur and Galtājī nearby. Formerly,
Vedāntācārya Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa defeated the
Vaiṣṇavas of the Śrīsampradāya in a major philosophical
debate in Galtā, and waved the victory banner of the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. In Galtā, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja gave a
brilliant lecture on Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa and his
commentary on Brahma-sūtra. He said that Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu defeated the opposition by the
inspiration of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and
on the strength of Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s arguments. The
mahantjī of the Śrīsampradāya at Galtāgaddī was
extremely impressed by Ācārya Kesarī’s personality and
by his discourse, and had Śrī Ṭhākurajī’s mahā-prasāda
served to the entire parikramā party.

From there the pilgrims reached Porbandar via Puṣkar,
Ajmer, Mehasānā, Mīramgāon, Surendranagar and ùholā. In
Porbandar they had darśana of the temple of Śrī Sudāmā
Vipra. They then travelled by ship to Veñṭa Dvārakā and
had darśana of the temples of Śrī Dvārakeśajī, Dāūjī,
and Rukmiṇījī. The next day, they took the ship to
Sonavati and visited Gopī Tālāb and Nāgeśvara Śīva, and
finally reached Gomatī Dvārakā. There the pilgrims had
darśana of Śrī Dvārakādhīśa, Totādrī Maṭha and Gomatī
Gaṅgā. After that, the pilgrims returned home via
Mehasānā and Āgrā.



Preaching in Medinīpura and Sundarvana

In the month of January, 1949, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja, Śrī
Dīnārtihara Brahmacārī, Śrī Sajjansevaka Brahmacārī and
Śrī Gaura-Nārāyaṇa Dāsādhikārī blessed the house of

                           88
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Haricaraṇa Dāsādhikārī in Jukhiyā in the district of
Medinīpura. They stayed there for some time and Śrīla
Gurudeva gave philosophical lectures on sanātana-dharma
at religious assemblies in the nearby villages.

Early one morning during Śrīla Guru Mahārājajī's sojourn
in Jukhiyā, Kṣīroda-candra Bhuīyāṁ, a retired judge from
Mohāṭī Grāma, came for a visit. Śrīla Gurudeva was
inside the house chanting harināma on his beads, while
Śrī Gaura-Nārāyaṇa Dāsādhikārī (the author) was studying
a book in the sweet rays of the winter sun on the
verandah outside. Śrī Kṣīroda Bābū, who had been seated
on a mat nearby, asked, “What are you reading?”

Gaura-nārāyaṇa answered, “I am reading Śrī Hari-bhakti-
vilāsa.”

Kṣīroda Bābū inquired, “Who is the author?”

“Jagadguru Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī.”

“Why are you not studying Śāṅkara-bhāṣya by Jagadguru
Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya?”

“Because Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī is much more
authoritative than Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya.”

Kṣīroda Bābū exclaimed, “What did you say? The very
recent Sanātana Gosvāmī is a greater authority than
Ācārya Śaṅkara? Ācārya Śaṅkara is the direct incarnation
of Śaṅkara. He is the author of the definitive
commentary on Brahma-sūtra and he vanquished all the
contemporary ācāryas of India.”

Gaura-nārāyaṇa replied, “Without a doubt, Ācārya Śaṅkar
is an āvatara of devādhīdeva Śaṅkara,who is one of the
guṇāvataras of Bhagavān (an incarnation who embodies one
of the characteristics of the Lord), and he is one of
the vibhūtis (opulences) of Bhagavān. According to the
śloka, ‘vaiṣṇavānāṁ yathā śambho’ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
12.13.16), Śaṅkara is the topmost vaiṣṇava and bhakta of
Bhagavān. Nonetheless, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī is one of
Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śacīnandana’s most beloved associates
and he is also the dearmost Śrī Lavaṅga Mañjarī of Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, Sanātana Gosvāmī’s
superiority is self-evident.”

Śrī Kṣīroda Bābū was somewhat taken aback by this
answer. In the meantime, Ācārya Kesarī had heard the
voices while he was chanting harināma inside the house
and had listened attentively to the discussion. He
quickly appeared on the scene, and a philosophical
battle started between the Bābū and himself.

Kṣīroda Bābū demanded, “Why don’t you have the
brahmacārīs study Śāṅkara-bhāṣya of the Brahma-sūtra?”

Gurudeva explained, “We have them study Śrī Bhāṣya,
Āṇubhāṣya, Govinda-bhāṣya and other commentaries of
Vyāsa’s Brahma-sūtra, but not the commentary of Ācārya
Śaṅkara.”

“Why not? You don’t study Ācārya Śaṅkara’s commentary,
even though he is an incarnation of Śaṅkara?”

                           89
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


“Even though he is an incarnation of Śaṅkara, the views
in his commentary are completely fabricated. This false
philosophy is in reality only covered Buddhism, and he
took shelter of it by the order of Bhagavān, in order to
control the Buddhists who were opposed to the Vedas and
Īśvara. This is clearly mentioned in Padma Purāṇa
(Uttara Khaṇḍa 25.7), māyāvādaṁ asacchastraṁ.”

“But don’t you accept the four mahā-vākyas of the Vedas:
ahaṁ brahmāsmi, prajñānaṁ brahma, tattvamasi, and
ekamevādvitīyam and the other clauses that Śaṅkara has
established?”

“It is not written in the Vedas or Upaniṣads that these
four vākyas (clauses) are mahā-vākyas. If what you are
claiming is true, then please support it with evidence.”

Kṣīroda Bābū was unable to answer, and sat quietly for
some time.

Gurudeva went on, “The only mahā-vākya in the Vedas is
oṁ; all other clauses are secondary. Alternatively, you
can say that all the clauses in the Vedas are mahā-
vākyas. Do you consider that the nirākāra, nirviśeṣa,
nirguṇa, and nirañjana Brahman, which Śaṅkara has tried
to establish are the same as saviśeṣa, sarvaśaktimān,
and ānandamaya Brahman, the shelter of all
transcendental qualities, established by Śrīla
Vedavyāsa?”

“Why not? All the eminent scholars of India corroborate
the doctrine of Śaṅkara.”

“Ācārya Śrī Rāmānuja, Madhvācārya, Nimbānditya,
Viṣṇusvāmī, Ballabhācārya, Kumārila Bhaṭṭa and other
learned persons have completely annihilated the doctrine
of Śaṅkara. The nirviśeṣa, niḥśaktik, nirākara Brahman
can never be ānanda svarūpa or ānandamaya. This
philosophy is just a kind of hidden Buddhism.”

Kṣīroda Bābū still did not understand. He said, “Your
statement is thoroughly confusing. Ācārya Śaṅkara
clearly established the doctrine, ‘brahma satyaṁ
jaganmithyā jīvo brahmaiva nāpara.’ Additionally, he
uses the term ‘ānanda-svarūpa’ to indicate Brahman. When
the jīva attains liberation from māyā it becomes one
with Brahman and perceives ānanda-svarūpa Brahman.”

Gurudeva explained further, “This siddhānta is only
Ācārya Śaṅkara’s fabrication. It is against śāstra. I
can destroy Ācārya Śaṅkara’s counterfeit idea that
Brahman is ānanda-svarūpa, simply on the basis of its
inference. Later on, I will demolish the statement that
the jīva becomes Brahman by merging into Brahman and
that the world is false. First, can you explain why you
want to merge into the nirviśeṣa Brahman?”

“Because Brahman is ānanda-svarūpa, the embodiment of
ānanda, so the jīva who merges into this Brahman also
becomes ānanda-svarūpa Brahman.”

“I say that Ācārya Śaṅkara’s nirviśeṣa Brahman is an
embodiment of stool. Do you have any objection to that?

                           90
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

If a jīva is able to merge into ānanda-svarūpa Brahman,
then he cannot have a separate experience of it. So how,
being Brahman, is the jīva able to experience ānanda, if
by desiring to merge with nirviśeṣa Brahman it cannot be
realized? It is only possible to experience ānanda when
one’s existence is separate from it. For example, anyone
who tastes sugar is able to say that sugar is sweet. But
if the person is made into sugar, how can he experience
his own sweetness? Similarly, how can anyone who is made
into stool experience his own bad smell? Therefore, it
doesn’t make any difference whether you call nirviśeṣa
Brahman the embodiment of ānanda or the embodiment of
stool. They are one and the same thing, because there is
no separate taster.”

Kṣīroda Bābū became completely silent. He offered
respects to Śrī Gurudeva by bowing his head and returned
to his home.

While we were staying with Śrīla Gurupādapadma, we
observed him discussing siddhānta with prominent
advaita-vādīs (impersonalists) in this way. Everyone was
respectful in the face of his deep personality, his
brilliant language, his wealth of scriptural evidence,
and his strong arguments. We will present these
doctrinal debates in the course of this book.

In the evening Śrīla Gurudeva gave a brilliant lecture
on sanātana-dharma to a huge public audience. For almost
two and a half hours, ten to fifteen thousand people sat
quietly like wooden dolls, reverentially listening to
his speech. The following is the essence of that
lecture.

“According to the Vedas, Upaniṣads, Vedānta-sūtra,
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā and other scriptures,
the root cause of creation and annihilation and the
limit of para-tattva is Svayaṁ Bhagavān. He is not
subject to birth, death or destruction. He is the
complete sanātana-tattva because He exists in the past,
present and future. The meaning of the word sanātana is
sadā (always) and tan (to continue), and refers to one
who is present in the past, present and future. Thus the
meaning of sanātana-dharma is the constitutional
function of someone who is ever-existing. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam it is said—

aho bhāgyam aho bhāgyaṁ nandagopavrajaukasām

yan mitraṁ paramānandaṁ pūrṇaṁ brahma sanātanam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.32)

“‘O! How greatly fortunate are Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā Maiyā
and all the other gopas and gopīs of Braja. There is
factually no limit to their good fortune, because Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is the abode of paramānanda (supreme bliss),
and the eternal and complete form of Brahman, is their
relative and friend.’

“Here Kṛṣṇa is called the eternal, complete Brahman. The
jīvātmā is also acknowledged to be this sanātana-tattva
because the uncountable souls are eternal (sanātana)
parts of sanātana-parabrahman Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa

                           91
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

Himself calls them His eternal parts in Bhagavad-gītā
(15.7):

mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke jīva-bhūtaḥsanātanaḥ

manaḥ ṣasṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

“‘O Arjuna! I am Sarveśvara (the Lord of all). All jīvas
are My parts and they are all eternal. Like the empty
space inside a waterpot, they are not fabricated or
false. Due to being conditioned and opposed to Me, they
are struggling intensely with the mind and the five
senses in this material world.’

And also,

nityaḥ sarva-gataḥ sthāṇur acalo ‘yaṁsanātanaḥ

(Bhagavad-gītā 2.24)

“‘This jīvātmā is changeless and immortal. It cannot be
cut by any weapon, burnt by fire, moistened by water or
dried by air. It is nitya (eternal), all-pervasive,
unchanging, steadfast and sanātana (ever-existing).’

“Thus, according to the Vedic śāstras there are two
sanātana-tattvas (eternal principles): one is Svāyaṁ
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the undivided, complete sanātana-
tattva; and the other is the jīva, the divided,
aṇusanātana-tattva. The nature of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, bṛhat-
caitanya-svarūpa (the embodiment of complete
consciousness) is unchangeable, but if the jīva is
opposed to Bhagavān, his pure nature can be covered due
to his being aṇusanātana-tattva (eternal but atomic in
size). But by nature, the jīva’s dharma (constitutional
nature) is śuddha and sanātana. Prema is the only
sanātana-dharma of the jīva. The eternal, pure prema is
service to Kṛṣṇa, therefore the svarūpa-dharma or
sanātana-dharma of the jīva is service to Kṛṣṇa. In
different places in the scriptures this sanātana-dharma
is referred to as bhāgavat-dharma or vaiṣṇava-dharma.

“The pure sanātana-dharma of the conditioned jīva is
distorted by māyā. In such circumstances, the jīva
considers the dharma of the gross and subtle body to be
his dharma, because he only understands the gross and
subtle body. But the dharma of these two bodies is not
sanātana-dharma, because it is perishable and prone to
change. ‘I am Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Sikh, Buddhist’
and ‘I am a brahmaṇa or kṣatriya’ are identifications of
the gross body, so this gross dharma is not sanātana.
Nowadays, pure sanātana-dharma is rarely preached due to
a lack of pure understanding of the Absolute Truth.
Actually the relationship of servant and master between
the jīva and īśvara is nitya (eternal) and sanātana
(ever-existing). This relationship is what is known as
sanātana-dharma.”

After this Śrīla Gurudeva extensively preached śuddha
sanātana-dharma, which is also known as śuddha-bhakti-
dharma. Accompanied by Śrī Nagendragovardhana Brahmacārī
and Śrī Gaṇeśa Dāsa, he preached in the towns of
Kulabāḍī, Hamscauḍā, Pichladā, Jhīnukkhālī, Narghaṭa,
and Terapekhyā. From there they travelled by boat with a

                           92
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

party of devotees from Pūrī to Gadāmathurā Saptama
Khaṇḍa, Gadāmathurā Pañcama, ±aṣṭha and Aṣṭama Khaṇḍa,
Āīplāṭa Prathama Khaṇḍa, Kedārpur, Āīplāṭa Dvitīya
Khaṇḍa, Sūryapur and various other places. A month and a
half later he returned to the maṭha in Chuṅchuṛā.



The self-manifestation of Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā on the
occasion of Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and Śrī Gaura-
Janmotsava

In March 1949, the parikramā and Śrī Gaura-Janmotsava
were celebrated with great festivities at Śrī Devānanda
Gauḍīya Maṭha in Navadvīpa. On Gaura Pūrṇima day, Śrī
Gauḍīya Patrikā, the transcendental monthly magazine of
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, manifested itself. The
maṅgalācaraṇa (auspicious beginning) of Śrī Patrikā took
place with prayers to Śrī Hari, Guru, and the Vaiṣṇavas.
On the masthead of the front cover of this first issue,
the name of Śrī Patrikā was written on the top of a
mṛdanga and karatālas, surrounded by a lotus, club,
conchshell and disc. Below this was a picture of Śrīla
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda.

The founder and founder-ācārya of Śrī Patrikā was
Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Mahārāja; the editor was Śrī Mahānanda Brahmacārī
Bhaktiśātrī Bhaktyāloka; and the preaching managers were
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktikuśal Nārsiṁha Mahārāja and
Paṇḍita Śrimad Jagannātha Ballabha Bābājī Mahārāja. The
contributing editors were Mahopadeśaka Paṇḍita Śrīpāda
Narottamānanda Brahmacārī Bhaktikamala Bhaktiśāstrī,
Paṇḍita Śrīyut Nāmvaikuṇṭha Dāsādhikārī, Paṇḍita Śrīyuta
Rādhānātha Dāsādhikārī, and Paṇḍita Śrīyut Gaura-
Nārāyaṇa Dāsādhikārī. The office manager was Paṇḍita
Kṛṣṇa Kāruṇya Brahmacārī Bhaktimaṇḍapa. The magazine was
published by Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha in Chuṅchuṛā by
Śrī Sajjansevaka Brahmacārī and printed by Śānti Press.

The essay ‘Viraha-māṅgalya’ states that it was written
with a desire to attain the svārasikī sevā of Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Vinodabihārī, under the guidance of vipralambha-
rasamaya vigraha Śrī Śrīman Mahāprabhu and the eternally
liberated, most munificent paramahaṁsas who are immersed
in His mood. In addition, the magazine included
philosophical dissertations by Jagadguru Śrīla
Prabhupāda, Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, an article about
Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā and the article ‘Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedāntācārya Śrī Baladeva Vidyabhūṣaṇa’ by Śrīla
Gurudeva. There were many other essays which enhanced
the splendour of Śrī Patrikā with their research and
explanation of prema bhakti. The first issue was
dedicated at the lotus feet of Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva, the
destroyer of all obstacles, whose temple in Devapallī
was visited on the first day of the Śrīdhāma parikramā.
It was placed in the lotus hands of Śrīla Prabhupāda in
his samādhi mandira in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, when the
pilgrims visited it on the last day of the parikramā.

The vaiṣṇavas enthusiastically began to sign up for the
Patrikā’s yearly subscription.



                           93
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Śrī Ayodhyādhāma, Naimiṣāraṇya parikramā and ūrjā vrata

In April, 1949, Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti’s founder and
president, Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhakti-
prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, was invited to Śrī
Gaurāṇga Maṭha in Kesiyāḍī in the district of Medinīpura
by the maṭha’s founder and president, Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Śrīmad Bhaktikumuda Santa Mahārāja. Śrīla Gurudeva
accepted the invitation and went with many of his
associates. Śrīmad Bhaktisarvasva Giri Mahārāja, Śrīmad
Bhaktigaurava Vaikhānasa Mahārāja and other sannyāsīs,
brahmacārīs and gṛhastha-vaiṣṇavas were also present.
After that Śrīla Gurudeva returned to Śrī Uddhāraṇa
Gauḍīya Maṭha in Chuṅchuṛā and celebrated Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s disappearance day and the
festival of Śrī Rātha-yātrā very splendidly.

Later that year, in the month of Kārtika, Śrīla Gurudeva
organized a parikramā to Śrī Ayodhyā and Naimiṣāraṇya.
There ūrjā-vrata niyam-sevā was observed. The pilgrims
carried the Deity of Śrīman Mahāprabhu on the parikramā,
and they stopped at Ayodhyā’s famous Lakṣmaṇ Kilā
(Lakṣmaṇ’s fort). This is a charming place on the banks
of the sacred Sarayu River, which even today reveals the
traditions of ancient times. Śrīla Gurudeva, who was
managing the entire parikramā, lectured on the glories
of the dhāma. Mahopadeśaka Śrīpāda Narottamānanda
Brahmacārī Bhaktiśāstrī Bhaktikamala Prabhu particularly
attracted an audience to hari-kathā by using black-and-
white slides to illustrate his Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
lectures. Under Śrīla Gurudeva’s guidance, the pilgrims
took darśana of Śrī Rāmacandrajī’s birthplace, Śrī
Rāmadarbār, Kanakbhavan, Hanumāngaḍhī, Dvādaśa Mandira,
Vālmīki Bhavan, Darśaneśvar-nātha Śīva, Pāpamocana
Ghāṭa, Svargadvāra, Nāgeśvara Mahādeva, Brahma Ghāṭa,
Śrī Sūrya Kuṇḍa, Goptāra Ghāṭa and other famous places
in Ayodhyā dhāma.

After staying twenty days in Ayodhyā, the parikramā
party went to Naimiṣāraṇya via Bālāmu Junction. When
they arrived, their first programme was a royal
saṅkīrtana at Paramahaṁsa Gauḍīya Maṭha, which had been
established by Śrīla Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda. Then they took rooms at a large, local
dharmaśālā.

At the dharmaśālā, Śrīla Gurudeva read from Mahāprabhu’s
teachings to Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta. He explained that it is detrimental for an
unqualified person to perform bhajana in a secluded
place, for unless the sādhaka has the association of a
superior tattva-darśī Vaiṣṇava (a self-realized soul),
the Name uttered in this solitary bhajana is always full
of anarthas (offences). Lack of pure association also
makes one unable to understand the nature of śuddha-
bhakti. Bhajana in the association of elevated vaiṣṇavas
is actually real solitary bhajana. Bhaktis tu bhagavad-
bhakta-saṅgena parījāyate (Bṛhan-Nāradīya Purāṇa 4.33):
“One attains pure kṛṣṇa-bhakti by the elevated
association of a pure Vaiṣṇava.”

Neither a goṣṭhānandī, a bhakta who preaches, nor a
viviktānandī (bhajanānandī), a bhakta who engages

                           94
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

exclusively in hearing and chanting, actually performs
solitary bhajana. This is because even though the
viviktānandī performs solitary bhajana, he assists in
the goṣṭhānandī's preaching of śrī nāma prema by
nourishing a favourable mood. One example of this is the
incident when the bhajanānandī Śrīla Gaura Kiśora Dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja blessed Vinodabihārī Brahmacārī by
taking away all the obstacles in his preaching,
inspiring him to preach fearlessly.

Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s instructions to restore lost places
of pilgrimage, to establish Deity worship, to compose
bhakti literature and to preach nāma-prema are not only
for Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī; rather, they are clear
directions for all bhakti-sādhakas. Therefore, Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī and other elevated
vaiṣṇavas would meet in iṣṭhagoṣṭhīs to accomplish these
tasks of bhakti. Nowadays, many sādhakas with weak faith
imitate solitary bhajana, but they soon stray from the
path and fall down from the realm of bhajana.

At Śrī Vyāsagaddī in Naimiṣāraṇya, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja
gave a profound lecture which delved deeply into
bhagavat-tattva. He explained this tattva directly and
indirectly as he described the bhāgavat guru-paramparā
and the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana Vedavyāsa.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrīla Veda-vyāsa’s foremost literary
composition, is the actual commentary on the Brahma-
sūtra, the conclusion of Mahābhārata, the commentary on
gāyatrī, and the ripened, nectarean fruit of the Veda,
which is like a desire tree. One who has already tasted
this nectar can never become attracted to any other
śāstra. This treatise contains astonishing solutions to
all problems pertaining to all people, in all countries,
throughout all time. While Śrīla Vyasadeva was in
samādhi, he realized the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam by bhaktī in
his pure heart. It is not just a book, but rather it is
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s literary incarnation.

In Naimiṣāraṇya the pilgrims took darśana of Brahma-
kuṇḍa, Gaṅgotrī, Daśāśvamedha Ghāṭa, Gomatīgaṅgā,
Yajñavaraha Kūpa, Śrī Lakṣmī Nṛsiṁhadeva, Cakratīrtha
and other places. In Miśrikatīrtha they took darśana of
Sītā-kuṇḍa, Vālmīki Āśram, the place were Sītādevī
entered Pātāla, Dadhīci Muni’s āśrama and many other
places. When the niyama-sevā kārtika-vrata was
completed, the pilgrims returned home.



Śrī Setubandha Rāmeśvara parikramā and ūrjā-vrata

The following year, 1950, Śrīla Gurudeva, the founder of
the Samiti, arranged a parikramā of Setubandha Rāmeśvara
to observe kārtika niyama-sevā. Under his guidance,
approximately 200 faithful bhaktas had the good fortune
of observing the kārtika vrata by performing parikramā
of the various South Indian places of pilgrimage which
had been purified by the footprints of Śrī Gaura.

The journey began from Howrah Station in Calcutta and
the first stop was Jagannath Purī Dhāma. In South India,
the pilgrims had darśana of Siṁhācalam, Maṅgalagiri,
Madrās (Chennaī), Ciṅgalpuṭ, Kaṅjīvaram, Cidambaram,

                           95
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

Sīyāli, Māyābharam, Tīrumeḍāmāruḍū, Kummakoṇam,
Pāpnāśanam, Tanjor, Rāmeśvaram, Dhanuṣkoḍī, Śrī
Vaikuṇṭham, Terucaṇḍūr, Kanyākumārī, Sucindram,
Tīruvantar, Trivendrum, Varkalā, Śaṅkarnārāyaṇakail, Śrī
Milīputtar, Madurā, Pālnī, Śrī Raṅgam, Vṛddhācalam,
Tiruminnāmalaī, Tirupati, Tirumalaī, Tirucāṇur, and
Kalahasī. Finally they arrived at Gunṭūr Junction, and
from there returned to Howraha Station. After observing
kārtika-vrata with a month of sādhu-saṅga,
saṅkīrtana,hari-kathā and darśana of innumerable
incomparably delightful places of pilgrimage, all the
bhaktas returned home. They were overwhelmed with
gratitude towards Śrī Guru Mahārāja. At the time of
departure, they fell at his lotus feet with their eyes
brimming with tears, and begged for his blessings:
“Please bestow your mercy on us so that we can quickly
obtain the association of Vaiṣṇavas and gradually
progress on the path of śuddha-bhakti.”



Śrīla Prabhupāda’s viraha-utsava in Ānandapāḍā

December 26th, 1950: On the occasion of Jagadguru Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s disappearance day, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja and
some fifteen maṭha residents preached the word of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu for seven days in Śaraṇāthīpallī in
Ānandapāḍā, in the district of Chaubīs Parganā. The
pious people living in the area were very impressed with
Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva’s exceptional hari-
kathā. The following is the essence of one of his
lectures.

“The majority of you have left East Bengal and have come
here to India to protect your dharma. The rule of
Bhagavān is always to give good fortune to the jīvas.
The purpose of human life is not simply to arrange for
food and clothing; it is to perform dharma. But what is
that dharma? One does not become a Hindu by adopting the
behaviour, dress, mannerisms, ways of thinking, and
ideology of the yavanas, and paying lip service to
Hinduism. We can only be Hindus by genuinely observing
the behaviour and views of the Hindu sanātana-dharma.
The real reason for the misery of Hindu society today is
the people’s lack of faith and devotion to their own
dharma. Modern Hindu society has forgotten its dharma
and is giving up its own personality because of Western
education and contact with Westerners. That is the main
reason for people’s misery today. We Hindus have
forgotten to devote our life to dharma, so the
degradation of Hinduism is inevitable. We have forgotten
the instructions and teachings of Śrī Rāma and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and instead we are going in the opposite direction.
Dharma is a matter of conduct; it is not to be
acknowledged only by mouth, but by our actions. Troubled
days are before us. If we are indifferent to our dharma,
we will suffer the consequences.

“Each person’s house is an āśrama. We live there to
practice bhāgavad-bhakti. If we are merely absorbed in
eating, sleeping, defending and mating, then staying at
home is like residing in hell. Living in such a
situation and being addicted to tamasic things, the jīva
will become more opposed to Bhagavān. Therefore the one

                           96
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

and only duty is to reject tamasic things such as
onions, garlic, meat, fish, alcohol, smoking, etc. It is
necessary to construct new settlements or villages on
the foundation of dharma. The backbone of these new
villages should be dharma. Without dharma the human
being becomes like a four-legged animal. Only by means
of dharma can human beings have worldly and
transcendental happiness.”



Preaching sanātana-dharma in Vasīrahāṭa and the reply to
Śrī Chaṭṭopādhyāya Mahāśaya’s protest

Throughout 1950, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja extensively
preached śrī sanātana-dharma in Medinīpura, Narghāṭa,
Śītalpura, Haldiyā, Tamaluk, Bājīpura in Chaubīs
Parganā, Vasīrhāṭa and other places. In the large
religious assembly of Vasīrhāṭa, Ācārya Kesarī
established with a lion-like voice the philosophical
conclusions of sanātana-dharma, and refuted the
worthless, non-Vedic, kevalādvaita-vāda put forward by
the hidden Buddhist, Ācārya Śaṅkara.

Śrī Gurudeva said that bhagavad-bhakti is sanātana-
dharma. The constitutional position of the jīva is to be
a servant of Bhagavān. Therefore, service of Bhagavān is
sanātana-dharma in the past, present and future. This
dharma is also known as Vedic dharma, bhagavad-dharma
and vaiṣṇava-dharma.

The jīva and the material world are never false. The
jīva is eternally a part of Bhagavān, and the material
world, which is manifested by Bhagavān’s external
potency (aparā-prakṛti), is also true although
changeable and perishable. The world is not false or
illusory like a dream, or like a rope resembling a
snake. The ideas of Śaṅkara, which are illusory and
contrary to logic, are only respected by extremely dense
people.

Śrī Gurudeva concluded his talk by saying, “This is what
we are teaching the young men of the Vedānta Samiti.”

In Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā’s fourth issue, during its second
year of publication, a synopsis of the above lecture
given by Śrīla Guru Mahārāja was published. After
reading the article, Śrī Satyabhūṣaṇa Chaṭṭopādhyāya
Mahodaya of Ṭāṭānagara wrote a letter challenging this
lecture. Śrīla Guru Mahārāja replied to his letter
according to scriptural logic and siddhānta. Śrīla Guru
Mahārāja’s letter is cited below.

“To summon the well-educated community of the world to
attain real tattva-darśana (realization of the Absolute)
is not to challenge anyone in any way. Careful
consideration and comparison has established that the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas’ acintya-bhedābheda-siddhānta (the
philosophy of simultaneous oneness and difference) is
superior to Ācārya Śaṅkara’s advaita-vāda or māyāvāda
(impersonalism). Pure Vaiṣṇavas do not have even the
slightest trace of faith in Ācārya Śrī Saṅkara’s views,
although we see that some proud, mixed Vaiṣṇavas have
faith in māyāvāda. We are Vaiṣṇava sannyāsis, and we

                           97
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

consider the refinement of society to be part of the
purification process of dharma. We have the right to
explain the truth of any subject to the educated
community for their welfare. Some people may become
disturbed when we preach truth, because they consider
non-truth to be truth; but in reality we do not want to
agitate anyone. We only want to say that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s teachings and practice are the foremost in
the entire world. We do not blaspheme Ācārya Śaṅkara,
but we are not ready to praise his opinions and
doctrines in any way.”

Śrīla Gurudeva’s answers to Śrī Chaṭṭopādhyāya
Mahāśaya’s many questions about the philosophy of
māyāvāda have been published in instalments in Śrī
Gauḍīya Patrikā.



Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā, Śrī Gaura-Janmotsava and
Śrī Vigraha’s inauguration of Their newly constructed
residence

In March 1951, the week-long Śrī Navadvīpa dhāma
parikramā and Śrī Gaura-Janmotsava were performed very
splendidly. Faithful pilgrims and bhaktas came to
participate, not only from Bengal but from all over
India. By the splendid management of Śrīla Guru
Mahārāja, all the pilgrims engaged in harināma-
saṅkīrtana, listened to wonderful hari-kathā, had
darśana of the places of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s pastimes,
and obtained the good fortune of the parikramā.

Until that time Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha which is Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti’s original maṭha, was located in
a small rented building. This served as a temple where
the Deities were worshipped and also as headquarters for
the management of the entire Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma
parikramā. The pilgrims stayed in tents erected in a
nearby field. That year the Samiti built huge fences on
the field to enclose the extensive area where the
arrangements for the parikramā were made. In one part of
this field a śrī mandira, a sevaka-khaṇḍa and a bhoga
storage area were constructed. In another part, tents
were set up for lodging the many pilgrims. Before the
parikramā, the Deities arrived at this new temple
accompanied by a magnificent nagar-saṅkīrtana.

The great bhāgavat, Śrīyuta Haripada Dāsa Adhikārī of
Śrī Rāmapur in the district of Hoogly, and his devout
wife, Śrīmatī Jñānadāsundarī Devī, generously financed
the construction of the high fences and the temple in
the huge field of Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha. This made
them the object of many blessings from Śrīla Guru
Mahārāja. Their ideal service and activities inspired
other virtuous people to also perform bhagavat-sevā.



Śrīpada Trigunātita Brahmacārī Prabhu’s veśāśraya

Siddhavāṭī Gauḍīya Maṭha in the town of Sīdhāvāḍī in the
Vardhamān district was constructed by Śrīpāda
Triguṇātīta Brahmacārī Prabhu. Previously he had been

                           98
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

the president of Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha, the main
preaching centre of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. Śrīla
Guru Mahārāja went to Siddhavāṭī Gauḍīya Maṭha after Śrī
Gaura Janmotsava. On May 11th, 1951, the auspicious
opening day of the newly built maṭha, Śrīpāda
Brahmacārījī was given veśāśraya (the cloth of a bābājī)
by Śrīla Guru Mahārāja.

Śrīpāda Triguṇātīta Brahmacārī was a learned and
respected member of the famous Mukharjī family (Sir
Āśutoṣa Mukharjī) from the village of Jiraṭa-Bālāgaḍha
in the District of Hoogly. His previous name was Śrī
Triguṇanātha Mukhopādhyāya and after accepting bābājī-
veśa he became known as Śrīmad Triguṇātīta Dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja. A brahmacārī since boyhood, he was one of the
foremost of Jagadguru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī’s
initiated, ekaniṣṭha (having fixed and undivided faith)
servants. All the service that he faithfully performed
for Śrīla Prabhupāda and the Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha Mission
established by Prabhupāda was outstanding. His
renunciation, detachment and service attitide are
especially worthy of being followed. When the ekaniṣṭha
guru-sevaka Śrīpāda Anaṅgamohana Brahmacārī was sick,
Śrī Triguṇātīta affectionately nursed him in a way which
is exemplary for all Vaiṣṇavas. It has already been
mentioned how he gave Śrī Gauraṅga Press, including all
its equipment, to the Samiti. He was very rare in the
vaiṣṇava world.



Preaching of śuddha-bhakti in different places

While Śrī Guru Mahārāja was staying at Śrī Siddhavāṭī
Gauḍīya Maṭha, he vigorously preached bhakti for three
days in Pānjanīyā Grāma on the special request of Śrīyut
Bhagavān Dāsādhikārī, a resident of the village. After
that, Śrīla Gurudeva preached śrī sanātana vaiṣṇava-
dharma extensively in Kākadvīpa, Kalārcaka, Sarbeḍiyā,
Ekatārā, Daimaṇḍa, Hārvara, Cānda-nagara, Mathurāpur,
Kāṁśīnagara and other places in the Chaubīs Parganā
District.

That same year, during the month of Kārtika, for the
second time Śrīla Gurudeva led 200 sannyāsīs,
brahmacārīs and gṛhasta-bhaktas on the 84-kosa Vraja-
maṇḍala parikramā and performance of ūrjā vrata. The
pilgrims left from Howraha Station, and after having
darśana of Gayā, Kaśi, Prayag and other holy places,
they arrived at Mathurā Dhāma.

In Gayā they had darśana of Śrī Gadādhara-pādapadma (the
lotus feet of Śrī Gadādhara), Phalgutīrtha, Bodhagayā
and the Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha. In Kaśi they went to Śrī
Sanātana śikṣa-sthalī, Śrī Viśvanātha Mandira,
Veṇīmādhava, Annapūrṇā, Daś-āśvamedha Ghāṭa and
Manikarṇikā Ghāṭa. Then in Prayāga they had darśana of
Śrī Rūpa Gauḍīya Maṭha, Triveṇīsaṅgama, Śrī
Bindumādhava, Śrī Rūpa śikṣa-sthalī, Daśāśvamedha Ghāṭa
and other places.

In Mathurā, the parikramā party stayed at the large
Helanagaṅjavālī Dharmśālā for a few days. During that
time they had darśana of the famous Viśrāma Ghāṭa,

                           99
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Dvārikādhīśa, Gataśrama Ṭīlā, Dhruva Ṭīlā, Pippaleśvara
Mahādeva, Raṅgeśvara Mahādeva, Bhūteśvara Mahādeva,
Gokarṇeśvara Mahādeva, Śvetavarāha, Kṛṣṇavarāha, Sapta
Ṛṣi, Dīrgha Viṣṇu, Śrī Padmanābha, Kṛṣṇa Janmabhūmi
(Kṛṣṇa’s birthplace), Kaṁsa Kārāgāra (the prison house
of Kaṁsa) and other places.

After that, following in the footsteps of Śrīla
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda, they started Vraja-maṇḍala
parikramā of the twelve forests and Kṛṣṇa’s places of
pastimes in these forests. They did parikramā of the
forests on the western bank of Yamunā, namely 1)
Vṛndāvana, 2) Madhuvana, 3) Tālavana, 4) Kumudavana, 5)
Bahulāvana, 6) Kāmyavana, 7) Khadīravana; and then the
forests on the eastern bank: 8) Bhadravana, 9)
Bhāṇḍīravana, 10) Belvana, 11) Lohavana and 12)
Mahāvana.

At Śrī Govardhana, a huge Annakūṭa ceremony was
performed. On other days, the pilgrims did parikramā of
Śrī Girirāja, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa,
Vṛndāvana, Nandagram, and Varsānā. The Samiti arranged
prasāda and accomodation for all the pilgrims so that
they could concentrate without anxiety on hearing about
the glories of the dhāma and listening attentively to
classes on bhakti. At the end of the parikramā and
vrata, the pilgrims returned to their respective homes
with tears in their eyes.



The collecting and publishing of Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā-paddhati

In the month of Feburary 1952, Śrī Śrī Vyāsa-pūja was
celebrated with great festivities for three days, from
Māghī Kṛṣṇā Tṛtīyā to Māghi Pañcamī, at Śrī Uddhārana
Gauḍīya Maṭha in Chuṅchuṛā. On Śrīla Guru Mahārāja’s
appearance day, he gave valuable instructions in
response to the greetings and puṣpāñjali of the
Vaiṣṇavas. He said, “Tridaṇḍī-sannyāsis should perform
Śrī Gurupūjā on their own appearance days. With this
Guru-pūjā it is also necessary together to worship the
guru-paramparā, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala and Sacinānadana
Śrī Gaurahari and His associates. Vyāsa-pūjā, guru-pūjā,
ācārya-pūjā and upāsya-pūjā are different names for the
same tattva (category of a concept). The word kṛṣṇa-
pañcaka does not mean five types of kṛṣṇa-pūjā, rather
it is a pūjā whose objects are Kṛṣṇa’s five
manifestation (prakaśas or vilāsas).

“Ācārya Śrī Śaṅkar’s vyāsa-pūjā is not a true vyāsa-
pūjā; it is only for show. Vyāsa’s sampradāya is the
foremost in India; India and Indians are indebted to
him. But at the present time the educated community of
India is showing disrespect towards Vyāsa. This is a
very painful matter. Therefore, the Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti is celebrating Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā very
enthusiastically in different places of India.

Śrīla Prabhupāda collected the book Vyāsa pūja-paddhati
from Śrī Govardhana Maṭha in Purī. Śrīla Gurudeva also
collected the same paddhati from Brahma Maṭha in Pushkar
and Śārdā Maṭha of Gomatidvārkā. He published Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s revised and modified edition in

                          100
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

the third issue of the fourth year of Śrī Gauḍīya
Patrikā. To this day, all the maṭhas of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti, and especially the original maṭha, Śrī
Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in Navadvīpa, celebrate vyāsa-
pūjā according to this paddhati.



Awarding aṣṭottara-śata-nāmi tridaṇḍa-sannyāsa

In 1952, with great festivity Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti
sponsored the week-long Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā
and Śrī Gaura-Janmotsava from March 6th to March 12th.
On Gaura Pūrṇima day (Monday, March 11th) at Śrī
Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha, the founder and president of
the Samiti, Parivrājakācārya Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, gave Vedic
tridaṇḍi-sannyāsa dress to Śrī Sajjansevaka Brahmacārī,
the publisher of Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā; to Śrī Rādhānātha
Dāsa Adhikārī, the office-in-charge of the Patrika; and
to Śrī Gaura-Nārāyaṇa Dāsādhikārī Bhaktabāndhava, the
preaching manager of the Patrikā. This was according to
the vaiṣṇava sāttvata-smṛti (authentic regulations for
vaiṣṇava practice) aṣṭottara-śata-nāmi (108 names)
system. Their sannyāsa names became Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja7 , Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja8 and Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja9, respectively.

The sannyāsa title ‘Bhaktivedānta’ before the sannyāsa
names was completely unheard of until that day. The
president of Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, whose nature is
identical to that of Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, the
composer of the Govinda-bhāṣya commentary on Brahma-
sūtra, inundated the earth with the flow of Gauḍīya
vedānta. Gauḍīya vedānta is non-different from bhakti-
vedānta. Its purport is established in the pāramahaṁsī
saṁhitā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is the authentic
commentary on Brahma-sūtra. Pure-hearted, expert
Vaiṣṇavas, who know how to extract the essence, realize
the very deep secret of bhakti-tattva through Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.

On Phālguna Pūrṇimā, the appearance day of Śrī Gaura,
the bhaktas had been fasting since morning. Reading of
the entire Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata was going on, together
with saṅkīrtana. Sometimes local Navadvīpa vāsīs entered
the maṭha compound stained with the bright colours of
Holi, singing Holi songs accompanied by ḍholak and small
cymbals, and throwing showers of coloured powder.
Joining the saṅkīrtana, they performed parikramā of the
Deities, took darśana of Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga Rādhā-
Vinodabihārī and Śrī Koladeva and then left. The
pilgrims had bathed in the Gaṅgā and were dressed in new
clothes. Carrying coloured powder in their hands they
first offered it to Śrī Mandira, then they offered
praṇāmas to Guru and Vaiṣṇavas, and with great love they
embraced one another.

At noon, the saṁskaras (rituals) of dor-kaupīn and daṇḍa
were performed, followed by the giving of sannyāsa, the
fire sacrifice and other rituals. These were all done
according to the rules of the vaiṣṇava-smṛti, Saṁskāra-
dīpikā. The sky was filled with the sound of saṅkīrtana

                          101
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

and jaya-dhvanī (jubilant cries of ‘Jaya!’) and the
atmosphere was beautified by the deep reverberation of
the conchshells and the auspicious ulū sounds made by
the ladies. On this glorious occasion, Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Śrīla Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja gave the sannyāsa-mantra
and the aṣṭottaraśata sannyāsī names, names indicative
of bhakti, to his three initiated servants in front of
an audience of thousands of faithful people. After the
ceremony, on the order of Śrīla Guru Mahārāja, the new
tridaṇḍi-yatis went out to beg alms, as is befitting in
the sannyāsa āśrama. Following the rules of the āśrama,
they offered everything they received from begging—
grains, money, flowers and fruits—to the lotus feet of
their Guru.

In the evening, in an assembly filled with innumerable
pilgrims, the three new sannyāsis astonished their
audience by explaining the profound truths and
philosophical conclusions of śuddha-bhakti.



Preaching śuddha-bhakti in various places of Assam

In April 1952, Paramārādhyatama Ācārya Kesarī traveled
to the state of Assam to preach Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
prema-dharma extensively. He was accompanied by
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktikuśala Nārsiṁha Mahārāja,
Śrīmad Dāmodara Mahārāja, Śrīmad Trivikrama Mahārāja,
Śrīmad Vāmana Mahārāja, Śrīmad Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Śrī
Parameśvara Brahmacārī, Śrī Satya Vigraha dāsa Adhikari,
Śrī Sudāma Sakhā Brahmacārī, Śrī Dhīra Kṛṣṇa Brahmacārī
and others. Śrīla Guru Mahārāja and the preaching party
first visited the house of Śrīmatī Sucitra Bālādevī in
Golokagaṅja. Then they preached very strongly in the
town of Dhūvaḍī, where they stayed at the residence of
Pūjyapāda Nimānanda Sevātīrtha Prabhu. Afterwards, on
the special invitation of respected Śrī G. N. Niyogī
Mahodaya, the chief minister of the kingdom of
Abhaypurī, Śrīla Gurudeva gave an impressive lecture on
Hindu dharma in the Bijanī royal palace of Abhaypurī.
From there Śrīla Gurudeva went to the village of
Bhāṭīpāḍā on the entreaty of the members of the Assam
Vaiṣṇava Assembly. Thereafter he lectured magnificently
on sanātana-dharma and Mahāprabhu’s philosophy at a huge
gathering at Gāndhī Maidan in Boṅgāī village.

After preaching in these places, Śrīla Gurudeva went to
Mālī, a large, important township in Assam, on the
insistence of Śrī Yādavendra Dāsa and Premānanda Dāsa.
Mālī is the stronghold of a community which is
completely against the philosophy of Śrī Caitanya. The
majority of the people there worship niḥśaktik Kṛṣṇa,
but do not accept His śrī vigraha. They do not
acknowledge Śrī Vyāsadeva’s Śrīmad-Bhāgvatam as
authoritative, but rather favour the modern
Bhagavatpothī, written in Assamese by Hankaradeva. They
eat fish, meat, onions and garlic and drink alcohol.
They are against Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s philosophy of
śuddha-bhakti and are antagonistic to śuddha Vaiṣṇavas.

One evening a huge public assembly was arranged for
Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī and his group of followers. The
grounds were packed with ten to twelve thousand people

                          102
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

waiting for Śrīla Gurudeva’s lecture. Śrīla Gurudeva
began to speak on pure sanātana-dharma with his
brilliant command of words. He said, “Brajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is complete eternal Brahman in His feature as
sarva-śaktimān10, saviśeṣa11 and akhila-rasāmṛta
mūrti12. The śuddha-bhakti which Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
preached and practised is actually sanātana-dharma in
its complete form. The supreme duty of human life is to
completely give up onions, garlic, meat, intoxication
etc. and follow the path of sanātana-dharma, which is
śuddha-bhakti. The life of those who go against this
highest duty and take meat, intoxication and other
impure substances is like that of an animal—dharmeṇa
hīnā paśubhiḥ samānā (Padma Purāṇa).”

On hearing this, a person in the middle of the gathering
stood up and declared, “We don’t believe in the
philosophy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.”

Gurudeva replied, “Not only Caitanya Mahāprabhu, but the
Vedas, Upaniṣads, Purāṇas and all other śastras all say
the same thing. No sat-śāstra gives a concession for
meat eating and intoxication. Bhagavān is not nirākāra,
or formless. He has an unprecedentedly beautiful śrī
vigraha. Despite having a form, He is still sarvavyāpī
(all-pervading) and sarva-śaktimān.”

One listener said, “That is not written in Hankaradeva’s
Bhāgavat. We do not accept this siddhānta; we consider
Hankaradeva’s Bhāgavat to be authoritative.”

Gurudeva explained, “Hankaradeva’s Bhāgavat is a modern
literature, written only 200 to 250 years ago. The
Vedas, Upaniṣads, Purāṇas and other śastras are divine,
eternal and ever-existing. That is why they are actual
evidence and proof.”

The listener scoffed, “Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is a
recent personality, and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta is also
modern literature. Is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s name
mentioned in the Vedas? Is there supporting evidence in
the Vedas that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Bhagavān?”

Gurudeva said, “Yes, there is evidence. Not only one but
thousands of examples are there. Listen carefully.” He
looked at Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja, indicating that he
should present the evidence. Śrīpāda Vāmana Mahārāja had
written in his notebook 40 to 50 śastric statements that
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Bhagavān, and he gave this to
Śrīpāda Trivikrama Mahārāja who, on Śrīla Gurudeva’s
order, started to read out the examples of evidence
loudly. However, the opposition was not interested in
hearing the proof of their defeatÇ but wanted to spread
chaos in the gathering instead, and they started
throwing stones. Other members of the audience objected
to such behaviour. Gurujī fearlessly continued with his
lecture throughout this disruption. He said, “We
sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs are not afraid of death. We
are followers of Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja and Śrī Haridāsa
Ṭhākura.” After the examples of śastric proof had been
read, the gathering came to an end. Śrī Gurudeva’s
fearlessness was discussed everywhere for many days. A
fearless speaker of impartial truth is rare in this
world.

                          103
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


After preaching in Mālī, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja was
requested to speak by the pious members of a religious
assembly in the village of Bāṁsvāḍī. He gave a
penetrating talk entitled, ‘The philosophical concepts
that distinguish Gauḍīya vaiṣṇava-dharma from the
different apasampradāyas’. Thereafter he and the
preaching party traveled to Gauhāṭī. At various places
in the town, Śrīla Gurudeva gave lectures filled with
scriptural explanations of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
prema-dharma and the subject matter which is established
in Vedānta. During the preaching in Gauhāṭī, very praise
worthy services were rendered by Śrī Gaurīśaṅkar
Chaṭṭopādhyāya, a Divisional Medical Officer of Assam’s
Railway, by Śrī M. Salaī, a lecturer at Gauhāṭī College,
and by others.



Darśana of Śrī Śrī Jagannāthajī’s Ratha-yātrā in Śrī
Jagannātha Purī

Later that year, during the month of Āṣāḍha (June-July),
almost 250 pilgrims under the leadership of Śrī Guru
Mahārāja left Howraha Station in a reserved coach and
headed first for the Bāleśvara railway station and from
there to Śrī Remunā. In Remunā they took darśana of Śrī
Kṣīracorā Gopīnāthajī. Śrīla Guru Mahārāja described the
pastime of Śrī Mādhavendra Purī and Kṣīracorā Gopīnātha
as it is told in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.

“Śrī Mādhavendra Purī is the first sprout of the desire
tree of bhakti-rasa. Śrī Nāthajī was so satisfied with
Śrī Mādhavendra Purī’s service that He appeared on the
slopes of Śrī Govardhana, near Ānyora village. Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī fulfilled Śrī Nāthajī’s desire by
worshipping Him for one month with abhiṣeka and an
Annakūṭa festival with extensive offerings of bhoga.
Thereafter, also by the desire of Śrī Gopālajī,
Mādhavendra Purī walked from Vṛndāvana to Jagannātha
Purī to procure Malayan candana (sandalwood) to offer to
Śrī Nāthajī. On the way to Purī, he arrived here in
Remunā in the late evening. Bhoga had been offered to
Ṭhākurajī. The curtain opened and he had darśana of the
astonishing deity of Śrī Gopīnāthajī. In front of the
Deity were pots of kṣīra-prasāda, a speciality of that
temple. Such a wonderful fragrance was coming from the
kṣīra offered to Ṭhākurajī that Śrī Mādhavendra Purī’s
mind became attracted. He thought, ‘If I could taste
only a little of the prasāda, I could prepare such a
delicious kṣīra for my Śrī Nāthajī.’ Meanwhile, the
curtain closed. Śrī Purī Gosvāmī then went to the nearby
market for bhajana. At night he heard a voice crying
out, ‘Who is Mādhavendra Purī?’ Śrī Gopīnāthajī’s pujārī
was calling him. Śrī Mādhavendra Purī stood up and said,
‘I am Mādhavendra. Why are you calling me?’

“With great humility, pujārījī placed a pot of kṣīra in
Mādhavendra Purī’s hands and said, ‘Great soul, after I
put Śrī Gopīnāthajī to bed, I closed the curtain and
went to sleep in my small room. At midnight Śrī
Ṭhākurajī came to me in a dream and said, ‘My bhakta is
performing bhajana somewhere in the market. I wanted him
to taste some of My prasāda, but he did not receive any.

                          104
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

He is a topmost niṣkiñcana Vaiṣṇava who never begs for
his living. I have hidden one of the twelve pots of
kṣīra under My clothes. Take it and give it to him now.’
After this dream I woke up, opened up the curtain and
went inside the Śrī Mandira. It is most amazing! One pot
was there inside Ṭhākurajī’s clothes. I had removed the
offered pots and purified the altar with my own hands.
How could one pot remain in spite of this? I closed
Ṭhākurajī’s door again and brought the pot here to you.
Never before have I experienced such a thing as this.’

“When Śrī Mādhavendra Purī heard this, he became
absorbed in joyful, ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa. However, he
thought, ‘Everyone will know about this incident in the
morning and a crowd will come here for my darśana.’
Fearing this fame, he fled Remunā in the dark for
Jagannātha Purī. Such a bhakta is exceptional and
blessed. From that time, the name of Śrī Gopīnāthajī was
changed to Śrī Kṣīracorā Gopīnātha.

“Mādhavendra Purījī reached Śrī Purī Dhāma and took
darśana of Śrī Jagannātha. He then obtained the Malayan
candana for his Gopālajī, put it on his head and started
walking back towards Śrī Vṛndāvana dhāma. On the way, he
came to Kṣīracorā Gopīnātha’s Remunā again. It was night
and he soon fell asleep. As he slept, Gopālajī came to
him in a dream and told him, ‘Stay in Remunā and rub the
Malayan candana on Gopīnātha’s whole body. I am that
same Gopīnātha. If you perform this service, the heat of
My body will be removed.’ Śrī Purī Gosvāmī did so, and
after receiving Śrī Gopālajī’s permission he again
returned to Vṛndāvana. Bhagavān is conscious of the
hardships that His bhaktas undergo to serve Him, and He
performs such transcendental pastimes to increase the
glory of His bhaktas in the world.”

The pilgrims were fascinated by this pastime. After
listening to the story, they took darśana of Śrī
Rasikānandajī’s samādhi nearby. Then they visited
Bhuvaneśvara, where they took darśana of Śrī Liṅgarāja,
Śrī Annanta Vāsudeva, Bindusarovar and other places.
Finally they reached Śrī Purī Dhāma. They stayed in Purī
for 15 days and took darśana of Ālālanātha, Sākṣī
Gopāla, Koṇārka and other places. On Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s disappearance day they were invited to a large
assembly in Śrī Jagannātha-Ballabha’s garden. Śrīla
Ācārya Mahārāja, the president of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti, gave a splendid philosophical lecture full of
tattva concerning Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s
transcendental character, his erudition and the bhakti-
śāstras that he composed. The learned scholars of Purī
were very impressed by this lecture.

The next day was Śrī Guṇḍicā Mārjana, after which came
Śrī Ratha Yātrā, Śrī Herā Pañcamī, Śrī Jagannātha’s
return yātrā and so on. Everything was observed with
kīrtana and lectures. The pilgrims also had the
opportunity to have darśana of Śrī Jagannātha, Gambhīrā,
Siddha Bakula, Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s samādhi, Ṭoṭā
Gopīnātha, Caṭaka Parvata, Yameśvara Ṭoṭā, Lokanātha
Śiva, Purī Gosvāmī’s well, Narendra Sarovara,
Indradyumna Sarovara, Guṇḍicā Mandira, Cakratīrtha,
Svargadvāra and various other places. In the end,
everyone returned home fully satisfied with the

                          105
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

wonderful hari-kathā they had heard and the beautiful
darśanas they had received.



Śrī Janmāṣṭamī Vrata and Śrī Nandotsava in Chuṅchuṛā
Maṭha

A few months later, in August (Śrāvaṇa), Śrī Janmāṣṭamī
was celebrated with great festivities at Śrī Uddhāraṇa
Gauḍīya Maṭha. All the bhaktas in the maṭha observed
nirjala fasting (without water) the whole day until
midnight. Reading of the entire Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam took place during the day. At midnight, the
time of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s appearance, the mahābhiṣeka of the
Deities was performed, bhoga was offered and arcana was
offered according to tradition. Śrīla Ācārya Mahārāja,
the president of Śrī Samiti, gave a lecture on the
philosophy of Śrī Janmāṣṭamī to the assembled audience.
The essence of his lecture is as follows.

“Śrī Gauḍīya vaiṣṇava literature distinguishes between
Śrī Bhagavān’s janma (birth) and His āvirbhāva
(appearance). The word āvirbhāva is filled with aiśvarya
(opulence), but janma is filled with mādhurya
(sweetness). We are related to Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is
Vrajendra-nandana13, Nanda-tanuja14, Nandātmaja15 and
Paśupāṅgaja16. Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura has addressed
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanaya: “Bhagavān
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is my worshipful object,”
and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said in His Śikṣāṣṭaka,
‘ayi nandatanuja’. Also by Śrī Vāsudeva we understand
Kṛṣṇa as Nanda-tanuja (the son of Nanda). Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa
appeared in Mathurā, but He did not take birth from
Devakī's womb. He appeared in Kaṁsa’s prison before
Devakī and Vasudeva fully dressed and decorated, and
holding His conch, disc, club and lotus (śaṅkha, cakra,
gadā and padma.) Therefore Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not addressed as
Vasudeva-tanuja (the son of Vasudeva). The cutting of
the umbilical cord and other ceremonies of childbirth
were not performed in Mathurā, but they were in Gokula.
There, Kṛṣṇa took birth from the womb of Yaśodā Maiyā,
and we worship this birth-pastime of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

kṛṣṇera yateka khelā sarvottama naralīlā

naravapu tāhāra svarūpa

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 21.101)

“‘Lord Kṛṣṇa has many pastimes, of which His pastimes as
a human being are the best. His form as a human being is
the supreme transcendental form.’

“Only Śrī Rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas are able to take to heart
this distinctive aspect of janma and āvirbhāva which is
saturated with mādhurya. We are praying to Nandanandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of the Śrī Rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇavas.”

The audience was very impressed when they heard this
profound discussion of bhakti by Śrī Guru Mahārāja.



                          106
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Parikramā of Śrī Badrikāśrama and Kedārnātha

The next month, Śrī Gurudeva led yet another parikramā,
this time to Śrī Badrikāśrama. On September 4th, 1952, a
group of 100 pilgrims departed from Howraha Station in a
reserved coach. At first they stopped in Haridvāra for a
few days and had darśana of the local places of
pilgrimage, such as Harakī Pauḍī, Kanakhala and
Satidāha. From there they went to Ṛṣikeśa and stayed in
the Bābā Kālī Kamalīvālī dharmaśālā. There they
organized the walking pilgrimage to Kedār and Badrī, and
arranged for all the supplies, including luggage, food,
water and bedding, to be carried by porters. After that,
they began their pilgrimage on foot. Śrī Gaurasundara
led the way on a handsomely decorated palanquin. After
Him came the sankīrtana party with sannyāsīs and
brahmacārīs. Gṛhastha-bhaktas followed, walking with
kīrtana, the men and women separate. Those who could not
walk rode on hired horses. The local people had never
before seen such a big parikramā party. They glorified
the beautiful procession and praised the party’s orderly
management.

The pilgrims walked for almost 45 days. They had darśana
of Ṛṣikeśa, Lakṣmaṇa-jhūlā, Vyāsaghāṭa, Devprayāga,
Kīrtinagara, Śrīnagara, Rudrprayāga, Agastamuni,
Candrapurī, Guptakāśī, Ukhīmaṭha, Maikhaṇḍā, Rāmpura,
Triyugī-nārāyaṇa, Sonaprayāga, Mandākinī,
Muṇḍakāṭāgaṇeśa, Gaurīkuṇḍa, Kedārnātha, Tuṅganātham
Ākāśagaṅgā, Gopeśvara, Vaitariṇīkuṇḍa, Pīpalkoṭhī,
Garuḍagaṅgā, Pātālagaṅgā, Yośīmaṭha, Pañcabadrī,
Pañcaśilā, Viṣṇuprayāga, Pāṇṣukeśvara, Hanumāna Caṭṭī,
Śrī Badrīnārāyaṇa, Taptakuṇḍa, Vasudhārā, Cāmpolī,
Nandaprayāg, Ādibadrī and other places, which were all
very difficult to reach.

Nowadays, the sacred tirthas in the mountains above
Ṛṣikeśa are accessible by bus or car, but at that time
there were no permanent roads, and it was impossible to
reach them except on foot. From time to time there was
danger that boulders would fall on the narrow, winding
paths. A few times during our pilgrimage this actually
happened; all of a sudden a rock would drop from the
cliffs into the middle of the group. But by Śrī
Bhagavān’s mercy no one was hurt. Disregarding these
incidents, the walking pilgrims, with the sympathy and
help of the local people, had the unparalleled
opportunity to view the beautiful nature and take bath
in the pure, sacred waters of the kuṇḍas at the places
of pilgrimage. None of this is possible on today’s bus
pilgrimages.

Devprayāga is the confluence of the Bhāgīrāthī and the
Alakānanda. The current of these two rivers is so swift
that if one were to throw a straw in the water it would
break into many pieces. From Devprayāga, the Bhagavatī
Gaṅgā begins her descent to the plains. By the time she
reaches Haridvāra, she is flowing on level ground.
Kīrtinagara and Śrīnagara are two charming towns in
valleys between arms of the mountains. Here there are
big dharmaśālās and resting places for pilgrims. Triyugī
Nagara and Tuṅganātha are two almost inaccessible places
which are always covered with snow. The yajñā fire from

                          107
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

the time of the wedding of Pārvatī and   Śaṅkara is still
burning even today at Gaurī-kuṇḍa, and   the pilgrims
offered oblations into it. The path to   Kedārnātha was
almost impassable, although it is more   accessible today.

It was evening when we reached Śrī Kedārnāthajī with Śrī
Gurujī. Snow was falling like cotton from the sky. The
pilgrims were shivering from cold, but we had a
magnificent view of Kedarnāthajī. On our return, fires
were made and everyone warmed up. There was concern
about the cold affecting the health of some of the
pilgrims, but woollen blankets protected them. Everyone
took prasāda and then fell asleep covered with three or
four blankets. In the morning, the party took bath,
performed sandhyā and ahnika, honoured some prasāda, and
then departed for Badrinārāyaṇa.

Yośīmaṭha, a famous maṭha established by Ādi Śaṅkara
Ācārya, is a charming place situated in a valley
surrounded by many mountains. Camolī is a significant
town through which pilgrims go to Badrinārāyaṇa or pass
on the trek from Badrinārāyaṇa to Kedārnāthajī. Some
pilgrims go from Ṛṣikeśa to Kedārnāthajī’s darśana, and
from there pass through Camolī on the way to
Badrīnārāyaṇa. They then return to Camolī, and from
there to Ṛṣikeśa. That is the route that we followed.

The best and safest time for the Kedār-Badrī pilgrimage
is the month of Bhādra. On our pilgrimage, the parikramā
party generally stayed overnight at Bābā Kālī-Kamalīvālī
dharmaśālās. The majority of the places worth seeing are
on the banks of Alakānanda.

Śrīla Gurudeva orchestrated the entire parikramā.
Everyday he went to sleep after everyone else, woke
everyone up, made the arrangements for the coming day
and was ready before everyone else. Śrīmad Bhaktikuśala
Nārsiṁha Mahārāja took the pilgrims for darśana. Śrīpāda
Svādhikārānanda Brahmacārī (Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī17)
performed kīrtana with mṛdaṅga right behind Ṭhākurajī’s
palanquin. Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja made
the preparations for the daily worship of Śrī
Gaurasundara, managed the facilities for the pilgrims,
and supervised the porters who carried the luggage and
supplies from one place to another. Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Vāmana Mahārāja took care of the lamps, and Sudāma Sakhā
Brahmacārī was in charge of prasāda and other comforts
of the pilgrims.

After staying in the lap of the Himālayas for forty-five
long days, performing kīrtana and hearing the glories of
Śrī Badrīnārāyaṇa and other sacred places, the pilgrims
returned to Howraha and from there to their own places.
No one will ever be able to forget the scenic beauty of
the Himālayas, so how can these faithful pilgrims ever
cease to remember their experience? At the time of
parting everyone offered prayers at the lotus feet of
Śrīla Gurudeva with grateful hearts and tearful eyes.



Śrī Puruṣottama vrata

Members and folowers of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti

                          108
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

observe Puruṣottama vrata (vows undertaken during the
month of Purusottama) like Kārtika vrata. Two essays
regarding the Puruṣottama month are published in Śrī
Gauḍīya Patrikā’s fourth and fifth issues in the second
year. One is about the greatness of the Puruṣottama
month and the other gives instructions on how to observe
the month. Vaiṣṇava Ācārya Śrīla Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda
has said that Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas should observe the
Puruṣottama vrata like the Kārtika vrata. Unfortunately,
the smārta calendar completely disregards this
observance.

The two essays mentioned above describe two kinds of
literature: smārta and transcendental. According to the
smārta śāstra, karma is the predominating factor, and
the special month of Puruṣottama is a leap month when no
religious activities should be observed. Therefore it is
also called malmās, an impure month. But in
transcendental śāstras, this leap month is described as
being topmost in all respects and supremely helpful for
hari-bhajana.

These two essays relate many significant stories and
give much important information regarding this leap
month, for example: the eminence of the leap month; the
reason for calling it Puruṣottama; the history of
Draupadī in the section describing the greatness of the
month; the story of King Dṛḍhādhavā narrated by Vālmīki;
the rules for bathing in the month of Puruṣottama; the
injunction that the only observance for Puruṣottama is
pūjā of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; proper and improper things to do
during the vrata; the transcendental observances for
svaniṣṭha, paraniṣṭha, and nirapekṣa devotees; ekāntika
Vaiṣṇavas’ natural interest in the month and what is
proper to be done; the revelation that the leap month is
dear to the bhaktas because it is free from the miseries
of karma-kāṇḍa; what is the haviṣyānna (grains for
sacrifice), and what are the prohibited things and the
proper conduct during the vrata; what is called āmiṣa
(non-vegetarian); the result of hearing Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and observing the vrata; the offering of
lamps (dīpdān) and its greatness; what is proper to be
done on caturdaśī, aṣṭhamī, navamī of kṛṣṇa-pakṣa; the
meaning of mantra and namaskār-mantra (when offering
praṇamas), nīrājana-dhyān and puṣpāñjali-mantra; and the
last observances of the vrata and rules for breaking the
vow.



Re-establishing the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhi

Śrī Madanmohana Dāsādhikārī was a rich, respected,
gifted and very religious person who lived in
Vaiṁcīgrāma in the Hoogly district. On his repeated
requests Śrīla Guru Mahārāja arrived there in June,
1953, together with Śrī Nārsiṁha Mahārāja (the editor of
Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā), Śrī Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja (Patrikā’s
preaching manager), Śrī Paramārthī Mahārāja, Śrī
Trivikrama Mahārāja and some brahmacārīs. For five days
various speakers gave lectures on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
śuddha-bhakti in large religious assemblies. Dr.
Siddeśvara Bhaṭṭācārya (M.A.) who was the vice-principal
of Viśva Bhārtī and had been a lecturer at the School of

                          109
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Oriental Studies in London, discussed Śaṅkara Vedānta or
māyāvāda philosophy with Śrī Gurudeva for two hours.
Śrīla Guru Mahārāja used śāstric evidence and
irrefutable logic to show that the māyāvāda philosophy
which Ācārya Śaṅkara established is insubstantial and is
opposed to śāstra. At the same time he established that
Ācārya Śaṅkara’s mukti (liberation) is false and that
Ācārya Śaṅkara was not able to obtain such mukti. When
the honourable vice-principal heard Ācārya Kesarī’s deep
views supported by śāstra, he was astonished and became
speechless. After that, Śrīla Gurudeva preached in
nearby Pāṇḍuyā, Muṭukpura and other places and
afterwards returned to Chuṅchuṛā Maṭha.

On September 29th, 1953 Śrīla Gurudeva re-established
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī in Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya
Maṭha. This Sanskrit Catuṣpāṭhī had been run previously
by Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti at 33/2 Bospāḍā Lane,
Bāgbāzār, Calcutta. It had taught Harināmāmṛta-vyākaraṇa
and kāvya, or literature, and many students had passed
their examinations with distinction. Śrīla Gurudeva gave
a lecture on Sanskrit, of which the following is a
summary.

“In the present age Sanskrit education is being
disrespected, but without Sanskrit the welfare of the
people is impossible. The word ‘Sanskrit’ means
‘refined’. People who do not know Sanskrit are not
qualified to study Vedic knowledge; they are also
unqualified for higher education. Higher education means
the worship of Bhagavān. In this worship the language,
the dīkṣā mantras, the mahā-mantra and so on are all in
Sanskrit. Śrī Gauḍīya Catuṣpāṭhī is open to all for the
eternal liberation of the baddha-jīvas, and for the
expression of transcendental moods in a very refined
language.

“Jagadguru Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī composed a transcendental
Sanskrit grammar called Śrī Harināmāmṛta-vyākaraṇa to
expand the education of youths. Reading and studying of
Śrī Harināmāṛta-vyākaraṇa is provided to awaken the
memory of Śrīla Gosvāmī-pāda in the heart of all jīvas.
An important sūtra in this vyākaraṇa is nārāyaṇādudbhūto
‘yaṁ varṇakramaḥ: “all varṇas are born from Nārāyaṇa.”
There is no difference between the varṇa (letter) of a
word and the varṇa (caste) of the jīvas. Therefore
creation and destruction and so forth are explained by
nāmvādī or sphoṭvādī words. In the viśuddha Sārasvata
line (coming from Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvati
Prabhupāda) even those who are born in low and
untouchable families can become perfect and qualified to
perform transcendental sevā for Śrīman Mahāprabhu.

“The prākṛta-sahajiyā sampradāya is an offender at Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī’s lotus feet and is also a forceful enemy
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti will
drive the outcaste and demoniac thoughts of the prākṛta
sahajiyās far away through the preaching of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī.”

On the very first day of the inauguration of the
Catuṣpāṭhī, nine jewels, nine brilliant students were
aimed for, who in the future would be revealed as the
real preachers of navadhā-bhakti.

                          110
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017




Parikramā of Śrī Avantikā (Ujjayinī) and Nāsik

October 20th, 1953: On the occasion of kārtika vrata-
niyama-sevā, Śrīla Gurudeva left from Howraha station
with sannyāsī, brahmacārī and gṛhastha bhaktas to go to
Śrī Avantikā, Nāsik and other famous pilgrim places for
darśana and parikramā. Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja, Sudāma Sakhā Brahmacārī and others came with
him to take care of the pilgrims. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu had previously travelled through all these
places.

At first the parikramā party took darśana of Śrī
Kurmadeva in Kurmāñcalam. This is the very place where
Śrī Jagannāthajī removed the mental agony of the pujārīs
by moving the sleeping Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya together with
his bed. While Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya was staying in Purī,
he had prohibited the pujārīs of Purī from serving Śrī
Jagannāthajī because of their chewing of betel, smoking
and other bad habits. The pujārīs fasted for several
days and prayed to Śrī Jagannāthajī in a distressed
mood, “He Jagannāthajī! You are our everything. We have
surrendered unto You. Without Your sevā we cannot stay
alive.” Hearing their prayers Śrī Jagannāthajī removed
Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya at night and put him here in
Kurmāñcalam. When Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya woke up in the
morning, he thought that he was in a Śiva temple and
became very unhappy. But Śrī Kurmadeva consoled him
saying, “I am not a Śiva liṅga, but Kurmadeva.” Hearing
this voice from the sky, Śrī Rāmānuja Ācāryabecame happy
and performed pūjā of Kurmadeva.

Next the pilgrims reached Kabūr (Vidyānagar) on the
banks of Godāvarī. This is where the transcendental
dialogue took place between Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
Rāya Rāmānanda, as described in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.
After that they reached Nāsik via Panḍharpur, Kolhāpur,
Mumbādevī (Mumbaī) and Nāsik Road. In Nāsik they took
bath in Godāvarī and had darśana of Pañcavaṭī, the place
where Sūparṇakhā’s nose was cut, the place where Mārīci
was killed, and various other places, and then they
reached Avantikā. There they took bath in Chiprā river
and took darśana of various different temples, as well
as Sandīpanī Muni’s āśrama, where Śrī Baladeva and Kṛṣṇa
together with Sudāmā Vipra learnt all kinds of arts.
From here the parikramā party went via ùākorjī,
Nāthadvārā, Puṣkar, Jaipur, Karaulī, Vṛndāvana,
Citrakūṭ, and Prayāga, and reached Howraha after a total
of 38 days. Then the pilgrims returned to their
respective places.

Panḍharnātha is a famous temple in Panḍharpur. Śrī
Viśvarūpa Prabhu came here after taking sannyāsa, and
went into aprakaṭa-lilā at the banks of the nearby Bhīmā
river. Later, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu also came here in
search of Śrī Viśvarūpa Prabhu.



Preaching sanātana-dharma in Śrī Rāmapura, Hoogly


                          111
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

December 15th, 1953: Śrī Ācārya Kesarī visited the home
of Haripāda Dāsādhikārī, a resident of Śrī Rāmapura, at
his special request. Śrīla Gurudeva was accompanied by
Śrīmad Bhaktikuśala Nārsiṁha Mahārāja (the editor of Śrī
Patrikā), Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
(preaching manager), Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama
Mahārāja (office-in-charge), as well as four or five
brahmacārīs. Śrī Guru Mahārāja preached śuddha-bhakti
for almost 15 days at different places in Śrī Rāmapura.
He lectured on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in some places; he
spoke on the particular virtue of sanātana-dharma in
large religious assemblies; and at other places he
talked on various other subjects, such as the
superiority of vaiṣṇava-dharma. His philosophical views
were complete and full of tattva and irrefutable logic,
and they attracted the local teachers, intellectuals,
lawyers, judges, businessmen and highly educated people
of various classes.

The service and help in the preaching work performed by
Kālīpada Gaṅgopādhyāya, the manager of Śrī Rāmapura
Dharamaśala, is particularly praiseworthy. This well-
known dharmaśala arranged a huge Gītā Jayantī programme
at the local school in Ballabhapura. Śrīla Gurudeva was
the chairman of the programme and gave a brilliant
lecture on the teachings of Gītā for almost 1 1/2 hours.
He said that bhakta Arjuna was a liberated soul, and a
sakhā and parikara of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa was apparently
instructing Arjuna when he spoke Bhagavad-gītā, but the
teachings of Gīta are actually for ordinary jīvas, and
not for Arjuna. Gītā is the primary teaching and Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is the topmost post-graduate textbook in the
kingdom of dharma. Those who wish to enter the kingdom
of dharma should carefully adopt these teachings.

The local Ramana Hall was the venue for a huge religious
conference on the topic, ‘The problems of the present
yuga and their solutions.’ The audience included eminent
and highly qualified people of the town and Śrīla
Ācāryadeva gave a very moving and philosophical lecture
for 1 1/2 hours. He said that all problems, whether
political, social or economical, will be solved when we
follow ṛṣi-nīti (the regulations given by saints and
sages). “All these problems existed in India 500 years
ago, just as they do now. At that time, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī was the prime minister of Hussain Shah, the
ruler of Bengal. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s intelligence
was very sharp, and when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
transmitted His śakti into his heart, he was able to
leave all material attachments and take shelter at
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s lotus feet. He enquired from
Caitanya Mahāprabhu about the solutions to all the
problems of all mankind at all times and in all places.
The answers that Śrīman Mahāprabhu gave to these
questions are called Sanātana śikṣā. The best, natural
and simple way—indeed the only way—for the educated
class in Bengal to solve all their problems is to follow
this śikṣā. ‘Ṛṣi-nīti’ indicates the principles of the
ṛṣis described in sat-śāstras like the Upaniṣads,
Vedānta-sūtra and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In order to attain
their śikṣā, it is therefore necessary to study the
ancient Sanskrit scriptures. How unfortunate it is that
the Education Ministry shows so little enthusiasm for
this essential aspect of education.”

                          112
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017




Preaching śuddha-bhakti in various places in Caubīs
Parganā and Medinīpura

January 4th, 1954: Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva visited
Aśokanagar Colony in Howraha at the request of the
devotees there. He explained Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for five
days, giving a clear analysis of the speciality of
vaiṣṇava philosophy compared to other philosophies,
especially Cārvāka nitī and the Bolshevik nitī from
Russia. He then lectured on ‘The necessity of religious
life’ at the huge religious assembly at the local
college in Mahiṣādal in Medinīpura district. After that
he gave a deep lecture filled with tattva on
‘Reconciliation of all different religions’ at the
religious assembly in front of Śrī Ananta Kumār Dāsa’s
mandira in Nātaśāla, close to Gehūkhalī.

Later on, in the premises of the High English School of
Maṅgalāmāḍo village, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja gave a lecture
on Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s prema-dharma. On this
topic, he said, “The only path to welfare for the jīvas
of Kali-yuga is harināma-saṅkīrtana as preached and
followed by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Certain
apasampradāyas have sanctioned drinking alcohol and
eating meat and fish. They also put forward the
philosophy of yatha mata tatha patha (‘whatever is your
opinion is the true way’), but these can never ever be
acepted as sanātana-dharma. Scriptures such as the Gītā
have clearly refuted these doctrines. The sādhu and the
thief have different paths, and their destination can
never be the same.

“One cannot attain Śrī Bhagavān by worshipping different
demigods. The supreme way of attaining Bhagavān is to
worship Him by chanting His names (śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana).
The doctrines of the apasampradāyas are opposed to the
śāstras and are full of bad siddhānta. Śuddha Vaiṣṇavas
are gurus of the four varṇas. Unfortunately, the modern
class of so-called Vaiṣṇavas is full of bad qualities,
and is a degraded apasampradāya. One cannot gain any
benefit by following it. Vaiṣṇavas must perform the
topmost bhakti to Viṣṇu and must follow the rules of
proper vaiṣṇava conduct and etiquette.”

After Gurudeva’s lectures at Sarveḍiyā, ùhoḍā, Ektārā,
Nāīkuṇḍi, Maluvasān, Pichladā, Golvāḍā, Maṅgalāmāḍo and
other places, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Trivikrama Mahārāja and Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja gave lectures on Śrī
Gaura-Kṛṣṇa-Rāma līlā with the help of slides. After
preaching strongly in this way everywhere, Śrīla
Gurudeva returned to Chuṅchuṛā maṭha.



Lecture at the eminent Sanskrit conference in Chuṅchuṛā

February 6th, 1954: The prominent Sanskrit scholars of
India assembled at the local Sanskrit school in
Chuṅchuṛā for a huge Sanskrit conference. The assembly
unanimously accepted Mahāmahopādhyāya Śrī Yogendranāth

                          113
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

(tarka-saṅkhya vedānta-tīrtha) as chairman, and then
began its work. At the special request of the members of
the assembly, Śrīla Gurudeva spoke for an hour on ‘Hindu
dharma and vaiṣṇava philosophy’. He began his lecture,
which was extremely brilliant and full of deep
philosophy, by especially emphasising the need to revive
Indian culture and Sanskrit education. He also stressed
the necessity to organise institutions such as eminent
Sanskrit conferences to augment Sanskrit education
throughout India. “None of the ancient scriptures such
as the Vedas, Vedānta-sutras, the Purāṇas and the
Itihāsas (histories) have mentioned the word ‘Hindu’,”
Śrīla Gurudeva pointed out. “Neverthless, those who live
between Hindukuśa or the Himālayan mountains in the
North and Bindu Sarovara in the South, and who follow
sanātana-dharma are called Hindus. Therefore, we should
understand that the term ‘Hindu dharma’ refers to
sanātana-dharma. The vaiṣṇava-dharma described in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures is simply and
solely sanātana-dharma.”

Śrīla Gurudeva then used scriptural logic and
irrefutable arguments to establish that Śaṅkarācārya’s
kevalādvaita-vāda or māyāvāda philosophy is opposed to
śāstra, and is a completely imaginary and illusory
doctrine. This created a commotion in the assembly, and
some people stood up and started to protest against his
views. But Ācārya Kesarī displayed his expertise in all
śāstras by wonderfully refuting their arguments and
establishing the tenets of vaiṣṇava-dharma. The
assembled Vaiṣṇavas became very joyful on seeing his
unprecedented erudition, but some advaita-vādī scholars
became disturbed.

After Śrīla Gurudeva left, other members of the assembly
gave lectures. These included Mahāmahopādhyāya Śrī
Yogendranātha (tarka-sāṅkhya-vedāntatīrtha), Śrī Jīva
(nyayatīrtha, M.A.), Dr. Mahāmānvrata Brahmacārī (M.A.,
Ph.D.), a teacher from Hoogly College (M.A.,
kāvyatīrtha) and many expert Sanskrit scholars from
Calcutta’s Sanskrit College.



Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā festival in Viṣṇupura Kamārpotā of
Medinīpura

February 20th, 1954: The founder-ācārya and president of
the Samiti visited the home of Śrī Rādhānātha
Dāsādhikārī, a resident of Kamārapotā Viṣṇupura, at his
earnest request. Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s appearance day, Śrī
Vyāsa-pūjā, was celebrated splendidly with pūjā-pañcaka
according to Śrī Vyāsapūjā-paddhati (which was collected
by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda and
revised by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura). After that,
Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s sannyāsī, brahmacārī and gṛhastha
disciples offered puṣpāñjali at his lotus feet.

Māghī Kṛṣṇapañcamī was the appearance day of Śrīla
Ācāryadeva’s most worshipful Śrī Gurudeva, Oṁ Viṣṇupāda
Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda. On that
day, Śrīla Gurudeva, together with his disciples and
followers, performed arcana-pūjan and offered śraddhā-
puṣpāñjali at Prabhupāda’s holy lotus feet. After

                          114
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

various sannyāsīs had given their lectures at the
religious assembly that day, Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave a
very significant lecture on Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s
transcendental character and teaching. Śrī Rādhānātha
Dāsādhikārī became the Samiti’s special object of
affection for taking care of all the expenses for this
Vyāsapūjā celebration.



Preaching sanātana-dharma at various places in Assam

May 14th, 1954: Śrīla Ācāryadeva started a journey to
Assam for preaching śuddha-bhakti together with
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrī Nārasiṁha Mahārāja, Śrī Trivikrama
Mahārāja, Śrī Vāmana Mahārāja, Śrī Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,
Śrī Paramārthī Mahārāja, Śrī Paramadharmeśvara
Brahmacārī, Śrī Ānanda Brahmacārī, Śrī Gajendramocana
Brahmacārī and some 10 or 12 residents of the maṭha. On
May 16th they reached Golokgaṅja station. Śrī Sanata
Kumār ‘Bhaktiśāstrī’ ‘Bhāgavatbhūṣaṇa’ and other leading
bhaktas then brought them with nagar-saṅkīrtana to Śrī
Divyajñāna Dāsādhikārī’s home, where Śrīla Gurudeva’s
pūjā-arcana was performed. For several days Śrīla
Gurudeva spoke on śuddha-bhakti and the glories of śrī
harināma at large religious assemblies. After that, he
went with his party to Dhūvaḍī. There he stayed at the
Prapannāśrama of his Godbrother, Śrīpāda Nimānanda
Sevātīrtha Prabhu and lectured continuously for seven
days on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He used logic and śāstric
evidence to establish that vedānta-darśana (Vedānta
philosophy) stands supreme amongst the ṣaḍ-darśanas (the
six philosophical systems of India) and that bhakti is
the ultimate subject matter of Vedānta-sūtra.

After this, Śrīla Gurudeva preached bhakti in
Kacaharīhāṭa, Khākasiyālī and other places, and then
accepted the hospitality of Śrī Prakṛtīśacandra Baruā
Bahādur, the prince of Gaurīpura kingdom. Śrīla Guru
Mahārāja stayed there for some days and extensively
preached sanātana-dharma. Every day he lectured on the
Eleventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam at the Sanskrit
School run by the local rāja. The principal of the
school came there regularly to hear Bhāgavatam, along
with other teachers and many students. The minister
Bahādur of Gaurīpura State and many officials came as
well. After that Śrīla Gurudeva preached in Kumārī
village and other places and arrived at the famous
village Cāpara. There, on the excellent premises of the
local English High School, an extensive religious
assembly was organised with an audience of some ten to
twelve thousand people. Śrīla Guru Mahārāja gave a deep
and investigative lecture on sanātana-dharma, which very
much impressed the educated, respected and faithful
listeners.

In those days a so-called guru called Kṣetramohana
Cakravartī was living in Cāpara. Posing as a Vaiṣṇava,
he preached many doctrines which were opposed to
vaiṣṇava-dharma, and his moral character was also not
very pure. The locals invited him and his followers to a
debate with Ācārya Kesarī. Śrīla Gurudeva asked him some
questions regarding śuddha-bhakti, but Cakravartī could
not answer them. Śrīla Gurudeva proved in front of the

                          115
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

assembled audience that Cakravartī’s doctrines were
against śāstra and were not in accordance with any
sampradāya. Cakravartī became ashamed. Begging for
forgiveness at Śrīla Gurujī’s lotus feet, he left the
assembly.

After this, at the request of the honourable minister
Bahādur of Abhayāpurī State, Śrīla Gurudeva and his
preaching party visited Abhyāpurī. They stayed there for
three days and Śrīla Gurudeva gave very impressive
lectures on sanātana-dharma on the premises of the local
girls’ school. Mahārāja Bahādur of Abhayāpurī was very
impressed by his lectures and very faithfully offered
prayers at Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s lotus feet. Mahārāja
Bahādur’s meek and humble behaviour, his non-pretentious
life, his truthfulness and generosity, and his sincere
faith in religion and in the Lord are all very
praiseworthy. After preaching in Cokāpāḍā and Boñgāī
village, Śrīla Gurudeva returned to Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya
Maṭha in Chuṅchuṛā.



Establishing Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā and
publishing Śrī Bhāgavat Patrikā

The 84-kosa Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā 1954 took place with
great festivities in the month of Kārtika under the
guidance of Śrīla Guru Mahārāja. After the pilgrims
left, Śrīla Gurudeva along with Śrīpad Sanātana
Dāsādhikarī18 , Śrīmad Bhakti-vedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
and other disciples, stayed in Mathurā for some days.
Śrīla Gurudeva wanted to establish a preaching centre of
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti in Śrī Mathurā dhāma and from
there spread Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s śuddha-bhakti to
the whole of North India. Śrīla Gurudeva was a perfect
niṣkiñcana Vaiṣṇava with no financial means whatsoever.
Nonetheless, for seven days he and his followers kept
searching for a suitable place. On the seventh day they
saw an old dharmaśālā on the south side of the famous
Kaṁsa-ṭīlā and in front of the big hospital in Mathurā.
The building was dilapidated, but the location was very
good. It was right in the middle of Holigate, the
Imperial Bank, the State Bank of India, the Head Post
Office, the State bus stand, and the main market. It had
36 rooms and a big hall made of bricks and stones. The
party discussed business with the owner of the
dharmaśālā, but Gurujī did not have even one paisā, so
what could be done? Gurujī returned to his own place
with his party.

The next day, Śrīla Gurudeva was ready to see another
place, but Śrīla Sanātana Prabhu declared, “Today I am
very tired. I like the place we saw yesterday. Now I
don’t want to see any other place.” Gurujī said, “It is
not possible to collect 40-50,000 rupees at once. At
least we would have to put down some money as an advance
payment and I don’t even have enough for that.” Śrīla
Sanātana Prabhu then took 7,000 rupees from the belt
around his waist and gave the money to Śrī Gurudeva.
Everyone stared at Sanātana Prabhu’s face in amazement,
their eyes open wide. “I have known your desire for a
long time,” Śrīla Sanātana Prabhu told Gurujī. “That’s
why I have been roaming about with this money around my

                          116
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

waist for a month or a month and a half. Now I don’t
want to see any other place. Please make arrangement to
buy the dharmaśala we saw yesterday.” Gurujī said, “We
need at least 12,000 rupees as an advance payment to get
the written agreement on this place.” On hearing this,
Śrīla Sanātana Prabhu sent a telegram to his son Śrī
Nārāyaṇa Dāsa, to get the rest of the money that was
needed quickly. The registration was done in the Mathurā
Registration Office.

Śrī Ācāryadeva established Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha on
the disappearance day of Jagadguru Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, December
16th, 1954. In accordance with Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s
desire, preaching of pure bhakti-dharma throughout the
whole of North India started from there. Besides this,
also according to his desire, publication of Śrī
Bhāgavat Patrikā, the Samiti’s transcendental monthly
Hindi magazine, started there. Śrīla Gurudeva appointed
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
as the editor of this magazine. It quickly became very
popular in the local educated community, because of its
bhāva (sentiments), language and its philosophy which
was full of siddhānta. Śrī Bhāgavat Patrikā introduced
eminent scholars of Mathurā to the supremacy of the
philosophical views of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas’ bhakti-
dharma, and they glorified it abundantly.

During Kārtika month of 1955, kārtika-vrata niyama-sevā
was organized at Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha under the
guidance of Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva. Under the
auspices of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti the pilgrimage
began on the auspicious day October 29th, from Howraha
Station. The parikramā party reached Mathurā via Kāśī
and Prayāga, and arrived at Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha on
November 2nd. From there they started Vraja-maṇḍala
parikramā. Śrīmad Bhakti-bhūdeva Śrautī Mahārāja, Śrīmad
Bhaktivijñāna Āśrama Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhaktijīvana
Janārdana Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikram
Mahārāja and Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
glorified the dhāma, performed kīrtana and gave hari-
kathā. The devotees of the maṭha arranged suitable
vehicles, transportation, lodging and so on for the
pilgrims. In this regard Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja (editor of Śrī Bhāgavat Patrikā), Rasarāja
Vrajavāsī (publisher and manager of the Patrikā), Śrī
Sudāma Sakhā Brahmacārī and Śrī Prabuddha Kṛṣṇa
Brahmacārī deserve to be mentioned.

At the time of Govardhana-pūjā, the Annakūṭa festival
was completed with big celebrations. The vast nāṭya-
mandira was filled with preparations for offering. The
mathurā-vāsīs had never before seen such a big Annakūṭa
festival. Ordinarily in Vraja chappan bhoga (an offering
of 56 dishes) is outstanding, but Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti offered 365 different preparations at this huge
Annakūṭa. All around Śrī Giriraja Mahārāja were pyramids
of rice as well as large and small plates of khicrī,
khīr, different kinds of sweets, vegetables, pickles,
chutnies, halva, laḍḍū, pūrīs, fruits, roots, green
leafy vegetables and other preparations, on all of which
were tulasī mañjarīs. Faithful people came from great
distances to have darśana, and about five thousand
people accepted mahā-prasāda. When kārtika-vrata was

                          117
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

completed, all the pilgrims returned to their respective
places.



Installation of the Deities and Annakūṭa festival in Śrī
Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha, Mathurā

November 3rd 1956: On the day of Śrī Govardhana-pūjā and
Annakūṭa, Paramārādhya Śrīla Ācāryadeva established his
worshipful Śrī Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga and Rādhā-
Vinodabihārījī in Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha. In this
way he gave his followers and the vraja-vāsīs a golden
opportunity for service to the Deities. The Deities’
darśana is very sweet and attractive. Those who see Them
feel in their hearts that the Deities have been
attracted by the unparallelled prema of aśraya-vigraha
(Śrīla Gurudeva) and have manifested Their own prema-
maya vigraha (Their form imbued with prema).

There was a great celebration when the Deities were
installed. Pūjyapāda Śrī Bhaktibhūdeva Śrauti Mahārāja
performed the ceremonies of abhiṣeka, arcana and other
aspects of the installation, along with Śrī Trivikrama
Mahārāja and Rasarāja Vrajavāsī. Śrīmad Bhaktikuśala
Nārsiṁha Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhaktideśika Ācārya Mahārāja,
Śrī Paramārthī Mahārāja, Śrī Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and other
prominent sannyāsīs performed vaiṣṇava-homa and other
ceremonies. After the abhiṣeka, the Deities were
installed in the altar room, and there Śrī Ācāryadeva
himself consecrated Them. He quoted a verse which he had
composed himself, to explain the tattva-siddhānta
regarding the white complexion of the Deity Śrī
Vinodabihārījī.

rādhācintā niveśena yasya kāntirvalopitā

śrī kṛṣṇa-caraṇaṁ vande rādhāliṅgita vigraham

“I worship that Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose dark
complexion has disappeared and who has become
resplendent with a golden complexion, due to being
tightly embraced by Śrīmatī Rādhika or thoroughly
immersed in separation from Her .”

Śrī Mohinīmohan Rāgbhūṣaṇa Prabhu and Śrī Satyavigraha
Prabhu charmed the listeners with their śrī nāma-kīrtana
at this ceremony. In the nāṭya-mandira, in front of śrī
mandira, Śrī Girirājajī was offered a mountain of
laḍḍūs, pūrīs, kacauṛis, rice, paramānna, puṣpānna,
khicrī, different kinds of vegetables, fruits, roots,
curd, milk, paneer and other preparations. Many people
participated in this ceremony, including professors from
various colleges in Mathurā Dhāma, teachers from
schools, lawyers, judges and other educated and
respected gentlemen. They were all very impressed to
hear from Śrīla Ācāryadeva about bhakti-tattva in the
Gauḍīya philosophy. After that, they became very
blissful on having the darśana of the Deities and
honouring delicious mahā-prasāda, which was distributed
to almost three thousand people on that day.

Giriścandra Dāsa from Pūrvacaka in Medinīpura district
bore all the expenses for the Annakūṭa. Gajendramohan

                          118
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Dāsādhikārī and Śrīyukta Kamalabālā Devī from
Kalyaṇapura donated the Deities, Their clothes,
ornaments and so on. Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti offers
special appreciation of their ideal service.



Preaching the words of Śrī Caitanya in various places of
Assam

December, 1955: Paramārādhyatama Śrī Gurudeva, accom-
panied by his initiated sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs,
extensively preached Śrī Caitanya’s message in various
places in Assam. This time he went to most of the places
in Pūjyapāda Śrī Nimānanda Sevātīrtha Prabhu’s preaching
area. Śrīla Gurudeva spoke on sanātana-dharma, bhāgavat-
dharma, śuddha-bhakti and other subjects at prominent
religious assemblies in Golokgaṅja, Dhūbaḍī, Bichandaī,
Khānurī, Rāmapura, Bongāī Grāma, Chakāpāḍā, Khagarpura,
Sākomūḍā, Calantāpaḍā, Abhaypurī and other places. He
returned to Chuṅchuṛā Maṭha after about one month of
preaching.



Śrī Vyāsa-pūja festival in Begunābāḍī

Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti has for many years observed
Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā according to the Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā-paddhati
compiled by Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda and revised by
Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. The original inception of Śrī
Vyāsa-pūja took place in Śrivās Āṅgana in Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura about five hundred years ago. Under the
guidance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu performed pūjā of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu on the
seat of Śrī Vyāsa. On this occasion Śrivās Paṇḍita
mentioned the question of a Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā-paddhati to
Śrīman Mahāprabhu. For this reason, Śrīla Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura was at great pains to collect this ancient
paddhati from Govardhana Maṭha in Purī. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura then revised and developed it to
make it useful for his sampradāya. Parama-ārādhyatama
Śrīla Gurudeva found this paddhati and introduced the
observance of Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā combined with pūjā-pañcaka.
This ceremony is observed every year with great
celebrations in various places.

This year Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā was organized in the vast
courtyard of the school at Begunābāḍī in Medinīpura
districtÇ and was celebrated in a grand way for three
days, from Māghī Kṛṣṇa Tṛtīyā to Pañcamī. Ten or twelve
thousand people participated every day in this festival,
and on the last day mahā-prasāda was distributed to a
crowd which was too large to count. Girīścandra
Dāsādhikārī from Pūrvacaka received special praise from
the Samiti for taking care of the entire expenses for
the festival.

Śrī Girīścandrajī and his wife both received hari-nāma
mantra and dīkṣā from Śrī Ācāryadeva on the first day of
the festival. At that time he was 84 years old. As a
wealthy landowner, he had previously spent his life in a
grandiose way with pomp and show. He had ordered
fragrant tobacco from France and other foreign

                          119
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

countries, and used to sit on his bed smoking his golden
hukka with the help of a long pipe. But during the last
84-kosa Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā he had spent one month
hearing śuddha hari-kathā and his heart had changed. Now
he was free from worldly attachments and had taken a vow
to perform bhajana. Before shaving his head on the day
of dīkṣā, he did a last praṇāma to his extremely dear
hukka and threw it far away. Everyone was amazed to see
his conviction and determination.

On the first day of Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā our most worshipful
Śrīla Gurudeva offered arcana-pūjan and puṣpāñjali at
the lotus feet of his Paramāradhyatama Śrīla Prabhupāda,
after which Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s sannyāsī, brahmacārī and
gṛhastha disciples offered puṣpāñjali at his lotus feet.
Śrī Trivikrama Mahārāja gave a lecture about Śrī
Gurupūja and our most worshipful Śrī Gurudeva spoke
about Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā. At the religious assembly in the
evening Śrīla Guru Mahārāja read the section in Śrī
Caitanya-Bhāgavata about Vyāsa-pūjā. On the second day,
letters of commemoration in various languages were read
and Śrī Ācāryadeva gave a lecture. On the third day,
Śrīla Ācāryadeva instructed Śrī Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and
Śrī Rasarāja Vrajavāsī to perform Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā
according to the Vyāsa-pūjā-paddhati with pūjā-pañcaka
of sixteen articles.



A protest against the law controlling Hindu sādhus and
sannyāsīs

Since ancient times India has been a predominantly
dharmic (religious) country. All aspects of the culture
in India—such as tradition, morality, social structure,
politics and administration—have been determined and
conducted from a religious perspective since Vedic
times. The supremacy of dharma in the Indian society was
protected even during the rule of the yavanas and the
British. However, after independence dharma has declined
very rapidly and to an extent that has not been seen for
thousands of years.

On July 27th, 1956, a proposal to control Hindu sādhus
and sannyāsīs was brought to the Indian Lok Sabhā (the
Lower House of the Indian parliament). The rationale
behind this legislation was that the behaviour of sādhus
and sannyāsīs was becoming more sinful, and that their
life style was becoming more contrary to the interests
of society at large. Furthermore, there was an increase
in the incidence of begging. It was thought necessary to
control this, and the intention was to use legislation
to remove the calumny on true sādhus and purify society.

At that time, Paramārādhyatama Ācārya Kesarī resided in
Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā. When his
attention was drawn towards this legislation, he
protested with a lion-like voice. “The Indian Penal Code
has ample regulations to suppress sinful behaviour and
activities opposed to society”, he said. “What is the
need for this separate law? And why not put a
legislation on the Muslim mullās, the Christian pope and
ministers and the Buddhists and Jains who are begging?
Why cause an uproar about Hindus and no one else? Before

                          120
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

any legislation against Hindu sādhus is presented in the
Lok Sabhā, it should be publicized throughout the whole
country. Only then should the debate be conducted in the
Lok Sabhā. It is improper in all respects to neglect
this procedure and to make some legislation or law
secretly.”

Ācārya Kesarī started a forceful campaign, protesting
strongly against this legislation. He wrote a letter of
protest, printed it in Hindi, Bengali and English, and
sent it to prominent politicians, social leaders and
leaders of religious societies. A copy of the letter was
sent to Śrī Nehrujī, who was the prime minister at the
time, and also to the members of the Lok Sabhā. The
result of this was such an awakening of the people that
the Lok Sabhā quickly rejected the legislation. Here is
a copy of the protest he wrote.

“The laws, rules and regulations of India are all
defined according to śāstric law; no legislation can be
accepted in India which is separate from śāstric laws.
No person or society can control sādhus and sannyāsīs;
they are only controlled by śāstra. We find evidence to
support this statement in all the Purāṇas and other
śāstras. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.21.12) it is said,

sarvatrāskhalitādeśaḥ sapta-dvīpaika-daṇḍa-dhṛk

anyatra brāhmaṇa-kulād anyatrācyuta-gotrataḥ.

“Mahārāja Pṛthu, who was the sole emperor of the entire
world, very firmly applied his system of law and
punishment to everyone except for the ṛṣis, brāhmaṇas
and acyuta-gotriya viṣṇu-bhaktas (the Vaiṣṇavas).”

“Saints and sādhus are India’s pride and charming
beauty. People from all over the world are attracted to
this beautiful ornament of India and are ready to
construct their own spiritual and social lives
accordingly. Indian sādhus and sannyāsīs are very peace-
loving. That is why the whole world looks to India for
peace. It is extremely improper and completely illegal
to check religious conduct by politics.

“It was declared by the Indian constitutional structure
that India is primarily a secular state. This attempt by
the Indian Lok Sabhā to try to restrict one religion and
not others is therefore completely against the
constitutional law. If this legislation were passed, the
Penal Code, Criminal Procedure Code and other laws would
also have to be changed and revised in many fields.

“There is no need to make a new law to control
misbehaviour separately. If it is necessary to prepare a
separate law to control the misconduct of sādhus, then
it is also necessary to prepare a separate law to
control the misconduct, the sinful behaviour and the
anti-social activities of the Congress party and other
political parties. It is more essential to control the
political agents than it is to control the ācāryas of
the sādhus and sannyāsīs. Another point is that so far
there are no laws prepared for control of the black
market and other anomalies in society.


                          121
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

“Only sādhus and sannyāsīs can understand the activities
of other sādhu and sannyāsīs. How can anyone recognise a
sādhu if he is not a sādhu himself, and has never had
the association of sādhus and sannyāsīs, or even been
near them? How can he judge who is a sādhu and who is a
non-sādhu? We need laws which apply to everyone. At
present there is no arrangement to control non-sādhus,
yet non-sādhus are tightening their waist-belts and
jumping to their feet to control sādhus. This is the age
of voting, and there are more non-sādhus than sādhus;
that is why they can present laws to condone atrocities
against sādhus. The majority is creating an atrocity
against the minority. We can never call this a good
rule.

“Nowadays malice, violence and so forth are directed
towards sādhus. Non-sādhus are becoming degraded and
ashamed because of their misconduct of in society. They
feel abandoned and disrespected by sādhus, and in
revenge are presenting bills to control them. This is
befitting the age of Kali. The proposal to register
sādhus will give all the non-sādhus of India a golden
opportunity; they will be able to validate their immoral
character by entering their names in the register of
sādhus. Actual sādhus do not want to be called ‘sādhu’
and would feel ashamed to be identified as a registered
or licensed sādhu. Some sādhus will not even register
their names at the government office. Besides, if the
licensing officer is anti-Hindu, how can one rely on him
to judge who is and who is not a sādhu according to
Hindu śāstra?

“Here is another point. Is a gṛhastha considered a sādhu
or not, according to the proposed definition? If
gṛhasthas are excluded from the sādhu category then
gṛhasthas who are actually very elevated will be called
non-sādhus. This will be an offense under section 352 of
Indian Penal Code, or else a case of defamation under
section 500 of the same. If some gṛhastha wants to adopt
a virtuous way of life or to become a sādhu, then he
will also have to take a license or get his name
registered. Suppose a highly posted official in an
office or a law court wants to lead a religious life.
Must he certify his goodness with some district
magistrate who may be immoral or even vicious? And will
that district magistrate have the power to cancel the
licence and punish that virtuous official?

“The constitution of India has passed the ‘Widow
Marriage Act’ and the ‘Śārada Child Marriage Act’
proposed by the honourable Īśvaracandra Vidyāsāgara, but
the Indian public has not accepted them. These laws are
lying in some corner of the library of the Indian
constitution. This present law will certainly face the
same sorry plight if it is forced on the general public
against their wishes. We are totally against such a law.
We humbly request the members of the Lok Sabhā not to
pass this bill. We also request all Indian newspapers
and their readers to oppose this blind law with all
their power. Indeed, we request the entire society,
especially the sādhus and sannyāsīs of India, to unite
and raise their voices against this law.”



                          122
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Inauguration of Śrī Golokgaṅja Gauḍīya Maṭha (Assam)

Jagadguru Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarsvatī Gosvāmī
Ṭhākura preached śuddha-bhakti strongly outside West
Bengal, for example in Assam, Bihar, Orissa, Madras
(Chennaī) and Uttar Pradesh. There were many gṛhastha-
bhaktas in these different states who were very expert
in the siddhāntas of śuddha-bhakti and who preached in
their own local languages. One of the foremost of these
was Śrīpāda Nimānanda Sevātīrtha Prabhu from Dhūbaḍī in
Assam, who preached Śrī Caitanya Mahā-prabhu’s message
in Assamese all over Assam, under Śrīla Prabhupāda's
guidance. But very shortly after Śrīla Bhakti-siddhānta
Sarsvatī Prabhupāda entered aprakaṭa-līlā, Śrīpāda
Sevātīrtha Prabhu also left this world. At that time he
instructed his disciples to continue their spiritual
life under the guidance of Paramapūjanīya Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

Among Śrīpāda Sevātīrtha Prabhu’s gṛhastha disciples,
Śrīmatī Sucitrābālā Devī is a very intelligent woman,
and learned in the subtle concepts of bhakti-dharma.
Rāmāyaṇa states, gurorājñā hyavicāraṇīyā: “The
disciple’s duty is to follow the guru’s order without
consideration.” Sucitrā Devī therefore very insistently
invited Ācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja to Assam to preach śuddha-bhakti. On her
repeated requests, Śrīla Gurudeva arrived in Golokgaṅj
with twelve followers, and preached bhakti strongly in
various places. The public was very impressed to see the
special quality of Śrīla Guru Mahārāja’s preaching, and
to hear the hidden siddhāntas of bhakti, and they
resolved to spend time in spiritual life under the
guidance of his teachings.

The devoted Sucitrā Devī unconditionally donated her
land and newly built residence etc. for establishing a
Gauḍīya Maṭha in Golokgaṅja. This donation was duly
registered at the Registration Office in the main town
of Gvālapāḍā district, Dhūbaḍī. Her husband, Śrīyuta
Devendracandra Dāsa (initiated as Śrī Divyajñāna
Dāsādhikārī), especially helped his wife in this
transcendental task.

At Śrī Surendranātha Dāsa’s request, Śrīla Gurudeva came
with his preaching party to Devān village in Gvālapāḍā
district on February 11-12th, 1957. A extensive festival
took place here at the occasion of Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu’s appearance day and Śrī Nimānanda Sevātīrtha
Prabhu’s disappearance. Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave a
brilliant lecture on the life history of Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu and Śrī Nimānanda Prabhu at the local religious
assembly. Tridaṇḍisvāmī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
explained Gaura līlā with the help of slides. Paṇḍita
Śrī Sanat Kumār Dāsādhikārī and Paṇḍita Śrī Vṛndāvana
Dāsādhikārī also gave lectures with a brilliant command
of words. Honourable Śrī Suren Dāsa met all the expenses
for the festival.



Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā celebration in Śrī Golokgaṅja Gauḍīya
Maṭha

                          123
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017


February 17th to 19th, 1957: There was a great
celebration of Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā at Śrī Golokgaṅja Gauḍīya
Maṭha for three days, while Śrīla Ācāryadeva was present
there with his disciples. Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā was carried out
under his guidance with pūjā-pañcaka according to Śrīla
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s paddhati. An extensive religious
assembly was held in the courtyard of the maṭha and
Śrīla Gurupādapadma submitted an investigative and
philosophical lecture on following Śrī Vyāsadeva and Śrī
Vyāsa-pūjā. Afterwards, mahā-prasāda was distributed to
two or three thousand invited and uninvited guests. The
service activities of Śrīmatī Sucitrā Bālādevī and her
family were very praiseworthy. The unwearying service of
Śrī Sudāma Sakhā Brahmacārī and Dhanyātidhanya
Brahmacārī was also very commendable.



Śrī Ācārya Kesarī in the ‘All-Bengal Vaiṣṇava
Conference’

March 12th to 14th, 1957: Śrīpāṭa Maheśa is a well-known
place adjacent to Śrī Rāmapura in Hoogly district in
Bengal and the Ratha-yātrā which is held there is like
the one in Jagannātha Purī. Previously, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s associate Śrī Kamalākara Pippallāī stayed
there performing sādhana-bhajana. On the occasion of the
anniversary of his disappearance day an ‘All-Bengal
Vaiṣṇava Conference’ was organised for three days under
the auspices of the Sinthi Vaiṣṇava Society and the Śrī
Rāmapura Dharma Sabhā. Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti’s
founder ācārya, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī was
selected as the chairman of this conference. Śrī
Gopendrabhūṣaṇa (sāṅkhyatīrtha), Paṇḍit Surendranātha
(pañcatīrtha), Śrī Nagendranātha Śāstrī (teacher),
Paṇḍit Śrī Phaṇīndranātha Śāstrī (M.A.B.L.) and other
famous scholars of Navadvīpa were all present there.

Śrī Vinoda Kiśora Gosvāmī (purāṇatīrtha) addressed the
as-sembly. The main guest, advocate Śrī Patitpāvana
Caṭṭopādhyāya gave a speech on Śrī Kamalākara
Pippallāī’s life history, and the scholars mentioned
above gave their speeches. Tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrīpād
Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja made some critical
comments on Śrī Phaṇīndranātha Śāstrī’s statements.
After that, the chairman, Śrīla Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja
gave a lecture full of śāstric pramāṇas on Śrī
Kamalākara Pippallāī. In a serious voice, he strongly
opposed apasiddhāntic views that prākṛta-sahajiyās had
written in unauthentic literature. Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta mentions Śrī Pippallāījī, whose life was
actually full of pure bhakti. However, the recorded life
history which has been written about him includes some
impure and avaiṣṇava views, which are actually against
bhakti. At the end of the assembly the audience brought
up many questions regarding Śrī Pippallāī, which Śrīla
Gurudeva solved.



Observing upavāsa (fasting) on Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī

Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī has a special significance in the society

                          124
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

of Śrī Gauḍīya vaiṣṇavas, and they honour this day very
deeply. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the most complete śakti of
Kṛṣṇa. She is Herself Īśvarī and all other śaktis
manifest from Her. For this reason, some people want to
regard Rādhāṣṭamī as a jayantī and observe fasting
without water, as they do on Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī. In
reality, though, even though Hari-bhakti-vilāsa refers
to Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī tithi as a vrata, it does not
prescribe any fasting for this day. Thus the sahajiyā
sampradāya, which observes fasting on this day, is
actually exhibiting excessive devotion towards Śrī
Rādhārāṇī. Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa is the only smṛti for
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, and it records in a splendid way,
with scriptural references, the system by which
vaiṣṇavas should observe vratas and fasting.
Satkriyasāra-dīpikā is another prominent text concerning
activities prescribed by śāstra. It is improper for a
pure Vaiṣṇava to create new vratas and transgress vratas
and other rules recorded in these books. Nowadays the
registered Gauḍīya Mission, which is run by Congress
Company, has changed the śuddha-vaiṣṇava line and has
begun to observe Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī vrata according to the
doctrine of the sahajiyās.

Observance of vrata and fasting is prescribed in the
śāstras only for the appearance days of śaktimān para-
tattva (the Supreme Truth who possesses all potencies)
or His incarnations. If fasting were observed for the
appearance of śakti-tattva, then one would have to
observe fasting on all 365 days of the year. This is
because, in addition to bhagavat-śaktis, all the ācāryas
and gurus in the guru-paramparā are included in śakti-
tattva and it is impossible to observe vrata and fasting
on all of the appearance and disappearance days.

All the maṭhas under the jurisdiction of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti observed Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī vrata on Sunday,
September 1st, 1957, according to the method of Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī. On this day there was abhiṣeka of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, with special offerings of bhoga,
lectures on Śrī Rādhā tattva, saṅkīrtana and so on.

On the Rādhāṣṭamī day, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja visited Śrī Caitanya Sārasvata Maṭha
which Paramapūjyapāda Śrīla Bhaktirakṣaka Sridhara
Gosvāmī Mahārāja had established in Kolerganja,
Navadvīpa. There the ācārya of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti gave a deeply philosophical lecture on Rādhā
tattva. Other speakers also offered puṣpāñjalī at the
lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā by revealing their various
conclusions.



Vyāsa-pūjā at Śrī Gauravāṇī-Vinoda Āśrama in Khaḍagpura

February 8th, 1958: Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā was celebrated in a
grand way on Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhupāda’s appearance day
at Śrī Gauravāṇī-Vinoda-Āśrama in Khaḍagpura. This was
made possible by the irrepressible enthusiasm of
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktijīvana Janārdana Mahārāja,
the president of the aśrama. In previous years Vyāsa-
pūjā had been celebrated with great festivities in Śrī
Golokgaṅja Gauḍīya Maṭha in Assam, according to the

                          125
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

method initiated by Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda. In 1957,
the celebrations had been held in Begunabāḍī, Pūrvacak,
near Medinīpura.

Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja came
to this ceremony with his disciples and performed the
priestly duties (purohitya) of Vyāsa-pūjā. On the second
day of Vyāsa-pūjā, mahā-prasāda was distributed to about
five thousand faithful people. A religious assembly was
arranged on the occasion of Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā, and Śrīla
Ācāryadeva addressed the assembly as follows: “Not only
we Indians, but the whole world, is eternally indebted
to Śrī Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana Vyāsa. He divided the Vedas into
four parts to help general people who are trying to
study them. He compiled Vedānta-sūtra or Brahma-sūtra in
order to reconcile apparent contradictions between
Vedānta and Upaniṣads, the essence of the Vedas. He
composed the different Purāṇas and the Mahābhārata and
finally, in order to make Vedānta-sūtra easily
understandable, he himself published the spotless mahā-
purāṇa, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, as the commentary on Vedānta-
sūtra.

All the religious societies in India believe that
somehow or other they are followers of Vyāsa
(vyāsānuga). However, when we carefully study the
literature composed by Śrī Vyāsadeva we can clearly see
that bhagavat-bhakti is the main subject matter in his
literature. He has not mentioned the words jñāna and
mukti anywhere in the 550 sūtras of his famous Brahma-
sūtra. On the contrary, he has established bhakti
everywhere in the genuine commentary of his Brahma-
sūtra, namely paramahaṁsī saṁhitā Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Although the Śrī Śaṅkara Sampradāya gives prominence to
Vyāsa-pūjā, their so-called Vyāsa-pūjā is a mockery. In
Ācārya Śaṅkara’s commentary on Brahma-sūtra, he has
accused Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana Śrī Vedavyāsa of being mistaken.
Śrī Śaṅkara has written that Brahman is ānanda-svarūpa
(embodiment of bliss), and can never be ānandamaya
(blissful). But Śrī Vyāsajī has called Brahman
ānandamaya (blissful) in Vedānta-sūtra. In this way,
Ācārya Śaṅkara has attempted to refute Śrīla Vyāsadeva’s
opinion. Therefore, Ācārya Śaṅkara’s Vyāsa-pūjā is only
for show.

Śrī Vyāsadeva is worshipped properly in the Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya. All tridaṇḍi-sannyāsīs should accept the
example of the vyāsa-pūjā celebrated by Śrīpāda
Janārdana Mahārāja. Nowadays, we see that, in the name
of Vyāsa-pūjā, so-called gurus everywhere accept
puṣpāñjali and arcāñjali offered to their own feet and
they hear and accept praise given to them by their own
disciples. However, those who only accept puṣpāñjali and
arcāñjali offered to their own feet and who do not
follow Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā-paddhati (which was collected by
Śrīla Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda and edited
and developed by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura) are not
actually performing Vyāsa-pūjā. On Vyāsa-pūjā day an
ācārya will worship guru, guru-paramparā and upāsya.
According to this pūjā-paddhati, on that day one should
worship the following:

1) guru-pañcaka (Śrī Guru, Paramaguru, Parameṣṭhīguru,

                          126
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Parātparguru, Paramparātparguru); 2) ācārya-pañcaka (Śrī
Śukadeva, Rāmānuja, Madhva, Viṣṇusvāmī, Nimbāditya); 3)
vyāsa-pañcaka (Śrī Vedavyāsa, Pail, Vaiśampāyana,
Jaiminī, and Sumanta); 4) sanakādi-pañcaka (Śrī Sanak,
SanatkumārÇ Sanātan, Sanandan, and Viṣvaksena); 5)
kṛṣṇa-pañcaka, (Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa,
Pradyumna, Aniruddha); 6) upāsya-pañcaka (Śrī Rādhā,
Kṛṣṇa, Gaura, Gadādhara, Śrī Gurudeva); and 7) pañca-
tattva (Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, Nityānanda, Advaita Ācārya,
Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa).

It is the supreme duty of Śrī Gauḍīya Sārasvata
Vaiṣṇavas to follow the Vyāsa-pūjā paddhati used by
Śrīla Prabhupāda.

On this occasion, when the disciples of Śrīpāda
Janārdana Mahārāja went to him to offer puṣpāñjali at
his feet, he instructed them to offer puṣpāñjali first
at the feet of their śikṣa guru, Śrīla Keśava Mahārāja.
When, on their guru’s order, all the disciples came to
Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja to offer
puṣpāñjali, he in turn explained that a disciple should
first worship his own Guru’s feet and then other Gurus.
For this he gave examples and proofs from śāstras.
Śrīpād Janārdana Mahārāja could not reject the
instruction from his senior god-brother and śīkṣa-guru.
Accordingly, his disciples worshipped their own Gurudeva
and then offered puṣpāñjali to Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Pūjyapāda Janārdana Mahārāja
did not forget this event for his whole life. He used to
say that he had watched all his god-brothers very
closely, but had never seen anyone who was so generous,
so learned in siddhānta, and such a fearless speaker of
truth as Śrīla Keśava Mahārāja. When he spoke like this,
tears used to come to his eyes.



Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti and Akṣaya Tṛtīyā

April 22nd, 1958: A special festival was observed for
Akṣaya Tṛtīyā, and for the anniversary of the
inauguration of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. Besides the
lecture and kīrtana, a special religious assembly was
organized that day in Śrī Uddāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha in
Chuṅchuṛā. Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva addressed the
assembly as follows.

“Akṣaya Tṛtīyā is the first day of Satya-yuga. It is on
this day that the road to Śrī Badrīnārāyaṇa is opened
every year, and Śrī Candana Yātrā also takes place in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī on Akṣaya Tṛtīyā. Śrī Jagannāthajī’s
whole body is smeared with Malayan candana and Śrī
Madana Mohanajī, the vijaya-vigraha of Śrī
Jagannāthadevajī, is seated in a well-decorated boat in
Śrī Narendra Sarovara to perform His boat-pastimes.

“Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti was inaugurated on this very
day in 1940. Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva established
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as Gauḍīya vedānta following the śloka
from Garuḍa Purāṇa, artho ‘yaṁ brahma-sūtrāṇāṁ: ‘Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is the purport of Vedānta and the purpose of
Mahābhārāta. It is the commentary of the gāyatrī mantra
and the essence of the Vedas.’ Gauḍīya Vedāntācārya

                          127
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa also composed Govinda-bhāṣya
following this same verse.”

Śrīla Gurudeva went on to point out by comparative study
that Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya is the topmost commentary on
Vedānta, and that after Govinda-bhāṣya, Śrī Mādhva-
bhāṣya is superior to all the other commentaries. He
further established that Śāṅkara Vedānta is
insubstantial and useless.



Preaching in Golokgaṅja, Assam

May 1st, 1958: Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva went with a
preaching party from Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha to Śrī
Golokgaṅja Gauḍīya Maṭha in Assam. Whilst there, he
stayed with his sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs in Śantinagar
Pallī of Dhūbaḍī city at the house of Śrī Advaitacaraṇa
Dāsādhikari, the prominent servant of the Samiti. From
there he went to Kālīvāḍī and other places in Dhūbaḍī to
give lectures on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In the Hari-sabhā-
maṇḍapa he gave three lectures on ‘The solution to the
problems of today’, ‘The necessity for religious life’
and ‘Sanātana-dharma’. The audience were very impressed
by his deep and powerful lectures.

In addition to Śrīla Gurudeva’s lectures, Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Śrīpād Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja and
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīpād Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
also gave lectures in different places with the help of
slides. Very educated and respectful people helped the
preaching party through body, mind, words and wealth.



Establishing a primary school and the method of teaching
in Pichladā

Within the Medinīpura district there is a small village
named Pichladā, which Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu visited on
his way to Śrī Jagannātha Purī. After repeated requests
from the village people, Śrīla Gurudeva established
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s pāda-pīṭha (an altar with the
imprint of Śrī Mahāprabhu’s lotusfeet) and Śrī Pichladā
Gauḍīya Maṭha.

Later, the villagers wanted to open a primary school in
the village. For this purpose they formed a School
Board, which they duly registered. To run the school
they needed a hall. On December 23rd, 1958, they sent a
written request to Śrīla Gurudeva (who was at that time
in Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā) requesting him
to donate the old house of the pāda-pīṭha for use as a
school. After reading their letter, Śrīla Gurudeva gave
his ideas to the village people in the letter which is
presented below.

“1) Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti does not have even the
slightest faith in the education provided by the present
universities. I do not accept education which is opposed
to Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s teachings.

2) I am not prepared to give up religious teachings for

                          128
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

rupees.

3) Pichladā has become important by the touch of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s lotus feet. The villagers should therefore
live according to the sevā given by Śrīman Mahāprabhu,
and they should accept whatever religious education that
entails.

4) Pichladā pādapīṭha is not an atheist pādapīṭha and
Vedānta Samiti will not approve of the teaching of
atheistic principles on its premises.

5) I have no objection to signing the deed if the School
Board is willing to educate the students as per the
pattern provided by Vedānta Samiti.

6) The village people should remember the strong
reproach against the activities of the Calcutta
University in the essay on acintya-bhedābheda in Śrī
Gauḍīya Patrikā’s 10th issue of the 10th year.

7) In Śrīdhāma Māyāpura I established a high school
which was sanctioned by the University. The law of the
University was broken when priority was given to
religious education. This example should also be
followed here.

8) It is impossible for the country to receive any kind
of benefit from disobedient students. Religious ethics
are the principal policy.

9) Our government recognises many Christian missionary
schools. There is no doubt, then, that the primary
school in Pichladā can keep religious education as the
main priority and still be recognised.

10) There should be no interference of any sort which is
contrary to the religious objectives of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti.

11) Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti will approve the
establish-ment of any college, school, or Sanskrit
school for expanding the field of education. Such a
school would be managed by a committee from the Samiti,
which would exclude any atheistic line of thought by the
department of education.

12) The demon Hiraṇyakaśipu sent his son Śrī Prahlāda
Mahārāja to be educated at ±aṇḍa and Amarka’s school,
where the education was controlled by Śukrācārya.
However, Prahlāda Mahārāja gave importance to the
education in Viṣṇu bhakti, thus violating the orders of
the emperor—his father—and the command of Śukrācārya,
the main director of the education department. This is
our ideal in expanding the field of education.

13) Śrīman Mahāprabhu instructed the jīvas of the world
about education in Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda saṁvāda in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta. We accept these instructions, and
not any kind of demoniac ideals.

14) According to the University’s rules and regulations,
every college must observe Saturday as a half-day and
Sunday as a full day holiday. However, in the school in

                          129
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrīdhāma Māyāpura the holidays were observed on ekādaśi
and pañcamī. This is contrary to the Unniversity rules.
When local Christians and Muslims opposed this, the
departmental inspector of the University came and issued
an order against me, which I refused to accept. As a
result, the aid given by the University was stopped. In
spite of this, the Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda Institute in
Śrīdhāma Māyāpura is still running today, and is still
recognised by the government.

15) This letter should be read to the villagers. I am
establishing and organizing more schools, Sanskrit
schools and colleges, so I am well experienced in
establishing colleges. We are not at all obliged to
follow the statute laid down by the government. People
from an independent country are not dependent on others.
The establishment of the school should be done in an
excellent manner, so that it is an ideal school in the
Medinīpura district. Please explain this to everyone.”



The installation of the Deities in Śrī Golokgaṅja
Gauḍīya Maṭha

January 29th, 1959: The president of the Samiti, Ācārya
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja,
imparted endless benefit to the world by installing the
Deities of Śrī Śrī Guru-Gauraṅga Rādhā-Vinodabihārījī in
Śrī Golokgaṅja Gauḍīya Maṭha in Golokgaṅja, Assam. The
daily sevā began in a splendid way. Śrī Bhagavān, the
Supreme Absolute Truth who resides in the bhakta’s
heart, mercifully appears in the outside world in His
Deity form. The bhāva (spiritual sentiments) in Śrīla
Ācāryadeva’s heart has been expressed in the bhāva of
the Deity of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is adorned with
unprecedented sweetness, because of embracing Rādhā and
accepting Her luster.

rādhā-cintā-niveśena yasya kāntirvilopitā

śrī kṛṣṇa caraṇaṁ vande rādhāliṅgita vigraham

(Śrī Rādhā-Vinodabihārī-tattvaṣṭakam)

Uṣā kīrtana and nagar saṅkīrtana were performed from the
early morning until 8 a.m.; from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. there
was abhiseka of śrī vigraha, reading from śāstras,
vaiṣṇava homa-yajña, installation activities, arcana-
pūja and the bhoga offering. Mahā-prasada was served to
invited and uninvited guests until 11 at night. The
Samiti’s tridaṇḍī-sannyāsīs and learned members spoke at
a religious assembly in the evening between 4 to 7 p.m.
Finally, Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave a deep lecture filled
with bhāva on śrī vigraha-tattva. He quoted a verse from
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 5.1),

padbhyāṁ calan yaḥ pratimā-svarūpo

brahmaṇyadevo hi śatāhagamyam

deśaṁ yayau viprakṛte ‘dbhute ‘haṁ

taṁ sākṣigopālamahaṁ nato’smi

                          130
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


“I offer my praṇāma to Sākṣīgopala, the performer of
transcendental activities, who appeared as brahmaṇya
deva (the Supreme Lord of brahminical culture) in Deity
form and walked for 100 days to reach a distant place
only for the benefit of a brāhmaṇa.”

Citing this śloka Śrīla Gurudeva said that śrī vigraha
is Svayam Bhagavān. Pratimā nahe tumi sākṣāt
vrajendranandana (Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 5.96): “You
are not an image; You are directly Vrajendra-nandana.”
Śrīman Mahāprabhu also expressed the same sentiments
when taking darśana of Jagannāthadeva.

According to Śrī Śankarācārya’s doctrines, the imaginary
form of nirviśeṣa brahman is called an image for the
benefit of sādhakas. There are five different imaginary
forms of nirviśeṣa brahman—Viṣṇu, Śiva, Śakti, Sūrya and
Gaṇeśa—and the worshipper of these forms is called
pañca-upāsaka. This view of Śankarācārya is opposed to
śāstras and is only a figment of his imagination.
Imaginary images of stone etc. can neither walk nor
talk. Therefore the Deities are cinmaya (conscious) and
pūrṇa brahman svarūpa (the complete personification of
Brahman). Bhagavān is not nirākāra, niḥśaktik, or
nirviśeṣa. Arūpavadeva hi tatpradhānatvāt, na pratīkena
hi saḥ, ānandāmayo ‘bhyāsāt and other sūtras of Vedānta-
sūtra prove that Bhagavān has an eternal form, is the
possessor of all śaktis and is full of all
transcendental qualities.

Śrīla Gurudeva refuted pratīkopāsanā19 and nirākāra-vāda
with irrefutable logic and śāstric evidences. His
wonderful lecture on śrī vigraha-tattva was filled with
tattva and siddhānta and left deep impressions in the
hearts of the audience. He pointed out the difference
between idols and śrī-vigraha, and announced very
seriously that nirākāra-vādīs and nirviśeṣa-vādis, who
are inimical to the eternal vigraha, have neither the
right nor the qualification to install Deities.



Vyāsa-pūjā and inauguration of Śrī Vigraha in the newly
constructed mandira in Śrī Gauravāṇī-Vinoda-Āśrama in
Khaḍagpura

February 27th to March 1st, 1959: There was a grand
celebration of Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā and the inauguration of
śrī vigraha in the newly constructed temple in Śrī
Gauravaṇī-Vinoda-Āśrama, Khaḍag-pura. The president of
the āśrama especially insisted that Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad
Bhaktijīvana Janārdana Mahārāja and Parivrājakācārya
Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja should be present at the festival. Śrīla
Ācāryadeva stayed there for four days and performed the
priestly duties on this grand occasion. Many sannyāsīs
and brahmacārīs under his shelter also participated in
the function.

February 27th, Māhgī Tṛtīyā, was the appearance day of
Śrīla Ācāryadeva. On that day he personally performed
the pūjā of his Gurudeva, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. By the order of Śrīla

                          131
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Gurudeva, Śrī Nityānanda Brahmacārī, who arrived from
Ganjām (Orissa), performed the ārati of Śrīla
Prabhupāda. During ārati, devotees sang the kirtana
‘Śrīla Prabhupāda-ārati’, which Śrīla Ācāryadeva himself
had composed.

jaya jaya prabhupādera ārati nehārī

yoga māyāpura-nitya sevā-dānakārī

sarvatra pracāra-dhūpa saurabha manohara

baddha mukta alikūla mugdha carācara

bhakati-siddhānta-dīpa jāliyā jagate

pañca-rasa-sevā-śikhā pradīpta tāhāte

pañca mahādīpa yathā pañca mahājyotiḥ

triloka-timira-nāśe avidyā durmati

bhakati vinoda-dhārā jala śaṅkha-dhāra

niravadhi bahe tāhā rodha nāhi āra

sarva-vādya-mayī ghanṭā bāje sarva-kāla

bṛhata-mṛdaṅga vādhya parama rasāla

viśāla lalāṭe śobhe tilaka ujjvala

gala deśe tulasī mālā kare jhalamala

ajānu-lambita bāhū dīrgha kalevara

tapta kāñcana-baraṇa parama sundara

lalita-lāvaṇya mukhe sneha-bharā hāsī

aṅga kānti śobhe jaiche nitya pūrṇa śaśī

yati dharme paridhāne aruṇa vasana

mukta kaila medhāvṛta gauḍīya gagana

bhakati-kusume kata kuñja viracita

saundarye-saurabhe tāra viśva āmodita

sevādarśe narahari cāmara ḍhūlāya

keśava ati ānande nirājana gāya20

Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
read for two days from the part of Caitanya-Bhāgavata
which describes the Vyāsa-pūjā performed in the house of
Śrivāsa. In addition to this, he performed kirtana
during these days at respectable people's houses in the
town.

At the religious assembly on the evening of the next
day, Śrīla Ācāryadeva spoke about Śrī Kṛṣṇa līlā and
gave a substantial lecture on the importance of

                          132
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

religious life. He said, “Dharmeṇa hīnā paśubhiḥ samānā
(Padma Purāṇa): ‘A life devoid of religion is the same
as animal life’. Eating, sleeping, fear and conceiving
children can be seen everywhere, even amongst the
animals. If we are entrapped in these four activities,
what is the advantage of gaining a human form of life,
and how is human life superior to animal life?
Therefore, it is written in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.9.29),

labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu sambhvānte

mānuṣyam artha-dam anityam apīha dhīraḥ

tūrṇaṁ yateta na pated anumṛtyu yāvan

niḥśreyasāya viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt

“‘This human birth is very rare, because it is attained
after many births. Even though it is temporary, it can
give the highest truth. We cannot obtain the highest
truth without sādhu-saṅga (association of devotees),
which is difficult to obtain in any species other than
the human form. An intelligent person should therefore
endeavour to achieve the ultimate good fortune before
death, without delaying for even a fraction of a moment.
And what is the ultimate good fortune? The ultimate good
fortune is cultivation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa bhakti.’

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.6)

“‘The topmost dharma of human life is Śrī Kṛṣṇa bhakti.
And this bhakti should also be without any kind of
selfish desires, regular and uninterrupted. By
performing bhakti in this manner, the heart feels
contented, perceiving the blissful form of Paramātmā.’

“There are many parts of bhagavad-bhakti. Amongst them
hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana is the topmost for human beings in
Kali-yuga.

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

“In śrī hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana there is only a
consideration of faith. Only a faithful person is
competent to perform nāma-saṅkīrtana. By attaining
faith, anyone can perform hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana in any
position. Even a person with no faith can get mukti
without any difficulty by taking Bhagavān’s name. Why
are people indifferent towards hari-nāma-japa or
saṅkīrtana when they are so easy to practise? To answer
this, one can use the Vedic injunction nāyamātmā
balahīnena labhya and the verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.2.37), bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syāt. We can
clearly understand from these references that only a
courageous and brave person can accept a religious life
and perform hari-nāma. A cowardly person is only
involved in material activities like eating, sleeping,
fearing and mating. These scriptural references explain

                            133
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

that those who are engrossed in statemanship, financial
policies, social welfare and so forth, are fearful and
cowardly people. Due to fear of māyā and ignorance they
are crushed and uselessly ruin their lives flattering
māyā. They do not have the courage to get free from
māyā’s prison and the agony of illusion.”

On Śrīla Prabhupāda’s appearance day, the devotees
performed his arcana-pūjā and offered puṣpāñjali at his
lotus feet. After that, the Deities which Śrīpāda
Janārdana Mahārāja had installed and worshipped
auspiciously entered the newly constructed palatial
temple with nine domes. This function was performed
according to the pañcarātrika method, and was
accompanied by śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana. On the same day
guru-pañcaka, ācārya-pañcaka, kṛṣṇa-pañcaka, upāsya-
pañcaka etc. and vaiṣṇava homa were performed according
to Vyāsapūjā-paddhati. This Vyāsa-pūjā was discussed for
a long time afterwards, not only in Khaḍagpura, but also
throughout the entire Medinīpura district.



Protest against Vaiṣṇava Darśana composed by Śrī Rādhā
Govindanātha

Ācārya Kesarī Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja strongly
protested against the book Acintya-bhedābheda-vāda
published by Bāgbāzār, Calcutta’s registered Gauḍīya
Mission. All learned and respectable persons in the
society are familiar with Ācārya Kesarī’s protest.
Śrīyut Rādhā Govindanātha has composed a large book,
Vaiṣṇava Darśana, which is based on the book Acintya-
bhedābheda-vāda, the ideas of both books being one and
the same. Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī protested against Vaiṣṇava
Darśana in the 4th issue of the 11th year of Śrī Gauḍīya
Patrikā, page 159-160. “The pure Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya as followed and preached by Śrīman Mahāprabhu
is within the Madhva sampradāya. In my essay Acintya-
bhedābheda (published in the 9th and 10th year of
Gauḍīya Patrikā) I have established elaborate evidence
protesting against the book Acintya-bhedābheda-vāda
composed by Śrī Vidyāvinoda. In the same essay I have
also protested against Nātha Mahāśaya’s book Vaiṣṇava
Darśana. The readers will understand my protest by
reading this essay. Nowadays different assemblies are
protesting against Śrī Rādhā Govindanātha as a result of
the publication of this essay. I hope that all the
religious bodies in India will protest against this
book.”

Śrīla Gurudeva has further written on this subject
matter. “We are happy to note that renowned gosvāmīs and
bābājī mahārājas etc. belonging to ordinary Vaiṣṇava
groups from Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Vṛndāvana, Govardhana, Mathurā
and other different places have unanimously strongly
protested against Śrī Rādhā Govindanātha’s book Vaiṣṇava
Darśana. On April 22nd, 1959, a huge assembly was
arranged in Śrī Amiya Nimāī Gaurāṅga Temple in
Vṛndāvana. In this assembly there was a critical review
of the aforesaid book. We are presenting a few points of
this review for the readers.


                          134
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

“First of all, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas in this assembly
pointed out that Śrī Nātha Mahāśaya is not an initiated
Vaiṣṇava in any Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya. Moreover, Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas have since Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s time considered
themselves to belong to the Mādhva Gauḍīyas or the Śrī
Brahmā-Mādhva-Gauḍīya Sampradāya. The president of the
aforesaid assembly affirmed, with the consent of all the
members present, that all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are within
Śrī Madhvācārya Sampradāya. However, Nātha Mahāśaya
rejects this conception. This shows how ignorant he is
of the philosophical tradition. Vaiṣṇavas should not
waste their time studying any book which attempts to
contradict this truth.

“Secondly, the president affirmed that Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, the protector of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya, is greatly revered by Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. He
is a genuine sevakācārya of Śrīman Mahāprabhu as well as
being a renowned and prominent philosophical paṇḍita in
the Śrī Mādhava Gauḍīya Sampradāya. There is not even a
shadow of doubt in this regard. Nātha Mahāśaya does not
accept Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa as an ācārya of the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya, and is therefore a great
offender at Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s lotus feet.

“The president’s third point is that the views expressed
by Nātha Mahāśaya in connection with acintya-bhedābheda-
vāda are irrelevant. Consequently, if śuddha-vaiṣṇavas
hear from or read the large book Vaiṣṇava Darśana which
he has composed and compiled, it will lead to their
total destruction. That is to say, they will fall
forever from the realm of authentic Gauḍīya vaiṣṇavism.

“This assembly determined, following the previous
mahājanas, that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community is
accepted as a part of the Brahmā-Mādhva-Gauḍīya
Sampradāya and that Nātha Mahāśaya’s Vaiṣṇava Darśana is
worthless, and should not be read by Śrī Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas.”



Śrīla Ācāryadeva in different places of Assam

May 21th, 1959: Paramārādhya Śrīla Ācāryadeva travelled
from Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa to Śrī Golokgaṅja Gauḍīya Maṭha
in Assam, after receiving an urgent letter from Śrī
Paramānanda Dāsādhikari (Śrī Palāśa Candraghūha) of
Dhūbaḍī. The train was delayed for nearly 12 hours due
to an accident at Kaṭihāra Junction. Having heard the
news of Śrī Ācāryadeva’s arrival by telegram, the
residents of the maṭha welcomed him at Golokgaṅja
railway station and respectfully brought him to the
maṭha to the accompaniment of saṅkīrtana with mṛdaṅga
and karatālas. At the maṭha, the renounced and
householder bhaktas performed Śrī Ācāryadeva’s pūjā and
ārati, and the assembled bhaktas had darśana of the
unprecedented beautiful Deities of Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga
Rādhā-Vinodabihārījī. They praised the devotee who had
donated the vigraha, saying, “The transcendental beauty
of these Deities is without equal. Such Deities cannot
be found anywhere else in Assam.”

Śrī Ācāryadeva addressed the assembled devotees saying,

                          135
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

“One should not take darśana of the Deities with the
eyes. Proper darśana is through the ears. This is
because darśana through the eyes is material and full of
faults, so there is always the possibility of delusion.
There is much less possibility of error and delusion in
darśana through the ears, by hearing. That is why the
mantra is given through the ears at the time of dīkṣā.
Śrī Gurudeva gives divya-jñāna (transcendental
knowledge) through the ears. All our senses help us to
enjoy, and our eyes enable us to enjoy beauty. However,
darśana of śrī vigraha is not meant to satisfy our sense
of vision, but rather to remove to a far distant place
our greed to enjoy with the eyes. Instead of thinking ‘I
am very blissfully having darśana of the Deities’, we
should think ‘The Deities will give me a merciful
glance’. It is with this attitude that we will achieve
our supreme welfare. Bhagavān and His Deity of Śrī
Bhagavān are not objects of sense perception. We cannot
accept Them

through any of our senses, because whatever we accept
through our senses is all material, and intended for our
enjoyment. But Śrī Bhagavān actually is the only
enjoyer; we are all meant to be enjoyed by Him. That
means that we are not the seer, but rather the one who
is seen.”

Śrīla Ācāryadeva then explained this subject in a way
which was easier to understand. “Suppose there is a ripe
mango in front of us. The eyes can see it, the skin can
touch it, the nose can smell it and the tongue can taste
it, but the ears have no connection with these four
senses. Whatever subject matter the ears comprehend is
completely beyond the perception of the remaining four
jñānendriyāni (knowledge acquiring senses). In other
words, these four senses are helpless with regard to
that subject matter and have no connection with it. The
ears comprehend words with which the other senses have
no connection. That is why the sad-guru gives trans-
cendental śabda-brahman in the ear of the sat-śiṣya.
Before giving śabda-brahman, Gurudeva purifies the
disciple with hari-kathā. Then he gives śabda-brahman in
the form of śrī hari-nāma and the dīkṣā-mantras. You
should try to realize this essential truth. This is why,
amongst all the senses, the ear is the most beneficial
for us.” The whole audience was fascinated to hear Śrīla
Gurudeva’s new and unprecedented view, and they un-
animously agreed that they had never heard such a
beautiful siddhānta before.

Śrī Ācāryadeva stayed at Golokgaṅja Maṭha for three
days, and then went to Dhūbaḍī town with his associates,
at Śrī Paramānanda Dāsādhikārī’s request. Śrī
Paramānanda Prabhu’s wife, Tāriṇī Devī, had expired some
time previously. Śrīla Ācāryadeva now supervised her
śrāddha saṁskāra according to the sātvata vaiṣṇava-
smṛti, Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā. Śrī Sanat Kumār Bhaktiśāstrī
Bhāgavatbhūṣaṇa performed the priestly duties at this
śrāddha ceremony, following Śrīla Gurudeva’s order.
Afterwards everyone was served mahā-prasāda.

The honourable Paramānanda Prabhu (Palāśa Bābū) was very
impressed with Śrīla Gurudeva’s preaching, and
repeatedly requested Śrīla Gurudeva to establish a

                          136
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

bhakti preaching centre in Dhūbaḍī. For this purpose he
offered his house in the district of Vidyāpāḍā in
Dhūbaḍī town, and also gave some money. He formally
registered the centre in Śrī Ācāryadeva’s name on May
29th, 1959.

After this, Śrīla Ācāryadeva travelled with his
associates to Amāyāpura by bus via Rangiyā. There he
visited the homes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Govinda Dāsādhikārī,
Śrīyuta Prāṇeśvara Dāsādhikārī (Saudāgara Prabhu) and
Vāṇeśvara Dāsādhikārī. After preaching śuddha-bhakti
there he returned to Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha,
Chuṅchuṛā.



Pichladā Gauḍīya Maṭha and installation of the Deities

Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva preached śuddha-bhakti
extensively for several years in Pichladā and in Assam,
and the faithful people in the area repeatedly requested
him to establish a Śrī Vedānta Samiti preaching centre
there. Moved by their strong insistence, Śrīla Gurudeva
agreed to establish a preaching-centre near Pichladā
pāda-pīṭha. A short time before snāna-yātrā he sent
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Paramārthī Mahārāja
with a few brahmacārīs to arrange for the installation
of the Deities. He himself arrived in Pichladā village
with many of his sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs.
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja
also reached Pichladā one day before Snāna Pūrṇimā.

Śrī Pichladā Gauḍīya Maṭha was established on Śrī
Jagannāthadeva’s Snāna Pūrṇimā, June 20th, 1959 and the
Deities of Śrī Śrī Guru, Nityānanda-Gaurāṅga Rādhā-
Vinodabihārījī were also installed on that day. On the
day of installation, after ūṣā kīrtana (early morning
kīrtana) and adhivāsa kīrtana (kīrtana before a ceremony
starts) the temple and maṭha premises were decorated
with mango leaves, flower garlands, flags, banners and
other auspicious items. In accordance with the rules of
Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, 12 banana trees, 12 pipal trees and
12 gūlar (wild fig) trees were placed on the four sides
of the temple. 12 water pots marked with svastikas were
placed in front of the banana trees, and mango leaves
and coconuts were placed on top of the water-pots.
Another five water-pots were filled up with sacred water
which had been collected from a holy river some distance
away with nagar-saṅkīrtana and a band party. These five
pots were placed in the snāna-maṇḍapa (bathing chamber)
of Śrī Rādhā-Vinodabihārījī.

After the arrival of the Deities on the altar of the
snāna-maṇḍapa, the priests performed mahā-abhiṣeka of
Śrī Śālagrāma Śila(the pratinidhi or representative form
of Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda) with milk, yogurt, ghee, honey,
sugar and 108 pots of fragrant water sanctified by
mantras. At the time of abhiṣeka the sound of the
kīrtana with mṛdaṅga and karatālas mixed with the sound
of conchshells, the jaya-dhvani and the ladies’ hulu-
dhvani ululation and resounded everywhere throughout all
directions. At the same time, prasthānatraya (i.e. Veda,
Upaniṣad, Viṣṇu-sahasranāma, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Gopāl-
sahasranāma and Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā) were recited with

                          137
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

loud voices on all sides of the temple. After the
abhiṣeka, while the atmosphere was resounding with
transcendental sounds from saṅkīrtana yajña and the
recitation of the Vedas and other śāstras, the Deities
were taken to śrī mandira. Śrīla Ācāryadeva himself
performed the consecration of the Deities with Vedic
mantras. Afterwards the temple doors opened and
thousands of assembled faithful people took Their
darśana accompanied by loud jaya-dhvani. After pūjā-
arcana and bhoga-ārati, supremely delicious mahā-prasada
was distributed to about five thousand faithful people.

After evening ārati and tulasī parikramā there was a
large religious assembly at which Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Parmārthī Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama
Mahārāja and others spoke. After that, Śrī Ācāryadeva
spoke vigorously for two hours. His very substantial
lecture was filled with siddhānta concerning śrī vigraha
and maṭha and mandiras. He talked about the situation in
modern India, about the village of Pichladā and the
villagers. He also spoke about śrī vigraha-tattva,
explained what a maṭha actually is, and how the maṭha-
mandira is factually beyond the guṇas (the three modes
of material nature). He went on to discuss sākāra-vāda
(personalism) and nirākāra-vāda (impersonalism);
Christianity’s sākāra-vāda, nirākāra-vāda and karma-
vāda; Islam’s sākāra and nirākāra-vāda; Buddhist and
Jain sākāra-vāda; and Ācārya Śaṅkara’s sākāra-nirākāra-
vāda. He then made a critical study of different Indian
doctrines and sects, including the sākāra-nirākāra-vāda
of Haṅkardeva of Assam, and the nirākāra-vāda of Kabīr,
Nānak and others. After that he talked about the
progressive development of atheistic society in India,
the necessity for maṭhas and mandiras, and other
subjects.

Śrīla Gurudeva said, “Dharma does not have a supreme
place in the present independent India. Adharma is
manifest under cover of people’s indifference to dharma.
As a result, an indescribable tāṇdava dance (violent
dance) of immorality, licentiousness, and bad thoughts
is going on everywhere in our country.

“Nowadays, under the guise of communism, we see very
forceful efforts to drag elevated people down and make
them equal to inferior people. However, nowhere do we
see any corresponding effort to elevate inferior people
and pull them up so that they are equal to superior
people. This trend is clearly visible in all fields,
such as politics, social movements, economics and
education.

“India is a pure and religious land, which is why Gītā
calls the great battlefield dharma-kṣetra (the field of
religion). In our country we can see many nirākāra-vādī
(impersonalistic) religious societies. In reality
nirākāra-vādīs cannot at all abandon the ideology of
sākāra (personalism). They want to absorb themselves in
an imaginary impersonal meditation while keeping a form
(sākāra) in the centre. It is this imaginary, impersonal
meditation which has given birth to atheism in our
country. The doctrine that the Lord has no form, no
character, no quality and no power is completely false
and imaginary. It is also the origin of the Buddhists’

                          138
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

śūnya-vāda (voidism) or atheism, which is opposed to the
Vedas. This philosophy is completely contradicted by the
Vedas and by all other śāstras, which consistently
acknowledge the Lord’s eternal form or svarūpa. To
acknowledge this is theism. Persons who do not accept
the eternal form of Bhagavān are atheists.” The audience
was very impressed by his lecture, which was full of
deep siddhānta and logic, supported by proofs from
śāstras.

At this ceremony Śrī Sudāma Sakhā Brahmacārī became a
special object of mercy because of his efforts in
collecting ornaments, clothes, pots and other items in
Navadvīpa Dhāma and Calcutta and bringing them to
Pichladā, and for his great endeavour in other services
for the installation of the Deities. The pious Śrī
Prabodhacandra Paṅḍyā Mahāśaya from Kāśimpura district
donated the Deities’s siṁhāsana and the Deities of Śrī
Rādhā-Vinodabihārī and covered most of the expenses for
the festival. He deserves praise for this service and is
the special object of the mercy of the Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti. The Samiti is grateful to the honourable
Śrī Gajendra-mokṣaṇa Dāsādhikārī for donating the Deity
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu and for donating rice and other
items for the festival. He provided almost 40 maund
(about 1600 kg) of rice ever year for the Śrīdhāma
Navadvīpa parikramā. His ideal service is praiseworthy
in all respects. Above all, Śrī Govinda Dāsādhikārī of
Pichladā is an object of mercy for his endeavour with
his life, wealth, and intelligence to establish the
maṭha. The endeavours and service of Śrī Kokila Rakṣita,
Śrī Govinda Dāsa, Nirāpada Māiti and Śrī Murārī Mohana
are also specially notable.



A philosophical assembly in Keśavapura

Śrī Ayodhyānātha Dāsādhikārī (from Keśavapura village,
in Medinīpura district) is an ekantika Vaiṣṇava, who was
initiated by Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti’s founder ācārya
and president. Although he took birth in an poor and
inferior family, he has firm faith in Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s śuddha-bhakti dharma. Although he is a
gṛhastha-vaiṣṇava, he regularly performs arcana-pūjāna
and sādhana-bhajana. He always abstains from eating meat
and fish, from smoking, from illicit association with
women and so on.

One year previously, in 1958, some important people in
the village were collecting donations for the public
worship of Śītalā Mātā which was to take place in his
village, and they insisted that Śrī Ayodhyānātha
Dāsādhikārī should donate 2 rupees for the pūjā. Śrī
Ayodhyānātha, however, very politely replied, “We are
initiated in the Gauḍīya vaiṣṇava-dharma proclaimed by
Śrīman Mahāprabhu and we are fully under the shelter of
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. Pure devotees are not
allowed to perform demigod worship, which is prohibited
in Gītā and other śāstras. For this reason, I am unable
to give any donation for this pūjā.” The villagers
became disturbed when they heard this, and they said,
“Demigod worship has been going on since ancient times,
and this is proved in śāstras. Let’s call an assembly,

                          139
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

and when we have heard the arguments on both sides, we
will decide whether demigod worship is proper or not.”
It was agreed to call an assembly in the coming month of
Srāvaṇa (July-August), but severe floods prevented this
from taking place.

During the month of Śrāvaṇa in 1959, a philosophical
assembly was arranged in Keśavapura village and eminent
smārta paṇḍitas were called to support the villagers’
side. Śrī Ayodhyānātha went to Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī’s
lotus feet in Chuṅchuṛā Maṭha and in a very moving voice
repeatedly requested him to take part in the assembly.
“If you do not go there and refute the arguments of the
opposite side,” he said, “it will be impossible for me
to stay in that village. They will simply throw me out.”

Before this occurrence, it had been decided that Śrīla
Ācāryadeva would go to Pichladā for the installation of
śrī vigraha, which was to take place at the same time as
the assembly in Keśavapura. But when Śrīla Gurudeva
heard Śrī Ayodhyā-nātha’s distress-filled prayers, he
decided to travel to Keśavapura with Śrīpad Trivikrama
Mahārāja and other leading sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs.

In the assembly, the smārta paṇḍitas raised this
objection on behalf of the villagers: “Demigod worship
is described in our Indian śāstras and has been going on
since ancient times. We find many proofs of this in the
Skanda and Padma Purāṇas. The worship of Kātyāyanī,
Yogamāyā, Durgā, Kālī, Śiva and others is even seen in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, so why do Vaiṣṇavas not worship
demigods?”

On Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva’s order, Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja replied first. He used
evidence from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Gītā and other śāstras
to show that the results of demigod worship are
temporary. Materialistic people worship demigods to
fulfill different material desires. However, all the
results are of a temporary nature. Indeed, even those
who have attained Svarga will fall down again to the
material world after enjoying the results of their pious
activities. Vaiṣṇavas, however, are exclusively devoted
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa bhajana and do not have any material
desires in their hearts.

After this, Śrīla Ācāryadeva explained very clearly that
Śrī Ayodhyānātha had not done anything wrong. On the
contrary, all śāstras approve of his action. “If the
gopis were performing Kātyāyanī pūjā, then why did Śrī
Kṛṣṇa have to come personally to give the benediction?
The reason is that Kṛṣṇa and His svarūpa śakti Yogamāyā
(Kātyāyanī) are non-different: śakti-śaktimator-abedhaḥ.
Therefore, in this case, Kātyāyanī pūjā is the same as
the pūjā of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself put an end to
the worship of Indra and other demigods, and He also
says in the Gītā, yānti deva-vratā devān pitén yānti
pitṛvratā (9.25) and kāmais tais tair hṛtajñānāḥ
prapadyante ‘nya devatāḥ (7.20). Evidence that the
results of demigod worship are temporary is also found
in Padma Purāṇa and elsewhere: yastu nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ
brahmarudrādi daivataiḥ and samatvenaiva vīkṣeta sa
pāṣaṇḍī bhaved dhruvam. The demigods cannot relieve us
from the vicious circle of birth and death nor can they

                          140
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

give us Kṛṣṇa bhakti.

“The second point is that in Padma Purāṇa demigod
worship is prohibited for ekāntika Vaiṣṇavas. The
performance of demigod worship is considered to be
nāmāparādha. Śāstric evidences are even cited in
Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā to prohibit ekāntika Vaiṣṇavas from
performing demigod worship.” When the opposite side
heard Śrīla Gurudeva’s vigorous lecture, they became
speechless.

Next day, another religious assembly was arranged on the
village school premises. There Śrīla Ācāryadeva
emphasised the importance of leading a religious life,
and said that the only duty of human beings is to spend
their life in religious activities. Not to lead a
religious life is equal to leading an animal life. The
main religion in Kali-yuga is kīrtana of Bhagavān’s
name. Following vaiṣṇava etiquette, kīrtana of
Bhagavān’s name and hearing hari-kathā are the only
means to make human life successful.

After preaching śuddha-bhakti in this way, through a
comparative study of different subject matters, Śrīla
Gurudeva and his party returned to Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya
Maṭha in Chuṅchuṛā.



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s disappearance festival in
Chuṅchuṛā

July 6th, 1959: The Disappearance Day of Śrīla
Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was celebrated in Śrī
Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha with śravaṇa (hearing) and
kīrtana. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is the best of the
followers of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmi,
and is non-different from Śrī Gaura-śakti Śrī Gadādhara.
From early morning on that day prayers were offered to
Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas; Vaiṣṇavas were glorified;
and kīrtana was performed of mahājanas’ padāvalis in a
mood of viraha (separation). Later there was a
discussion of Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s transcendental
character, the significance of his appearance in the
present time and other subjects. Ārati was performed at
noon, after arcana-pūjā of the Deities and offering of
rāja-bhoga. After that, wonderful delicious mahā-prasāda
was served to the assembled devotees.

In the religious assembly in the evening, Śrīla Guru
Mahārāja said in his lecture, “Today is the
disappearance day of Gauraśakti Saccidānanda
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and of Gauraśakti Gadādhara Paṇḍit
Gosvāmī. Both mahā-puruṣas appeared in this world to
carry out the mano ‘bhīṣṭa sevā of Śrīman Mahāprabhu.
After completing this sevā, they entered nitya-līlā on
this day. This auspicious day comes every year to shower
us with mercy and to demonstrate the supremacy of
vipralambha-rasa. Although Śrī Vṛṣabhānunandinī is
insulted and abused in hundreds and hundreds of ways,
She does not abandon Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s vipralambha-sevā. This
sacred day auspiciously arrives every year to teach us
devotion to the service of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, and so
that we can reject the association of people who are

                          141
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

unfavourable to the happiness enjoyed by Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda in Their meeting. Hence, this day is called
adhivāsa-tithi of the ratha-yātrā of Śrī Nīlācalanātha,
who is non-different from Śrī Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

“Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s dhāma, Nīlācala, is called Mathurā
or Dvārakā, and Sundarācala (Guṇḍicā) is known as
Vṛndāvana. Nīlācala is full of aiśvarya and Sundarācala
is full of mādhurya. Śrī Kṛṣṇa desires to leave Nīlācala
and go to Sundarācala (Vṛndāvana) to meet the gopis.
When he proceeds to Vṛndāvana, Rukmiṇī and other Lakṣmis
try in many ways to prevent Him from going there. Seeing
this, Kamala Mañjarī, a follower of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
depending on śuddha-audārya and mādhurya-rasa, becomes
restless and abandons this manifest līlā. Situated in
her nitya-siddha form she enters Śrī Rādhā-Govinda’s
midday līlā. Saccidānanda Vinoda-vāṇī-vaibhava
(Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura) appointed Śrī Rādhā’s Nayana Maṇi
Śuddhā-Sarasvatī (Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura) as
a preacher established in siddhānta, to establish the
supremacy of audārya-mādhurya rasa. This is the special
mystery of this day.

A huge assembly was arranged at 5 p.m. on the same day.
The picture of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was seated on
a beautiful siṁhāsana. Afterwards, there was performance
of prayers to Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī Godruma-candra
bhajanopadeśa and kīrtana of vaiṣṇava padāvalis in a
mood of viraha. The assembly started after the arrival
of Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Ācāryadeva. On his instruction
the brahmacārīs, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja and finally Śrīla Ācāryadeva himself gave
lectures filled with special siddhānta and deep
philosphical tattva.



Śrī Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s ratha-yātrā

July 6th to July 17th, 1959: Śrī Ratha-yātrā festival
was celebrated very gorgeously for 12 days at Śrī
Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha. Śrī Jagannāthajī ascended a
beautifully decorated chariot and was brought to Guṇḍicā
Mandira (Śrī Śyāmasundara Mandira) accompanied by a
royal nagar-saṅkīrtana party. Even the stony hearts of
the atheists melted when they heard the kīrtana, which
was filled with strong affection towards Śrī
Jagannāthadeva, and saw the devotees dancing along the
road. Many people crowded the street to take darśana of
Śrī Jagannāthadeva and to pull the rope of His chariot.
Faithful people offered bhoga to Śrī Jagannātha on the
street, and the pujārī then distributed it to the crowd.
It was wonderful to see how eager the people were to
have darśana of Śrī Jagannātha and to take His prasāda.
The whole atmosphere resounded with Śrī Jagannātha’s
jaya-dhvani. Sometimes the ratha stopped for a while,
and sometimes it went on slowly, until it finally
reached Śrī Śyāmasundar Mandira, where Śrī
Jagannāthadeva stayed for nine days’ sporting in
Vṛndāvana.

On the day of Śrī Guṇḍicā Mārjana and Herā Pañcamī,
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja read from Śrī

                          142
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Caitanya-caritāmṛta in Śrī Guṇḍīcā (Śrī Śyāmasundara
Mandira). Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja read
about Ratha-yātrā from Caitanya-caritāmṛta in the maṭha.
Śrīmad Bhakti-vedānta Vāmana Mahārāja and Śrīmad
Bhaktivedanta Trivikrama Mahārāja also gave lectures
illustrated with slides on Śrī Gaura līlā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
līlā. Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave many different instructions
and directions filled with siddhānta. Beginning on the
day of Ratha-yātrā, he explained aspects of Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta for four days, and spent another
four days giving explanations of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Here
is a summary of the essence of his talks.

On Snāna-yātrā day a very festive mahābhiṣeka of Śrī
Jagannātha, Baladeva and Subhadrā Devī is performed
according to rules and regulations. Brahmā and all the
other demigods participate in this ceremony invisibly.
Afterwards, the curtain of Jagannātha Mandira is closed
and there is no darśana for 15 days, because Śrī
Jagannāthajī becomes sick from too much bathing. This
period is called anavasara, and Lakṣmījī serves Him
alone at that time. During that period, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, the embodiment of vipralambha-rasa, used to
go to Alālanatha, because He was so restless in
separation from Jagannāthajī. After anavasara, on the
second day of Śukla-pakṣa, Śrī Jagannātha, Baladeva and
Subhadrājī ascend three different chariots and start
Their journey for Sundarācala (Guṇḍicā). But Śrī
Jagannāthadeva does not tell His wife Lakṣmījī that He
is going to Vṛndāvana. After sporting for nine days in
Vṛndāvana (Sundarācala) He returns to Śrī Mandira in
Nīlācala. Going to Sundarācala is called Ratha-yātrā,
returning from there is called return yātrā, and the
fifth day from the day of the yātrā is called Herā
Pañcamī.

There is a special meaning of Herā Pañcamī. On the day
after the yātrāÇ Śrī Lakṣmījī is eagerly waiting for Śrī
Jagannātha to return, and she becomes very anxious when
He does not return after four days. In an angry and
sulky mood she climbs her beautifully decorated chariot
and goes searching for Śrī Jagannāthajī in the night
with her maidservants. Somehow she reaches Vṛndāvana,
and there she quarrels with Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His beloved
gopis and makes Him promise that He will return quickly.
After that she returns to Nīlācala temple. Herā means to
search, and because this līlā takes place on the fifth
day it is called Herā Pañcamī.

One day before the Ratha-yātrā the Guṇḍicā Mandira is
washed clean so that Śrī Jagannātha, Baladeva and
Subhadrā can reside there happily. The mandira is first
swept to remove dust and stones, and then it is washed
with water and wiped dry with cloths. Śrīman Mahāprabhu
also performed Śrī Guṇḍicā Mandira mārjana with His
associates while performing hari-saṅkīrtana. The purpose
of this līlā is to wash and dust one’s heart, and to
make it clean like a temple for Bhagavān to reside
there. Bhagavān will never live in the heart of a
devotee who still has desires for material enjoyment,
heavenly happiness and liberation. This is the main
feature of the Śrī Ratha-yātrā festival.

Ordinary people cannot easily understand the meaning of

                          143
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

the Ratha-yātrā celebration. However, the Śrī Rupānuga
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas’ understanding of this subject matter
is full of excellent siddhānta. They are very dear to
Śrī Sacīnandana Gaurahari, who is Himself resplendent
with the bhāva and lustre of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The vraja-
ramaṇiyas were in deep distress because of separation
from Kṛṣṇa after He left for Mathurā. While they were
taking their beloved Kṛṣṇa from Kurukṣetra (Dvārakā) to
Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana, they thought, seī to parāṇanātha
pāinu, jāṁhā lāgi madana dahane jhuri genu (Caitanya-
caritāmṛta 13.113): “Today we are meeting with our
beloved Prāṇanātha, after suffering for a long time in
separation from Him.” The vraja-ramaṇiyas are doing this
only to serve and please Kṛṣṇa, not for their own
happiness. Those who have not realized this deep
understanding of the Śrī Rupānuga Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are
not qualified to participate in this great ceremony.
They cannot serve Śrī Jagannātha because they are
attached to material enjoyment. Jagat-darśana is called
prakṛta-darśana or darśana of this material world, and
there can be no attraction or taste for aprakṛta
Jagannātha darśana as long as prakṛta-darśana is strong
in the heart. The main object of Ratha-yātrā is to
engage the whole world in the service of Śrī Jagannātha.

Śrī Gaurahari, who is non-different from Śrī Vrajendra-
nandana, instructed the whole world by performing Śrī
Guṇḍicā mārjana līlā with His associates. Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti organises this festival every year to
give everyone a golden opportunity to participate.



Celebration of Śrī Janmāṣṭamī and Śrī Nandotsava at Śrī
Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha, Mathurā

1959 was a particularly note∑worthy year for Śrī
Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha, for Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva
arrived there with some disciples a week before
Janmāṣṭamī. In that year the residents of the maṭha
enthusiastically observed Śrī Janmāṣṭamī by fasting for
the whole day, performing saṅkīrtana, reading Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, offering bhoga and so on. At midnight
abhiṣeka of the Deities was performed with saṅkīrtana,
blowing of conchshells and the jaya-dhvani of thousands
of faithful people. At the evening’s religious assembly
Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave a deep philosophical lecture
filled with siddhānta from śāstras. He established that
Kṛṣṇa is advaya-jñāna para-tattva by quoting the
following ślokas:

‘ete cāṁśa kalā puṁsa kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayaṁ’
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.28), ‘aho bhāgyam aho bhāgyaṁ
nanda-gopa-vrajaukasām, yan mitraṁ paramānandaṁ pūrṇaṁ
brahma sanātanam’ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.32)’ īśvaraḥ
paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ, anādir ādir
govindaḥ sarva kāraṇakāraṇam’ (Brahma-saṁhita 5.1), and
‘mattaḥ parantaram nānyat kiñcidasti dhanañjaya’
(Bhāgavad-gītā 7.7).

Apart from this he also established the distinctive
characteristics of Śrī Yaśodā-nandana in relation to Śrī
Devakī-nandana.


                          144
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017



Observing kārtika-vrata in Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha

All the maṭhas under the jurisdiction of Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti observed kārtika-vrata, dāmodara-vrata, and
niyama-sevā from October 16th to November 15th, 1959.
This year kārtika-vrata was celebrated in Śrī Devānanda
Gauḍīya Maṭha with special festivities and great
enthusiasm because of the presence of Paramārādhya Śrīla
Gurudeva himself. During the period of kārtika, there
were many regular, distinctive aspects of this great
vrata, such as śrī maṅgala-ārati, morning kīrtana,
reading from Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, reading from
Brahma-sūtra or Vedānta-sūtra, tulasī parikramā, āhnika
and other duties, discussion on bhakti literature,
bhoga-ārati, iṣṭa-goṣṭhī, mahā-prasada sevā, sandhyā-
ārati and so forth. During this vrata, devotees
established the practices of being moderate in eating
and drinking, sleeping on the floor and taking prasāda
on leaf plates instead of metal plates.

During śrī dāmodara-vrata, Śrī Chidghanānanda Brahmacārī
gave discourses on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta every
morning; in the evenings Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrī Bhaktivedānta
Trivikrama Mahārāja explained the Nemi-Navayogendra
dialogue in Bhāgavatam. Paramārādhya Oṁ Viṣṇupāda
Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja himself gave elaborate commentaries on Vedānta-
darśana and Govinda-bhāṣya in the afternoons, from 3
p.m. to 5 p.m. During the Dāmodara month he finished
explaining up to the first and second pāda of the
eleventh sūtra of the first chapter of Govinda-bhāṣya.

During Śrīla Gurudeva’s discourse, he summarised eight
other authentic commentaries on Vedānta and established
that Govinda-bhāṣya stands supreme among all of them. He
read regularly from the commentaries of Śrī Śaṅkara,
Bhāskar, Rāmānuja, Madhva, Vijñāna Bhikṣu, Vallabha and
Nimbārka, as well as from Gauḍīya Vedāntācārya Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya. Śrīla
Ācāryadeva also emphasized Mahā-mahopādhāya Śrīyuta
Haridāsa ‘Siddhānta-vāgīśa’ Mahāśaya’s Bhāgavat-bhāṣya
at many points in the discussion. Besides the sannyāsīs
and brahmacārīs from the Samiti, educated, respected and
eminent scholars from Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma were also
present in the audience during the discourse on Govinda-
bhāṣya. Among them, the names of Śrī Kumuda Kamala Nāg
(B.A., B.L.), Śrī Mākhana Lāl Sāhā (B.A., assistant
headmaster of Navadvīpa Śikṣa Mandira), Paṇḍita Śrīyut
Navīncandra Cakravartī (smṛti-vyākaraṇatīrtha) and Śrī
Vardākānta Datta are worth mentioning. The respectable
Varadā Bābū, a great scholar of Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya’s
kevalādvaita-vāda, was also present as an opponent, and
this gave the audience a rare opportunity to hear a
comparative discussion on Govinda-bhāṣya by Śrīla
Ācāryadeva.

Even after the completion of śrī dāmodara-vrata, the
study of Govinda-bhāṣya continued for another five days,
due to the special request of the elderly Varadā Bābū
and Śrī Kumuda Kamala Nāg. During these last days there
was an elaborate and detailed discussion of sūtras such
as ‘athāto brahma-jijñāsā’ ‘janmādyasya yataḥ’ and

                          145
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

‘śāstrayonitvāt.’ While explaining these sūtras, Śrīla
Ācāryadeva specifically established Śrī Bhagavān’s nāma,
rūpa, guṇa and līlā and at the same time used logic and
śāstric evidence to refute Śaṅkarācārya’s view that
Brahman is nirviśeṣa, niḥśaktik, arūpa and nirguṇa. He
also established that bhakti, and not jñāna or mukti, is
the subject matter expounded in Vedānta-sūtra. The words
jñāna and mukti are not mentioned anywhere in the 550
sūtras of Vedānta-sūtra. Rather, it is only Śrī
Vrajendra-nandana Govinda who is established, along with
His premamayī bhakti, in Vedānta-sūtra’s ‘ānandamayo
‘bhyāsāt’ ‘api saṁrādhane pratyakṣānumānābhyām’ and
other sūtras. In the end harināma-saṅkīrtana is clearly
specified by the sūtra, ‘anāvṛtti śabdāt anāṛtti śabdāt’
and this is made clearer still by the confirmation of
‘harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam’ and Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s ‘parama vijāyate śrī kṛṣṇa
saṅkīrtanam.’

Vedānta-sūtra establishes that advaya-jñāna paratattva
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His śakti Śrīmatī Rādhikā are non-
different, and thus clearly indicates the worship of Śrī
Yugala. The Upaniṣads show that para-tattva can never be
nirviśeṣa, niḥśaktik, arūpa and nirguṇa without
transcendental guṇas. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (3.1) states,
yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante, yena jātāni jīvanti, yat
prayantyabhisaṁviśanti, tad vijijñāsasva tad brahma:
“Everything emanates from the Absolute Truth (para-
tattva), rests upon the Absolute Truth, and after
annihilation again re-enters the body of the Absolute
Truth.” In this śloka three cases are used, namely the
ablative case (apādān), the instrumental case (karaṇa),
and the locative case (adhikaraṇa). How, then, can
Brahman be niḥśaktik and nirākāra?

Śrīla Gurudeva’s explanation of all these subject
matters was ever-fresh and very remarkable. On the last
day, Varadā Bābū said, “People would be benefitted if
the reading of Govinda-bhāṣya continued for another few
days. I have never before heard such a beautiful
discussion on Vedānta in my Navadvīpa town”. Śrīla
Ācāryadeva jokingly told him, “If you faithfully hear
Govinda-bhāṣya for another few days, then you can become
liberated from Ācārya Śaṅkara’s advaita philosophy”.
Hearing this, Varadā Bābū laughingly agreed.

On the first day of ūrjā-vrata Śrīla Ācāryadeva
instructed the audience as follows. “Kārtika-vrata
niyama-sevā is a part of cāturmāsya-vrata. Those who
only honour ūrjā-vrata and do not observe the full
cāturmāsya-vrata cannot gain the full develop-ment of
bhakti which is the result of cāturmāsya-vrata. In fact,
this negigence actually reveals their disrespect towards
cāturmāsya-vrata. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His
associates observed cāturmāsya-vrata with great
conviction and devotion, and in this way they instructed
sādhakas in the whole vaiṣṇava community as to the means
of attaining bhakti. Who will abandon cāturmāsya vrata
as a whole, and keep faith only in kārtika-vrata? Only
those who do not generally accept difficulties in hari-
sevā or who are averse to renunciation.

“What to speak of only observing kārtika-vrata, nowadays
people in modern apasampradāyas do not even do that

                          146
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

much. For such people eating, sleeping, and sexual
enjoyment is the purpose of life. The śāstric clause,
tapo veśopajīvinaḥ refers to those who do not want to
follow any rules. They do not respect Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s teaching in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, bhāla nā
khāibe āra bhāla nā paribe: ‘Do not eat very palatable
food and do not dress very nicely.’ (Antya 6.236) These
people are counted amongst inferior and indisciplined
sampradāyas, insofar as they also deviate from the
glorious statement, mahāprabhura bhakta-gaṇera vairāgya
pradhāna: ‘Renunciation is the basic principle of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s devotees’. (Caitanya-caritāmṛta
Antya 6.220)

“It is not that the observance of cāturmāsya vrata is
only meant for Vaiṣṇavas. It should be observed by the
followers of every religion, and also by karmīs, jñānīs,
tapasvīs and all other classes of people. This vrata is
prevalent even in the sampradāyas of Śaṅkara, the
smārtas and others. All kinds of sādhakas have observed
kārtika-vrata since ancient times, because it is a
principal part of the cāturmāsya-vrata. Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti instructs and encourages their followers
to observe this vrata fully. Those who are following
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti are well versed in this subject
matter and will remember this even in the future.”



Śrīla Prabhupāda’s viraha-utsava in Chuṅchuṛā Maṭha

All the maṭhas under the jurisdiction of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti celebrated Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
disappearance day (viraha-utsava) lavishly in December,
1959. It was celebrated with great faith in Śrīdhāma
Navadvīpa, Mathurā, Golokgaṅja and other maṭhas.

Paramārādhya Śrīla Ācāryadeva was personally present at
Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha in Chuṅchuṛā, so the dis-
appearance day was celebrated there with special faith.
At the persistent request of the president of the maṭha,
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja, after the
lecture and kīrtana that day, the maṭha devotees and Śrī
Samiti’s initiated devotees first offered puṣpāñjali at
Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva’s lotus feet and then at
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s lotus feet. After that, ārati of
Śrīla Prabhupāda was performed with the ārati kīrtana
composed by Śrīla Gurupādapadma. In the religious
assembly in the evening Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja read Śrīla Prabhupāda’s collection of letters,
essays and instructions from Gauḍīya Patrikā.

In his lecture, Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave many instructions
which are easy to put into practice. “Every year on this
special day we have hari-kathā in a particular way.
Śrīla Prabhupāda Siddhānta Sarasvatī was hari-kīrtana
personified. Those who had his association definitely
experienced this. During his discourses the kathā would
flow as if from thousands of mouths, instead of from
just one. We count 24 hours as one day, but in Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s hari-kathā one day would be converted into
a thousand days. The ānanda experienced by him during
bhagavad-kīrtana cannot be described in words. Generally
people leave aside all other duties and become

                          147
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

enraptured in mundane occupations such as eating and
sleeping because that is the only time they feel happy.
They do not understand that there are other, superior
types of happiness. Śrīla Prabhupāda gave up eating,
sleeping and so on and engaged in hari-kathā kīrtana,
because that is how he gained the greatest pleasure.”

Śrīla Ācāryadeva discussed various topics in specific
connection with Prabhupāda’s teachings. He talked about
ignorance and māyā and about ancient and modern views on
nirviśeṣa. He pointed out that history and tattva
(truth) are not the same, and discussed Śrīla Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura’s contribution to the jīvas’ welfare. He also
talked about the difference between various
philosophical views, the oneness of para-tattva and so
on. In addition to this he expressed deep thoughts, full
of tattva, on the three features of para-tattva—Brahman,
Paramātmā and Bhagavān. He showed that only theism can
control māyā (māyāvaśya īśvaravāda), and also spoke
about the inconceivable, all-powerful Śrī Kṛṣṇa, about
Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s inconceivable pastimes, the
eternity of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s līlā, jīvas’ eternity and other
subject matters.



62 lectures of Śrī Ācārya Kesarī in 66 days

April 19th, 1960: Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī started to travel
with his preaching party to about 30 villages in
Medinīpura and Caubīs Parganā, preaching sanātana-dharma
strongly. During this period he gave brilliant lectures
at 62 religious assemblies in 66 days, and his power was
like that of a lion. Sanatāna-dharma started to blow
like a strong whirlwind in the regions where the
religious assemblies took place. In some places as many
as fifteen or twenty thousand people came and listened
to his speech for two hours without moving or talking.
At times the audience asked questions, which Ācārya
Kesarī answered on the strength of śāstric evidences and
irrefutable logic. This dialogue increased the
audience’s curiosity and eagerness. Not only those who
asked the questions, but also the entire audience,
became ecstatic when they heard Śrīla Gurudeva’s
answers. Everyone was impatient to touch the dust of
Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s lotus feet at the end of the sabhā,
and even after he returned to his residence, a crowd of
hari-kathā listeners assembled there as well. Nearby
villages sent appeals and requests to Ācārya Kesarī to
hold religious gatherings in their places also, but it
was not possible to go everywhere. Śrīla Saccidananda
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Disappearance Day was on June
24th, 1960, and Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s ratha-yātrā would
begin the next day. Consequently, Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī
was obliged to return to Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha,
Chuṅchuṛā, together with his preaching party.

Below is Ācārya Kesarī’s daily preaching schedule during
this time.

1) April 19th, 1960, in the courtyard of Śrī Yogendra
Nātha Sāmanta Dāsa’s home at Keśavapura Jalpāī village
(Medinīpura): “Who is called a human being?”


                          148
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

2) April 20th, in the courtyard of Śrī Ayodhyānātha
Dāsa’s home in the same village: “Vaiṣṇava etiquette and
the symptoms of bhakti.”

3) April 21st, in the courtyard of Śrī Bhuvanamohana
Jānā’s home in the village of Āktalā: “Sanātana-dharma.”

4) April 22nd, at the same place: “The duty of human
life.”

5) April 23rd, in the courtyard of Śrī Aruṇa Candra
Dāsa’s home in the same village: “The solution to
various problems.”

6) April 24th, in the Durga maṇḍapa near Śrī Jānakīnātha
Mandira at Nandīgrāma: “The solution to various
problems”.

7) April 25th, in the ground of Śrī Vrajamohana Tivārī
Śikṣā Niketan in the same village: “The necessity of
religion”.

8) April 26th, in the courtyard of Śrī Sītāprakāśa Dāsa
Adhikārī’s home at Bheṭuriyā village: “The difference
between sevā to jīva and sevā to Īśvara.”

9) April 27th, in the huge courtyard of Kodāmvāḍī High
School from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m.: “The necessity for
religion”.

10) April 27th, in the courtyard of Śrī Nanīgopāla Dāsa
Adhikārī’s home in Bheṭuriyā village, from 8.30 p.m. to
10.30 p.m.: “What makes a human being human?”

11) April 28th, at the same place: “Sanātana-dharma.”

12) April 29th, at the huge ground of Śrī Gagancandra
Hājrā Higher Secondary School in Sāivāḍī village: “Śrī
Caitanyadeva and the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya.”

13) April 30th, at the same place: “The duty of human
life.”

14) May 2nd, in the grounds of Vegunāvāḍī Junior High
School in Pūrvacaka village: “The duty of human life.”

15) May 3rd, in the courtyard of Śrī Giridhārī
Dāsādhikārī’s home in Pūrvacaka village: “The difference
between vaiṣṇava philosophy and Śaṅkara’s philosophy.”

16) May 4th, in the huge courtyard of the local Śiva
temple in Mohāṭī village, at the request of Bhakta
Śaśībhūṣaṇa Bhuñā: “The duty of human life.”

17) May 5th, in the grounds of the High School in
Simuliyā Grāma: “Sanātana-dharma”.

18) May 6th, at the same place, at 9 a.m.: “The
necessity of religion in student life.”

19) May 6th, at the same place at 8 p.m.: “The
superiority of vaiṣṇava-dharma.”

20) May 7th, in the courtyard of Śrī Harekṛṣṇa

                          149
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

Dāsādhikārī’s home in Eḍāśāla Grāma: “Śrī Ekādaśī tattva
—pure (śuddhā) and mixed (biddhā) with previous tithi.”

21) May 8th, at the same place: “Is vaiṣṇavism a caste
or a religion?”

22) May 9th, in the courtyard of Śrī Jitajñāna
Dāsādhikārī’s home in the same village: “What is the
jīva’s dharma?”

23) May 10th, in the courtyard of Śrī Ṭhākura Mandira in
Kulavāḍī Grāma: “What is humanity?”

24) May 12th, in the courtyard of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti’s Śrī Pichladā pādapīṭha in Pichladā Grāma: “The
purpose of human life.”

25) May 13th, at Pichladā Gauḍīya Maṭha: “Sectarianism
and union.”

26) May 14th, in the ground of the local Primary School
in Nar-Cāknāna Grāma, at the request of Bhakta
Hārādhana: “The speciality of Śrī Caitanyadeva’s great
contribution.”

27) May 15th, at Terpekhyā Bāzāra: “The subject
established in Vedānta.”

28) May 16th, at the same place: “The subject
established in Vedānta.”

29) May 17th, at the same place: “Interpreting Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.”

30) May 19th, in the courtyard of Śrī Mandira in
Kalyāṇpura village: “The necessity of religious life.”

31) May 20th, at the same place: “Solutions to problems
of the present time.”

32) May 21st, in Śrī Madanmohana Gauḍīya Maṭha in
Kalyāṇpura village: “Vaiṣṇava-dharma.”

33) May 22nd, in the courtyard of Śrī Revatībhūṣaṇa
Pāl’s home in Maluvāsāna village: “Nāma-tattva.”

34) May 23rd, in the courtyard of Śrī Harināma Pracāriṇī
Sabhā in the city of Tamaluka: “Śrī Nāma-tattva.”

35) May 24th, at the same place: “Sanātana-dharma.”

36) May 25th, at the same place: “The subject
established in Vedānta.”

37) May 26th, at the same place: Śrīla Gurudeva read
from and commented on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

38) May 28th, in the school ground in Cakgāḍupotā
village: “Sanātana-dharma and the worship of demigods
and demi-goddesses.”

39) May 29th, at the same place: “Pañca rasa-tattva and
Bhāgavatam.” On this occasion there were arguments with
people from the Ārya Samāja concerning Śrīmad-

                          150
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam, but they became speechless when they heard
Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī’s irrefutable logic and śāstric
evidence.

40) May 30th, in the courtyard of Śrī Narendra Paḍuā’s
home in the same village: “Proper vaiṣṇava conduct.”

41) May 31st, at the same place: “The problems of the
present age.” Here someone in the audience asked whether
or not Vaiṣṇavas can engage in agriculture. Śrīla Ācārya
Kesarī gave śāstric evidence that Vaiṣṇavas can do so.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes this as part of varṇāśrama-
dharma. During Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s time there were two
categories of the gopa community: gopas engaged in cow
grazing and gopas engaged in agriculture; both are
Vaiṣṇavas. During Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s time, too, there
were gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas engaged in agriculture. The
audience was very satisfied to receive such a good
reply.

42) June 2nd, in the courtyard of Śailendranātha Ghoṣa’s
home in Diamond Harbour (in Caubīs Parganā district):
Śrīla Ācāryadeva read from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

43) June 3rd, in the courtyard of Śrī Viśālākṣmī Mandira
in Kākdvīpa: “Sanātana-dharma.”

44) June 4th, at the same place: “The duty and dharma of
human life.”

45) June 6th, at the local Harisabhā: “Sanātana-dharma.”

46) June 7th, in Kāśīnagara Bāzāra: “The duty of human
life.”

47) June 8th, at the same place: “Sanātana-dharma.”

48) June 9th, in Gilārchaṭa village: “Vaiṣṇava-dharma.”

49) June 10th, at the same place: “Nāma-tattva.”

50) June 11th, in Kāśīnagara Bāzāra: “Vaiṣṇava etiquette
and eternal dharma.”

51) June 12th, on the college ground in Kṛṣṇacandrapura
village: “Jīva-tattva and how the jīva can become
qualified for bhagavat-sevā.”

52) June 13th, in the courtyard of Śrī Dvijottama Dāsa
Adhikārī’s home in Sarveḍiyā village: “Adhokṣaja-
tattva.”

53) June 15th, in the courtyard of the Primary School in
Ektārā Grāma: “The duty of human life.”

54) June 16th, at the same place: “Sanātana-dharma.”

55) June 17th, in the Harisabha Bhavan in Hadugaṅja
Grāma: “The duty of human life and vaiṣṇava-dharma.”

56) June 18th, in the courtyard of Śrī Vasanta Kumāra
Ghoṣa’s home in Cāndanagara Grāma: “Nāma-tattva.”

57) June 19th, in the courtyard of Śrī Nīlamaṇi Ghoṣa’s

                          151
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

home in the same village: Śrīla Gurudeva read ‘The
conversation between Nimi and the Navayogendras’ from
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

58) June 20th, in the courtyard of Śrī Kṛṣṇapāda Ghoṣa’s
home in the same village: Śrīla Gurudeva read from the
same part of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

59) June 20th, in the courtyard of Śrī Rajanīkānta
Ghoṣa’s home in the same village at 8 p.m.: Śrīla
Ācāryadeva read from the same part of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
again.

60) June 21st, in the courtyard of the Court in Diamond
Harbour: “Sanātana-dharma.”

61) June 22nd, at the same place: “Sanātana-dharma.”

62) June 23rd, at the same place: Śrīla Gurudeva read
from the Eleventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.



Śrīla Ācāryadeva in Murśidābāda region

December 23rd, 1960: Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva arrived
with his associates at Howraha Baharampura city, in the
district of Murśidābāda, having received a special
invitation from the distinguished citizens of that city.
Śrīla Gurudeva’s childhood friend Śrī Kṛṣṇadeva
Mukhopadhyāya and many citizens were anxiously waiting
to welcome him at the Baharampura Court Station. When he
arrived they greeted him very enthusiastically with
garlands, candana and other paraphernalia, and then
brought him and his party in a car to Śrī Haripada
Sāhā’s temple in Howraha city, where he was going to
stay.

On the next evening, Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave a very
powerful lecture on the duty of human life to a huge
congregation in the large courtyard of the temple. On
the third day, December 25th, Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave a
profound lecture at the same place. The subject was ‘The
original nature of vaiṣṇava-dharma’, and lawyers,
teachers and other educated people of the city were
fascinated by his lecture, which was full of Vedantic
tattva. On the special request of these people, Śrīla
Ācāryadeva extended his stay for three more days and
spoke on mukti-tattva and acintya-bhedābheda, analysing
some very deep philosophical tattvas. The general public
became very attracted when they heard his powerful
lectures. At the end of the assembly Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja gave a lecture
illustrated with slides on Śrī Gaura-Kṛṣṇa līlā.

After preaching śuddha-bhakti for five days in Howraha
Baharampur, Śrīla Ācāryadeva accepted the special
invitation of the respected Rāya Bahādura Surendra
Nārāyaṇa Singh, a very religious and learned person, and
went to Jiyāgaṅja with his preaching party. On the first
day, Rāya Bahādura organized a large religious assembly
in the extensive courtyard of the local Caṇḍīmaṇḍapa. At
his special request Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave a
philosophical lecture full of deep tattva regarding

                          152
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

acintya-bhedābheda.

He said, “Parabrahman Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of all Lords,
who creates the entire world and all the universes, is
advaya-jñāna paratattva. He is the unparallelled tattva.
He is not nirākāra, niḥsaktik, nirviśeṣa tattva; rather,
He is the inconceivable sarva-śaktimān. Actually, the
Supreme Absolute Truth, Śrī Bhagavān has one śakti,
which is called parāśakti or antaraṅga śakti. However,
this parāśakti is known by different names because it
performs many kinds of functions. Amongst these names
three are principal, namely cit-śakti, jīva-śakti and
māyā-śakti. The spiritual world manifests from cit-
śakti, innumerable jīvas from jīva-śakti or taṭasthā-
śakti, and innumerable material worlds from māyā-śakti
or bahiraṅgā-śakti. When we say ‘manifest’ it is to be
understood that this means the transformation of the
different śaktis, or energies of the Lord.

“The śaktis of para-tattva (the Absolute Truth) are
simul-taneously one with and different from the
transformations of those same śaktis, but this oneness
and difference is beyond the petty reasoning, logic and
comprehension of the jīvas. In this sense, it is
inconceivable. At the same time, it is conceivable or
accessible through the medium of transcendental sound.
Therefore this oneness (bheda) and difference (abheda)
is called acintya-bhedābheda. Now, what do we mean when
we say that it is accessible through the medium of
transcendental sound? This should be understood very
carefully. When we say ‘transcendental sound’, we mean
the words of the scriptures such as the Vedas, the
Upaniṣads, Vedānta-sūtra, the Purāṇas, Rāmāyaṇa,
Mahābhārata, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which are accepted
by the genuine guru-parampāra. This specific
relationship of simultaneous bheda and abheda (oneness
and difference) can be understood only by the authority
of this transcendental sound; otherwise it remains
inconceivable. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu taught this
acintya-bhedābheda-tattva to Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya,
and it has been very thoroughly discussed by Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī in ±aṭ-sandharbhas and by Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedāntācārya Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa in his Govinda-
bhāṣya.”

This lecture was so full of very deep philosophical
thoughts that even learned and educated people—and what
to speak of the general audience—could not understand it
easily. They all told Śrī Ācārya Kesarī that, since the
lecture had been so difficult to understand, they wanted
to hear a simple and easy talk about the duty of human
life. Śrīla Gurudeva therefore spoke the following day
on ‘Dharma and the duties of human life’. He refuted the
views of the modern apasampradāyas and upa-sampradāyas
and extensively discussed pure sanātana-dharma,
bhagavad-bhakti. Every day after Śrīla Gurudeva’s
lectures, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama
Mahārājajī gave a lecture with the help of slides on
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s śikṣā. Prayers were also offered to
Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas at the beginning and end of
the lecture every day, and kīrtanas of mahājanas and
harināma mahāmantra kīrtana were also performed.



                          153
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Preaching of śuddha-bhakti in Sundarvana region of
Bengal

January 24th, 1961: Śrī Ācāryadeva arrived with his
associates at Rājanagara near Kākdvīpa, on the special
invitation of the Dharma Sammelana. Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, the editor of Śrī
Bhagavat Patrikā (which was published in Hindi from
Śrīdhāma Mathurā) was also with Ācāryadeva.

In the evening a very large religious conference was
organized in the extensive courtyard of Rājanagara High
School, and Śrīla Ācāryadeva was unanimously selected as
chairman. Speakers from other sampradāyas gave lectures,
and then Śrīla Ācāryadeva instructed the chief guests of
the assembly, Tridaṇḍipāda Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja and Śrī Cidghanānanda Brahmacārī to speak in
favour of vaiṣṇava-dharma. Finally, Śrīla Ācāryadeva
gave a very attractive lecture on the difference between
Bhagavān Kapila and the modern saṅkhya philosopher
Kapila. He asserted that Hindus are the only followers
of sākāra-vāda (the truth that Bhagavān has form),
whereas all non-Hindus are nirākāra-vādīs (believers in
the formless Absolute).

Śrīla Ācāryadeva explained that Kapiladeva Ṛṣi is the
original founder of sāṅkhya philosophy. There are two
Kapilas, one who appeared in Satya-yuga and the other in
Treta-yuga. The first Kapila was born from the womb of
Manu’s daughter Devahuti as the son of Mahaṛṣi Kardama.
He is an incarnation of Bhagavān and is famous as the
original founder of sāṅkhya philosophy. Although he did
not write any special scripture called sāṅkhya-darśana,
the doctrine of sāṅkhya which he founded is very clearly
found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures. The
second Kapila Muni (who destroyed the dynasty of Sagara)
appeared in Treta-yuga and composed sāṅkhya-darśana.
Even though this sāṅkhya-darśana is a compilation of the
essence of the original Kapiladeva’s sāṅkhya-darśana and
contains excellent explanations of ātma-tattva (the
reality of the soul), it has some specific features
which are completely against the conclusion of the
śrutis. For instance, Kapila Muni says that that Īśvara
is incomplete, and that the non-sentient prakṛti is the
original creator of the material world. According to
vedānta-śāstra this is against the opinions of śrutis.
Vaiṣṇavas apparently have little respect for the
sāṅkhya-darśana which is current at present, but in fact
they only object to these attached parts which
contradict the śrutis.

There is no mention of the word 'Hindu' in the ancient
scriptures, yet all the followers of sanātana-dharma are
to be understood as Hindus. All Hindus are sākāra-vādīs
(they believe in a form of Bhagavān), and they worship
the transcendental śrī vigraha of the Lord. Christians,
Buddhists, Muslims, Jains and followers of religions
other than Hinduism are all nirākāra-vādīs (they believe
in a formless Absolute). The followers of sanātana-
dharma are followers of eternal dharma. All religions
other than this sanātana-dharma have a beginning and an
end. Even though their followers do formally believe
that God has no form, they are forced to accept a form

                          154
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

or shape in one aspect or another. Their religious books
also contain descriptions of God (for example the shape
and form of Khudā). In the Buddhist and Jain temples
huge mūrtis are worshipped. If Īśvara has no form, then
what is the need of temples, mosques, churches and
Buddhist stupas? For whom are they needed? If there is
no form, and nobody actually exists, then for whom are
the temples and mosques intended?

Ācāryadeva was also elected chairman on the second day
of the religious conference. After members of other
sampradāyas had spoken, Śrīla Ācāryadeva instructed
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja to lecture on
para-tattva (the Absolute Truth), who is the upāsya-
vastu (worshipful object), and His worship. Śrī Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja established that Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
solely advaya-jñāna para-tattva. In support of this, he
presented scriptural evidence such as, ete cāṁśa kalāḥ
puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇastu bhagavān svayam (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
1.3.28), īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ
anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam (Brahma
Saṁhita 5.1), and ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas-tad-
dhāma vṛdāvana ... na paraḥ. He also strongly emphasised
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s opinion that the topmost aim
for the jīvas is to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa prema and that the
vraja-ramaṇīs’ worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the topmost.

After that, Śrī Viśvanātha Rāya, Śrī Sudarśana
Brahmacārī, and Śrī Cidghanānanda Brahmacārī spoke about
vaiṣṇava-dharma. In the end they explained very nicely
for the whole audience that the vaiṣṇava-dharma that Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu has established is actually
sanātana-dharma.

The organisers of the religious conference, especially
the teacher Surendranātha Bhaṭṭācārya (M.A. triple) and
Śrī Dvijendranātha Pātra, praised very highly Śrī
Ācāryadeva’s style, his heartfelt feelings and his way
of deliberation. At the end of the conference they
discussed dharma with Śrīla Guru Mahārāja.



Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā celebration in Chuṅchuṛā Maṭha

February 3rd to February 6th, 1961: Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā
celebrations were held in all the maṭhas of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti for four days. This was celebrated with
particular success in Śrī Uddharaṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha
because of Śrī Ācāryadeva’s personal presence there.

The appearance day of Śrīla Ācāryadeva was on the third
day of Māghī Kṛṣṇā (February 3rd), and prayers and
kīrtana glorifying Śrī Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas were
performed from brāhma-muhūrta (very early morning).
After that, pūjā of guru-pañcaka, ācārya-pañcaka, vyāsa-
pañcaka, kṛṣṇa-pañcaka, upāsya-pañcaka, tattva-pañcaka
etc. and vaiṣṇava-homa (fire sacrifice) ∑were performed
according to Śrī Vyāsa pūjā-paddhati. Śrīla Ācāryadeva
very kindly arrived at the place of worship and all his
sannyāsī, brahmacārī and gṛhastha followers offered
their śraddhā puṣpāñjali at his lotus feet. After the
noon offering of bhoga and ārati, wonderful mahā-prasāda
was distributed to all the invited and uninvited guests.

                          155
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

At the religious assembly in the evening Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Muni Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Parmārthī Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja
and others lectured on śrī guru-tattva.

The next day (February 4th) the puṣpāñjalis received
from the devotees of different places were read in the
evening assembly. Finally, Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave special
instructions on the need of sad-guru-padāśraya (taking
shelter at the lotus feet of a bona fide guru) and the
duties of the sat-śiṣya.

February 6th was Govinda Pañcamī (Māghī Kṛṣṇā Pañcamī)
and the appearance day of Jagadguru Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. Prayers
and kīrtana were performed continuously from the early
morning, and then Tridaṇḍisvāmī Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja read Śrīla Prabhupāda’s views on Śrī Vyāsa-
pūjā, from lectures by Prabhupāda. After arcana-pūjana
of the Deities at noon, there was an offering of
puṣpāñjali and bhoga, ārati was performed and then all
the assembled guests were served mahā-prasāda.

A large assembly was organized in the evening at 5
o’clock. First of all there were readings of the bhakti-
puṣpāñjalī sent by devotees for Śrīla Ācāryadeva and
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. Then
Śrī Cidghanānanda Brahmacārī spoke on Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
personality and instructions, and after that
Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva gave a very instructive and
substantial lecture regarding the speciality of Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s teachings. He said that Śrī Guru-pūjā is
also known as Vyāsa-pūjā. Śrīla Vyāsadeva is śikṣā-guru
because he gives śikṣā. Gurus are of two kinds: śikṣa-
guru and dīkṣa-guru. In the arcana process the rule is
to worship and perform arcana of the dīkṣā-guru first.
From the viewpoint of tattva, śikṣā-guru and dīkṣā-guru
are non-different and all śāstras declare that, since
they are non-different, the śikṣā-and dīkṣā-gurus should
both be served. Both are manifestations of Kṛṣṇa, the
dīkṣa-guru being Kṛṣṇa’s rūpa (form) while the śikṣa-
guru is Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa (personality). This is stated in
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta:

guru-kṛṣṇa-rūpa hana śāstera pramāṇe

guru-rūpe kṛṣṇa kṛpā karena bhakta-gaṇe

śikṣā guruke ta’jāni kṛṣṇera svarūpa

antaryāmī, bhakta-śreṣṭha,—ei dui rūpa

(Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi līlā, 1.45, 47)

“According to śāstra the guru is a manifestation of
Kṛṣṇa. In the form of guru Kṛṣṇa bestows mercy on the
bhaktas. One should know the śikṣā-guru to be Kṛṣṇa
Himself. In the form of caitya-guru Kṛṣṇa gives
encouragement and as the topmost bhakta He gives
association and śikṣa.”

In other śāstras, the following are accepted as śikṣā-
gurus: the Six Gosvāmīs; Gaurahari endowed with Śrī
Rādhā’s bhāva and bodily complexion; and Kṛṣṇa wearing a

                          156
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

peacock-feather crown. Even then it is the disciple’s
duty to worship the dīkṣā-guru first. The guru who gives
mantras has a very prominent special feature. The śabda-
brahman (transcendental sound) which protects us from
mano-dharma (mental concoction) is called mantra, and he
who protects the disciple from mano-dharma is called the
mantra-giving guru. The guru who gives mantras is
therefore the topmost, and should be worshipped first.
Śrī Vedavyāsa gives all kinds of śīkṣa, and since he is
śikṣa-guru, his importance or speciality is an
unavoidable fact.

It is rare to find a sad-guru (a bonafide guru) in this
present time. Disputes are often seen among dīkṣā- and
śikṣā-gurus because they are actually unqualified.
Therefore the actual śikṣā-guru is one who is non-
envious, who gives instructions for bhakti-sādhana, and
who instructs the disciple to serve dīkṣā-guru. Śāstras
say that one should give proper respect to him. One who
does not teach the disciple to serve dīkṣā-guru is not a
real śikṣā-guru. In fact, a person who cannot honour the
dīkṣā-guru is not even a pure Vaiṣṇava. What kind of
behaviour does such a preceptor show towards his own
dīkṣā-guru? Those who are immersed in non-dual (advaita)
thinking disrespect the guru or teach disrespect to guru
following Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya's ‘anavagatasyāta (guru
does not know theory fully).’ They also consider guru to
be non-guru or insignificant. If the guru is ignorant or
has not realized tattva, then how can the disciple
respect his status? A sat-śiṣya (qualified disciple)
does not think, “I shall get all types of benefits by
performing guru-sevā. It will enable me to spend my life
lazily and comfortably in the name of being
bhajanānandi, and I shall be able to lord it over other
devotees.” Gurūra sevaka haya mānya āpanāra (Caitanya
Bhagavata): “Devotees and disciples who have taken
shelter of a sad-guru always give respect to all other
devotees. Only one who teaches guru-sevā is śikṣā-guru.”



An extensive religious conference in Valāgaḍa

February 23rd to February 25th, 1961: Saccidānanda
Sevāśrama, a resident of the city of Valāgaḍa in the
Hoogly district, organised an extensive religious
conference there for 3 days. Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, the president-
ācārya of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, had a special
invitation, and attended this great celebration along
with his sannyāsīs and 20 brahmacārīs. The Sevāśrama had
made very good arrangements for the lodging and prasāda
of the participants.

The large conference started at 4 o’clock in the
afternoon. Different speakers and guests arrived first,
and then Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī was brought to the platform
to the echoing of conchshells and saṅkirtana. Śrīla
Ācārya Kesarī was very respectfully seated as the
chairman by the son of Sir Āśutoṣa Mukhopādhyāya (the
first Indian governor of Bengal), and Śrī Vāmā Prasāda
Mukherjī (the brother of Śyāmāpada Mukherjī), the
retired chief justice of Calcutta High Court. Svāmī
Samādhiprakāśa Araṇya and Śrī Jīva (nyāya-tīrtha) were

                          157
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

selected as main guests. The speaker Mahāsthavīra
Dharmakīrti, Śrīmatilāla Dāsa (retired district judge),
Śrī Sudhīndranātha Mukhopādhyāya, sannyāsīs of the
Samiti, brahmacārīs and other distinguished persons took
their seats and then the programme started.

After the inaugural music of Śrī Jitendranātha Caudharī,
Śrī Tārakagati Mustafī spoke about the aim of the
conference on behalf of Svāmī Bhūpānanda Purī Mahārāja,
the president of Saccidānanda Sevāśrama. After that, at
the request of the chairman Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī, Dr.
Motīlāla Dāsa lectured on dharma, giving pramāṇas
(evidence) from Vedas and Upaniṣads. Later, Mahāsthavīra
from the Mahābodhi Society spoke on religious moral
behaviour (dharma-nīti) and the religious preaching of
Buddhadeva. Śrī Jīva (nyāyatīrtha) gave a lecture on
‘The necessity of dharma’ and Svāmī Samādhiprakāśa
Araṇya Mahārāja followed with a wonderful lecture on
‘The condition of the present religious world.’

Finally, Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave a very brilliant lecture,
which the audience liked most of all. It was full of
sentiments regarding the national leaders’ lack of
concern for dharma, the opposition to dharma in society,
and the degrading influence of modern education on
Indian culture. After 8 p.m. the secretary of the
convention requested the chairman, Śrīla Ācāryadeva, to
open and announce the exhibition arranged by the
conference. However, the enthusiastic audience requested
Śrīla Ācāryadeva again and again to continue his
lecture. He did so and gave very impressive instructions
on the theme ‘Following dharma is the foremost duty of
human life.’ After the conference, the organisers and
the audience were lavish in their praise of Śrīla
Ācāryadeva’s views.



Preaching in Assam, Sundaravana and other places

April 1st, 1961: By the repeated and insistent request
of the devotees of Assam state, Śrīla Ācāryadeva came to
preach sanātana-dharma (śuddha vaiṣṇava-dharma) very
strongly for one month in Golokagaṅja Gauḍīya Maṭha,
Caḍaīkholā, Ṭokre Chaḍā, ùiḍiṅgā, Dhūbaḍī, Śāntinagara
and many other different places. A large religious
conference took place in the court-yard of the ùiḍiṅgā
village Junior High School. Hindus, Muslims and
Christians were all present in great numbers at this
conference, and everybody praised Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s
views, which strongly appealed to the heart.

After returning from Assam, our most worshipable Śrīla
Gurudeva travelled with some sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs
to the region of Sundaravana on June 16th for preaching.
The party preached śuddha-bhakti extensively in
Kṛṣṇacandrapura, Kāśīmgaṛha, Laxmī Janārdanapura,
Āīplaṭa and other places and returned to Chuṅchuṛā maṭha
on June 24th.



Ratha-yātrā and Jhūlana-yātrā celebrations in Śrī
Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha

                          158
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


July 12th, 1961: A special celebration of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s disappearance day took place at
Śrī Uddharaṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha in Chuṅchuṛā. Śrīla
Ācāryadeva was the chairman, and there were many
lectures on Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s transcendental
life and on his teaching and practice of vaiṣṇava-
dharma. Speakers included Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja,
Śrīmad Viṣṇudaivata Mahārāja and other principal
sannyāsīs, Śrī Hari Brahmacārī, Śrī Bhagavān Dāsa
Brahmacārī, Śrī Bhāgavata Dāsa Brahmacārī, Śrī Gajendra-
mokṣaṇa Brahmacārī, Śrī Vamśīvadanānanda Brahmacārī, Śrī
Cidghanānanda Brahmacārī, Śrī Yaduvara Dāsādhikāri
(M.A.V.T.), Śrī Jitākṛṣṇa Dāsādhikāri and other
Vaiṣṇavas. Śrīla Ācāryadeva concluded with very
educational instructions on the same subject.

The next day saw the beginning of the festive Ratha-
yātrā celebrations, which continued for ten days. Śrīmad
Bhakti-vedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja’s endeavour and
services during this celebration were very praiseworthy.

Later on, in the month of Śrāvaṇa, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda’s Jhūlana-yātrā and the appearance day of Śrī
Baladeva (pūrṇimā) were celebrated very splendidly. Our
most worshipable Śrīla Gurudeva disclosed some very deep
tattva and mysteries on these occasions.



Parikramā under Śrīla Gurudeva’s shelter of all the
Indian tīrthas

The parikramā of all the sacred places (tīrthas) in
India, including three dhāmas and seven purīs, was
completed very nicely during kārtika niyama-sevā of
1961, under the shelter of Parivrājakācārya Oṁ Viṣṇupāda
Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, and in his direct presence. Altogether there
were 118 pilgrims on this pilgrimage, including
sannyāsīs, brahmacārīs, vānaprasthīs and gṛhasthas. The
journey started on October 3rd, 1961 from Howraha
station with a reserved tourist railway coach, and was
completed within two months.

First of all the pilgrims took darśana of Śrī Madana-
Mohanajī in Viṣṇupura. Once, when the Muslims had
attacked Viṣṇupura, the Deity of the king, the Madan-
Mohanajī chased out the enemies Himself by firing a
cannon. The pilgrims also took darśana of the cannon.
Under Śrīla Gurudeva’s guidance, the parikramā party
then had darśana of Śrī Jagannāthadeva, Ṭoṭa Gopīnātha,
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s appearance place and bhajana-kuṭira,
Gambhīrā, Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s samādhi and bhajana-
kuṭira, Guṇḍica Mandira and other places in Jagannātha
Purī. On October 8th, they climbed 987 steps up a hill
in Siṁhācalam, and received the good fortune of having
darśana of Jiyaḍa Nṛsiṁhadeva. On October 10th, they had
darśana of Pānā Nṛsiṁha and the next day they saw Madrās
Gauḍīya Maṭha, Pārthasārathi Mandira and other
noteworthy places. In Madrās they changed from the
Eastern Railway train to a Southern Railway train and
the journey continued.

                          159
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


The party reached Pakṣītīrtha on October 13th and had
darśana of Veda Girīśvara Mahādeva and Har Pārvatī who
had the form of birds. On October 14th the pilgrims took
darśana of Śrī Vāsudeva and Śrī Naṭarāja in Cidambaram,
and of Pārvatī Devī in the form of a peahen in
Māyābharam, and reached Kumbhakoṇam the same night. Next
day they had darśana of Mokṣa-kuṇḍa, Kumbheśvaram, Śrī
Rāja Gopala Cakrapāṇi and other sacred places in
Kumbhakoṇam.

Śrīla Gurudeva narrated a story about Mokṣa-kuṇḍa, which
is a very large, deep pond. The Pāṇḍavas came to this
place during their exile, and while they were taking
bath in this sacred place, Devarṣi Nārada arrived there.
Nārada asked Bhīmasena, who was very proud of his
strength, “Do you know what this sacred place is and
what are its glories?” The very powerful Bhīmasena
offered obeisances to Devarṣi Nārada and said, “Oh
Devarṣi! We don’t know much about this. Please tell us.”
Nāradajī said, “First take bath, and then I will tell
you.” After they had bathed, Nāradajī explained that the
whole pond in which they had taken bath is situated in
the skull of Kumbha Karṇa. Śrī Rāmacandra killed that
great warrior and, throwing Kumbha Karṇa’s skull to this
place with his arrows, created this pond. Kumbha Karṇa’s
skull became purified by the touch of Śrī Rāmacandrajī’s
arrows, and anyone who takes bath in this pond attains
Śrī Rāmacandrajī’s Dhāma. When Bhīmasena heard this from
Devarṣi Nārada, he lost his pride in his strength, and
fell down at Devarṣi’s feet. This big city received its
name Kumbhakarṇam or Kumbhakoṇam from the name of Kumbha
Karṇa.

On October 16th the pilgrims took darśana of Śrī
Vṛhadeśvara Mahādeva in Tanjore in one of the largest
temples of India. On the top of this extensive temple is
a round stone weighing 80 tons and carved with fine
designs. Modern scientists and archeologists wonder how
such a large stone could be placed at such height before
the invention of modern cranes.

There is another wonder here too. Śrī Nandījī, the
carrier of Śīva, has been carved out of a stone of 25
tons and sits facing Śiva in front of the door of the
main temple. The pilgrims were very happy to have
darśana of śrī mandira and Śrī Nandī. On October 18th
the pilgrims reached Dhanuṣkotī at the extreme southern
point of India, where they took bath. They then visited
Śrī Rāmeśvara, where they had darśana of the huge Śiva
temple which Śrī Rāmacandra established. In a nearby
place they also had darśana of the mūrti brought by
Hanumān.

On October 20th they visited the temple of Mīnākṣī Devī
in Madurā and the next day visited Kanyā Kumārī in
Kanyā-kumārī. On October 23th they took darśana of Śrī
Raṅganāthajī in Śrī Raṅgam, where Śrīman Mahāprabhu
observed cāturmāsya-vrata. This is considered to be the
largest temple of India; each wall of the temple
accomodates a whole city. Śrī Yamunācārya and Śrī
Rāmānujācārya lived in this famous temple of
Raṅganāthajī and preached everywhere from there.
Raṅganāthajī is present there in His Śeṣaśāyī form with

                          160
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Laxmījī. After having darśana of Viṣṇukāncī and
Śivakāncī on October 25th the party reached Anakoṇam
Junction, where they changed the Southern Railway
tourist coach for an Eastern Railway coach. Travelling
from here the pilgrims had darśana of Tirupati Bālājī,
which is the richest temple of South India, and is
situated on the Tirumalaī Hills.

On October 29th in Nāsika Pañcavaṭī, the pilgrims took
darśana of the place where Sūrpanakhā’s nose was cut
off, the place where Śrī Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa and Sītā stayed
on the bank of Godāvarī, and other places. On October
31st they took darśana of Mumbā Devī in Mumbaī. On
November 1st in Broca they had darśana of the place
where Vāmana Deva begged from Balī Mahārāja. After that
the pilgrims travelled to Prabhāsa, Sudāmāpurī, Venta
Dvārakā, Gomatī Dvārakā, ùākorajī (Raṇachoḍajī),
Ujjayanī, Śrī Nāthadvārā, Puṣkara, and Sāvitrī. In
Jaipur they took darśana of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, Śrī
Rādhā-Gopinātha, Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara, Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava
and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. They visited Galtā Gaddī
and other places and finally reached Mathurā-dhāma.

Starting from Mathurā on November 17th they had darśana
of Gokula, Vṛndāvana, Govardhana, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Barsānā,
Nandagrāma and other places. Then they visited
Indraprastha in Delhi, Bhadrakālī in Kurukṣetra,
Haridvāra, Ṛṣikeśa and Laxmanjhūlā and after that went
to Naimiṣāraṇya, Ayodhyā, Kāśī Viśvanātha in Vārāṇasī
and Gadādhara Pādapadma in Gāyā. The parikramā party
returned to Calcutta after spending two months having
darśana of all these places.



Śrīla Ācāryadeva in Jaipur

January 4th, 1962: Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva came
with his associates to the Samiti’s branch maṭha in
Mathurā. There he preached Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s message
extensively for a week. He then proceeded to Jaipur, the
capital of Rājasthāna, at the repeated request of some
distinguished residents of that city. For a week he
lectured in Hindi and English in different assemblies,
associations and temples, speaking about the spotless
vaiṣṇava-dharma and sanātana-dharma that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu had taught and practised. He explained very
clearly to the general public that śrī harināma
sankīrtana is easy and simple, and is the only way to
attain Bhagavān, especially in Kali-yuga.

A huge assembly was organized in the local Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa temple. Distinguished literary people and educated
gentlemen of the city were present and Śrīla Gurudeva
gave a very brilliant lecture regarding śrī nāma-tattva.
The famous Hindi scholars, Śrī Kamalākara ‘Kamala’ and
Paṇḍita Śrī Kṛṣṇacandrajī (kāvya-vyākaraṇa tīrtha
sāhityācārya) were very impressed by Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s
lecture. Even though were both initiated ācāryas in Śrī
Vallabhācārya’s puṣṭi-mārga, they came to hear vaiṣṇava-
tattva from Śrīla Ācāryadeva when he came to Jaipur.
Śrīla Gurudeva told them that Śrī Vallabhācārya met Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu twice. The first time was in Aḍaila
Grāma near Prayāga, and the second time was in Śrī Purī

                             161
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

dhāma. Śrī Vallabhācārya’s son, Śrī Viṭṭhalādeva, had a
close and affectionate friendship with Śrī Rūpa,
Raghunātha and the other Gosvāmīs.

Both Śrī Kamalākara ‘Kamala’ and Śrī Kṛṣṇacandrajī
maintained a connection with Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha
for their whole life. They kept an affectionate
friendship with Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, and their poems and essays were
published in Śrī Bhāgavat-patrikā.

After preaching vaiṣṇava-dharma extensively like this
for a month in Mathurā and Jaipur, Ācārya Kesarī
returned to Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha, Chuṅchuṛā, on
February 9th.



Establishing a preaching centre of the Samiti in Orissa

Bhadraka is a famous place within the Bāleśvara district
in Orissa. On the bank of the river Sālindī nearby is
the sacred village Koranṭa, where the inhabitants are
brāhmaṇas from karaṇa-gotra. The majority of the
residents there are highly educated and prominent
governmental officials. There is a temple of Śrī
Gopālajī in this village, whose priest was Śrī Lāl
Mohana Mahāpātra. Unable to perform the temple sevā, he
offered the temple and its adjoining agricultural land
to the Samiti’s president Śrīla Ācāryadeva and it was
duly registered at the registration office of the Court.
Śrīla Ācāryadeva named this new branch Śrī Gopālajī
Gauḍīya preaching center.

After some time Śrī Gopālajī was moved from inside the
village to the large main road. An extensive śrī
mandira, nāṭya-mandira and sevaka-khaṇḍa (servant
quarters) were constructed on a large piece of land
there, and Śrī Gopālajī is now worshiped in this huge
temple.

Koranṭa village is situated 2 1/2 miles further north
from Bhadraka town. Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura composed
his famous Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṁhitā here while he was appointed
as sub-divisional officer (S.D.O.) in Bhadraka. He has
mentioned in his poetical work ‘Vijana Grāma’ kimvā nā
rahili kena sālindīra kule yathāya pathikagaṇa
aśvatthera mūle kāṭāya ātapa-tāpa niścinta antare: “On
the bank of Sālindī there is a pipal tree, under whose
shade travellers take rest.” When the preaching-centre
was established there, Śrīla Ācāryadeva said, “We will
reside in Śrī Gopālajī Gauḍīya preaching centre and have
the good opportunity to remember Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s sacred character and devotional instructions.”

This maṭha is situated only two furlongs from Vāudapura
station, the next station after Bhadraka railway
station, and the road is also very good for vehicles.
The atmosphere is very captivating here. The Samiti
offers its heartly thanks to the above mentioned Śrī
Mahāpātra Mahāśaya and his family for establishing this
preaching centre for śuddha-bhakti.



                          162
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017


Preaching of śuddha-bhakti in Jaipur town

August 29th, 1962: Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja arrived with some brahmacārīs at Śrī Keśavajī
Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā and stayed there for 15 days.
Educated people living locally came to listen to Śrīla
Ācāryadeva, as did many research scholars from the
universities at Alīgaṛha and Āgrā. They were very
pleased to hear his philosophical conceptions. These
research scholars came to the extensive library which
Śrīla Ācāryadeva established in Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya
Maṭha to study books favourable for their research, and
even from time to time to borrow them.

Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave lectures in the
nāṭya-mandira of Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha, and when
the mathurā-vāsīs heard his impressive philosophical
conceptions on śuddha-bhakti, they gradually became his
followers. Triaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja was the president of the maṭha and he was very
devoted in his care for Paramārādhyatama Śrīla
Gurupādapadma and the brahmacārīs who came with him.

On September 4th, 1962, Śrīla Gurudeva arrived in
Jaipura with his group of followers and stayed at the
main office of the Jaipura Halvāī-Samiti at the special
request of the president, Seṭh Somī Lāljī. Paṇḍit Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Candra Śāstrī (kavya-tīrtha, sāhityaratna)
organised an eminent assembly in the premises of his Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇajī temple on the evening of Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī.
Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva gave a Hindi lecture which
was full of siddhānta, establishing the usefulness of
śabda-brahman (transcendental sound) and uselessness of
ordinary sound. The Vedas and all other śāstras
establish that śabda-brahman is śrī harināma and that
sad-guru is the expert who has realized Bhagavān, and
who bestows the transcendental śabda-brahman in the pure
ear of the sat-śiṣya. This śabda-brahman is not created
by the interactions of air with the throat or palate.
Rather,

ataḥ śrī kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam-indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuratyadaḥ

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Pūrva Vibhāga 2.234)

“The human material senses cannot perceive śrī harināma
because it is a transcendental sound, but it will appear
by itself on the pure senses of the sevon-mukha sādhaka,
in whose heart the desire to serve Kṛṣṇa has arisen.”

In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu the nature of śrī nāma is
described like this:

nāmaś cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto ‘bhinnatvān nāma nāmiṇoḥ

(Bhaktirasāmṛta-sindhu, Pūrva Vibhāga 2.233)

“Śrī kṛṣṇa-nāma is cintāmaṇi, a transcendental wish-
fulfilling gem, for it is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Himself,

                          163
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

the personification of rasa. It is complete, beyond
illusion and eternally liberated, because kṛṣṇa-nāma
(Kṛṣṇa’s name) and nāmī (Kṛṣṇa Himself) are non-
different.”

Sac-cid-ānanda rasamaya tattva is non-dual, but this
advaya-tattva has appeared in two forms, vigraha and
nāma. Only through sevā of śabda-brahma, that is through
pure nāma-saṅkīrtana, can the jīva be established in his
pure svarūpa and be eternally devoted to Yugala sevā.

Ordinary sound is that which appears by the interactions
of air with the throat, palate, teeth etc. without the
shelter of sad-guru or the guidance of transcendental
literature. This ordinary sound cannot bring about any
good fortune for the baddha-jīvas (conditioned souls).
The sat-śāstras have abundantly glorified śabda-brahman,
and Śrīla Ācāryadeva used vedānta-darśana and other
evidence to establish the speciality and superior
excellence of śabda-brahman.

After that, the mahantājī of the famous Śrī Govindadeva
temple in Jaipur organised a scholarly assembly there
and Śrīla Gurudeva gave a brilliant lecture on Śrī Rādhā
tattva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa tattva and the astonishing nature of
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-Yugala līlā. The audience was very
attracted when they heard Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s
unprecedented śāstric and siddhāntic conceptions. On
that day they could understand something of the deep
siddhāntic conceptions of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
the vaiṣṇava ācāryas in His line.

Gradually it became known throughout the whole of Jaipur
that a very philosophical scholar and siddhānta-vid
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācārya from Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma was
visiting the city. At that time the principal of Jaipur
Mahārāja’s Sanskrit College was Mahāmahopādhyāya Śrī
Candraśekhara Dvivedī Vyākaraṇa-ācārya (sānkhya-yoga-
vedānta-tīrtha). (Later on he accepted sannyāsa in the
Śaṅkara Sampradāya and was installed as Śaṅkarācārya in
Śrī Govardhana Maṭha in Purī). He very respectfully
invited Śrīla Ācāryadeva to preside at a huge scholarly
assembly which he organised at his college, and which
various college professors, students and honourable and
faithful citizens also attended. In his scholarly
lecture Śrīla Ācāryadeva used pramāṇa (evidence) from
the Vedas and other śāstras to establish Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa as akṣara brahman (imperishable
Brahman). After that he spoke on ‘The duty of human
life.’ He compared modern democracy, where everyone,
whether intelligent or foolish, can vote, and also be
elected minister, to Gaṇeśa (who is considered foolish
because he does not know who his father is). Quoting
‘arūpavadeva hi tat pradhānatvāt’ and other sūtras of
Vedānta sūtra, he refuted nirākāra-vāda and established
the Lord as sākāra (having form). He also impressed his
audience by revealing the conclusion that bhakta and
Bhagavān are eternally present, even though they are
beyond the limit of time and place.

The honourable principal of the college praised Śrīla
Ācāryadeva’s Vedāntic viewpoints very highly and thanked
him profusely. He also told the students and human
society to accept Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s spiritual

                          164
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

instructions. He said that he would like to organize a
conference for all sampradāyas, which would facilitate a
comparative discussion on the Gauḍīya vedānta commentary
along with other commentaries on Vedānta.

The Samīti particularly praises Seṭha Somīlāljī, Śrī
Oṁprakāśa Vrajavāsī ‘Sāhityaratna’ and Śrī Jagadīśa
Prasādajī Guptā, the director of Lakṣmī Motor Company,
for all their different services while Śrīla Ācāryadeva
was preaching śuddha-bhakti in Jaipur.



The auspicious desire of Śrīla Ācāryadeva regarding Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī managed by Śrī Samiti

In 1957, Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti established a
Sanskrit school called Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāthī,
in Bospāḍā Lane, Bāgbāzār, Calcutta. Modern universities
do not give proper attention to the Sanskrit language,
and students do not receive education in Sanskrit. If
such an ignorant attitude towards Sanskrit persists, the
bhagavat ideology, which is the life of Indian culture,
will undoubtedly disappear.

Bengali has been respected as the pre-eminent language
in the whole of India because its literature depends
exclusively on Sanskrit literature. Nowadays, however,
Bengali is unfortunately becoming disconnected from this
relationship with Sanskrit. The present atheistic
society in Bengal wants to eradicate the Hindu dharma,
but they know very well that Hindu dharma cannot be
destroyed as long as Bengali is connected to Sanskrit,
the language of the Gods. Therefore the managers of the
modern universities want to make Bengali a rāvindrīya-
karaṇa language, i.e. a language as simple as that used
by Rāvindra Tagore, by separating Bengali from Sanskrit
literature and grammar. In this way, by removing the
combined letters which are difficult to read, a very
easy language suitable the uneducated class is created.
One should understand that this is disrespect of
Sanskrit and ignorance of the Indian Vedas, Upaniṣads,
and Purāṇas and other traditional, spiritual teachings.

Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti reflected for a long time on
this wretched situation in Bengal, and indeed in the
whole of India. To spread Sanskrit education they
established the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāthī in
Chuṅchuṛā, from where it was later transferred to Śrī
Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa. Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti formed a committee to manage the
Catuṣpāthī. The committee members are as follows:

1) Chairman: Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Paramahaṁsasvāmī
Parivrājakācāryavarya Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī

2) Secretary: Tridaṇḍīsvāmī Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Vāmana Mahārāja

3) Member: Tridaṇḍīsvāmī Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Trivikrama Mahārāja

4) Member: Tridaṇḍīsvāmī Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta

                          165
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

5) Member: Śrīyuta Śacīndra Mohananandī (chairman of
Navadvīpa city council)

6) Member: Śrīyuta Jitendranātha (pañcatīrtha)

7) Member: Paṇḍita Śrī Nimāicaraṇa (vyākaraṇatīrtha)

8) Member: Paṇḍita Śrīyuta Sureścandra Rāya
(vyākaraṇatīrtha)

9) Member: Paṇḍita Śrī Brajānanda Brajavāsī

In previous years, many Catuṣpāthī students passed the
examination of the Baṅgīya Sanskrit Literature
Association (Baṅgīya Sanskṛt Sāhitya Pariṣad) with great
distinction. This year, 1963, the honourable Śrī
Jitendranātha (pañcatīrtha—kāvya-vyākaraṇa-purāṇa-
vedānta-vaiṣṇava darśana) is managing the Catuṣpāthī
very earnestly and enthusiastically. In a short time Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāthī has become glorious
throughout Navadvīpa.

This year, a new teacher—Paṇḍita Nimāi Caraṇa
(vyākaraṇa-tīrtha)—has been appointed because the number
of students has increased. The students read and study
kāvya (literature), vyākaraṇa (grammar) and vedānta, and
seven of them have taken examinations at primary,
medium, and degree level this year. We respectfully
offer Sanskrit students an education in Sanskrit from
qualified teachers in this exemplary Catuṣpāthī. I am
also humbly submitting that this Sanskrit school
particularly emphasises education in Śrī Harināmāmṛta-
vyākaraṇa. Facility for boarding and lodging is also
available for students of Śrī Harināmāmṛta-vyākaraṇa.
Such students may send their application forms together
with their credentials to the secretary of the
Catuṣpāthī, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja.



The opinion of the ṭola21 supervisor regarding Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī

“The inspection of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī took
place today, at which two teachers, the secretary and
ten students were present. At present there are twelve
students in the Catuṣpāṭhī, which teaches kāvya,
Harināmāmṛta-vyākaraṇa, Vedānta, vaiṣṇava-darśana and
other śāstras. The principal is pañcatīrtha and he
teaches very diligently. An assistant teacher has been
appointed in this school due to the increasing number of
students.

“According to the register the Catuṣpāṭhī has twelve or
thirteen resident students; this is something to be
happy about and proud of. The managing committee applied
for governmental approval a long time ago, but this was
not given until today.

“The Catuṣpāṭhī’s examination result is not lower than
the previous year and the records are being kept as
accurately as before. I wish this Catuṣpāṭhī all

                          166
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

prosperity and progress.”

Signed—Śrī Nalinīkānta (tarkasmṛtitīrtha)

West Bengal ṭola inspector (additional inspector),
19.12.1963



Establishment of Śrī Gauḍīya Charity Clinic

December 15th, 1962: The Śrī Gauḍīya Charity Clinic was
established at Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha, Navadvīpa,
to provide homeophathic, biochemic and allopathic
treatment. A sub-committee was formed to manage the
clinic, which is subordinate to Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti. At the inauguration of the Charity Clinic,
Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva was selected chairman.
He requested the secretary of the sub-committee, Dr.
Śrīyut Vrajānanda Vrajavāsī (L.M.F.) to read the article
‘Gauḍīya Clinic’, after which Śrīla Gurudeva gave an
attractive lecture full of deep thoughts about this
clinic.

Śrīla Ācāryadeva said, “Ṭhe Śrī Gauḍīya Charity Clinic
is not the same as the clinics of the Rāma-Kṛṣṇa mission
and the India Sevāśrama Association. It may look the
same from the external point of view of distributing
medicine to patients, but there is a tremendous
difference in the purpose. If we endeavour to give
material help and sympathy to human beings, it will
cause their bondage. Contrary to this, if we give help
and sympathy to the jīvas for their progress in
bhagavat-bhajana, this will remove their material
bondage and help them to enter the spiritual realm. We
are very happy to point out that this Charity Clinic has
quickly become very famous throughout Navadvīpa. Every
day many patients come here from far away to be treated
by our qualified and skilled doctors.”

The selected members of the committee were as follows:

1) Chairman: Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Paramahaṁsa-svāmī
Parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī

2) Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja

3) Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama
Mahārāja

4) Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

5) Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Harijana Mahārāja

6) Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Viṣṇudaivata
Mahārāja

7) Śrīyut Vrajānanda Dāsa Vrajavāsī (L.M.F.)—secretary
(Regd. No. 8134 Cal.)

8) Śrīyut Advaita Dāsa Vrajavāsī

9) Śrī Kṛṣṇabandhu Bhaumika (H.M.B.H.T.C.) Śrī Gauḍīya

                            167
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Charity Clinic’s doctor.



Installation festival of Śrī Vigraha in the newly built
śrī mandira during Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and Śrī
Gaura-Janmotsava

March, 1963: Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti organized the
extensive celebration of Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā
and Śrī Gaura Janmotsava. The atmosphere of the entire
maṭha was filled with unprecedented joy on the third day
of the parikramā (March 7th), because of the
installation of śrī mandira and śrī vigraha. The nāṭya-
mandira and especially the installation altar of the
Deities were beautifully decorated with flower garlands,
festoons of mango leaves and flowers and the trunks of
banana trees. There was no parikramā on that day, and
the day’s auspicious ceremony was heralded by
mangalārati, saṅkīrtana, various musical instruments in
a band party and the sweet sound of the shenai during
brāhma-muhūrta.

First the devotees prepared to bring water from the
Bhagavatī Bhāgīrathī for the installation and abhiṣeka.
When Śrīla Ācāryadeva himself was ready with a waterpot
in his hands, the maṭha sannyāsīs, brahmacārīs and
thousands of devoted pilgrims also assembled with their
waterpots. The procession made its way to the holy bank
of the Bhagavatī Bhāgīrathī keeping the band party in
the front, followed by the saṅkīrtana group of maṭha
devotees, then Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva with the
waterpot on his head, and finally thousands of devoted
pilgrims performing kīrtana with great joy. The devotees
performed pūjā of Śrī Jāhnavī Devī with sixteen
articles, and then filled up their waterpots with sacred
Gaṅgā water and returned very joyfully to the maṭha
premises and the yajña altar.

Śrīla Ācāryadeva requested Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktibhūdeva Śrautī Mahārājajī to perform the priestly
duties at this ceremony, with the help of Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Trivikrama Mahārāja arranged for the Deity installation
and Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja looked after
the main guests.

The Deities were placed on the bathing platform. First
of all They were bathed with milk, yoghurt, ghee, honey,
and sugar sanctified by mantras. After that, Their
abhiṣeka was performed with 108 waterpots containing
fragrant water from all the tīrthas, sarvauṣadhi22,
water from various jewels23 and other kinds of waters.
During the abhiṣeka, Vedic scholars were reciting
Puruṣa-sūkta. Around the altar, Śrīmad Bhaktijīvana
Janārdana Mahārāja and other prominent sannyāsīs
melodiously recited different dharma-śāstras, such as
Veda-chatuṣṭya (the four Vedas), Upaniṣads, Vedānta-
darśana (Govinda-bhāṣya), Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī Gītā,
Viṣṇu-sahasra-nāma and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. As well
as this, the sounds of mahā-saṅkīrtanaÇ conch shells,
and the ladies’ hulu-dhvani resounded everywhere in the
sky. Nearby, at the sacrificial altar, amidst the
chanting of Vedic mantras, Tridaṇḍisvāmi Bhaktipramoda

                           168
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Purī Mahārāja24 and others were offering oblations in
the fire. All directions were purified by the fragrant,
sacred smoke of the vaiṣṇava-homa and the very
impressive sound of the loud saṅkīrtana. No one could
count the people who filled up the nāṭya-mandira and the
mandira, taking darśana of the mahābhiṣeka with wide-
open eyes. After the abhiṣeka the Deities were taken to
the altar and Śrīla Ācāryadeva himself completed the
installation.

There were kīrtanas, recitals and brilliant lectures in
Sanskrit, Hindi, Bengali, Assamese, Oriya, and other
languages by the ācāryas, tridaṇḍi-sannyāsīs and
scholars learned in siddhānta from different maṭhas.
Altogether, the occasion was full of trans-cendental
potency and life.

At that time Yatirāja Śrīla Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara
Mahārāja, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivicāra Yāyāvara
Mahārāja and other sannyāsīs arrived. They were welcomed
with garlands and candana and seated on the well-
decorated stage in the nāṭya-mandira. Pūjyapāda Śrīla
Śrīdhara Mahārāja gave a significant lecture on Śrī
Gauḍīya Maṭha’s great contribution and the superiority
of its philosophical views. Śrīla Ācāryadeva then
respectfully escorted them to the entrance of śrī
mandira to inaugurate the opening. At that time the
assembled multitude vibrated their jaya-dhvani, hari-
dhvani and the ladies’ hulu-dhvani and this mixed with
the auspicious sound of conchshells and the mṛdaṅgas and
kartalas from the saṅkīrtana, and filled all directions.
Śrīmad Bhaktikisaudha Āśrama Mahārāja and Śrīmad
Bhaktivikāśa Hṛśīkeṣa Mahārāja came with their entire
parikramā parties at the time of inauguration and in the
evening they were joined by Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad
Bhaktisāraṅga Gosvāmī Mahārāja and Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad
Bhaktidayita Mādhava Gosvāmī Mahārāja with their
parties.

Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Vinodabihārī were
installed in the middle prakoṣṭha (chamber). In the
prakoṣṭha on Their right is Dhāmeśvara Śrī Koladeva
(Varāhadeva) and Lakṣmī-devī, and in the prakoṣṭha on
Their left is the arca-vigraha of Jagadguru Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda. Śrīla Ācāryadeva
had bestowed Their darśana on the whole world.

After the installation, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Bhaktideśika
Ācārya Mahārāja performed arcana, and offered bhoga and
ārati to the Deities. After bhoga ārati, mahā-prasada
was distributed to thousands and thousands of people.
The audience was enchanted by the Deities’ unprecedented
rūpa-mādhurī (the sweetness of Their form), and
unanimously declared that they had never before seen
such beautiful Deities.

Paramārādhya Śrīla Ācāryadeva declared at the occasion,
“Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti has taken a vow to destroy
adharma (irreligiosity), kudharma (bad activities),
vidharma (non-conformist religion), apadharma (heresy),
chaladharma (deceitful religion) and so on. To this end,
we have installed Śrī Koladeva (Varāhadeva) who is
Dhāmeśvara of Koladvīpa, together with Śrī Śrī Guru-
Gauraṅga and Rādhā-Vinodabihārījī in this huge and

                          169
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

prominent śrī mandira in Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma. But
constructing large temples is not the only purpose of
preaching; it is a limb of arcana. The foremost purpose
of preaching is kīrtana-sevā under the guidance of Śrī
Rūpa. We have not established this prominent śrī mandira
and huge nāṭya-mandira in Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa only for
arcāsevā (Deity worship). Rather, it is the symbol of
Bhaktisiddhānta vāṇi, the preaching of kīrtana bhakti,
which is the topmost perfection of vedānta. Following
the mahājanas in my heart I have established the
foundation of this maṭha-mandira to preach Siddhānta
vāṇī by the transcendental sound of śrī nāma saṅkīrtana,
blended with the nectar flowing from my Śrī Gurudeva’s
mouth. The construction of śrī mandira, the auspicious
task of installing the Deities and other works have been
completed through the medium of śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana.”

One of the Godbrothers of our most worshipable Śrīla
Ācāryadeva was attracted by his qualities and wrote a
title essay in Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā, which included the
following com-mendation. “According to Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s commentary on yāra mantre sakala mūrtite
vaise prāṇa (Caitanya Bhāgavata Ādī līlā 2.305), in the
Śrī Gauḍīya sampradāya, śrī vigraha is installed by the
chanting of the mahā-mantra prescribed by Śrī Gaurahari.
Only nāma-saṅkīrtana can remove the misconception that
śrī vigraha is stone. The śloka, ‘kṛṣṇa varṇam
tviṣākṛṣṇam’ shows that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanyadeva has
prescribed the chanting of the mahā-mantra as the
appropriate and affectionate worship of śrī vigraha.
Worship and darśana of the Deities are lifeless where
Bhagavān is not served by the worshipper’s inner love
and affection, but by wealth or as a ritual. No matter
what system one is following, worship with life is
performed with the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra as chanted by
Śrī Gaurasundara.

“Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in Koladvīpa has today
assumed new splendour, for it is now surrounded by and
decorated with a new mandira with nine prominent sky-
high domes, a new huge nāṭya-mandira, a new group of
quarters for sevakas, a new building for the printing
press, a new school for spiritual education and a new
charitable dispensary. The sevakas of this place have
dedicated themselves to the service of Śrī Gaura-
Bhaktivinoda-vāṇī (the instructions of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, as explained by Śrī Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda).
The disciples of Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja, who are expert in
bhajana, jointly performed the inauguration ceremony of
Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga-Gāndharvikā-Vinodabihārījī and Śrī
Varāhadeva in the new mandira following Śrī Śrī
Rūpānuga-guru-paramparā. This has created a new
atmosphere in Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma.”

A large religious assembly was arranged in the Śrī Hari-
kīrtana nāṭya-mandira on the evening of the third day of
Śrīdhāma parikramā. At Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s request,
Yatipravara Tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrīmad Bhaktisarvasva Giri
Mahārāja accepted the chairman’s seat. Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Śrīmad Bhaktibhūdeva Śrautī Mahārāja and Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Śrīmad Bhaktisaurabha Bhakti-sāra Mahārāja gave
lectures. After that, Śrīla Ācāryadeva spoke on the
difference between the vaiṣṇava and māyāvada

                          170
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

philosophies of śrī vigraha-tattva. He then recited ‘Śrī
Rādhā-Vinodabihārī-tattvāṣṭakam’ and explained why the
Deity of Śrī Vinodabihārī does not have Kṛṣṇa’s śyāma
complexion. He concluded by glorifying the outstanding
sevā of the late Śrī Giridhārī Dāsādhikārī in the
construction of śrī mandira and the sevā of Śrī Haripada
Dāsādhikārī, who covered all the expenses for
constructing the naṭya-mandira. Finally, the chairman of
the assembly, Śrīmad Bhaktisarvasva Giri Mahārājajī,
gave an attractive lecture.



Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and Śrī Gaura-Janmotsava

On the first day of Śrīdhāma parikramā, the pilgrims had
taken darśana of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s
bhajanasthalī in Godrumadvīpa, of Suvarṇavihār,
Nṛsiṁhapallī, Hariharakṣetra, Haṁsavāhan and other
places. On the second day, they had visited
Samudragaṛha, Champakhaṭṭa, Vidyānagara and
Modadrumadvīpa and then returned to the maṭha. On the
fourth day they completed parikramā of Prauḍhamāyā, Śrī
Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja’s samādhi and
Rudradvīpa. That day a special assembly was arranged in
the evening. Śrīla Ācāryadeva was selected as chairman,
and Paṇḍitpravar (the best of paṇḍits) Śrīyuta Gopendra
Bhūṣaṇa (sāṅkhyatīrtha) was selected as chief guest. At
Śrīla Gurudeva’s request, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Bhaktideśika
Ācārya Mahārāja started by giving an attractive lecture

in Sanskrit with śāstric evidences showing that Śrīman
Mahāprabhu is Svayaṁ Bhagavān. Paṇḍitapravara Śrīyuta
Nityānanda (pañcatīrtha) also spoke in Sanskrit,
glorifying the importance of sādhu-saṅga. The honourable
chief guest (sāṅkhyatīrtha) said that Śrī Keśava
Mahārājajī had in fact fully established Koladvīpa by
installing the deity of Śrī Koladeva: “Today, the memory
of ancient Koladeva has awakened in my heart.” He then
praised and glorified Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda.

On the parikramā’s fifth day, the pilgrims had darśana
at Śrī Īśodyāna in Antardvīpa, Śrī Yogapīṭha (Śrī
Caitanya Mahā-prabhu’s appearance place), Śrī Caitanya
Maṭha, the samādhis of Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrīla Gaura
Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārājajī, Chand Kāzī’s samādhi,
Sīmantadvīpa (Simuliyā Grāma) and other places. Mahā-
prasāda was served at noon-time at Śrī Jayadeva Pāṭa and
the parikramā party then returned to Śrī Devānanda
Gauḍīya Maṭha. Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrī Bhakti-sarvasva Giri
Mahārāja was the chairman of the religious assembly that
evening, and Tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivicāra Yāyāvar
Mahārāja, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktijīvana Janārdana
Mahārāja, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivāridhi Purī
Mahārāja and Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja gave beautiful lectures in Hindi.

The sixth day of the parikramā was the appearance day of
Śrī Gaurasundara. The devotees fasted, there was a
reading of the complete Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavat and
śravaṇa-kīrtana was performed very joyfully.
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktijīvana Janārdana Mahārāja was
chairman of the assembly after Śrī Gaura’s appearance in
the evening. Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana

                          171
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Mahārāja, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama
Mahārāja, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja and other sannyāsīs gave lectures
on the distinctive characteristics of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s great contribution.

At noon on the seventh day, yajñā-homa and other rituals
were performed for those who had accepted dīkṣā,
sannyāsa and bābājī veśa. After that, wonderful mahā-
prasāda was served to twenty or twenty-five thousand
invited and uninvited faithful guests.

Śrīla Ācāryadeva was chairman of the religious assembly
that evening. First of all there were lectures by those
who had accepted sannyāsa and bābājī-veśa the previous
day, namely Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Rāddhvamanthī Mahārāja, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Rāddhānti Mahārāja and Śrīmad Raghunātha
Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. After that, Śrī Rasikamohana
Vrajavāsī, Paṇḍita Nimāī Caraṇa (vyākaraṇatīrtha) and
Śrī Haridāsa Vrajavāsī gave lectures in Hindi. Finally,
the main guest, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s expert sannyāsī,
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktiprakāśa Araṇya Mahārāja gave
an attractive lecture. In this way the sublimely joyful,
week-long celebration of Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma Parikramā
and Śrī Gaura Janmotsava took place smoothly and was
concluded successfully.



Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha

Our supremely worshipful Śrī Ācārya Kesarī established
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti (Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha)
in Kuliyā Nagar (present day Navadvīpa town) to nourish
the service of the innermost desires of his
Gurupādapadma Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī
Prabhupāda. Inside the vast boundary wall of the temple
grounds there is a divine temple with nine huge domes.
Śrīla Gurudeva constructed this maṭha and mandira in an
inspired way and on the basis of philosophical
siddhānta. Below is a short presentation of the maṭha.

Śrī Narahari Toraṇa

At first we enter the courtyard of the maṭha via the
main entrance door, Śrī Narahari Toraṇa. Above this gate
on the outside are carved the words ‘param vijayate śrī
kṛṣṇa saṅkīrtanam’ and ‘kīrtanīya sadā hariḥ.’ Here
Śrīla Gurudeva is waving the victory flag of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s ultimate instruction in His Śikṣāṣṭaka,
namely to perform śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana. Kīrtana of śrī
harināma has been announced to be the life of sādhana-
bhajana. In order to enter śrī bhakti-mandira one should
first perform the maṅgalācaraṇa of tad-rūpa vaibhava
(Guru and Vaiṣṇavas) and of the worshipful Deity. Also
on the gate is the jayagāna (glorification) spoken by
Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhakura, who is the Vyāsadeva of Śrī
Caitanya līlā: jaya navadvīpa-navapradīpa-prabhāvaḥ
pāṣaṇḍa-gajaikasiṁhaḥ. We may mention in this context
that one of Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s intimate god-brothers,
Śrī Bhaktisaraṅga Gosvāmī Mahārāja, gave him the title
‘Pāṣaṇḍa-gajaikasimha (the lion who defeats the
elephants of heresy and atheism).’

                          172
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


The name Śrī Narahari Toraṇa which Śrīla Gurudeva has
given refers both to the tattva of aśraya or sevā-
vigraha (Śrī Narahari Brahmacārī is the personification
of sevā), and also to the tattva of viṣaya or sevya-
vigraha (Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva).

Above this arched gateway on each side are two very
powerful lions on the heads of two mad elephants. The
mad elephants signify vaiṣṇava-aparādha. Śrī Jagāī and
Śrī Madhāī stand on each side below as doorkeepers, and
on the inside of the gateway are Śrī Devānanda Paṇḍita
and Śrī Vāsudeva Vipra, who proclaim the glory of Kuliyā
aparādha-bhañjana-pāṭa, the place where offenses are
destroyed. Śrī Devānanda Paṇḍita had committed an
offense to the lotus feet of Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, but later
repented by the mercy of Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi. He begged
for forgiveness at Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita’s lotus feet,
whereupon Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu also forgave him. By
the mercy of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, such extremely
offensive persons as Jagāī and Madhāī also became
perfect devotees. Vāsudeva Vipra obtained darśana of Śrī
Gaurasundara here by the mercy of Śrī Koladeva.

Śrī maṭha consisting of seven sections

Amongst the nine dvīpas (islands) of Śrī Navadvīpa
Dhāma, Śrī Koladvīpa, which is situated on the west bank
of Gaṅgā, is very important. According to Śrī Bhakti-
ratnākara and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Śrī Navadvīpa
Dhāma-parikramā and Navadvīpa-bhāva-taraṅga, the twelve
forests of Vṛndāvana are situated in a somewhat
transformed order on the nine dvīpas of Śrī Navadvīpa.
This Koladvīpa is said to be Girirāja Govardhana
himself, and rasika bhaktas take darśana of the sandy
banks of the nearby Bhāgīrathī as the arena of rāsa by
the Yamunā. Adjacent to this rāsa arena and to the south
is Ṛtudvīpa which is non-different from Rādhā-kuṇḍa and
Śyāma-kuṇḍa, and Bahulāvan is situated to the north. Our
supremely worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva, the crest jewel of
the community of ācāryas, has established this maṭha
here only after considering everything written about
this place in śāstras.

When we enter the courtyard of the maṭha through Śrī
Narahari Toraṇa, we have darśana of śrī maṭha enclosed
within the vast boundary walls. Śrīla Gurudeva divided
this maṭha into seven khaṇḍas or sections and named them
according to philosophical siddhānta.

(1) Paramārtha-khaṇḍa—printing press etc.

In this section the literary incarnation of Bhagavān,
bhakti-literature, such as Vedas, Upaniṣads, Gītā and
Bhāgavatam is published. Bhagavad-bhakti is preached all
over the world through the medium of these books, and
for this reason Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī called the printing press the bṛhat-mṛdanga.
He also said that the tridaṇḍi-sannyāsī preachers of
śuddha-bhakti are the living mṛdanga and they preach
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s message of śuddha prema-dharma
according to their ability at home and abroad. This is
why our Ārādhyadeva Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja has

                          173
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

displayed special enthusiasm in preaching and publishing
Vaikuṇṭha Vārtāvaha, Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā, Śrī Bhāgavat
Patrikā as well as the original literature of our Śrī
Bhaktisiddhānta vāṇī such as Vedānta, Bhāgavatam and the
literature of the Gosvāmīs. With this intention he also
established Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī and Śrī
Gauḍīya Charitable Dispensary.

(2) Kīrtana-khaṇḍa

In śrī nāṭya-mandira (the congregational assembly hall)
hari saṅkīrtana and kīrtana of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta and other literature etc. is always
going on. Great personalities give classes and speeches
in the large religious assemblies which also take place
here.

(3) Upāsya khaṇḍa

Śrīla Ācāryadeva has given the name navadhā bhakti-
mandira to the mandira with its nine distinctive domes.
The names of these nine domes are respectively śravaṇam,
kīrtanam, smaraṇam, pāda-sevanam, arcanam, vandanam,
dāsyam, sakhyam and ātma-nivedanam. The highest dome of
śrī mandira is ātma-nivedanam. In the middle of the
Sudarśana cakra on the top of this dome is a flute which
proclaims, ‘kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ’ to all the
inhabitants of the world. The profound meaning of this
is that the inhabitants of the world should assemble in
śrī hari kīrtana mandira for śrī nāma saṅkīrtana-yajña,
which bestows seven excellent results25. Āgacchantu
mahābhāgā nitya kīrtana-mandire: “Welcome, you are very
fortunate to come to the kīrtana-mandira.”

On every dome is the Śrī Brahma-Mādhva-Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava
tilaka, which attracts the faith of travellers towards
pure Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism even from far away. Inside the
four domes of the first floor of śrī mandira are
situated the original founders of the four sat-
sampradāyas: Śrī Lakṣmī, Śrī Brahmā, Śrī Rudra and Śrī
Chatuḥsan. Near them the four ācāryas of those
sampradāyas (namely Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhavācārya, Śrī
Viṣṇusvāmī and Śrī Nimbāditya) are situated and
worshipped properly. They instruct people who want
sādhana-bhajana that it is absolutely necessary to
accept a sāttvata-sampradāya (bonafide sampradāya).

On the four walls of the first floor of the mandira are
pictures of the daśāvatāras (the ten āvatāras). These
ten incarnations of Bhagavān correspond to the gradual
development of consciousness, and indicate the
progressive development of theistic philosophy. In the
eastern portion of the first floor of śrī mandira, the
vidhi-mārga and rāgamārga, or pāñcarātrika and
bhāgavatīya sādhana-mārga, have been exhibited in
accordance with the instructions of the Gauḍīya guru-
varga. In the eastern area of the second floor of śrī
mandira is the surabhī cow, and Indradeva begging for
forgiveness at Śrī Govinda’s lotus feet. Along with this
is the destroyer of all obstacles, Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva. His
killing Hiraṇyakaśipu announces the victory over people
with demonic thoughts and proclaims the glory of
aparādha-bhañjana pāṭa, the place which destroys all
aparādhas.

                          174
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva has exhibited his ideal of ekāntika-
niṣṭhā (single pointed unflinching faith) in his guru-
sevā by installing Jagadguru Śrīla Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda’s mūrti and arranging for his daily worship.
He has written, “I have installed my Gurupādapadma
Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda in
śrī mandira of this maṭha. We see many so-called
paramahaṁsas in the world today, but on consideration we
find that they are not equal to a fragment of this mahā-
puruṣa, or even to those who have obtained only a
particle of dust from his lotus feet. Still, these so-
called paramahaṁsas are being honoured by worldly people
who are devoid of tattva-jñāna. Many people call Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda the crest
jewel of the community of paramahaṁsas. I do not object
to this, but my personal statement is that he is the
svāmī (master) or pati (lord) of the community of
parama-haṁsas. He is empowered to give instructions even
to paramahaṁsas. For this reason he is called Jagadguru.

“This mahā-puruṣa who is rādhā-pakṣī (partial towards
Rādhā) is famous in England, Germany and all other
countries as Śrīla Prabhupāda. Here we perform his ārati
first of all. There is an absolute necessity in the
whole world to perform worship and service to this mahā-
puruṣa. If his worship is stopped, bhakti-dharma will
disappear from this world, and the whole world will be
destroyed and go to Rasātala, the lowest hellish planet.
For this reason the people of this world address him as
Prabhupāda.”

In the first prakoṣṭha (chamber) Koladeva is installed.
Since Satya-yuga He has been bestowing his mercy on
devotees such as His exclusive devotee Śrī Vāsudeva
Vipra. His daily worship and sevā in śrī mandira
announce the glories of Koladvīpa. The name Kuliyā has
originated from the word ‘Kola.’ Places which today have
names such as Kuliyādaha, Kolergaṅja, Koler Āmād, Gada
Khālira Kol, Tegharir Kol and Kuliyā town (present
Navadvīpa town) are all part of ancient Kuliyā. This
place is also called Kuliyā Pahāḍapura, because this
land is high like a pahāḍa (a mountain). In Satya-yuga
Śrīla Varahadeva gave darśana to His parama-bhakta Śrī
Vāsudeva Vipra and said that in the coming Kali-yuga He
would accept the bodily luster and internal bhāva of
Śrīmati Rādhikā, and in this very place would manifest
His greatly munificent pastimes as Śrī Gaurāṅga
Mahāprabhu. To attain the mercy of this Koladvīpa, which
is named pāda-sevanam and is non-different from
Girirāja-Govardhana, it is essential to pray first of
all for the mercy of Dhāmeśvara (Koladeva). Only by His
mercy can one achieve the qualification to enter into
the audāryamayī-līlā (munificent pastimes) of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu.

In the second prakoṣṭha of śrī mandira Śrī Gaura Rādhā-
Vinodabihārījī are installed. Here the supremely
wonderful and mysterious white lustre of Śrī
Vinodabihārījī, who is absorbed in thinking of Śrī
Rādhā, defeats even the bhajanānandis’ bhajana secrets.
Even the bhajanānandis cannot understand this highest
secret, but Śrīla Ācāryadeva has personally explained
it. Śrīman Mahāprabhu is Himself Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala and

                          175
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are worshiped by Śrī Gaura mantra.
People may ask why the three Deities in this temple (Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādharani and Śrī Gaurasundara) are all
white in colour. The answer is that They are not white,
but rather have the golden lustre of Śrīmati Rādhājī. By
accepting Śrīmati Rādhikā’s bodily lustre, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
taken on a golden (gaura) complexion. The bodily lustre
of Śrī Gaurasundara is as fair as pure gold, which is
why these three have the same complexion. Here we must
understand that the apparently white complexion is
actually gaura (golden).

Why did Śrī Kṛṣṇa take on Śrī Rādhā’s gaura complexion?
Śrīmati Rādhikā has a natural contrary mood (vāmya-
bhāva) towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but only for increasing the
ever-fresh variety of Kṛṣṇa-sevā. Once Śrīmatījī became
angry with Kṛṣṇa and exhibited māna, and at that time
Kṛṣṇa became so absorbed in thinking of Śrīmatījī that
His śyāma-complexion changed and became like Hers.

rādhā-cintā-niveśena yasya kāntir-vilopitā

śrī kṛṣṇa-caraṇaṁ vande rādhāliṅgita-vigraham

We refer to this deep mystery in the first verse of Śrī
Rādhā-Vinodabihārī-tattvāṣṭakam. The word rādhā-liṅgita
has two meanings; 1) rādhayā liṅgita, and 2) rādhayā
āliṅgita.

In the first of these meanings (rādhayā liṅgita), the
word liṅgita means ‘having the appearance of.’ Śrī Kṛṣṇa
lost His own complexion and assumed Śrīmati Rādhikā’s
due to being very absorbed in thinking of Her in
separation. This is the deep meaning of rādhā liṅgita
vigraha. It is this śrī vigraha that has been brought to
light here. The meaning of this deep tattva has been
illuminated by the crest jewel of rasika Vaiṣṇavas,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravarti Ṭhākura in his Śrī Svapna-
vilāsāmṛta. This tattva has been manifested to the world
by my Śrīla Guru-pādapadma from the core of his heart.

The second meaning of rādhā-liṅgita is rādhayā āliṅgita
or ‘embraced by Rādhā.’ The confidential meaning of this
has been spoken by Śrī Rāyā Rāmānandajī to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu on the banks of Godāvarī.

pahile dekhiluṅ tomāra sannyāsī-svarūpa

eve tomā dekhi muñi śyāma-goparūpa

tomāra sammukhe dekhi kāñcana-pañcālikā

tāṅra gaurakāntye tomāra sarva aṅga ḍhākā

tabe hāsi’ tāṅre prabhu dekhāila svarūpa

‘rasarāja’, ‘mahābhāva’—dui eka rūpa

(Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 8.268, 269, 282)

Rāyā Rāmānandajī asked Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, “I first
saw You as a sannyāsī, and now I am seeing You as the
gopa Śyāmasundara. At the same time I am seeing a
golden-complexioned Deity in front of You, whose golden

                          176
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

lustre fully covers Your Kṛṣṇa-lustre.” Upon hearing
this Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu laughed and gave darśana of
Kṛṣṇa in His distinctive gaura complexion as ‘Rasarāja-
Mahābhāva’ combined. Śrī Rāyā Rāmānanda fainted in bliss
when he saw this unprecedented sweet form.

So this is another explanation of the deep mystery of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s golden complexion. The śyāma complexion of
Kṛṣṇa has been completely covered by Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
embrace, and He is manifesting Her bodily lustre.

Amongst people who serve on the path of the most
advanced bhajana with vipralambha bhāva (mood of
separation), nearly all perform smaraṇa (remembrance) of
Śrīmati Rādhikā’s feelings of separation towards Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. However, our Śrī Gurudeva, Śrīla Prabhupāda, is a
sakhī of Śrīmati Rādhikā, and he used to remember the
vipralambha-bhāva that Śrī Kṛṣṇa felt towards Śrīmati
Rādhikā. My Gurudeva was partial towards Śrī Rādhā, so
he was more favourable to the separation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
than that of Śrīmati Rādhikā. Śrīmati Rādhikā is grief-
stricken in separation from Kṛṣṇa—this is the perfection
of vipralambha bhāva that ordinary sādhakas are praying
for. However, Śrīla Prabhu-pāda’s viewpoint is
completely opposite to this. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa was
completely engrossed in the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, He
lost His śyāma complexion and manifested as rādhāliṅgita
vigraha. In other words He attained the colour of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Śrīman Mahāprabhu preached about this
very vipralambha-rasa and gave instructions on it. The
ideal of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
anxious for Śrī Rādhārānī.

(4) Sevaka khaṇḍa

The place where the group of sevakas of Śrī Śrī
Gaurasundara and Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Vinodabihārījī live,
perform service, and take rest has been called the
sevaka section. This section has also been separated
into two parts, (a) the bhajana-kuṭīra of Śrīla
Gurupādapadma, and (b) the living quarters or bhajana-
kuṭīras of Śrīla Gurudeva’s sevakas. Amongst these
kuṭīras are the kuṭīras of Śrīla Gurudeva’s sannyāsīs
and brahmacārīs.

(5) Bhoga khaṇḍa

The storage room and the kitchen is called the bhoga
khaṇḍa or ‘offering section.’ Adjacent to the bhajana-
kuṭīra of Śrīla Gurudeva is the storage room and
kitchen, which is also divided into two sections; (a)
the kitchen for the daily cooking, and

(b) the kitchen for Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and
special festival days. This large kitchen has
permanently fixed stoves, on which huge potsare placed
for cooking 16-20 maunds (one maund is about 40 kg) of
rice or 40 maunds of sabji at one time. About 20 very
strong cooks prepare the bhoga for Ṭhākurajī. Between
fifteen and twenty thousand pilgrims all sit together in
the huge courtyard of the maṭha to honour prasāda. At
that time the system of serving mahā-prasāda is a
wonderful sight, which cannot be seen anywhere else in
the world.

                          177
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


(6) Govardhana khaṇḍa

The place where the cows live is known as the gośālā or
Govardhana khaṇḍa. The cows here are very beautiful.
Yogurt, ghee, khīra, paramānna etc. are made from their
milk and offered to Ṭhākurajī.

(7) Jñāna-khaṇḍa

The public and residential lavatory is called jñāna-
khaṇḍa, the section of knowledge. The principal limb of
śaraṇāgati is to give up objects and moods that are
unfavourable for bhakti. Nirviśeṣa-jñāna and activities
not performed for Bhagavān are opposed to bhakti. For
this reason Śrīmad-Bhāgavtam (5.14.43) instructs us to
give up such knowledge and activities just as one gives
up stool after evacuating.

yo dustajyān dāra-sutān suhṛd-rājyaṁ hṛdi-spṛśaḥ

jaho yuvaiva malavaduttamaḥślokalālasaḥ

“Mahārāja Bharata gave up his wife, son, relatives,
friends and kingdom, as one gives up stool after
evacuating, to enter the forest to perform bhajana.”

In Śrī Prema-bhakti-candrika (8.8) it is also said,

karma-kāṇḍa jñāna-kāṇḍa kevala viṣera bhāṇḍa

“Both karma-kāṇḍa (fruitive activities) and jñāna-kāṇḍa
(mental speculations) are like pots of poison. Knowing
these two to be opposed to bhakti, devotees of Bhagavān
abandon them like stool.”

Also,

asat saṅga tyāga ei vaiṣṇava ācāra

strīsaṅgī eka asādhu, kṛṣṇābhakta āra

(Caitanya-caritāmṛta Mad. 22.87)

“Giving up bad association is a primary aspect of
Vaiṣṇava conduct. Bad association is of two types; a)
people who have illicit association with women, or
persons who associate with such people and their
attachment in worldly matters, or

b) association of non-devotees who are intent on
nirviśeṣa-jñāna. Sādhakas who w∑ant to attain bhakti
should carefully reject these two types of bad
association.”

Of these seven sections of the maṭha, the first six are
favourable to bhakti and are to be respected because
they are directly the svarūpa of bhakti. The seventh
section signifies nirviśeṣa-jñāna and is to be rejected
because it is opposed to bhakti. Śrīla Gurupādpadma has
divided śrī maṭha into these seven sections and named
them in this way from the viewpoint of this
bhaktisiddhānta.


                          178
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017



Argument in the discussion regarding ‘touched and
untouched’ (bhoga) in Śrī Jagannātha Mandira

November 3rd, 1963: An article was published in the
Bengali daily newspaper Yugānantara regarding the
throwing away of thousands of rupees worth of bhoga in
Purī. “Today, November 1st, a person who was not engaged
in Deity service touched the bhoga by sight before it
was offered to Śrī Jagannāthajī in the evening. This
resulted in an uprising amongst the cooks, and the
police had to intervene. In accordance with the
procedures of the temple, the outcome was that thousands
of rupees worth of bhoga was disposed of into the
ground. (V.N.I. 1.11.1963)”

Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva commented on this
incident as follows. “We are attracting the attention of
the public by this incident, which Śrī Jagannāthadeva
Himself has arranged. Some people try to disregard the
offence of touch in bhagavat-sevā and want to dismiss as
insignificant the distinction between ‘touched’ and
‘untouched.’ Such people are hypocrites and are opposed
to the path of dharma. We should accept this teaching of
Śrī Jagannāthadeva and always remain on the path of
distinguishing between ‘touched’ and ‘untouched’
according to śāstric rules. We should also instruct
others to stay on this path. This deceitful teaching is
atheistic, and we should never let it enter into the
worship of Bhagavān, whether it comes from western
atheists or native atheists. Even today the conception
regarding ‘lawful and unlawful food’ in Śrī Jagannātha
Mandira exists in different systems all over India. We
consider that those who do not acknowledge the offence
of touch (sparśa-doṣa) are untouchables.

“It is not an offence to touch this mahā-prasāda after
the bhoga has been offered to Śrī Jagannāthadeva, for
the food prepared by the cooks then becomes mahā-
prasāda. But no one has the right to touch the bhoga
before offering, apart from Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s
servants who are qualified to prepare and offer it. No
naivedya (offering) that has been touched by an
unqualified person can ever be offered to Śrī
Jagannāthajī. This is the correct opinion.

“Human beings should only accept Śrī Bhagavān’s
remnants, and it is improper to give anyone anything
that Śrī Jagannāthajī has not accepted. Śrī Jagannāthajī
is using this incident to teach us that Bhagavān does
not want to accept any unofferable substances. There is
another instruction within this one. Meat, fish, eggs,
tobacco, tea, bīḍīs, cigarettes, chewing tobacco,
alcohol, coffee, onion, garlic and so on cannot be
included in the offering to Bhagavān. Therefore all
these substances are to be rejected. Those who make use
of these unlawful substances in Ṭhākura sevā belong to
non-bonafide sampradāyas and are separate from Hindu
sanātana-dharma. The śāstras call such people mlecchas,
(untouchables or those born in the lowest caste).”

Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s sevakas and virtuous men of Hindu
dharma were very pleased with Śrīla Gurudeva’s argument.

                          179
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017




Preaching in Siliguḍi and in various places in Bihār

After Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa parikramā and Śrī Gaura-
janmotsava in 1963, Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva went
preaching for a week with his associates to places in
Sundaravana region such as Maīpīṭha-Vinodpura, Damkala
and Kāśīnagara. After that, he preached sanātana-dharma
(śuddha-bhakti) extensively for almost a month in
various places in Siliguḍi, between April 21st to May
18th.

During the same period in the following year, 1964, he
preached vaiṣṇava-dharma with sannyāsīs and 16 maṭha
residents in Sārasājola, Āsanavanī, Rājvandha, Palāśī,
Bāramāsiyā, Dhādikā, Kumaḍāvāda, Dumkā town and other
places in the Dumkā district of Bihar. With Śrīla
Gurudeva at that time were Śrīpād Trivikrama Mahārāja,
Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Śrīpād Kṛṣṇakṛpā Brahmacārī,
Śrī Gajendra Mokṣaṇa Brahmacārī, Śrī Rohiṇīnandana
Vrajavāsī, Śrī Bhagavāndāsa Brahmacārī, Śrī
Vṛndāvanavihārī Brahmacārī, Śrī Cidghanānada Brahmacārī,
Śrī Vṛṣabhānu Brahmacārī and other leading sannyāsīs and
brahmacārīs.

Sārasājola is a well-known and prosperous village in the
Dumkā district. Śrīla Gurudeva stayed in Śrī Madhusūdana
Vidyānidhi’s home in Sārasājola and preached śuddha-
bhakti there for seven days. All the leading villagers
there accepted vaiṣṇava-dharma along with their
families. Sārasājola became like Kulīnagrāma, whose
inhabitants were all great Vaiṣṇava bhaktas during
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s time. In those days, there were only
Vaiṣṇavas in the village of Kulīnagrāma; even the
village dogs were bhaktas who observed ekādaśī and other
vratas. Śrīla Gurupādapadma’s auspicious arrival in
Sārasājola was also very blessed. He lectured for six
days there on the following six different subjects:

1) ‘What is śāstra?’

2) ‘The distinction between suras and asuras.’

3) ‘Kīrtana is the only beneficial sādhana.’

4) ‘To merge with Brahman or to become Brahman is a
curse for the jīva.’

5) ‘Īśvara is saviśeṣa (with a personal feature) and
sākāra (with form), not nirākāra (formless).’

6) ‘Nirākāra-vāda is only an atheistic heretical point
of view (pākhaṇḍa-vāda).’

Śrīpāda Trivikrama Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,
Śrī Cidghanānada Brahmacārī, Śrī Rohiṇīnandana Vrajavāsī
and other speakers also gave lectures during this time.

Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave brilliant lectures in Dumkā town
on ‘±aḍ-darśana and vedānta-vijñāna’ ‘The philosophy of
nirākāra-vāda is worthless and empty’, ‘Dharma-sevā is
the only perfection of society’ and other subject

                          180
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

matters. At the chairman’s request, Śrīpāda Trivikrama
Mahārāja and Śrīpāda Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja gave lectures on
Śrī Gaura līlā and Śrī Rāma līlā. These lectures were
full of bhaktisiddhānta and were illustrated with
slides. The preaching of śuddha-bhakti in these regions
of Dumkā district inspired the people there with
unsurpassed faith towards vaiṣṇava-dharma. Whole groups
of them rejected alcohol, meat, fish, smoking and so on,
and were initiated into śuddha-bhakti. Śrīla Ācāryadeva
and his associates returned to Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya
Maṭha after preaching in this way for about a month.

In August, 1964, Śrīla Gurudeva was at Śrī Devānanda
Gauḍīya Maṭha during the grand and festive celebration
of Śrī Śrī Janmāṣṭamī and Śrī Nandotsava. Many
educational exhibitions had been organised on the
premises of the Samiti on Śrī Janmāṣṭamī that year, but
the devotees insisted that Śrīla Gurupādapadma should be
freed from the exhibition. Accordingly, in the religious
assembly in the nāṭya-mandira, he gave a lecture on Śrī
Janmāṣṭamī which was filled with profound siddhānta.

In this lecture Śrīla Ācāryadeva said that it is a
mistake to observe Śrī Janmāṣṭamī and fasting for other
vratas according to the views of the smārta
Raghunandana. According to Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, when
Vaiṣṇavas observe these vratas, they should abandon
mixed tithis and observe śuddha vrata. Śrī Kṛṣṇa did not
take birth on saptamī-biddhā aṣṭamī (aṣṭamī mixed with
saptamī), but rather on navamī-biddhā aṣṭamī (which is
also called Umā-Māheśvarī tithi). Navamī combined with
aṣṭamī tithi is therefore the tithi to be observed for
vrata-upavāsa. Abhijit-muhurta, Rohiṇī nakṣatra and
other considerations are of special importance for this
vrata-upavāsa.



Śrīla Ācāryadeva preaching śuddha-bhakti in Calcutta and
Medinīpura

In 1964, Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti’s founder-ācārya
observed ūrja vrata-niyama sevā for one month with many
sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs in the Kening Street residence
of Śrī Sudhīra Kumār Sāhā, the owner of the famous
Bhavānī-Paper Concern in Calcutta. At that time his home
became Śrī Vaikuṇṭha dhāma for a whole month. Every day
maṅgala ārati, saṅkīrtana, reading from Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other bhakti
literature, sandhyā ārati and other devotional
activities took place regularly. Many educated,
respected and prosperous persons from Calcutta
participated. Śrīla Gurudeva regularly explained the
dialogue between Vasudeva and Nārada in the Eleventh
Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Teachers, lawyers,
educationalists, highly posted officials and many others
were very attracted when they heard his Bhāgavatam
lectures, which were full of excellent siddhānta. From
time to time Śrīpāda Trivikrama Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Vāmana
Mahārāja and Śrīpāda Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja also gave
lectures on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Śrīla Gurudeva returned to Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha
and from there preached in different regions of

                          181
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Medinīpura and inaugurated śrī mandira in Kalyāṇpura. He
also preached sanātana-dharma in Sābaḍāveḍe Jalpāī and
other places. A grand and festive celebration of Śrī
Vyāsapūjā was held in his presence in Khāmaṭī Grāma.

In the next year, 1965, after Śrīdhāma parikramā and Śrī
Gaura-janmotsava, Śrīla Ācāryadeva went to Śrī
Siddhavāḍī Gauḍīya Maṭha with many sannyāsīs and
brahmacārīs and there he laid the foundation stone for
śrī mandira. After returning, he preached for a month in
various places in Assam, such as Golokagaṅja, Baṅgoi
Grāma, Māthābhāṅgā, Śītala Kuci and Siliguḍi, and then
returned to Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha, Chuṅchuṛā.

Preaching śuddha-bhakti in Śrī Mathurā, Vṛndāvana,
Lukhnow and Kaśī

September and October, 1966: During kārtīka-vrata-
niyama-sevā, Śrīla Ācāryadeva performed the 84-kosa Śrī
Vrajamaṇḍala parikramā with many pilgrims. First of all,
Śrīla Ācārayadeva went to Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha,
where Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and Śrī Muni
Mahārāja offered him garlands and candana at a grand
reception. Śrīla Gurupādapadma entrusted the
responsibility of the parikramā to Śrīpād Harijana
Mahārāja and took rest in Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha for
a month. Afterwards he went to preach in Lukhnow,
Prayāga, Vārāṇasī and Gāyā with Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and a few brahmacārīs, and then
returned to Chuṅchuṛā.

While Śrīla Gurupādapadma was staying in Śrī Keśavajī
Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā, many educated people of the
city came to hear his hari-kathā. Among them, the
principal of Śrī Māthur Caturveda College, Śrī Gayā
Prasāda Saksenā (Employment-Exchange Officer), and Śrī
Pītāmbara Pantha (S.D.O.M.E.S.) are particularly worth
mentioning. In Lukhnow Śrīla Ācāryadeva accepted Śrī
Pītāmbara Pantha’s special invitation and stayed at his
residence with some sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs for three
days, and then left for Kāśī. While he was there he
collected Vedas (the main scripture of the science of
transcendental sound vibrations); some rare scriptures;
and a large brass bell weighing two maunds (about 80 kg)
for Śrī Navadvīpa Maṭha. After staying in Kāśī for three
days, he returned to Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha.



Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī in Śrī Caitanya Gauḍīya Maṭha,
Calcutta

January 26th to February 1st, 1967: There was a large
annual festival lasting a week at Śrī Caitanya Gauḍīya
Maṭha in Calcutta. During this time, the inauguration of
the new mandira and śrī nāṭya-mandira took place with
great celebrations. Nityalīlā Praviṣṭa Śrī Śrīla
Bhaktidayita Mādhava Gosvāmī Mahārāja was the president
and founder-ācārya of Śrī Caitanya Gauḍīya Maṭha and its
branch maṭhas in India. He personally went to invite our
worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva and other Gauḍīya ācāryas to
participate in this big festival, so many of Jagadguru
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s sannyāsīs
took part. Some of the prominent sannyāsīs amongst them

                          182
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

are mentioned below:

1) Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktirakṣaka
Śrīdhara Mahārāja; 2) Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja; 3)
Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktibhūdeva
Śrautī Mahārāja; 4) Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Śrīmad Bhaktisarvasva

Giri Mahārāja; 5) Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad
Bhaktipramoda Purī Mahārāja; 6) Parivrājakācārya
Tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrīmad Bhaktikamala Madhusūdana Mahārāja;
7) Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhakti Āloka
Parama-haṁsa Mahārāja; 8) Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Śrīmad Bhaktivikāśa Hṛṣīkeśa Mahārāja; 9)
Parivrājakācārya Tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrīmad Bhaktiprāpana
Dāmodara Mahārāja; and 10) Parivrājakācārya
Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktikumuda Santa Mahārāja.

Paramapūjya Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara
Mahārāja performed the inauguration of the newly
constructed mandira and nāṭya-mandira at this big
festival. Pūjyapāda Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktibhūdeva
Śrautī Mahārāja and Pūjyapād Bhaktipramoda Purī Mahārāja
performed the installation of the Deities, the vaiṣṇava
homa-yajña and other tasks.

Every evening for three days, there were religious
assemblies with learned audiences. Paramārādhya Śrīla
Gurudeva gave three lectures filled with tattva-
siddhānta on ‘The necessity of maṭha and mandira’, ‘The
teaching of the Gītā’, and ‘Yuga-dharma’. During these
three days the post of chairman was accepted by
honourable Śrīyut Dīpanārāyaṇa Simha (Calcutta High
Court’s main judge), Śrī Śambhunātha Banarjī (Calcutta
University’s former vice-chancellor) and judge Śrīyuta
Pareśanātha Mukharjī respectively.

Śrīla Ācāryadeva said in his lecture, “The leading judge
of the High Court of Bengal is present here at this
religious conference. The fact that he is present in the
maṭha and mandira is a proof of the necessity for the
maṭha and mandira. The authors of our smṛti-śāstras say
that it is not proper to reside where there are no
maṭha-mandiras.

“Nowadays many people question whether one will get food
just by calling out to Kṛṣṇa. This country can never be
prosperous as long as this materialistic point of view
persists. Modern politics are devoid of siddhānta and
are irreligious. In ancient times, the country was ruled
according to the codes and rules which the ṛṣis
presented. Today our country disregards these rules and
is imitating western countries. It is very sad that
permission is given today to slaughter cows and other
animals and to drink alcohol, and that dharma has no
place in the constitution of the nation. It is also
unfortunate that this constitution makes no provision
for religious people. On the contrary, anxiety and
inconvenience are being created for religious people
without any reason.

“It is easy for anyone to understand that the
renunciation of the sādhus is a great help for the

                          183
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

country. The government has not yet been able to solve
the problem of unemployment. No one can tell how many
more lakhs of unemployed people there would be if all
the highly educated persons who are presently residing
in maṭhas were to be employed in service, business or
agriculture. There would also be a lack of agricultural
land for their farming. It is difficult to estimate how
many more people would be unemployed if the sādhus were
to stop living in maṭhas and live in society.

“These days the suicidal and self-destructive teaching,
‘aham brahmāsmi’ is being given in many maṭhas,
mandiras, missions and sevāśramas. This is turning the
public into atheists who are opposed to dharma.”

This fearless speaker of impartial truth expressed his
revolutionary views at this conference and the audience
listened very eagerly. His brilliant lecture went on for
almost one hour, after which other speakers also
revealed their views. When the assembly ended all the
sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs of Śrī Caitanya Gauḍīya Maṭha
came to Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s lotus feetÇ praising his
views and asking questions concerning the siddhānta of
bhakti.



Inauguration of Śrī Vāsudeva Gauḍīya Maṭha in Vāsugrāma,
Assam

May 21st, 1967: Śrī Pārvatīcaraṇa Rāya, a prominent
gentleman from Vāsugrāma in the Gvālapāḍā district,
Assam, repeatedly requested Śrī Gurupādapadma to
establish a preaching centre of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti in Vāsugrāma. He also donated some land for this
purpose near his residence, in the centre of the bāzār.
Śrīla Ācāryadeva went there with Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Vāmana Mahārāja, Śrī Mukunda Gopāla Brahmacārī and six
other sevakas. A large assembly was organized on the
second day, which was Śrī Nimānanda Sevātīrtha Prabhu’s
appearance day. Śrīla Ācāryadeva was the chairman, and
at his request Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja,
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Urddhavanthī Mahārāja, Śrī Gajendra
Mokṣaṇa Brahmacārī and other speakers gave very
heartfelt lectures on this mahā-puruṣa’s great
contribution to Śrī Gaura-Vinoda-Sārasvata preaching.
Afterwards Śrīla Guru Mahārāja gave an attractive
lecture full of siddhānta about Sevātīrtha Prabhu.

After preaching śuddha-bhakti for some days in
Golokagaṅja, Śrīla Ācāryadeva came to Vāsugrāma with his
followers. There Śrī Vāsudeva Gauḍīya Maṭha was
established on the land given by Śrī Pārvatī Bābū by the
extraordinary endeavour of Śrī Viśvarūpa Brahmacārī
(B.A.), the headmaster of the local high school. After
seeing Śrī Viśvarūpa Prabhu’s unwearying service
endeavours during the establishment of the maṭha, Śrīla
Ācāryadeva appointed him as the maṭha president. Śrīmad
Urddhvamanthī Mahārāja and Śrī Sārathī Kṛṣṇa Brahmacārī
stayed in this new maṭha and were engaged in preaching
work. Three religious assemblies were organised at this
place in three days. Śrīla Ācāryadeva gave lectures, and
so did Śrīmad Vāmana Mahārāja, Śrīmad Urddhavamanthī
Mahārāja and others. After some time, Śrī Śrī Gaura-

                          184
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Rādhā-Vinodabihārījī were installed here, with Parama
Pūjyapāda Śrīla Śrautī Mahārāja as the presiding priest.



Lecture in the law court library and district library of
Siūḍī

June 21st, 1967: Śrīla Gurudeva auspiciously arrived in
Siūḍī with his associates and stayed for some days at
Śrīyut Umāpada Sādhu’s (Śrī Urukrama Dāsādhikārī)
residence, where Śrīla Gurudeva preached śuddha-bhakti.
One day he lectured at the library of the law court and
the next day at the local district library on “The
modern situation and sanātana-dharma.” On the other days
Śrī Urukrama Dāsādhikārī gave brilliant lectures on
‘Vaiṣṇava literature and culture’ in śrī mandira.

February 17th, 1968: A huge Vyāsa-pūjā festival took
place in Rāmanagar Ābādagrāma. On the special request of
Śrīmatī Nārāyaṇī Devī, Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja came there with several
sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs and observed a great
celebration of Vyāsa-pūjā. There were extensive
religious assemblies for three days. Pūjyapāda Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja, the chairman of these
assemblies, gave scholarly lectures on Vyāsa-pūjā and
sanātana-dharma.

Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā was observed with particularly great
celebrations in Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha, in Śrīdhāma
Navadvīpa, because Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva was
personally present there.



Entering aprakaṭa-līlā

After vyāsa-pūjā, Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa parikramā took
place with great celebrations. At that time
Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva began his līlā of being
somewhat unhealthy. He stayed for some days at the home
of Śrīyuta Rādheśyāma Sāhā and for a few more days with
Śrī Kṛṣṇagopāla Vasu Mahodaya in Calcutta to get medical
treatment. The service of these two gentlemen during
that time was extremely commendable.

On October 3rd, 1968, Śrīla Ācāryadeva was brought back
from Calcutta to his bhajana-kuṭīra at Śrī Devānanda
Gauḍīya Maṭha. Finally, on Sunday October 6th, 1968 (19
Āśvina 1375 baṅgābda), the śāradīya rāsa-pūrṇima, at
sandhyā-ārati (6.15 p.m.) Paramārādhyatama Śrīla
Gurupādapadma Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja left us all
drowning in an ocean of separation and entered Śrī
Yugala-Kiśora’s sāyana nityā-līlā.

The following passage is from a description which was
written by someone suffering pangs of separation from
his master. It was published in Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā’s
5th issue of the 20th year.

“Ācārya Kesarī Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Paramahaṁsa Aṣṭottaraśata
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja is

                          185
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

the founder of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. He is also
the dear and intimate associate of Śrī Brahma-Mādhva
Gauḍīya sampradāya’s guardian Ācāryabhāskara Paramahaṁsa
Mukuṭmaṇi Nityalīlā-praviṣṭa Jagadguru Oṁ Viṣṇupāda
Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. Sunday, October 6th, 1968, was the
auspicious day of Śāradīya Pūrṇimā, and the first day of
śrī-dāmodara-vrata. On the evening of that day, at the
time of candra-grahaṇa (eclipse of the moon) at Śrī
Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa, Ācārya
Kesarī Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja was surrounded by his servants who had taken
shelter of his lotus feet, his sannyāsi and ācārya
Godbrothers, renunciate and householder bhaktas, and
gentlemen who had become charmed by his qualities.
Leaving them all drowning in an ocean of separation, of
his own free will he entered nitya dhāma Śrī Goloka
Vṛndāvana and the sāyana-līlā of his abhīṣṭadeva Śrī
Rādhā-Vinodabihārī.

“Renunciate and householder bhaktas had assembled from
various places of India at Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha
on that day. From early morning, eminent sannyāsīs and
sevakas had been tenderly singing kīrtanas like ‘jaya
rādhe, jaya kṛṣṇa’ ‘je ānila premadhana’ ‘śrī rūpa
mañjarī pada’ and ‘rādhe jaya jaya mādhava dayite’ by
Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and other
mahājanas. Sandhyā-ārati was going on in the temple, and
here Gurudeva, together with the devotees, was
thoroughly absorbed in performing kīrtana with a faint
voice. Then he entered nitya-līlā, uttering Hare Kṛṣṇa
Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma
Rāma Rāma Hare Hare, and holding the picture of his most
worshipful Gurudeva to his breast.

“Just as this happened, an astonishing event occurred.
The head pujārī of śrī mandira came there with Śrīmatī
Rādhikājī’s garland in his hands and tearfully said,
“Right at the end of sandhyā-ārati Śrīmatī Rādhika’s
garland broke by itself and fell from Her neck. I have
never experienced this before.” Everyone present
understood this to mean that Śrīmatī Rādhikājī, out of
mercy, had called Her beloved sahacarī (companion and
attendant) to sāyana-līlā-vilāsa.

“In a moment the news that Śrīla Gurudeva had entered
aprakaṭa-līlā spread to all the Gauḍīya maṭhas situated
on both banks of Bhagavatī Bhāgīrathī. Thousands of
faithful people assembled to offer puṣpāñjali to
Paramārādhyatama Śrī Gurudeva’s lotus feet, and the
final rites were performed under the guidance of
Prapūjyacaraṇa Śrīmad Bhaktiśrīrūpa Siddhāntī Mahārāja,
according to the method of Samskāra-dīpikā. As the
assembled multitude performed hari-kīrtana, Śrīla
Ācāryadeva was given samādhi in front of the sky-kissing
śrī mandira of Śrī Śrī Guru-Gauraṅga Rādhā-
Vinodabihārījī.”

Thus ends the Third Part of The Life and Teachings of
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī by Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.




                          186
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017



Fourth Part




a) A hint of his internal identity (siddha-svarūpa)

Fresh construction work was in progress on a new and
unusually grand steeple above the Śrī Mandira at Śrī
Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa. In the
Śrī Garbha Mandira an altar was being prepared for the
Deities. Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva came into the Śrī
Garbha Mandira to decide on the shape of the altar and
the number and the colour of its steps. Śrīpāda
Bhaktivedānta Muni Mahārāja and I were with him. Śrīla
Gurudeva surveyed the area, decided on the length, width
and height of the altar, and then became immersed in
thought. After a while he turned to us and said, “There
will be three steps below the altar. The highest step
will be blue, the second step yellow and the bottom step
will be aruna-varṇa, a dawn-like reddish colour.”

Śrīpāda Muni Mahārāja asked, “Why should it be so?”

Śrīla Gurudeva replied, “The highest step will symbolise
the lustre of Vrajendranandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa which is like
that of an indranīla jewel. The second step will
symbolise the golden radiance of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the
crest-jewel of Kṛṣṇa’s sweet-hearts.” Then he remained
silent for a few moments. Assuming an extremely grave
countenance, he continued, “The third step will
symbolise the colour of a sakhi (mañjari) who creates
varieties of delightful fun (vinoda) for Yugala-Kiśora,
the divine Youthful Couple. She will be symbolized by
aruna-varṇa.” As he was speaking, his voice faltered and
his throat became choked. Then he became completely
stunned. Seeing his extraordinary bhāva we were both
struck with wonder. At that time we could not understand
anything, nor could we muster up the courage to ask him.
But after his entering the aprakaṭa-līlā, unmanifest
pastimes, we realized the meaning of that hint. The
lowest step symbolises Śrī Vinoda Mañjari, the eternally
playful dāsī of Śrī Yugala-Kiśora. Śrīla Gurudeva had
given a hint of his own siddha-deha in a very hidden
way.

In those days Śrīla Gurudeva’s dear sevaka, Śrīpāda
Nārāyāṇa Dāsādhikārī inquired from him privately, “Did
your Gurudeva reveal the identity of the siddha-deha of
any of his own disciples or not?”

Solemnly, he replied, “He has certainly done so. Śrīla
Prabhupāda has given the identity of the siddha-deha and
śikṣā in bhajana-praṇālī to some of his qualified
disciples; otherwise the Śrī Rūpānuga line would come to
an end. He also mercifully gave this praṇāli to me.”

Śrī Nārāyāṇa Prabhu again asked, “Will you bestow your
mercy and reveal the name of your siddha-deha?”

Śrīla Gurudeva replied, “Not just now; it will be
disclosed at the appropriate time.”

                          187
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017




b) The inferiority of direct perception

Once my most worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva was returning to
Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa from Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha by
train. Four or five brahmacārīs, including myself, were
all sitting with him in a reserved compartment. When the
train pulled out of Mathurā Junction a railway
magistrate accompanied by a few soldiers came to check
our compart-ment. Having done so, he sat down in a
vacant seat right next to Śrīla Gurudeva, and
immediately said to Śrīla Gurudeva, “Mahātmājī! Where
are you coming from?”

Gurujī: “We have just come from Mathurā. We have an
aśrama called Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha opposite the
district hospital.”

Magistrate: “And where are you going?”

Gurujī: “We’re going to our headquarters in Śrīdhāma
Navadvīpa.”

Magistrate: “What is the aim of your organisation?”

Gurujī: “We preach pure sanātana-dharma throughout the
world. Specifically, following in the footsteps of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we preach and practise saṅkīrtana
and śuddha-bhakti as described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
other scriptures. The only aim of our organisation is to
attract the living entities to this auspicious path.”

Magistrate: “What do you mean by ‘bhakti?’”

Gurujī: “The creator and conductor of the universe is
the one supremely merciful, all-powerful Truth. This
ultimate Truth is known as Īśvara, Paramātmā or
Bhagavān. Although we are all His parts and servants, we
have forgotten this, and we have been subjected to the
threefold miseries in various species of life in this
material world since time immemorial. Without the mercy
of Bhagavān we cannot be released from the bondage of
material existence. Bhakti means to observe the
injunctions described in the scriptures for the sake of
pleasing Bhagavān.”

Magistrate: “You people believe in God, but I don’t
believe in the existence of any God. I don’t put any
faith in anything which does not appear before these
eyes. Is Bhagavān visible to the eyes?”

Gurujī: “Although you speak like this, you are obliged
to accept the existence of many things which you cannot
see.”

Magistrate: “You may say that. Nevertheless, the fact is
that I have no faith in anything other than what I can
see directly with my eyes.”

Gurujī: “That is not true. Are your mother and father
still alive?”


                          188
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

Magistrate: “Yes! They are still living.”

Gurujī: “Can you say for certain that the person you
call ‘Father’ is actually your genuine father? If so,
then what evidence is there? Is it visible to your own
eyes that he is the man who impregnated your mother when
she conceived you?”

When the honourable magistrate heard this question, he
became embarrassed and could not answer.

Gurujī: “No! You have not seen this incident which
occurred prior to your birth. So you do have faith in
the unseen. You accept with confidence that he is your
father just on the word of your mother and family
members.”

Magistrate: “What you have said is absolutely correct. I
have come to know the identity of my father by putting
faith in the words of my mother and family members.”

Gurujī: “In the same way all the scriptures are like a
mother in the sense that they are authoritative
evidence. They include the Vedas, which are not of human
origin, and literatures such as the Gītā, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and Rāmāyaṇa, which support the Vedic
version. They say repeatedly that the creator and
director of the Universe is God, or Īśvara. He is
referred to by terms such as Brahman, Paramātmā and
Bhagavān.

“If you can put your faith in so many different fault-
ridden text-books or in your own defective and limited
sense-perception, then why not put faith in the Vedas
and other authoritative scriptures which are beyond
human origin, which are devoid of all kinds of defects,
and which are not subject to faults such as illusion and
negligence. The Vedic scriptures are even more reliable
and trustworthy than your mother.

“In the Veda it is stated:

yato vā imānī bhūtāni jāyante yena jātāni jīvanti

yat prayantyabhisaṁviśanti tadvijijñāsasva tad brahma

(Taittirīya Upaniṣad, Bhṛgu 1. Anu 3.1.1.)

“ ‘One should inquire about that Brahman from whom all
living entities are born, by whom their existence is
maintained and into whom they all ultimately enter.’

“Furthermore in Brahma-sūtra it is said, janmādyasya
yataḥ: ‘Brahman is He from whom the creation,
maintenance and destruction of the universe arises.’ In
the Gītā, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has also said:

ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo, mattaḥ sarvam pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ, budhāḥ bhāvasamanvitāḥ

(Bhagavad-gītā 10.8)

“ ‘I am the origin of everything. All are engaged in

                             189
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

activities by Me alone. Understanding this, the wise
serve Me with spiritual emotion.’

“Veda-śāstra is the unerring illuminator of the Supreme
Truth. These literatures are not created by any human
being of limited intelligence. From beginningless time
Manu and all the greatest ṛṣis headed by Nārada, Vyāsa
and Vālmīki have tested and realised the validity of
this fact. Highly intelligent people and ācāryas such as
Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya, Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya and Śrī Madhva
Ācārya have also acknowledged the evidence of the Vedic
scriptures and accepted the existence of God. Therefore
it is quite appropriate and in your own best interest to
accept this conclusion.”

Magistrate: “You have opened my eyes. I understand that
I have been quite wrong up till now.”

He touched Gurujī’s lotus feet with great faith, and
said, “I have to get off here, but in the future I will
go to see Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha.”

Other passengers had sat down around us, eager to hear
the magistrate’s conversation with Gurujī. They were
influenced by the exchange and went on discussing the
subject of dharma with Gurujī for the rest of the
journey.



c) Discussion with the Communist Samyavādī, Jyoti Bābū.

In 1951 or 1952, Paramārādhya Gurudeva had gone to the
border region of Sundaravana in Bengal before Śrīdhāma
Navadvīpa parikramā to preach śuddha-bhakti, to invite
faithful people to join the parikramā, and to collect
provisions for the parikramā. One day Śrī Gurudeva was
taking us with him to the house of a faithful devotee
when he encountered Jyoti Bābū and a group of his
followers. Jyoti Bābū, at present the chief minister of
Bengal, was at that time the main chairman of the
Communist party of Bengal. As leader of the opposition
party, he had come to investigate the condition of the
flooded land in the border region. When he saw Śrī
Gurudeva dressed in saffron cloth and carrying his
tridaṇḍa, he stopped and asked in a very arrogant way,
“From where are you all coming?”

Śrī Gurudeva replied politely, “We are from Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti in Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma.”

Jyoti Bābū: “Have you come to inspect the state of the
flooded area and show sympathy for the people?”

Gurudeva: “We have come to preach the śuddha vaiṣṇava-
dharma for the eternal welfare of the jīvas, and to
collect some provisions for Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma
parikramā.”

Jyoti Bābū: “Can’t you see that the lives of these
people have been thrown into turmoil by the terrible
flood? Their crops have been ruined, and village after
village has been submerged. They are expecting help from
others for food and clothing, yet you have come to beg

                          190
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

alms from these very same people?”

Gurudeva: “The flood has come! Where has the flood come?
So far the cigarette in your hand has not been
extinguished, so where is the flood? Dear sir, this
flood is not the real flood. We have come here to
extinguish the fire of devastation which is afflicting
the jīvas birth after birth, and to protect the living
beings from the real flood-water which comes at the time
of the universal inundation.

“We have come here so that those jīvas who are averse to
Kṛṣṇa may attain their natural condition of everlasting
happiness. A jīva can never be happy as long as he does
not adopt the principles of dharma in his life, and as
long as he does not worship Bhagavān. Atheistic life is
animal life. You are going to ruin Bengal and India
completely by accepting the conception of Western
civilisation.”

Jyoti Bābū: “We don’t believe in Veda-śāstra. We believe
in hard work. Work (karma) is life, work is God. It is
because of people like you that this country has gone to
hell. You people should do some work yourselves and then
give instructions about work (karma). Begging alms is
the occupation of cowards.”

Gurudeva: “It is atheists like you who have caused the
devastation of India. India was happier and more
civilised than the other countries of the world as long
as her politics were governed by dharma and her people
were faithful and religious. In ancient times stalwarts
like Hiraṇyakaśipu, Rāvaṇa, Duryodhana and Kaṁsa were
far greater advocates of karma than you are, but the
scriptures recount how they all came to an abominable,
sticky end. More recently, we have heard of Alexander
the Great and Napoleon and in modern times champions of
karma like Hitler, Mussolini and Lenin. Have you not
observed their contemptible fate? There is no place in
India for atheists like Cārvāka and others. India is the
country of sanātana-dharma. No one can vanquish this
sanātana-dharma, no matter how influential he may be. A
day will come when you will not even have the
opportunity to repent.”

When Jyoti Bābū heard Gurudeva’s answer, he was at a
loss for words. He promptly departed in a tantrum,
accompanied by his followers.

Śrī Gurudeva was a fearless speaker of the impartial
truth. Even the most proficient logicians used to bow
their heads in defeat before his powerful arguments.



d) Śrī Gurudeva and bhikṣā-dravya (donated commodities)

There was a time around 1951 when Śrīla Gurudeva used to
stay at Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha, the headquarters of
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, and preach śuddha-bhakti
everywhere from there. The sevā and pūjā in the Maṭha,
as well as Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā and other
activities, used to run on whatever alms came from doing
madhukarī. Before Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa parikramā, I went

                          191
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

with Parama Pūjyapāda Śrī Śrīmad Narasiṁha Mahārāja to
Śrī Rampura and other towns near Calcutta to preach and
beg alms.

After preaching and performing bhikṣā for fifteen days
we returned to Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha, having
collected a total of 250 rupees, which at that time was
a large sum of money. As soon as I arrived I offered my
praṇāma at Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva’s lotus feet.
After giving his blessings, he asked, “How was the
preaching?”

“The preaching went very well”, I replied. “We collected
about 250 rupees.” Gurujī was pleased.

Some time later Pūjyapāda Narasiṁha Mahārāja came before
Gurujī, offered his praṇāma and put the donated rupees
in Gurujī’s hand. Śrī Gurudeva asked, “How much is it?”

“225 rupees,” replied Pūjyapāda Narasiṁha Mahārāja.

“Where are the remaining 25 rupees?” asked Śrīla
Gurudeva.

“I have kept some rupees for my personal expenses,”
replied Mahārāja.

“Bring those donated rupees right now and give them to
me,” said Śrī Gurudeva.

Śrīpāda Narasiṁha Mahārāja was somewhat angry and said,
“Can’t we keep even a few rupees for our immediate
expenses?”

“Of course,” replied Śrīla Gurudeva, “but first please
kindly give them to me.”

Pūjyapāda Mahārāja resentfully went to his bhajana-
kuṭīra, brought back the remaining 25 rupees, and threw
them down in front of Śrīla Gurudeva. Gurujī picked up
the rupees, counted them and then began to return those
very same rupees.

“If you are just going to return them, then what was the
point in taking them in the first place?” demanded
Śrīpāda Narasiṁha Mahārāja.

Śrī Gurudeva became quite grave and said, “The food and
wealth of sensuous people contains poison which ordinary
people cannot digest. It has been written in the śāstra
that when a sādhaka eats food from a viṣayī, his heart
becomes wicked and it is not possible to remember
Bhagavān with such a disturbed mind. Therefore sādhakas
should always be careful. Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī is
direct proof of this. He did not accept the money sent
by his own father, because although his father appeared
to be a Vaiṣṇava, he was actually a materialist
(vaiṣṇava prāya). Even excellent sādhakas have been
deviated and have fallen from the realm of bhajana
through eating the food of sensuous people. That is why
I have taken this money from you. It was acquired from
sense enjoyers, and therefore it was mixed with poison.
Now I have purified it and I am giving it back to you.
There is no harm in it any more.

                          192
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017


“Disaster is guaranteed if even one paisa which has been
collected in the name of Śrī Hari, guru and Vaiṣṇavas is
used in one’s own service. I do not use even a single
paisa from donations for my own purposes. Who can engage
donated wealth in the service of Hari, guru and
Vaiṣṇavas? Only a highly qualified Vaiṣṇava who has
offered his body, mind, words and everything at the feet
of Śrīla Gurudeva and Bhagavān, who is unconditionally
surrendered at the lotus feet of Bhagavān, and who is
empowered in bhajana. Ordinary maṭha-vāsīs (temple
devotees) cannot.”

When Pūjyapāda Narasiṁha Mahārāja heard this, he became
thoroughly ashamed and all misgivings were dispelled
from his heart. Bowing his head, he said with complete
humility, “Please forgive me! I never took this matter
so seriously. Whatever you are saying is completely
correct. I will follow this instruction for the rest of
my life.”

The lesson to be learnt from this is that one should
never at any time utilise for one’s own enjoyment money
or commodities received from worldly people. One should
offer them at the divine feet of Gurudeva or of equally
elevated Vaiṣṇavas, because such Vaiṣṇavas can engage
these commodities in the service of Bhagavān. Otherwise
their poison is deadly for the sādhaka. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu has said,

viṣayīra anna khāile malina haya mana

malina mana haile, nahe kṛṣṇera smaraṇa

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya 6.278)

“When one eats food offered by sensuous or worldly
people, the mind becomes contaminated, and in that state
one cannot remember Kṛṣṇa.”

pratigraha kabhu nā karibe rājadhana

viṣayīra anna khāile duṣṭa haya mana

mana duṣṭa haile nahe kṛṣṇera smaraṇa

kṛṣṇa-smrti binā haya niṣphala jīvana

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi. 12. 50-51)

“One should never accept alms from royalty or wealthy
people because when one eats such food the mind becomes
polluted. A polluted mind cannot remember Kṛṣṇa and
without remembrance of Kṛṣṇa one’s whole life is a
failure.”



e) Śrīla Gurudeva and the svarūpa of the jīva

In 1955, Kartika vrata-niyama-sevā and the 84-kosa Vraja
Maṇdala parikramā were brought to a successful
conclusion under the guidance of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti. Many highly proficient sannyāsī disciples of

                          193
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Śrīla Prabhupāda came from other Gauḍīya Maṭhas after
the parikramā and assembled at Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya
Maṭha in Mathurā to meet with Śrī Gurudeva. In addition,
some of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s finest sannyāsīs and
brahmacārīs had already been together with Śrī Gurudeva
during the parikramā. Consequently, since so many
Godbrothers had come together in one place, a special
iṣṭa-goṣṭhi took place, in which many prominent
sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs were present, besides Śrī
Gurudeva. They included Prapūjyacaraṇa Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Bhūdeva
Srauti Mahārāja, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Vicāra Yāyāvara
Mahārāja, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Dayita Mādhava Mahārāja, Śrī
Narottamānanda Brahmacārī (Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Kamala
Madhusūdana Mahārāja), Śrī Mahānanda Brahmacārī, (Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Āloka Paramahaṁsa Mahārāja), Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Viveka Hṛṣikeśa Mahārāja, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Vijñāna Āśram Mahārāja, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prāpaṇa
Dāmodara Mahārāja and Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Jīvana Janārdana
Mahārāja.

The youngest in that assembly, Śrīpāda Bhakti Vikaśa
Hṛṣikeśa Mahārāja, was very inquisitive about tattva.
Full of humility, he did namaskara and politely said,
“For a long time I have had a doubt about the svarūpa of
the jīva. I have scrutinised many Gosvāmī granthas, and
I have also asked my senior Godbrothers, but so far my
doubt has not been dispelled.

“In Sanātana śikṣā in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is
stated that the jīva is Kṛṣṇa nitya-dāsa, manifested
from Kṛṣṇa’s taṭasthā-śakti.

jīvera svarūpa haya kṛṣṇera nitya-dāsa

kṛṣṇera taṭasthā-śakti bhedābheda prakaśa

From this verse it seems that the quality of being the
servant of Kṛṣṇa is eternally latent in the very
constitution of the jīva. Consequently his service, his
name, his form and so on must be present in some form or
other in his constitutional nature, which is now covered
by māyā.

“However, it can also be said that, since the jīva is a
transformation of taṭasthā-śakti, his svarūpa should
also be taṭasthā —guru-kṛṣṇa prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-
bīja (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 19.151). From this
point of view it seems that the jīva is constitutionally
an infinitesimal particle of consciousness who obtains
the bhakti-latā bīja by the mercy of guru and Kṛṣṇa. In
that case, the nature of his perfected condition will be
in accordance with the nature of the bīja he has
received. Śrīla Narottama Ṭhakura supports this idea in
Śrī Prema-bhakti-candrikā.

sādhane bhāvibe jāhā siddha-dehe pāibe tāhā

rāga pathera ei se upāya

"This verse informs us that perfection will be in
accordance with whichever type of sādhana is practiced.

“Superficially, it seems that there are two

                           194
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

contradictory points of view. Is it that some specific
service tendency is eternally present in the nitya-
svarūpa of the jīva, and that perfection is attained
accordingly? Or is it that one’s method of devotional
practice determines the perfected condition that one
finally attains? Please, kindly clear up my confusion
about this matter.”

When Prapūjya Caraṇa Yāyāvara Mahārājajī heard this
question, he became overjoyed and humbly requested
Pūjyapāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja to
give an answer to this question. Prapūjya Caraṇa
Śrīdhara Mahārājī was highly knowledgeable in the
vaiṣṇava-śāstras and was also a scholar of philosophy.
He began to give the answer to this profound question.

“The nature of the jīva is compared to an atomic
conscious particle of the spiritual sun, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The
jīva has been described in the Gosvāmī granthas as the
vibhinnāṁśa-tattva of brahma. The meaning of
vibhinnāṁśa-tattva is that Bhagavān possesses aghaṭana-
ghaṭana-paṭīyasī śakti, the potency to make the
impossible possible. When Bhagavān is equipped only with
His atomic conscious jīva-śakti, then His expansion
(aṁśa) is called a vibhinnāṁśa jīva. However, when that
same Bhagavān is replete with all of His potencies, then
His expansion is called svāṁśa. Thus the vibhinnāṁśa
jīvas are eternal. It is certain that their methods of
bhagavat-sevā, their names, forms and so on are
inherent. Yet the jīva’s transcendental form and charac-
teristics remain concealed because he is covered by
māyā. By the grace of Bhagavān, one’s inherent svarūpa
becomes manifest as one performs bhajana in the company
of sādhus and becomes freed from māyā. It is also
certain that, unless one has sādhu-saṅga, release from
māyā and the manifestation of the svarūpa are both quite
impossible. For this reason, sādhu-saṅga is obligatory
and unavoidable.

“It is inconsistent to suppose that the svarūpa of the
jīva manifests according to the type of sādhu-saṅga one
has. For example, not even the association of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His associates could change the
hearts of Anupama Gosvāmī and Murāri Gupta. Murāri Gupta
is considered to be Hanumān, the parikāra of Śrī
Rāmacandrajī. Śrīman Mahāprabhu pointed out to him that
Kṛṣṇa is adorned with more sweetness than Śrī
Rāmacandra, and furthermore that Kṛṣṇa is also avatārī,
the origin of all avatāras. After hearing from
Mahāprabhu, Murāri Gupta vowed to leave Śrī Rāmacandrajī
aside and to perform Kṛṣṇa bhajana.

“But when he came before Śrī Mahāprabhu the next day he
began to cry, saying, ‘I took a vow before You to
perform Śrī Kṛṣṇa bhajana, and I could not sleep the
whole night. On the one hand, I have offered my head at
the feet of Śrī Rāmacandrajī and I cannot give Him up.
On the other hand I cannot transgress Your order.
Whatever happens, my life will leave me.’ As he spoke he
fell down at Śrī Mahāprabhu’s feet. Śrīman Mahāprabhu
lifted him up and embraced him, saying, ‘Your life is so
fortunate. You are an eternal associate of Śrī
Rāmacandra. The way in which you are serving Him is
auspicious for you. I have become filled with joy to see

                          195
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

your ecstatic sentiments.’

“Later on, when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was in Śrī
Raṅgam during His tour of South India, He met with Śrī
Vyeṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa, Śrī Trimalla Bhaṭṭa, Śrī Prabodhānanda
Sarasvatī and Vyeṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa’s son Gopāla Bhaṭṭa.
Ultimately Śrīman Mahāprabhu convinced them from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and other scriptures of the supremacy of the
sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form and so on. He proved the
pre-eminence of Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
loveliness, and consequently all their hearts were
changed. They accepted dīkṣa in the Kṛṣṇa mantra and
they all became engaged in Kṛṣṇa sevā, following the
sentiments of the vraja-vasīs.

“One noteworthy point here is that, according to our
Gosvāmīs, Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī is Tungavidyā
Sakhī in Vraja līlā and Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is Śrī
Guṇa Mañjari. For pastime purposes, they both appeared
in South India and were performing their sādhana-bhajana
after accepting dīkṣa in the Śrī Samprādaya, but
constitutionally, they were gopīs of Vraja. Although
they had been initiated in the Śrī Sampradāya earlier in
their lives, they were attracted to the sevā of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa by the influence of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
association.

“Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana similarly told their younger
brother Śrī Ballabha (also known as Anupama) about the
beauty and sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa and the
ultimate superiority of His loving dalliance (prema-
vilāsa). They also advised him to perform Kṛṣṇa bhajana.
Anupama was very much influenced by his brothers’ words
and took dīkṣa in the Kṛṣṇa mantra, expressing the
desire to do Kṛṣṇa bhajana.

"However, early the next morning he fell crying at their
feet and said,

raghunāthera pādapadma chāḍāna na jāya

chāḍivār mana haile prāna phāti jāya

(Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi līlā 4.42)

“ ‘I have sold my head at the feet of Śrī Raghunāthajī.
Please be merciful to me so that I may serve His lotus
feet birth after birth. My heart breaks simply at the
thought of giving up His lotus feet.’

“Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana were very happy to hear the words
of their younger brother. Praising and congratulating
him, they took him in their arms and embraced him. From
this it is evident that sādhu-saṅga assists in
manifesting the svarūpa of the jīva, but sādhu-saṅga
cannot change his svarūpa.”

Having said this, Prapūjyacaraṇa Śrīdhara Mahārājajī
requested our Gurupādapadma Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja to say something on this
subject. Śrīla Gurudeva said, “Whatever we have
reflected and deliberated upon, and whatever we have
seen in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava literature definitely supports
your conclusion. The jīva has his own siddha-svarūpa;

                             196
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

his inherent name, form and so on are all eternal. Each
of the innumerable individual jīvas has his own separate
svarūpa, but the jīva has forgotten this because of
being covered by māyā.

“When by good fortune the jīva attains sādhu-saṅga and
the mercy of Guru, gradually māyā begins to go away and
his svarūpa begins to be manifest. We can give a
material example to illustrate this. If different types
of seeds such as a mango seed, jackfruit seed and so on
are sown in the same piece of land on the bank of the
river, different types of plants or trees will come from
the different types of seeds, even though the river
gives the same water to each of them, the same wind
blows on them, and the same sunlight shines on them all.
When they mature, different types of fruits will grow on
each of them. This shows that different types of seeds
manifest their inherent natures as different types of
trees with their own particular fruits and flavors, even
when they are all exposed to the same association of the
natural elements. These features are not directly
manifest in the seed, but still the seedling and the
tree with its leaves, branches, fruits, flowers, flavour
and all characteristics are present in the seed in an
unmanifested or latent form. This is invariably the
case. We never see a deviation from this.

“In the very same way, the constitutional name, form,
bodily limbs, nature and everything are present in a
latent and unmanifest form in the constitution of the
jīva. When the essence of hlādinī and saṁvit arises in
the heart of the jīva by the association of sad-guru and
Vaiṣṇavas, then whatever constitutional form the jīva
has gradually begins to manifest itself.

“We can give another material example. At the time of
the stellar constellation known as Svāti nakṣatra,
raindrops falling on an oyster produce a pearl; on a
banana tree, camphor; on a snake, a precious jewel; on
an elephant, the gaja-mukta (elephant pearl); and when
they fall on the hoof of a cow, gorocanā is produced.
One type of water causes different substances to
manifest because of the different receptacles;
similarly, when different disciples are influenced by
the association of one guru or Vaiṣṇava, they manifest
service moods in different rasas and varieties of
spiritual perfection.

“In Jaiva-dharma, Śrī Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumār heard
everything from the same guru, Śrīla Ragunātha Dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja. Still their respective tastes
manifested differently. They both attained perfection,
but for Vrajanātha it was in sakhya-rasa and for Vijaya
Kumār it was in madhura-rasa.

“According to Śrī Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam, when Śrī Nārada
Gosvāmī and Śrī Uddhava saw Gopa Kumāra, they
ascertained that he was constitutionally a parikāra in
sakhya-rasa. He had the association of Śrī Nārada
Gosvāmī, Uddhavajī, Hanumanjī and others, but no-one’s
influence changed his natural sakhya-bhāva.

“If association could change one’s inherent service,
then why didn’t the gopīs’ association change Uddhava’s

                          197
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

svarūpa? Śrīmatī Yaśoda also associated with the gopīs,
but her svarūpa did not change. The confidential purport
is that in the stage of practice the sādhaka performs
sādhana-bhajana according to his association, as long as
he does not realize his svarūpa. However, when his
anarthas have gone away, his inherent mood appears in
the form of some particular taste (ruci) and begins to
reveal his identity. Śrī Gurudeva notices his natural
taste and so on, and merely indicates his relationship
and eleven types of bhāva and thereby enables him to
make progress in bhajana.

“Sometimes a sādhaka who is by nature of a higher rasa
can engage in service in a lower rasa by the association
of devotees in dāsya and sakhya-rasa. However, when he
is not satisfied and later comes into higher
association, he will give up the previous moods and
attain his inherent bhāvas.

“The opinion of Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhakura, the Seventh
Gosvāmī, is quite clear on this subject. In his
explanation of the verse ‘ceto darpana mārjanam’ (Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭakam 1) he has written,

ceto darpana mārjanam ityādinā jīvasya svarūpa tatvaṁ
vivṛtam. tathā śrīmajjīvavacaraṇāḥ jīvākhya-samasṭaśakti
viśiṣṭasya paramatattvasya khalvaṁśa ekojīvaḥ. tathā
śrīmad vedānta bhāṣyakāro’pi. —
vibhucaitanyamīśvaro’nucaitanyaṁ jīvaḥ, nityaṁ
jñānādiguṇakatvam asmad arthatvaṁ cobhayatra jñānasyāpi
jñātṛtvaṁ prakāśasya raveḥ prakāśakatvavadaviruddham.
etena jīvasyā ṇutvaṁ cit-svarūpatvaṁ śuddhāhaṅkāra
śuddha-citta śuddha-deha-viśiṣṭatvañ ca jñāpitam. pareśa
vaimukhyāt bahirāṅga-bhāvāviṣṭatvācca śuddhāhaṅkāragata
śuddha-cittasyāvidyāmala duṣaṇamapi sūcitam.

"The correct conception of svarūpa-tattva of the jīva
has been given by the verse beginning with ceto darpaṇa
mārjanam. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s siddhānta on this subject
is that when the Supreme Absolute Truth is equipped only
with the sum total of the jīva-śakti, his minute
expansion is known as a jīva. Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa,
who compiled the Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya commentary on
Vedānta-sūtra, also has the same opinion: īśvara is the
supremely conscious Being, whereas the jīva is a
minutely conscious being.

“‘Īśvara is eternally radiant with all auspicious and
unlimited, transcendental qualities. He has a completely
pure ahaṅkāra (ego). He is both the knower and the
embodiment of knowledge. Similarly, the jīva also has
his own pure svarūpa. Most of the qualities of īśvara
are also partially present in the jīva. This conception
is not opposed to reasoning, for the qualities of the
sun are also seen in the atomic particles of sunshine,
and similarly the qualities of para-tattva are also
observed to be partially present in the jīvas. The jīva
also has a pure ahaṅkāra, but when the jīva is averse to
parameśvara, his pure svarūpa is concealed by māyā.
Conversely, when he becomes inclined towards
parameśvara, the curtain of the covering potency māyā is
withdrawn, and thus the jīva’s pure svarūpa and
qualities are uncovered. Immediately thereafter he has
the direct perception of his own svarūpa.

                          198
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


“‘From this siddhānta it is evident that the jīva is an
infinitesimal atomic particle of consciousness. He has
an inherent spiritual identity, cinmaya-svarūpa, in
which his pure ahaṅkāra, pure consciousness, pure form
and method of service and so on are definitely present.

śravaṇa-kīrtanādi-sādhanasamaye yadā śuddhā-bhaktir
udeti tadā svasyā’vidyatvaṁ parihṛtya vidyayā cidetara
vitṛṣṇājananis āpi jīvaśya sthūlilaṁ
gamayasaupādhikadeha-dvayaṁ vidyāśya tasya svarūpa-gata
śuddha-cid-deham adhikāra bhedena madhura-rasāsvādanā
yatanaṁ gopikā deham api prakaṭayati

“‘As the sādhaka jīva goes on hearing and chanting, pure
bhakti appears in his heart, and the function of the
essence of hlādinī and saṁvit known as bhakti-devī
removes all other desires and aspirations except for the
service of Bhagavān. After avidyā (ignorance) is
dispelled, the jīva’s gross and subtle coverings are
both destroyed by the vidyā-vṛtti function of the
knowledge potency. At once the jīva’s pure,
constitutional, transcendental body appears. Those who
are eligible to taste madhura-rasa attain the purely
spiritual body of a gopī..

“Now it is necessary to reconcile two considerations. In
Prema Bhakti-candrikā we read, sādhane bhāvibe jāhā
siddha-dehe pāibe tāhā: “Whatever I contemplate during
the practice of devotional service will certainly be
achieved upon perfection in a spiritual body.” Hari-
bhakti-sudhodaya states, yasya yatsaṅgatiḥ puṁso maṇivat
syāt sa tad gunaḥ. This does not mean that the svarūpa
of the jīva is like spotlessly clear crystal and that
his siddha-svarūpa appears according to association.
Rather, when the conditioned soul performs the
activities of śuddha-bhakti such as hearing and chanting
in the association of a pure sad-guru and Vaiṣṇavas, at
that time the impurity of avidyā, anarthas and so on is
cleared by the influence of that svarūpa-siddha-bhakti,
and a semblance (ābhāsa) of the natural characteristics
of the soul begins to manifest.

“Only for such a sādhaka has Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī given
the instruction, svajātīyāsaya snigdha: “We should
associate with Vaiṣṇavas who are affectionately disposed
(snigdha) towards us and who are svatiya āsaya,
established in the same mood of loving service for which
we aspire.” At that time the dīkṣā-guru, śravaṇa- guru
or śikṣā-guru sees the internal characteristics of the
sādhaka and gives ekādaśa-bhāva (the eleven features of
the svarūpa) as expounded in śrī rāgānuga-mārga for his
advancement on the path of bhajana. In this way the
sādhaka performs bhāva-bhajana by this internally
conceived siddha-deha to bring about the manifestation
of his siddha-svarūpa. The following śloka has been
given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as an example to illustrate
this very point.

kiṭaḥ peśaskṛtā ruddhaḥ

kuḍyāyaṁ tamanusmaran

saṁrambha bhaya yogena

                          199
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


vindate tat svarūpatām

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.1.27)

“‘A type of wasp forcibly confines a caterpillar in his
hole in a wall. The caterpillar continuously thinks of
the wasp out of fear and anxiety and also becomes a
wasp.’

“The same principle also applies in relation to the
sādhakas of rāgānuga-bhakti. At the time of sādhana,
they go on continuously thinking about serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and His pastime associates with their internally
conceived bodies. Thus they also become totally
absorbed. Finally, giving up their gross and subtle
material bodies, they take a birth in Vraja which
corresponds to their internally conceived siddha-deha,
and they attain that very same service that they
previously contemplated.

“Thus the constitutional appearance, name and mood of
the jīva is present even in the conditioned stage, at
which time it remains latent in an unmanifest form. That
svarūpa is simply illuminated by the mercy of svarūpa-
śakti, and specifically by the action of the essence of
hlādinī and saṁvit. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has written,
nitya siddhasya bhāvasya prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā: 'It is
not that sādhana produces something entirely new.
Rather, sādhana is performed exclusively to bring about
the manifestation of that eternally perfect bhāva which
is in the svarūpa of the jīva’.”

The assembled Vaiṣṇavas were extremely delighted to hear
such an elaborate presentation. Śrīpāda Bhakti Vikaśa
Hṛṣikeśa Mahārāja especially expressed his gratitude and
said, “I am eternally indebted to you because today you
have dispelled a doubt which I have harboured for a long
time.”



f) The charm and superiority of the bhāgavata-paramparā

Nowadays, people are concocting newer and newer doubts
about śrī guru-paramparā in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya. Some people believe that Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa was initiated in the Madhva Sampradāya and
that he was not actually a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava. They assert
that, although he had the association of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas, the influence of the Madhva Sampradāya was so
strong that in his own writings he stubbornly included
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya as part of the Madhva Sampradāya. They claim
that there is no reasonable justification for this, and
that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa can therefore not be
accepted as an ācārya of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya.

Another group of ignorant people say that Jagadguru Śrī
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupādajī created a
completely new concept which he called the bhāgavata-
paramparā. According to them, he has explained in this
supposedly new doctrine of bhāgavata-paramparā that

                             200
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is a disciple of Vaiṣṇava
Sarvabhauma Śrīla Jagannātha dasa Bābājī Mahārāja, and
that Śrī Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja is a disciple
of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. Some sahajiyā Vaiṣṇavas
also present the doubt that Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī’s guru-paramparā cannot be considered bona
fide because he accepted the renounced order (sannyāsa)
from himself. Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva has shattered
all these accusations with powerful logic and solid
scriptural evidence, and this article presents his
analysis of the subject.

The disciples and grand-disciples of Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda are currently preaching Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s suddha-kṛṣṇa-bhakti and śrī
harināma through-out the world. Because they have
preached extensively all over the world, the streets and
avenues in every prominent city—and even in every town
and village—are resounding with the sound of the holy
name, and young men and women are very enthusiastically
applying themselves to the cultivation of śuddha-bhakti.
They are meeting Vaiṣṇavas from India, and performing
harināma-saṅkīrtana and preaching śuddha-bhakti together
with them. A few ignorant, so-called Vaiṣṇavas of the
sahajiyā community are agitated by this, and are trying
to mislead common people by presenting fraudulent
accusations against the Sārasvata Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
lineage. Śrīla Gurudeva has established the rational and
perfect conclusion on this matter in his own essay
entitled ‘Gauḍīya Vedantācārya Śrī Baladeva’. Here we
have presented some extracts from that essay.

i) The guru-paramparā of the commentator Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa

The historical truth regarding the guru-paramparā of the
commentator, Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa is as follows. He
first acquired specific expertise in the bhakti-śāstra
under the guidance of Virakta-Śiromani1 Pitambara Dāsa.
After that, he accepted pañcarātriki-dīkṣā from a
Vaiṣṇava called Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Dāsa, who had
appeared in a dynasty of brāhmaṇas in Kanyakubja. Rādhā-
Dāmodara Dāsa, who was the grand-son of Rasikānanda
Murari, accepted dīkṣā from another Kanya-kubjiya
brāhmaṇa called Śrī Nayanānandadeva Gosvāmī.

Rasikānanda Prabhu, a disciple of Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu,
is the fourth guru before the commentator Baladeva
Vidyā-bhūṣana in the pañcarātrika-guru-paramparā, and
his son was the aforementioned Nayanānandadeva Gosvāmī.
The guru of Śrī Śyāmānanda was Śrī Hṛdaya Caitanya,
whose guru was Gauridāsa Paṇḍita, upon whom Śrīman
Nityānanda Prabhu bestowed His mercy. Even though
Śyāmānanda Prabhu was a disciple of Ācārya Hṛdaya
Caitanya, he afterwards accepted discipleship under Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was a disciple of Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī, who was a disciple of Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī, and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī was a follower and
associate of Śrīman Mahāprabhu.

ii) The śiṣya-paramparā of Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa

We have given an account of the pañcarātrika-paramparā
from Śrīman Mahāprabhu down to Śrī Baladeva

                          201
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Vidyābhūṣaṇa. Now we will give an account of his śiṣya-
paramparā. Śrī Uddhara Dāsa, referred to in some places
as Uddhava Dāsa, was a disciple of the commentator. Some
think that these are two different people, but in any
case Uddhava Dāsa had a disciple named Śrī Madhusūdana
Dāsa. Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī was a disciple of this very
Śrī Madhusūdana Dāsa. Previously, as Vaiṣṇava
Sarvabhauma or the prominent leader of the Vaiṣṇava
community in Mathurā-maṇḍala, Kṣetra-maṇḍala and Gauḍa-
maṇḍala, he became famous by the name of Siddha
Jagannātha Dāsa. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura accepted
this very Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja as his
bhajana-śikṣā-guru by the system of bhāgavata-paramparā.
It was under the direction of Vaiṣṇava Sarvabhauma Śrīla
Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura discovered the birthplace of Śrīman Mahāprabhu
at Śrīdhama Māyāpura. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was the
śikṣā-guru or bhajana-guru of Śrīla Gaurakiśora Dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja. Śrīla Gaurakiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja
accepted my Gurupādapadma Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda as his own
disciple and gave him dīkṣā-mantras and so on. Whoever
is incompetent in accepting this paramparā is to be
counted amongst one of the thirteen types of
apasampradāyas mentioned in writing by Śrī Totarama
Bābājī Mahārāja. Alternatively, he may be regarded as
the creator of a fourteenth apasampradāya.

From the aforementioned guru-paramparā we can easily
understand that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa is a follower
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu within the spiritual family lineage
(parivāra) of Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu. Ācārya Śrī
Śyāmānanda accepted the guidance of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī,
and because Jīva Gosvāmī is exclusively rūpānuga (a
follower of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī), it therefore follows that
Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa is also a rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava.
There are those who acknowledge that Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa is in the line of Śrī Śyāmānanda, and yet
deny that he is a rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava or that he is
qualified for the topmost service mood of unnata-
ujjvala-rasa. Such people are certainly only deluded
offenders. Although Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was
initiated in pañcarātrika-dīkṣā by Śrī Rādhā Dāmodara
Dāsa, he also accepted śikṣā in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
the literatures of the Gosvāmīs.

iii) Pañcarātrika-paramparā is included within the
bhāgavata-paramparā

The system of bhāgavata-paramparā is superior to that of
pañcarātrika-paramparā, and is founded on the degree of
proficiency in bhajana (bhajana-niṣṭha). The charm and
superiority of bhāgavata-paramparā is that pañcarātrika-
paramparā is included within it. In bhāgavata-paramparā
there is no obstruction in regard to time. From the
viewpoint of śuddha-bhakti, the doctrines of
pañcarātrika and of bhāgavata both explain the same
teachings with the same objective. In Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta it is said, pañcarātra bhāgavate ei lakṣana
kaya: “These symptoms are described in Vedic literatures
such as the pañcarātras and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.”
(Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 19.169). The prakrta-
sahajiyā sampradāya, while claiming to be followers of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, accumulate offences to the lotus feet

                          202
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. Similarly, nowadays the jāti-
gosvāmīs and those who accept their remnants—such as
several members of the sahajiyā, kartābhajā,
kiśorībhajā,and bhajanākhājā sampradāyas—proudly
conceive of themselves as followers of Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, but cast calumnies against the commentator Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa. In this way, they are growing
excessively hateful and progressing towards hell.

Here is a diagram of the pañcarātrika-guru-paramparā and
the bhāgavata-paramparā. This will enable readers to
properly appreciate the speciality of śrī bhāgavata-
paramparā, and also understand how pañcarātrika-guru-
paramparā is included within the bhāgavata-paramparā.
With the help of the diagram below and on the next page
we will give an account of the pañcarātrika-guru-
paramparā and bhāgavata-paramparā of Śrī Śyāmānanda
Prabhu, Śrī Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura and
other Vaiṣṇava ācāryas.

Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu: In pañcarātrika-guru-paramparā
Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu’s disciple is Gauridāsa Paṇḍita,
and his disciple Hṛdaya Caitanya is the dīkṣā-guru of
Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu. In bhāgavata-paramparā Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s disciple is Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī,
the disciple of Sanātana is Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, and Rūpa’s
disciple is Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu is
the śikṣā disciple of this same Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. It is
no exaggeration to say that Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was
superior to Śrī Hṛdaya Caitanya in tattva, rasa, bhajana
and indeed in all respects. For this reason, Śrī Hṛdaya
Caitanya personally sent Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu to Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī for advanced instruction in the practice of
bhajana, and Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu accepted the anugatya
(guidance) of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. Thus the serious
question which deserves our consideration here is this:
Which is superior, pañcarātrika-guru-paramparā or
bhāgavata-paramparā?

Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura: According to the pañcarātrika-
guru-paramparā, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura’s guru is Śrī
Lokanātha Dāsa Gosvāmī. However, there is no record
anywhere of Śrī Lokanātha Dāsa Gosvāmī’s pañcarātrika-
dīkṣā-guru. Texts such as Śrī Gauḍīya vaiṣṇava abhidhana
have stated that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Śrī
Lokanātha Dāsa Gosvāmī’s guru, but it is a well-known
fact that Śrīman Mahāprabhu did not accept anyone as His
disciple according to the pañcarātrika-praṇālī (method).
That means that, if Śrīman Mahāprabhu is actually the
guru of Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī, it is only on the basis
of bhāgavata-paramparā. In any case, Śrī Narottama
Ṭhākura, besides being the pañcarātrika disciple of Śrī
Lokanātha Gosvāmī, is also the disciple of Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī in bhāgavata-paramparā. It was in the anugatya
of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī that Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura became
steeped in bhajana-śikṣā.

Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī: In pañcarātrika-paramparā
Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī is a disciple of Śrī
Yadunandana Ācārya, who is situated in the pañcarātrika-
sākhā (branch) of Śrī Advaita Ācārya. However, if we
consider Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī’s life history

                          203
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

deeply from another viewpoint, we find the very clear
and indelible influence of the bhajana-śikṣā of Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara and Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who are his gurus
in bhāgavata-paramparā. Here, too, if we compare
pañcarātrika-paramparā with bhāgavata-paramparā, we find
that the superiority of bhāgavata-paramparā shines as
radiantly as the sun.

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa: According to pañcarātrika-
guru-paramparā, Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa is a
pañcarātrika disciple of Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara in the
paramparā of Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu. At the same time, in
bhāgavata-paramparā he is a disciple of Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura with whom he studied Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and all the various Gosvāmī literatures, and
from whom he received advanced instruction in bhajana.
The guidance of Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in the
life of Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa is widely known. Only
under this guidance did he defeat the Śrī Vaiṣṇavas in
the royal court of Galtā and keep intact the service and
worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govindajī. It was after
attaining the mercy of Śrī Govindadeva, Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s worshipful Deity, that Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa composed Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya. There is no
doubt about Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa being a rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇava, because he is under the guidance of Śrī
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, who is himself most
assuredly a rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava. Furthermore, it is a
well-known fact that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa attained
the mercy of Śrī Govindadeva, the treasured life-breath
of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, and ensured His continuing service.
From this perspective, too, since he attained the mercy
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and his ārādhyadeva Śrī Govindajī,
what doubt could possibly remain about his being a
rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava?

Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: According to the pañcarātrika-
guru-paramparā, the dīkṣā-guru of Śrī Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura is Śrī Vipina Bihārī Gosvāmī, who is situated in
the pañcarātrika-paramparā of Śrī Śrī Jāhnavā Ṭhākuranī.
From our other viewpoint, no one can deny that Śrī
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s life is imprinted with the stamp
of Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja’s anugatya
(guidance). Vaiṣṇava Sarvabhauma Śrīla Jagannātha
Mahārāja is a disciple of the famous Madhu-sūdana Dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja in the paramparā of Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa. It is not necessary to say that Vaiṣṇava
Sarvabhauma Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja is
superior to Śrī Vipina Bihārī Gosvāmī in tattva-jñāna,
bhajana-śikṣā, etc.

Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura: According to
pañcarātrika-guru-paramparā Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s dīkṣā-guru is Śrī Gaura Kiśora Dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja who is a descendant in the pañcarātrika-
guru-paramparā from Śrī Jāhnavā Ṭhākurānī. Śrīla Bābājī
Mahārāja accepted the attire of a renunciate (veśa) from
a disciple of Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja
named Śrī Bhāgavata Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. Thus by
bhāgavata-paramparā, Śrī Gaurakiśora Dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja is in the branch of Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja. According to this analysis, by
pañcarātrika-paramparā Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura is in the
paramparā of Śrī Jāhnavā Ṭhākurānī, and in bhāgavata-

                          204
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

paramparā he has been connected with Śrīla Jagannātha
Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja.

It is clear from Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s life
history that Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s practices,
precepts and bhajana-praṇali were his very life and
soul, and that he made the fulfilment of the Ṭhākura’s
aspirations the sole aim and object of his life. Thus
his guru in bhāgavata-paramparā was Śrī Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, whose guru was Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja. Therefore there is not even the slightest
justification for raising a finger against the guru-
paramparā of Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, the Founder-Acārya
of the Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha.

Several additional facts are worthy of our consideration
on the subject of pañcarātrika-guru-paramparā and
bhāgavata-paramparā—

(1) The guru of lower rasa

If a pañcarātrika-dīkṣā-guru in his siddha-svarūpa
(constitutional spiritual form) is situated in a rasa
which lower than that of his disciple, how can he give
bhajana-śikṣā pertaining to the more elevated rasa? In
this situation, the disciple must go elsewhere and take
shelter of a Vaiṣṇava who is qualified to give the
appropriate superior guidance. For example, Śrī Hṛdaya
Caitanya is an associate in sakhya-rasa in Kṛṣṇa lila,
whereas his disciple Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu (Duḥkhī Kṛṣṇa
Dāsa) is an associate in madhura-rasa. Therefore Śrī
Hṛdaya Caitanya personally sent Duḥkhī Kṛṣṇa Dāsa to
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī to receive higher bhajana-śikṣā
pertaining to madhura-rasa.

(2) The less qualified guru

It may happen that guru and disciple in pañcarātrika-
guru-paramparā are in the same rasa, but that the guru
is not so highly qualified as the disciple. Under such
circumstances, the disciple must go and take shelter of
an uttama Vaiṣṇava for higher bhajana-śikṣāÇ and this
Vaiṣṇava will be called his guru in bhāgavata-paramparā.

We can see from these two considerations that the
pañcarātrika process has some inherent defects, whereas
the bhāgavata-paramparā is completely free from these
defects, and is flawless in all respects.

(3) Śrīman Mahāprabhu is not pañcarātrika-guru of anyone

All members of the Gauḍīya Sampradāya accept Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu as jagad guru, and consider
themselves to be His followers. However, on what basis
do they maintain this conviction? There is no recorded
account anywhere of Śrīman Mahāprabhu giving dīkṣā-
mantra to anyone. This means that Śrīman Mahāprabhu is
not the guru of anyone else in pañcarātrika-paramparā,
although He Himself is a disciple of Śrī Īśvara Purī.
Therefore, if the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community accepts the
anugatya and discipleship of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, it
can only be on one basis, and that basis is bhāgavata-
paramparā.


                             205
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

(4) All Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are rūpānuga on basis of
bhāgavata-paramparā only

Each and every Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava is proud to call himself
‘rūpānuga’. But let us consider this point: How many
disciples did Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī initiate by the
pañcarātrika method? The fact is that Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
is his one and only dīkṣā disciple, and he himself is
not actually a dīkṣā disciple of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. So on what basis do members of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava community accept Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī as their
guru? How is it possible to be a follower of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī and at the same time be a follower of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu? Even Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, who is
the śikṣā-guru of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, has no second
thoughts about calling himself rūpānuga.The basis of all
these examples is one—bhāgavata-paramparā. It is only on
the basis of bhāgavata-paramparā that Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
is the disciple of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and that the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community considers Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī to
be their guru.

Who is the pañcarātrika-dīkṣā-guru of Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kaviraja Gosvāmī? We cannot say, because he has not
mentioned the name of his pañcarātrika-dīkṣā-guru in any
of his literatures, but he has named his śikṣā-gurus in
Śrī Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi 1.37:

ei chaya guru, śikṣā-guru ye āmāra

tāṅ-sabāra pāda-padme koṭi namaskāra

“These six gurus (the Six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana) are my
śikṣā-gurus and I offer countless obeisances at their
lotus feet.”

At the end of each chapter of Śrī Caitanya-caritamrta he
has written:

śrī-rupa-raghunātha-pade yāra āśa

caitanya caritāmṛta kahe kṛṣṇa dāsa

In these statements he has accepted Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and
Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī as his main śikṣā-gurus.
Thus he has also accepted them as gurus on the basis of
bhāgavata-paramparā.

From these facts it becomes thoroughly obvious that
bhāgavata-paramparā, which includes pañcarātrika-
paramparā, always shines forth brilliantly. What can we
say, then, about those who ignore these facts, about
those who cast aspersions on the guru-praṇālī of Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and
Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and about those
who doubt that they are rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas? Such people
are certainly staunch opponents of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and secret agents of Kali.

Thus, whatever opinion my most worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva
has written on the subject of the guru-praṇālī of Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, and also in regard to
pañcarātrika-guru-paramparā and bhāgavata-paramparā, is
both logical and fully in agreement with the established

                          206
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

conclusions of the scriptures (śāstra-siddhānta).



g) The rasika and bhāvuka bhāgavata

Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva was profoundly grave and
sometimes harder than a thunderbolt, but his natural
disposition was actually softer than a flower. He was
exceedingly rasika2 and bhāvuka3. He was harder than a
thunderbolt towards those who were opposed to bhakti,
such as the kevalādvaita-vādīs4 and the followers of
apasampradayās such as smārtas, jāti-gosvāmīs, jāti-
vaiṣṇavas and prākṛta sahajiyās. Yet to sincere
disciples who were steadily engaged in guru-sevā without
duplicity, he was much softer then a flower.

After Śrīla Prabhupāda’s entrance into aprakaṭa-līlā,
Vidyābhuṣaṇa and Vidyāvinoda were influenced by
undesirable bad association and became staunch opponents
of Śrīla Prabhupāda. Śrīla Gurudeva’s brother Śrīmad
Bhaktikevala Auḍulomi Mahārāja also followed in their
footsteps, but Śrīla Gurudeva vehemently opposed their
ideas. Although Śrīmad Auḍulomi Mahārāja was his brother
and Godbrother, Śrīla Gurudeva objected to his ideas
without compromise and said, “I don’t want to see the
face of anyone who is opposed to Śrīla Gurupādapadma.
Auḍulomi Mahārāja is my brother from my previous aśrama
and in paramārthika (spiritual) life he is my
Godbrother. Even so, from now on I have no relationship
or connection with him whatsoever.”

Whenever anyone opposed Jagadguru Śrīla Siddhānta
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s conceptions, Śrīla Gurudeva would
smash their objections to pieces by the strength of
undisputed logic and steadfast scriptural evidence.

Now we will present a few examples of how he was also
bhāvuka and rasika.

a) During his manifest presence, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja
used to go to Śrīdhāma Māyāpura every year at the time
of Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma parikramā. He would begin to
describe the glories of his most worshipful Gurudeva at
his Gurudeva’s Samādhi Pīṭha in the presence of
thousands and thousands of faithful pilgrims. On
recollecting Śrīla Prabhupāda’s glorious and
transcendental qualities, he would become so emotional
that his throat would become choked, he would burst into
tears, and all the aṣṭa-sattvika bhāvas would be clearly
visible on his body. Incapable of speaking any further,
he would somehow indicate that we should say something.

b) Once Śrīla Gurudeva was sitting on the verandah of
his bhajana-kutir at Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha in
Chuṅchuṛā, chanting hari-nāma. A few maṭha-vāsīs were
sitting near him and he was talking to us on the subject
of Vraja madhura-bhakti. He explained that only the
vraja-ramanīs (gopīs) are actually parikāras of madhura-
rasa, and they are all in parakīya-bhāva. Although there
are many varieties of vraja-ramanīs defined according to
their different moods, still they are all parakīyā
nāyikās (paramour heroines) in madhura-rasa. The mahīṣis
(queens) of Dvārakā Purī, Sītājī the wife of Śrī

                          207
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Rāmacandrajī, and Mahālakṣmī of Vaikuṇṭha are not
nāyikās in madhura-rasa. They are all servants in the
mood of dāsya-rasa.

In the course of this explanation I posed a question:
“Rasa-ācarya Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has described three
types of nāyikās in Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, namely
sādhārāṇī, samañjasā and samarthā. Kubjā of Mathurā is
in the category of sādhārānī; the queens of Dvārakā such
as Rukminī and Satyabhāmā are in the category known as
samañjasā; and the Vraja gopīs are in the category
called samarthā. Among these nāyikās, the mahīṣis of
Dvārakā have been called parikāras in the svakīya aspect
of madhura-rasa, and the vraja-ramanīs have been called
parikāras in the parakīya aspect of madhura-rasa. So
what harm is there in accepting Śrīmatī Sitajī and the
mahīṣis of Dvārakā to be associates of svakīya madhura-
rasa?”

Śrīla Gurudeva replied, “You do not have the capacity to
assimilate these profound conceptions at present. This
will not be accessible to you now even if I tell you.
Only dāsya-prema predominates wherever there is
affection imbued with aiśvarya-bhāva5. Pure madhurya-
prema is completely bereft of aiśvarya-bhāva, and
appears to resemble the love between bosom friends in
this world (laukika sambandhuvat). The affection of
Lakṣmī, Sītājī and the mahīṣis of Dvārakā for their
respective iṣṭadevas is imbued with the highest
aiśvarya-bhāva. They have no pure madhurya-prema and are
always in sambhrama-bhāva, a mood of awe and reverence.
Thus, although the prīti of the mahīṣis is somewhat more
elevated than that of dāsya-bhaktas such as Hanumān,
Arjuna and Uddhava, their bhāva cannot be called pure
madhurya-bhāva. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhakura have presented a beautiful assessment
of this subject in their respective commentaries.

“This is why Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta has emphasised the
special importance of gopī-prema. Only when one has
performed bhajana for some time under the guidance of
pure Vaiṣṇavas can one realize these profound subject
matters by their mercy.”

c) Once, during the month of Kartika, Śrīla Gurupāda-
padma had brought his noble presence to Śrī Keśavajī
Gauḍīya Maṭha. One day he was sitting in his bhajana-
kuṭīra and chanting harinām, absorbed in transcendental
emotions. I had sat down close to him and was reading
about Śrī Dāmodara bandhana in Śrī Gopāla Campū. Having
read it, I became so attracted to Jīva Gosvāmī’s ideas
that I could not check myself. Taking the book in my
hand, I came right in front of Śrīla Gurudeva and said,

“In his time Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was a great mahā-puruṣa
with immense knowledge of all philosophical principles.
Yet at the same time he was also an aprākṛta rasika
poet. The combination of vast spiritual erudition with
poetic artistry is extremely rare in this world. But
when we read the episode of Dāmodara bandhana-līlā in
Gopāl Campū, we can see how Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī combined
these two attributes in an astonishing way.”

Having said this I began to read aloud from Gopāl Campū

                          208
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

for Śrīla Gurudeva to hear.

- - - - - - - -

Yaśodā Maiyā ran very quickly after her infant child,
who had fled out onto the main road. She caught Him with
one hand, took a small stick in the other, and began to
scold Him. “I’ll give you such a beating! I know you go
from house to house stealing. You are a thief (caura)!”

Kṛṣṇa: “Oh Maiyā! Don’t beat me! No caura has ever
appeared in my father’s dynasty. They only appear in
your father’s dynasty. I’m not a thief.”

Maiyā smiled and said, “How was the yogurt churning pot
broken, then?”

Kṛṣṇa: “Well, that is the punishment given by the
Supreme Lord.”

Maiyā: “And who fed the butter to the monkeys?”

Kṛṣṇa: “He who has made the monkeys feeds the monkeys.”

Maiyā (angry, but laughing): “Now tell me the truth. How
did the butter pot break?”

Kṛṣṇa (crying): “You jumped up in a hurry to pacify the
milk that was boiling over, and you were so flustered
that your heavy anklets struck the pot and it broke. So
tell Me, how am I to blame for this?”

Maiyā: “Is that the truth? In that case, tell me how You
come to have butter on Your face.”

Kṛṣṇa: “Oh Maiyā! Every day a monkey comes and puts his
hand in the pot to eat the butter, but today I caught
him. He pulled out his hand and began to run away, but
the butter on his hand smeared on My face. Tell Me
honestly, am I at fault in this? But still you call Me a
thief and want to beat Me.”

Maiyā: “Are barabola! Hey cheeky! Bandhar-bandho! Oh,
friend of the monkeys! You and the grinding mortar are
accomplices in crime. Now I shall punish you both by
binding you together.”

After a great deal of endeavour, by the mercy of
Bhagavān, she tied Kṛṣṇa to the grinding mortar and went
inside to get on with her household duties. Dragging the
grinding mortar with his little friends, Bāla-Kṛṣṇa
began to crawl through the gap between the two Ārjuna
trees which stood before the entrance of the house. At
the mere touch of the grinding mortar, both trees came
crashing down with the most terrific thundering sound.

Wherever the Vrajavāsīs were, they all heard the sound
and came running to that place. Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā
Maiyā also arrived there, and when Yaśodā Maiyā saw her
son between the two fallen trees, she became speechless.
Nanda Bābā was struck with wonder. He approached his son
and took Him in his lap. When Kṛṣṇa saw His father He
began to weep loudly. Nanda Bābā gently caressed Kṛṣṇa’s
head and His limbs with his hands. He began to pat Him,

                          209
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

and kissing His face he said, “Lālā! My darling boy! Who
bound you like this?” Kṛṣṇa was crying and did not
answer. Nanda Bābā asked again and again. Finally, Kṛṣṇa
whispered in Bābā’s ear, “Maiyā did it.” Nanda Bābā
became very grave. “Maiyā did it! Your mother is so
cruel!” After saying this, he fell silent.

Nanda Bābā then took both Kṛṣṇa and Baladāū in his lap
and went to take bath in the Yamuna. He employed
brāhmaṇas to recite auspicious benedictions, distributed
cows in charity, and then quickly returned home. Rohiṇī
Maiyā engaged some gopīs in cooking and serving food to
Rāma and Kṛṣṇa with Nanda Bābā. After honouring prasāda
in silence, Nanda Bābā went with his two sons to take
his seat in the council of the community. In the
evening, when he came to the gośālā he fed Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva with miśri (white sugar candy) and squirted
warm milk into their mouths directly from the udder of a
cow until their bellies were full.

When Vrajarāja (Nanda Bābā) had finished taking his
evening meal along with his two sons, the elder gopīs of
the community all came before him, bringing Rohiṇījī
with them. The two children were sitting in Bābā’s lap.

Rohiṇījī said, “Rājan! Kṛṣṇa’s mother has not taken her
meal. She is sitting in a corner as silent as a stone.
All the gopīs in the house are so sad. They are also
sitting silently without eating or drinking.”

With mixed feelings of sorrow and amusement, Vrajarāja
said: “What should I do? She should realize that this is
the fruit of anger!”

Tears flowed from the eyes of the elder gopīs as they
said, “Hāya! Hāya! Yaśodā is extremely soft, both inside
and out. You shouldn’t call her cruel. It’s not right to
use a word like that for her.”

Hearing this Vrajarāja became even more emotional;
smiling he asked, “Lālā! Will you go to Maiyā?”

“No! No! I will only stay with you,” replied Kṛṣṇa
emphatically.

Upananda’s wife laughed and said, “You may stay with
Bābā, but who will breastfeed you?”

Kṛṣṇa: “Bābā will squirt warm milk into my mouth from
the udder of the cows and he will feed me miśri, too.”

“Who will you play with?”

“I’ll play with Pitājī and Dāū Bhaiyā.”

Vrajarāja said, “Why don’t you go to Rohiṇī Maiyā?”

Kṛṣṇa sobbed and said angrily, “I was calling out to my
elder Maiyā to let me go, but she didn’t come, and
Rohiṇī Maiyā didn’t come either.”

Hearing this, Rohiṇī Maiyā said softly with tears
flowing down her face, “Lālā! Don’t be so cruel-hearted.
Your mother is crying for you.”

                            210
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇa’s eyes, too, brimmed with tears when He heard
this. He turned around and began to look at the face of
His father. At the same time, Rohiṇī Maiyā gestured to
Baladeva to bring Kṛṣṇa to His mother. Baladeva caught
hold of Kṛṣṇa with both hands and began to drag Him
towards Rohiṇī Maiyā, but Kṛṣṇa shook him off with a
jerk and wrapped His arms tightly around Nanda Bābā’s
neck. A shower of tears began to fall from Bābā’s eyes,
as well. Raising his hands he said, “Lālā! Should I slap
your Maiyā?”

Bāla-Kṛṣṇa could not tolerate this, and caught hold of
both of his father’s hands tightly. At that moment, Bābā
re-membered the anguish within the heart of Yaśodā.
Rohiṇī Maiyā said to Kṛṣṇa, “Lālā! What if your Maiyā
should . . . “ She paused and motioned with her hand
meaning that if she should die, “then what will you do?’

As soon as He heard this, Kṛṣṇa cried out loudly,
“Maiyā! Maiyā! Maiyā!” He stretched out His arms in the
direction of His elder mother, and of His own accord He
ran to sit on her lap.

Rohiṇī Maiyā was in tears. She picked up Kṛṣṇa who was
also crying, and entering the ladies’ inner chamber of
the house, she put Him down in Yaśodā Maiyā’s lap.
Yaśodā Maiyā covered Kṛṣṇa with her veil and began to
weep like a kurarī bird. All the gopīs who had assembled
in the ladies’ quarter began to cry as well, and Nanda
Bābā was crying in the meeting room.

The whole atmosphere became submerged in vatsalya-rasa.

-

As soon as Śrīla Gurudeva heard this narration, he also
burst out crying. An uninterrupted stream of tears began
to flow from his eyes and other bodily transformations
(aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāva) were also clearly visible. I have
only seen such unprecedented bhāva once or twice in my
life.



h) Service to the sampradāya

Some time in 1956, Śrīla Gurudeva came to Mathurā to see
Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha. At that time followers of the
Nimbārka Samprādaya in Vṛndāvana used publish a
spiritual journal called Śrī Sudarsana. In one issue
they cast aspersions on Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, saying
that He was a disciple of Keśava Kaśmīrīi. In other
editions they insolently dared to claim that Gauḍīya
Vaisnava ācāryas such as Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhakura were in the Nimbārka Samprādaya. When I showed
these editions to Śrīla Gurudeva he become extremely
angry and immediately had a short essay written for Śrī
Bhāgavata Patrikā. The headline was ‘Śrī Nimbāditya and
Nimbārka are not the same person.’ The purport of his
headline is as follows.

“Nowhere in the scriptures is there any mention of a
Nimbārka Samprādaya. The Purāṇas mention a vaiṣṇava-

                          211
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

ācārya called Śrī Nimbāditya, and the Catuḥsana (the
four Kumāras) have accepted this Nimbāditya Ācārya as
their samprādaya-ācārya in the age of Kali. However,
Nimbārka Svāmī is a completely different person.
Nimbāditya was a disciple of Nāradajī at the end of
Dvāpara-yuga and the beginning of Kali-yuga, but
Nimbārka Ācārya appeared much more recently. Great and
eminent authors of scripture such as Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
have mentioned the names of the prominent ācāryas of all
the other sampradāyas, but they have not mentioned the
name of Nimbārka Ācārya anywhere.

“The Nimbārka samprādaya currently uses the Pārijāta-
bhāṣya which was written, not by Nimbāditya Ācārya, but
rather by Śrīnivāsa Ācārya and Keśava Kaśmīrī. These two
wrote this scripture and then preached that it had been
written by their guru. The scriptures of the Six
Gosvāmīs mention the names of ācāryas such as Śrī
Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva, Śrī Viṣṇu Svāmī, Śrī Nimbāditya
and Śrī Vallabha Ācārya. If the Nimbārka samprādaya had
existed even to a slight extent at that time, then they
would most certainly have mentioned the name of Nimbārka
Ācārya as well. None of the other samprādaya ācāryas,
such as Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva, Śrī Viṣṇu Svāmī and so
on have mentioned Nimbārka Ācārya’s name in any of the
scriptures that they have written.”

When this essay was published in Śrī Bhāgavata Patrikā,
the office directors of the Sudarsana journal announced
that they were making arrangements to prosecute for
slander. Śrīla Gurudeva replied firmly, “We will prove
each and every word that we have written on the basis of
evidence supported by śāstra.” When the prosecution
party heard about Śrīla Gurudeva’s immense scriptural
knowledge and his profound personality, they became
absolutely silent, and from that day onwards they did
not dare to write any more nonsense.

On another occasion, members of the sahajiyā-sampradāya
of Bengal wrote essays full of apasiddhānta, opposing
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta. Śrīla Gurudeva argued with them
in a similar way, using abrasive words. The opposition
party actually presented a lawsuit in court against
Śrīla Gurudeva and other devotees, including the editor
of Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā. However, when they were faced
with Śrīla Gurudeva’s train of thought, they also had to
bow their heads in defeat. They begged him for
forgiveness in the court of law and thereafter avoided
him. For these reasons, Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisaraṅga Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who was Śrīla Gurudeva’s
dear Godbrother and a leader of the Gauḍīya community,
decorated Śrīla Gurupādapadma with the title ‘Pāṣaṇda-
Gajaikasiṁha’, ‘The lion who vanquishes the elephants of
heresy’



i) The distinction between the smārta and the vaiṣṇava
conceptions

(The essence of a letter from Śrī Gurudeva to Nityagaura
Prabhu).

In the Canton of Māthābhāṅga in West Bengal’s Kūcibihāra

                          212
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

District there lived a gṛhasta-vaiṣṇava named Śrī
Nityagaura Dāsādhikārī who was a disciple initiated into
Kṛṣṇa mantra by Jagadguru Śrī Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī. Once, when one of his family members
died, he followed vaiṣṇava-sadācāra, the behaviour which
is appropriate for Vaiṣṇavas, and did not observe the
avaiṣṇava smārta regulations concerning impurity.
Instead, he went on reading and teaching the bhakti-
granthas such as Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, and taking
harināma. After twelve days he invited maṭha-vāsī
Vaiṣṇavas to his home. At that time, following the
injunctions of vaiṣṇava-smṛti-sāstra such as Śrī Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa and Satkriyāsāra-dīpikā, he offered the
prasāda grain remnants of Viṣṇu to the soul of the
deceased relative. He also requested the Vaiṣṇavas to
perform the vaiṣṇava-homa ceremony for the sake of the
ultimate transcendental auspiciousness of the deceased.
Mahāprasāda was then distributed to all the assembled
Vaiṣṇavas.

The other members of his community, who were not
Vaiṣṇavas, particularly emphasised the performance of
śrāddha (a ceremony fior the benefit of a deceased
relative) according to the smārta conceptions of
Raghunandana prevalent in the smārta community of
Bengal. They were not at all satisfied with Nityagaura
Prabhu’s vaiṣṇava śrāddha and boycotted the ceremony
altogether. Despite this, Nityagaura Prabhu was so
steadfast in vaiṣṇava-sadācāra that he neglected the
orders and directives of the village society. The
village community then became extremely angry with him.
They stopped the barber, the washerman and so on from
going to his house; severed all social connections with
him in eating, drinking, sitting and standing; and even
prohibited him from drawing water from the same well.
Nityagaura Prabhu became acutely fearful of this
oppressive social harassment, and sent a letter to
Gurudeva, informing him about the atrocious tyranny of
the community. At that time, Srīla Gurudeva was at Śrī
Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha in Chuchura. As soon as he
received the letter, he immediately wrote back, and the
condensed essence of his reply is given below.

“I have received your letter informing me of the
outrageous transgressions committed by the smārta
community. There is no need to be afraid in the
slightest. The community in your village is utterly
fallen, and they have no knowledge of what is referred
to as āsauca (mourning). They do not have any sādhu-
saṅga, and consequently they do not have even the
slightest understanding of sadācāra given in śāstra.
These people are constantly absorbed in nothing but the
five ‘m’s’—madya, māṁsa, matsya, mudra and maithuna
(wine, meat, fish, money and sex). They eat bad
foodstuffs like onions, garlic and eggs and they are
always taking tea, tobacco, gāñjā and bhāṅg. This means
that they are all low-class people in rajaḥ and
tamoguṇa. Such people are in the majority these days;
there are very few saintly people established in proper
behaviour and tattva-jñāna. Since misbehaved, low-class
people are in the majority, they commit atrocities
against the moral minority. I will give a simple example
to illustrate what I mean by this.


                          213
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

“In one village, everyone was addicted to gāṅjā. There
was no one—young, old, man or woman—who did not take it,
with the sole exception of a small child in one
particular family. This boy had abstained from an early
age, and as soon as he smelled the rank fumes of gāñjā,
he would go far away. As he grew older, his mother and
father, relatives and community members tried in various
ways to make him take gāñjā, but he would not take it in
any way whatsoever. His mother and father and all the
villagers were struck with wonder to see this boy’s
nature. In the end, they came to the conclusion that he
must be afflicted by some terrible disease, and they
called the village doctor to arrange for some compulsory
medical treatment.

“This is the deplorable condition of our village
societies today. They cannot tolerate anyone performing
bhagavad-bhajana and practising saintly behaviour. They
inflict inhumane atrocities on those who do, and even
expelled them from the village. Such low-class people
are in the majority, and that is why they commit various
types of grievious offences against the moral minority.”

Srīla Gurudeva continued,

“Nityagaura! Are there no literate, well-behaved,
sattvic personalities in your village? If there are,
then show them my letter. I am firmly convinced that
rajaḥ and tamoguṇa will always be defeated. Victory
always belongs to sattva-guṇa, even if it seems slow in
coming. Demonic people may appear to be strong in the
beginning, but they are defeated in the end. In ancient
times, those who adhered to the demonic ideology were
always defeated in the struggles between the devas and
the asuras, in the war between Rāma and Rāvaṇa, and in
the conflict between the Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas.
Hiraṇya-kaśipu was immensely powerful but he could not
stand before his five-year-old devotee son Prahlāda, and
Bhagavān Nṛsiṁhadeva annihilated him in a second.

“Take harināma continuously. You are always pure.
Bhagavān Nṛsiṁhadeva will protect you. You should always
remember that the Vaiṣṇavas and devotees of Bhagavān are
always and forever pure. Impurity never touches them,
even during birth and death. What to speak of Vaiṣṇavas,
anyone who takes shelter of harināma is relieved of the
reactions of all past, present and future sinful
activities, even if they have murdered their parents,
committed adultery or perpetrated the most grievous
sins. It is quite clear in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that when
the greatly sinful Ajāmila called out the name
‘Nārāyāṇa’ at the time of death, he was calling his son.
Therefore this was nāmābhāsa, not śuddha-nāma. Even so,
Ajāmila’s sinful reactions were all dispelled simply by
the influence of this nāmābhāsa. His death retreated,
and afterwards, when he took harināma in the association
of sādhus, he attained his destination, Vaikuṇṭha.

“You are eternally pure, because you have taken shelter
of harināma and you are always observing the limbs of
bhakti. It is not necessary for you to observe any
regulations at all for so-called impurity due to a death
in the family. Those who are not initiated in the viṣṇu-
mantra and who do not take the name of Bhagavān are

                            214
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

impure throughout their whole lives and observe lifelong
āsauca (impurity). They have no right to enter the
mandiras of Hari.

“Raghunandana’s preaching of smārta regulations and his
Aṣṭāviṁśati-tattva is limited only to Bengal. Throughout
the rest of India, people use the vaiṣṇava ṣmṛtis called
Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa and Satkriyāsāra-dīpika. These
vaiṣṇava ṣmṛtis have been prevalent in Bihar, Orīssa,
Uttar Pradeśa and elsewhere from approximately five
hundred years ago until today. Aṣṭaviṁśati-tattva has
only been current for two hundred and fifty years.

“There are many defects in Raghunandana’s smṛti. For
instance, according to this smṛti, no one, even those
who have taken birth in a brāhmaṇa dynasty, can ever be
pure throughout their whole life. According to
Raghunandana, when anyone appears in a household of
brāhmaṇas, seven generations of ancestors in the
dynasties of both the mother and the father become
untouchable for ten days. Similarly, seven generations
of the dynasties of both the father and the mother,
whether male or female, become untouchable for ten days
when anyone dies. Now, the number of present-day
descendants of ancestors from seven previous generations
will be very large, and if any birth or death takes
place in this vast population, then the complete dynasty
is supposed to become untouchable. That means that if
just thirty-six births or deaths occur in one year among
this huge number of people, then their whole year will
be spent in an impure condition.

“According to this doctrine, they can never be pure at
any time in their lives and there is no means by which
they can become purified again. If it supposed that they
become purified by the recitation of mantras at the time
of the śrāddha ceremony then how are they supposed to
become untouchable again? A brāhmaṇa chants the gāyātrī
mantra every day during the three saṅdhyas. Is the
gāyātrī-mantra not capable of purifying him? Obviously,
they have no faith in the potency of the mantra. Their
conceptions are all mistaken and contrary to śāstra.

“It is necessary to say something further on the subject
of smārta-brāhmaṇas. One who knows the smṛti-śāstras is
called smārtaÇ as are his followers. There are two types
of smṛti-śāstra: laukika6 and pāramārthika7. The
principal subject matter established by the Vedas,
Upaniṣads and Purāṇas is bhagavad-bhakti, and those
smṛti-śāstras which describe the rules and regulations
of bhagavad-bhakti are called pāramārthika-smṛti. Those
smṛti-śāstras which neglect this confidential purport of
the Vedas, and instead emphasise the rules and
regulations for maintaining the gross social shackles
are called laukika smṛti-śāstra.

“Smṛti is basically one, but there are divisions of
smṛti because of the differences between ṛṣis who are
inclined to the service of Bhagavān and ṛṣis who are
averse to serving Bhagavān. The brahmanism of worldly
brāhmaṇas who only follow laukika smṛtis is not perfect.
Birth in a brāhmaṇa dynasty is not enough in itself,
because one who practises no brahminical activities and
has no brahminical qualities is not a brāhmaṇa, even if

                          215
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

he happens to have taken birth in a dynasty of
brāhmaṇas. It is one’s qualities and activities which
determine whether one is considered to be in the social
castes of the brāhmaṇas, non-brāhmaṇas or untouchables.
This subject is completely clear in authoritative
śāstras such as Gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣtaṁ

guṇa-karma vibhāgaśaḥ

(Bhagavad-gītā 4.13)

“‘The four divisions of human society were created by
Me, in terms of their respective qualities and
characteristic work.’

yasya yal lakṣanaṁ proktaṁ puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam

yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta tat tenaiva vinirdiśet

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.11.35)

“‘If one shows the characteristic symptoms of a
brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, or śūdra, he should be
accepted as a member of that varṇa, even if he has taken
birth in another.’

“Now suppose someone performs a śrāddha ceremony by
engaging a priest who may have taken birth in a dynasty
of brāhmaṇas, but is averse to Bhagavān and who has the
temperament of a demon. Then this śrāddha ceremony will
also be demonic. Can there be any doubt about this? The
performance of such a śrāddha can bring no
auspiciousness whatsoever to the soul of a deceased
person. The atheistic villagers and laukika smārta-
brāhmaṇas who are averse to Hari may follow this
supposed observance of impurity. However, people who are
initiated in Viṣṇu mantra and who are established in
vaiṣṇava-sadācāra will never follow it. You, your wife
and your children are householders who are established
in vaiṣṇava-sadācāra and initiated in Viṣṇu mantra.
Therefore you are always pure. You should never
associate with fallen people, otherwise you will also
become fallen. I never approve of heretical doctrines.
The misbehaved village community is not Bhagavān. You
should stay on the path of bhakti with very firm resolve
and do not be fearful in the slightest.

“There is another matter which should be properly
understood. It is forbidden in all respects for pure
Vaiṣṇavas to do kuśa-dhāraṇa and nāndīmukha-śrāddha. The
meaning of the word ‘śrāddha’ comes from ‘śraddhā’
(faith). The word ‘śrāddha’ can only properly refer to
those activities which are performed with śraddhā. But
what is the śraddhā in this smārta observance of
śrāddha? According to the smārtas, everyone becomes a
ghost in his next life, even those who have taken
shelter of harināma and have been dedicated to the
param-dharma as well. On the basis of this notion,
smārta priests make everyone call out the mantra, ete
pretatarpaṇakāle bhavanti iha: 'May the ghost be present
here and accept this piṇḍa.' Here the belief (śraddhā)
is that one’s mother or father may have engaged in

                            216
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

bhagavad-bhajana throughout their entire lives and may
always have adhered to pure behaviour; yet as soon as
they died they became ghosts. Then at the time of
śrāddha they are offered piṇḍa composed of meat, fish,
burnt bananas and rice and they are addressed, 'O
pitṛdeva! You have become a ghost. May you accept this
ghost-food and be satisfied.' Is this a qualified son’s
expression of faith (śraddhā) in his qualified father?

“This is why Vaiṣṇavas boycott such ghostly śrāddha
ceremonies. Show my letter to the members of your
village community and tell them that we are prepared to
debate on this subject anywhere in any religious
assembly. If they want to engage in debate, then we are
always ready to come to your village for a scriptural
discussion.”



j) A subtle distinction between the ideas of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura

After Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva accepted sannyāsa, he
invariably went after every Gaura-purṇimā to meet with
Pūjyapāda Śrīmad Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja, from
whom he had received his sannyāsa veśa. When he went to
Śrī Caitanya Sārasvata Gauḍīya Maṭha in 1952, he took
some of us residents of the Maṭha with him. All the
Vaiṣṇavas offered daṇḍavat-praṇāmas to each other when
they arrived there, and then they began an iṣṭa-goṣṭhī.
Devotees present at that iṣṭa-goṣṭhī, besides our
Gurupādapadma, included Śrīmad Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara
Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhaktivicāra Yāyāvara Mahārāja, Śrīmad
Bhakti Āloka Paramahaṁsa Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Kamala
Madhusūdana Mahārāja, and Śrīmad Bhaktiviveka Hṛṣikeśa
Mahārāja.

In this iṣṭa-goṣṭhī someone very politely posed the
following question. “There is a slight difference
between the commentaries of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
and of Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura on the fifth verse of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Śrī Upadeṣāmṛta:

kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta

dīkṣāsti cet pranatibhiś ca bhajantam īśam

How may this difference be reconciled?”

Pūjyapāda Śrīmad Bhaktivicāra Yāyāvara Mahārāja asked,
“What seems to be the difference between the two com-
mentaries?” and the enquirer clarified his question.

“Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written in his commen-
tary that the madhyama-adhikārī who properly understands
his responsibility towards kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs will offer
them respect from the core of his heart. He can hear
Kṛṣṇa nāma from their mouths providing they are free
from the faults of association with women and with
māyāvādīs, even though such kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs may be of
meagre intelligence and bereft of sambandha-jñāna. If
such kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs have received dīkṣā-mantra from
a sad-guru and are engaged in hari-bhajana, then on
hearing Kṛṣṇa nāma from their mouths the madhyama-

                          217
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

adhikārī will respect them by offering daṇḍavat-praṇāma.

“However, Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda, has
explained it a little differently, on the basis of the
words dīkṣāsti cet, which refers to those who have
accepted dīkṣā. He says that the madhyama-adhikārī who
properly understands his responsibility toward the
kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs will offer respect from the core of
his heart to those who are taking the name of Kṛṣṇa,
provided they have been initiated in the Kṛṣṇa mantra by
a sad-guru, have understood that Kṛṣṇa and His name are
not different, and have accepted the transcendental name
of Kṛṣṇa to be the only sādhana. The madhyama-adhikārī
will show respect by physically offering his daṇḍavat-
praṇāmas to those initiated Vaiṣṇavas who continuously
chant Kṛṣṇa nāma with great affection, who have attained
their own svarūpa by nāma-bhajana, and are established
in madhyama-adhikāra; and he will also offer them
respect in his mind. Thus it seems that there is some
difference between these two commentaries. Which of the
two explanations should we accept? Alternatively, how do
we reconcile the apparent difference between them? How
can they be harmonised?”

On hearing this, all of the Vaiṣṇavas requested
Prapūjya-caraṇa Śrīmad Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārājajī
to solve the apparently problematic question. Pūjyapāda
Śrīdhara Mahārāja became very serious and began to give
his reply. “Ordinarily, the commentaries of two members
of our guru-varga have the same meaning. Nevertheless
the explanation of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is supported by
the śāstra. According to the verse, 'no dīkṣāṁ na ca
sat-kriyām' from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Padyāvalī, Kṛṣṇa
nāma is so powerful that it bestows results even up to
the point of liberation, as soon as it touches the
tongue of untouchables such as dog-eaters. It does not
even wait for pious activities, preparatory rituals and
so on. In śāstra there are many statements to
substantiate the unprecedented effect of Kṛṣṇa nāma,

a) yan nāmadheya śravanānukīrtanād...śvādo ‘pi sadyaḥ
savanāya kalpate

b) aho bata śvapaco to garīyān yad vartate jihvāgre nāma
tubhyaṁ

c) yan nāma sakṛc chravaṇāt pukkaśo ‘pi vimucyate
saṁsārāt

d) sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā bhṛguvara
naramātram tārayet kṛṣṇa nāma

e) sāṅketyaṁparihāsyam ... haraṁ viduḥ

f) yadābhāso 'pyudhan ... mahimānaṁ prabhavati (Rūpa
Gosvāmī's Kṛṣṇa-nāma-stotram)

g) mriyamāni harer nāma...kiṁ punaḥ śraddhayā gṛṇan

h) patitaḥ skhalito bhajanaḥ ... pumān nārhati yātanāma

“This scriptural evidence supports the conclusion that
even an uninitiated dog-eater becomes supremely pure
simply by chanting hari-nāma. Whether he has śraddhā or

                          218
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

not, Kṛṣṇa nāma delivers him from the endless cycle of
birth and death when he chants even once. What to speak
of chanting, even one who hears Kṛṣṇa nāma is at once
liberated from material existence. Those who take the
name of Bhagavān while coming or going, slipping,
falling, sneezing or in any other way will not have to
taste the dire sufferings of repeated birth and death.
So if anyone chants Kṛṣṇa nāma and is free from ungodly
qualities opposed to bhakti, it is certainly proper
vaiṣṇava behavior to honour him mentally, whether he is
initiated or not.”

When Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva heard Pūjyapāda
Śrīdhara Mahārāja's opinion, he very politely said,
“Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārājajī’s explanation of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s commentary on this verse is in
accordance with śāstra in all respects, and it is full
of good conclusions. There is no doubt about that.
However, I have something further to say on this
subject. The first point is that Jagadguru Śrīla
Prabhupāda has associated with Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura since his very birth. From his childhood he
studied vaiṣṇava literatures such as Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
under Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s tuition, and heard
his explanations of Vedānta-sūtra and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
He is steeped exclusively in the Bhaktivinoda dhārā (the
flowing current of his conceptions). At the same time he
is an unparalleled scholar, who is thoroughly versed in
Veda, Vedānta and all śāstra. It was he who acquainted
us with the gracious Śrīman Mahāprabhu, His associates
and especially with Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. Without
a doubt, he knows the moods of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s
heart. He must certainly have seen the translation and
Pīyūṣavarsinī-vṛtti commentary that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura has written on this verse. Yet he has still
given a distinct explanation in his own translation and
Anuvṛtti commentary. He has certainly done this
intentionally. Therefore we must understand the
commentary of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura through the
medium of Śrīla Prabhupāda and we should give prominence
to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s commentary.

“The second point is that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has
determined the vaiṣṇava-sadācāra (appropriate conduct)
in relation to the general glories of Kṛṣṇa nāma.
However, the fruit of Śrī Kṛṣṇa nāma that Śrīman
Mahāprabhu practised and propagated is the ultimate
prayojana, namely the attainment of Kṛṣṇa prema. Now,
one cannot progress even one step in the direction of
that ultimate prayojana unless one takes Kṛṣṇa nāma with
sambandha-jñāna, and is free from aparādha and so on. In
Śrī Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta it has been stated,

kṛṣṇa nāma kare aparādhera vicāra

kṛṣṇa balite aparādhīra na haya vikāra

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi 8.24)

“‘One must consider the effect of offences while
chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. It is because of these
offences that one does not become ecstatic while
chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa.’

                          219
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017


eka kṛṣṇa nāma kare sarva pāpa nāśa

premera kāraṇa bhakti karena prakāśa

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi 8.26)

“‘Chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name just once destroys all sinful
activities, and pure devotional service, which is the
cause of prema, becomes manifest.’

hena kṛṣṇa nāma yadi laya bahu bāra

tabu yadi prema nahe, nahe aśrudhāra

tabe jāni tāhāte aparādha pracura

kṛṣṇa nāma-bīja tāhe na kare aṅkura

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi 8.29.30)

“‘If, one takes harināma again and    again, but ecstatic
love does not develop and tears do    not appear in his
eyes, then one may know that it is    because of many
offences that the seed of the holy    name of Kṛṣṇa does
not sprout.’

“Keeping in mind the particular consideration mentioned
in these verses, Śrīla Prabhupāda has given the
instruction to honour in one’s mind the person who is
endowed with sambandha-jñāna, that is, one has received
dīkṣa, who is free from aparādha, who understands that
Kṛṣṇa and His name are not different, and who
understands that aprākṛta-nāma is the only method of
attainment. He also continually

engages in the service of Kṛṣṇa nāma, and strives for
the prayojana, Kṛṣṇa prema. It is this type of nāma that
Śrīman Mahāprabhu describes in 'ānandāmbudhi vardhanaṁ
pratipadaṁ pūrnāmṛtāsvādanam' and 'paraṁ vijayate śrī
kṛṣṇa saṅkīrtanam' in His Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam.

“Pūjyapāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja has quoted the verse, 'no
dīkṣaṁ na ca sat-kriyam' which appears in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya 15.110). In Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
Anubhasya on this verse, he himself has said that
measures such as puraścaraṇa (preparatory rituals) have
been given so that one can achieve perfection in
chanting one’s mantra. But for śrī nāma mahā-mantra
there is no consideration of the regulations of
puraścaraṇa, because all the results of puraścaraṇa are
obtained automatically simply by uttering Kṛṣṇa nāma
once. So for the perfection of śrī mahā-mantra, there is
no con-sideration of pious activities such as puraścaryā
and so on.

“However, in this verse a confidential meaning of
'kṛṣṇa-nāmātmākaṁ mantro ‘yaṁ rasanāspṛg eva phalatī' is
given: ‘This mantra composed of Kṛṣṇa nāma offers its
result simply by touching the tongue’. Specifically,
rasanāspṛg means touching that tongue which is
sevonmukha (intent on or inclined to render service).
The tongue cannot possibly manifest Kṛṣṇa nāma at any
time unless it is sevonmukha. The presence of various

                          220
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

anarthas and aparādhas prevent śuddha-nāma from arising
on the tongue which is inclined to enjoy inert matter.
This has been stated in the sādhana-laharī of Śrī
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu:

ataḥ śrī kṛṣṇa nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuratyadaḥ

“‘Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, qualities and pastimes are all
trans-cendental principles. They are not perceptible to
the material senses such as the eyes, ears and tongue.
Śrī nāma, rūpa, guṇa and līlā manifest on the jīva’s
tongue when the tendency to render service arises in his
heart.’

“In this way as the sādhaka becomes somewhat elevated by
continually taking the name, then by nāma-bhajana he
earns the qualification to serve Kṛṣṇa. He then realizes
the transcendental nature of the nāma, the dhāma and so
on and he becomes established in madhyama-adhikāra.
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has stipulated in this verse of
Upadeṣāmṛta that one should honour such a madhyama-
adhikārī Vaiṣṇava within one’s heart, and at the same
time one should also offer daṇḍavat praṇāmas.”

When the assembled Vaiṣṇavas heard Śrīla Gurudeva’s
thoughts, which were pregnant with substantial
siddhānta, they all supported his opinion and applauded
him heartily.



k) Śrīla Gurupādapadma’s supramundane character and guru
niṣṭhā

(Written by Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja,
the present Ācārya and President of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti)

While Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Keśava Gosvāmīpāda was
commenting on vairāgya-yukta bhakti-rasa, he explained
that vairāgya (renunciation) is the intense feeling of
separation from Kṛṣṇa which consists of the desire to
please His senses8. The knowledge of vairāgya which
consists of the desire to give happiness to Kṛṣṇa9 is
actual vairāgya brahma-jñāna, and it displays contempt,
fear and disrespect towards worthless jñāna, sāyujya
mukti and other forms of mukti. Generally, sādhaka jīvas
consider that vairāgya means the renunciation of all
enjoyment for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa. However, the mukta
puruṣas accept only dedication to the sevā of Kṛṣṇa as
vairāgya. Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī has pointed out that
vairāgya-yug bhaktirasa consists of detachment and
devotional activities (all activities performed for
Kṛṣṇa’s sevā). The māyāvāda conception excludes the
existence of cid-vilāsa, transcendental pleasure
pastimes, but this can never be called vairāgya.

The word vairāgya is used to describe one of the six
opulences of Bhagavān. This Bhagavān is Māyādhīśa, the
Lord over māyā. Bhakti can never be attained by
artificial endeavours to practice vairāgya in nirjana
bhajana. People who are not spiritual think that

                          221
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

material renunciation is vairāgya, but in the śāstras we
find that vairāgya is simply the topmost stage of
longing for kṛṣṇa-vilāsa, Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure-pastimes.
Prākṛta sahajiyās and those who renounce material
enjoyment practise so-called vairāgya to satisfy their
desires, but this is merely temporary, deceitful
sādhana. Only through the eyes of bhakti can one see or
realize the nitya-siddha vairāgya of the nitya-siddha
mahātmās who are intent on Kṛṣṇa’s happiness.

Detachment and omniscience are naturally evident in the
lives of mahā-puruṣas. Residing in the heart of the
sādhaka in the form of antaryāmī, these mahā-puruṣas can
easily say who is attached to satisfying his own senses
in the name of hari-sevā. They also give favourable
opportunities for the sādhaka to become liberated from
the clutch of this kapaṭatā, hypocrisy. Moreover, being
very affectionate towards the sevakas, and seeing their
service tendency, they bestow on them the enthusiasm to
serve Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas.

Keśarīra svapotānām anyeṣām ugravikramaḥ: “The lion
shows her prowess towards her enemy, but is very
affectionate towards her offspring.” Similarly, for
atheistic hypocrites Śrīla Gurupādapadma was the direct
personification of Yama10, but he was full of loving,
parental affection towards his disciples and those who
had taken shelter of him. He would correct their
hundreds of faults and mistakes, give them the chance to
do sevā, and engage them in hari-bhajana. If anyone came
to his maṭha and mission for hari-bhajana, he would give
them shelter and a chance to do hari-bhajana, even if
they were old, diseased, or devoid of any worldly
qualifications. This is undoubtedly a brilliant example
and certainly demonstrates his surrender to Kṛṣṇa, his
mercy and magnanimity, his compassionate nature and
quality of helping all, and his sorrow to see others
suffering.

Adherents to morality say, satyaṁ bruyāt priyaṁ bruyāt,
mā bruyāt satyam apriyam: “One should speak true and
palatable words, but the truth should not be spoken if
it is unpalatable.” However, Gurupādapadma would always
announce loudly that it is right to speak the truth even
if it is unpalatable. If we do not speak the truth, then
many secrets of śāstras will not be preached and
displayed in this world. Sādhu, guru and Vaiṣṇavas give
real welfare to the people of the world, and even if
their heart-touching words are are not materially
pleasing, they are nonetheless the cause of complete
auspiciousness. In this connection, Paramārādhya Śrīla
Gurudeva has written, “Nowadays we see the publication
of many religious magazines which are gradually
deviating from the rules and regulations established and
preached by Ācārya Kesarī Jagadguru Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda. The main cause for
this is the desire for worldly gain, name and fame. We
should always remember the teaching of Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta: ‘Dharma cannot be protected unless one is
detached.’ One should set an ideal example to the whole
world by embracing even the toughest adversity, and by
maintaining complete detachment.” The sharp words and
criticism of sādhu, guru and Vaiṣṇavas cause one’s good
fortune and remove the difficulties and obstacles

                          222
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

related to bhajana. Their detached morality, and the
disciplinary words and unpleasant truths that they
administer have the same function as chanting medicinal
mantras, and the result is that we obtain a taste for
chanting śrī nāma.

Śrīla Guru Mahārāja showed incomparable love and
sympathy towards his peer Godbrothers. As soon as a
Godbrother affectionately addressed him as ‘Vinod Dā’ or
‘Keśava Mahārāja’, he would understand their situation
and help them as much as he could financially and in
other ways. But he never expected financial help for
himself. In this way he generously and selflessly gave
thousands of rupees to help others. This was undoubtedly
because of his parental affection towards his
Godbrothers.

All sorts of people used to come in great numbers for
his darśana: scholars, people who were proud of their
so-called devotion, ignorant people, intelligent people,
children, young men and elderly men. Everyone would
forget their own desires and questions when they heard
his grave and authoritative voice, and saw his mild and
peaceful figure, his face and his gentle smile. Even
when he was defeating māyāvādī logicians, he would
always protect their dignity. Many people who had
separate motives would come and listen to various kinds
of advice, but they could not accept the śakti of this
ekāntika sādhu and mahā-puruṣa who was so devoted to
Kṛṣṇa. How can ordinary people truly understand the
transcendental behaviour of nitya-siddha mahātmās? They
do not and cannot understand their mercy and desire. Śrī
Gurudeva’s view was, “No one in this world is an object
for my attachment (anurāga) or indifference (virāga).
All are means for serving guru and Kṛṣṇa.” This is the
transcendental viewpoint of the mahā-bhagavatas.

It has already been mentioned that Śrīla Guru Mahārāja’s
fresh outlook and unique speciality was evident in every
engagement and action that he performed. He used the
figures of pāṣaṇḍa-gajaikasiṁha (the lion-like person
who destroys the elephant of hypocrisy) on the wall of
Narahari Toraṇa, the main gate of Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya
Maṭha, Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti’s original preaching
centre in Navadvīpa. Śrīla Vṛndāvana Dāsa Ṭhākura
glorified Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya-candra as pāṣaṇḍa-
gajaikasiṁha. Śrīla Gurudeva’s intimate Godbrother Śrīla
Bhaktisāraṅga Gosvāmī Mahārāja also decorated him with
this same name, for it was as if he was always holding a
sword in his hand to defeat māyāvādīs and others who
were opposed to śuddha-bhakti. Knowing such people to be
his eternal enemies, he made an unshakeable vow to
uproot Śrī Śaṅkara’s advaitavāda or māyāvāda from this
world. He clearly expressed this determination in his
letters, essays, articles, commentaries, explanations,
statements, lectures and so on. Parama Pujyapāda Śrīla
Gosvāmī Mahārāja would say to Śrīla Gurupādapadma, “When
I see you, the memory of Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
Prabhupāda comes into my mind. Anyone whose darśana
makes the memory of Śrīla Gurudeva appear in the mind is
guru-svarūpa, the embodiment of guru, and he is the
greatest of all mahā-bhāgavatas.”

It is said, “All of Kṛṣṇa’s qualities appear in His

                          223
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

bhaktas.” Śrīla Ācāryadeva had not passed exams in law
or engineering, but he would give legal advice to
lawyers and barristers, and he would also advise
engineers. Many expert engineers were amazed to learn
that the tilaka-marked, sky-high śrī mandira of the main
maṭha was constructed according to Śrīla Guru Mahārāja’s
instructions and plan. Jagadguru Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
has said, “It is quite essential to protect the sevā of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāni in order to protect the sampradāya.”
By this he meant that he aimed to protect Śrīmatī
Rādhārānī’s sevā by bringing law suits to save maṭhas
and mandiras from the hands of sense-enjoyers and wicked
people. Śrīla Guru-pādapadma followed the instructions
of his Ārādhyadeva Śrīla Prabhupāda, and accepted the
responsibility of protecting the mission by legal means.
Even Prabhupāda would be amazed by his astonishing
talent and power of memory. Once, during an argument
with some lawyers, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja’s Godbrother
Śrīla Mādhava Mahārāja asked him, “When was it that you
studied law so that lawyers who argue with you accept
your words?”

Śrīla Guru Mahārāja made an unparallelled contribution
in composing vaiṣṇava literature and revealing ever-
fresh deep meanings of the principles of bhakti. The
speciality of his writings is that he kept an unbroken
flow of bhāva, or inner meaning contained in the main
tattva-siddhāntas; at the same time, he maintained his
own position and point of view, and did not follow the
general masses. “Protecting the sampradāya is the top-
most service of Śrīmān Mahāprabhu,” he used to think,
and only after carefully considering this did he use his
powerful pen. His main goal was to establish tattva-
siddhāntas directly and indirectly through the medium of
debates, and he exhibited a remarkable and
transcendental creativity in doing this. His ever-fresh
and transcendental talent has been illuminated in his
songs such as Śrīla Prabhupāda’s ārati, Śrī Tulasī-ārati
and Maṅgala-ārati. Following the transcendental poet Śrī
Jayadeva’s Gīta-govinda, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja’s Maṅgala-
ārati gives an introduction to the supreme and
unequalled, sweet trans-cendental pastimes of Śrī Vraja-
nava-yuva-dvandva, the eternally youthful Conjugal
Couple of Vraja.

Sometimes an unexpected guest would arrive when Śrīla
Gurupādapadma was dictating an article for Śrī Patrikā.
At such a time, he would not leave the principal subject
matter of the article, but at the same time he would
converse with the guest without showing any kind of
indifference towards him. There is no doubt that this is
also one of his unique and transcendental
characteristics.

It was Śrīla Ācāryadeva’s undivided niṣṭhā towards his
own Śrī Guru Mahārāja which most clearly established his
superior position amongst Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disciples
and followers. Śrīla Gurupādapadma gave good advice to
his Godbrothers on legal matters and all kinds of other
concerns. In so doing, he showed himself to have a
generous and moral disposition. The Sārasvata Gauḍīya
community accepted him as a lawyer and also as a very
learned expert in management and politics. This was
because, when complex questions arose concerning

                          224
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

spiritual knowledge and pseudo-logic, he would give good
answers which were in accordance with the conclusions of
śāstras.

Śrīla Ācāryadeva displayed the ideal standards for
observing fasting days. On Śrī Janmāṣṭamī, Śrī Ekādaśī,
Śrī Gaura Jayantī, Śrī Rāmanavamī, Śrī Nṛsiṁha
Caturdaśī, Śrī Advaita Saptamī, Śrī Nityānanda Trayodaśī
and other fast days, he firmly rejected fasting on days
which overlapped with the previous day11. He gave the
fullest protection to the observance of Cāturmāsya and
ūrjā-vrata in Śrī Vedānta Samiti, completely following
the rules practised and preached by Śrīla Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīman Mahā-
prabhu. He never supported reluctance to follow the
Cāturmasya vow or laxity in honouring ūrjā-vrata.

Śrīla Gurudeva especially manifested guru-niṣṭhā during
a discussion of tattva-siddhānta with Parama Pūjanīya
Yatirāja Śrīla Śrīdhara Gosvāmī Mahārāja. On that
occasion, he said, “I don’t know or recognize the path
of the previous Gosvāmīs. I simply accept Jagadguru
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s line of thought as unerring truth,
and I will try to know and understand the previous
Gosvāmīs through Śrīla Prabhupāda’s vision. I will first
accept the excellence of his explanations and com-
mentaries. Ācāryera jeī mata seī mata sāra: ‘The order
of the guru is the active principle in spiritual life’
(Caitanya-caritāmṛta Adi 12.10) and anya āra jata mata
jāuka chārakhāra. This is my conception.” This single
pointed niṣṭhā that he showed towards Śrīla Prabhupāda
is certainly unequalled.

Śrīla Gurupādapadma, the dearmost associate of Śrī
Gaurasundara, has written ‘Māyāvāda kī Jīvanī or
Vaiṣṇava Vijaya’ for the eternal benefit of the
conditioned souls. After refuting materialists, bad
yogis, and other people with faulty doctrines, he showed
them the path of real spiritual knowledge and the
ultimate spiritual benefit12. As an ideal tridaṇḍi
gosvāmī, he wanted to bestow true auspiciousness even on
opposing hypocrites. We have many times witnessed his
fearlessness and steadfastness in protecting the truth.
He never ever supported those who said that spirit and
matter are non-different. To expose the enjoying
tendencies and selfish opinions of the prākṛta-
sahajiyas, he published the book Sahajiyā-dalana, which
was based on a compilation of articles written by Śrīla
Prabhupāda and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. He
demonstrated the ideal of a faultless way of life by
preaching from this book and by devoting himself to pure
behaviour.

Śrīla Ācāryadeva established spiritual hospitals and
also a Vedānta college. The central government and
various missions were introducing initiatives to try to
relieve the sufferings of the perishable body and mind
in the name of social service. Śrīla Gurudeva’s purpose
was to show that these endeavours were practically
useless. He was stronger than a thunderbolt in rejecting
bad association, and softer than a lotus flower in
endeavours which were favourable for the cultivation of
bhakti. He never supported the karma-kāṇḍīya principles
of the materialistic smārta society, who simply follow

                          225
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

ritualistic customs and principles. (These regulations
dictate, for example, that a certain number of days
after someone’s birth or death are impure, and that the
leap month of Puruṣottama is an impure month, when no
religious activities should take place). Śrīla
Gurupādapadma instead gave the pure instructions to
follow vows such as Śrī Puruṣottama vrata by engaging in
śrī nāma-bhajana only. He spent his life as a
surrendered soul who had no possessions and was
completely dependent on Kṛṣṇa’s will. His attitude was
always ‘May the desire of Bhagavān be fulfilled’ and ‘By
the will of Bhagavān everything is possible’. His group
of disciples would become amazed to see this. Everyone
was attracted to his affection towards birds like
pigeons and sparrows, his intimate love and affection
(mamatā), his practice of non-violence, and his simple
and compassionate behaviour towards all, especially
children and old people.

Śrīla Gurupādapadma’s simple, sweet and profound inner
sentiments would never be disturbed, even while he was
strongly refuting the degraded, devious and cheating
belief that the jīva is Brahman, or when he was
challenging people who respect all kinds of gods13;
worshippers of the five deities Surya, Ganeṣa, Śakti,
Śiva and Viṣṇu14; people who believe that there are many
gods15; voidists; impersonalistic pantheists and others.
He never supported laziness in the name of performing
solitary bhajana. On the contrary, he instructed
everyone to cultivate Kṛṣṇa bhakti in sādhu-saṅga by
body, mind and words. He taught by his own exemplary
practice that one attains all perfection and absorption
in Kṛṣṇa prema only by śrī harināma. To his disciples he
demonstrated by his own perfect example that one can
conquer hunger, thirst and the inimical tendencies of
the senses by performing regulated or unregulated loud
kīrtana of the sixteen-syllable Name day and night.

Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī said, “I am lower than a worm in
stool” and Śrīla Vṛndāvana Dāsa Ṭhākura said, “I will
beat the head of such people with a stick,” but the
purport of these two statements is one and the same. One
should understand the real humility in these words, for
it is beneficial for the real self. The spiritual
instruction in these statements is to take Kṛṣṇa nāma
after being initiated into the dharma of offering
respects to one and all without expecting any respect in
return. The exalted and profound sentiments of Śrīla
Gurudeva’s bhajana concerning upāsya-tattva established
him as both bhajanānandī and goṣṭhānandī at the same
time.

His mercy in acting to liberate jīvas from their burden
of anarthas was causeless. The doors of his mandiras and
maṭhas were always open for the benefit of people trying
to perform hari-bhajana. His endeavours to serve his
peer Vaiṣṇavas were without limit, and his sevā
satisfied them in all respects. The best introduction to
his supramundane character is given through the books
that he wrote to destroy māyāvāda; through his poems,
philosophical articles and so on; and through the
profound lectures based on tattva-siddhānta which he
gave at various assemblies. He remained immersed in the
pleasure of serving Śrī Gaura-Rādhā-Vinodabihārījī. He

                          226
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

took full shelter of Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s
instructions, was eternally established in the
conception of Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and always
relished the subject matter of the preaching of Śrī Rūpa
and Raghunātha. He would always try to engage his
disciples in harikathā and hari-kīrtana, and he
instructed them to keep away from materialistic
conversation, which he called ‘the urge of speech’
following Upadeśāmṛta.

No one could give Śrīla Gurupādapadma any foodstuffs or
clothes, no matter how hard they tried. He very rarely
accepted any donations or deeds of properties from his
widowed followers, and he would not allow his disciples
to accept such charity either. On the other side, he
would hardly ever refrain from giving mercy even when it
was not asked for. To make people enthusiastic to serve
guru and Vaiṣṇavas he sometimes accepted their ordinary
things. He was anxious about the condition of people who
were attached to their families, and he would always
warn his renunciate disciples by describing the prākṛta
sahajiyās as ‘gharapāgāla (madly attached to home) and
gṛhī bāulā (staying at home but making a show of being
renunciates).’

He used to quote the statement from Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Antya 6.278),

viṣayīra anna khāile malina haya mana

malina mana haile naya kṛṣṇera smaraṇa

“If one eats food which is offered by materialists, the
mind becomes contaminated, and when the mind is
contaminated one cannot remember Kṛṣṇa.”

Following this principle, he strictly forbade any
exchange or contact with the sampradāyas of those who
try to enjoy guru16 and those who renounce guru17. By
his own example he taught his disciples to practice
renunciation of enjoyment for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa.
During śrī ūrjā-vrata, Śrī Puruṣottama vrata and so on
he would instruct his disciples to practise renunciation
by sleeping on the ground, by abandoning the greed for
food, and by eating simply from leaf-plates. As regards
accepting what is favourable for sevā, he instructed the
devotees going for bhikṣa to properly consider the verse
by Bhaktivionda Ṭhākura, tomāra sevāya duḥkha haya jata
seo to parama sukha: “Troubles encountered in Your sevā
shall be the cause of great happiness.”He told them that
they should notto live a comfortable life, but should
tolerate difficulties for the sevā of Śrī Hari, guru and
Vaiṣṇavas. Some people living in the maṭha had large
enough bank balances to maintain themselves for the rest
of their lives. He called those so-called disciples
‘hypocrites disguised as Vaiṣṇavas’ ‘sense-enjoyers
devoid of faith in Bhagavān’ and ‘atheists.’

Śrīla Gurupādapadma was an ideal guru, and was expert in
kṛṣṇa-tattva. He forbade followers with anarthas to
remember aṣṭakalīya līlā and imagine their siddha-deha
(spiritual form). He particularly attracted the
attention of everyone by quoting Jagadguru Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s instructive words: “Smaraṇa will take place

                          227
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

by the influence of kīrtana, and then it is possible to
perform nirjana bhajana.” He pointed out that the
improper imitation of śrī guru and Vaiṣṇavas is not sevā
or bhajana, but rather hypocrisy. He asked his disciples
to write the following verse by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura on
the main door of his Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī:

jaḍavidyā jata māyāra vaibhava tomāra bhajane bādhā

moha janamiyā anitya saṁsāre jīvake karaye gādhā

“The knowledge of this material world is knowledge born
of Your illusory energy (māyā). It creates obstacles in
devotional service and makes an ass of the eternal jīva
by increasing his infatuation with this temporary
world.”

The goal of studying the śāstras, grammar and so forth
is not to collect money, beautiful women and prestige.
“Everyone will appreciate that knowledge which, in
discussion, causes Kṛṣṇa rati to manifest in the heart.
You must sincerely kick out whatever knowledge causes
obstacles in bhakti. Sarasvatī, the goddess of learning,
is dear to Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa bhakti resides in her heart.
This knowledge in devotion is the sanctifying grace.”
Śrīla Gurudeva always liked to explain these statements
and moods of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.

Śrīla Gurupādapadma never tolerated those who imitated
bhakti, or those who were duplicitous while pretending
to offer service. Once he established a maṭha which one
of his gṛhastha disciples had donated to him. Later on,
when this disciple tried to make guru and Vaiṣṇavas his
servants, Śrīla Gurudeva called back the maṭha residents
and showed indifference towards his so-called disciple.
He would be strict in instructing his personal servants
or so-called disciples to abandon duplicity. He was
particular to protect the honour of the guru’s senior
servants so that they could co-operate and live together
on good terms. He condemned the behaviour of people who
falsely pretended to maintain their lives by begging
madhukarī (alms) in the vicinity of Vraja-maṇḍala or
other similar areas. He would also remind us that people
who are attached to sense gratification have to accept
birth in Vraja as monkeys, turtles and so on. He would
say that no one is qualified to beg for nirguṇa
madhukarī until their heart has achieved the state of
nirguṇa, that is until it is free from material
qualities.

On one occasion, one of Śrīla Guru Mahārāja’s God-
brothers wrote in his magazine, “Those who are outside
Māyāpura are deprived of service to Śrīla Prabhupāda.”
Śrīla Ācāryadeva objected to this and announced in a
deep voice like a thunderbolt, “Those who are guru-
bhogis or guru-tyāgis are situated millions of miles
away from Prabhupāda. Such people may apparently have
lived in Māyāpura for ten or twelve years, but actually
they have deserted Māyāpura and have been living in the
kingdom of Kali the whole time. Outwardly they pretended
to serve Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrī Dhāma, but they were
not really serving them at all. Śrī Gurupādapadma, who
is non-different from Nityānanda Prabhu, always deceives
those people who are duplicitous about wealth. However,

                          228
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

those servants who have niṣṭhā in guru-sevā and whose
life is surrendered to guru can always remain absorbed
in the service of Śrī Gurudeva’s innermost desires,
regardless of where they are staying.” Śrīla Guru-
pādapadma tried from the core of his heart to serve any
person related to Śrīla Prabhupāda. In this respect he
was equal to all, whether they were renunciate residents
of the maṭha, gṛhasthas, or ordinary people who came
close to him. This is the special transcendental quality
of a disciple who has offered his ātmā, his very self,
to Śrī Gurudeva.

Śrī Gurupādapadma was many times seen to be very
particular about the way he kept even five and ten rupee
notes in his purse. This sometimes caused doubts about
his detachment from money. When he was asked about this,
he would reply in Śrīla Prabhupāda’s words, āsaktirahit
sambandhasahit viṣayasamūha sakali mādhava: “We should
be detached from material things and at the same time
see them in relation to Kṛṣṇa. The prema-sukha in the
devotee's heart arises when he satisfies Kṛṣṇa's senses.
This the transcendental attitude to serving Caitanya
Mahāprabhu." Those who try to imitate Śrīla
Gurupādapadma’s divine character will inevitably fall
down from bhajana. However, accepting the instructions
which he gives out of love to benefit the soul will
bring auspiciousness. He said that śrī guru becomes
unhappy at seeing the misery of others, but even though
śri guru’s heart is distressed when he sees duplicitous
people, this still does not bring them auspiciousness.

One day a devotee was studying the commentaries on rāsa-
līlā, bhramara-gīta and so on, and Śrīla Gurudeva said,
“The qualification to hear topics such as rāsa-līlā will
come when śrī nāma-kīrtana has freed the heart from
anarthas, and śuddha-sattva has appeared there.
Otherwise the trans-cendental pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda will appear to be the activities of a worldly
hero and heroine, and will only give rise to false
ideas. The conception of rasa is only possible in the
siddha deha, the perfect state. It is impossible to
perceive sṛṅgāra-rasa in a material body. Only a person
who is free from the lower types of enjoyment and is in
the stage of bhāva is qualified to discuss sambhoga
rasa.”

It is essential to have the mercy and inspiration of
Bhagavān to know and understand śrī guru and Vaiṣṇavas
in truth. Sometimes Vaiṣṇavas give honour to an impious
person in order to stay away from bad association.
Moreover, they sometimes hide their svarūpa, their real
form, out of fear of association with the public.
Sometimes they appear to accept disciples, and falsely
maintain a disguise by acting as if they were accepting
service and advice from their disciples. Nevertheless,
in all respects they protect their dependence and
independence. This is the speciality of their
inconceivable, divine character.

Śrīla Ācāryadeva always led his life in such a way as to
protect Śrīla Prabhupāda’s innermost desire. He would
constantly be engaged in establishing daiva-varnāśrama-
dharma, in preaching the conclusions of bhakti which he
himself fully practised, in establishing Śrī Dhāma

                          229
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

parikramā, in setting up printing presses, in publishing
bhakti literature, in preaching of śrī nāma haṭṭa and in
other such services.

Some months before Śrīla Paramārādhyadeva entered
aprakaṭa-līlā, he acted as if he were accepting medical
treatment in the big city of Calcutta, the capital of
Kali. At that time, he was staying in a house of a very
faithful bhakta in Ṭyāṇrā. Many people may doubt why he
left Śrī Dhāma to stay in the capital of Kali. Yathāya
vaiṣṇava-gaṇa seī sthāna vṛndāvana, seī sthāne ānanda
aśeṣa: “Wherever mahā-bhāgavata śrī gurus go, they make
transcendental Goloka Vṛndāvana appear, and they are
themselves absorbed in the aṣṭa-kālīya sevā of Vraja-
nava-yuva-dvandva, the divine Youthful Couple of Vraja.”

The eternally liberated, topmost mahā-puruṣas relish the
sweetness of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda’s transcendental pastimes
and the magnanimity of Śrī Gaurasundara, who came to
bestow the ultimate goal (prayojana), which is kṛṣṇa-
prema. Ordinary people who yearn to perform hari-
bhajana, and especially the servants of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti, are exceptionally fortunate and
excessively blessed to attain the shelter of the lotus
feet of such mahā-bhāgavatas. The Śrī Rūpānuga Sārasvata
Vaiṣṇavas are and will always remain endebted in all
respect to this transcendental maha-puruṣa. There is no
doubt in this regard.

Thus ends the Fourth Part of The Life and Teachings of
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī by Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.




Fifth Part




The siddhānta proclaimed by Śrīla Gurudeva

In every age, Bhagavān and His dear associates appear on
earth, bringing with them gifts of universal
auspiciousness. Each time they come, the gifts they
bring have their own unique and original nature.
Bhagavān is an ocean of compassion, and He and His dear
associates do not come to cheat the inhabitants of this
material universe by giving away any perishable wealth
or commodity. They appear to give in charity something
for the eternal welfare of the ātmā. Their gifts or
contributions cannot be seen in a gross form as mundane
objects of sense gratification. If anyone tries to view
their immortal charity as gross sense enjoyment, then he
must be bereft of the immense mercy of this gift.

Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, having accepted the
ecstatic emotions and lustre of Śrī Rādhā, appeared in
this world in the form of Śrī Gaurasundara. He is parama
karuṇa (supremely merciful) and rasika śekhara (the
supreme enjoyer of rasa). Therefore He has distributed a
distinctive type of prema-bhakti in this world through

                          230
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

the medium of śrī harināma.

Each of the various gifts given by the supremely kind
Bhagavān and His associates is unique and special.
Still, nothing can compare with the prema-bhakti
distributed by Śrī Gaura-sundara, for it includes the
original nature and specialities of all the immortal
contributions of all previous avatāras and ācāryas.

By the inspiration and mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī initiated the river of bhakti-rasa in
his books such as Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu and
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. This is the fundamental asset of the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrī Narottama
Ṭhākura, Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Jagadguru Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhu-pāda and all rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇavas have preached and propagated this very same
śuddha- or prema-bhakti.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared in this world with His
associates and preached harināma-saṇkīrtaṇa and śuddha-
bhakti throughout India in a very few days. Similarly,
Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda descended to the earth with his associates
roughly 125 years ago and preached śrī nāma-saṇkīrtaṇa
and śuddha-bhakti throughout the world in a very short
time. My Gurupādapadma Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja was
prominent among Śrīla Prabhupāda’s confidential
associates.

When Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhupāda entered nitya-līlā, a
dark age arrived for the Sārasvata Gaudīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya. The stream of śuddha-bhakti which Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīla Prabhupāda had initiated
began to diminish. Their daily, weekly, fortnightly and
monthly magazines and journals in different languages
were stopped. The sannyāsīs and braḥmacārīs in the
preaching centres which Śrīla Prabhupāda had established
lost their enthusiasm. Giving up the principal maṭha,
they began to establish their separate, independent
maṭhas. Many of those who had previously lived in the
āśrama began to return to household life, and in this
way the current of preaching began to dry up.

Śrīla Gurupādapadma has written in his brief
autobiography, “After the entrance of our Śrī Śrī
Gurudeva into the unmanifest pastimes on January 1st,
1937, various kinds of disturbances began in the Gauḍīya
mission. I left Śrī Caitanya Maṭha under these difficult
circumstances in June 1939 and in 1940, on the day of
Akṣaya Tṛtīyā in the month of Vaiśākha, I founded Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti in a rented building at 33/2
Bospāḍā Lane, Bāgbāzār, Calcutta. After that, in
September 1941 on the Pūrṇimā day of Bhādrapada, in
Kaṭvā, where Śrīman Mahāprabhu previously took sannyāsa,
I accepted tridaṇḍa-sannyāsa from Pūjyapāda Śrīmad
Bhaktirakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja, who had accepted the
renounced order from Śrīla Prabhupāda. I then returned
to my maṭha in Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa, and began to preach
from there in various other places.”


                          231
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

The main subject of the preaching of Ācārya Kesarī Oṁ
Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keṣava Mahārāja was
firstly establishing the śuddha-bhakti practised and
preached by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His followers,
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, and secondly breaking
apart the ill-conceived doctrines opposed to bhakti,
such as māyāvāda, smārta and sahajiyā. We are giving an
account herein of the nature of the śuddha-bhakti that
he preached. In his own preaching he always used to
quote two particular ślokas as evidence to establish
bhakti. One of these is the Daśamula-tattva written by
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, which we shall consider in
some detail a little later in this Fifth Part. The other
śloka is by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura:

ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa tanayas tad dhāma vṛndāvanam

ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū vargeṇa yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ pramāṇam amalaṁ premā pumārtho mahān

śrī caitanya mahāprabhor matam idaṁ tatrādaro naḥ paraḥ

“Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is my only wor-
shipful object. In the same way that He is worshipful,
so is His transcendental abode, Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma. The
mood in which the young brides of Vraja have worshipped
Him is the most excellent of all. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
alone is the immaculate śabda-pramāṇa (scriptural
evidence) and prema is the supreme objective of life.
This is the conception of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and
there is nothing beyond it.”

Here Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has explained
in a highly condensed form the conceptions of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In this verse, sambandha, abhidheya
and prayojana-tattva have been described in an
exceedingly beautiful way according to the siddhānta
accepted by Śrī Gauḍīya Gosvāmīs.

Vadanti tat tattva vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam. In
this śloka of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11) three types of
realisation of the non-dual, Supreme Absolute Truth
(advaya-jñāna para-tattva1) have been mentioned. These
are Brahman realisation, Paramātmā realisation and
Bhagavān realisation. The supreme realisation is that of
Bhagavān, who is the cause of all causes and the
controller of all controllers. He is full in six
opulences, and is the origin of the universe, although
He Himself has no origin. The imperfect vision of only
the cit feature of bhagavat-tattva has been called
Brahman realisation. In the Upaniṣads this has been
called nirviśeṣa-brahman, and it is the bodily lustre of
Bhagavān. In yoga-śāstra, the partial realisation of the
sat and cit features of the omnipotent bhagavat-tattva
has been called Paramātmā realisation. Paramātmā
realisation is to know that Viṣṇu who measures the size
of the thumb and who is situated splendidly within the
heart of every jīva as the witness or regulator of the
fruits of action.

There are also two types of bhagavat-tattva, namely
aiśvarya-pradhāna and mādhurya-pradhāna. Aiśvarya-
pradhāna, the bhagavat-tattva who is complete in six

                          232
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

opulences, reigns over Vaikuṇṭha in the spiritual sky in
the form of Śrī Nārāyāṇa, eternally served by His
associates headed by Lakṣmī. Mādhurya-pradhāna is
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is radiantly present in
Vraja where He is served by gopas and gopīs. He is
especially endowed with the four types of mādhurī
(sweetness) namely His venu-mādhurī, rūpa-mādhurī, guṇa-
mādhurī and līlā-mādhurī (His incomparably sweet flute,
beauty, qualities and pastimes). Therefore in the above
verse, only Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara who resides
in Vraja has been described as the most worshipful of
all. Although Brahman, Paramātmā and the whole multitude
of avatāras are essentially one in tattva, Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is the ultimate aspect of para-
tattva because of His speciality in regard to śakti and
the display of rasa. The specific meaning of the phrase
‘tad dhāma vṛndāvanam’ is that the sweet pastimes of
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, who is the nectarean
ocean of all mellows of love and affection, cannot
possibly take place in Vaikuṇṭha, Ayodhya, Dvārakā,
Māthurā or anywhere else other than in Vṛndāvana.
Therefore Vraja Dhāma, being non-different from Kṛṣṇa,
has been described as an equally worshipful tattva.
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāma-sundara is served in Vraja by
His associates in dāsya, sakhya and vatsalya-rasa, but
the sweet service of the Vraja ramaṇīs (gopīs) is filled
with the highest mellows of paramour love, and is
supermost. Among these gopīs in paramour love, Śrīmatī
Rādhikājī, the embodiment of mahābhāva and the crest-
jewel of Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds is the best of all. Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa accepted Her sentiments and bodily
complexion, and appeared in this world as Śrī
Gaurasundara to taste His own mādhurī and to distribute
nāma-prema throughout the universe. The conceptions of
this very Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu have been described in
a condensed form in the above śloka.

Śrīla Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, an associate of
Śrī Gaura, has extracted the essence of the conceptions
of the Śrī Gauḍīya Gosvāmīs and ācāryas, and has given
the teaching of daśamūla-tattva. As if putting the ocean
in a jar, he has filled this daśamūla-tattva with the
concentrated essence of the cream of the Vedas,
Upaniṣads, Vedānta-sūtra, Gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
the literature of the Gosvāmīs. Our most worshipful
Śrīla Gurupādapadma used to proclaim Śrī Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura's daśamūla-tattva everywhere he went. We are
therefore giving a summary of daśamūla-tattva here.

āmnāyaḥ prāha tattvaṁ harim iha paramaṁ sarva-śaktiṁ
rasābdiṁ

tad bhinnaṁśaṁśca jīvān prakṛti-kavalitān tad vimuktāṁś
ca bhāvād

bhedābheda-prakāśaṁ sakalam api hareḥ sādhanaṁ śuddha-
bhaktiṁ

sādhyaṁ tat prītim evetyupa diśati jānān gauracandraḥ
svayaṁ saḥ

“The message of the Vedas received through guru-
paramparā is called āmnāya. The Vedas and smṛti-śāstra
(such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam) which follow the Vedic

                          233
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

version have been accepted as authoritative proof, as
have different types of evidence such as direct
perception, inasmuch as they confirm the Vedic version.
From these sources of evidence, the following essential
truths are established.

(1) Hari is the Supreme Truth.

(2) He is sarva-śaktimān, possessed of all potencies.

(3) He is akhila rasāmṛta-sindhu, the ocean of all
nectarean transcendental mellows.

(4) Two kinds of jīvas, namely mukta and baddha
(liberated and conditioned) are His separated expansions
(vibhinnāṁśa-tattva).

(5) The conditioned souls are under the control of māyā.

(6) The mukta-jīvas are liberated from the influence of
māyā.

(7) Everything in existence, whether conscious or un-
conscious, is a manifestation of Śrī Hari and is
simultaneously and inconceivably one with Him and
different from Him.

(8) Bhakti is the only sādhana (means to attain the
goal).

(9) Love for Kṛṣṇa (prema) is the only objective
(sādhya).”

Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given
instructions on ten types of tattva to the faithful
jīvas. Of these, the first is the principle of evidence
(pramāṇa-tattva), and the remaining nine are prameya-
tattva, the subject which is established by pramāṇa-
tattva. The ten fundamental principles in the above
śloka have been analysed as follows.

a) Pramāṇa-tattva

When the śrutis (Vedas) which are called brahma-vidyā
are received through the medium of hearing from the
guru-paramparā coming from Brahmā, the creator of the
universe, who is the dear servant of Śrī Bhagavān, that
knowledge is called ‘āmnāya'. The four Vedas, the
itihāsas, the Purāṇas, the Upaniṣads, ślokas, sūtras and
anuvyākhya—these are all included in āmnāya. Here we
should understand ‘itihāsas’ to mean Rāmāyaṇa and
Mahābhārata. The eighteen mahā-purāṇas headed by Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam are indicated by the word ‘Purāṇa.’
‘Upaniṣad’ refers to the principal body of Upaniṣads
such as Īśa, Kena, Kaṭha and so on. ‘Śloka’ means the
books written in metres such as anuṣṭupa2 by the ṛṣis,
and ‘sūtra’ means the sūtras expressing the purpose of
the Veda written by the prominent tattva-ācāryas.
Superior to the sūtra literatures are vyākhyā or
commentaries and the other works written by those
ācāryas. All these are identified by the term ‘āmnāya’.
The principal meaning of the word ‘āmnāya' is—Veda. The
same idea has been expressed in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.


                          234
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

svataḥ pramāṇa veda pramāṇa śiromaṇi

lakṣaṇā karile svataḥ pramāṇatā hāni

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Ādi-līla 7.132)

“The self-evident Vedic literatures are the highest
evidence of all, but if these literatures are
interpreted, their self-evident nature is lost.”

b) The self-evident Veda is the crest-jewel of evidence

The evidence of the Vedic literature (veda-pramāṇa) is
also known as śruti-pramāṇa or śabda-pramāṇa (the
evidence of transcendental sound). Thus the Vedas, the
Purāṇas, Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata, the Upaniṣads,
Vedānta-sūtra and literature such as the commentaries
written by vaiṣṇava-ācāryas are called āpta-vākya or
āmnāya-vākya. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī established beyond
doubt the authority of āpta-vākya or śabda-pramāṇa, and
went on to prove the authority of the Purāṇas as well.
Ultimately he has established that Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is
the crest-jewel of all sources of evidence. Using the
same criteria by which he showed that Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
is the most authentic of all sources of evidences, he
has also authenticated the authoritative śāstra revealed
by Brahmā, Nārada, Vyāsa, Śukadeva and after them in
sequence tattva-guru Śrīman Madhva Ācārya, Vijayadhvaja,
Brahmaṇya Tīrtha, Vyāsatīrtha and so on.

From this it is clearly evident that the Brahmā
sampradāya is the guru-praṇālī (the paramparā or
spiritual hierarchy) of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas who have
taken shelter of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Kavikarṇapura
Gosvāmī has established this very opinion in his Gaura-
gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī has
described this guru-paramparā in his Saṁskāra-dīpikā.
Śrī Baladeva Vidyabhūṣaṇa, the com-mentator on Vedānta-
sūtra, has also accepted the same spiritual hierarchy.
Our revered Gurupādapadma Śrī Ācārya Kesarī has
supported this opinion with various logical arguments
and scriptural evidence in all of his literatures,
articles and especially in his essay entitled
‘Acintyabhedābheda-tattva’. Śrīla Gurupādapadma’s role
in protecting his sampradāya is very important at this
present time.

Ordinarily, the defects of bhrama, pramāda, vipralipsā
and karaṇāpāṭava3 are present in the opinions of human
beings. These four defects are certainly found in the
conditioned soul. Even great paṇḍitas are unable to give
up these four defects when they reflect upon the Reality
which is transcendental or beyond the jurisdiction of
the senses, so their opinions are not flawless or
reliable evidence. This means that the statements of the
Vedas are the only authentic evidence regarding subject
matter which is beyond the jurisdiction of material
sense perception, because their origin is divine
(apauruṣeya), and not human. Direct perception,
hypothesis, comparison, history and other types of proof
are useful when they are subordinate to śabda-pramāṇa
(the Vedic statements). Then and then only can they help
to a limited degree and be accepted as evidence;
otherwise they cannot be accepted as evidence at all.

                          235
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

However, the fully independent and omnipotent Bhagavān
Himself appears in the pure hearts of perfected sages
and vaiṣṇava ācāryas who are situated in the state of
complete trance, and He manifests perfect knowledge in
the form of Veda. Thus the authenticity of the self-
evident Veda, which is the embodiment of knowledge, is
always spotless and reliable in all respects.

c) Only Kṛṣṇa is parama-tattva

Kṛṣṇa alone is Svayaṁ Bhagavān and He is the shelter of
all. Kṛṣṇa alone has been called the pūrṇa tattva or
parama tattva throughout the Vedas, the Upaniṣads, Gītā,
the Purāṇas headed by the Bhāgavata Purāṇa, and the
Āgamas. He is also sarveśvareśvara, the Lord and
controller of all other controlling agents. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, Kṛṣṇa has been established as Svayaṁ
Bhagavān and advaya-jñāna para-tattva in the verses
‘kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam’ and ‘vadanti tat tattva-
vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam.’ Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
advaya-jñāna para- tattva, has three svarūpas, or
natural appearances. These are Brahman, Paramātmā and
Bhagavān. Only Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Svayaṁ Bhagavān. His bodily
lustre, the light emanating from his limbs, is called
nirviśeṣa-brahman, the homogeneous spirit. Paramātmā is
Bhagavān’s partial expansion, who dwells within all
jīvas in the form of the sākṣī (witness). Pure devotees
of Bhagavān, who have taken shelter of bhakti-yoga and
attained the darśana of Bhagavān, see His sac-cid-ānanda
śrī vigraha.

premāñjana cchurita bhaktivilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

(Brahma Saṁhitā 5.38)

“His pure devotees, whose eyes are smeared with the
salve of love, always see Him in their hearts.”

Jñānis see the para-tattva in the form of nirviśeṣa-
brahman. Their eyes cannot see Bhagavān’s śri vigraha
because they are blinded by the dazzling effulgence of
His limbs. Those who worship the para-tattva by taking
shelter of the path of yoga realise Him in the form of
Paramātmā. However the devotees of Bhagavān see His sac-
cid-ānanda śrī vigraha by the influence of bhakti.
Vision of Bhagavān is the complete and perfect vision,
whereas the vision of Brahman and Paramātmā is partial.
The Vedas, Upaniṣads and Purāṇas prove that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Hari:

a) apaśyam gopāmanipadyamānamā

ca purā ca pathibhiścantam

sa sadhrīciḥ

sa viṣucīrvasāna āvarīvartti-bhuvaneśvantaḥ

(Ṛg Veda 1.12.164.31)

“I saw a boy who appeared in the dynasty of cowherds and
who is never annihilated. He wanders on many paths,

                             236
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

sometimes close by and sometimes far away. Sometimes He
is adorned with varieties of garments and sometimes He
is covered by different garments of the same colour. In
this way He repeatedly exhibits His manifest and
unmanifest pastimes.”

b) śyāmāc chabalaṁ prapadye

śabalāc chayāmaṁ prapadye

(Chāṅdogya Upaniṣad 8.13.1)

“The transcendental cid-ānanda-maya dhāma (abode), which
is full of wonderful pleasure pastimes, is attained by
Kṛṣṇa sevā, and Kṛṣṇa is attained from that
transcendental world which is full of varied
curiosities.”

The word ‘śyāma’ means ‘by Kṛṣṇa.’ The purport is that
saying ‘Kṛṣṇa’ (black) conveys the conception of the
para-tattva in its nirguṇa aspect, when it is without
material qualities and can thus be represented as
colourless. Conversely, the word ‘śabal’ means ‘gaura’
which signifies that it is equipped with a myriad of
colours or the aggregate of all colours. In other words,
the name of the para-tattva equipped with all
transcendental qualities is ‘Gaura.’ Therefore the
confidential meaning of the above mantra is that Gaura
is attained by Kṛṣṇa bhajana, and Kṛṣṇa is attained by
Gaura bhajana.

c) ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.28)

“All avatāras begining with Rāma and Nṛsiṁha are the
parts, and parts of the parts, of the Supreme Person
Bhagavān. However, only Kṛṣṇa is the original Svayaṁ
Bhagavān.”

d) mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya

(Bhagavad-gītā 7.7)

“O Arjuna! There is nothing superior to Me.”

e) ekovaśī sarvagaḥ kṛṣṇa īḍya

eko’pi san

bahudhā yo’vabhāti

(Gopāla-tāpani Upaniṣad, Pūrva)

“The one controller of all, the all-pervading,
unparallelled Para-brahman Śrī Kṛṣṇa is worshipful for
the devas, humans and all living beings. Although He is
One, He is manifest in many forms by the influence of
His own inconceivable potency, and performs various
types of revelry.”

f) vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ

(Bhagavad-gītā 15.15)

                             237
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


“I am the only subject to be known in all the Vedas.”

Some people harbour the doubt that Kṛṣṇa’s name is not
to be found anywhere in the Vedas, but this idea is not
correct. It is only Kṛṣṇa who has been represented in
the Vedas, in some places by the mukhya (primary) or
dictionary usage, in others by gauṇa (secondary) or the
figurative sense, and in others again by anvaya or
direct interpretation. We have already shown this by the
śruti mantras such as ‘apaśyaṁ gopāmani padyamānamā’ and
‘śyāmāc chabalaṁ.’ In the Ṛg mantras, the līlā of
Bhagavān have been described in this way:

tā vāṁ vāstūnyuśmasigamadhyai yatra

gāvo bhūriśṛṅgā ayāsaḥ

atrāha tadurugāyasya kṛṣṇaḥ paramaṁ

padamavabhāti bhūri

“I desire to attain Your (Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa) abodes,
wherein the acclaimed kāmadhenus (wish fulfilling cows)
have excellent horns and are capable of bestowing my
heart’s desired wealth. This supreme abode of Kṛṣṇa, the
fulfiller of the desires of His devotees, is illuminated
to the fullest extent.”

This Vedic mantra describes the charm and beauty of
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa and of His beloved cows.
There are numerous places in the Vedas in which
descriptions such as this are mukhya i.e. according to
standard dictionary usage. Elsewhere, Kṛṣṇa has been
described taking the secondary sense, gauna-vṛtti.

ayam ātmā sarveṣāṁ bhūtānāṁ

madhu ayamātmā sarveṣāṁ

bhūtānām adhipatiḥ sarveṣāṁ

bhūtānām rājā ity ādi

(Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.5.14-15)

This mantra alludes to Kṛṣṇa by gauṇa (secondary) usage,
saying that He is the honey, the master and the king of
all states of existence. Here Kṛṣṇa is indicated by the
word ātmā. This has also been stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam:

kṛṣṇam enamavehi tvam ātmānam akhilātmanām

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.55)

“O King! Know that Kṛṣṇa is the ātmā of all ātmās.”

Kṛṣṇa is Para-brahman, paramānanda, pūrna-brahma and
Svayaṁ Bhagavān. This has been proclaimed clearly in the
verses of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam such as ‘gūḍhaṁ parama-
brahma manuṣya-lingam’, ‘yan mitraṁ paramānandaṁ pūrṇaṁ
brahma sanātanam’ and ‘kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam.’ Viṣṇu
Purāṇa has also determined that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Para-

                          238
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

brahman by conclusive statements such as ‘yatrāvatīrṇaṁ
kṛṣṇākhyaṁ para-brahma narākṛtiṁ.’ Similarly, in Gītā we
find, ‘brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham.’ Our Gosvāmīs have
given evidence from the śāstras supporting the siddhānta
that Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate aspect
of para-tattva. He is the source of all avatāras and
expansions such as Rāma and Nṛsiṁha, and He is also the
basis of Paramātmā and Brahman.

d) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is sarva-śaktimān (the possessor of all
potencies)

The descriptions of the potencies of para-tattva are
found throughout the Vedas and other śāstras of divine
origin. Great liberated personalities who accept the
essence of the śāstra have supported the conclusion that
śakti (potency) is one tattva (principle) and śaktimān
(the possessor and master of potency) is another tattva.
These two tattvas are distinct, and yet they are also
eternally and in all respects inseparable. Mortal men
cannot realise the confidential relationship between
śakti and śaktimān, because their thoughts are always
limited. Actually, although the factual substance and
the potential energy of the substance are different,
they are also indivisible, meaning that they are non-
different. This difference and non-difference is
established at one and the same time. Therefore Śrī
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His followers, the Gauḍiya
Vaiṣṇavas, have accepted the relationship of acintya-
bhedābheda (inconceivable oneness and difference)
between the factual substance and the potential energy
of the substance. In his Sandarbhas, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
has used scriptural evidence and incontrovertible
reasoning to prove the acintya-bhedābheda relationship
between the potent and the potency. In Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta it has been said that Śrīmatī Rādhikājī is
the complete energy and Kṛṣṇa is the complete energetic
source, yet there is no difference between them. Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa are inherently non-different, in just the same way
that musk and its fragrance, or fire and its heat,
cannot be separated from each other. Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are
manifest in two forms just to taste the rasa of Their
pastimes.

rādhā—pūrṇa-śakti, kṛṣṇa—pūrṇa-śaktimān

duī vastu bheda nāhi, śāstra-paramāṇa

mṛgamada, tāra gandha—yaiche aviccheda

agni, jvālāte—yaiche kabhu nāhi bheda

rādhā-kṛṣṇa aiche sadā eka-i svarūpa

līlā-rāsa āsvādite dhare dui-rūpa

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Ādi 4.96-98)

“Śrī Rādhā is the full potency and Śrī Kṛṣṇa possesses
that potency in full. All the revealed scriptures prove
that these two are not different. They are indeed the
same, just as musk and its scent are inseparable, or as
fire and its heat are non-different. Thus Śrī Rādhā and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa are One, yet They have taken two forms to

                          239
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

enjoy the mellows of pastimes.”

This siddhānta has also been established in Vedānta-
sūtra: śakti saktimator-abhedaḥ. From the consideration
of vastu-tattva (the principle of factual substance),
there is no substance other than Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which is why
He is called the advaya-tattva (non-dual Reality) in the
śāstra. The same advaya-tattva is seen in three ways by
candidates of different qualifications according to
their various degrees of worship. Those who only
cultivate jñāna imagine Brahman to be a state of being
which is opposite to the inert material existence; in
other words, they can conceive of Brahman as a
homogeneous, formless, impotent and inactive spirit.
However, this does not make clear what are the
characteristics of the substance. Those who search for
the advaya-tattva through buddhi-yoga (the meditational
process) see Paramātmā, as the witness of the ātmā, a
realisation which is not contrary to the individual
nature of the ātmā. Finally, those who see the factual
substance through pure undesignated bhakti-yoga directly
attain that advaya-tattva and see Svayaṁ Bhagavān in the
form of the Supreme Reality, endowed with complete
opulence, sweetness and potency.

The realisations of Brahman and Paramātmā are materially
designated. In other words, Brahman realisation comes
from a negative conception of the illusory designations
and Paramātmā realisation is in relation to the illusory
designations. However, the vision of the spiritual form
of Bhagavān is attained only by undesignated spiritual
eyes. The factual substance is the svarūpa of Bhagavān
and bhakti-śakti is the śakti-tattva.

The vision of Bhagavān without śakti is only nirviśeṣa-
brahman. Some believe that brahma-darśana is the
ultimate realisation, but this opinion reflects their
own preconceived inclination; darśana of Brahman which
is homogeneous and without potency can only be a partial
vision or experience, because in śāstras such as Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam we see the use of words such as Parabrahman.
Brahman and Parabrahman do not have the same meaning. In
Gītā and other śāstras, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has been called the
basis of the Brahman, so Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the intrinsic reality and Brahman is only His non-
differential manifestation or the radiance of His form.
Paramātmā is also a partial expansion of Bhagavān. In
other words, it can be said that Brahman realisation is
the dry and impotent experience of advaya-jñāna-tattva-
vastu. Clear knowledge of the Supreme Being who has
entered within inert matter in a subtle form is
Paramātmā realisation, and the complete experience of
the advaya-jñāna with all distinct characteristics is
Bhagavān realisation.

Realisation of Bhagavān is also of two types—aiśvarya-
pradhāna (realisation in which reverence inspired by
knowledge of His opulence is prominent) and mādhurya-
pradhāna (a realisation in which sweetness is
prominent). The aiśvarya-pradhāna feature is realised as
Śrīpati Nārāyaṇa and the mādhurya-pradhāna feature is
realised as Rādhānātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the one and only advaya-tattva-vastu. He

                          240
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

includes the aspects of Brahman and Paramātmā; He also
covers the complete opulence of Śrī Nārāyāṇa by His own
sweetness; and He is equipped with His transcendental
energy. This has been described in Svetāśvatara Upaniṣad
(6.8):

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇañ ca vidyāte

na tat samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca

“The activities (kriyā) of that Parabrahman, Paramātmā
are not prākṛta (material) because His karaṇa (active
senses) such as hands and feet are not material. Since
He is without material senses, His activities are
aprākṛta-līlā, transcendental pastimes. He is radiantly
present in all places and at all times by His aprākṛta
body. Therefore, it is seen that no other is even equal
to Him, what to speak of being greater than Him. It is
heard that parameśvara has a variety of divine potencies
of which three are prominent, namely His jñāna-śakti,
bala-śakti and kriyā-śakti. These three potencies are
known as cit-śakti or samvit-śakti; sat-śakti or
sandhinī-śakti; and ānanda-śakti or hlādinī-śakti
respectively.”

This parā-śakti of Bhagavān is also manifested in three
ways, namely as cit-śakti, jīva-śakti and māyā-śakti.
Cit-śakti, which is also called the svarūpa-śakti or
antaraṅgā-śakti, manifests the dhāmas such as Vaikuṇṭha,
Goloka and Vraja. Māyā-śakti is called bahiraṅgā-śakti.
All the mundane worlds or inert material creations have
been manifested from this potency. Its expanded majesty
is exhibited as unlimited universes. Jīva-śakti is also
called taṭasthā-śakti, from which the aggregate of
unlimited jīvas has been manifested. The shelter or
abode of these three śaktis is Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa has one naturally inherent potency called parā-
śakti. This is composed of variegated pleasure pastimes
and ever increasing varieties of bliss. Although this
śakti has unlimited spheres of influence, among them
only cit-śakti, jīva-śakti and māyā-śakti are perceived
by the jīvas.

The descriptions of the three aspects of this parā-śakti
are available in many places in the Veda.

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca

In Viṣṇu Purāṇa it is also found.

viṣṇu śaktih parā proktā

kṣetrajñākhyā tathā parā

avidyā karma samjñānyā

tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate

                           241
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017


“The potency of Viṣṇu is of three types—parā, kṣetrajña
and avidyā. The name of Viṣṇu’s parā-śakti is cit-śakti,
kṣetrajña is jñāna-śakti and avidyā-śakti is called
māyā-śakti.”

Also in Gītā:

apareyam itas tvanyāṁ pṛakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahābāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

(Bhagavad-gītā 7.5)

“However, this inanimate material nature which has eight
divisions (earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind,
intelligence and false ego) is an inferior nature. Know
that I have another superior energy in the form of the
jīvas, who have accepted this material word for
enjoyment by means of their fruitive actions.”

Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa or constitutional form is composed of
sat, cit and ānanda. Therefore His svarūpa-śakti is
manifest in three forms. From the ānanda portion comes
hlādinī-śakti, from sat comes sandhinī and from cit
comes saṁvit-śakti. Saṁvit-śakti is also called jñāna-
śakti. Hlādinī-śakti makes Kṛṣṇa joyful (āhlādit), which
is why its name is hlādinī. By this śakti Kṛṣṇa, the
embodiment of bliss, tastes pleasure, and the bhaktas
are also enabled to taste transcendental happiness. The
essence of this hlādinī is prema. Prema is a phenomenon
entirely composed of transcendental rasa, and is the
embodiment of ānanda. The concentrated essence of prema
is called mahā-bhāva. The embodiment of this mahā-bhāva
is Śrīmatī Rādhikā. This is a summary introduction to
the identity of śakti.

e) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is akhila-rasāmṛta-sindhu (the ocean of all
ambrosial mellows)

Para-tattva, the embodiment of non-dual knowledge, is
simply rasa (transcendental mellow). Those who have had
no experience of rasa-tattva cannot realise the advaya-
jñāna-svarūpa para-tattva even in the slightest. In
Taittirīya Upaniṣad it has been said,

raso vai saḥ

rasaṁ hy evāyaṁ labdhvānandī bhavati

ko hy evānyat kaḥ prāṇāyati

yad eṣa ākāśa ānando na syāt

eṣa hy evānandayati

(Taittirīya Upaniṣad, 2.7.1)

“Para-tattva is simply rasa. On attaining that rasa the
jīva attains ānanda. If that undivided Reality were not
the embodiment of ānanda in the form of rasa then who
could remain alive and who would endeavour to live? He
alone gives pleasure to all.”


                          242
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Prior to Svayaṁ-Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
different vaiṣṇava-ācāryas had established, preached and
propagated bhakti-tattva. However only Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī,
being empowered by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, further
developed that bhakti-tattva into bhakti-rasa. He has
described this subject elaborately in his Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu and Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. He has said that
the bhakti-lātā-bīja in the form of kṛṣṇa-sevā-vāsanā
(the tendency or inclanation to serve Kṛṣṇa) develops
sequentially from śraddhā to niṣṭhā, ruci, and āsakti.
When it comes to the stage of rati, it is called sthāyī-
bhāva. When the four bhāvas, namely vibhāva, anubhāva,
sāttvika and vyābhicārī meet together in a combined form
in this sthāyī-bhāva, then rati in the form of sthāyī-
bhāva is transformed into a relishable and supremely
astonishing condition called bhakti-rasa.

The regulations governing both mundane rasa and pure
spiritual rasa are the same. Where the application of
the sthāyi-bhāva is in relation to Bhagavān there is
pure spiritual bhakti-rasa, whereas when sthāyī-bhāva is
in relation to material sense enjoyment, there is the
insignificant, mundane rasa. Where the sthāyī-bhāva is
applied in relation to non-differentiated knowledge
there is nirviśeṣa-brahma-rasa and where the sthāyī-
bhāva is applied in relation to yoga, there is
paramātmā-rasa. Before śraddhā attains the condition of
rati, when there is the endeavour for rasa from the
combination of the constituent bhāvas such as vibhāva,
then incomplete fragmented rasa arises. The mundane rasa
is thoroughly rejectable and insignificant. Herein only
the pāramārthika (spiritual) rasa is being evaluated.

Rati in the form of sthāyī-bhāva is the foundation of
rasa. Rasa comes from the union of its four constituent
ingredients, namely vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika and
vyabhicārī. Vibhāva is of two types, namely ālambana and
uddīpana. Ālambana is also divided into two types:
āśraya and viṣaya. In pāramārthika-rasa Kṛṣṇa is the
only viṣaya (object) of rasa and the worshipper is the
āśraya (abode) of rasa. The qualities of the worshipful
object and objects in relation to Him are called
uddīpana. Dancing, singing, yawning, hiccups and so on
are expressions of the bhāva within the heart, and are
therefore called anubhāvas. The bodily transformations
such as becoming stunned, perspiration and horripilation
are called sāttvika-bhāvas because they are manifested
from sattva. There are thirty-three types of vyabhicārī-
bhāva such as self-disparagement, despondency and
humility. This collection of bhāvas move in the
direction of the ocean of the sthāyī-bhāva and increases
it. Therefore they are called vyabhicārī-bhāva (vi =
intensification, abhi = towards, cārī= going). Rasa is
of two types, namely mukhya (primary) and gauṇa
(secondary). The five mukhya-rasas are śānta (passive
adoration), dāsya (servitude), sakhya (friendship),
vātsalya (parental) and madhurya (conjugal). The seven
gauṇa-rasas are hasya (comedy), adbhuta (wonder), raudra
(anger), vīra (chivalry), karuṇa (pathos), bhayānaka
(horror) and vībhatsa (disgust).

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has given a brand-new and compre-
hensive definition of bhakti.


                          243
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

anyābhilāṣitā śūnyaṁ jñāna-kārmādy anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Pūrva-vibhāga 1.1.11)

“The cultivation of activities which are meant
exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or in other
words, the uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
performed through all endeavours of the body, mind and
speech, and through the expressions of various spiritual
sentiments (bhāvas), which is not covered by jñāna
(knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation) and karma
(reward-seeking activity), and which is devoid of all
desires other than the aspiration to bring happiness to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is called uttamā-bhakti, pure devotional
service.”

By performing sādhana of the above-mentioned bhakti,
rati is awakened. When rati is more condensed it is
called prema. As that prema becomes mature and more
condensed it is known as sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga,
anurāga, bhāva and mahā-bhāva. Kṛṣṇa rati is also of
five types arising from five divisions of devotees:
śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vatsalya and madhura rati. Among
these, madhura rati is the best. Kṛṣṇa prema is also of
two types—aiśvarya-miśrita and kevala or śuddha prema.

The prema by which one considers Kṛṣṇa to be Bhagavān
endowed with six opulences and oneself to be destitute,
low and insignificant is called aiśvarya-miśrita (mixed
with knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s opulences). The prema that we
see in the material world is mainly this mixed prema,
which does not control Bhagavān. Kevala or śuddha prema
is that pure affection through which one considers Kṛṣṇa
to be one’s son, friend or sweetheart, exactly as in an
intimate worldly relationship.

Kṛṣṇa is only controlled by this kevala prema. Yaśoda
Maiya scolds Kṛṣṇa and binds Him by this śuddha vatsalya
bhāva. In their pure sakhya-bhāva Kṛṣṇa’s friends climb
on His shoulders. The charming gopis of Vraja consider
Kṛṣṇa their most dear one, and when they rebuke Him,
their words of reproach are even more dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
than the veda-stuti, the reverent Vedic hymns. If
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāma-sundara had not descended to
this world, then the subjects of these three elevated
levels of rasa, namely sakhya, vātsalya and madhurya,
would not be found and the material world would remain
deprived of these bhāvas. Specifically, if Śrī Kṛṣṇa had
not mercifully manifested His cowherd-boy pastimes,
which madden the world with love, then no one would even
be able to realise that parameśvara is the object of
madhurya-rasa.

Among Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, Vraja līlā is the best of all,
because in this very līlā the highest benefit of all the
jīvas is seen in regard to the subject of rasa.
Logicians and worldly moralists cannot touch the glories
of Kṛṣṇa līlā. Vraja līlā is composed entirely of rasa,
and those who can reconcile this līlā in their hearts
are very fortunate. Only those fortunate bhaktas who
have tasted the sweetness of Vraja līlā can know its
sweetness. It is impossible to enter this subject by

                          244
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

thoughts of logic, morality, knowledge, yoga, religion
or irreligion.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the embodiment of rasa, is Parabrahman. At
the same time He is supremely rasika (expert in
relishing the mellows of love). Therefore, although He
is one, in order to taste rasa, He is eternally situated
in four natural forms by the influence of His own
inconceivable potency. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has described
these four natural forms in his Bhagavat-sandarbha,
Anuccheda 16.16.

ekam eva paramaṁ tattvaṁ svābhāvika-acintya śaktyā

sarvadaiva svarūpa-tad rūpa-vaibhava-jīva-pradhānarūpeṇa

caturddhāvatiṣṭhate, sūryāntara-maṇḍalasthita-teja īva

maṇḍala tad vahirgata tad raśmi-tat praticchavi-rūpeṇa

“The parama-tattva is one. He is equipped with His
inconceivable natural potency. With the assistance of
that potency He is eternally manifest in four forms: His
original form (svarūpa); His personal splendour, which
includes His abode, eternal associates and expansions
such as Lord Nārāyaṇa (tad-rūpa-vaibhava); the living
entities (jīvas) and the unmanifest state of the three
modes of material nature (pradhāna). There are some
simple examples which illustrate this point to a certain
extent. The four features may be compared to the
effulgence situated in the interior of the sun planet;
the sun globe; the rays of the sun emanating out from
the globe; and a remotely situated reflection
respectively.”

In the śāstras which describe the essential purports of
the Vedas such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the mahājanas have
researched the pure rasa within Kṛṣṇa. Great ṛṣis such
as the Catuḥsana headed by Sanaka Kumāra, Śiva, Vyāsa
and Nārada have described the rasa within Kṛṣṇa’s
supernatural pastimes in their own respective scriptures
as they have realised it in their states of trance.
Still, only Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has manifested this
nectarean Śrī Kṛṣṇa rasa on the surface of the earth.
Before Him and until today no one has been able to do
this. Therefore Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī has stated
quite appropriately:

premanāmādbhutārthaḥ śravaṇapathagataḥ kasya nāmnāṁ
mahimnaḥ

ko vettā kasya vṛndāvanavipinamahā mādhurīṣu praveśaḥ

ko vā jānāti rādhāṁ paramarasa camatkāramādhuryasīmām

ekaś caitanya candraḥ parama karuṇayā sarvamāviścakāra

(Śrī Caitanya-candrāmṛta 130)

“O brother, who had even heard of the name of parama-
puruṣārtha, the ultimate goal of life, called prema? Who
knew the glories of śrī harināma? Who had entered into
the wonderful sweetness of Śrī Vṛndāvana? And indeed who
knew the parā-śakti, (transcendental potency) as the

                          245
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

pinnacle of the supremely astonishing mādhurya-rasa,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā? Only the most merciful Śrī
Caitanyacandra has uncovered all these truths out of
compassion for the jīvas.”

f) Jīva is the vibhinnāṁśa-tattva of Śrī Hari

In the Vedic scriptures the jīvātmā has been called the
vibhinnāṁśa (separated part) of Bhagavān. Therefore the
jīva is constitutionally a servant of Kṛṣṇa. We have
already mentioned that the one parā-śakti or svarūpa-
śakti is manifested in three forms, cit-śakti, jīva-
śakti and māyā-śakti. When sac-cid-ānanda para-tattva
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is complete in six opulences, is equipped
only with His jīva-śakti, then His expansion is called
vibhinnāṁśa-jīva. Alternatively, when sac-cid-ānanda
Bhagavān is equipped with all potencies such as His
svarūpa-śakti, then His expansion is called svāṁśa.
There is no difference in principle between Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and His svāṁśa such as Śrī Baladeva, Paravyomapati (the
lord of the spiritual sky) Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Rāma,
Nṛsiṁhadeva and the other avatāras. Only when we
consider the degree of manifestation of śakti and rasa
can we understand that Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the last limit of the Supreme Truth, the summit of
aiśvarya and mādhurya, and avatāri or aṁśī4. His
avatāras such as Śrī Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, Baladeva, and
Paravyomapati Nārāyaṇa are called His vaibhava prakāśa.
These are all bhāgavat-tattva and the masters of māyā.
However this cannot be said in relation to jīvātmā. The
jīva is a transformation of Bhagavān’s jīva-śakti or
taṭasthā-śakti.

In the śāstra Bhagavān has been described as akhaṇḍa
(undivided), avikārī (immutable), and pariṇāmarahita
(without transformation). If the jīvas were direct
expansions of Bhagavān then Bhagavān would have to be
transformable or mutable. However Parabrahman cannot be
mutable or divided. In śāstra the jīva has been accepted
as the trans-formation of the śakti of Parabrahman. On
account of the non-difference of Brahman and His śakti
the jīva has been called the aṁśa of Brahman, as it has
been stated in the Gītā, mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke jīva-bhūta
sanātanaḥ (Bhagavad-Gītā 15.7). However, after
evaluating various scriptural evidence, the vaiṣṇava-
ācārya followers of Śrīman Mahāprabhu have announced
that the jīva is a transformation of śakti.

It is sometimes seen that a special jewel or a person
accomplished in chanting a special mantra can manifest
many other substances, although the jewel or the person
who knows the mantra themselves remain untransformed.
This is because the substances are manifested by their
potency. In the same way the cit-śakti of Parabrahman
Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifests the trans-cendental abodes such as
the unlimited Vaikuṇṭha planets, Goloka Vṛṇdāvana and
all their spiritual para-phernalia; the jīva or
taṭasthā-śakti manifests unlimited jīvas; and māyā-śakti
manifests unlimited mundane universes. Still, Brahman
remains immutable, undivided and pure. The jīva is an
aṁśa (partial expansion) of the śakti of Brahman, and
not a direct partial expansion of Brahman. That is why
he is called vibhinnāṁśa (separated expansion). It has
been stated in Śrī Nārada-pañcarātra, yattaṭasthaṁ tu

                          246
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

cidrūpaṁ svasaṁvedyādvinirgatam: “Being a particle of
consciousness and an emanation from the cit-śakti, the
jīva is taṭasthā (marginal).”

Further clarifying taṭasthā-śakti, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
says:

taṭasthatvañca māyāśaktyatītatvāt asyāvidyā
parābhavādirūpeṇa doṣeṇa paramātmano lepābhāvācca
ubhayakoṭāvapraviṣṭestasya tac chaktitve satyapi
paramātmanas tal lepābhāvaś ca yathā kvacidekadeśasthe
raśmau chāyayā tiraskṛte’pi sūryasyātiraskārastadvat

(Paramātma-sandarbha 37 saṅkhyā)

The purport is that jīva-śakti, which is called
taṭasthā, is different from the māyā-śakti; therefore it
does not come in the category of māyā. However, the jīva
is controlled by avidyā (ignorance) so he cannot be on
the same level as Paramātmā who remains ever
uncontaminated by ignorance. Although the smear of
ignorance is the śakti of Paramātmā, it does not touch
Paramātmā, just as the sun itself is not covered when a
cloud obscures its rays in one region. It has also been
stated as such in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.3.9).

tasya vā etasya puruṣasya dve eva sthāne

bhavata idam ca paralokasthānañca sandhyaṁ

tṛtīyaṁ svapnasthānam tasmin sandhye sthāne tiṣṭhannete
ubhe

sthāne paśyatīdañca paralokasthānañca

“That jīva-puruṣa has two positions, namely the
inanimate material world and the spiritual world about
which he should enquire. The jīva is situated in a third
position, which is svapnasthāna (taṭasthā) and is the
juncture between these two. Being situated on the place
where the two worlds meet, he sees both the jaḍa-viśva
(inert world) and the cid-viśva (spiritual world).”

The aggregate of jīvas is manifest from the taṭasthā-
śakti. Although they have arisen from parameśvara, they
are still separately existing individual entities. The
jīva is compared to an atomic particle of the sun’s rays
or to a spark of a fire. This has been stated clearly in
the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad.

yathāgneḥ kṣudrā visphulingā vyuccaranti

evamevāsmādātmānaḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni vyuccaranti

(Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.1.20)

“As sparks emanate from a fire, similarly the aggregate
of jīvas is manifested from sarvātmā Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

From this it is clear that the jīvas, being atomic
conscious particles and vibhinnaṁṣa-tattva, are
subordinate to the original ātmā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They are
eligible for the māyā-jagat or the cit-jagat because of
their taṭasthā (marginal) nature. Being situated on the

                          247
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

marginal line between the cit-jagat and jaḍa-jagat, if
they look in the direction of the cit-jagat, the śakti
of yogamāyā empowers them and they become engaged in the
service of Bhagavān in the cit-jagat. However, if they
look in the direction of the māyika (illusory) jagat,
the desire to enjoy the māyika-jagat arises in them.
Then, turning away from the spiritual sun, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
they become attracted by māyā. Māyā, who is very close
by, immediately gives them a gross body with which to
strive for enjoyment, and casts them into the current of
birth and death in material existence.

The jīvas' condition of being averse to Kṛṣṇa is anādi,
without beginning. Kṛṣṇa is supremely compassionate, and
He is not at fault for this undesirable condition of the
jīvas, because, being exceedingly sportive, He has given
the jīvas a divine jewel in the form of independence,
and He never interferes with their independence. The
cause of the jīvas' undesirable condition is their own
misbehaviour in regard to misuse of their God-given
independence.

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī has stated,

jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya kṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’

kṛṣṇera ‘taṭasthā-śakti’ 'bhedābheda prakāśa'

sūryāṁśu-kiraṇa, jaiche agni jālā ca ya

svābhāvika kṛṣṇera tina prakāra ‘śakti’ haya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 20.108-109)

“Kṛṣṇa’s natural potency is of three types. The jīva is
Kṛṣṇa’s taṭasthā-śakti. The jīva is related with Kṛṣṇa
as a manifestation simultaneously different and non-
different from Him. If Kṛṣṇa is compared to the sun then
the jīva is like an aṁśa, an atomic particle in His
rays.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it has also been stated:

bhayaṁ dvitīyābhinuveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo’ smṛtiḥ

tan māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ

bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru devatātmā

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.37)

“The jīva who is averse to Bhagavān forgets his own
consti-tutional nature because of being controlled by
māyā. Due to this forgetfulness, he becomes absorbed in
the material body and all things related to the body,
and a sort of mistaken and inverted identification
arises in which he develops the conception that he is
the material body: ‘I am a devatā, I am a human being’.
In this state of bodily identification, there are many
things to be feared, such as old age, disease and death.
Therefore people who know the truth should consider that

                          248
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

their own guru is īśvara (their master), that he is not
different from Bhagavān, and that he is very dear to
Him. They should then perform single-pointed bhajana of
īśvara (their guru) by ananya-bhakti, unalloyed
devotional service.”

Kevalādvaita-vādīs (monists) say, “Jīvātmā and Paramātmā
are abhinna; there is no difference at all between them.
In the conditioned state, when Brahman is covered by
avidyā (ignorance) it is called jīva. Jīva and the world
have no factual existence, brahma satyaṁ jaganmithyā
jīvo brahmaiva nāparaḥ." However, this conclusion of the
advaita-vādī is completely imaginary, opposed to śāstra
and false in all respects, because in the śrutis
Parabrahman has been described as complete, flawless,
undivided and composed of eternity, knowledge and bliss
whereas the jīva has been described as the minute,
conscious expanded part of Parabrahman or Bhagavān who
is sarva-śaktimān, omnipotent. Parabrahman is one, but
the jīvas are innumerable.

bālāgra śata bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca

bhāgo jīvaḥ sa vijñeyaḥ sa cānantyāya kalpate

(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 5.9)

“Though the jīva is situated in an inert material body,
he is a subtle transcendental principle (tattva). If one
divides the tip of a hair into one hundred parts and
again divides one of those parts into one hundred parts,
then however subtle one of those parts may be, the jīva
is even more subtle than that. Although he is so subtle,
the jīva is a spiritual substance (aprākṛta vastu) and
he is suitable for ānantya dharma.” (Ant means ‘to be
free from death’, and ānantya means mokṣa, liberation).

aṇurhyeṣa ātmāyaṁ vā ete sinītaḥ puṇyaṁ cāpuṇyañca

(Gaupavan śruti-vākya quoted in Madhva bhāṣya

on Vedānta-sūtra 2.3.18)

“The ātmā is atomic (minute) in size. Sun, piety and so
on can take shelter of him.”

It has also been stated in Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad, eṣo’
ṇurātmā setasā veditavyo: “This ātmā is atomic in size
(minute).”

It has been stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.5),

apareyam itas tvanyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva bhūtāṁ mahābāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

“He Māhabāho! (O mighty armed one!) The māyā-śakti is my
aparā or inferior potency. Apart from this I have jīva-
bhūtā, my parā or superior potency, in the form of jīva-
śakti by which, you should know, this entire creation is
being maintained.”

Kṛṣṇa naturally refers to himself by the title ‘I’
(aham), and says that constitution of the jīvas, which

                           249
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

have come forth from the inconceivable potency of
Paramātmā, is purely spiritual. Since the jīva has
manifested from the taṭasthā-śakti, his dharma is also
always taṭasthā. At the same time, because of being
minute, he is naturally susceptible to being controlled
by māyā. Therefore he is neither completely different
nor completely non-different from Paramātmā. The jīva is
controlled by māyā whereas īśvara is the master of māyā.
It is clear from the statements of āmnāya that jīva is
an eternal principle distinct from īśvara. Therefore the
jīva’s simultaneous difference and

non-difference from īśvara are both established by
śruti. Kevalādvaita-vāda is avaidika (non-Vedic).

The jīva is anu-caitanya (minutely conscious) and
endowed with the quality of knowledge. He has the self-
reference of ‘I’, and he is an enjoyer, a thinker and an
intelligent entity. The jīva’s eternal svarūpa is one.
This eternal svarūpa is extremely subtle. Just as a
beautiful form appears when the limbs of the gross body
such as the hands, legs, nose and eyes are each
consigned to their own places, similarly, in the body
composed of the particle of spiritual energy (cit-kaṇa)
there is also a very beautiful, minute, spiritual
svarūpa composed of all the minute spiritual limbs and
bodily parts. This svarūpa is the jīva’s eternal
constitutional form.

When the jīva is conditioned by māyā, its eternal body
is covered by the gross and subtle material bodies. It
is not māyāvāda to say that the jīva is controlled by
māyā (māyāvaśa). According to the māyāvādīs, the jīva is
a temporary principle enveloped or reflected by māyā.
However when we say that the jīva is ‘controlled by
māyā’ it is clear that the conscious particle jīva is
prone to be defeated by māyā because of his minute
nature. Māyā is the aparā-śakti (inferior potency) and
the jīva is parā-śakti (superior potency). The false
identification (ahaṅkara) with inert matter is the
function of māyā. The jīva is a transcendental substance
beyond this māyā. Even when the jīva is free from māyā,
his quality of being an individual living entity is not
destroyed.

Māyāvāda is a mistake. According to this philosophy,
Brahman is non-dual, pure, undivided and uncontaminated.
If we accept this siddhānta for the sake of argument,
then what is it that becomes covered or reflected? How
is it possible for Brahman to be reflected or covered?
Who is the seer of this? What is the place of
reflection? When is there any other substance apart from
Brahman? When we examine the māyāvāda conception in this
way we see that it is ridiculous to the fullest extent.
The evidence of the śruti-mantras becomes useless when
philosophers stretch their meaning to concoct an
interpretation in support of their own opinion and
sectarian doctrine.

The consistent opinion of the Veda is that the inherent
principle of simultaneous and inconceivable difference
and non-difference is true, eternal and meaningful. The
jīva, being in a separate category from īśvara, is
vibhinnāṁśa-tattva and he is manifest from Kṛṣṇa’s

                          250
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

taṭasthā-śakti. The jīva is a pure substance and by
nature engaged in his dharma (constitutional activities)
in accordance with Kṛṣṇa. This is the factual
understanding of the living entities' intrinsic
characteristics.

g) Deliberation on the jīva who is under the influence
of māyā in the conditioned stage on account of his
marginal nature

The jīva is constitutionally the eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa, but when he misuses his own natural independence
because of his marginal nature (taṭasthā-dharma), he
becomes averse to Kṛṣṇa. At that time his pure
constitutional form becomes covered by the gross and
subtle body given by māyā and he identifies himself with
these gross and subtle material bodies. Then he tastes
happiness and distress in the cycle of material
existence, taking his birth in various species of life,
sometimes in the heavenly planets and sometimes in the
hellish regions. He is burnt continually by the three-
fold miseries: ādhyātmika (miseries arising from the
body and mind), ādhidaivika (those arising from other
living beings) and ādhibhautika (those arising from the
natural environment). In this way, he goes on wandering
throughout the material world. If by good fortune he
attains the company of a pure Vaiṣṇava who is
accomplished in tattva-jñāna then by his instructions
the jīvas’ ignorance is dispelled. Attaining Kṛṣṇa
bhakti, he becomes qualified to render service to Kṛṣṇa.

‘nitya-baddha’—kṛṣṇa haite nitya-bahirmukha

‘nitya-saṁsāra’, bhuñje narakādi duḥkha

sei doṣe māyā-piśācī daṇḍa kare tāre

ādhyātmikādi tāpa-traya tāre jāri’ māre

kāma-krodhera dāsa hañā tāra lāthi khāya

bhramite bhramite yadi sādhu-vaidya pāya

tāra upadeśa-mantre piśācī palāya

kṛṣṇa-bhakti pāya, tabe kṛṣṇa-nikaṭe jāya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 22.12-15)

“The jīva is constitutionally the eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa, but when he misuses his natural independence
because of his marginal nature, then he becomes averse
to Kṛṣṇa, and he tastes happiness and distress from
heaven to hell in this material existence. Because of
jīva's fault of being averse to Kṛṣṇa, the witch māyā
binds him in the covering of the gross and subtle bodies
and inflicts punishment upon him by burning him with the
three-fold miseries of ādhyātmika, ādhidaivika and
ādhibhautika. Controlled by the six enemies of lust,
anger and so on, the jīva is continually beaten by the
witch māyā; this is the jīva’s disease. As he goes on
wandering high and low in material existence, he may by
good fortune find a doctor in the form of a sādhu. Then,
by the influence of the sādhu’s instructions, Māyādevī

                          251
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

abandons the jīva and runs away. This is just like a
witch giving up her influence over a man, and fleeing
from the mantras of an exorcist. Only a jīva who is free
from māyā attains Kṛṣṇa bhakti and is qualified to
approach Kṛṣṇa.”

The jīva bound by māyā is controlled by the saṁskāra
(impressions) of his own fruitive actions, by the guṇas
and by self-identification with the body expressed
through conceptions such as “I” and “mine.” Thus he
accepts birth in various species of life. While
wandering on and on in this way, he may get saintly
association, and by that influence develop śraddhā. When
he comes to know Kṛṣṇa through his inclination to render
service, he attains release forever from all the
bindings of māyā. In Goloka Vṛndāvana, Śrī Baladeva
Prabhu manifests unlimited jīvas who serve Vṛndāvana
Bihārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa as nitya-pārṣada (eternal associates).
In Paravyoma Vaikuṇṭha, Mahā-Saṇkarṣaṇa manifests
unlimited nitya-pāṛsada jīvas to serve Vaikuṇṭhādhipati
Nārāyaṇa. Situated in their own constitutional forms for
eternal time, they always remain attentive to the
service of their worshipful Deity. They are always
inclined towards the object of their worship and they
are always strong, having attained the strength of the
cit-śakti. They have no relationship with jaḍa-māyā, and
do not even know that there is a śakti called māyā.
Prema alone is their life. They are unaware of even the
slightest semblance of birth, death, fear and
lamentation.

Kāraṇābdhiśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu is situated in the Virajā,
which lies between the cit-jagat and the māyika-jagat.
By His glance towards māyā the minute conscious jīvas
are manifest in the form of the rays of His glance.
Because they are situated close to māyā, these jīvas
notice the wonderful nature of māyā. All the
characteristics of the ordinary jīvas which were
previously mentioned are found in them. Because of their
being extremely minute or insignificant by nature, and
because of their marginal disposition, they sometimes
gaze in the direction of the cit-jagat and sometimes in
the direction of the māyika-jagat. The jīvas are
extremely weak in the marginal condition, because at
that time they have not yet attained cid-bala (spiritual
strength) by the mercy of the sevya-vastu, (the object
of service). Among these unlimited jīvas, those who are
infatuated by sense gratification and want to enjoy māyā
become bound by māyā. Conversely, those jīvas who ponder
over the sevya-vastu attain the strength of cit-śakti by
the mercy of the sevya vastu, and go to the
transcendental abode.

Māyā is Kṛṣṇa’s śakti by which He creates the mundane
universe. He then engages the māyā-śakti in purifying
the jīvas who are averse to bhakti. Māyā has two
functions, namely avidyā and pradhāna. The function of
avidyā is related to the jīva and the function of
pradhāna is characterized by jaḍa, inanimate matter. The
jīva’s desire to perform reward-producing activities is
born from avidyā, and the whole inert universe has
arisen from pradhāna. Vidyā and avidyā are two further
dimensions of māyā which are both related to the jīva.
The bondage of the jīva comes from the function of

                          252
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

avidyā and his liberation comes from the function of
vidyā. When an offensive jīva becomes inclined towards
Kṛṣṇa the actions of the vidyā function begin in his
heart. However, when he becomes averse, the action of
the avidyā function begins.

h) The jīva is free from māyā in the liberated state

The intrinsic constitutional nature of the jīva to be
the servant of Kṛṣṇa is not destroyed even though he has
remained bound since time without beginning in the
fetters of desires for fruitive work. Somehow or other
it certainly continues to exist and when it finds just a
small opportunity, it becomes manifest again and begins
to reveal its own identity. This opportunity is nothing
but sādhu-saṅga.

yasya deve parābhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hyarthāḥ prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.23)

“The actual purport of the Vedas becomes manifest within
the hearts of those mahātmās who have parābhakti for
Kṛṣṇa, that is to say, those who have become eligible
for śuddha bhakti through śraddhā in Kṛṣṇa, and who also
have the same śraddhā in guru and sādhus.”

It has also been stated in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,

saṁsāra brahmite kona bhāgye keha tare

nadīra pravāhe yena kāṣṭha lāge tīre

kona bhāgye kāro saṁsāra kṣayonmukha haya

sādhu-saṅge kare kṛṣṇe rati upajaya

‘sādhu-saṅga’, ‘sādhu-saṅga’— sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya

‘kṛṣṇa, tomāra haṅa’ yadi bale eka-bāra

māyā-bandha haite kṛṣṇa tāre kare pāra

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 22-43.45.54.33)

“When the jīva becomes averse to Kṛṣṇa, he is swept away
in the current of birth and death in material existence.
He wanders aimlessly throughout 8,400,000 species of
life, being burnt by the three-fold miseries. It is
extremely difficult to attain deliverance from this
current. However, just as a piece of wood flowing in the
forceful current of a river may by good fortune be
washed up on the bank, similarly, a jīva may by
extremely good fortune attain the shelter of sādhu-
saṅga, gain release from the current of material
existence, and again become established in his own
constitutional position as the servant of Kṛṣṇa.

"There is a sign that a person will by good fortune soon
be released from material existence. This is that he

                          253
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

keeps the company of sādhus, and as a result awakens his
loving attachment to the lotus-feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. That
is why the descriptions of the glories of sādhu-saṅga
are found in abundance in all the śāstras. The śāstras
state that it is not at all easy to attain a moment’s
association with a sādhu. If any jīva, feeling extreme
anguish, prays to Kṛṣṇa from the core of his heart and
even once calls out, 'O Kṛṣṇa! I am Yours,' then Kṛṣṇa
gives him sādhu-saṅga and makes him cross beyond the
bondage of māyā."

When, by exceedingly good fortune, someone’s material
existence is about to come to an end then he associates
with sādhus. What is this good fortune (bhāgya)? We
should understand this very well. The jīva’s fortune is
only the fruit of his previous activities (karma). There
are two types of karma: ārthika (for material gain) and
paramārthika (for spiritual gain). Ārthika fortune
arises from ārthika karma, and paramārthika fortune
arises from paramārthika karma. Activities such as
serving sādhus, Bhagavān and His name, which are
performed for the sake of acquiring spiritual wealth
(paramārtha), are collectively paramārthika. No matter
what a jīva may do, if he performs paramārthika
activities, these collective activities create within
his heart a type of saṁskāra (impression) in the form of
the desire for bhakti. When this impression becomes well
nourished it is called good fortune (saubhāgya), and by
the influence of this good fortune the jīvas’
materialistic desires gradually begin to weaken. When
desires pertaining to material existence are very much
diminished and the saṁskāra of good fortune has been
nourished to a great extent, then śraddhā in sādhu-saṅga
arises. This same śraddhā easily causes sādhu-saṅga to
occur repeatedly, and that is the cause of attaining
complete perfection.

Thus the siddhānta is that bhāgya is the fruit of sukṛti
accumulated in birth after birth, and on the awakening
of this bhāgya one develops an affection for sādhu-
saṅga. Then again, after the gradual sequential
development of śraddhā in the form of bhajana-kriyā,
anartha-nivṛtti, niṣṭhā, ruci and āsakti, Kṛṣṇa rati
appears. The life in which one’s bhāgya arises is the
life characterized by śraddhā. Therefore śraddhā and
sādhu-saṅga are called the root of all auspiciousness.
This is confirmed in the Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa.

bhaktis tu bhagavad-bhakta saṅgena parijāyate

sat-saṅga prāpyate puṁbhiḥ sukṛtaiḥ pūrva sañcitaiḥ

(Bṛhan-Nāradīya Purāṇa 4.33)

“Bhakti becomes manifest by the association of the pure
devotees of Bhagavān. Such sādhu-saṅga is attained by
the accumulation of sukṛti in previous lives.”

It has also been said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,

bhavāpavargo bhramato yadā bhavejjanasya tarhyacyuta
satsamāgamaḥ

satsaṅgamo yarhi tadaiva sadgatau parāvareśe tvayi

                          254
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

jāyate ratiḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.51.53)

“He Acyuta! O Infallible one! The jīvas are wandering in
samsāra, the cycle of repeated birth and death, from
beginningless time. When the time for their release from
that cycle is approaching, then they attain the
association of sādhus. At the very moment that the jīva
acquires sat-saṅga, his intelligence becomes firmly
attached to You, the supreme shelter and controller of
all causes and activities.”

satam prasaṇgān mama vīrya-samvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj joṣaṇādaśvapavarga vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.25)

“In the association of saintly persons My kathā (topics
spoken by Me or about Me) are the cause of genuine
knowledge of My valiant deeds, and they are dearly
pleasing to the heart and to the ears. By serving this
kathā the fruit of release from ignorance occurs very
quickly, first of all in the form of śraddhā, then rati,
and in the end the awakening of prema-bhakti.”

When one is freed from material existence, it is very
necessary to cultivate bhakti to attain Bhagavān. It has
been said in the śāstra such as Upaniṣads that it is
only unalloyed bhagavad-bhakti that carries the jīvas
close to Bhagavān, and brings about an audience with
Him, and eternal engagement in His sevā. Bhagavān is
only controlled by bhakti.

bhaktir evainaṁ nayati bhaktir evainaṁ darśayati

bhakti vaśaḥ puruṣo bhaktir eva bhūyasī

(Māthara śruti vacan quoted in Mādhva-bhāṣya

on Vedānta-sūtra 3.3.53)

Bhakty āhaṁ ekayā grāhyaṁ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.14.23).
Such statements are evidence of this. However this
bhakti is also not attainable without sat-saṅga. When
one cultivates bhakti in the association of devotees,
first sādhana-bhakti is awakened, then bhāva-bhakti and
in the end prema-bhakti. When the jīva attains prema-
bhakti his life becomes successful. After being
completely released from māyā, he attains pañcama
puruṣārtha (the fifth objective of human life) in the
form of Kṛṣṇa prema.

There are two types of jīvas who are liberated from
māyā. Nitya-mukta (eternally liberated) jīvas are those
who have never been in the bondage of māyā. Baddha-mukta
jīvas are those who were first bound in māyā and who
then became liberated by sādhana and bhajana. There are
also two types of nitya-mukta jīvas: aiśvaryagata-nitya-

                           255
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

mukta jīva and mādhurya-gata nitya-mukta jīva. The
aiśvaryagata nitya-mukta jīvas such as Garuḍa are the
associates of Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha and they
are the particles of the effulgent rays emanating from
the Mūla-Saṇkarṣaṇa situated in Paravyoma. Madhurya-gata
nitya-mukta jīvas are the associates of Goloka
Vṛndāvananātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and they are manifest from
Baladeva in Goloka Vṛndāvana.

There are three types of baddha-mukta jīvas, namely
brahmajyoti-gata, aiśvarya-gata and mādhurya-gata. Those
jīvas who perform sādhana with the objective of
attaining the oneness of jīva and Brahman attain
complete destruction in brahma-sāyujya (entering into
the brahma-jyoti). Those whose sādhana is based on
fondness for opulence attain sālokya (residence on the
same planet) with the parikāras of Vaikuṇṭha. And those
whose sādhana is imbued with the love of sweetness,
after being released from māyā taste the rasa of
happiness derived from prema-sevā in dhāmas such as
Nitya-Vṛndāvana.

It is necessary to know one special siddhānta, and that
is that mādhurya-rasa has two aspects, namely mādhurya
and audārya. Where mādhurya predominates, the form of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is gorgeously manifest. Where audārya
predominates, the form of Śrī Gaurāṅga reigns with
splendour, radiant with the sentiments and bodily lustre
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. In Mūla Vṛndāvana there are two
compartments: Kṛṣṇa-pīṭha and Gaura-pīṭha. In Kṛṣṇa-
pīṭha, Kṛṣṇa’s gaṇa (attendants) are nitya-siddha and
nitya-mukta parṣadas who have attained audārya-bhāva
predominated by mādhurya. In Gaura-pīṭha the nitya-
siddha and nitya-mukta parikāras experience mādhurya
predominated by audārya.

Some associates are, by the disposition of their
svarūpa, present in both pīṭhas simultaneously. Others
are present in one svarūpa in one pītha, but not present
in the other. Those who worship Gaura exclusively at the
time of sādhana, render service only in Gaura-pīṭha at
the time of perfection. Those who worship Kṛṣṇa
exclusively at the time of sādhana render service in
Kṛṣṇa pīṭha at the time of perfection. And those who
worship both svarūpas, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Gaura at the time
of sādhana, accept two bodies at the time of perfection
and are present in both pīṭhas simultaneously. This is
the supreme mystery of the acintya-bhedābheda
(inconceivable difference and non-difference) of Gaura
and Kṛṣṇa.

i) The ideology of inconceivable difference and non-
difference

Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva is the inconceivable
relationship of simultaneous difference and non-
difference existing between (a) the inconceivable and
unlimitedly powerful para-tattva, (b) His energy and (c)
the aggregate of substances which are transformations of
the energy of the para-tattva. This principle has been
called acintya (inconceivable) because it is accessible
only by apauruṣeya śabda (transcendental sound). It is
inaccessible to logic, arguments and the jīva’s
insignificant thinking capacity, although we can know it

                          256
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

if we accept the statements of the śāstra through guru-
paramparā. The human intellect and power of
comprehension cannot conceive of the condition of being
simultaneously and equally both different and non-
different. Nevertheless, we certainly have to accept
this tattva as factual and eternal because śāstra has
described it in that way. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
expounded this teaching of acintya-bhedābheda-tattva to
Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya in Śrī Purī Dhāma, to the
kevalādvaita-vādī Śrī Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, and
especially when he instructed Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī in
Kāśī.

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has also established this
acintya-bhedābheda-tattva in his Bṛhad-bhāgavatamṛta
(2.2.186) and Vaiṣṇava-toṣanī, and so have Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī in Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in
±aṭ-sandarbha and Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa in Govinda-
bhāṣya and Bhāṣya-pīṭhaka. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has
specifically established acintya-bhedābheda-tattva in
his treatise Sarva-saṁvādinī, on the foundation of
evidence from Vedānta-sūtra, the Upaniṣads and Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. On the basis of the verse vadanti tat tattva
vidaḥ in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11), he has proved that
the advaya-jñana para-tattva is devoid of three types of
differences: svagat-bheda, differences within itself;
sajātīya-bheda, differences from others in the same
category; and vijātīya bheda, differences from others in
different categories. In this regard he has written,

ekam eva paramaṁ tattvaṁ svābhāvikācintyaśaktyā
sarvadaiva-svarūpa-tadrūpa-vaibhava-jīva-pradhāna-rūpeṇa
caturddhāvatiṣṭhate, sūryāntara maṇḍalasthita teja iva,
maṇḍala, tad vahirgata tad rasmi, tat praticchavirūpeṇa

“Parama-tattva is one. He is adorned with his natural,
inconceivable energy by which He eternally exists in
full splendour in four aspects, namely (1) svarūpa; (2)
tad-rūpa-vaibhava; (3) jīva; and (4) pradhāna. To some
degree we can use the following four examples to
illustrate these four aspects of para-tattva: the
effulgence situated in the interior of the sun planet,
the sun globe itself, the rays emanating from the sun,
and its remote reflected image.”

The svarūpa of the para-tattva is only His sac-cid-
ānanda vigraha. His tad-rūpa-vaibhava is His
transcendental dhāma, nāma, associates, and collective
paraphernalia in His dealings. There are innumerable
jīvas, who are classified as nitya-mukta or nitya-
baddha. The word ‘pradhāna’ refers to the unmanifest
material nature and the whole gross and subtle inert
creation arising from it. Now that the oneness of the
eternal parama-tattva in four manifestations has been
established, a question can be raised. How can the
parama-tattva accomodate activities which are eternally
opposed to each? The answer is that the intelligence of
the jīva is distinctly limited; thus it is impossible
for him to understand bhagavat-tattva—except of by the
mercy of the acintya-śakti of parameśvara.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has not classified jīva and prakṛti
as tattva. Rather, by establishing them as śakti, he has
established the non-duality of the para-tattva. He has

                          257
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

accepted the para-tattva endowed with potency as
Parabrahman. If one considers the para-tattva to be
devoid of potency or attributes, the pūrṇatā or
completeness of the para-tattva who is complete in six
opulences and omnipotent is lost. Brahman is the Supreme
Truth in whom lies the integral potency to be great and
also to make others great. Since the sac-cid-ānanda
para-tattva is one without a second, his śakti is also
(a) aghaṭana-ghaṭana-paṭīyasī, capable of making the
impossible possible; (b) composed of sac-cid-ānanda; and
(c) one without a second. This one para-śakti is
manifest in three forms—saṁvit, sandhinī and hlādinī. On
account of the activities of this śakti, Brahman is
eternally established as saviśeṣa, possessed of form and
attributes. The śakti of Brahman exists in two ways.
When the potencies of Bhagavān are situated within the
vigraha of Śrī Bhagavān and as one with it, then they
are manifest as potency alone without shape. When they
are manifest in the form of the adhiṣṭātrī or presiding
deity of the śakti, they appear as the parikāras of
Bhagavān, and render all of their varieties of service;
then they are called personified.

In Gauḍīya philosophy, śakti and śaktimān together are
accepted as the one undivided, non-dual para-tattva.
Only in Gauḍīya philosophy is the word ‘acintya’ used to
define the truth or the divinity of His śakti, which is
beyond our material sense perception. We do not see this
mentioned anywhere else. Ācārya Śaṇkara has referred to
Parabrahman as acintya in his explanation of ‘Viṣṇu-
sahasra-nāma’, and Śrīdhara Svāmī has also used the word
acintya in his commentary on Śrī Viṣṇu-purāṇa. However,
there is some speciality in Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī’s
consideration of the word ‘acintya’. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
has pointed out that the word acintya means ‘śabda
mūlaka śrutārthāpatti jñāna gocara’, that which can be
known through the statements of śāstra received in guru-
paramparā. We have explained this previously.

It is impossible for śakti and śaktimān to be either
absolutely different or absolutely non-different from
each other. In the Vedas we find śruti-mantras
indicating difference and others indicating non-
difference; both types of mantra are evident. It is the
acintya-śakti of the one para-tattva which achieves the
compatibility of the simultaneous difference and non-
difference. This is also impossible to understand by
human intelligence, without taking shelter of the
evidence of śāstra as it is received in paramparā.
Therefore Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has accepted this acintya-
bhedābheda-tattva, difference and non-difference which
can only be comprehended with the help of śāstra, and
would remain inconceivable without it.

Others, such as Paurāṇikas, Śaivas and Bhāskarācārya,
have also accepted bhedābheda, but their bhedābheda is
based on logic, and is therefore refutable and
inconsistent. There is also some bheda practically and
theoretically in the kevalādvaita-vāda of the māyāvādīs.
However, the testing stone of scriptural evidence shows
that it is false to accept the non-existence of māyā on
the pretext of the indescribable real-and-unreal
advaita-vāda logic. Therefore kevalādvaita-vāda is
imaginary and contrary to śāstra. Bheda-vāda is also

                          258
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

accepted in the doctrines of Gautama, Kanāda, Jaiminī,
Kapila and Pātañjalī, but it is not in agreement with
Vedānta.

Natural bhedābheda or dvaitādvaita is accepted in the
doctrine of Nimbārka, but it is also incomplete. Śrī
Rāmānuja’s viśiṣṭādvaita-vāda accepts the difference
between śakti and śaktimān, so Śrī Rāmānuja can be
called another type of dvaita-vādī. In the dvaita-vāda
of Madhvācārya, because of the acceptance of extreme
bheda there is an eternal difference between the
dependent tattvas and the independent tattva, īśvara. In
this philosophy, five types of bheda are eternal, real
and beginningless; namely the bheda between (1) jīva and
iśvara; (2) jīva and jīva; (3) īśvara and jaḍa (inert
matter); (4) jīva and jaḍa; and (5) jaḍa and jaḍa.
Although this is the case, the sac-cid-ānanda eternal
vigraha (Nartaka Gopāla) is accepted in the doctrine of
Madhva Ācārya. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has accepted the
Madhva Sampradāya because the sac-cid-ānanda vigraha is
the fundamental foundation stone of this acintya-
bhedābheda.

There are some technical differences between the
philosophical opinions expounded by previous vaiṣṇava
ācāryas because of some incompleteness in them. The
sampradāyas are different simply because of these
technical philosophical differences. By the power of His
omniscience Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is directly the
para-tattva, has compensated for the deficiencies in all
these doctrines and thus completed them. He has bestowed
His mercy on the world by giving the thoroughly pure,
scientific and realised conception of acintya
bhedābheda, correcting and completing Śrī Madhva’s
ideology of sac-cid-ānanda vigraha, Śrī Rāmānuja
Ācārya’s śakti-siddhānta, Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī’s śuddhādvaita
siddhānta and tadīya sarvasvatra, and the dvaitādvaita
siddhānta of Nimbārka.

When we assess the statements from all limbs of the
Vedas, we find that one eternal Truth is to be known.
This sanātana-tattva is that the world is real; it is
not a false substance imagined out of ignorance. It has
arisen from the unimpeded will of parameśvara. It is not
manufactured by the jīva. To attribute reality to
something false is called ‘vivarta’, illusion. Although
the world is perishable, it is real. It has arisen from
the glance (meaning simply by the will) of īśvara, the
possessor of inconceivable potency. There is no place
for ‘vivarta’ in this. Parameśvara’s māyā called aparā-
śakti, the inferior potency, has created the inert
material world full of moving and stationary entities in
accordance with the will of parameśvara. The principle
of acintya-bhedābheda is applicable to the whole
universe. Although the universe is real, it is not an
eternal reality. This very fact is proved by the śruti-
mantra, ‘nityo nityānām’ (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.23,
Śvetaśvatara Upaniṣad 6.10).

Exclusive bheda, exclusive abheda-vāda, śuddhādvaita and
viśiṣṭādvaita-vāda are all localized or contextual
perspectives found in some areas of the śruti-śāstra,
which are simultaneously opposed to the perspectives
found in other areas. But the doctrine of acintya-

                          259
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

bhedābheda is the most perfect and complete conclusion
of all limbs of the Vedas. This very opinion is the
abode of the self-evident faith of the jīva and it is
also consonant with the reasoning of śāstra. The jīva’s
eternal relationship is not with this inert world. The
creation is not a transformation of vastu, the
Parabrahman Himself; it is a transformation of the śakti
of Parabrahman. This gross and subtle universe is merely
for the jīva’s endeavor to enjoy sense gratification.

j) Deliberation on śuddha-bhakti

We have already mentioned that, according to the
śāstras, bhakti is the only means of attaining Bhagavān.
Only bhakti can bring the jīvas into the presence of
Bhagavān. Only bhakti can cause the jīvas to have
darśana of Bhagavān. Only bhakti can control Bhagavān,
the parama puruṣa. We shall now make a critical
assessment of the intrinsic nature of bhakti.

In determining the definition of bhakti, Maharṣi
Śāṇḍilya has stated,

sā parānuraktir īśvare

“Transcendental attachment to īśvara is bhakti.”
(Śāṇḍilya-sūtra 1.2)

In Nārada-pañcarātra,

sarvopādhi vinirmuktaṁ tat paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Pūrva-vibhāga 1.10, Nārada-
pañcarātra)

“Bhakti is service rendered by aprākṛta (transcendental)
senses to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the aprākṛta senses.
Such bhakti in which all endeavours are undertaken for
the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa is free from obstructions arising
from the nature of the body and mind. It is also pure;
that is, it is not covered by the creepers of karma,
reward-seeking activity, or jñāna, knowledge in pursuit
of impersonal liberation.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam the definition of bhakti has been
given in this way:

mad-guṇa-śruti-mātreṇa mayi sarva-guhāśaye

mano-gatir avicchinnā yathā gaṅgāmbhaso ‘mbudhau

lakṣaṇaṁ bhakti-yogasya nirguṇasya hy udāhṛtam

ahaituky avyavahitā yā bhaktiḥ puruṣottame

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.29.11-12)

“I am the Supreme Enjoyer, the Lord who dwells within
the hearts of all. When there is unmotivated and
unimpeded natural affection for Me, and when simply on
hearing My qualities the progress of the mind flows
towards Me, like an unbroken stream of oil, just as the

                          260
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Ganges flows without interruption towards the ocean,
that is called nirguṇa bhakti-yoga, transcendental
devotional service.”

Although such definitions of bhakti have been given in
the śāstras, Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
dear associate Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has combined all
previous definitions of bhakti, and has given in his
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu a beautiful, new definition which
is the life and treasured aspiration of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas:

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Pūrva-vibhāga 1.9)

“Uttamā-bhakti is that anuśīlana (cultivation)—service
to Kṛṣṇa—which is performed by all endeavours of the
body, mind and words and also by bhāva (moods)
exclusively for Kṛṣṇa, which is uninterrupted like a
flow of oil, which is free from all types of desires
other than the desire to please Kṛṣṇa, and which is not
covered by karma and jñāna etc.”

In this sūtra both the svarūpa (intrinsic) and taṭasthā
(marginal) characteristics of bhakti have been lucidly
evaluated. The purport of the words ‘uttamā-bhakti’ is
śuddha-bhakti (pure bhakti). Karma-miśra-bhakti and
jñāna-miśra-bhakti are not pure. The goal of karma-
miśra-bhakti is material enjoyment and the goal of
jñāna-miśra-bhakti is liberation. Only bhakti which is
devoid of the desires for material enjoyment and
liberation is called uttamā-bhakti, and this bhakti is
the means to attain prema for Bhagavān.

What is this bhakti? We shall describe its intrinsic
charac-teristic (svarūpa-lakṣaṇa) and its marginal
characteristics (taṭasthā-lakṣaṇa). Its intrinsic
characteristic (svarūpa-lakṣaṇa) is the full endeavour
by body, mind and speech for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa and
the cultivation of loving sentiments (bhāva). Endeavours
and bhāvas—these two always remain active for the
pleasure of Kṛṣṇa. The svarūpa-lakṣaṇa, the intrinsic
nature of bhakti, arises when the special function of
Bhagavān’s svarūpa-śakti (the function of the essence of
hlādinī and saṁvit) appears in the svarūpa of the jīva
by the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa or His bhakta.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has described two taṭasthā-lakṣaṇa
(marginal characteristics) of bhakti. The first is that
it is completely devoid of all desires other than the
desire to serve Kṛṣṇa. All types of desire other than
the desire to advance one’s devotion are opposed to
bhakti, and they are included within anyabhilāṣitā. The
second marginal characteristic is that it is not covered
by jñāna, karma and so on. Knowledge of the oneness of
jīva and Brahman; the smārta’s daily and occasional per-
formances of prescribed duties for the sake of material
self interest; and activities filled with indifference
to Bhagavān such as prāyāścitta, knowledge of atheistic
sāṅkhya philosophy, dry renunciation and so—these are
all opposed to bhakti. Only when the cultivation of

                          261
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

activities for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa is free from these
two types of opposing marginal characteristics is it
called śuddha-bhakti.

Sādhana-bhakti is the practice of śuddha-bhakti which is
performed under the guidance of śuddha-bhaktas after one
has received initiation and instructions from a sad-
guru. In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has
described six special characteristics of bhakti:

kleśaghnī śubhadā mokṣa-laghutākṛt sudurlabhā

sāndrānanda-viśeṣātmā śrī kṛṣṇākarṣiṇī ca sā

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Pūrva-vibhāga 1.12)

“Śuddha-bhakti has six characteristics: (1) kleśaghnī,
it destroys all types of distress; (2) śubhadā, it
bestows complete auspiciousness; (3) mokṣa-laghutākṛtā,
it makes the attainment of liberation insignificant; (4)
sudurlabhā, it is extremely rare; (5) sāndrānanda-
viśeṣātmā, it is the embodiment of condensed bliss; (6)
śrī kṛṣṇākarṣiṇī, it attracts Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

In the very beginning of sādhana-bhakti, the first two
symptoms, kleśaghnī and śubhadā, become visible. Mokṣa-
laghutākṛtā and sudurlabhā are also present in the stage
of bhāva, and in the stage of sādhya (prema),
sāndrānanda-viśeṣātmā and śrī kṛṣṇākarṣiṇī are observed
in addition to the previously mentioned four symptoms.

There are different types of kleśa (suffering), such as
sin, the desire to sin, the seed of sin (pāpa-bīja),
pious activity, the desire to perform pious activity and
the seed of pious activity (puṇya-bīja). The first
symptom of bhakti is the destruction of all these. The
second symptom of bhakti, called śubhadā, includes the
following four qualities: bhakti makes one pleasing to
all, affectionate towards all living entities and the
abode of all good qualities; and it also bestows pure
happiness. These first two symptoms are both observed at
the time of sādhana-bhakti.

The third characteristic is that bhakti renders even the
attainment of liberation insignificant or worthless. The
quality of sudurlabhā, being extremely rarely attained,
is the fourth characteristic of śuddha-bhakti; although
one may be detached from sense gratification and may
have practised the limbs of bhakti for a long time,
still one may not attain bhakti. These second two
characteristics are the symptoms of bhāva-bhakti.

The fifth characteristic is that bhakti is the
embodiment of condensed blissfulness, and the sixth is
that it attracts Śrī Kṛṣṇa. These last two
characteristics are the symptoms of sādhya or prema-
bhakti. The first four symptoms are also observed in the
stage of sādhya-bhakti. The first stage of sādhya-bhakti
is called bhāva-bhakti and its highest stage is called
prema.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has described the definition of
sādhana-bhakti in this way.


                          262
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya-bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Pūrva-vibhāga 2.2)

“Sādhana-bhakti is the performance by the present senses
of that śuddha-bhakti by which bhāva is achieved. The
final goal of sādhya-bhāva is nitya-siddha. That is to
say, it is an eternally established phenomenon, but
sādhana is the means by which it is manifested within
the heart.”

This sādhana-bhakti is of two types, vaidhī and
rāgānugā. In vaidhī-bhakti, śravaṇa, kīrtana and the
limbs of bhakti are not undertaken out of a natural
affection and inclination; rather they are performed
only because of the discipline of the śāstra, out of
fear of scriptural laws. In the śāstras the duties which
have been prescribed for the jīva are called vidhi. When
the jīva’s engagement in bhakti is out of fear of this
scriptural discipline it is called vaidhī-bhakti.

yatra rāgānavāptatvāt pravṛttir upajāyate

śāsanenaiva śāstrasya sā vaidhī bhaktir ucyate

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.6)

“That bhakti in which the cause of engagement is not
lobha (greed), but rather the command of scriptures, is
called vaidhī-bhakti.”

There are many aṅgas of sādhana-bhakti, but in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu sixty-four aṅgas have been described in
particular, beginning with guru-padāśraya, accepting
dīkṣā-śikṣā, guru-sevā and so on. Those sixty-four aṅgas
are naturally included within the nine prominent aṅgas
mentioned in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. These nine aṅgas known
as navadhā-bhakti are as follows:

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.5.23)

Some attain perfection even by practising just one aṅga
from among these nine processes. Some also practise many
aṅgas at once. In fact the chief result of all the aṅgas
of sādhana-bhakti is one—rati for the transcendental
Reality.

The second type of sādhana-bhakti is rāgānugā-bhakti.
This is the method of bhakti performed by sādhakas who
practise the aṅgas of bhakti such as śravaṇa and kīrtana
out of greed to attain the service of their desired
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Rāga is the quality of
natural, excessive absorption in the object of one’s
devotion and attachment to it. That kṛṣṇa-bhakti which
is endowed with such rāga is called rāgātmikā-bhakti and
that bhakti which follows in the wake of such rāgātmikā-
bhakti is called rāgānugā-bhakti.


                             263
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

In conclusion, vaidhī-bhakti is that type of bhakti
which is subordinate to the regulative principles and
disciplines of śāstra, and rāgānugā-bhakti is that
bhakti which follows in the wake of rāgātmikā-bhakti.
Neither of these two are sādhya-bhakti; they are both
only sādhana-bhakti. Rāgātmikā-bhakti, the bhakti of the
residents of Vraja, Mathurā and Dvārakā, is sādhya-
bhakti. The bhakti of these nitya-parīkāras is
rāgātmikā-bhakti. When one reads or hears about their
devotion, and lobha (greed) arises in the heart to
attain such a type of bhakti, one becomes an eligible
candidate for rāgānugā-sādhana-bhakti. Eligibility for
vaidhī-bhakti comes from śāstrīya-śraddhā (faith in
scriptures); eligibility for rāgānugā-bhakti is attained
by lobha for the loving sentiments of the rāgātmīka
bhaktas.

tat-tad bhāvādi-mādhurye śrute dhīryadapekṣate

nātra śāstraṁ na yuktiñ ca tal lobhotpatti lakṣaṇam

kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janañ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija samīhitam

tat tat kathā-rataś cāsau kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rupeṇa cātra hi

tad bhāva lipsunā kāryā vraja lokānusārataḥ

(Bhakti rasāmṛta-sindhu, Pūrva-vibhāga,

sādhana bhakti, 292, 294, 295)

“The cause of rāgānugā-bhakti is lobha (greed) for the
bhāvas of the rāgātmika devotees. This greed is not
aroused by the arguments of śāstra. Rather, pure greed
(viśuddha lobha) is the aspiration to be immersed in the
moods of the rāgātmika devotees, and it arises on
hearing about the sweetness of their various bhāvas.
Those who have developed a greed to attain the bhāvas of
the dear associates of Kṛṣṇa of their own choice will
always reside in Vraja in their sādhaka5 forms , and by
their siddha6 forms they will render service following
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s most dear Vraja associates and those who are
under their guidance. Thus they will hear, chant and
remember the narrations of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. This is the
method of practice (sādhana-praṇālī) for rāgānugā-bhakti
in connection with Vraja.”

Rāgānugā-bhakti is of two types, namely kāmānugā and
sambandhānugā. Kāmānugā is also of two types—sambhoga-
icchāmayī and tat-tad-bhāva-icchamayī. Sambhoga-
icchāmayī-bhakti refers to keli, the amorous meeting of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa with His lovers. Tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī-
bhakti is only the desire for the sweetness of the moods
of the gopis of Vraja.

At this point we must understand that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has bestowed on the jīvas of this world that
specific bhakti which arouses the desire to be rāgānugā.
Only bhajana through rāga-mārga is approved by Him. If,
by extreme good fortune, the jīvas attain the
association of the dear associates of Śrī Gaurasundara,
then lobha for the mood of the residents of Vraja must

                          264
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

certainly be evoked. However, the sādhaka should take
shelter of vaidhī-bhakti until such association is
available. One will certainly enter into rāga-mārga by
taking shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.

The duty of those very fortunate sādhakas who have
attained lobha for the bhāvas of the residents of Vraja
is to perform the sādhana of rāgānugā-bhakti. When such
greed is evoked there no longer remains any taste for
subjects other than Bhagavān. The release from pāpa,
puṇya, karma, akarma, vikarma, dry knowledge and
renunciation is acquired and ruci (taste) in the
practice of bhakti arises. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has
written in relation to the gradual development of
bhakti:

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo ‘tha bhajana-kriyā

tato ‘nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Pūrva, 4.25,26)

This verse describes advancement on the vaidhī-mārga, in
which there is first śraddhā (faith), then the
association of sādhus and then the eradication of
anarthas (unwanted desires) through engagement in
bhajana. Immediately after that comes niṣṭhā, ruci,
āsakti and bhāva. In this process, bhāva remains the
sādhya (final goal) for a very long time.

With the appearance of lobha, however, anarthas are
vanquished very easily, because of a lack of greed for
other subjects; even bhāva arises simultaneously along
with this lobha. In rāga-mārga it is only necessary to
drive away preten-tiousness and duplicity. If these are
not driven far away, then a dire agitation of the mind
will occur and anarthas will grow. In such a condition,
debased attachment will be mistaken for viśuddha-rāga,
and in the end the association of sense objects becomes
very strong and that attachment becomes the cause of the
jīva’s downfall.

The sādhakas who are under the shelter of the lotus feet
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu take shelter of rāgānugā-
bhakti by the medium of śuddha-lobha. After taking
shelter of the lotus feet of a sad-guru in vaidhī-
bhakti, such sādhakas serve śrī-vigraha (the Deity).
Then, associating with Vaiṣṇavas, showing respect to the
bhakti-śāstras, residing in the places of the līlā of
Bhagavān and continually chanting Śrī Bhagavān nāma,
they render service to Kṛṣṇa by the path of bhāva,
completely following the moods of the residents of Vraja
from the core of their heart in siddha-deha. From among
them, sādhakas who are extremely fortunate, who have
remained in the association of sādhus, and who have
taken shelter of hari-nāma which is the best of the
aṅgas of bhakti, are appointed to the service of
Bhagavān.


                          265
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

When taking shelter of hari-nāma, there is no
consideration of regulations such as dīkṣā and
puraścaryā. Remaining far from nāmābhāsa and
nāmāparādha, gradually they come to the point of
continuous chanting. While chanting incessantly and
meditating on the merciful glance of śrī vigraha, they
constantly consider the śrī nāma and rūpa. Gradually
they begin to review the aggregate of the qualities of
śrī vigraha, His form and nāma all at once. Immediately
thereafter they begin to reflect on the guṇa, rūpa and
nāma with meditation on the līlā in connection with the
svarūpa. Slowly, slowly rasa also appears. The
appearance of rasa is the ultimate attainment. One
special point worthy of attention is that the appearance
of rasa occurs within a very short time if from the very
beginning of the cultivation of nāma the sādhaka
anxiously longs for rasa while awaiting it intently.

k) Love for Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate objective of the jīva

The parama-puruṣārtha (supreme goal of life) is prema.
This is the tattva for which Brahmā, the grandfather of
the worlds, and Mahādeva Śiva, the god of gods, are
searching. It is also the most sought-after object for
the liberated jīvas. It is the one and only object of
attainment of all sādhana, and it is the ultimate
necessity delineated by the entire body of śāstra. In
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, in the section known as Śrī-
Rūpa-śīksa, Jagadguru Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says,

brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

mālī haiya kare seī bīja āropana

śravaṇa-kīrtana-jale karaye secana

prema phala pāki paḍe mālī āsvādaya

latā avalambi mālī kalpavṛkṣa pāya

tāhāṅ sei kalpavṛksera karaye secana

sukhe premaphala-rasa kare āsvādana

ei ta parama phala-parama puruṣārtha

jāṅra āge tṛṇatulya cāri puruṣārtha

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 19)

“While wandering on and on in this material existence
some fortunate jīva, by the mercy of guru and Kṛṣṇa,
attains the bhakti-latā-bīja, the seed of the creeper of
devotion, in the form of Kṛṣṇa sevā-vāsanā (the desire
to serve Kṛṣṇa). He waters that seed with the water of
śravaṇa and kīrtana. At first it begins to sprout, and
then it becomes a creeper. It pierces the coverings of
the universe, and one after another traverses the
virajā, Brahmaloka and the paravyoma. Finally, it climbs
up to the desire-tree of Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet in Goloka Vṛndāvana. There it bears fruits in
the form of prema. When the fruit becomes ripe, it falls

                          266
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

here in this world, and the gardener tastes it. Taking
support from that bhakti-latā he takes shelter of the
desire-tree of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet and always tastes
the rasa of the prema fruit. This very prema is the
crest-jewel of all achievements for the jīva.”

If prema is compared to the sun, then bhāva is likened
to a ray of that prema. In describing the definition of
bhāva, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī says,

śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā prema-suryāṁśa sāmyabhāk

rucibhiś cittamāsṛṇya kṛdāsau bhāva ucyate

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Pūrva vibhāga 3.1)

“That bhakti which is the embodiment of śuddha-sattva,
which is compared to a ray of the sun of prema, and
which melts the heart by various tastes is called
bhāva.”

When śuddha-sattva in the form of bhāva becomes mature,
it evokes very thick mamatā (feelings of possessiveness)
for the object of one’s service and makes the heart
extremely soft (snigdha). Such bhāva, imbued with very
thick mamatā, is called prema.

samyak masṛṇitasvānto mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ

bhāvaḥ sa eva sāndrātmā budhaiḥ premā nigadyate

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Prema-lahari 1)

This can be expressed as follows. The saṁvit function of
the self-manifesting svarūpa-śakti is called śuddha-
sattva. Bhāva imbued with very thick mamatā for Kṛṣṇa is
the special function of the hlādinī aspect of cit-śakti.
That supremely astonishing bhāva which arises when these
two mix together in the heart of the pure jīva is called
viśuddha-prema.

When bhāva or rati, which is the sprout (aṅkura) of
prema, arises in the heart of the sādhaka, its intrinsic
nature produces the following collection of anubhāvas
(subsequent conditions): kṣanti, tolerance; avyārtha
kālatva, the habit of never wasting even a single moment
of time; virakti, detachment from worldly enjoyment;
māna-sunyatā, absence of pride;

āśā-bandha, the hope that Kṛṣṇa will bestow his mercy;
samutkaṇṭhā, intense longing to attain one’s goal; nāma
gane sadā ruci, continuous taste in nāma-kīrtana; tad-
guṇākhyāna-āsakti, attachment for the narrations of
Kṛṣṇa’s līlā; and tad-vasati-sthale-prīti, affection for
the places of His pastimes.

This rati is the first stage of prema. The highly
intensified stage of rati is called prema. This rati is
evoked in two ways: (1) by the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa or His
bhaktas; and (2) by absorption in sādhana. In this world
rati is generally born of absorption in sādhana. The
appearance of rati born purely from mercy is rarely
seen.


                          267
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

The rati arising from absorption in sādhana is also of
two types: (1) rati arising from vaidhī-bhakti sādhana;
and (2) rati arising from rāgānugā-bhakti sādhana. The
rati arising from vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti is full of
reverence for the opulence of Bhagavān and leads to
Vaikuṇṭha. In contrast, the rati arising from rāgānugā-
sādhana-bhakti is full of the love of Vraja and bestows
the service of Kṛṣṇa.

Rāgātmikā-bhakti exists splendidly and forever in the
associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. The devotion which
follows in the wake of this bhakti is called rāgānugā.
Rāgānugā-bhakti has two types of sādhana: external and
internal. External sādhana consists of practices such as
hearing and chanting which the sādhaka performs by the
body in which he is presently situated. The service
performed throughout the eight periods of the day to the
Divine Couple Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala in Vraja is called
internal manasī-sevā.

Prīti is merely joyful in the first stage when it has
not yet blossomed. At that time it is called rati. This
kind of rati is attained in śānta-rasa. When rati
arises, everything except for Kṛṣṇa sevā seems to be
insignificant. When excessive mamatā appears in such
joyful rati, then it is called prema, and this prema is
realised in dāsya-rasa. That love in which there is a
higher sense of faith and confidence, and which becomes
even thicker despite the presence of causes for its
destruction is called praṇaya. This praṇaya is observed
in sakhya-rasa. When this praṇaya assumes a surprising
and unusual state, it is called māna. That intense prema
which makes the heart extremely molten is called sneha.

When sneha is imbued with intense longing it is known as
rāga. With the appearance of rāga, even a moment of
separation is intolerable, and at that time even
distress seems to be happiness. When rāga always
experiences its object (the most beloved Kṛṣṇa) in ever-
fresh ways then it is called anurāga. In this stage
there is visphūrti (the condition of being bereft of
external knowledge) at the time of separation. When that
anurāga becomes more condensed and an incomparably
astonishing condition like madness (unmāda) is attained,
then it is called mahābhāva. When mahābhāva arises,
during the time of meeting even the blinking of one’s
eyelids produces intolerable separation, and even a
kalpa (4,320,000,000 years) passes away like a moment.
In anurāga and mahābhāva the combination of all
transformations such as sāttvika and vyabhicārī is
observed in a highly blazing (mahādīpta) condition.

This very mahābhāva is the intrinsic nature of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Each and every limb and part of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
is made of mahābhāva. This is the teaching of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and it has been described by Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in a condensed form.

ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa tanayas tad dhāma vṛndāvanaṁ

ramyā kācid upāsanā vrajavadhū vargeṇa yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ pramāṇām amalaṁ premā pumārtho mahān


                          268
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

śrī caitanya mahāprabhor matam idaṁ tatrādaro na paraḥ

“Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is my only
worship-ful object. In the same way that He is
worshipful, so is His transcendental abode Śrī Vṛndāvana
Dhāma. The mood in which the young brides of Vraja have
worshipped Him is the most excellent of all. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam alone is the immaculate śabda-pramāṇa,
(scriptural evidence) and prema is the supreme objective
of life. This is the conception of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and there is nothing beyond it.”

Thus ends the Fifth Part of The Life and Teachings of
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī by Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.




Sixth Part




Protecting the Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya Sampradāya

Jagadguru Nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa Aṣtottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Ṭhākura preached
extensively and spread Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s śuddha-
bhakti or prema-bhakti throughout the world in a very
short time. It is by his great endeavour that the sound
of the mahā-mantra—Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare—is
resonating in every part of the world today. After his
entrance into nitya-līlā, the current of the preaching
of śuddha-bhakti became very much diminished. At that
time the followers of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and
especially the Sārasvata Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, were being
attacked from all sides. Some so-called Sārasvata
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas were playing their own tambourines and
singing in their own different tunes. In this dire
situation, our Śrīla Gurudeva Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who was
Jagadguru Śrīla Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda’s
internal associate, accepted sannyāsa by Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s inspiration and tirelessly endeavoured
until the end of his life to preach and spread his
Gurudeva’s innerheart’s desire. We are presenting herein
a thorough survey of how he made the current of bhakti
flow once again throughout the world and how he
protected the sampradāya.

Śrīla Gurupādapadma was a profoundly philosophical
ācārya, adorned with immense genius and knowledge of
tattva. He preached śuddha-bhakti in two ways. Firstly,
he used scriptural evidence to establish the ideas
practised and preached by Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Secondly,
he refuted apasiddhāntic opinions such as the anti-
devotional kevalādvaita-vāda or māyāvāda (which is a
hidden form of Buddhism), sahajiyā, smārta and jāti
Vaiṣṇavism, all of which are opposed to śuddha-bhakti.

It was Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, the Seventh Gosvāmī,

                          269
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

who reinitiated the flow of bhakti when it had dwindled
and almost disappeared. He preached essential aspects of
v aiṣṇava philosophy such as bhagavat-tattva, śakti-
tattva, bhakti-tattva, māyā-tattva and acintya-
bhedābheda-tattva in the modern world. Śrīla Gurudeva
often declared that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Daśa-
mūla-tattva is the singular essence of all the
literatures of the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya, including
those of the Six Gosvāmīs. He accepted Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
as the immaculate scriptural evidence and the natural
commentary on Brahma-sūtra. Furthermore, he said that
the nāma-prema dharma practised and propagated by Śrīman
Mahāprabhu is the actual subject matter of Vedānta. In
order to establish these three points he expressed the
desire to publish a commentary indicating the glories of
śrī harināma, based on the word explanations of Vedānta-
sūtra. He also wanted to publish a commentary based on
the bhaktivedānta (devotional con-clusions) of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. He collected various written information and
began to prepare an outline of these two compositions,
but he could not complete it because of his sudden
entrance into nitya-līlā. Sometimes it was also seen
that he had an acute desire to publish commentaries on
all the prominent Upaniṣads according to the viewpoints
of his sampradāya.

a) Refutation of kevalādvaita-vāda

Śrīla Gurudeva was clearly of the opinion that śuddha-
bhakti cannot possibly be propagated as long as the
covered Buddhist doctrine of māyāvāda is current in the
world. He refuted māyāvāda philosophy with powerful
scriptural evidence and in-controvertible arguments,
which we shall now summarise.

i) The kevalādvaita-vāda propounded by Śaṅkara Ācārya is
not Vedic. According to the doctrine of kevalādvaita-
vāda, Brahman, the Supreme Truth, is nirviśeṣa (devoid
of attributes), nirguṇa (without qualities) and nihśakti
(powerless or having no potencies); and it is only
illusion which causes the appearance of jīva (the
individual living entity) and jagat (the world of inert
matter) in Brahman. However the question arises, “To
whom does this illusion belong?” Some māyāvādīs say that
this is the illusion of the jīva in the grip of
ignorance; others that the illusion of jīva and jagat
arises when Brahman is afflicted by ignorance.

Śrīla Gurudeva would say that both of these opinions are
mistaken and are against the Vedas. To consider that
Brahman is afflicted by ignorance is thoroughly
illogical and opposed to śāstra. According to the
Upaniṣads, brahma satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ brahma: “Brahman
is truth, Brahman is knowledge and Brahman is without
end.” Ekam eva dvitīyam: “There is no substance other
than Brahman.” Brahman is described as the embodiment of
knowledge, bliss and truth in all three phases of time;
it is also unlimited and one without a second. How,
then, can Brahman be afflicted by ignorance? From where
did this second substance called ignorance come? That
ignorance is false, for it is neither real or unreal. So
how can it touch Brahman? It is impossible.

One may assert that it is the jīva which is illusioned,

                          270
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

but that is also quite illogical. What is the origin of
this independent jīva-tattva which is separate from
Brahman? If the answer is that Brahman was afflicted by
ignorance and became jīva, then it is Brahman, and not
the jīva, which was the original shelter of avidyā.

ii) Some māyāvādīs say, “Brahman is not covered by māyā.
Rather, īśvara is the reflection of Brahman in avidyā
and jīva is the semblance of Brahman in avidyā. Both the
reflection (īśvara) and the semblance (jīva) are false
because they have no tran-scendental existence. We can
give the example of mistaking a rope for a snake or an
oyster shell for silver. The rope’s apparent condition
of being a snake is false, but people make such a
mistake because a rope and a snake are somewhat similar
in appearance. Similarly, the illusion of jīva and jagat
can arise in Brahman, but it is quite false.”

Śrīla Gurudeva pointed out that this māyāvāda doctrine
is also opposed to śāstra and logic. The māyāvādīs say
that avidyā is not real. It is neither existent nor non-
existent, and it is indescribable. (This is actually
equivalent to saying that avidyā is false, because it
has no spiritual or worldly existence). Now, it is
totally impossible for avidyā of this nature to cover
Brahman. Furthermore, if (as they say) Brahman as
undivided, formless, unlimited and without attributes,
how can it be reflected in that avidyā? Then Brahman
would have to be divided, defined, possessed of
attributes and limited, and avidyā would have to be a
separate, individual and real substance.

There is another objection. In the example of mistaking
a rope for a snake there are three separate and real
substances, namely the snake, the rope and the observer.
Now, what is this example supposed to tell us about
Brahman, jīva and avidyā (māyā)? Does the example imply
that they are also real and distinct from each other? If
the māyāvādīs accept such a proposal, the golden palace
of māyāvāda collapses through self-destruction.

Another point is that throughout the Vedas, the
Upaniṣads and Vedānta-sūtra, it is stated that Brahman
is the Creator of the universe, omniscient, omnipotent,
and the unequalled and unsurpassed Supreme Truth. For
example:

yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante yena jātāni jīvanti

yat prayanty abiśaṁviśanti, tad vijijñāsasva tad brahma

(Taittirīya Upaniṣad, bhṛgu 1 anu)

janmādyasya yataḥ

(Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.2)

oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ

divīva cakṣurātatam

(Ṛg Veda)

sa aikṣata

                          271
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017


(Aitereya Upaniṣad 1.1.1)

If the māyāvādīs’ opinion were to be accepted, then
these statements of śruti would become false, incoherent
ravings.

iii) Some māyāvādīs put forward the following theory:
“Avidyā is composed of the three guṇas, namely sattva,
raja, and tama; and that avidyā is dependent on Brahman.
In other words, avidyā has accepted shelter of Brahman.
This avidyā is known as māyā and has the characteristics
of the throwing potency (vikṣepa-śakti), which throws
the living into illusion, and the covering potency
(āvarnana-śakti), which covers over the living entity’s
knowledge. Jīva is then the reflection of the conscious
Brahman in the āvarnana-śakti and īśvara is the
reflection of the conscious Brahman in the vikṣepa-
śakti.”

However, the testing stone1 of scriptural consideration
and reasoning shows that this doctrine is not genuine.
The concept that avidyā exists within the pure and self-
manifest brahma-vastu is completely contradictory, for
then avidyā would be perpetually self-supporting and
would continually afflict Brahman with designations,
because there is no one there to destroy it. This is
thoroughly absurd. In the following mantras of the
Upaniṣads, Brahman has been accepted as asamorddhva-
para-tattva (the unequalled and unsurpassed Supreme
Truth), the witness of the jīvas, the regulator of the
results of karma, and the inconceivable, omnipotent
entity by whose mercy one can easily be released from
māyā. How, then, can Brahman be subject to the attack of
māyā?

dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyā samānaṁ vṛkṣaṁ pariṣaṣvajāte

tayoranyaḥ pippalaṁ svadvatyan aśnānnanyo bhīcākaśīti

(Śvetāsvatara Upaniṣad 4.6, Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.1.1,

Ṛg Veda 1.164.21)

“Paramātmā and the jivātmā reside like two birds on the
branch of a pīpal tree which represents the gross and
subtle body. The jīva is tasting the pīpal fruits
according to his fruitive activities whereas Paramātmā
does not taste the fruit. He is situated as a witness.”

This shows that jīvātmā and Paramātmā are not one.

māyādhyakṣena prakṛtiḥ sūyate sacarācaram

(Bhagavad-gītā 9.10)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “My prakṛti (māyā-śakti) is the creator
of this world of moving and non-moving entities.” Thus
the world is also real and true; but it is by nature
mutable and de-structible. This statement establishes
that Kṛṣṇa is śaktimān (possessed of potency).

na tasya kāryaṁ karanañca vidyate na tat samaś
cābhyadikaś ca dṛśyate

                            272
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-
kriyā ca

(Śvetāśvatāra Upaniṣad 6.8)

“Parabrahman Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the unequalled and unsurpassed
truth (asamorddhva-tattva). None of His senses such as
hands and feet are material in nature. Since He has no
material senses, He performs all activities by
transcendental senses. It has been heard that
parameśvara has various types of divine potency, among
which three—namely jñāna-śakti, bala-śakti and kriya-
śakti—are prominent. These three are also known as cit-
śakti, sandhinī-śakti and hlādinī-śakti respectively.”

yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas tasyaiṣātmā vivṛṇute tanu
svām

(Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.2.23)

nityo nityānaṁ cetanaś cetanānām

eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān

(Kaṭha Upaniṣad 5.13 and Śvetāśvatāra Upaniṣad 6.13)

“He is the one eternal Being amongst all other eternal
Beings, and the one conscious Being amongst all the
other conscious beings. One amongst the many, He
fulfills the desires of all.”

Māyāvādīs say that Brahman is exclusively jñāna and is
neither the knower (jñānī) nor one who possesses
knowledge (jñānavān). This being the case, one cannot
possibly imagine any relationship of avidyā in Brahman.
Ignorance may be seen for some time in a knower or in
one who possesses knowledge, but ajñāna (nescience) is
never evident in a substance constituted exclusively of
knowledge (jñāna). This is completely impossible because
jñāna and ajñāna have mutually contradictory
characteristics.

iv) Some māyāvādīs say, “Avidyā exists from time without
beginning, and does not need the support of a second
substance. It is due to this avidyā that the dualities
of existence such as jīva and so on are imagined to
exist in Brahman.” But then, who is imagining this out
of ignorance? If no second entity is imagining this,
then the natural dharma of the avidyā must be to imagine
dualities such as the jīva and so on. However, the
svabhāvika-dharma (natural intrinsic nature), such as
the power of fire to burn, is inherent and can never be
given up. This means that the natural dharma of avidyā
exists eternally and there is no possibility of becoming
free from illusion. This is against the doctrine of
kevalādvaita-vāda and therefore invalidates it.

v) We have already discussed the māyāvādīs’ theory of
reflection in Section (ii) above. They say that īśvara
is the reflection of Brahman in avidyā and that the
reflection is false, because it has no transcendental
existence. This example is contrary to śāstra and to
reason. We see the reflection of the sun in water only

                          273
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

because the reflection, the sun and the water all have
their own specific characteristics. However, the
māyāvādīs say that the invisible Brahman, which is
formless and without limbs or attributes, is reflected
in a shapeless avidyā to produce a reflection which is
not real, nor is it unreal, nor is it both real and
unreal at the same time. This is impossible.

Here is another objection to the māyāvādī’s imaginative
theory of reflection. The reflection of an observer’s
face in a mirror is separate from the observer himself.
However, if the forms of jīva and īśvara are supposed to
be reflections, then which separate observer will
observe this reflection? Furthermore, if Brahman and
jīva are seen as reflections, then they must be
inanimate (jaḍa) like the visible materials of the
universe. (Philosophers generally maintain that all the
visible materials of the universe are inert.) Therefore
this idea is also completely illogical.

vi) The substance of a reflection is inert, and it has
no capacity either to imagine its designation or to
destroy it. According to the theory of reflection, then,
the reflected jīva is also unable to destroy the avidyā
of its false designation by genuine knowledge, the
realisation of “I am Brahman.” Now, according to the
māyāvādīs, mokṣa (liberation) is the destruction of the
nescience which has taken shelter of the pure Brahman.
But if the jīva cannot even destroy its own avidyā, how
can it possibly destroy the avidyā of Brahman? It is
impossible.

vii) Māyāvādīs say that the jīva is a reflection of
Brahman, but when we consider the essential differences
between an object of vision and its reflection, we see
that this theory is quite inconsistent. We have
different direct perceptions because the resting places
of an object of vision and its reflection are separate
and individual. The sun and the sun’s reflection each
have their own separate and individual resting places.
The sun resides in the sky, while its reflection resides
in water. This enables us to have different direct
perceptions. An object of vision and a reflection can
never be one under any circumstances, because they are
fundamentally different from each other. For instance,
the reflection is inverted and the limbs appear on the
“wrong” side. Besides, a reflection is invariably
unconscious, even if that which is reflected is
conscious. Since the māyāvādīs say that Brahman is like
the original and jīva is the reflection, the theory of
reflection actually teaches us that jīva and Brahman can
never be one.

viii) According to the above doctrine, jīva is
consciousness reflected in the covering potency
(āvaraṇa-śakti) of avidyā, while īśvara is consciousness
reflected in the throwing potency (vikṣepa-śakti). In
other words, the jīva and īśvara are situated in their
separate individual designations. This opposes the
statement of Bṛhad-aranyaka Upaniṣad (3.7) that īśvara
is present in the hearts of all living beings.

Suppose we accept that īśvara is consciousness reflected
in māyā, that māyā is not the śakti of Brahman, and that

                          274
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

īśvara is without potencies (in other words, impotent).
Then all the opulences of īśvara mentioned in śāstra
would be invalidated. Everywhere in śāstra such as the
Upaniṣads and Vedānta, īśvara has been described as the
repository of six opulences.

aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śrīyaḥ

jñāna vairāgyayoś caiva ṣaṇṇām bhaga itīṅganā

(Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.74)

“One who is complete in the six opulences of wealth,
power, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation is known
as Bhagavān.”

This mantra must be invalid if the māyāvāda doctrine is
accepted.

ix) Māyāvādīs say, “Brahman is exclusively composed of
jñāna, and its relationship with avidyā is simply false
conjecture.” If it is so, then the above-mentioned
doctrine can never be consistent. This is because jīva
and īśvara are supposed to arise by reflection of
Brahman in avidyā. But they say that avidyā has no
reality whatever. In that case, it cannot reflect jīva
and īśvara, any more than a real function can be
achieved by the imaginary water of a mirage. Therefore
the reflection in the form of jīva and īśvara can never
arise by the imaginary connection of avidyā with
Brahman.

x) Śrī Śaṅkara Ācāryajī states, brahma satyaṁ jagan
mithyā jīvo brahmaiva nāparaḥ: “Brahman is true, the
phenomenal world is false and the jīva is Brahman.” To
support this opinion, he has accepted four contextual
statements from the Vedas, and has very cunningly tried
to describe them as the chief statements (mahāvākya) of
the Vedas. Actually, it is oṁkāra which has been stated
to be the mahāvākya throughout the Vedas; these four
statements are never described as such anywhere.
Besides, their meaning completely opposes Śaṅkara
Ācāryajī’s conclusions, so he has crushed his own
doctrine to powder by introducing them.

The four contextual statements are as follows: ahaṁ
brahmā ‘smi, prajñānaṁ brahma, sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma
and tat tvam asi śvetaketo. The real purport of these
four statements is that the relationship between the
jīva and Brahman is that of the servant and the served,
and is of the nature of prema. In ‘tat tvam asi
śvetaketo’ it has been distinctly stated, śvetaketo!
tvaṁ tasya asi: “Śvetaketo! You are His.” In sarvam
khalv idaṁ brahma, the word ‘idam’ shows that this world
is Brahman in the sense that it is manifested by the
potency of Brahman which at once makes all His wishes
come true (satyasaṅkalpa-śakti). This is because śakti
and śaktimān have been considered non-different in
literatures such as the Brahma-sūtra.

Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya quotes the statement, sarvam khalv
idaṁ brahma, and at the same time tries to establish
that the world is false. But if everything of this world
is Brahman, then how did the whole universe become false

                          275
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

like a dream? In that case, the Vedas, Upaniṣads, and
other śāstras which Śaṅkara Ācārya quotes must all be
false because they have manifested in this world. By the
same logic, Śaṅkara Ācārya and his whole guru-paramparā
must also be false. In any case, what was the necessity
for Śaṅkara Ācārya to instruct the false people of a
false world? Thus the whole conclusion of the māyāvādīs
is an imaginative concoction opposed to scripture.

xi) Followers of Śaṅkara have described the world as
mithyā (false). However, if they are asked “Is your
‘universal falseness’ true or false?” they can neither
reply, “Falseness is true,” nor, “Falseness is false.”
If they say that falseness is true, then the truth of
‘the falsehood of the world’ presents itself as another
truth which exists in the presence of the reality or
truth of Brahman. However, this invalidates advaita-
vāda, because Brahman is the only truth without a
second. Besides, if there is another truth, then the
Vedic mantra, ekam eva advitīyaṁ brahma is lost.

Conversely, if Śaṅkara’s followers accept that the
falsehood of the world is false, then they affirm the
truth of the world, and so directly oppose the teaching,
brahma satyam jagat mithyā. It is quite clear that the
māyāvādīs’ conclusion that jagat is mithyā is neither
Vedic nor logical.

b) The protection of his sampradāya

The followers of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu accept the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya as the Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya on the strength of the guru
paramparā. This is mentioned by the prominent Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava Ācāryas Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Kavi-
karṇapūra and Gauḍīya Vedānta Ācārya Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyabhūṣaṇa. Thus Gauḍīyas consider themselves to be a
branch of the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya. Vaiṣṇava Ācāryas
such as Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Viṣvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Jagadguru Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī have also accepted this opinion. However these
days some people are trying to establish their own
concocted opinion that the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya is an independent sampradāya of which Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the original founder.

Śrī Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda (who became opposed to his
own guru Śrī Ananta Vāsudeva) has tried, together with
some other personalities, to prove that the sampradāya
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu is not included in the Śrī Brahma-
Madhva Sampradāya. They state instead that it is
included in the impersonalist advaita-vādī sampradāya.
Originally, Śrī Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda Mahodaya
accepted in his Ācārya Śrī Madhva that Mahāprabhu’s
sampradāya is included in the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya.
However, afterwards he considered that his own previous
evidence was not authentic. In his later book Acintya-
bhedābheda, he tried unsuccessfully to prove that the
Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya is an independent sampradāya. All
the arguments of the contending party are evident in his
book.

Paramārādhya Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī

                          276
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Mahārājajī, who is like a lion for the elephant-like
heretics, wrote his own essay entitled Acintya-
bhedābheda, in which he uses scriptural evidence and
incontrovertible reasoning to refute all the arguments
in Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda’s book. This essay has been
published in several issues of the Bengali Śrī Gauḍīya
Patrikā and the Hindi Śrī Bhagavata Patrikā. We shall
now briefly mention some of those arguments and
evidence.

i) The Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya is in the line of
Śrī Madhva

First we shall mention two currently prominent arguments
which Śrī Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda has put forward.

Objection 1: “According to Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and
Śrī Caitanya-candroḍaya-nātaka, Śrī Caitanyadeva
accepted sannyāsa veśa from a kevalādvaita-vāda
sannyāsī, Śrī Keśava Bhārati, and He has referred to
himself as a māyāvāda sannyāsī. In addition to this,
Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, who was the guru of the māyāvāda
sannyāsīs of Kāśī, also described him as a sannyāsī of
the māyāvādī sampradāya.

keśava bhāratīra śiṣya tahe tumi dhanya

sāmpradāyī sannyāsī tumi raha ei grāme

“Sarvabhauma Bhatta Ācārya has also accepted this:

bhāratī sampradāya ei hayena madhyama

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 6.72)”

Refutation: This argument of the opposing party is
totally unfounded, for the following reasons.

After a jīva has realised that material existence in the
chain of birth and death is useless and distressful, he
can recognise that the attainment of service to the
lotus feet of Bhagavān is the supreme auspiciousness.
Therefore one who is extremely fortunate accepts dīkṣā
and śikṣā from a person who is thoroughly versed in
śabda-brahma, who is adorned with realisation of
Bhagavān and who has no attachment for sense
gratification. That jīva then enters into paramārtha,
the acquisition of his highest spiritual objective. In
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s nara-līlā (human-like
pastimes), He went to Gayā Dhāma on the pretext of
making offerings (pitṛ-śrāddha) for the benefit of his
deceased father. There He offered Himself fully at the
lotus feet of Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda, who was the bud of
the desire-tree of prema. He was also a supremely rasika
and bhāvuka disciple of Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, the root
of that desire-tree of prema.

prabhu bale gayā yātrā saphala āmāra

yatra kṣane dekhilāṅ caraṇa tomāra

(Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Ādi 17.50)

saṁsāra-samudra haite uddhāraha more

                          277
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


eī āmi deha samarpilāṅ tomāre

kṛṣṇa-pāda-padmera amṛta-rasa pāna

āmāre karāo tumi ei cāhi dāna

āra dine nibhṛte īśvara purī sthāne

mantra dīkṣā cāhilena madhura-vacane

(Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Ādi 17.54)

tabe tāna sthāne śikṣā-guru nārāyaṇa

karilena daśākṣara mantrera grahaṇa

(Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Ādi 17.107)

According to this section of Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavata, Śrī
Nimāī Paṇḍita performed the pastime of surrendering his
heart at the feet of Śrī Īśvara Purī. He prayed to him
for the dīkṣā-mantra in order to get release from
material existence and to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa prema, and
Śrī Purīpāda very affectionately gave him dīkṣā by the
ten-syllable mantra.

Sometime afterwards, Śrī Nimāī Paṇḍita accepted sannyāsa
veśa in Kaṭva from the advaita-vāda sannyāsī Śrī Keśava
Bhārati. After accepting sannyāsa he set off for
Vṛndāvana, saturated in the madness of prema. When he
arrived in Rāḍha-deśa, absorbed in prema, he chanted a
verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

etāṁ sa āsthāya parātmaniṣṭhām

adhyāsitāṁ pūrvatamair mahārṣibhiḥ

ahaṁ tariṣyāmi durantapāraṁ

tamo mukundāṅghri niṣevayaiva

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.23.57)

“I shall easily cross over the insurmountable ocean of
nescience by rendering service to the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. This was approved by the great ṛṣis of ancient
times, who were fixed in firm devotion to Mukunda.”

prabhu kahe sādhu ei bhikṣuka-vacana

mukunda sevanavrata kaila nirdhāraṇa

parātmāniṣṭhāmātra veśa-dhāraṇa

mukunda-sevāya haya saṁsāra-tāraṇa

seī veśa kaila ebe vṛndāvana giyā

kṛṣṇa-niṣevana kari’ nibhṛte vasiyā

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 3.7.9)

After accepting sannyāsa, Mahāprabhu said, “This promise

                          278
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

of the tridaṇḍi-bhikṣu is supremely true because the vow
to serve the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is fixed by
accepting this veśa. Having renounced dedication to
material sense objects, the purpose of accepting this
veśa is parātmā-niṣṭha, single-pointed devotion to the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. I have accepted this veśa, so
now I will go to Vrndavana and serve the lotus feet of
Kṛṣṇa.”

In the above verse, the phrase ‘parātmaniṣṭhāmātra veśa-
dhāraṇa’ is particularly worthy of consideration. It
indicates that Mahāprabhu only accepted veśa from Śrī
Keśava Bhārati because it was favourable for the
cultivation of bhagavad-bhakti. He did not accept any
mantra or any doctrines of advaita-vāda. On the
contrary, throughout His life He refuted kevalādvaita-
vāda and the conclusions of māyāvāda. It is clear that
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted only Śrī Īśvara
Purīpāda as his genuine guru, because it is Śrī Īśvara
Purīpāda’s śuddha-bhakti that He accepted, preached and
propagated throughout His life. Śrī Mādhavendra Purīpāda
and Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda are included within the Madhva
Sampradāya, so Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and his
followers, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, are also included in
the Madhva Sampradāya. Moreover, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s con-temporary pastime associates Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī Puṇḍarīka
Vidyānidhi, Brahmānanda Purī and others are also
followers of the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya because they are
all in the line of Śrī Mādhavendra Purī.

Śrīman Mahāprabhu always respected the disciples of Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī as his gurus, and He treated the
disciples of Śrī Īśvara Purī as Godbrothers. Guru ājñā
haya avicāranīya: “One should not deliberate on the
validity of the order of the guru.” According to this
conclusion, he accepted Govinda as his servant. It is
proved by this that Īśvara Purī was actually his Guru.

Another point is as follows. Śrī Madhva Ācārya accepted
sannyāsa from Acyutaprekṣa, who was also a kevalādvaita-
vādī. Suppose we accept the opinion of the opposing
party, just for the sake of argument. In that case, if
Mahāprabhu is a kevalādvaita-vādī sannyāsī, then by the
same logic so is Madhva Ācārya as well. Where, then, is
the obstacle to Śrīman Mahāprabhujī’s being in the
Madhva Sampradāya, if both of them accepted the advaita-
vādī Śankara’s sampradāya? There is a second point here.
Śrī Madhva Ācārya accepted eka-daṇḍa (a single staff of
renunciation) according to the customs and regulations
of the Śankara sampradāya. It would be logically
consistent to say that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu followed
his ideal example, and also accepted eka-daṇḍa sannyāsa
from a sannyāsī of the Śankara sampradāya, namely Śrī
Keśava Bhārati. From this it seems clear that Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas are in the line of Śrī Madhva Ācārya.

Objection 2: “Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Ācārya Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
has not mentioned any sort of relationship between the
Gauḍīya Sampradāya and the Madhva Sampradāya any-where
in his literatures such as Tattva-sandarbha or Sarva-
saṁvādinī. This idea has been introduced by Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, who was initiated into the Madhva
Sampradāya in the early part of his life and only later

                          279
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

entered the Gauḍīya Sampradāya. For this reason he had a
natural inclination toward the Madhva Sampradāya.
Therefore Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has forced the issue out
of prejudice, and has mentioned the Śrī Madhva
Sampradāya in his commentary on Tattva-sandarbha. In his
Prameya Ratnāvalī he delineated a guru-paramparā which
includes Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His sampradāya
within the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya.”

Refutation: These accusations are completely groundless
and imaginative fabrications. Actually Jīva Gosvāmī
acknowledged the tattva-vāda of Śrī Madhava Ācārya, who
is the guru of tattva-vāda, and took support from it
when he compiled his Tattva-sandharbha, Bhagavata-
sandarbha and so on. Not only this, but he also cited in
his literatures the fundamental pramāṇa or
substantiating verses of tattva-vāda such as, ‘vādanti
tat tattva-vidas tattvam’ (S.B. 1.2.11).

Of the four vaiṣṇava sampradāya-ācāryas, only Madhva
Ācārya is celebrated by the name of tattva-vādī. Since
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has personally established tattva-vāda,
the Vaiṣṇavas of the Madhva-Gauḍīya Sampradāya are
therefore tattva-vādīs. In the third śloka of the
maṅgalācaraṇa (auspicious invocation) of Tattva-
sandarbha, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī glorifies his guru Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī and his paramguru Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī as
‘tattvajñāpakau’ (the ācāryas who proclaim tattva).
Similarly, the crown of the dynasty of vaiṣṇava ācāryas,
Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu, has also designated
Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana as ‘tattvavid-uttamau’ (the
highest of all knowers of tattva) in his commentary on
this same śloka.

It is clear from this that Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has offered
respect to Śrī Madhva Ācārya, and that Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa has followed Jīva Gosvāmī in honouring
Madhva Ācārya. Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu, has not
shown any prejudice towards Madhva Ācārya. On the
contrary, if we compare Jīva Gosvāmī with Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, we find that Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has
glorified the two Gosvāmīs Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana more
than Jīva Gosvāmī has. There is no doubt whatever that
Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa is situated in the āmnāya-
dhārā (the transcendental current of conclusive
evidence) or the paramaparā of Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda
Prabhus and of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmīpāda who immediately
follows them. Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa is in the ninth
generation from Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu according to
bhāgavat-paramparā, and in the eighth generation
according to pañcarātrika-paramparā. Historians have
accepted his pañcarātrika-paramparā as follows: Śrī
Nityānanda, Śrī Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita, Hṛdaya Caitanya,
Syāmānanda Prabhu, Rasikānanda Prabhu, Nayanānanda
Prabhu and Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara. Śrī Baladeva Prabhu is
the initiated disciple of this Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara and is
also the most prominent śikṣā disciple of Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī.

Historians have declared that in no branch of the Madhva
guru-paramparā were there any brilliant scholars of such
widespread fame as Baladeva. In fact, at that time no
one in any sampradāya anywhere in India could equal Śrī
Baladeva’s knowledge in logic, in Vedānta and in śāstra

                          280
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

such as the Purāṇas and itihāsas. It is true that he
stayed for some days in the most prominent maṭha
established by Śrī Madhva Ācārya in Uḍūpī, and that he
studied the Śrī Madhva commentary on Vedānta; however,
the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya was more of an influence upon
him than was the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya.

It is natural for scholarly personalities, who are
worshipful throughout the worlds and who are the
preceptors of great precepts, to follow in the lotus-
footsteps of the vaiṣṇava ācāryas of the very
influential Madhva-Gauḍīya Sampradāya. Śrī Baladeva
thoroughly studied the commentary of Madhva, and also
made a meticulous study of the commentaries of Śaṅkara,
Rāmānuja, Bhāskara Ācārya, Nimbārka, Vallabha and
others. It is illogical to say that he is included in
each one of those sampradāyas because he had studied
those groups of philosophers.

Śrī Baladeva Prabhu has described historical events and
quoted the conclusions of the previous Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas in many literatures, such as his Govinda-bhāṣya,
Siddhānta-ratnam, Prameya-ratnāvalī and his commentary
on Tattva-sandharba. He has enabled all the philosophers
of the world to understand that the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya is included within the Madhva Sampradāya. In
this regard all the scholars of the world, eastern and
western, ancient and modern, have bowed their heads in
reverence, and have unanimously accepted the siddhānta
and opinions of Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu.

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was sent by Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī to protect the honour of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
sampradāya in the Galatā Gaddī in Jaipura. There he
defeated the objecting paṇḍitas of the Śrī sampradāya in
scriptural debate. There are no second opinions about
this. Does this not show that Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura personally inspired his śikṣā disciple Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa to prove that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are in
the line of Madhva Ācārya? Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura sent
his dīkṣā disciple Śrī Kṛṣṇadeva Sarvabhauma with Śrī
Baladeva to help him. If Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura had not
been so aged and weak at that time, he certainly would
have gone to Jaipur in person to take part in this
debate about the sampradāya. He would also have
established the very same conclusion as Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa. There is no sound evidence to prove that
Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was first an ācārya or
disciple in the Madhva Sampradāya. There may be hearsay
and imaginative rumours, but no one has given any
substantial proof.

The opposition party has alleged that Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
has not mentioned anywhere in his literature that
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are in the line of the Madhva
Sampradāya. This accusation is born of ignorance and is
absurd in the extreme. In numerous places in Tattva-
sandarbha, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī mentions his being in the
line of Madhva. Moreover, while composing ±aṭ-sandarbha,
he accepted the guidance of ācāryas in the Śrī Madhva
Sampradāya such as Vijayadhvaja, Śrī Brahmaṇyatīrtha and
Vyāsatīrtha, and collected many scriptural proofs from
their literatures. It is true that he has also quoted
the statements of Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya and Śrīdhara

                          281
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

Svāmīpāda in many places, but he has not considered
these ācāryas to be previous ācāryas of the Śrī Gauḍīya
Sampradāya. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has even accepted the
statements of sages of different philosophical schools
such as Kapila and Pātañjalī when they are favourable to
bhakti. Nonetheless, that does not mean that he is
within those sampradāyas. One may establish a specific
point of siddhānta which supports the views of an ācārya
of a particular sampradāya. That does not mean that one
is then a member of that sampradāya. Only when the
siddhānta is established by taking all the opinions of
the ācārya’s disciple and grand-disciple is the person
establishing that conclusion considered to be in that
sampradāya, otherwise not.

A part of the writings of Sila Jīva Gosvāmī in regard to
this topic is quoted here:

atra ca sva-darśitārtha-viśeṣa-prāmāṇyāyaiva. na tu
śrīmad-bhāgavata-vākya-prāmāṇyāya pramāṇāni śrutī-
purāṇādi vacanāṁ yathā dṛṣṭam evodāharaṇī yāni. kvacit
svayamadrṣṭākarāṇi ca tattva-vāda-gurunāmādhunikānāṁ
śrīmac chaṅkarācārya śiṣyatāṁ labhvā’pi śrī
bhagavatapakṣapatena tato vicchidya, pracura-pracārita
vaiṣṇavatama- viśeṣāṇāṁ dakṣiṇādi-
deśavikhyāta-'śiṣyopaśiṣya-
bhūta'-’vijayadhvaja’-’jayatīrtha’-’brahmaṇyatīrtha’-
vyāsatīrthādi-veda-vedārtha vidvadvarānāṁ ‘śrī-
madhvācārya-caraṇāṁ’ bhāgavata tātparya-bhārata-
tātparya, brahma-sūtra-bhāṣyādibhyaḥ saṅgṛhītāni.
taiścairamuktaṁ bhārata tātparye (2.1.8)

śāstrāntarāṇi sañjānan vedāntasya prasādataḥ

deśe deśe tathā granthān dṛṣṭvā caiva pṛthag vidhān

yathā sa bhagavān vyāsaḥ sākṣān nārāyanaḥ prabhuḥ

jagāda bhāratādyeṣu tathā vakṣye tadīkṣayā iti

(Tattva-sandarbha 97-98)

tatra taduddhatā śrutiś catur veda śikhādyā, purānañ ca
gāruḍādīnāṁ saṁprati sarvatrā-pracaradrūpamaṁśādikaṁ;
saṁhitā ca mahāsaṁ hitādikā; taṅtrañca taṅtra bhāgavataṁ
brahma tarkadikamiti jñeyam.

“I (Jīva Gosvāmī) have quoted various authentic
scriptural statements as evidence in the ±aṭ-sandharbha
literature. This is to establish the authenticity of my
own interpretation or opinion which I have expressed in
this literature; it is not to try to prove that the
statements or conclusions of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam are
authentic. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, like the Vedas, is self-
evident (svataḥ-pramāṇa) and therefore does not depend
upon any second evidence. In this literature I have
quoted various statements of evidence from the original
texts of śruti-smṛti, the Purāṇas and so on, exactly as
I have personally seen them in those literatures.
Besides that, my predecessor ācāryas from among the
guru-varga of tattva-vāda have cited evidence which I,
the author of Tattva-sandarbha (tattva-vādī), have also
quoted although there are several of the original texts
which I have not seen personally. These tattva-vādī

                           282
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

predecessor gurus, such as Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, have
accepted the śiṣyatva of Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya by accepting
sannyāsa from ācāryas in the Śaṅkara sampradāya.
Nonetheless, because of their strong inclination to
Bhagavān, they remained completely aloof from the
doctrines of Śaṅkara. They broadly promulgated vaiṣṇava
doctrines of ācāryas which contain various specialities
from the conclusions of the ācāryas. The disciples and
grand-disciples of the renowned Ānanda-tīrtha,
Vijayadhvaja, Brahmaṇyatīrtha and Vyāsatīrtha have
collected evidence from literatures such as Bhāgavata-
tātparya, Bhārata-tātparya and Brahma-sūtra-bhāṣya
composed by Śrīman Madhva Ācārya, the best of those who
know the Vedas and their inner purport.

“In his Bhārata-tātparya, Śrīman Madhva Ācārya has also
written, ‘By the grace of Vedānta and the Upaniṣads, I
will establish the siddhānta, since I know the
confidential mystery of various other śāstras, I have
investigated varieties of literature from different
countries and I have honour for the conclusions
expressed in texts such as the Mahābhārata written by
the direct manifestation of Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa.’

“I (Jīva Gosvāmī) am composing Tattva-sandarbha
following the above statements of Śrīman Madhva Ācārya.
I am accepting statements quoted by him and those in his
line, without having personally seen the originals of
many of the texts. This includes tantra such as saṁhitā
and mahāsaṁhitā, tantra-bhāgavata and brahmatarka.”

This evidence clearly proves that Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has
accepted only Śrīman Madhva Ācārya as the predecessor
ācārya of the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya. Nowhere does Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī such a clear statement in regard to Śrī
Rāmānuja Ācārya or Śrīdhara Svāmīpāda. Specifically he
has not accepted all the conclusions of the disciples
and grand-disciples of any sampradāya ācārya other than
Madhva. Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya had many disciples and
grand-disciples, and Śrīdhara Svami also had many
disciples, but Jīva Gosvāmī has not written down their
names anywhere. What to speak of mentioning Nimbārka
Ācārya’s name, we cannot find even a scent of his
existence anywhere in Jīva Gosvāmī’s literature.

Objection 3: “Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has described the
glories of Śrīman Mahāprabhu in a verse in the
maṅgalācaraṇa of his Sarva-saṁvādinī. Praying to
Mahāprabhu, he has described Him as ‘sva-sampradāya-
sahasrādhidaiva' (the eternal presiding Deity of
thousands upon thousands of sampradāyas founded by Him).
How, then, can He be included within any other
sampradāya? He is personally the founder of the
independent Gauḍīya Sampradāya.”

Refutation: This objection is quite ridiculous. The
complete verse from the maṅgalācaraṇa of Sarva-saṁvādinī
reads as follows:

durlabha-prema-pīyūṣagaṅgā-pravāha-sahasraṁ sva-
sampradāya-sahasrādhidaivaṁ śrī kṛṣṇa caitanyadeva
nāmānaṁ śrī bhagavāntam


                          283
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Śrī Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda and other antagonists have
interpreted ‘sva-sampradāya-sahasrādhidaivam’ in this
verse to mean ‘the presiding Deity of thousands of
sampradāyas which Śrīman Mahāprabhu has personally
inaugurated.’ The salient point here is that Śrīman
Mahāprabhu has not founded thousands of sampradāyas; He
has established only one sampradāya, which is called the
Śrī Madhva-Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya. Therefore their
interpretation is completely mistaken.

Śrī Rasikamohana Vidyābhūṣaṇa Mahodaya has inter-preted
‘svasampradāya-sahasrādhidaiva’ in another way as ‘the
supreme presiding Deity of his own sampradāya.’ This
meaning is quite appropriate, and all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
have accepted it. One may say, “Śrīman Mahāprabhu is
Svayaṁ Bhagavān, and is directly Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra. Is it
necessary for Svayaṁ Bhagavān Gauracandra to consider
any other personality as His guru, and to accept dīkṣā
and śikṣā from him?” The answer is, “Yes, it is
necessary, when Śrī Bhagavān performs his nara-līlā
(human-like pastimes).” Śrī Rāmacandra has exhibited the
pastime of accepting dīkṣā and śikṣā from Vaśiṣṭha Muni,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa from Sāndīpani Muni, and Śrīman Mahāprabhu
from Īśvara Purīpāda. These activities do not effect
their bhagavattā (Godhood) even in the slightest way.
Svayaṁ Bhagavān performs such pastimes in order to give
instructions to the world.

There is no question of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s tattva being
lost if He is included in any sampradāya. It is not the
personal duty of Bhagavān to found a sampradāya; His
devotees do that. History shows that in all cases only
Viṣṇu śakti or the servants of Viṣṇu have ever founded a
sampradāya. Granted, Śrī Bhagavān is the original,
eternal personality of sanātana-dharma which He Himself
establishes, as is evident in scriptural statements such
as 'dharman tu sākṣāt bhagavat pranītam' (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 6.3.19) and 'dharmo jagannāthaḥ sākṣāt
nārāyaṇāh' (Mahābhārata, Śānti-parva 348.54). Still the
statement 'akartā caiva kartā ca karyaṁ kāraṇam eva ca'
(Mahābhārata, Śānti-parva 348.7) shows that Bhagavān has
no direct agency in the business of establishing a
sampradāya. Rather, He accomplishes this task through
his empowered representatives. If it were not so, then
instead of the Brahma, Rudra, Sanaka and Śrī
Sampradāyas, there would be the Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa and
Nārāyaṇa Sampradāyas.

Objection 4: “While touring in South India, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu went to Uḍūpī. There he had a discussion with
a tattva-vādī ācārya, who was in Śrī Madhva Ācārya’s
sampradāya. Mahāprabhu refuted the views of the tattva-
vādīs, so He can never be included in that sampradāya.”

Refutation: Śrīman Mahāprabhujī did not directly refute
Madhva Ācārya’s ideas about śuddha-bhakti. Rather, He
refuted the distorted opinions of the tattva-vādīs which
had entered into the Madhva Sampradāya in the course of
time. Readers can understand this simply by looking in
this section of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 9.
276.277)

prabhu kahe — karmī, jñānī, dui bhaktihīna


                          284
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

tomara sampradāye dekhi sei dui cihna

sabe eka guṇa dekhi tomāra sampradāye

satya-vigraha īśvare karaha niścaye

“Karmīs and jñānīs are devoid of devotion, and it is
seen that both of these are respected in your
sampradāya. Still, in your sampradāya there is one very
great quality—the form of Bhagavān or śrī vigraha has
been accepted. Not only this, but śrī vigraha has also
been accepted as Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. He
is worshipped in your sampradāya in the form of Nṛtya-
Gopāla.”

This proves that Śrīman Mahāprabhu refuted distortions
which later entered the Madhva Sampradāya in the course
of time. He did not refute Madhva Ācārya’s opinions on
śuddha-bhakti or the fundamental conclusions that he
expressed in his commentaries. On the contrary, we have
already shown that literatures such as Tattva-sandarbha
and Sarva-saṁvādinī have been based on the conclusions
of Śrī Madhva and his disciples and grand-disciples. In
this connection we should point out that a difference of
sampradāya does not generally arise from some minor
difference of opinion. Rather, the difference between
sampradāya comes from the differences of theory about
the principal object of worship.

Objection 5: “Madhva Ācārya’s doctrine includes the
following specific points: (a) liberation is only
attained by brāhmaṇas who have taken birth in a brāhmaṇa
dynasty; (b) among devotees, the devas are prominent;
(c) only Brahma merges with Viṣṇu; (d) Lakṣmījī is in
the category of jīva; and (e) the gopīs are in the
category of the āpsarās of Svarga. However, in the
opinion of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas in his line these conceptions of Madhva are
contradictory to the conclusions of śuddha-bhakti. Under
such circumstances, why would Śrī Caitanyadeva accept
the Madhva Sampradāya? That being the case, how can the
ācāryas following in his Gauḍīya Sampradāya be included
within the Madhva Sampradāya?”

Refutation: When Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was in Galtā
Gaddī in Jaipur, he used śastric evidence and
incontrovertible logic to break to pieces all these
arguments of the opposition party. He quoted the
conclusions of Madhva Ācārya as well as those of his
disciples and grand-disciples such as Vijayadhvaja,
Brahmaṇyatīrtha and Vyāsatīrtha. Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa has refuted all such accusations in his
literary compositions such as his commentary on Tattva-
sandarbha, his Govinda-bhāṣya, Siddhānta-ratnam and
Prameya-ratnāvalī, and he has proved that the Śrī
Gauḍīya Sampradāya is included within the Madhva
Sampradāya.

In the Galtā Gaddī assembly, Baladeva proved that Madhva
considered Laksmījī to be the dear consort of Viṣṇu.
Madhva taught that her spiritual body is composed of
knowledge and pleasure and, like Viṣṇu, she is also
completely free from defects, such as the misery of
being confined in the womb prior to birth. She is all-

                          285
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

pervading, and she also enjoys in unlimited forms along
with the unlimited forms of Viṣṇu. When the avatāra of
Viṣṇu descends, Lakṣmījī also descends and remains
splendidly present in the form of that avatara’s dear
beloved consort.

Like Viṣṇu, Lakṣmiji also has various names and forms
(Bṛhad-āranyaka Bhāṣya 3.5, written by Śrī Madhva).
Further-more, Lakṣmīdevī is Viṣṇu’s subservient
embodiment of all knowledge. She is also superior to and
more qualified than Caturmukha Brahmā. She exists
radiantly on the limbs of Bhagavān in the form of
various types of ornaments, and it is she who manifests
all facilities for the pleasure of Viṣṇu, such as his
bed, seat, throne, ornaments and so on. (This is from
Śrī Madhva Ācārya’s explanation of Brahma-sūtra 4.2.1,
supported by Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.13) Nowhere has Śrī
Madhva described Śrī Lakṣmījī to be in the category of
jīva.

Similarly, the ideas that only brāḥmaṇas attain
liberation, that the devas are the prominent devotees,
that only Brahmā merges with Viṣṇu and so on, are all
foreign to the Madhva Sampradāya. On this subject Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has explained in his The Teachings
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu why Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has
accepted the Madhva Sampradāya.

“Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, having determined the authenticity of
one whose speech is true, has also ascertained the
authenticity of the Purāṇas. Ultimately he has proved
that Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the crest jewel of all
evidence. He has shown that the same characteristic
qualities which qualify Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as the topmost
evidence also apply to the scriptures certified by
Brahmā, Nārada, Vyāsa, Sukadeva and after them in
sequence Vijayadhvaja, Brahmaṇyatīrtha, Vyāsatīrtha, and
their tattva-guru Śrīman Madhva Ācārya. These
scriptures, then, are also in the category of authentic
literatures.

“It is clearly evident from this that the Brahma-Madhva
Sampradāya is the guru-praṇālī (system) of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas who have taken shelter of Śrīman Mahāprabhu.
Kavikarṇapura confirmed this same idea in his
delineation of the guru-paramparā in his Gaura-
ganoddeśa-dīpikā. The commentator of Vedānta-sūtra Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has also accepted this same
succession. There is no doubt at all that those who do
not accept this succession are prominent enemies of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas who are
following in His footsteps.

“The doctrine of bhedābheda or dvaitādvaita which
Nimbārka propounded is incomplete. It is in accepting
the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu that the
vaiṣṇava world has attained the complete perfection of
the doctrine of bhedābheda. The principal foundation-
stone of acintya-bhedābheda is sac-cid-ānanda vigraha,
and it is because Śrī Madhva Ācārya has accepted the
sac-cid-ānanda vigraha that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has
accepted the Śrī Madhva S ampradāya.

“There is a technical difference between the

                          286
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

philosophical ideas which the previous Vaiṣṇava ācāryas
have propagated because there some slight incompleteness
in those philosophical ideas. The difference in
sampradāya is due to this technical difference. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is directly para-tattva, has
shown compassion on the world and given His own
thoroughly pure and realised doctrine of acintya-
bhedābheda. By the power of His omniscience, He has
completed and made flawless all those opinions which
were suffering from some deficiency, for example,
Madhva’s sac-cid-ananda nitya-vigraha, Rāmānuja Ācārya’s
śakti-siddhānta, Viṣṇu-svamī’s śuddhādvaita siddhānta
and tadīya sarvasvatva and Nimbarka’s nitya dvaitādvaita
siddhānta.” (The Teachings of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, p.
110).

Another reason for Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s acceptance of
Madhva’s opinion is that Madhva’s doctrine distinctly
refutes māyāvāda or kevalādvaita-vāda, which is opposed
to bhakti-tattva in all respects. A third point is that
Śrī Madhva Ācārya manifested and worshipped Nanda-
nandana Nartaka-Gopāla in Uḍūpī. When Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu had darśana of the Deity, He became
overwhelmed in ecstatic love and began to dance. He had
not seen such a Deity anywhere else during his tour of
South India. This is also powerful evidence for His
being in Madhva’s line.

In his Śrī Kṛṣṇa Vijaya, Śrī Guṇarāja Khān wrote the
line, Nanda-nandana kṛṣṇa—mora prāṇanātha: “Nanda-
nandana Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of my life” (quoted in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 15.100), and for this
utterance Śrī Caitanya Mahā-prabhu sold Himself forever
into the hands of Śrī Guṇaraja Khān’s descendants. Why,
then, would He not sell Himself to the paramparā of
those disciples and grand-disciples for whom Nanda-
nandana Nartaka-Gopāla is their most worshipful Lord?
This is also specific evidence that the Gauḍīya
Sampradāya is in the line of Madhva.

Although there is some slight difference of opinion
between Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas and Śrī Madhva in regard to
Brahman, jīva and jagat, this simple difference of
opinion is not the cause of a difference of sampradāya.
The difference between Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas has been
created on the basis of a difference in upāsya-tattva
(the object of worship) or on the basis of gradations of
excellence between aspects of para-tattva. Even if there
is some slight difference in regard to sādhya, sādhana
and sādhaka-tattva, this is rarely considered to be the
cause of a difference of sampradāya. Actually, it is the
difference in realisation of para-tattva or upāsya-
tattva (the worshipful Supreme Truth) which is the main
cause of distinct sampradāyas. This was why Śrīman
Mahāprabhu overlooked the philosophical differences with
the tattva-vādīs and, focusing on the worship of para-
tattva Nartaka-Gopāla, accepted Śrī Madhva Ācārya as the
prominent sampradāya ācārya.

Objection 6: Some persons who are ignorant of
sampradāya-tattva say, “Śrī Mādhavendra Purī and Īśvara
Purī cannot be sannyāsīs of the Madhva Sampradāya
because they have the designation ‘Purī’, whereas
sannyāsīs in the Madhva Sampradāya are called ‘Tīrtha.’

                          287
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

If Śrī Mādhavendra Purī is not included within the
Madhva Sampradāya, then there are no grounds for
claiming that Śrīman Mahāprabhu has accepted the Madhva
Sampradāya.”

Refutation: Śrī Mādhavendra Purīpāda’s title ‘Purī’ is
his sannyāsa name. Actually, he was the initiated
disciple of Lakṣmīpati Tīrtha, who was in the Śrī Madhva
Sampradāya. Śrī Mādhavendra Purīpāda later accepted
sannyāsa from a sannyāsī bearing the name ‘Purī’ just as
Śrīman Mahāprabhu first accepted dīkṣā from Śrī Īśvara
Purī and later manifested the pastime of accepting
sannyāsa fron Śrī Keśava Bhārati. There is no rule that
the dīkṣā-guru and sannyāsa-guru have to be the same
person. In some cases they may be, and in others not.
Śrī Madhva Ācārya himself was first initiated in a
Vaiṣṇava sampradāya by the Viṣṇu mantra and after that
accepted sannyāsa-veśa from an advaita-vādī,
Acyutaprekṣa. After some days, Śrī Madhva Ācārya
influenced Acyutaprekṣa and brought him into the
Vaiṣṇava conception. Even after taking sannyāsa from an
advaita-vādī, Śrī Madhva Ācārya did not accept advaita-
vāda. On the contrary, he powerfully refuted all the
ideas of advaita-vāda and, having established tattva-
vāda, he preached and spread it everywhere. The same is
also seen in the life of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

It is true that sannyāsīs in the Madhva Sampradya are
called ‘Tīrtha’, but ‘Tīrtha’ is not the title of
gṛhastha-vaiṣṇavas or braḥmacārīs in that sampradāya.
Since Śrī Mādhavendra Purī did not have the title
‘Tīrtha’ before taking sannyāsa, when he accepted veśa
from a sannyāsī in the advaita-sampradāya, his title had
to be ‘Purī.’ This is not illogical.

Objection 7: Some say, “The sādhya (goal) and sādhana
(practice) of the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya differ from that
of the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya. Therefore the Śrī Gauḍīya
Sampradāya cannot be considered to be within the Śrī
Madhva Sampradāya.”

Refutation: This objection is thoroughly false, and
rooted in ignorance. Madhva’s doctrine acknowledges
bhagavat-bhakti as the sādhana in all respects. As with
Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, the initial sādhana prescribed
for kaniṣṭha-adhikārī sādhakas (neophyte practitioners)
is offering the results of ones’ fruitive activities to
Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-karmārpanam). However, bhagavat-parama-
prasāda sādhana (i.e śuddha-bhakti) has been established
as the principal practice.

Śrī Madhva Ācārya has established bhakti as we see from
his Sūtra-bhāṣya (3.3.53): bhaktir evainaṁ nayati
bhaktir evainaṁ darśayati bhaktivaśaḥ puruṣo bhaktir eva
bhūyasi iti maṭharaśrutaḥ. In sūtra 3.3.45 he writes,
varāhe ca guru-prasādo balavānna tasmād valavattaram/
tathāpi śravanādiś ca karttavayo mokṣa-siddhaye: “The
mercy of Śrī Gurudeva is more powerful than anything
else for attaining the perfection of liberation in the
form of service to Viṣṇu’s lotus feet. Yet it is still
more necessary in engagement in the limbs of sādhana-
bhakti such as śravaṇa and kīrtana.” In his text
Mahābhārata-tātparya-nirṇaya (Defining the Purport of
Mahābhārata) the position of bhakti is seen throughout:

                          288
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

sneho bhaktir iti proktastayā muktir na cānyathā (1.105)
and bhaktyaiva tuṣyati hariḥ pravanatvam eva (2.59). We
have not given more evidence simply because of lack of
space.

In the Madhva Sampradāya, love of Bhagavān is the only
sādhya. Although Śrīman Madhva Ācārya has accepted mokṣa
as the goal in some places, his definition of mokṣa is,
viṣṇav-āṅghri lābhaḥ mukti: “Liberation is the
attainment of service to the lotus feet of Viṣṇu.” Thus,
the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya accepts the definition of
mukti spoken by Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, muktir hitvānyathā
rūpaṁ svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ: “The jīva carries the
conception of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ arising from the gross and
subtle designations which are accomplished by the action
of māyā. Mukti means to be released from this false
identity and to be established in rendering loving
service to Bhagavān in one’s pure constitutional form.”
Madhva Ācārya’s mukti is not the sāyujya (merging with
Brahman) spoken of by Śaṅkara. Rather, it is based on
love of Bhagavān. Nowhere has he accepted sāyujya in the
form of the oneness of Brahman and jīva. On the
contrary, he has refuted it in every way. Madhva is well
known as a bheda-vādī because he accepts the jīva and
Brahman as being different both in the stage of bondage
and of liberation—abhedaḥ sarva-rūpeṣu jīvabhedaḥ
sadaiva hi.

Although Śrīman Madhva emphasises bheda (difference), he
does not at all disregard śrutis which indicate abheda
(non-difference); instead he has accepted their
compatibility. In other words, we find a hint of the
acceptance of acintya-bhedābheda, as Śrīla Jīva Goswami
has suggested in his Sandharbha literature. According to
Vedānta-sūtra, śakti śaktimator abhedaḥ: “The potency
and the potent are not different.” An indication of
acintya-bhedābheda is found in a statement of Brahma-
tarka which Śrī Madhva supported.

viśeṣasya viśiṣtasyāpy abhedas tadvad eva tu

sarvam ca cintya-śaktitvād yujyate parameśvare

tac chaktyaiva tu jīveṣu cid-rūpa-prakṛtāvāpi

bhedābhedau tad-anyatra hy ubhayor api darśanāt

(Brahma-tarka)

Thus there is no particular difference between Madhva
Ācārya and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu regarding sādhya and
sādhana. Whatever slight difference is evident is only
mutual vaiśiṣtya (specific distinction).

There is a very specific similarity between the Madhva
and Gauḍīya Sampradāyas. The sannyāsīs presiding over
the eight maṭhas of the tattva-vādīs in Uḍūpī perform
bhajana in the mood of the gopīs under the guidance of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eight beloved nāyikās (heroines) in Vraja.
On this subject, Śrī Padmanābhacārī, the author of Śrī
Madhva Ācārya’s biography, has written, “The monks who
take charge of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in rotation are so many gopīs
of Vṛndāvana who moved with and loved Śrī Kṛṣṇa with an
indescribable intensity of feeling, and are taking

                          289
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

rebirths now for the privilege of worshipping Him” (Life
and Teachings of Śrī Madhva Ācārya by C.M.
Padmanābhācārī, Chapter XII, page 145).

Even today, the service of Yasodānandana Nṛtya-Gopāla is
seen in the prominent maṭha in Uḍūpī. Śrīla Madhva
Ācārya has praised his iṣṭadeva Nartaka Gopala Śrī Kṛṣṇa
in this way in the fifth verse, chapter six of his
Dvādasa stotram.

devakinandana nanda-kumāra

vṛndāvanāñjana gokulacandra

kandaphalāśana sundara-rūpa

nanditagokula vanditapāda

Similarly, in the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya,
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of the gopis has
been ascertained as the sādhya in the writings of Śrīla
Rūpa, Sanātana, Raghunātha, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī
and others.

In this way, by evaluating the opinions of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas from first to last, one can conclude
that the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya is included
within the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya and that this is
consistent with reason in all respects.

Objection 8: “The Madhva Sampradāya is bheda-vādī,
whereas the Gauḍīya Sampradāya is acintya-bhedābheda-
vādī. Therefore there is a vast difference of opinion
between them.”

Refutation: We have said previously that, although the
Madhva Sampradāya accepts five kinds of bheda between
Brahman, jīva and jagat, still there is a hint of
acintya-bhedābheda-vāda in their teachings. The Vedic
scriptures give evidence both for bheda and abheda in
relation to Brahman, jīva and jagat. However, although
there is both bheda and abheda, we only have experience
of bheda, not of abheda. In the field of bhakti, the
difference (bheda) between upāsya (the object of
worship) and upāsaka (the worshipper) is the back-bone
of worship, and this bheda is proved both in the stage
of sādhana and siddha. Otherwise, if there were no
difference between the worshipper and the object of
worship, then worship would not be possible. Thus,
although there may be some mutual difference between the
Śrī Gauḍīya and Madhva Sampradāyas, this cannot be the
cause of a difference in sampradāya. The object of
worship is Bhagavān, the method of worship is bhakti and
the objective is mokṣa in the form of bhagavat-sevā.
Vaiṣṇavas of the four Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas hold slightly
different opinions in regard to these tattvas, but we
cannot say that they are fundamentally different. They
are all adherents to the same religious principles.

The difference between Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas has been
created only on the basis of difference in upāsya-tattva
(worshipful Deity) or a difference of excellence in
regard to para-tattva. Though there may even exist a
difference in sādhya, sādhana and sādhaka-tattva, this

                             290
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

is rarely considered the cause of a difference between
sampradāyas. Actually the difference in realisation of
para-tattva and upāsya-tattva is the principal cause of
differences between sampradāyas. The upāsya-tattva has
been considered superior in proportion to the degree of
excellence exhibited.

Śrī Murāri Gupta is one of Mahāprabhu’s internal
associates and he is described in the Gauḍīya Sampradāya
as an avatāra of Hanuman. Although Śrīman Mahāprabhu
informed him that Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa has more
mādhurya (sweetness) than Bhagavān Śrī Ramacandra,
Murāri Gupta was not attracted to Kṛṣṇa bhajana. His
worshipful Deity was Rāma, and he went on worshipping
Śrī Rāma until the very end. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was
very pleased to see his dedication to his worshipful
Lord. Śrīvasa Paṇḍita is also one of the principal
associates of Mahāprabhu. His worshipful Deity is Śrī
Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa, and Śrī Karṇapūra has considered him to
be an avatāra of Śrī Nārada. It is well known that he
personally preferred the worship of Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa to
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s unnata-ujjvala rasa.

Some ignorant and misguided persons say that there is a
difference of opinion between Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Jīva
Gosvāmī because Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has rejected Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s explanation of the parakīya-rasa of the Vraja
gopīs, and has instead supported svakīya-rasa. Actually
this accusation is completely unfounded and incorrect.
The truth is that Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī supported svakīya-
vāda for the benefit of some of his followers who had
taste for svakīya-rasa. His internal consideration was
that unqualified persons entering into the
transcendentally wonderful parakīya vraja-rasa should
not fall into any adulterous behaviour. It is offensive
to consider him an opponent of the transcendental vraja-
rasa, and he is not considered to be outside the Gauḍīya
Sampradāya on account of this simple divergence of
views.

We also see differences of opinion among the ācāryas of
the māyāvādī or kevalādvaita-vādī sampradāya; the
māyāvādīs themselves accept this point. However, they
are all within the advaita-vādī Śankara Sampradāya. Some
believe in vivarta-vāda, some believe in bimba-
pratibimba-vāda, some have accepted avicchinna-vāda,
some admit ābhāsa-vāda, and they have refuted each
others’ opinions. Even so, they are included within the
same sampradāya. Similarly, although there are some
slight mutual differences of opinion between the Śrī
Madhva and the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya, it is thoroughly
appropriate to accept that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya follows Madhva Ācārya.

c) Refutation of the doctrines of the smārta opponents
of bhakti

Ācārya Kesarī Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
refuted the doctrines of the smārtas, who are bereft of
devotion, while he was preaching śuddha-bhakti in vast
religious assemblies in West Bengal’s Medinīpura, Caubīs
Paraganā, Varddhamān, Kūcbihar, Māthābhāṇgā and also in
Assām. I am presenting herein whatever ideas I recorded
from those speeches and collected in my notebook.

                          291
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Smārtas are those who know and follow the smṛti-śāstras,
or scriptures of prescribed regulations manifested by
Caturmukha Brahmā, Nārada, Vyāsa, Manu, Yājñavalkya and
others for executing the practical duties of life. There
are two kinds of smṛti-śāstra: laukika (worldly) and
pāramārthika (transcendental). Pāramārthika-smṛti are
those smṛti-śāstra which support the regulations of the
principal subject namely bhagavad-bhakti, which is
established in śāstra such as the Vedas, Upaniṣads,
Purāṇas, Mahābhārata and Rāmāyāna. Laukika smṛti-śāstra
neglect the confidential purport of śāstra and only
prescribe regulations for protecting the gross social
shackles. Fundamentally, smṛti is one; this division of
smṛti came about later because of the distinction
between ṛṣis and munis who were attentive to Bhagavān
(bhagavat-unmukha) and those who were averse to Bhagavān
(bhagavat-vimukha). Those very rare people who have
regard for the statements of pāramārthika smṛti are
called śuddha-smārtas or Vaiṣṇavas. The majority of
people in this world are averse to Hari, and maintain
the conception that the gross body is the self. Those
who honour the statements of laukika smṛti, which favour
the affairs of the body and mind, are generally
celebrated by the name smārta.

Smārtas mistake the jīva for Bhagavān, and perform
various types of activities only for their own
enjoyment, with the understanding, “I (the ātmā) am the
gross and subtle body.” Various kinds of laws have been
given in the smṛti in order to instruct those jīvas who
are not under the guidance of bhagavad-bhaktas, and who
are busily engaged in endeavours related only to their
bodies. Such people are always engaged in materialistic
activities, and in order to fulfil their selfish
interests, they are absorbed in inappropriate behaviour
such as telling lies, cheating others, stealing and
violence. To curb their base pursuits, the smṛti-śāstra
has given many strict orders, which are only
circumstantial, and not eternal. That is to say, such
regulations have been presented in relation to some
particular circumstance.

In contrast, all activities in relation to Bhagavān are
eternal, because Bhagavān is the enjoyer of the fruit of
all activities. All such activities are done with the
aim and object of pleasing Bhagavān, and will continue
to be so in the future and throughout eternal time. The
laukika smṛti-śāstra mentions duties such as dāyabhāga
(sharing inheritance), saṁskāra (rites of passage and
purification), śuddhinirṇāyā (endorsing purification by
penance and atonement), prāyaścitta (purificatory
activities) and śrāddha (making offerings to the
ancestors). These are only relevant for the duration of
the lives of men; and it is man, not Bhagavān, who is
the enjoyer of their results. These laukika smṛti-
śāstras do not mention any regulations for the spiritual
welfare of the jīvas. Their festivals for Durgā, and
their determination of the times and procedures for vows
such as ekādaśī, śrāddha, saṁskāra and so on are all for
material enjoyment and liberation, and are therefore
occasional.

Unlike the smārtas, Vaiṣṇavas are surrendered to

                          292
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Bhagavān. The purpose of all their activites is
bhagavat-sevā and therefore they are non-envious and
unwavering. They give respect to all jīvas, because they
understand that the living entity is the servant of
Bhagavān. There is not the slightest desire in their
hearts to become great personalities in this world, to
make others insignificant, or to acquire prestige in
this life and Svarga in the next by performing yāga-
yajña (sacrifice), dhyāna (meditation), japa, tapasya,
śrāddha, tarpana, pilgrimages to holy places and giving
offerings in the worship of devas and devīs. They do not
even have the expectation of attaining deliverance from
the cycle of birth and death and becoming liberated. If
the service of their worshipful Deity may be attained by
taking millions of births, and even by taking up
residence in hell, then that is the object of their
prayers. Their pleasure lies only in the pleasure of
Bhagavān. Even great ṛṣis and munis do not know the
glories of śuddha-bhaktas and śuddha-bhakti.

In the Sixth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam we hear of a
debate which took place in ancient times between
Vaiṣṇavas (the associates of Viṣṇu) and smārtas (the
yamadūtas) concerning Ajāmila. In this section Yamarāja
told the smārtas (yamadūtas), “What to speak of others,
even Jaiminī, Manu and other prominent ṛṣis and munis of
karma-kāṇḍa do not realise the glories of bhagavat-
bhaktas within their hearts because their intelligence
is enchanted by the sweet, flowery statements of the
three Vedas. Their power of discrimination is bewildered
by daivī-māyā. Therefore they praise the ostentations
and costly activities mentioned in smṛti.”

Kāmukāḥ paśyanti kāminī-māyāṁ jagat: “Sensual persons
see the world as being full of amorous women.” In
accordance with this logic, and coupled with their
conception of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ in relation to the material
body, smārtas even attribute various types of defects to
the devotional endeavours of śuddha-bhaktas. They
consider the foot-bathing water of Viṣṇu and Vaiṣṇavas
to be ordinary water. They think that Śrī Nārāyaṇa (Śrī
Śālagrāma) can be contaminated by the touch of a śudra,
and can then be purified and made suitable for worship
by the performance of saṁskāras with pañca-gavya (five
pure products from a cow). In other words, they have the
base conception that even in the direct form of
Bhagavān, a defect can arise as a result of being
touched, and that Bhagavān can be made pure by cow dung
and so on.

In addition to this, smārtas consider Vaiṣṇavas to
belong to a mundane caste or creed. They consider
bhagavat-prasāda to be ordinary lentils and rice which
can become contaminated. They think that even the caste
of guru and Bhagavān is destroyed by accepting or
offering to Bhagavān grains which have been cooked by a
non-brāḥmaṇa disciple. They consider bhagavat-bhakti to
consist of activities such as accepting only rice from
uncooked paddy, taking bath three times a day, and
wearing a silk dhoti. Furthermore, they consider
Vaiṣṇavas to be jīvas bound by the results of their
fruītive activities; they perform the worship of various
devatās and their consorts; they think that dharma is
subservient to society; and they have great respect for

                          293
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

a society which is opposed to Bhagavān. This is their
misfortune.

In the Garuḍa Purāṇa the glories of Viṣṇu bhakti have
been described in this way:

brāḥmaṇānāṁ sahasrebhyaḥ satrayājī viśiṣyate

satrayājī-sahasrebhyaḥ sarva-vedānta pāragaḥ

sarva-vedāntavit-koṭyā viṣṇu-bhakto viśiṣyate

vaiṣṇavānāṁ sahasrebhyaḥ ekāntyeko viśiṣyate

“One sacrificial priest is superior to one thousand
brāḥmaṇas, one scholar of all Vedānta is better than one
thousand sacrificial priests, one Viṣṇu bhakta is
superior to millions of Vedāntic scholars and one
aikāntika (unalloyed) bhakta is superior to thousands of
Vaiṣṇavas.”

aho bata śvapaco’ to garīyān

yaj jihvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam

tepus tapas te juhuvuḥ sasnur āryā

braḥmān ūcur nāma gṛnanti ye te

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.33.7)

“Aho! What more can I say about the superiority of those
persons who take the holy name? Those on whose tongues
Your name is manifest are the best of all, even though
they may have appeared in a family of cāṇḍālas. Their
brahminical qualifications have already been perfected
in many past births, because those topmost persons who
utter your name have already observed all the
brahminical activities, such as tapa, havan, bathing in
the holy places and studying the Vedas.”

na me bhaktaś catur-vedī mad bhaktaḥ śvapacaḥ priyaḥ

tasmai deyaṁ tato grāhyaṁ sa ca pūjyo yathā hy aham

(Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 10.91)

“The catur-vedī   brāḥmaṇa who is berefit of bhakti is not
dear to Me, but   My devotee is extremely dear to Me,
although he may   have accepted birth in a family of
cāṇḍālas. He is   a worthy recipient of charity and his
mercy should be   accepted. He is certainly as worshipful
as I am.”

bhagavad-bhakti-hīnasya jātiḥ śāstraṁ japas tapaḥ

aprāṇasyaiva dehasya maṇḍanaṁ loka-rañjanam

suciḥ sad-bhakti-dīptāgni-dagdha-durjāti-kalmaṣaḥ

śvapāko’pi budhaiḥ ślāghyo na vedajño’pi nāstikaḥ

(Śrī Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 3.11.12)


                             294
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

“Those who are of good character and whose sins have
already been destroyed by the blazing fire of genuine
bhakti are to be honoured by highly learned paṇḍitas,
though they may be cāṇḍalās by birth. However, although
an atheistic person may be a scholar of the Vedas, he is
not respectable. The high birth, scriptural learning,
uttering of mantras and austerities of a person who is
devoid of bhakti are like the decoration of a dead body;
they are of no use. Such external practices are only for
the sake of delighting the minds of common people.”

viṣṇu-bhakti vihīnā ye cāṇḍālāḥ parikīrttitāḥ

cāṇḍālā api te śreṣṭhā hari-bhakti parāyanāḥ

(Bhakti-sandarbha, Anuccheda 100, Bṛhan-nāradīya-purāṇa)

“Persons devoid of viṣṇu-bhakti are cāṇḍālas. In
contrast, those who are dedicated to bhagavat-bhakti are
the greatest personalities, even though they may have
appeared in cāṇḍāla families.”

śvapaco’pi mahīpāla viṣṇu-bhakto dvijādhikaḥ

viṣṇu-bhakti vihīno yo yatiś ca śvapacādhikaḥ

(Bhakti-sandarbha, Anuccheda 100, Nārada Purāṇa)

“O King! Even a cāṇḍāla who is a devotee of Viṣṇu is
superior to a brāḥmaṇa who is devoid of bhakti.
Moreover, a sannyāsī who is devoid of Viṣṇu bhakti is
even more wretched than a cāṇḍāla.”

The authentic scriptures have established daiva-
varnāśrama (theistic social order), not adaiva-
varnāśrama (secular social order). In the adaiva-
varnāśrama system, only the son of a brāḥmaṇa is a
brāḥmaṇa, whether he has the proper brahminical
qualities or not. However in daiva-varnāśrama, one’s
brahminical status is determined by one’s qualities and
activities. Brāḥmaṇas are considered to have appeared
from the mouth of Brahmājī, the first preacher of the
Vedic jñāna. One who does not study the Vedas can never
be a brāḥmaṇa, although he may have taken his birth in a
dynasty of brāḥmaṇas. The only genuine brāḥmaṇa is a
person who follows the righteous conduct of Brahmājī,
that is a person who acts in Brahman, who knows brahma-
tattva, or who is searching for brahma-tattva. In Śrī
Gītā the divisions of varṇa have been accepted according
to the qualities and behaviour of the individual.

catur-varṇyaṁ māyā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma vibhāgaśaḥ

(Bhagavad-gītā 4.13)

It has also been stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,

yasya yal lakṣanaṁ proktaṁ puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam

yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta tat tenaiva vinirdiśet

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.11.35)

“If a person has all the qualities which have been

                          295
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

described, characterising a particular caste in human
society, then that person should be understood to be of
the caste for which he is qualified, even if he took
birth in another caste.” (In other words, varṇa must not
be determined by birth alone. A person’s caste is
determined by his qualities, and not by the caste in
which he happened to take birth).

sthito brāḥmaṇa-dharmena brāḥmaṇāmupajīvati

kṣatriyo vā’tha vaiśyo vā brahmabhūyaḥ sa gacchati

(Mahābhārata anuḥ Śalyaparva 143.8)

“Nīlakaṇṭha speaks thus: ‘Kṣatriyas or vaiśyas who are
situated in brahminical behaviour and who spend their
days living in accordance with Brahman can achieve the
stage of being brāḥmaṇas.’”

This same subject is established by the narration of
Satyakāma Jāvāla and Gautama described in the śruti.

taṁ hovāca kiṁ gotro nu saumyasīti. sa hovāca. nāham
etad veda bho yad gotro’ haṁ asmi. apṛcchaṁ mataram. sā
mā pratyabravīdvahvahaṁ carantī paricāriṇī yauvane tvām
alabhe. sāham etat na veda yad gotros tvam asi. javālā
tu nāmā aham asmi. satyakāmo nāma tvamasīti. so’haṁ
satyakāmo jāvālo’smi bho iti. taṁ hovāca—etad brāḥmaṇo
vivaktum arhati samidhaṁ saumya āhara. upa tvā neṣye
satyādra iti

(Chāndogya Upaniṣad 4.4.4)

Gautama said to Satyakāma, “ O saumya (brāḥmaṇa)! From
which gotra (genealogical caste) are you?”

He replied “I don’t know what my gotra is. When I asked
my mother, she told me, ‘In the days of my youth while I
was serving many men as a maidervant, I got you as my
son. I do not know to which gotra you belong. My name is
Jāvālā and your name is Satyakāma.’ Thus I am Satyakāma
Jāvālā.”

Gautama exclaimed, “Dear child! One who is not a
brāḥmaṇa cannot speak the truth as you have spoken. Thus
you are a brāḥmaṇa. O saumya (dvija)! Bring wood for the
performance of yajña, and I will perform your upanāyana
saṁskāra (sacred thread ceremony) Do not ever deviate
from the truth.”

Śrī Ṛṣabhadeva, who was an avatāra of Bhagavān, had one
hundred sons of whom eighty-one were brāḥmaṇas
accomplished in knowledge of Veda, nine (the nava-
yogendras) were mahā-bhagavatas, and the remainder were
kṣatriyas. Among the sons who were kṣatriyas, Bhāratajī,
who was decorated with all desirable qualities, was the
emperor after whom India was named Bhārata-varṣa. Here
also we see that the divisions of varṇa are determined
according to the qualities and activities present in the
many sons of one father.

d) Eligibility for serving Śrī Śālagrāma

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has a full understanding of

                             296
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

vaiṣṇava-smṛti, and he has refuted the imaginative
considerations of certain hateful, envious smārtas. He
has written in his Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa that certain
smārtas who are engrossed in the bodily concept of life
believe that only persons who have taken birth in a
brāḥmaṇa dynasty are eligible to worship Śālagrāma. They
think that women are not eligible to worship Śālagrāma
under any circumstances, because they are śūdras, even
if they are born brāḥmaṇas. However these points are
opposed to śāstra in all respects. Males or females who
are initiated into viṣṇu-mantra by a sad-guru are
eligible to perform arcana regardless of birth. In his
Digdarśinī Tika, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has quoted many
scriptural references as evidence to support his point
of view. He has quoted the words of Bhagavān Kapiladeva
from the Kapila-Devahuti saṁvāda of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

yannāmadheya śravanānukīrtanād

yat prahvaṇād yat smaraṇād api kvacit

śvādo’pi sadyaḥ savanāya kalpate

kutaḥ punas te bhagavān nu darśanāt

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.33.6)

“He Bhagavān! Even a person born in a family of
untouchable dog-eaters immediately becomes eligible to
perform soma-yajña (a celestial Vedic sacrifice) if he
hears Your name and afterwards performs kīrtana, offers
obeisances to You and remembers You. What more can I say
about one who has actually attained Your audience?”

Furthermore, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has clarified this
point with an example from the life-history of Pṛthu
Mahārāja. Although Śrī Pṛthu Mahārāja was the exclusive
ruler of the earth planet consisting of seven islands,
he never enforced discipline or punishment upon
brāḥmaṇas born in the dynasty of ṛṣis or upon Vaiṣṇavas
(Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 4. 21. 12). Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
has also given evidence from Purañjana Upākhyāna that
King Purañjana also never ordained punish-ment for
brāḥmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas. Therefore, women as well as
śūdras are eligible to perform arcana of Śrī Śālagrāma
once they are initiated into the viṣṇu-mantra by a sad-
guru, because they also become equal to brāḥmaṇas and
Vaiṣṇavas. Food offerings cooked by them can certainly
be offered to Śrī Bhagavān and sad-guru. It would be an
offence to disregard this conclusion.

e) Śrīla Gurupādapadma and śrī vigraha-tattva

(A compilation of instructions in relation to śrī
vigraha-tattva collected from the speeches delivered by
Śrīla Ācārya Kesari on the occasion of the vigraha
pratiṣṭhā (Deity installation) at the Śrī Pichladā
Gauḍīya Maṭha of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti in the year
1959 and the vigraha pratiṣṭhā at Śrī Caitanya Gauḍīya
Maṭha, Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma in 1962.)

Throughout the authentic scriptures such as the Vedas,
Upaniṣads and Purāṇas, there are descriptions of the
sac-cid-ānanda vigraha of Bhagavān along with the method

                             297
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

of worship. Some people consider the para-tattva vastu
(the Supreme Truth) to be formless, devoid of
attributes, devoid of śakti and unchangeable. In their
opinion the pact. The false and imaginary impersonal
conceptions such as the śunyavāda (voidism) of the
Buddhists or the anti-Vedic theory of atheism are
material.

Furthermore, it will not be entirely inappropriate to
say that the modern theory of formlessness is, to a
great extent, the contribution of Christianity. It will
not be a mistake to say that whatever theory of
formlessness is current in our country today is a symbol
of the Christian religion. The karma-vāda of
institutions such as the Bhārata Sevāśrama Saṅgha, the
Rāma-Kṛṣṇa Mission and Arvācīna Āryasamāj is completely
the remnant of Christian dharma because the ancient
karma-vāda of our country is in all respects based on
the Vedic injunctions. Therefore in literatures such as
Gītā or other smṛti and saṁhitā, there is no mention of
karmas other than Vedic karmas. These people have done a
great deal of harm to the world by the preaching of non-
Vedic ideologies.

If the Christian conception of formlessness is indeed
true, then what is the meaning of constructing places of
worship and establishing the sign of the cross inside
huge churches and on the tops of their steeples? Why do
they not perform worship while looking at the sky in an
open field? The most authoritative Christian literature
is the Bible, and there it is written,”God created man
after His own image.” That is, īśvara has made man
resembling His own form. Why do they not give more
emphasis to this statement from the Bible, in which the
human-like form of Bhagavān has been accepted?

Similarly, in the Koran sharif of the Muslim propounders
of formlessness there is one āyatta (authoritative
statement) of the Hadiz which also resembles the
statement from the Bible, and which I am quoting as far
as I remember, innālāhā khālākā men sūrātahi. ‘Sūrat’
means shape or form. “God has made man corresponding to
His own form.” Thus the human-like form of parameśvara
is supported by both the Koran and the Bible. Under such
circumstances why do those supporters of the formless
who have taken shelter of Muslim dharma bother to
construct mosques? Why do they not also meditate on the
formless Absolute in the open sky or within the ocean?

The Buddhists and Jains are also nirākāra-vādīs,
proponents of formlessness. But the Buddhists and Jains
have huge mūrtis (deity figures) in their temples in
places such as Buddhagayā, Kāśī, Sāranātha, Ajantā, and
Elorā. Mount Ābu, Paṇḍharapūra, and Calcutta’s
Pareśanātha Mandira are examples of the mūrti worship
performed by the Jains. According to the ancient history
of Purī, the Buddhists attacked the śrī mandira of Purī
and brought it under their control. At that time they
used to give honour to Jagannāthadeva considering Him to
be Buddhadeva, Subhadrā to be kirti (fame), Balarāma to
be dharma (religion) and Sudarśana to be saṅgha
(community). After driving the Buddhists out from there,
Ācārya Śaṇkara again established Jagannatha, Baladeva
and Subhadrā.

                          298
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017


In Indian literature, the indisputable truth is that
parameśvara is the cause of which the visible universe
is the effect. According to the theory of cause and
effect, there is an inseparable relationship between
cause and effect. Whatever is seen in the effect must
exist in a subtle form within the cause. It is
impossible in all respects for something which is not
present in the cause to be present in the effect. Some
philosophers maintain that a substance may be present in
the effect, even if it does not exist in the cause. The
defect in this viewpoint is that, if one accepts an
effect without a cause, then anything and everything
could manifest from each substance. For instance, oil
could be obtained from dust, ghee from water, and a
mango could be obtained from an acacia tree. However,
this is not so. The factual reality is that whatever
potential substance is in a seed (the cause), that very
substance will come out as the effect, just as oil comes
from mustard and sesame seeds, ghee comes from milk and
mangoes come from mango trees.

Thus, as many forms as are visible in the effect must
all necessarily exist in the cause, Brahman. If it were
not so, and if Brahman were formless, then this visible
universe full of innumerable forms could not have arisen
from it. Thus the śrī vigraha of Bhagavān and the
existence of the potential for the universe’s
innumerable forms within Him is proved by the theory of
cause and effect.

To accept that the universe has originated from a
formless Brahman which is devoid of attributes is
tantamount to accepting that something or everything is
born from nothing. However we do not see this happening.
Rather, parameśvara has been accepted in the Vedic
scriptures as the pūrṇa-tattva (complete truth): pūrṇām
adaḥ pūrṇam idam. The Gītā also proclaims the very same
conclusion. Nāsato vidyate bhāvo nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ:
“There is no permanent existence of the asat, and no
cessation of the sat.” Thus the śrī vigraha of Bhagavān,
the Personality of complete existence, is established
beyond a doubt. Here and there in the śruti, Brahman has
been called nirākāra (formless), nirguṇa (without
qualities), arūpa (without features) and nirviśeṣa
(devoid of attributes). However, this does not mean that
Brahman is fundamentally nirviśeṣa, nirākāra and śunya
(void). The words nirguṇa, nirākāra, arūpa and nirviśeṣa
are not prominent. It is ākāra, rūpa, guṇa and viśeṣa
which are the prominent words. Words such as nirākāra,
arūpa, nirguṇa and nirviśeṣa signify the prohibitive
sense, and are derived from the words ākāra, rūpa, guṇa,
and viśeṣa. Therefore the para-tattva with vigraha, rūpa
and guṇa is saviśeṣa tattva, possessed of attributes.
Then why has He been called arūpa and so on in the
śruti? The śāstras have given the answer to this.

acintyaḥ khalu ye bhāvā na taṁs tarkeṇa yojayet

prakṛtibhyaḥ paraṁ yacca tad acintyasya lakṣaṇam

(Mahābhārata, Bhīma Parva 5.12)

“It is not proper to apply logic and argument to that

                          299
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

existence which is acintya, inconceivable. That which is
acintya is beyond material nature.”

yā yā śrutir jalpati nirviśeṣam sā sābhidhatte
saviśeṣameva

vicārayoge sati hanta tāsāṁ prāyo valīyaḥ saviśeṣameva

(Hayaśīra pañcarātra)

“Wherever śrutis have initially described the tattva-
vastu as nirviśeṣa (devoid of attributes), they have in
the end established the saviśeṣa-tattva (truth with
attributes), not the nirviśeṣa-tattva. Nirviśeṣa and
saviśeṣa are both eternal qualities of Bhagavān.
Nevertheless, after seriously de-liberating on the
matter, it is the saviśeṣa-tattva which turns out to be
prominent because in this world there is experience of
only the saviśeṣa-tattva. There is no experience of the
nirviśeṣa-tattva.”

The purport is that the para-tattva has been called
acintya, arūpa, nirākāra and so on because of His being
beyond māyā. Actually Bhagavān has an aprākṛta
(transcendental) form. He is the foundation of all
aprākṛta qualities, and is possessed of all
transcendental features and attributes. There is not
even the slightest hint of prakṛti (material nature) or
māyā in His sac-cid-ānanda form. The words such as
nirākāra have been stated in particular places in the
śāstras only to make us understand this fact.

Some people consider the universe and all of the forms
within it to be false. But if this world is false, then
the people who say such things are also false and
illusory. Furthermore, the statements of such illusory
people are also illusory. This establishes the reality
of the world.

Some people assert that a form cannot be all-pervading.
However, this charge is also incorrect. As well as being
all pervading, parameśvara is also the possessor of all
potencies (sarvaśaktimān). One of His potencies is His
aghaṭana-ghaṭana paṭīyasī śakti, by which the impossible
is made possible. So why can He not have a form?
Besides, why can that form not be all-pervading by the
influence of that śakti? If He cannot have form and also
be all-pervading, then where is His omnipotence? This
type of mistake is due to a lack of tattva-jñāna. That
parameśvara, being unborn and without origin is also the
eternal son of Śrī Yaśodā by the power of His acintya-
śakti.

It is impossible to worship a formless substance. Some
philosophers have given a method of worshipping nirākāra
Brahman. They say, “Any substance which has a shape is
illusory and should be rejected. Therefore the best
sādhana is just to worship the formless.” However, this
opinion is incorrect. Out of the five gross material
elements, air and ether are formless, but no-one accepts
them as aprākṛta or sac-cid-ānanda. Therefore we cannot
say that the Brahman of the propounders of formlessness
is worshipful just because it is formless or void like
ether. In the śrutis it has been said that mukta-puruṣa

                          300
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

(liberated personalities) always worship and have the
darśana of the para-tattva by nirguṇa (transcendental)
bhakti,

oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā

paśyanti surayaḥ divīva cakṣur ātatam

(Ṛg Veda)

“The divine and learned Vaiṣṇavas always have the
darśana of the supreme abode of Viṣṇu by their aprākṛta
(spiritual) eyes.”

The form of the para-tattva is clearly established by
this śruti-mantra.

Some people say that śrī vigraha or śrī mūrti is not
mentioned anywhere in the Vedas and that Deity worship
is therefore not Vedic. This charge is also erroneous
and entirely unfounded, because accounts of śrī mūrti
are found throughout the Vedas. For example:

sahasrasya pratimā asi

(Yajuḥ 25.65)

“O parameśvara, You have thousands of mūrtis.”

arcata prārcata priyamedhāso arcata

(Ṛg 6.5.58.8)

“O intelligent men! thoroughly perform worship of the
śrī vigraha of parameśvara.”

Further, in the Gītā those who disregard the śrī mūrti
of Bhagavān have been called mūḍha (foolish) and
narādhama (the lowest of mankind).

avajānanti maṁ mūḍhā

mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mama bhūta maheśvaram

(Bhagavad-gītā 9.11)

yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante yena jātāni jīvanti yat
prayanty abhisaṁ viśanti tad vijijñāsasva tad brahma

(Taittirīya Upaniṣad 3.1)

“Know that Brahman as that by whom the universe is
created (the ablative case), by whom the universe is
protected and maintained (the instrumental case) and
into whom the universe enters at the time of devastation
(the locative case).”

That Brahman in whom there are these three cases cannot
be nirākāra. We see fruit falling from a tree, but if we
do not accept the existence of the tree, how can fruit

                            301
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

fall from it?   The falling of fruit is possible only if
we accept the   existence of the tree. Similarly, the
appearance of   the universe, which is full of form, is
only possible   if its source, Brahman, also has form.

Māyāvādīs say that the form of Bhagavān has been denied
in the Vedānta-sūtra in the sūtras, 'arūpavadeva hi
tatpradhānātvāt'(3.2.14) and 'na pratīkena hi saḥ'
(4.1.4). However, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has
established the śrī mūrti of Brahman by these very same
sūtras. The meaning of 'arūpavadeva' is not that Brahman
has no śrī vigraha. Rather, this sūtra is clear evidence
that Brahman has form but it seems to those who are
unqualified as if the meaning is arūpa (formless). In
the word ‘arūpavat’ the suffix ‘vatup’ has been used. In
Sanskrit grammar the suffix ‘vatup’ is used in the sense
of ‘tulya’ (similar). Thus ‘arūpavat’ conveys na-
rūpavat, ‘appearing as if not having a form.’ Rather His
own form, vigraha, is predominant. There is no
difference between Brahman Himself and His vigraha.
Similarly, in the next sūtra, ‘na-pratikena’ means “śrī
vigraha is not a symbol of Brahman,” and saḥ means “this
vigraha is Brahman Himself.” At the time of taking
darśana of Śrī Jagannatha, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said,
pratimā nahe tumi sākṣāt vrajendra-nandana: “You are not
a statue; You are directly Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of
Vraja” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 5.96).

The following mantra from Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad first
denies that the form of Brahman is material, and then
establishes His transcendental sac-cid-ānanda form.

apāṇipādo javano grahītā

paśyaty acakṣuḥ sa śṛṇoty akarṇaḥ

sa vetti vedyaṁ na ca tasyāsti vettā

tamāhuragryaṁ puruṣaṁ mahantam

(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3/19)

“Although Parabrahman is devoid of material hands He
accepts all things. Although devoid of material feet, He
comes and goes everywhere at great speed. Although
devoid of material eyes He sees everything.”

The purport is that His form is not material, but
aprākṛta (transcendental) and sac-cid-ānanda (composed
of eternal existence, cognizance and pleasure).

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇa sac-cid-ānanda vigraha

(Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā)

The crest-jewel of all evidence, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also
proclaims that Śrī Nanda-nandana is the complete,
supremely blissful, eternal Brahman:

yan mitraṁ paramānandaṁ purnaṁ brahma sanātanam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.32)

The suffix ‘vatup’ is never used to convey the meaning

                            302
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

of a substance which does not exist. The existence of a
class of completely non-existent substances is not
accepted. We cannot make statements such as “There is a
substance which does not exist.” We have already
established this earlier in relation to the evidence of
the Gītā, 'nāsato vidyate bhāvaḥ.' The compiler of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Vedavyāsa, is indeed the compiler of
Vedānta-sūtra and so his opinions can never be
contradictory. Thus it is thoroughly improper to
interpret the sūtras as indicating the formless, when
they are illuminated by ślokas such as 'kṛṣṇas tu
bhagavān svayam', 'nandagopa vrajaukasām yan mitraṁ
paramānandaṁ pūrnaṁ brahma sanātanam', and 'brahmaṇo hi
pratiṣṭhāham'. In addition to thisÇ the śrī vigraha of
Brahman is also established by the aphorisms of Brahma-
sūtra such as, 'api saṁrādhane pratyakṣānumānābhyām'
(3.2.24), 'prakāsaś ca karmaṇyabhyāsāt' (3.2.25); and
'prakāśavaccāvaiśeṣyāt' (3.2.25).

The purport of ‘arūpavad eva hi tat pradhānātvāt’ is
that Brahman does not have a particular shape or form.
He is Himself vigraha. That is why it has been said
arūpavat—na rūpavat. The suffix ‘eva’ indicates the
hopelessness of opposing arguments. Brahmarūpa is
predominant. There is no bheda (division) in His svayaṁ-
rūpa or śrī vigraha. If you ask, “Can we accept that an
omnipresent Being has a human-like form?” then the
answer is, “Yes, He can.” 'Api samrādhane pratyakṣānu
mānāmyām' (3.2.24): “Although He is omnipresent and
unmanifest, His darśan can be obtained by the process of
worship.” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.21) also confirms
this. Bhakty āham ekayā grāhyaḥ: “I am perceived only by
bhakti.”

This conclusion has been made even clearer in the next
sūtra, na pratīkena hi saḥ. We cannot attain perfection
or Bhagavān by worshipping a symbol or an idol, nor is
it correct to impose the presence of Bhagavān on the
idol. In this regard, Ācārya Śaṇkara states that the
forms of the formless Brahman have been imagined for the
welfare of the sādhakas. His idea is that the
consciousness is purified by worshipping these imaginary
forms, and that when the consciousness is purified, then
the sādhana to attain the formless Brahman becomes easy.
However, it is not correct to worship Bhagavān by
imagining forms or idols. The sac-cid-ānanda-mūrti is
svayaṁ-rūpa, directly Parabrahman Himself. His worship
should be performed. This has been said in the above-
mentioned aphorism of Vedānta-sūtra. The consideration
here is this: “Can we establish the worship of some
imaginary form of Bhagavān?” In reply to this the sūtra
states emphatically, na hi: “NO!” “Then how will worship
be performed?” 'Saḥ', by performing worship of the
spiritual form of Bhagavān Himself, that is śrī vigraha,
one will meet with Bhagavān. Therefore it has been
stated in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta:

īśvarera śrī-vigraha sac-cid-ānandākāra

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 6.166)

“The transcendental form of Bhagavān is complete in
eternity, cognisance and bliss.”


                          303
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

cid-ānanda kṛṣṇa vigraha ‘māyika’ kari’ mani

ei baḍa ‘pāpa’ — satya caitanyera vāṇī

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 25.35)

“The māyāvādīs do not recognise the personal form of
Bhagavān as spiritual and full of bliss. This is a great
sin. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s statements are factual.”

pratimā nahe tumi sākṣāt Vrajendra-nandana

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 5.96)

“You are not a statue; You are directly Vrajendra-
nandana Kṛṣṇa Himself.”

Therefore the śrī vigraha of Bhagavān is the form of
eternal existence, cognisance and pleasure. However one
should bear in mind that only the śrī vigraha
established by mahā-puruṣa, great liberated
personalities, are sac-cid-ānanda forms. The mūrti
established by conditioned souls is called pratimā, a
statue, and the worship of such statues is prohibited in
the scriptures. In the same way that a certified copy of
a certified copy is no evidence, even a duplicate statue
of a śrī vigraha established by a mahā-puruṣa is not a
sac-cid-ānanda śrī vigraha. Throughout the śāstras it
has been mentioned that there is endless auspiciousness
for the jīvas by rendering service to śrī vigraha.

f) Refutation of ‘yata mata tata patha’

Paramārādhya Ācārya Kesarī Śrī Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja made a storm-like preaching tour
in many villages in the district of Medinīpura, West
Bengal, in the year 1950. At that time, within thirty
days he preached extensively in about forty different
religious assemblies on the subject of śrī sanātana-
dharma, the dharma of śuddha-bhakti, as practised and
expounded by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. There was one
large village of Medinīpura called Gehūṅkhalī, in which
a vast religious assembly took place. Śrī Śrīla
Gurupādapadma had come there on the request of his own
Godbrother Param Pūjyapada Nityalīlāpraviṣṭa Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti-bhūdeva Śrauti Mahāraja. The huge assembly had
been arranged in the courtyard of a high school managed
by the Rāma-Kṛṣṇa Mission, and the head master of the
school, other teachers, local students and various other
personalities were present.

In very poetic language, Śrīla Gurupādapadma established
the siddhānta of the śuddha-bhakti practised and
expounded by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu before an audience
of about twenty-five thousand people. He explained that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the last limit of the para-tattva. He is
the ultimate worshippable truth for all jīvas, who are
his separated parts, vibhinnaṁśa-tattva. By constitution
the living entities are the servants of Bhagavān. The
wretched condition of the jīva is due to forgetfulness
of his service attitude towards Bhagavān.

Śrīla Gurudeva was establishing these conclusions by
scriptural evidence and incontrovertible reasoning, when

                          304
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

right in the middle of the lecture, some people asked,
“We have read and heard that the jīva is Śiva. Śiva,
Durgā, Kālī, Gaṇeśa—these are all different names and
forms of the same one Bhagavān. Bhagavān is attained
whichever viewpoint you take, and whichever devatā you
worship. When one goes up into the sky, all things are
seen equally. Although letters are posted in different
post-offices, they all arrive at the same place. One can
reach Delhi on foot, by car, by train or by any
conveyance. Similarly when the sādhaka is situated in an
elevated position of spirituality, he sees all as one
and the same. The one Bhagavān is attained by
worshipping anyone, yet you accept that Kṛṣṇa alone is
the exclusive object of worship and that bhakti to Him
is the best of all means of spiritual attainment.”

Having heard this question, the entire audience was
enchanted by Śrīla Gurudeva's brilliant reply. Those who
had posed the question were completely unable to
respond. I shall now present some parts of the speech
which Śrīla Guru-pādapadma delivered in that assembly.

With profound gravity, Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī said that the
viewpoint thrown up by the opposing party was the
remnant of Christian doctrine; it is non-Vedic and it is
against the verdict of śāstra. “The slogan, ‘yata mata
tata patha’ means that all philosophical systems are
different paths to attain the same Bhagavān. First of
all, let us deliberate upon this. This opinion is
misleading and against scripture in all respects. If we
accept it, then we will have to regard the conceptions
of everyone to be equal, whether they are thieves,
plunderers, prostitutes, sādhus or materialists. No
thoughtful person can accept that those who take shelter
of sattvic, rājasic or tāmasic methods of accomplishment
will all attain the same result. The destination of
violent people who eat meat, fish and eggs is not the
same as that of righteous people who harbour a pure
sattvic conception and are devoted to sattvic and
nirguṇa matters. No intelligent person can accept any
view to the contrary. Śāstras such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
and Gītā have not described all religions or paths as
equal. On the contrary, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam states that
the only supreme dharma for all living entities is
bhakti to Adhoksaja Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which should be
unmotivated and uninterrupted like a stream of oil.

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā saṁprasīdati

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.6)

dharmaḥ projjhita kaitavo ‘tra paramo nirmatsarāṇām
sataṁ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.1.2)

“Apart from bhakti to Bhagavān, all opinions that go by
the name of dharma are useless and hypocritical.”

Paths other than pure bhakti cannot enable one to meet
with Kṛṣṇa. Bhagavān can be pleased only by the devotion
described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The Gītā also states

                            305
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

that those who worship the devatās attain the planets of
the devatās; those who worship the forefathers go to
Pitṛloka; and those who worship ghosts attain the
planets of the ghosts. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not
attained by these mundane worldly methods of worship.
Service to Kṛṣṇa in Kṛṣṇaloka can be attained only by
śuddha-bhakti. If all methods of worship were the same,
then Kṛṣṇa would not say in Gītā,

yānti deva-vratā devān pitṛn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā yānti mad yājino ‘pi mām

(Bhagavad-gītā 9.25)

“Those   who worship the devas attain the planets of the
devas,   those who worship the forefathers attain the
planet   of the forefathers and those who worship ghosts
attain   the ghostly worlds. But those who worship Me
attain   Me.”

kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ prapadyante ‘nya-devatāḥ

taṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya prakṛtyā niyatāḥ svayā

(Bhagavad-gītā 7.20)

“Those whose knowledge has been stolen by desires to
drive away distress and so on take shelter of
appropriate regulations and perform worship of the
devatās, being impelled by their own natures.”

antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām

devān deva-yajo yānti mad-bhaktā yānti mām api

(Bhagavad-gītā 7.23)

“However, the result of the worship performed by those
people of meagre intelligence is perishable. The
worshippers of the devatās attain the devatās and My
devotees attain Me.”

Giving up Kṛṣṇa to worship various other devatās has
been called unlawful.

ye ‘py anya-devatā-bhaktā yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

te ‘pi mām eva kaunteya yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam

(Bhagavad-gītā 9.23)

“Whatever a man may sacrifice to the devatās, O son of
Kuntī, is really meant for Me alone, but it is offered
without true understanding.”

Some people say, “Viṣṇu, Ganeśa, Durgā, Kālī and Śiva
are all one and the same. There is no fundamental or
intrinsic difference between them; they are different in
name only, and the result of worshipping all of them is
the same.” However this account is not in agreement with
śāstra.

oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā

                            306
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017


paśyanti sūrayaḥ divīva cakṣur ātatam

tad viprāso vipranyavo jāgṛvāṁśaḥ

samiṇdhate visnor yat paramaṁ padam

(Ṛg Veda 1.22.20)

“As eyes are capable of seeing the sun in the sky
without impediment, similarly liberated mahā-puruṣas
always see the supreme abode of the parameśvara Viṣṇu.
The sādhus, who are devoted to Bhagavān, and who are
free from defects such as the tendency to be mistaken or
deluded, preach everywhere about the supreme abode of
Viṣṇu.”

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇañ ca vidyate

na tat samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala kriyā ca

(Śvetāsvatara Upaniṣad 6.8)

“The activities of that Parabrahman Paramātmā are not
material because His senses such as His hands and feet
are not material. He is splendidly present in all places
at the same time by His spiritual body. Therefore, far
from being greater than Him, no others are seen even to
be equal to Him. It is heard that parameśvara has
various types of divine potency, amongst which jñāna-
śakti, bala-śakti and kriyā-śakti are prominent. These
three potencies are called cit-śakti (saṁvit-śakti),
sat-śakti (sandhinī-śakti) and ānanda-śakti (hlādinī-
śakti) respectively.”

In Gītā it has been said,

mattaḥ parataraṁ naṇyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya

(Bhagavad-gītā 7.7)

“O Dhanañjaya, there is no truth superior to me.”

And also,

vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham

(Bhagavad-gītā 15.15)

“By all the Vedas I am to be known. Indeed, I am the
compiler of Vedānta and the knower of the Vedas.”

It is established by all the authentic evidence that
viṣṇu-tattva is the supreme para-tattva. It has not been
said anywhere in the śāstra that devatās such as Ganeśa,
Kālī, Durgā and Sūrya are equal to Viṣṇu tattva. On the
contrary, those who consider these devatās to be equal
to Nārāyaṇa are offenders.

                            307
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017


yas tu nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ brahmārudrādi daivataiḥ

samatvenaiva vikṣeta sa pāṣaṇḍi bhaved dhruvam

(Vaiṣṇava-tantra)

“One who considers Śrī Nārāyaṇa to be in the same
category as devatās such as Brahmā and Rudra is a
pāṣaṇḍi (a faithless non-believer).”

Moreover in Gītā it has been said,

tapasvibhyo’ dhiko yogī jñānibhyo’ pi mato’ dhikaḥ

karmibhyaś cādhiko yogī tasmād yogī bhavārjuna

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

(Bhagavad-gītā 6. 46-47)

“Among fruitive workers who have material desires,
tapasvīs (those engaged in the performance of
austerities) and jñānīs (those engaged in the
cultivation of knowledge) the yogī is the best of all.
Therefore, O Arjuna! Be a yogī. However, even among
these yogīs, those who do bhajana (transcendental
service) to Me, Vāsudeva, being devoted to Me with
complete faith, are the best of all; this is My opinion.
Therefore become a yogī like this.”

Bhagavān cannot be easily attained by any means other
than bhakti. Śṛī Kṛṣṇa has personally said,

na sādhyati māṁ yogo na sāṅkhyaṁ dharma uddhava

na svādhyāyastapastyāgo yathā bhaktirmamorjitā

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.14.20)

“Yoga-sādhana, jñāna-vijñāna, religious ceremonies,
japa, austerities, studying and renunciation are not
sufficient to attain Me. I can only be attained by
devotional service composed of unalloyed prema.”

This same conclusion has also been expressed in śruti:

bhaktir evainaṁ nayati bhaktir evainaṁ darśayati
bhaktivaśaḥ puruṣo bhatir eva bhūyasī

(Māthara śruti-vācan quoted in Mādhva-bhāṣya on Vedānta-
sūtra (3.3.53).

For this reason, the instruction has been given in
Śrīmad Bhāgavad-gītā, sarva dharmān parityajya māmekaṁ
śaraṇaṁ vraja: “Surrender to Me, giving up all temporary
dharmas related to the body and mind.” Nowhere in the
authentic śāstras has it been stated that all opinions,
paths or wordly dharmas are the same. People who preach
this misleading idea of ‘yata mata tata patha’ are
ignorant of tattva.


                           308
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

When one goes up to a great height in an aeroplane, the
trees and plants and the high and low places down below
all appear to be the same, but this simply indicates the
observer’s lack of seeing power. His eyes do not find
remote objects for want of the appropriate type of
observation. Similarly, because of a lack of tattva-
jñāna, ignorant people, who see everything from their
own limited material viewpoint, consider all good and
bad opinions to be equal. This simply reveals their
ignorance. It is not that everyone is one, nor do they
become one if someone whose vision is full of ignorance
sees them as one. Those who perform forbidden activities
are not the same as those who perform pious activities,
or those who perform prescribed duties without
attachment, or jñāna-yogīs, or bhakti-yogīs. Their
activities are different; the results of their
activities are different; and their destinations are
different. If it were not so, this opinion would not
have been refuted in the Gītā and other scriptures.

Only ignorant and foolish people can say, “One can reach
the same destination by bullock-cart, horse-drawn
carriage, train or car. The same destination can be
attained by all roads.” Countries and islands such as
England, Australia or Hawaii are situated in the middle
of the ocean; they cannot be reached bullock-cart,
horse-drawn carriage or car. Everyone acknowledges this
fact. Even passengers on the same train cannot arrive at
the same destination if they have tickets for different
places. Similarly those who adopt various methods of
attainment to realise various goals such as material
sense gratification, liberation, or love of God cannot
all attain the same loving service to Bhagavān. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa has explained this nicely in the śloka, ye yathā
māṁ prapadyante: “As they surrender unto Me, I reward
them accordingly (Bhagavad-gītā 4.11).”

Some people also say, “All letters reach the same
destination even if you post them in different post-
offices. Similarly, all worshippers attain the same
parameśvara, no matter what devatā they worship.”
However, this argument is also utterly imaginary; it is
born of ignorance. It is true that if the address
written on different letters is the same, then they will
all arrive at the same place, even if they are posted in
different post-offices. This is correct. But if letters
have different addresses written on them, then they will
reach different destinations. Similarly, if all
worshippers perform the same exclusive worship of Svayaṁ
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa which culminates in bhakti, then they
become purified and can attain Bhagavān. This sequence
has been shown in a beautiful way in the Bhagavad-gītā.

Nowadays we hear many slogans which are opposed to the
conclusions of scripture. The authentic śāstras do not
at all support ideas such as ‘service to daridra-
nārāyaṇa’ (God in the form of poverty-stricken people),
‘janatā-janārdana’ (the common people are God) and ‘jīva
hi śiva’ (the soul is Śiva). If poverty-stricken people
are Nārāyaṇa, then what about wealthy and respectable
people who have performed pious activities in their
previous births? What about righteous, learned and
honourable people? Why is it that they cannot be
Nārāyaṇa? Those who accept the notion of daridra-

                          309
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

nārāyaṇa are all atheists impelled by base saṁskāras
(impressions from previous births). They have no
relation whatsoever with the pure ātmā-dharma.

People talk about daridra-nārāyaṇa, but to this day no
jīva ever succeeded in becoming Bhagavān. The ātmā and
paramātmā have separate individual natures by their very
constitution. The jīvātmā is minute, subject to the
control of māyā and helpless in regard to tasting the
results of his own activities. In contrast, Paramātmā is
the creator, master and maintainer of the entire
universe and He is the Lord of māyā. How can these two
be called one? Those who maintain such a conception
propound a vicious brand of folly. They are mistaken in
all respects.

Those who say that the jīva becomes Śiva after attaining
jñāna and becoming liberated are atheists. At this
stage, they call Mahādeva Śaṅkara (Śīva) ‘Father’ and
they address Bhavānī as ‘Mother’, but when they are
liberated and they have become Śīva, they will see
Bhavānī as their wife. Therefore Bhavānī in the form of
Durgā cuts the throats of such miscreants and wears a
garland of their heads. Evidence of this can be found in
many places in śāstra.

After hearing this brilliant speech of Srīla Ācārya
Kesarī some of the teachers who were present there
placed a proposal before Śrī Gurudeva. They offered to
bring the main svāmījī of the Rāma Kṛṣṇa Mission Maṭha
located in Velūra, and to investigate this subject by
means of a scriptural debate in a special assembly. “We
will call him tomorrow,” they said. Ācarya Kesarī
replied, “He will never come, once he hears my name.”
Śrila Gurudeva waited for three or four days for the
sannyāsīs of the Rāma Kṛṣṇa Mission, but it became known
that they were not prepared for a scriptural debate at
any cost.

g) Refutation of the sahajiyā doctrine

Prākṛta-sahajiyās are those who understand the aprākṛta
(spiritual) līlā of the aprākṛta Bhagavān to be prākṛta
(mundane) like the affairs of ordinary men and women,
and who think that the aprākṛta-tattva is attained by a
material sādhana. Contrary to the teachings of the
aprākṛta rasācārya Śri Rūpa Gosvāmī, they imagine
themselves to be gopīs. They decorate the inert, gross,
material male body with the dress of a woman and they
act out the role of performing bhajana with this
imaginary gopi-bhāva. Those who do this are called
prākṛta-sahajiyā. While maintaining a mood of male
within their hearts, these people outwardly hide their
male bodies by keeping long hair like women, and wearing
rings in their noses, long veils, sārīs or voluminous
skirts, bodices, bangles on their wrists, girdles on
their waists, ankle-bells on their feet, golden
ornaments and so on. They introduce themselves with
names like Lalitā or Viśākhā. On the pretext of
parakīyā-bhajana they keep young women in their āśramas
as maidservants and maintain improper relationships with
them. Such is their anti-scriptural conduct.

Others do not adorn their male bodies in the dress of

                          310
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

women, but they support the opinion of those who do.
With flirtatious gestures, they sing about the
confidential loving play of Rāī-Kānū (Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa) in
the presence of all kinds of ordinary people anywhere in
the market-place without considering the eligibility of
their audience. They give pretentious lectures on rāsa-
līlā and they also imitate rāsa-līlā. Thus debauchees
come to mistake the aprākṛta-rasa for the jaḍa
(material) rasa. They believe that it is absolutely
necessary to keep the company of another’s wife as an
illegal paramour in order to realise the aprākṛta-rasa.
Conversely, they think that Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrīla
Narottama Ṭhākura can not possibly be rasika, because
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was a brahmacārī from boyhood and Śrīla
Narottama Ṭhākura never entered household life. Such
people also come in the category of prākṛta-sahajiyā.

Externally Śrīman Mahāprabhu was male, but internally He
used to nurture the mood of a gopī in the service of
Kṛṣṇa. These people completely contradict this. They
nurture the male mood within their hearts but externally
they hide it by trying to cover their outer limbs with
the attire of a gopī. Śri Caitanya Mahāprabhu has
explained that gopī-bhāva is the dharma of the ātmā, but
the prākṛta-sahajiyās think that gopī-bhāva is the
dharma of the body.

antare niṣṭhā kara bāhye loka-vyavahāra

acirāt kṛṣṇa tomāya karibe uddhāra

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 16.239)

mane nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana

rātri-dine kare vraje kṛṣṇera sevana

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 22.152)

Here Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhujī is saying that in the
beginning one should keep niṣṭhā (very firm faith) in
the core of one’s heart, and at the same time behave
like ordinary people in order to sustain one’s life.
Slowly, slowly, when one’s faith has become mature,
one’s worldly activities will also come to correspond
with one’s bhajana; that is they will become favourable
to bhajana. In such a condition, one should meditate on
one’s internally conceived siddha-deha which is suitable
for the service of the Divine Couple, and in the core of
one’s heart one should engage in the aprākṛta mānasī-
sevā to Kṛṣṇa. By following this procedure, at first one
attains svarūpa-siddhi (realisation of one’s eternal
spiritual body). Ultimately, at the stage of vastu-
siddhi in prakaṭa Vraja, after giving up the material
body, one gets the body of a gopī corresponding to one’s
internally conceived siddha-deha.

On the topic of rāgānugā bhakti-sādhana Śrila Rūpa
Gosvāmī has said,

kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janañ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija samīhitam

tat tat kathā rataś cāsau kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā


                          311
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad bhāva lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ

śravaṇotkīrtanādīni vaidhī-bhakty uditāni tu

yānyaṅgāni ca tānyatra vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ

“One should always continuously reside in Vraja,
remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa and those dear associates of His
whom one aspires to follow, and one should remain
engrossed in their līlā-kathā. If one is unable to
reside in Vraja directly then one should reside in Vraja
by mind. On the path of rāgānugā, one should follow
Kṛṣṇa's intimate beloved associates and their followers,
always remaining absorbed in their service. This should
be done by the sādhaka-rūpa (the external material body
of one’s present condition) and also in sīddha-rūpa (by
the internally conceived body suitable for rendering the
type of service to Śrī Krṣṇa for which one’s heart is
eager). One should eagerly desire the bhāva, that is the
special loving mood of those associates of Kṛṣṇa in
Vraja whom one aspires to follow. Learned scholars who
know bhakti-tattva point out that in vaidhī-bhakti one
is instructed to observe the limbs of bhakti such as
śravaṇa and kīrtana according to one’s adhīkāra
(eligibility). These same instructions also apply in
rāgānugā-bhakti.”

Neither Śrī Śrīman Mahāprabhu nor Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
who fulfilled Mahāprabhu’s heart’s desire, have given
instructions anywhere that male sādhakas should hide
their male forms; keep a braid; wear a veil, a skirt, a
blouse and ornaments suitable for women; and then
perform rāgānugā bhajana with others’ wives. Rather, in
all cases they have said that these activities are
abominable and are opposed to śāstra. Śrīman Mahāprabhu
rejected Choṭa Haridāsa to establish a high ideal for
practitioners of bhakti. The same immaculate ideal has
also been set by the Six Gosvāmīs. In Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s literatures such as Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
and Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, he has given the instruction
to perform sādhana-bhajana following in the cooling
footprints of the śrutis (personified Vedas) and the
sages of Daṇḍakāraṇya. Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda, Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura, Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura and others are shining examples of
such bhajana. How pure their lives are! It is proper for
śuddha-bhaktas to follow such great spiritual
personalities.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written as follows in his
essay entitled ‘The Depravity of the Sahajīyā Doctrine.’

“A loathsome ideology is spreading insidiously in
several places in Bengal. All the activities and conduct
prescribed by this sahajiyā doctrine are extremely
corrupt and contemptible. The jīva is cinmaya
(spiritual), and its only natural dharma is cinmaya
service to Kṛṣṇa. The word ‘sahaja’ means saha-ja, i.e.
that which arises along with the ātmā. Transcendental
service to Kṛṣṇa is sahaja (natural) for the pure ātmā,
because it occurs along with the jīvātmā and thus it is

                          312
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

naturally inherent. However, it is not natural in the
stage of bondage to inanimate matter. Sahajiyās cheat
others and are themselves cheated or deprived of their
pure and natural love for Kṛṣṇa by transforming the
union of man and woman into a mundane, supposedly
natural dharma. In actuality, the union of man and woman
is not a natural dharma. On the contrary, in the natural
dharma of the ātmā, the union of the dull male and
female bodies is extremely loathsome, depraved and
inappropriate conduct. What is called sahajiyā-dharma
nowadays is totally immoral, contrary to saintly
behaviour and opposed to śāstra. Śuddha Vaiṣṇavas should
be extremely careful in regard to this. That dharma in
which the custom is to accept mantra in the left ear is
in all respects a deviation.

“ We never find anywhere in the scriptures instructions
such as, ‘One should associate with a woman in order to
attain Vrajendra-nandana’. On entering into madhurya-
rasa the minute conscious jīva attains his own natural
condition. Then there is no necessity whatsoever for
associating with the inanimate material nature. Choṭa
Haridāsa, himself being prakṛti (female), was rejected
by Mahāprabhu for committing the offence of conversing
in puruṣa-bhāva (male mood) with another prakṛti.
Licentious people create the path of their own sense
gratification (see Antya-līlā 2.117), but śuddha
Vaiṣṇavas neglect them. The association of a married
woman is not part of bhajana even for householders,
therefore this association of woman has been accepted in
a regulated way free from sin for conducting household
life. It is the opinion of pure Vaiṣṇavas that male
sādhakas should perform bhajana and remain separate from
female sādhakas. A female sādhaka should not invite any
male person to her bhajana party. Bhajana is a
completely spiritual activity. When even the slightest
mundane sentiment is allowed to enter it becomes
ruined.”

h) Bheka-praṇālī and siddha-praṇālī

In recent times in Bengal and in places such as Rādhā-
kuṇḍa and Vṛndāvana in Vraja the custom called bheka-
dhāraṇa and siddha-praṇālī has perverted the intrinsic
nature of the śuddha-bhakti established by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and the Six Gosvāmīs. Without consideration
of qualification or disqualification these people give
siddha-praṇālī and bābājī veśa to adulterous fellows,
debauchees and ordinary people who are ignorant of
śāstra and siddhānta. Having adopted this base practice,
those people fall to even greater depths of corruption
and depravity.

i) Bheka-dhāraṇa (the system of bābājī-veśa)

From when was the custom of bheka-dhāraṇa2 in use? On
making an investigation we see that this custom was not
current at the time of the Six Gosvāmīs, Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrī Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī and so on because these
personalities were instinctively paramahaṁsas. Naturally
Śrī Sanātāna Gosvāmī, taking an old dhotī from Tapana
Misra, tore it up and wore it as bahir-vāsa and ḍor-
kaupīna (loin cloth worn by a paramahaṁsa). There is no

                          313
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

mention at all of giving siddha-praṇālī3 in this
connection. This dress of a renunciate was adopted
simply to indicate a firm dedication to bhajana.
Similarly, one should understand the case to be the same
in regard to the other Gosvāmīs.

In one way, this is included in category of the bhikṣuka
(mendicant) āśrama or sannyāsa because paramahaṁsa
mahātmās do not have any definite or fixed dress. They
are beyond rules, regulations and the distinguishing
marks of the āśramas such as sannyāsa. Since they are
always carried away in bhagavat-prema, the regulations
and prohibitions of scriptures such as the Vedas are no
impetus for such paramahaṁsas. However those people who
are not in the paramahaṁsa stage accept vaiṣṇava
sannyāsa according to sāttvata vaiṣṇava-smṛti such as
Satkriyāsāra-dīpika or according to the same regulations
they wear a white outer cloth and ḍor-kaupīna. This is
for firm dedication to sādhana-bhajana, and is called
bheka-dhāraṇa. The word ‘bheka’ is a corrupted form of
the Sanskrit word ‘bheṣa.’ Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
has written in his essay entitled ‘Bheka-Dhāraṇa
(reprinted in Gauḍīya Patrikā Year 6, No. 2):

“The word ‘bheka’ is properly understood to mean the
āśrama of bhikṣuka (mendicants). The name of the
sannyāsa āśrama is bhikṣu-āśrama. Sannyāsīs can never
associate with women in this life. They will sustain
their lives by the occupation of begging.

“Here a question arises. In which āśrama are those
Vaiṣṇavas who have accepted bheka situated? Our studies
of śāstra and the instructions of Mahāprabhu establish
that detached Vaiṣṇavas are situated in the bhikṣu-
āśrama. When the association of women is completely
forbidden for them then they are situated in the
sannyāsa āśrama. The sign of sannyāsa is kaupīna (loin
cloth). When they have accepted ḍor-kaupīna or bahirvāsa
(outer-garment) then they are definitely included in the
sannyāsa aśrama.

“Sannyāsa is of two kinds, ordinary sannyāsa and
vaiṣṇava sannyāsa. There is a vast difference between
these two. In ordinary sannyāsa there is peacefulness,
self-control, tolerance, renunciation, knowledge of the
eternal and the temporary and the ambition to attain
Brahman. When these dharmas have arisen in an
individual, then sannyāsa has been accepted. However,
the presence of these qualities does not by itself
provide eligibility for vaiṣṇava-sannyāsa.

The process for developing rati for Bhagavān begins
first of all with faith in subjects related to Bhagavān.
After that one proceeds to sādhu-saṅga, bhajana-kriyā,
anartha-nivṛtti and so on. At the stage when rati for
Bhagavān arises in the heart, a dharma called virakti
(detachment) takes shelter of the Vaiṣṇava. At that
stage the vaiṣṇava-sādhaka becomes completely detached
from the gṛhastha-āśrama. He then wears kaupīna to
minimize his personal necessities, and maintains his
life by begging. This is called vaiṣṇava-bheka. Those
who are simple and free from duplicity and who accept
bheka for the purpose of doing bhagavat-bhajana are
worthy to receive the prayers of the whole world. This

                          314
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

type of acceptance of bheka is of two kinds. Some
sādhakas, after achieving detachment born of bhāva,
accept bheka from a worthy guru; and some have put on
ḍor-kaupīna and bahirvāsa themselves. In the sampradāya
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu this custom of bheka is extremely
pure. Bowing my head with great faith, I repeatedly
offer my obeisances to such a tradition.

“However, it is very unfortunate that these days the
bheka-āśrama is becoming extremely corrupted. The
consideration of eligibility has completely disappeared.
Some people, who want to wear bheka although they are
unqualified, have their heads shaven, put on ḍor-kaupīna
and accept bheka whimsically.

“In the present time some perversions have come in the
system of sannyāsa. What are they?

(1) Some householder Vaiṣṇavas become bābājīs, having
shaven their heads and put on a kaupīna. What can be
more injurious than this? Their action is opposed to
śāstra and to the interests of society. If they are
actually detached from material life then they may
accept bheka in genuine renunciation. Otherwise they
will disgrace vaiṣṇava-dharma and in the next life they
will also have to taste the fruit of doing so.

(2) There is a terrible and disastrous custom among
bābājīs of keeping maidservants in their āśramas. In
some āśramas a bābājī may even keep his own wife from
his previous āśrama in the form of a maidservant. These
people associate with women on the pretext of service to
God and service to sādhus.

(3) Bābājīs who are actually renounced completely reject
the greed for women, wealth, eatables and so on.
Nowadays, common people are losing faith in Vaiṣṇavism,
because they see that these defects are spreading among
supposedly renounced people. The essence of the matter
is that those who accept the symbols of renunciation
without having developed the genuine detachment which
arises from rati (love of Bhagavān) are a disturbance in
society and a disgrace to vaiṣṇava-dharma. Their own
downfall and the defamation of vaiṣṇava-dharma are both
guaranteed when they accept bheka before they are
qualified to do so.”

After Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, a dark age began in Śrīman Mahā-prabhu’s
Gaudīya Sampradāya, during which the current of śrī
rūpānugā-bhakti became somewhat impaired. Various kinds
of speculative malpractices and opinions opposed to
śuddha-bhakti became mixed in with the true conception.
At that time the situation was so dire that the educated
and cultured section of society began to hate even the
name of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, having witnessed the
misbehaviour of its followers. In this way the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya became distanced from the
intelligentsia and respected society.

At that time the Seventh Gosvāmī Saccidānanda Bhakti-
vinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
appeared. These two personalities brought about a re-
volutionary transformation in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava

                          315
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Sampradāya and restored its lost dignity. To these two
mahā-puruṣas and their followers goes the entire credit
for whatever diffusion of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s nāma-
saṅkīrtana and śuddha-bhakti has taken place among the
learned and respectable sector of society, not only in
India but also throughout the world. They have
established the Gauḍīya Maṭḥa preaching centres of
śuddha-bhakti everywhere; they have published the
literatures of śuddha-bhakti along with magazines and
journals in all of the major languages of the world; and
thus in a very short time they have revolutionized the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava society.

After the disappearance of Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhupāda
these improper practices began to appear openly in all
the prominent places of Śrī Vraja-maṇdala, Gauḍa-maṇḍala
and Kṣetra-maṇḍala. These groups of bābājīs began to
make allegations against Śrīla Prabhupāda and the
śuddha-vaiṣṇavas under his shelter. They said that
Vaiṣṇavas of the Gauḍiya Maṭha are simple jñānīs who are
ignorant of rasa-tattva, and that their acceptance of
reddish cloth and sannyāsa is not properly established
procedure. Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva has refuted
these accusations with scriptural evidence and powerful
arguments and has preached śuddha-bhakti everywhere. For
this purpose he had the essays previously written by
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Jagadguru Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda published again in
his Śrī Gauḍiya-Patrikā and Bhāgavat-Patrikā. He
published a literature entitled ‘Sahajiyā-dalana’
(destroying the sahajiyā theory) and also argued these
points in huge assemblies in many places in Vraja-
maṇḍala, Gauḍa-maṇḍala and Kṣetra-maṇḍala. As a result
of this the opposition party made a case to prosecute
him for loss of reputation in a court of law. However in
the end they had to beg forgiveness in the same
courtroom.

ii) Siddha-praṇālī

Siddha-praṇālī is very much misused nowadays in certain
places in Vraja-maṇḍala, Gauḍa-maṇḍala and Kṣetra-
maṇḍala. Some people are abused and even driven from
their homes when their wives pass away. Although they
are bereft of tattva-jñāna and unaware of vaidhī-bhakti-
sādhana, they have their heads shaved in the middle of
the night, put on kaupīna and quickly take siddha-
praṇālī. These days siddha-praṇālī can be obtained very
easily by giving half a rupee. Just before giving mantra
a financial contract takes place. These people think,
“There can be no auspiciousness for sādhakas until they
acquire siddha-praṇālī. There is no necessity for
vaidhī-bhakti sādhana, tattva-jñāna or anartha-nivṛtti.
The rāgānugā-bhakta should obtain siddha-praṇālī before
he goes through anartha-nivṛtti. In that way he can
avoid getting caught in the inconvenience of vaidhī-
bhakti.” These people’s conception is exactly like
thinking that a fruit will grow from a leaf before the
appearance of a flower.

About fifty-five years ago, we were performing Vraja-
maṇḍala parikramā with Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva.
Approximately four hundred pilgrims attending the
parikramā were staying in a large dharma-śālā in

                          316
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Mathurā. Gurudeva had made a big feast there, to which
all the local sādhus, saints and Vaiṣṇavas had been
invited. Bābājīs who had accepted bheka also assembled
there in very large numbers. When they came to meet with
Śrīla Gurudeva, he became very curious and asked them,
“What is the aim and object of your Kṛṣṇa bhajana?” They
were taken aback when they heard this question, but
after thinking about it they said, “By performing Kṛṣṇa
bhajana we will attain mukti and merge into Kṛṣṇa.” When
Gurujī heard their answer, he became very sad. On
questioning them further, he found that women were also
staying in their āśramas as maidservants. From that day
on, he vowed to reform these malpractices which had
spread in the Gaudīya Vaiṣṇava society. I have indicated
this before. In spite of being busy in preaching śuddha-
bhakti throughout his life, he never forgot this matter.
A great deal of credit for the improvement and reform of
this situation goes to this mahā-puruṣa. Here I am
presenting whatever views I have heard from him on this
subject.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has defined the following sequence
which we have to follow in order to enter into the realm
of bhakti.

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅga ‘tha bhajana-kriyā

tato ‘nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sadhakānām ayaṁ premnaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

Bhakti flees very far away when the sādhaka transgresses
this sequence. Therefore it is extremely necessary to
execute the first aṅga of sādhana-bhakti, namely vaidhī-
bhakti or regulative devotional service, in order to
enter the realm of prema. Vaidhī-bhakti is not directly
the cause of the attainment of Kṛṣṇa prema. Still, it is
necessary to observe the appropriate limbs of vaidhī-
bhakti in order to enter into rāga-mārga. Vaidhī-bhakti
is established on the steadfast foundation of scriptural
evidence and it is endowed with powerful codes of
correct behaviour. Moreover, there is no particular
difference between the observance of the limbs of
rāgānugā sādhana-bhakti and vaidhī-bhakti. The
difference is only in devotion to the observance. Thus
the aṅgas of vaidhī-bhakti sādhana cannot be neglected
entirely. When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī on the subject of the prayojana-tattva,
which is Kṛṣṇa prema, he said,

kona bhagye kona jīvera ‘sraddhā’ yadi haya

tabe sei jīva ‘sāadhu-sanga’ ye karaya

sadhu-sanga haite haya ‘sravana-kirtana’

sadhana-bhaktye haya ‘sarvānartha-nivartana’

anartha-nivṛtti haile bhaktye ‘niṣṭha’ haya

niṣṭha haite śravaṇādye ‘ruci’ upajaya


                          317
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

ruci haite bhaktye haya ‘āsakti pracura

āsakti haite citte janme kṛṣṇe prity-aṅkura

sei ‘bhava’ gadha haile dhare ‘prema’-nāma

sei prema— ‘prayojana’ sarvānanda-dhāma

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 23.9-13)

“If by good fortune a jīva develops śraddhā, he begins
to associate with sādhus, and in that company he engages
in hearing and chanting. By following sādhana-bhakti he
becomes free from all anarthas and advances with firm
faith (niṣṭhā) whereby ruci (taste) awakens for sravaṇa,
kīrtana and so on. After ruci, then āsakti (deep
attachment) arises, and from abundant āsakti the seed of
prīti (affection) is born in the heart. When that
emotion intensifies, it is called prema. This prema is
life’s ultimate goal and the abode of all joy.”

It is quite impossible for one who transgresses this
sequence to enter the realm of bhakti. Thus, those who
want to enter this domain while neglecting the limbs of
vaidhī sādhana-bhakti are in all respects unrestrained
and outside the conclusions of śāstra. They have no
relation at all with śuddha-bhakti.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has also expressed the same
opinion.

vidhi-mārga rata jane svādhīnatā ratna-dāne

rāga-mārga karāna praveśa

By considering the gradations of sādhya-vastu
(objectives) we find that the prema of Śrīmatī Rādhājī
for Kṛṣṇa is the crest-jewel. Furthermore, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has explained that the sādhya for the living
entities is Rādhā dāsya, service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā
imbued with pārakīya-bhāva. In order to obtain that
sādhya-vastu, sādhana is necessary.

sādhya-vastu sādhana vinā keha nāhi pāya

kṛpā kari kaha rāya pābāra upāya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 8.197)

“The goal of life (sādhya-vastu) cannot be achieved
unless one accepts the appropriate process (sādhana).
Now, being merciful upon Me, please explain that means
by which this goal can be attained.”

In reply to this Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda says,

rādhā-kṛṣṇera līlā ei ati gūḍhatara

dāsya-vātsalyādi-bhāve nā haya gocara

sabe eka sakhī-ganera ihāṅ ādhikāra

sakhī haite haya ei līlāra vistāra


                            318
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

sakhī vinā ei līlā puṣṭa nāhi haya

sakhī līlā vistāriyā, sakhī āsvādaya

sakhī vinā ei līlāya anyera nāhi gati

sakhī-bhāve ye tāṅre kare anugati

rādhā-kṛṣṇa kuñja-sevā-sādhya sei pāya

sei sādhya pāite āra nāhika upāya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 8. 201-205)

“The pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are very confidential
and cannot be understood through the mellows of
servitude, fraternity or paternal affection. Actually,
only the gopis have the right to appreciate these
transcendental pastimes, and only from them can these
pastimes be expanded. Without the gopis, these pastimes
between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa cannot be nourished. Only by
their cooperation are such pastimes broadcast. It is
their business to taste the mellows. One cannot enter
into these pastimes without the help of the gopis. Only
one who does bhajana in the ecstasy of the gopis,
following in their footsteps, can engage in the service
of Sri Sri Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the groves of Vṛndāvana. Only
then can one understand the conjugal love between Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa. There is no other procedure for
understanding.”

ataeva gopī-bhāva kari angikara

ratri-dina cinte rādhā-kṛṣṇera vihara

siddha-dehe cinti’ kare tahanni sevana

sakhī-bhāve paya rādhā-kṛṣṇera caraṇa

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 8. 228-229)

“Therefore one should accept the mood of the gopīs in
their service. In such a transcendental mood, one should
always think of the pastimes of Sri Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
After meditating on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa for a long time in
the internally conceived spiritual body, one attains the
opportunity to serve the lotus feet of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa as
one of the Vraja devīs.”

Essentially the gist of the matter is that the love-
laden līlā of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is so confidential and so full
of mysteries that it is imperceptible, even for those in
moods such as dāsya and vātsalya. Only the sakhīs are
eligible for this. Therefore, no one can attain the
service of Śrīmatī Rādhikā or the kuñja-sevā of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala by sādhana without anugatya of the
sakhīs, that is being under their guidance. Thus the
only means of attaining this supreme sādhya is
meditation on the līlās of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa throughout the
day and night by the internally conceived siddha-deha
and in the mood of the sakhīs. For this reason, Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī has given this instruction in his Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu in the section on the sādhana of śrī
rāgānugā-bhakti:

                          319
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017


kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janañ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija samīhitam

tat-tat kathā rataś cāsau kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad bhāva lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ

śravaṇotkīrttanādīni vaidhī bhakty uditāni tu

yānyaṅgāni ca tānyatra vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ

Here Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has mentioned two types of
sādhana in rāgānugā bhakti-sevā:

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad bhāva lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ

When there is lobha, greed for rāgātmikā bhakti,
rāgānugā bhakti is executed in two ways: in the sādhaka-
rūpa, the external body in which one is presently
situated, and in the siddha-rūpa. Eagerly desiring to
attain rati for Kṛṣṇa or the bhāva (ecstatic sentiments)
of one’s chosen associates of Kṛṣṇa, one must follow the
associates of Vrajaloka such as Lalitā, Viśākhā, Rūpa
Mañjarī and their followers such as Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and
Sanātana Gosvāmī. One must render bodily service with
the sādhaka-rūpa following the great authorities
residing in Vraja such as Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana. And
with the siddha-rūpa one must render mānasī-sevā
following the vrajavāsīs such as Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and
others. The meaning of the above verse has been given in
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta in this way.

bāhya, antara — ihāra dui ta’ sādhana

‘bāhye’ sādhaka-dehe kare śravaṇa-kīrtana

‘mane’ nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana

rātri-dine kare vraje kṛṣṇera sevana

(Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya, 22.156-157)

“This rāgānuga bhakti is performed in two ways:
externally and internally. Externally, in the sādhaka
body, the devotee engages in hearing and chanting. In
his mind, in his internally conceived, perfectedÇ
spiritual body he serves Kṛṣṇa in Vraja day and night.”

Thus rāgānugā-bhakti sādhakas should in all respects
practise bhāva-sambandhi sādhana such as śravaṇa,
kīrtana, service to tulasī, wearing tilaka, observing
vows beginning with Śrī Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī and so
on, for all these activities nourish one’s own desired
bhāva. Simultaneously one must also render service to
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja, meditating on one’s siddha-deha in
the heart. The body of a gopī which is suitable for
rendering service to Rādhā-Govinda is called siddha-
deha. When the bhajana is complete, the jīva gives up
the inert material body, and attains the body of a gopī
corresponding to its eternal intrinsic form.

                          320
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017


Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura has saidÇ

sādhane bhābiba jāhā siddha-dehe pāba tāhā

rāga pathera ei se upāya

(Śrī Prema Bhakti-candrika 5.8)

“Whatever subject is constantly meditated upon at the
time of performing sādhana, that same subject is the
prominent meditation at the time of death and it
engrosses the citta (heart).”

One’s destination at the time of death will exactly
correspond to the subject one remembers at that time.
Rājarṣi Bhārata attained the body of a deer at the time
of death, so what doubt is there about attaining the
body suitable for rendering to the Divine Couple the
service on which one constantly reflected in one’s
internally conceived siddha-deha?

In relation to the siddha-deha it has been said in the
Sanat-Kumāra Saṁhitā,

ātmānaṁ cintayet tatra tāsāṁ madhye manoramām

rūpayauvanasampannāṁ kiśorīṁ premodāakṛtim

rādhikānuñcarī nityaṁ tat sevana parāyaṇāṁ

kṛṣṇād apy adhikaṁ prema rādhikāyāṁ prakurvatīm

Sadāśiva is giving instruction to Nāradajī on the
subject of siddha-deha suitable for rendering service to
the Divine Couple. “O Nārada! Meditate in this way upon
your own svarūpa among Śrī Kṛṣṇa's beloved associates
who take pride in being His paramours in the aprākṛta
Vṛndāvana Dhāma. ‘I am an extremely lovely and supremely
blissful kiśorī (adolescent girl), endowed with youthful
beauty. I am an eternal maidservant of Śrīmati Rādhikā.
Having arranged for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost mistress
Śrīmatī Rādhikā to meet with Him, I will always make
them both happy. Therefore I am the maidservant of
Rādhikā, the most beloved of Kṛṣṇa. Remaining always and
forever engaged in the service of the Divine CoupleÇ may
I maintain more love for Śrīmatī than for Kṛṣṇa.’”

Now we should note that the descriptions of siddha-deha
that śāstra and the mahājanas have given are for
sādhakas of a particular level. Wherever siddha-deha has
been mentioned it has been shown in the context of
rāgānugā-bhakti. Specifically such instructions are
intended for those very fortunate sādhakas in whose
hearts lobha, a genuine greed to attain rāgātmikā-
bhakti, has already arisen due to saṁskāras
(impressions) from this life and previous lives.

Here is a further matter which is worthy of
consideration. It is one thing to understand the
excellence of some particular rasa by the discrimination
given in śāstra. It is another thing altogether to have
lobha for that rasa. When someone has lobha in a
particular rasa, then the symptoms of lobha will also be

                           321
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

evident in that sādhaka. When lobha arises, rāgānugā-
bhakti sādhana begins from the stage of ruci. It will be
understood from this that the nāmāparādha, sevāparādha
and various other anarthas of a sādhaka have, for the
most part, already gone far away. He has already
controlled the six urges mentioned by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
in Śrī Upadeśāmrta (Verse 1); he is virtually free from
the six faults (Verse 2); he is endowed with the six
qualities beginning with utsāhān niścayāt (enthusiasm
and confidence) (Verse 3); having recognized the three
types of Vaiṣṇavas, he is expert in behaving
appropriately with them (Verse 5); and he has also
become established in the purport of the verse beginning
tan nāma rūpa caritādi (Verse 8). In other words he
conducts himself according to this verse.

In this stage the sādhaka goes on performing bhajana,
and when he crosses the stage of ruci and enters the
stage of āsakti then a semblance of the symptoms related
by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in the verse kṣāntir-avyartha-
kālatvaṁ will be observed in him. In the stage of
āsakti, a semblance (ābhāsa) of the rati which arises in
the stage of bhāva will appear, and in order to make
that rati manifest fully, the sādhaka will perform
bhajana meditating on his siddha-deha. When this
ratyābhāsa transforms into rati by the practice of
bhajana, then the sādhaka attains factual experience of
his own svarūpa. This is called meditation on siddha-
deha, or the acceptance of vaiṣṇava-bheka. One who is
endowed with simplicity and who has lobha for this is
worshipful for the whole world.

There are two types of acceptance of bheka. A sādhaka
may receive bheka from some suitable guru;
alternatively, when genuine vairāgya arises as mentioned
previously, he may accept bheka from himself. Haridāsa
Ṭhākura, the Six Gosvāmīs, Lokanātha Gosvāmī and others
are examples of the practice of accepting bheka from
oneself. This is also the way that Śrīla Bhakti-
siddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura accepted sannyāsa veśa after
the disappearance of Śrīla Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī from
whom he had received dīkṣā-mantra. We see from these
examples that acceptance of bheka in this way is fully
in agreement with śāstra. Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya also
accepted tridaṇḍi-sannyāsa from himself after the
disappearance of his guru Śrīla Yamuna Ācārya.

In any case, the meditation on one’s siddha-deha depends
on the mercy of one’s guru. The guru or śikṣā-guru who
is established in rasa-vicāra and who is a svarūpa-
siddha will indicate the details of the sādhaka’s
perfected form. Otherwise, if the sādhaka changes the
order of the sequence described above, he cannot attain
perfection. On the contrary, his bhakti may become
completely ruined and the conceptions of the sampradāya
will also become corrupted. We see this going everywhere
nowadays.

Some ignorant people say that there is no siddha-praṇālī
in the Gaudīya Maṭha. This vicious propaganda is
erroneous in all respects. In the authentic literature
written by Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī entitled Sat-
kriyā-sāra-dīpikā and Saṁskāra-dīpikā, which is a
supplement to Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, there is an

                          322
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

account of the tridaṇḍi-sannyāsa saṁskāra. The original
manuscript handwritten by Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is
protected even today in the Royal Library of Jaipur. An
old copy of this same literature is also kept to this
day by the Gosvāmīs of Śrī Rādhā-Ramana. Therefore this
literature is authoritative evidence. According to
Saṁskāra-dīpikā, tridaṇḍi-sannyāsa veśa is given among
Gauḍīy as. In this sannyāsa saṁskāra, ḍor-kaupīna,
bahir-vāsa and the sannyāsa-mantra for taking shelter of
gopī-bhāva are also given. The eka-daśa-bhāva (eleven
aspects of gopī-bhāva), namely sambandha, vayaḥ, nāma,
rūpa, yūtha, veśa, ājñā, vāsa, sevā, parākāṣṭā-śvāsa and
pālya-dāsī-bhāva, are contained within this gopī-bhāva.
The identity of the siddha-deha is determined by the
instructions of Śrī Guru in accordance with the ruci of
the sādhaka. One’s own nāma, rūpa, vayasa, veśa,
sambandha, yūtha, ājñā, vāsa, parākāṣṭā-śvāsa and pālya-
dāsī bhāva given by guru is called siddha-praṇālī. As
the sādhaka goes on performing this type of sādhana, the
perfection of his svarūpa takes place along with the
attainment of śuddha-rati in his heart.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has described his siddha-
svarūpa in this way.

varaṇe taḍit vāsa tārāvalī

kamala mañjarī nāma

sāḍe bāra varṣa vayasa satata

svānanda sukhada dhāma

karpūra sevā lalitāra gaṇa

rādhā yūtheśvarī hana

mameśvarī-nātha śrī Nanda-nandana

āmāra parāṇa dhana

śrī rūpa mañjarī prabhṛtira sama

yugala sevāya āśa

avaśya se-rūpa sevā pāba āmi

parākāṣṭhā suviśvāsa

kabe bā e dāsī saṁsiddhi labhibe

rādhā-kuṇḍe vāsa kari’

rādhā-kṛṣṇa sevā satata karibe

pūrva smṛti parihari’

“My complexion is like a flash of lightning and my dress
is bedecked with twinkling stars. My name is Kamala
Mañjarī and I am eternally twelve-and-a-half years old.
My abode is Svānanda Sukhada Kuñja. My service is to
supply camphor to Śrī Yugala. I serve in the gaṇa of
Lalitā and Śrī Rādhā is my yūtheśvarī. The Beloved of my
Svāminī, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, is the treasure of

                             323
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

my life. I aspire to serve Śrī Yugala like Rūpa Mañjarī
and others, and I am confident that I will surely attain
this service. This is my highest aspiration. Oh, when
will this maidservant attain complete perfection and,
residing at Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, serve Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in
complete forgetfulness of my past?”

In conclusion, whatever custom of accepting bheka is
seen among bābājīs is not a fifth āśrama, rather it is a
second form of the fourth āśrama, namely the sannyāsa
āśrama.

Thus end the Sixth Part of The Life and Teachings of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī by Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.




Seventh Part




Śrīla Gurudeva and vaiṣṇava literature

Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva had the opulence of
being exceptionally brilliant in all spheres. No one
could equal him in organising an ideal society, and at
the same time he was also uniquely attached to
transcendental knowledge. He was a mature and profound
scholar of philosophy, and a rasika poet as well. It is
very rare to find a person who is so extremely talented
in such diverse fields. He had the gift of astonishing
everyone with his ever-fresh thoughts and feeli ngs, and
it was a natural part of his life to compose Vaiṣṇava
literatures expressing new siddhānta and realizations.
He enriched the treasure-house of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
literature, not only by publishing the authentic
compositions of previous ācāryas, but also by personally
composing new books, articles, essays, prayers and poems
which were full of siddhānta and rasa. Here is an
appreciation of a few of his prayers, essays and sweet
poems.



‘The life history of māyāvāda’ or ‘The victory of
vaiṣṇavism’

Paramārādhya Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī considered that śuddha-
bhakti cannot be propagated completely as long as the
conception of māyāvāda exists in the world. It is
therefore very essential to uproot māyāvāda and for this
reason he composed a book entitled The Life History of
Māyāvāda or The Victory of Vaiṣṇavism. Here is a brief
account of the essence of this book.

a) What is māyāvāda?

The word māyā generally indicates jaḍā-śakti (the
potency of inert matter) or avidyā-śakti (the potency of
nescience), which is the shadow of the svarūpa-śakti

                          324
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

(internal potency) of para-tattva. She is the presiding
deity of the material world. It is this very potency
which leads a living entity in material bondage to
identify himself with the physical body, to consider the
objects connected with the body to be his own, and to
accept the shelter of māyāvāda.

The māyāvāda doctrine is that Brahman is an
undifferentiated or homogeneous spirit, which is devoid
of any potency or attributes. From this point of view,
then, there can be no existence of a distinct māyā
potency with the characteristic function of creating
illusion. However, māyāvādīs also assert that the jīva
is actually Brahman, and that the apparent existence of
the living entity separate from Brahman is simply an
illusion, which is created by the influence of māyā or
avidyā. As long as māyā exists, the jīva will remain. In
this respect, māyāvādīs consider that the māyā potency
does exist. According to the māyāvāda doctrine, then,
māyā (ignorance or illusion) has the specific,
distinguishing characteristic of being both sat
(existing) and asat (non-existing), and is therefore
inexpressible1. People who hold this deceptive opinion
are māyāvādīs, or impersonalists. According to the
māyāvāda conception, īśvara, like the jīva, is also in
the clutches of māyā. However, the difference between
īśvara and the living entity is that jīvas are forced to
accept the fruits of their actions, whereas īśvara
covered by māyā does not have to accept the fruits of
action. Vaiṣṇava ācāryas have pointed out that this idea
is contrary both to śāstra and to logic.

The author of Vedānta-sūtra, the omniscient Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa, who divided the Vedas, has
declared in his own composition, Padma Purāṇa, that
māyāvāda is false and against the Vedas.

māyāvādam asac-chāstraṁ

pracchannaṁ bauddham ucyate

(Padma Purāṇa, Uttara khaṇḍa 25.7)

and furthermore:

vedārthan mahā-śāstraṁ māyāvādam avaidikam

māyāiva vihitaṁ devī jagatāṁ nāśa-kāraṇāt

svāgamaiḥ kalpitais tvaṁ ca janān mad-vimukhān kuru

māṁ ca gopaya yena syāt sṛṣṭir eṣottarottarā

(Padma Purāṇa, Uttara khaṇḍa 62.31)

Vaiṣṇava ācāryas such as Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya, Śrī Madhva
Ācārya, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrī Vallabha Ācārya, Śrī
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī and Śrī Baladeva
Vidhyābhūṣaṇa have pointed out that Śaṅkara Ācārya is a
hidden Buddhist and that his doctrine is covered
Buddhism. Some scholars of the Śaṅkara Sampradāya think
that Vaiṣṇavas only say this out of envy, but in this
they are mistaken. Many scholars who are not Vaiṣṇavas
have also accepted Śaṅkara as the one who nurtured the

                          325
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

flow of the Buddhist conception. These scholars include
Vijñāna-bhikṣu, who was a prominent scholar of sāṅkhya
philosophy; learned yogīs of the Patañjalī doctrine; and
even Buddhist scholars. Now we will show the
similarities between the views of Ācārya Śaṅkara and
Buddha.

b) Is this world false?

Buddha stated that the world is śūnya-tattva (void or
non-existent) in all the three phrases of time.
Everything of the world is śūnya, non-existent, in the
beginning, middle and end.

Ācārya Śaṅkara also taught that the cause of the world
is a principle called avidyā (ignorance), which is
devoid of past, present and future. This principle of
ignorance is inexpressible due to its special
characteristic of being neither existent nor non-
existent. Brahma satyaṁ jagat mithyā: “Brahman is real
and the world is false.”

nidrāmohāt svapnavat tan na satyam śuddhaḥ pūrṇo nitya
ekaḥ śivo ‘ham

(Ātma-pañcaka 3)

It is clear that Buddha’s śūnya and Ācārya Śaṅkara’s
dream-like mithyā (falsehood) are both one and the same.
Only the words are different. There is no difference
between Buddha’s trikāla-śūnyatva (voidism in the three
phases of time) and Ācārya Śaṅkara’s inexpressible
principle of existence and non-existence.

c) The means of liberation

Many scriptures of the Mahāyāna branch of Buddhism have
said that the only means of achieving liberation is
prajñā-pāramitā which is the same as tattva-jñāna or
knowledge of Reality. Buddhism teaches that one should
understand that this whole world is a source of grief
and is full of sorrows. To attain complete relief from
this suffering, one should try to obtain knowledge of
reality (tattva-jñāna).

Ācārya Śaṅkara also says that, although the world is
false, it is still the source of suffering, and is
filled with intense misery. The condition of complete
freedom from the grief of this distressful world is
called mokṣa (liberation). The cause of this liberation
from material existence is knowledge of the oneness of
Brahman and jīva, and of Brahman and this illusory
existence. This knowledge is tattva-jñāna, and without
it one cannot attain the perfection of oneness. Tattva-
jñāna (knowledge of Reality) or brahma-jñāna (knowledge
of Brahman) is the only cause of the complete
annihilation of avidyā.

When we examine both opinions, we see that Buddha’s
prajñā and Ācārya Śaṅkara’s brahma-jñāna are identical;
there is no real difference between them at all. We can
verify this with the observation that Ācārya Śaṅkara,
having quoted the mantra ‘prajñānaṁ brahma’ from
Taittirīya Upaniṣad, has consistently supported the

                             326
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

opinion of the Mahāyāna branch of Buddhism with regard
to prajñā-pāramitā. In this way Ācārya Śaṅkara has
propagated tattva-jñāna (the theory that Brahman and
jīva are one) by following in the footsteps of Buddha’s
doctrine, prajñā or prajñā-pāramitā.

There is no difference between Buddha’s śūnya and
Śaṅkara’s Brahman. In the nineteenth verse of the
Buddhists’ Prajñā-pāramitā-sūtra, in relation to supreme
liberation in the form of śūnya-tattva, it has been
written:

śaktaḥ kastvāmihastotuṁ nirṇimittāṁ nirañjanām

sarvavāg viṣayātītām yā tvaṁ kvacidaniśritā

It is clear from the above verse that śūnya-tattva is
untainted, causeless, unborn, non-existent, without any
support and is inexpressible through speech. It is
unimpeded, imperishable and also immeasurable. These are
the specific symptoms of śūnya-tattva. Śaṅkara, for his
part, states that Brahman is spotless and formless, and
without variety, potency and distinct qualities. It is
clear, then, that there is no difference between
Śaṅkara’s brahma-tattva and Buddha’s śūnya-tattva.
Śaṅkara Ācārya himself has actually referred to Brahman
as śūnya.

draṣṭṛdarśanadṛśyādibhāva śūnyaika vastuni

nirvikāre nirākāre nirviśeṣe bhidā kutaḥ

nityo ‘ham nirvado ‘ham nirākāro ‘ham akśaraḥ

paramānanda rupo ‘ham aham evāham avyayaḥ

In the Amara-koṣa, Buddha has been called an advaya-vādī
(non-dualist). The followers of Śaṅkara Ācārya also
introduce themselves as kevalādvaita-vādīs (pure non-
dualists), so there is agreement between the two at this
point as well. Readers can judge for themselves whether
or not there is any difference of opinion between
Śaṅkara and Buddha.

Although there is no specific difference between advaya-
vāda and advaita-vāda, Ācārya Śaṅkara still named his
doctrine advaita-vāda and not advaya-vāda (Buddhism).
Why did he conceal this truth when he was fully aware in
the core of his heart that he was a Buddhist? The reason
for this was not a philosophical difference. The real
cause was the order of his worshipful Lord, Śrī
Bhagavān. Śaṅkaraḥ śaṅkaraḥ sākśāt: Ācārya Śaṅkara is
the direct incarnation of Śaṅkara, or Lord Siva, who is
the most exalted Vaiṣṇava and dear devotee of the Lord.
Indeed, Lord Siva is regarded as the guru of Vaiṣṇavas.

At the time when Ācārya Śaṅkara made his appearance in
India, the general mass of ordinary people were
deviating from the principles of varṇāśrama because of
the influence of the Buddhist doctrine of śūnya-vāda.
Even the brahminical class of men were also rejecting
Vedic dharma in favour of Buddhism. At that time Lord
Śaṅkara incarnated as Śaṅkara Ācārya, who was endowed
with extraordinary powers. He then transformed śūnya-

                          327
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

vāda into brahma-vāda and re-established the honour and
authority of the Vedas. India will remain eternally
indebted to Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya for accomplishing this
extraordinary task. Establishing the false doctrine of
brahma-vāda on the foundation of Vedic authority was
only a temporary achievement. However, Śrī Rāmānuja
Ācārya, Śrī Madhva and other vaiṣṇava ācāryas later
erected the palace of Vaiṣṇavism on the foundation that
Śaṅkara Ācārya made. We have already mentioned the
orders of Bhagavān to Śrī Śaṅkara. Śrī Viṣṇu said to Śrī
Rudra (Padma Purāṇa),

māṁ ca gopaya yena syāt sṛṣtireṣottarottarā

“Cover Me in such a way that people will take more
interest in advancing material civilization just to
propagate a population bereft of spiritual knowledge.”

d) The history of māyāvāda

Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī conducted research into the history
of impersonalism from Satya-yuga toπ the present age of
Kali, and has given us a bird’s-eye view of māyāvāda.
Scholars of philosophy have concluded that Ācārya
Śaṅkara’s nirviśeṣa kevalādvaita-vāda (non-variegated
exclusive monism) is not the same as the advaita-vāda
which was current prior to his time. On the contrary,
the advaita-vāda prior to Ācārya Śaṅkara is Vedic, for
we find it described in the Vedas and Upaniṣads. The
Vedic literatures state that the aupaniṣadika Brahman
(the Supreme Truth as defined by the Upaniṣads) is
neither without potency nor devoid of transcendental
attributes. They also state that the world is perishable
but not false. Śukadeva Gosvāmī and the four Kumāras led
by Sanaka and Sanatana were fixed in meditation on this
nirguṇa (without qualities) Brahman. However, this
Brahman was not an inexpressible principle with the
special characteristic of being both existent and non-
existent. Later by the mercy of pure Vaiṣṇavas they were
established in śuddha-bhakti.

The jñāna-yoga of the four Kumāras was somewhat
unfavourable to śuddha-bhakti, so their father Brahmā
pleaded with Śrī Bhagavān, who advented in the form of a
swan and instructed them in the process of bhakti-yoga.
This narration is found in the Seventh Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, an adherent of the
unqualified Supreme Truth, entered into the realm of
śuddha-bhakti by the mercy of Śrī Vedavyāsa, a
śaktyāveśāvatara (empowered incarnation) of Bhagavān.
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī has himself accepted this fact in
the First Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

e) Advaita-vāda in Satya-yuga

In Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya’s commentary on Brahma-sūtra
3.2.17, he has accepted as evidence the dialogue between
Bādhva and Vāskali. Bādhva was the guru of Vāskali, who
was a famous advaita-vādī during Satya-yuga. Now Vāskali
was the son of Anuhlāda, who was in turn a son of
Hiraṇyakaśipu; Vāskali, like Hiraṇyakaśipu, was by
nature a ferocious demon. There are many such examples
in the history of impersonalism in different yugas. All
the great demons were either advaita-vādīs or māyāvādīs.

                             328
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

This proves that the impersonal conception is especially
honoured in the dynasty of demons. Impartial and soft-
hearted sages who took to advaita-vāda were saved from
the devouring mouth of māyāvāda and their hearts were
purified by the mercy received from the incarnations of
Bhagavān. But stone-hearted demons, who had fanatical,
blind faith in opinions which are opposed to the
śāstras, could not receive bhakti-tattva. Therefore
incarnations of Bhagavān destroyed these demons to
safeguard the dignity of bhakti-tattva. Śrī Vāmanadeva
appeared in the evil sacrifice of Vāskali or Vāskala and
delivered him.

f) The evolution of nirviśeṣa advaita-vāda in Treta-yuga

Vaśiṣṭha

Śrī Vaśiṣṭha Muni was the main ācārya of advaita-vāda in
Treta-yuga. He was the family priest of the kings
belonging to the surya-vaṁśa (sun-dynasty), and he was
also a brahma-jñānī. No one disputes this fact, and his
Yogavāśiṣṭha Rāmāyana is irrefutable evidence.

The brahma-vādī Vaśiṣṭha Muni used to impart the
knowledge of the undivided Brahman to his disciples.
Bhagavān Śrī Ramacandrajī felt great pain on seeing His
family priest wandering in the forest of brahma-vāda, so
He mercifully rescued him and Vaśiṣṭha Muni offered
himself in the service of Śrī Rāmacandra.

Rāvaṇa

Rāvaṇa was the chief of the rākṣasa dynasty, and was the
son of Viśravā Ṛṣi, who was in turn the son of Pulastya
Ṛṣi. Viśravā Ṛṣi left his place of residence in Brahma-
varta and stayed for five days in Laṅka, where he
married the daughter of a rākṣasa. Rāvaṇa took birth
from the womb of this demon’s daughter, and was thus
half ṛṣi and half rākṣasa. He can be called an advaita-
vādī, for prominent philosophers in Ācārya Śaṅkara’s
line accept him as the first commentator on monistic
advaita-siddhānta. The Buddhist sampradāya’s
Lankāvatāra-sūtra also states that Rāvaṇa was a well-
known advaita-vādī and śūnya-vādī ṛṣi. This shows the
similarity between advaita-vāda and śūnya-vāda.

The māyāvādīs want to take away the potency of Brahman
in order to establish that the Supreme Truth is
powerless. Rāvaṇa tried to steal away Sītādevī, the
eternal potency of Parabrahma Śrī Rāmacandra. For this
offence, the great devotee Hanumān dealt a powerful
punch of bhakti-siddhānta to Rāvaṇa’s heart. This
vanquished his advaita-jñāna and he fainted and fell
flat on the ground. Śrī Rāmacandra then used the
unerring arrow of veda-dhvani (the sound of the Vedas)
to cut off Rāvaṇa’s ten heads, which signify the ten
principles of nirvāṇa. That is the significance of the
deliverance of Rāvaṇa.

g) Advaita-vāda and its transformations in Dvāpara-yuga

Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī

Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī was the son of Śrī Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana

                          329
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

Vedavyāsa and Vīṭikā-devī, the daughter of Javāli Ṛṣi.
Śukadeva stayed in his mother’s womb for twelve years
until, on the request of his father, he relieved his
mother’s pain and came out as a liberated soul. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa have narrated the
story of Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī’s birth in detail. From
birth he was fixed in nirguṇa Brahman. However, by the
mercy of the śaktyaveśa avatāra Śrīla Vedavyāsa, he
became a great rasika and bhāvuka bhakta. He narrated
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to Mahārāja Parikṣit, who had been
cursed to die after seven days. Although Śukadeva
Gosvāmī was a brahma-jñānī, by the mercy of Śrīla
Vyāsadeva he realized the superiority of the sweet
pastimes of Śrī Bhagavān, who is extolled in choice
poetry, and he became attracted to follow the path of
śuddha-bhakti. He imparted the teachings of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam to the faithful King Parīkṣit, because he
understood that the ultimate benefit for the jīvas lies
only in hearing and chanting the topics of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, which are saturated with the sweet and
rasika pastimes of Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He did not
instruct brahma-jñāna to Mahārāja Parīkṣit, because it
is impossible for the jīvas to achieve complete
auspiciousness through brahma-jñāna. Śrī Śukadeva
Gosvāmī himself states this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.9:

pariniṣṭhito ‘pi nairguṇye uttamaḥ-śloka-līlayā

gṛhīta-cetā rājarṣe ākhyānaṁ yad adhītavān

“O saintly King, I was certainly situated perfectly in
Transcendence, yet I was still attracted by the
delineation of the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
described by enlightened verses.”

Kaṁsa

Kaṁsa was born from the womb of Mahārāja Ugrasena’s wife
Padmā by the semen of the daitya (demon) Drumila. His
nature was like the demonic nature of the rākṣasa King
Drumila, and not like that of Mahārāja Ugrasena, who was
endowed with godly qualities. Kaṁsa imprisoned Mahārāja
Ugrasena and declared himself to be king. His paternal
cousin Devakī married Vasudeva, and at the time of the
wedding, a divine voice from the sky declared that the
eighth child born from Devakī’s womb would kill Kaṁsa.
The atheist Kaṁsa wanted to kill Devakī in order to
counter the prophecy and prove it false. However, after
deliberating carefully, he arrested Devakī and Vasudeva
and kept them in prison, thinking, “As soon as Bhagavān
accepts a form and takes birth from the eighth pregnancy
of Devakī, I will destroy Him.”

Māyāvādīs are opposed to the form of Bhagavān, for they
do not accept that Brahman has a form. Their doctrine is
that to accept a body is the action of māyā and to
destroy the dharma of nescience is moksa. Kaṁsa was also
of this same opinion: “Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu (Kṛṣṇacandra)
is going to take birth by accepting a material body, so
it will be very easy for me to kill him.” He did not
know that the transcendental substance is beyond the
jurisdiction of material substances, such as the
material senses. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed him and also
his followers such as Pūtanā, Agha, Baka, Tṛnāvarta and

                          330
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Pralamba, and in this way established the special
characteristics of His personal, transcendental form.

The fourth chapter of Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda’s Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
saṁhitā refers to Kaṁsa and Pralambāsura as covered
Buddhists and māyāvādīs. Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva destroyed
them and thus saved the jīvas from the devouring mouth
of atheistic māyāvāda.

devakīm agṛhīt kaṁsa nāstikya-bhaginīṁ satīṁ

pralambho jīvacaurastu śuddhena śauriṇā hataḥ

kaṁsena prerito duṣṭaḥ pracchanna bauddharūpadhṛk

(Kṛṣṇa-saṁhitā)

“Vasudeva married the sister of the embodiment of
atheism, Kaṁsa. Śrī Baladeva killed jīva-caura, the
vicious Pralambāsura, who was sent by Kaṁsa and who
signifies māyāvāda, or covered Buddhism.”

In this verse, the word jīva-caura is especially
significant. Buddhists, like the māyāvādīs, also believe
that Brahman becomes jīva through the effect of
ignorance; in other words Brahman is perceived as jīva
when it is covered with ignorance. This attempt to
abduct form itself is caura or stealing. It is the
nature of demons to destroy the individual form and to
rob the jīva of his very existence. That is why these
māyāvādīs and atheists are called jīva-caura. Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva re-established vaiṣṇava-dharma by destroying
advaita-vāda in Dvapara-yuga.

h) Advaita-vāda or māyāvāda in Kali-yuga

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Liṅga Purāṇa, Bhaviṣya Purāṇa and
Varāha Purāṇa describe Buddha as the ninth of the
daśavatāra (ten incarnations). In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
10.40.22, obeisances have been offered to Viṣṇu Buddha:
namo buddhāya śuddhāya daitya-dānava-mohine. This Viṣṇu
Buddha was born in the beginning period of Kali-yuga
(about 3,500 years ago, or 1,500 B.C.) in Gayā as the
son of Añjana or Ajina. ‘Kalau prāpte yathā buddhau
bhagavān nārāyaṇaḥ prabhu.’ About 500 B.C., another
Buddha was born. This was Śākya-siṁha Gautama Buddha,
who took birth as the son of Śuddhodhana and Māyādevī in
Kapilavastu. Indian philosophers have acknowledged this
Buddha as an atheist, because he rejected the Vedas and
īśvara and instead propagated the philosophy of śūnya-
vāda. His doctrines are known as bauddha-vāda or
Buddhism.

It is important to understand that there are two
Buddhas. They are both described in famous, authentic
Buddhist scriptures such as Amara-koṣa, Prajñā-pāramitā-
sūtra and Lalitavistāra, which verify that Viṣṇu Buddha
is not Gautama Buddha the son of Śuddhodhana. For more
detailed information please refer to The History of
Impersonalism.

Viṣṇu Buddha opposed the jīva-hiṁsā (violence) mentioned
in the Vedas, but He was not an atheist. Gautama Buddha
was born 1,000 years after Viṣṇu Buddha, and was

                          331
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

enlightened with tattva-jñāna in Bodhisattva (Gayā),
Viṣṇu Buddha’s birthplace. They are two different
people. Gautama Buddha denied both the Vedas and īśvara
and was thus a complete atheist. As we have already
seen, Buddhists say that this world is śunya (void).
Śaṅkara Ācārya very cleverly used word jugglery to
propagate Gautama Buddha’s conception under the name of
māyāvāda.

Ācārya Śaṅkara

Ācārya Śaṅkara’s guru is Govindapāda and Govindapāda’s
guru is Gauḍapāda. We do not find any scripture written
by Govindapāda, and it may be said that it is Gauḍapāda
who is actually Śaṅkara Ācārya’s guru. Gauḍapāda was a
famous śūnya-vādī and his name is of great importance in
the history of māyāvāda. His two texts Māṇḍukya-kārika
(on which Ācārya Śaṅkara has written a commentary) and
Sāṅkhya-kārika are the life and soul of māyāvāda. Thus
Śaṅkara Ācārya actually followed Gauḍapāda and
propagated his śūnya-vāda doctrine. Śaṅkara Ācārya
defeated many smārta, śaiva, śākta and kāpālika scholars
in scriptural debate and made them his disciples.
However, he never defeated any vaiṣṇava ācārya or
scholar. There is no historical record anywhere of any
Vaiṣṇava being defeated by Śaṅkara Ācārya, or giving up
Vaiṣṇavism to accept advaita-vāda.

Śrī Śivanātha-śiromani’s Śabdārtha-mañjarī sheds light
on Śaṅkara Ācārya’s life history. There we read that
Śaṅkara Ācārya was eventually defeated in scriptural
debate by a Tibetan Buddhist lāmā, who was at that time
famous as a jagad-guru among the Buddhists. Before
commencing the debate they vowed that the loser would
give up his life by falling into a vessel filled with
boiling oil. Ācārya Śaṅkara finally admitted defeat, and
actually gave up his life as they had agreed. In this
way, Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya, an effulgent flame in this
world, departed in 812 A.D.

After Śaṅkara Ācārya’s time, many prominent ācāryas of
kevaladvaita-vāda or māyāvāda were defeated by vaiṣṇava
ācāryas in scriptural debates. Others were influenced so
much that they accepted Viṣṇu as the Supreme Absolute
Truth, acknowledged the superiority of bhakti over
jñāna, gave up kevalādvaita-vāda and accepted initiation
into bhakti-dharma. We may cite as examples
Yādavaprakāśa, Śrīdhara Svāmī, Śrī Bilvamaṅgala,
Trivikrama Ācārya, Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, Vāsudeva
Sārvabhauma and Śrī Madhusūdana Sarasvatī.

i) Liberation is a false concept

We have briefly described the history of māyāvāda and
critically analysed its doctrines in the light of
historical evidence. We have seen that māyāvāda
philosophy is based on extremely feeble logic.
Consequently, from Satya-yuga until the present,
māyāvādis have constantly accepted defeat at the hands
of their opponents on the battle-field of debate. People
may still aspire to follow the path of māyāvāda and
attain nirvāṇa, just because this doctrine existed in
ancient times. To these people we want to say that the
nirvāṇa-mukti of māyāvāda is completely and totally

                          332
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

false. In reality the jīva can never attain any such
state as nirvāṇa, because the supposed condition of
nirvāṇa-mukti is simply imaginary. We can use historical
evidence to prove without any doubt that there is not
even a single instance of any advaita-vādī attaining
this condition. When we analyse the life histories of
great māyāvādīs like Gauḍapāda, Govindapāda, Ācārya
Śaṅkara and Mādhava, we see clearly that none of them
achieved the nirvāṇa-mukti which they themselves
supported.

According to Śaṅkara Ācārya’s biography, after his
grand-guru Gauḍapāda left his material body, he came
into Śaṅkara Ācārya's trance when Śaṅkara Ācārya was
absorbed in his meditation one day, and said, “Śaṅkara!
I have heard your praises from your Gurudeva, Ācārya
Govindapāda. I have also heard that you have composed a
beautiful commentary on my Māṇḍukya-kārikā. I want to
see it.” Ācārya Śaṅkara immediately showed Gauḍapāda the
commentary. Gauḍapāda felt very happy to see it and,
after giving his approval, he left.

From the above incident it is evident that Gauḍapāda and
Govindapāda did not become liberated from their material
bodies and achieve nirvāṇa-mukti. In the first place,
how could Gauḍapāda hear about Śaṅkara from the mouth of
Govindapāda, if both Gauḍapāda and Govindapāda had
achieved nirvāṇa-mukti? Secondly, how could Ācārya
Śaṅkara show his commentary on Māṇḍukya-kārikā to
Gauḍapāda, if Gauḍapāda was a nirvāṇa-mukta? If they had
actually attained nirvāṇa-mukti, neither incident could
possibly have taken place. If we accept these incidents
as real, then the nirvāṇa-mukti, or nirviśeṣa-mukti, of
the māyāvādīs must be false. Conversely, if we accept
nirvāṇa-mukti or nirviśeṣa-mukti as real, then the above
mentioned incidents are either false or imaginary. Even
if we accept that the incident is partly true, stillÇ
the liberation of both the māyāvādi ācāryas is false,
according to the māyāvādīs’ description of the symptoms
of nirvāṇa-mukti.

Putting this incident aside, the biography of Śaṅkara
states that he personally reincarnated as Mādhava
Ācārya; that is, he appeared in the form of Vidyāraṇya.
Now, how is this consistent with the conception of
nirvāṇa-mukti? Māyāvāda doctrine says that after
nirvāṇa-mukti, the jīvas have no existence separate from
Brahman, which is formless, changeless, inactive and
without any attributes. However, we see that Gauḍapāda,
Govindapāda and Śaṅkara Ācārya all had their respective
separate existence. How can we logically accept, then,
that they had actually attained nirvāṇa-mukti? The
nirvāṇa-mukti which the māyāvāda ācāryas propagate has
no aspect or principle which allows any reciprocal
dialogue, and what to speak of reincarnation, after the
attainment of nirvāṇa. This consideration very clearly
shows that nirvāṇa-mukti is simply a false and deceptive
expression, or a trap to collect followers. If the chief
preachers of nirvāṇa-mukti—those whom we can regard as
the founders of the doctrine—could not attain such mukti
themselves, then how can anyone else expect to?




                          333
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Vinodabihārī tattvāṣṭakam

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Vinodabihārīji are the presiding Deities
in Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Matha. When They were installed,
some Vaiṣṇavas were curious to know why both the Deities
have the same colour, and they respectfully asked Śrīla
Ācārya Kesarī, “In our Gauḍīya Sampradāya and
elsew∑here, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s vigraha is made of white
marble and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s vigraha is made of black marble.
How is it that both the vigrahas which you have
manifested are of white marble?” Śrīla Ācāryadeva
answered this question in a beautiful and unprecedented
way by composing Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Vinodabihārī-
tattvāṣṭakam. In the pitcher of this tattvāṣṭakam,
Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva has wonderfully manifested
the fathomless ocean of Śrī Rādhā tattva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
tattva, prema-tattva, rasa-tattva and the topmost
rupānuga current of thought. We will try to reveal
something of his bhāvas (moods) in the following
explanation, using śākhā-candra nyāya, the logic of the
branch and the moon2.

Verse 1

rādhā-cintā-niveśena yasya kāntirvilopitā

śrī kṛṣṇa caraṇaṁ vande rādhālingita-vigraham

“We pray at the lotus feet of that form of Rādhālingita-
Rādhācihnita Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is embraced and marked by
Śrī Rādhikā. When Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the personification
of mahābhāva, displayed māna (Her mood of jealous
anger), and He became thoroughly immersed in separation
from Her, His own dark complexion vanished and He
assumed Her bright, golden lustre.”

Or, “We pray at the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is
beautified by Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s golden lustre when She
embraces Him, after Her māna has broken.”

Tattva prakāśikā-vṛtti (the commentary which illuminates
the philosophical principles)

In this verse the word ‘rādhāliṅgita’ has two meanings.
The first is ‘rādhā-liṅgita’: ‘marked by Śrī Rādhā.’ The
second meaning is ‘rādhayā-āliṅgita’: ‘embraced by
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.’ When Śrīmatī Rādhikā exhibits māna,
and dhīra-lalita nāyaka Śrī Kṛṣṇa becomes completely
absorbed in feelings of separation from Her, His
natural, bluish radiant lustre disappears and He
helplessly accepts Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s golden lustre. In
other words, His own lustre becomes golden. He does not
have to perform even the slightest endeavour for this;
it happens automatically. It is like the strong bhṛṅgī
insect forcefully arresting the weak telacaṭṭā insect
and confining it in its cave. When the weak insect hears
the strange sound made by the bhṛṅgī, it becomes afraid.
Contemplating the form of the bhṛṅgī, out of fear it
assumes a bodily form exactly like that of the bhṛṅgī
insect.

We can also give the example of Mahārāja Bhāratajī, who
was thinking of a fawn at the time of his death and so
accepted the body of a deer in his next life. In the

                          334
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

same way, Śrī Kṛṣṇa takes on Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s golden
lustre as He becomes more and more absorbed in thoughts
of Her.

One such incident is described in a conversation between
Varāha-deva and Dharanī in Varāha-saṁhitā. Śrī Varāha-
deva told Dharanī, “In Vṛndāvana there is a very big
banyan tree on the bank of Yamunā, and its branches and
sub-branches spread far and wide in all directions. Many
different types of birds are always chirping on its
branches. Surrounding the root of this tree is a
beautiful raised platform on which Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
enjoy delightful pastimes. OnceÇ Śrī Kṛṣṇa was relishing
His rāsa-līlā pastimes with His sakhīs on the bank of
the Yamunā. Crores of gopīs were dancing with Him and,
He began to dance with the gopīs one after another,
absorbed in ecstatic love, sometimes embracing one and
sometimes another. Kṛṣṇa enjoyed loving pastimes in many
different ways, sometimes with Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
sometimes with others.

“At this time, Śrīmatī Rādhikā observed that Kṛṣṇa was
dancing with other gopīs as He was with Her, and
embracing them in the same way that He embraced Her. Not
seeing any recognition of Her superiority over the other
gopīs, She became angry with Kṛṣṇa. She immediately left
the rāsa-sthalī and hid Herself in a nearby kuñja. After
a short time, Kṛṣṇa noticed Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s absence
and became restless. ‘She for whom I perform this rāsa-
vilāsa, who is dearer to Me than My very life, has left
Me’ He thought. ‘Where did She go?’

“Dancing and dallying with millions and millions of
gopīs could not capture Kṛṣṇa’s heart even for a moment.
Afflicted with separation from Śrīmatī Rādhikā, He left
the dancing group at once and began to search in one
kuñja after another, calling out, ‘He Rādhe! Where are
you?’ As He searched and searched for Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
the crown jewel of all His beloved sakhīs, He arrived at
the bank of Kālindī. By now He had already become tired
and hopeless from repeatedly searching for Her, so there
on the bank of Kālindī, under the shade of a tamarind
tree in a charming kuñja, He began chanting the mantra
of rādhā-nāma in deep anxiety. Sometimes he would call
out in a melancholy way, ‘Praneśvarī! Alas! O Queen of
My heart! You have left Me aside. Where have You gone?’

rādhā viśleṣataḥ kṛṣṇaḥ hyekadā premāvihvalaḥ

rādhāmaṅtraṁ japan dhyāyan rādhā sarvatra paśyati

(Vārāha-saṁhitā)

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa went on madly chanting rādhā-mantra in deep
separation from Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and meditating on Her.
Gradually Rādhikā began to manifest Herself to Him
everywhere. As He started to feel Her presence inwardly
and outwardly, He became like Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and His
bodily lustre also became like that of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.”

This is the first meaning of the word rādhā-liṅgita.

Remembering this pastime, Śrī Gaurasundara used to go to
Imlitālā, the place of that particular tamarind tree.

                          335
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Overwhelmed with excessive emotions, He used to chant
nāma-saṅkīrtana, weeping bitterly. In the afternoon He
would go to beg alms in a village near Akrūra-ghāṭa. It
seems that Śrī Gaurasundara came to Vraja-dhāma from
Nīlācala only to attain and strengthen His Rādhā bhāva,
because without Rādhā bhāva He would never fulfil His
three desires.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the crest-jewel of the dynasty of
rasika Vaiṣṇavas, wrote the verse ‘hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-
dyuti kadamba sandīpitaḥ.’ Here he indicates the form of
Hari which is effulgent with the radiance of gold,
meaning the form of Kṛṣṇa which is radiant with Rādhā’s
golden splendour when He is deeply absorbed in thoughts
of Her. Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, who is an intimate
associate of Śrī Gaurasundara and is also the rasa-
śāstra guru, has indicated the same mood in his kaḍacā
(notebook), rādhā-bhāva dyuti suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa
svarūpam: “I offer my obeisances again and again to that
Kṛṣṇa who is resplendent with the lustre and intrinsic
mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.”

Now we will discuss the second meaning of the word
rādhā-liṅgita. Here the poet offers prayers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
when He is embraced by His beloved Śrī Rādhikā, who has
assumed the mood of svādhīna-bhartṛkā-nāyikā (happily
controlling Her lover) after Her māna has broken. Seeing
Kṛṣṇa bewildered in separation from Her, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s heart also became aggrieved. Her impatience
and sulkiness immediately disappeared and She bound
Kṛṣṇa in the ropes of Her embrace. Kṛṣṇa then became
content and all His grief and sorrows went far away. Śrī
Rāyā Rāmānanda refers to this in his dialogue with Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta:

nā so ramaṇa, nā hāma ramaṇī

duṅhū-mana manobhava peṣala jāni’

e sakhī, se-saba prema-kāhinī

kānu-ṭhāme kahabi vichurala jāni

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 8.194)

In the madness of love in separation, virahinī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā says, “Our prema attained its ultimate climax in
just the briefest blink of an eye. We have met each
other in such a way that We have become one; I have even
forgotten that I am the beloved and You are My lover.
Now I am separated from You, and this loving vilāsa has
become like a mere story. Is this the path that virtuous
men follow in their pursuit of love?”

This poem has disclosed the ultimate stage of milana
(meeting), in which Kṛṣṇa is completely embraced by
Rādhikā. Soon after this Rāyā Rāmānanda said to Śrī
Gaurasundara,

pahile dekhiluṅ tomāra sannyāsī-svarūpa

ebe tomā dekhi muñi śyāma-gopa-rūpa

tomāra sammukhe dekhi kāñcana-pañcālikā

                          336
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017


tāñra gaura-kāntye tomāra sarva aṅga ḍhākā

tāhāte prakaṭa dekhoṅ sa-vaṁśī vadana

nānā bhāve cañcala tāhe kamala-nayana

ei-mata tomā dekhi’ haya camatkāra

akapaṭe kaha, prabhu, kāraṇa ihāra

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 8.268 - 271)

A doubt arose in Rāyā Rāmānanda Prabhu’s heart and he
enquired from Śrīman Mahāprabhu, “Earlier I saw You in
the dress of a sannyasī, but now I see You in the form
of a bluish cowherd boy. At the same time I am
witnessing another most uncommon phenomenon. It is as if
a wonderful and beautiful doll (the mūrti of a gopī) is
standing in front of You, covering all the limbs of Your
body with Her golden lustre. I am directly perceiving
that in that form You are holding a flute to Your lips,
and Your lotus eyes are dancing here and there,
displaying a mood of deep hankering. Please be merciful
to me and tell me without duplicity what is the reason
for Your manifesting such a form.”

The deep and confidential purport of these four verses
is that Kṛṣṇa’s radiant bluish lustre is covered by
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s radiant golden lustre, because each
limb of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s body is embraced by each limb of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s body. The body of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who
carries the flute remains unchanged; only His lustre
becomes golden. It is this very form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is embraced by Śrīmatī Rādhikā, which is worshipped in
all the temples of our Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti.

This profoundly philosophical prayer, which is endowed
with the most exalted sentiment, very clearly indicates
its author’s exclusive allegiance to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
conceptions. To imbibe this elusive mood of the damsels
of Vraja in our heart, we must first understand the
principles of bhakti-tattva. Generally the practice
(sādhana) and perfection (siddhi) of bhakti are divided
into three categories: sādhana-bhakti, bhāva-bhakti and
prema-bhakti. When sādhana-bhakti matures, the sādhaka
is endowed with bhāva-bhakti, and fully matured bhāva-
bhakti is known as prema-bhakti.

Sādhana-bhakti, which is performed during the sādhaka’s
stage of practice, has two divisions: vaidhī-sādhana-
bhakti and rāgānugā-sādhana-bhakti. When the practice of
bhakti bears the fruit of prema, there is still a
corresponding subtle difference between prema arising
from vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti and prema arising from
rāgānuga-sādhana-bhakti. Prema which has developed from
the performance of vaidhī-bhakti is imbued with
reverence for Śrī Bhagavān’s opulence and is known as
vaikuṇṭhīya-prema. Prema which is obtained through the
cultivation of rāgānuga-bhakti is completely free from
even a scent of reverence and is known as pure sweet
Vraja prema; the mood of the gopīs is the most elevated
stage of Vraja prema.


                          337
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

In order to comprehend rāgānuga-bhakti properly, it is
essential that one first understands rāgātmika-bhāva.
Rāga is the unquenchable loving thirst arising from
intense absorption in the object of one’s affection, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. The deep and intense loving attachment which this
rāga produces is called rāgātmika prema.

The distinctive and unique prīti of the eternal
inhabitants of Vraja—including cows, deer, parrots,
animals, and birds—is called rāgātmika-prīti. This
rāgātmika-prīti is of two types: sambandha-rūpā and
kāma-rūpā. The term 'kāma-rūpā' refers only to the
affection of Kṛṣṇa’s beloved sweethearts, and the
longing which follows in the wake of this kāma-rūpā rati
is called kāmānugā-bhakti. Kāma-rūpā rāgātmika prema is
also of two kinds: sambhoga-icchāmayī and tat-tad-bhāva-
icchāmayī. The rati of nāyikā’s such as Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
Candravali, and Śyamalā, who desire to meet Kṛṣṇa for
His pleasure, is called sambhoga-icchāmayī. Sakhīs who
have the rati which is called tat-tad-bhāva-icchātmikā
do not desire to meet Kṛṣṇa independently, but are keen
to relish Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sweet mood when She meets
with Kṛṣṇa.

There are five types of sakhīs, known respectively as
sakhī, nitya-sakhī, prāṇa-sakhī, priya-sakhī, and
priyanarma-sakhī. Sakhīs who have equal sneha for Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are known as sama-snehā, whereas those
who display more sneha towards one or other of Them are
called visama-snehā. Vṛndā and Dhanisṭhā are examples of
sakhīs; they are visama-snehā, having more affection for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The nitya-sakhīs, for example Kastūrī Mañjarī
and Maṇi Mañjarī, are also visama-sneha, but they have
more affection for Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The chief sakhīs in
this group are called prāṇa-sakhīs, of whom Śrī Rūpa
Mañjari is the foremost. Gopīs such as Mālati are priya-
sakhīs. They have sama-sneha (equal affection) for Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa, but still show somewhat more favour towards
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Among these priya-sakhīs, the most dear
and prominent such as Lalitā and Viśakhā are called
priya-narma sakhīs or parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs. These
nayikās are adorned with all good qualities, yet they
feel more satisfied and content in arranging the meeting
of the Divine Couple Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Sakhīs
such as Rūpa, Rati and Lavaṅga, who are the chief among
the nitya-sakhīs and prāṇa-sakhīs, are devoted to the
uninterrupted and unhesitating service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā in secluded nikuñjas. These sakhīs do not have
any desire to meet with Kṛṣṇa separately, and feel
completely satisfied when they relish the moods of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā in Her meeting with Him.

All the inhabitants of Vraja—including the gopas, gopīs,
cows, calves, animals and birds—are rāgātmika. Sādhakas
who follow the moods of these inhabitants of Vraja in
order to attain their bhāva are called rāgānugā. Amongst
these rāganuga sādhakas, only those who specifically
follow the internal mood of Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī are
rūpānuga. Thus, every rūpānuga sādhaka is also a
rāgānuga-sādhaka, but rāgānuga sādhakas are not
necessarily rūpanuga. Rūpānuga sādhakas are those who
with the external body follow the process of bhajana as
shown by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and simultaneously with
their internally conceived spiritual body (siddha-deha)

                          338
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

follow the moods of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī as she eternally
serves Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. Only that sort of
rāgānuga sādhaka is called a rupānuga Vaiṣṇava.
Rūpānuga-vara Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays in his
Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjali:

tavaivāsmi tavaivāsmi na jīvāmi tvayā vinā

iti vijñāya devī tvaṁ naya māṁ caraṇāntike

“He Devī Śrī Rādhike! I am yours! I am yours! I cannot
live without You. Knowing this, please give me a place
at Your lotus feet.”

pādābjayos tava vinā vara dāsyam eva

nānyat kadāpi samaye kila devī yāce

sākhyāya te mama namo ‘stu namo ‘stu nityaṁ

dāsyāya te mama raso ‘stu raso ‘stu satyam

“He Devī Rādhike! I never desire anything but the best
loving service unto Your lotus feet. If You want to give
me the position of a sakhī, then I offer my obeisances
again and again to that position from a distance, but I
do not actually want it. Taking a vow, I am begging only
to have steadfast anurāga (loving attachment) in Your
service.”

We also see the desire of Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura for
rūpānugatya in the following prayer:

śrī rūpa mañjarī-pāda, sei mora sampada,

sei mora bhajana-pūjana

sei mora prāṇa-dhana, sei mora ābharaṇa,

sei mora jīvanera jīvana

sei mora rasa-nidhi, sei mora vāñchā-siddhi,

sei mora vedera dharama

Śrī Rūpānuga Ācārya Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura submits
the following plea in his lālasamayī prārthanā (prayers
of intense yearning):

śrī rūpa mañjarī saṅge yābo kabe

rasa-sevā-śikṣā-tare

tad anugā ha’ye rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭe

rahiba harṣitāntare

“When will Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī teach me how to perform
service unto the transcendental mellows? Following her
moods and instructions on the banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa,
I will feel the greatest delight within my heart.”

śrī rādhāra sukhe kṛṣṇera ye sukha


                           339
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

jāniba manete āmi

rādhā-pāda chāḍi śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅgame

kabhu nā haiba kāmī

rādhā pakṣa chāḍi je jana se jana

je bhāve se bhāve thāke

āmi ta’ rādhikā, pakṣa pātī sadā

kabhu nāhi heri tā ‘ke

“I will know that Rādhā’s pleasure is Kṛṣṇa’s only
source of joy. Therefore I will never desire to abandon
Her lotus feet to meet Him. I am always in Rādhikā’s
party and I never even glance at those who have left Her
group.”

These moods are the life and soul of rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas.
My most revered Śrīla Gurupādapadma is a prominent
rūpānuga-ācārya and his heartfelt sentiments are quite
clearly manifest in this first verse of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Vinodabihārī-tattvāṣṭakam. His bhāva is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
should be immersed in the remembrance of Rādhājī, that
He should search for Śrīmatījī, and that He should feel
distressed in separation from Śrīmatījī. This verse
expresses partiality towards Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
rūpānugatva in the stages of both separation and union.

Verse 2

sevya-sevaka-sambhoge dvayor-bedaḥ kuto bhavet

vipralambhe tu sarvasya bhedaḥ sadā vivarddhate

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa is sevya (He who always takes service from
the sevaka) and bhoktā (He who is always enjoying).
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is sevaka (She who always performs sevā
for sevya) and bhogya (She who is enjoyed). When They
meet together and enjoy each other, how can there be any
distinction between Them? At that time, bheda
(distinction) vanishes and abheda (non-difference) is
apparent. However, in the stage of vipralambha
(separation), bheda perpetually becomes more intense.”

Tattva-prakāśika-vṛtti

At the time of union, no difference exists between sevya
(one who is served) and sevaka (one who serves). Śrī
Nanda-nandana, who is the embodiment of śṛṅgāra-rasa
(the mellow of amorous love), is the ultimate limit of
sevya or bhoktā-tattva and Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the
ultimate limit of sevaka-tattva or āśraya-tattva. Their
anurāga is known as sthāyī-bhāva. When this anurāga
reaches its last limit it is known as yāvadāśrayavṛtti.
In that stage, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s unprecedented anurāga
for Kṛṣṇa attains the level of svasamvedya-daśā, when
the aṣṭa-sattvika bhāvas (eight types of bodily
transformations arising from śuddha-sattva) manifest in
the sudīpta (blazing) condition. Only Śrī Rādhā, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s special preyasī (beloved), attains this stage.


                          340
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

In this special situation, the sevya and sevaka both
completely forget Their own identities. They also forget
the distinctions, “He is the lover” and “I am the
beloved.” Their hearts melt and become one. In this
stage it is not possible to conceive of or imagine any
distinction between Them. However, in the stage of
separation, They are both seen searching for each other
in great distress. The dialogue between Rāya Rāmānanda
and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu on the banks of the sacred
river Godāvarī gives us insight into this glorious and
unprecedented rasarāja-mahābhāva.

nā so ramaṇa, nā hāma ramaṇī

duṅhū-mana manobhava peṣala jāni’

e sakhī, se-saba prema-kāhinī

kānu-ṭhāme kahabi vichurala jāni’

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 8.194)

Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara has also envisioned this profound
and confidential bhāva in his kaḍacā:

rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktir asmād

ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau

caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptaṁ

rādhā-bhāva-dyuti-suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa-svarūpam

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Adi 1.5)

“Śrīmatī Rādhikā is Kṛṣṇa’s hlādinī-śaktī (pleasure-
giving potency) and the embodiment of the transformation
of His praṇaya (intimate love). Since They are ekātmā-
svarūpa (one soul), She is intrinsically non-different
from Kṛṣṇa and is one in identity with Him. However, to
enjoy the transcendental pleasure of Their loving
pastimes, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have eternally manifested
Themselves in these two apparently separate forms. Now
these two transcendental identities, sevya and sevaka,
viṣaya-tattva and āśraya-tattva, have manifested in one
svarūpa as Śrī Caitanya tattva. I repeatedly bow down to
Śacīnandana, who is the svarūpa of Kṛṣṇa and who is
adorned with the bhāva and complexion of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.”

In this verse, Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodarajī has used the word
ekātmā to establish that Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa,
sevaka-tattva and sevya-tattva, are not different from
each other. Then he says, deha bhedaṁ gatau tau to
indicate the difference between the two tattvas. Param-
rasika tattva ācārya Śrīla Gurupādapadma has indicated
these same profound and confidential sentiments in the
second verse of his composition.

Verse 3

cil-līlā-mithunaṁ tattvaṁ bhedābhedam acintyakam

śakti-śaktimatoraikyaṁ yugapadvarttate sadā

                          341
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


“The eternal divine couple are the embodiments of the
combined form of śakti and śaktimān. To fulfil Their
transcendental, pleasure-giving pastimes, They both
become one in the stage of sambhoga (union) and yet
simultaneously and inconceivably exist as different and
non-different from each other. This means that para-
tattva is never without śakti. Śakti and śaktimān are
eternally united together in that para-tattva. He is
puruṣottama endowed with completely transcendental
pastimes, the original Self in the conjugal form, the
combined form of śakti and śaktimān. That conjugal form
is Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa as Gaura tattva. By the influence of
acintya-śaktī (inconceivable potency), the contrary
principles of difference and non-difference
simultaneously reside in Him eternally.”

Tattva-prakāśikā-vṛtti

Śrī Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the non-dual Absolute
Truth advaya-jñāna para-tattva. He is the embodiment of
the nectar of all rasa and He possesses all potencies
(sarva-śaktimān). His natural internal potency is also
one and is known as svarūpa-śakti. By the desire of
śaktimān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, this singular potency manifests in
various forms to accomplish different tasks. It expands
itself in the form of cit-śakti to manifest cit-jagat
(the spiritual world), as jīva-śakti to manifest all the
jīvas, and as māyā-śakti to manifest the entire material
creation. This potency also fulfils Kṛṣṇa’s various
desires in the form of saṁvit, sandhinī and hlādinī.
Prema is the essence of hlādinī, mahā-bhāva is the
essence of prema, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the embodiment
of this mahā-bhāva. That parā-śakti, which is the
essence of the essence of prema in the form of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, eternally fulfils all the desires of Kṛṣṇa who
is the personification of śṛṅgāra-rasa. At the time of
sambhoga (union), Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are mithuna-tattva or
yugala-tattva. That is to say, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, desiring to
relish a particular type of rasa, has accepted the
external bodily lustre and the internal mahā-bhāva of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and is eternally present in the form of
Gaurasundara, who is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa combined. Thus Śrī
Gaurasundara is also mithuna-tattva. Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas,
have accepted Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s simultaneous and
inconceivable difference and non-difference. This tattva
has been established in the first verse.

Śrī Śaṅkara Ācārya has accepted the unqualified,
formless and powerless Brahman as para-tattva. This
Brahman is without svagata-bheda (differences within
itself), sajātīya-bheda (differences from others of the
same kind or category) and vijātīya-bheda (differences
from others of different kinds or categories). Many
ācāryas have used irrefutable logic and strong śāstric
evidence to cut down Śrī Śaṅkara’s doctrine of nirviśeṣa
kevalādvaita. These ācāryas include Śrī Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana
Vedavyāsa, ∑who is the author of Vedānta-sūtra;
Parāśara; Auḍulaumi and other ācāryas of ancient times
who had realized knowledge of the Absolute Truth;
vaiṣṇava-ācāryas such as Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva, Śrī
Viṣṇusvāmī and Śrī Nimbāditya; Śaivite ācāryas such as
Śrī Nīlakaṇtha; as well as ācāryas such as Śrī Bhāskara

                          342
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Ācārya and others who came in a later period.

Vaiṣṇava ācāryas have accepted Parabrahman and His
śakti, as well as the extremely beautiful sac-cid-ānanda
śrī vigraha of Parabrahman ∑who possesses all attributes
(saviśeṣa). Ācāryas from the different vaiṣṇava
sampradāyas have propagated śuddha-bhakti in the world.
Amongst them, Śrī Rāmānuja’s viśiṣṭādvaita-vāda, Śrī
Madhvācārya’s dvaitavāda, Śrī Viṣṇusvāmi’s śuddhādvaita-
vāda and Śrī Nimbāditya’s svābhāvika dvaitādvaita
(bhedābheda) vāda are all famous. According to Śrī
Rāmānuja, para-tattva is the saviśeṣa Brahman who
possesses cit and acit śaktis. According to Śrī Madhva
Ācārya five types of differences are eternal. These are
the differences between 1) Brahman and jīva, 2) jīva and
jīva, 3) jīva and jaḍa (inert matter), 4) jaḍa and jaḍa
and 5) jaḍa and Brahman. Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī has accepted
that the eternal vigraha of Parabrahman, His associates,
His pastimes, His abode and so on all exist in the plane
of pure existence beyond the jurisdiction of māyā.
Similarly Śrī Nimbāditya has accepted the natural
difference and non-difference between saviśeṣa Brahman,
jīva and jagat.

Svāyaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has completed
the opinions of the vaiṣṇava ācāryas wherever they were
lacking. He has embraced the universal doctrines of the
Vedas and the Upaniṣads, and has established the
relationship of eternal oneness and difference between
Parabrahman, śakti, and also jīva and jagat, which are
transformations of śakti. This bheda and abheda is
acintya, because it is beyond the conception of human
intelligence, and can be understood only by following
śāstra-buddhi (scriptural wisdom). The vaiṣṇava ācāryas
following in the footsteps of Śrīman Mahāprabhu have
accepted this bhedābheda-tattva.

No scriptures have ever referred to para-tattva as being
without distinctions, without potency, formless or
devoid of transcendental qualities. In Śrīla Vedavyāsa’s
Brahma-sūtra we find sūtras such as 'janmādyasya yataḥ',
'arūpavadeva hi tat pradhānatvāt', 'api saṁrādhane
pratyakṣānumānābhyām', 'ānandamayo ‘bhyāsāt' and 'śakti
śaktimator abhedaḥ'. Thus, Śrīla Vyāsadeva has openly
accepted the sac-cid-ānanda vigraha, śakti, name, form,
qualities, pastimes and abode of the Parabrahman.
Various mantras in the Upaniṣads also firmly establish
the śakti of Parabrahman, His sac-cid-ānanda vigraha and
the doctrine of bheda and abheda. For example, we read,

yato vā imāni bhutāni jāyante

yena jātāni jīvanti

yat prayanty abhisaṁ viśanti

tad vijijñāsasva tad brahma

and

nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

and


                          343
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate.

We find descriptions of the transcendental form, name,
qualities, pastimes and associates of Parabrahman, as
well as acintya bhedābheda-tattva, throughout Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, which is the crown jewel of all authentic
evidence and proof. All these conclusions have been
specifically supported by verses such as aho bhāgyam aho
bhāgyam nandagopa-vrajaukasām/ yan mitraṁ paramānandam
pūrṇa brahma sanātanam, gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma
manuṣyaliṅgam and kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam.

All these doctrines are specifically and distinctly
described in the catuḥ-ślokī of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.33
- 36. We will not give an elaborate description here for
want of sufficient space.

Verse 4

tattvam ekaṁ paraṁ vidyāllīlayā tadvidhā-sthitam

gauraḥ kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ hy etad ubhāvubhayam āpnutaḥ

“The non-dual Absolute Truth advaya-jñāna-para-tattva is
one. That Absolute Truth is eternally manifested in two
forms for the sake of conducting pastimes. One form is
that of Śrī Gaurasundara and the other is that of Śrī
Kṛṣṇasundara. Both are absolute para-tattva and are non-
different from each other. By tattva, Śrī Gaurasundara
is Kṛṣṇa Himself and Śrī Kṛṣṇa-sundara is Śrī
Gaurasundara. Both manifest both forms; that is to say,
Śrī Kṛṣṇasundara has become Śrī Gaurasundara and Śrī
Gaurasundara has become Śrī Kṛṣṇasundara.”

Tattva-prakāśikā-vṛtti

Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, who is the chief internal
associate of Śrī Gaurasundara, has elaborately explained
the confidential siddhānta of Śrī Gaura-Kṛṣṇa tattva in
his notebook.

rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktir asmād

ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau

caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptaṁ

rādhā-bhāva-dyuti-suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa-svarūpam

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi 1.5)

The purport is that Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are one identity.
Śrīmatī RādhikāÇ who is the embodiment of mahābhāva, and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the embodiment of all rasa, assume one
form to enjoy pleasurable pastimes in the stage of
sambhoga (union). At that time They forget even the
bhāva of being lover and beloved, and thus it is
impossible even to imagine any difference between the
two. Still, in separation Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
manifest two separate forms and relish vipralambhā-bhāva
through various loving pastimes. Again, in order to
enjoy some special bhāvas, these two tattvas unite and
manifest Themselves in the form of Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari. Actually Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the

                          344
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

transformation of Kṛṣṇa’s praṇaya (intimate love), and
She is also His svarūpa-śakti. She gives pleasure to
Kṛṣṇa by fulfilling all His desires and that is why She
is also called hlādinī-śakti.

In Tattva-sandarbha, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has quoted
verses from the saṁhitās which reveal that Śrī
Gaurasundara is the combined form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī
Rādhā.

antaḥ kṛṣṇaṁ bahirgaura-darśitāṅgādi vaibhavam

kalau saṅkīrtanādyaiḥ smaḥ kṛṣṇa caitanyam āśritāḥ

(Tattva-sandarbha, Verse 2)

“I take shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu in
Kali-yuga through the sacrifice of saṅkīrtana.
Internally He is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, and externally He
appears in His Gaura svarūpa. He has manifested Himself
along with His majestic influence in the form of His
aṅga (limbs) and upāṅga (subsidiary limbs), namely Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī Gadādhara and
His devotees headed by Śrīvāsa.”

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has also offered obeisances to the
most munificent Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who distributes
Kṛṣṇa prema and who is non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself.

namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne gaura-tviṣe namaḥ

This siddhānta has been supported in the Mārkaṇḍeya
Purāṇa:

golokaṁ ca parityajya lokānāṁ trāṇakāraṇāt

kalau gauraṅga rūpena līlā lāvaṇya vigrahaḥ

In many other scriptures, and especially in the books of
the Gosvāmīs, there is plenty of evidence which proves
that Śrī Gaurasundara is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is Śrī Gaura-sundara. In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is
stated,

sei kṛṣṇa avatārī vrajendra-kumāra

āpane caitanya-rūpe kaila avatāra

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi 2.109)

Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura has also written,

vrajendra nandana jei śacīsūta haila sei

balarāma haila nitāi

Verse 5

sarve varṇāḥ yatrāviṣṭāḥ gaura-kāntir vikāśate

sarve varṇena hīnastu kṛṣṇa-varṇaḥ prakāśate

                          345
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


“When all the colours are mixed with each other, a
golden hue is manifest. For instance, the sun is golden
because all the colours are present in it. On the other
hand, where all the colours are absent, a blackness
beyond mundane colours is manifested.”

Tattva-prakāśikā-vṛtti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaura are both the ultimate limit of
para-tattva and are identical abhinna-tattva (non-
different from each other). The bodily lustre of Svayaṁ
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has the distinctive hue of fresh,
dark, bluish rain clouds or the effulgence of a
sapphire. The bodily lustre of Śrī Gaurasundara defeats
the splendour of lightning and molten gold. Svayaṁ
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Gaurasundara
are both transcendental Absolute Truth. They are
completely beyond the qualities and actions of material
nature and thus They cannot compared to anything in this
mundane world. Still, some comparisons have been given,
following the logic of the moon and the branch, so that
conditioned souls may easily come to some understanding.
However, these examples only refer to the particular
aspect of the transcendental bhagavata-svarūpa which
they illustrate. They cannot be used to explain the
complete form of the Absolute Truth.

At night a small child may want to see the moon, and the
parent may show it to him by indicating its position
above the branch of a nearby tree. The moon appears to
be just above the branch of the tree, but it is really
thousands and thousands of miles away. In the same way,
bhagavat-tattva is in reality completely beyond all
mundane qualities. Still, it is essential in the primary
stage to use examples of mundane objects to describe the
Absolute, so that materially conditioned people, who are
completely ignorant about the transcendental truth, can
at least develop some idea of Transcendence. Both the
colours black and white are mundane, yet the example of
these colours has been given here to convey an idea of
the bodily lustre of Śrī Kṛṣṇasundara and Śrī
Gaurasundara.

The theories of mundane scientists also support the
siddhānta expressed in this verse. Scientists say that
black is not a colour, so the example of the colour
black points to the truth that Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His bodily
lustre (which resembles the colour black) is nirguṇa,
i.e. completely beyond the material qualities. Even when
Śrī Kṛṣṇa advents in this material world, He and His
bodily lustre are nirguṇa in all respects. Moreover, all
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's transcendental attributes are also
nirguṇa, including His gravity, courtesy, His lack of
pride, His respectfulness, cleverness, ever-
youthfulness, His incomparable beauty, His expertise in
relishing rasa, His virtues, His self-control and His
extreme mercy.

Conversely, Śrī Gaurasundara, His bodily lustre and all
of His qualities are aprakṛta (transcendental). That is
why He is saguṇa-tattva, the Absolute Truth possessed of
all qualities. Still, His qualities are also nirguṇa.
Again, following the logic of the moon and the branch, a

                          346
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

comparison is given here to illustrate saguṇa-tattva.
Just as the sun is endowed with the combination of all
the colours, so Śrī Gaurasundara, who is endowed with a
distinctive golden lustre, embodies all transcendental
qualities. Thus, He is worshipful. When all the colours
are mixed together a golden hue is manifest, in which
the colours are not visible separately. For instance,
the rays of the sun appear white, but sometimes in the
rainy season we see a rainbow opposite the sun, and we
can then see the component colours separately. In
English the acronym ROYGBIV is used to denote the
following seven colours: R—red, O—orange, Y—yellow, G—
green, B—blue, I—indigo, V—violet. Following this same
logic, Śrī Gaurasundara’s bodily lustre resembles molten
gold because He embodies the combination of all
transcendental qualities.

One day, when our most worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva was
telling us some hari-kathā, he related an incident which
occurred when he went to Prayāga (Allahābāda) after
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disappearance. He stayed there for a
few days at the house of his dear friend and Godbrother
Śrī Abhaya-caraṇāravinda Prabhu, who introduced him to a
well-known High Court advocate. This advocate was sharp-
witted and a good logician, and he was deeply impressed
on hearing the thoughts of Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu, who was
a profound scholar of philosophy and an instructor of
instructors. One day the advocate arrived at the house
with a church bishop, who was a famous philosopher and
preacher of Christianity. The advocate introduced the
bishop to Kṛtiratna Prabhu, and to have some fun
initiated a dialogue which led to an interesting
argument employing logic and counter-logic. As the
discussion began, the Bishop turned to Kṛtiratna Prabhu
and asked, “Why do you worship Kṛṣṇa who is coloured
black?”

Showing his presence of mind, Śrīla Gurudeva immediately
answered, “Black is not a colour. It is beyond all
colours, which means that Kṛṣṇa is beyond all mundane
qualities. We don’t worship any worldly object or
colour. Nirguṇa-tattva is not subject to the stages of
birth, growth, decay and destruction. It is beyond the
modes of goodness, passion and ignorance, and it is
eternally existing. We worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the
ultimate limit of the nirguṇa-para-tattva.”

The Bishop was an expert and sportive opponent, and at
once enquired, “Then why do you worship the fair-
complexioned Śrī Gauranga Mahāprabhu?”

Śrīla Gurudeva answered so quickly that it seemed that
he was waiting for the question with his answer already
prepared. “All the qualities of the material nature are
abominable and distressful. Beyond this, in the
spiritual world, there is a treasure of transcendental
virtuous qualities. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the
unlimited treasure-house of all those transcendental
qualities, and the mixture of those spiritual qualities
is His bodily lustre. The combination of all the colours
in sunlight appears white, but in fact it is a mixture
of seven colours: red, orange, yellow, blue, green,
indigo, and violet. We see this in the rainy season,
when the sun’s light is refracted to make a rainbow in

                          347
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

which all the seven colours are easily visible.
Similarly, our worshipful Śrī Gaurasundara embodies
unlimited transcendental qualities.”

When the honourable Bishop heard this irrefutable,
scientific argument, he was struck dumb and became a
little morose. Trying to conceal his discomfiture, he
smiled and said, “You people worship a cowherd boy. I
cannot understand this.”

Śrīla Gurudeva replied, “Perhaps you don’t understand
because you worship a shepherd. If a shepherd can be
worshipped, then why is it strange to worship the
caretaker of cows, who nourish the whole world like
mothers?”

On hearing this, both the advocate and the bishop
extolled Śrī Kṛtiratna Prabhu’s eloquent speech and took
their leave.

Thus, the transcendental saguṇa and nirguṇa are an
identical tattva. There is no difference between the
two. There is no doubt at all that Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī
Gaurasundara are simultaneously saguṇa and nirguṇa-
tattva.

Verse 6

saguṇaṁ nirguṇaṁ tattvam ekam evādvitīyakam

sarva-nitya-guṇairgauraḥ kṛṣṇau rasastu nirguṇaiḥ

“Constitutionally both the saguṇa and nirguṇa tattvas
are non-different from each other and are one without a
second. Śrī Gaurasundara is saguṇa-tattva, the
embodiment of unlimited, eternal, transcendental
qualities. The omnipotent Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is devoid of
all kinds of mundane modes and is beyond them, and who
is the embodiment of all rasas, is nirguṇa-tattva. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is described everywhere in the scriptures as rasa-
svarūpa (the form of rasa) and rasika-śekhara (the
foremost relisher of rasa). Rasa-tattva is nirguṇa or
transcendental. It can never come under the influence of
the mundane modes.”

Tattva-prakāśikā-vṛtti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaura are one and the same worshipful
tattva. This has been concluded here by comparing the
word varṇa from the previous verse with the word guṇa in
this verse. Intrinsically, nirguṇa Śrī Kṛṣṇa and saguṇa
Śrī Gaurasundara are equally worshipful para-tattva and
cannot be distinguished from each other. They are both
simultaneously saguṇa and nirguṇa tattva.

Māyāvādīs, who are ignorant of the Absolute Truth,
consider saguṇa and nirguṇa to be two separate tattvas.
They further conclude that these two are completely
opposite to each other; that saguṇa-tattva is under the
influence of the material modes, and thus undesirable;
and that nirguṇa-tattva is therefore superior to saguṇa-
tattva. According to these people, nirguṇa-tattva means
that formless Brahman which is beyond the material
world, which is devoid of attributes, unalloyed, without

                          348
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

potency and formless. They say that this world is false
and that the jīva is Brahman. According to them, saguṇa-
tattva is the stage in which nirguṇa-tattva manifests
itself in the material world, endowed with a material
name, a material form and material qualities. They
consider Svayaṁ Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rāmacandra to be
that saguṇa-tattva, whose appearance, disappearance and
body are material and influenced by illusion.

The Gītā and other authorised scriptures state that this
māyāvāda doctrine is very offensive.

avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto mama bhūta-maheśvaram

moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ

rākṣasīm āsurīṁ caiva prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ

(Bhagavad-gītā 9.11-12)

“Fools deride Me, the Supreme Īśvara of all living
entities. They fail to understand the supreme nature of
My svarūpa by their human intelligence, which is covered
with māyā. All the hopes, actions and knowledge of such
fools go in vain. Their minds become agitated and,
deviating from the spiritual path, they take shelter of
the demoniac nature, which destroys intelligence, and
they head towards the hellish planets.”

The conclusion is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the root of all
avatāras and is the Supreme Absolute Truth. In the form
of Kṛṣṇa He is the īśvara of all īśvaras, of all living
beings and of the entire cosmic manifestation. His
determination is infallible. That is, whatever He wills
must take place. He is omniscient, omnipotent and
supremely compassionate. Wicked King Veṇa and other such
fools used to disrespect Kṛṣṇa when they saw Him. These
fools used to abuse Śrī Vasudeva-nandana or Śrī Nanda-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, considering Him a worldly man who is
subject to death. These fools imagine that Paramātmā is
a separate ātmā in Kṛṣṇa’s body. This belief has been
condemned everywhere in the scriptures, which establish
that Kṛṣṇa’s form is sac-cid-ānanda. Śāstra has
established that the distinction between deha (the body)
and dehī (the possessor of the body) is also false in
the case of the sac-cid-ānanda śrī vigraha of Bhagavān.

a) oṁ sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāya kṛṣṇāya (Gopāla-Tāpani
Upaniṣad 1.1)

b) tam ekaṁ govindaṁ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaṁ

c) dvibhujaṁ mauna-mudrāḍhyaṁ vanamālinamīśvaram

d) īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ saccidānanda vigrahaḥ (Brahmā-
saṁhita 5.1)

e) apaśyaṁ gopamanipadyamānamā (Ṛg Veda 1.22.166.31)

f) gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma manuṣya-liṅgam (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
7.10.48)


                          349
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

g) yatrāvatīrṇo bhagavān paramātmā narākṛtiḥ (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 9.23.20)

h) deha-dehi-bhidā nāsti īśvare vidyate kvacid

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is unborn, yet by dint of His
inconceivable potency, He is the eternal son of Śrī
Nanda-Yaśodā. He is nirguṇa, yet He is ever youthful,
the best of dancers, and He is dressed as a cowherd boy,
carrying a flute. He is equally disposed to all, and yet
He is partial to His devotees who take exclusive shelter
of Him. Viruddha dharmaṁ tasmin na citram: “All
apparently contradictory and mutually exclusuve
qualities co-exist within Him simultaneously.” Four-
headed Brahmā and other demigods have referred to Him as
being simultaneously saguṇa and nirguṇa.

Rāvaṇa thought that Śrī Rāmacandra was an ordinary human
being, so he kidnapped Sitadevī, His svarūpa-śakti. Śrī
Rāmacandra later killed Rāvana as well as all his demon
followers and rescued Sitadevī. Kaṁsa, Jarāsandha,
Śiśupāla and other foolish kings thought that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is an ordinary human being. By His causeless mercy, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa destroyed them, either personally with His disk or
through His devotees, and established His divine
position as nirguṇa. Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has said
in the Gītā, dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ yena mām upayānti
te: “I give them the intelligence, the divine vision, by
which they can come to Me.” One cannot realize bhagavat-
tattva, the Absolute Truth, without the mercy of
Bhagavān or His devotees. Hence, Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra and Śrī
Gaurasundara are both equally worshipful as one and the
same unparalled and supreme tattva.

Verse 7

śrī kṛṣṇaṁ mithunaṁ brahma tyaktā tu nirguṇaṁ hi tat

upāsate mṛṣā vijñāḥ yathā tuṣāvaghātinaḥ

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaura are both the same supreme
Brahman. Those who abandon Their service to worship the
formless Brahman never attain factual liberation, and
are precisely like those who try to extract rice by
beating empty husks. All they obtain is their own
fruitless, hard labour. Similarly all seekers of
empirical knowledge, who give up the service of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa to worship the nirviśeṣa nirguṇa Brahman, simply
perform fruitless hard labor. All their efforts go in
vain.”

Tattva-prakāśikā-vṛtti

The Vedas, Upaniṣads and especially Vedānta-sūtra
describe only bhakti. The topic established by all these
scriptures is Bhagavān and His bhakti. The word jñāna
has not been mentioned even once throughout the 550
aphorisms of Vedānta-sūtra. The sūtra ‘janmādyasya
yataḥ’ clearly states that Bhagavān is the creator,
maintainer, and destroyer of this cosmic manifestation.
This proves the divine existence of His form, śakti and
transcendental qualities. The sūtra ‘arūpavad eva tat
prādhānatvāt’ describes the transcendental śrī vigraha
of Parabrahman. The sūtra ‘ānandamayo ‘bhyāsyāt’

                          350
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

confirms the pleasurable pastimes and ‘anāvṛtti śabdād
anāvṛtti śabdāt’ states that the only process to attain
the supreme truth is nāma-saṅkīrtana. In the prayers of
Śrī Brahmā in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the cultivation of
nirviśeṣa-jñāna has been forbidden.

śreyaḥ-sṛtiṁ bhaktim udasya te vibho

kliśyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye

teṣām asau kleśala eva śiṣyate

nānyad yathā sthūla-tuṣāvaghātinām

(Srīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.4)

“O Prabhu! You are the ultimate auspiciousnessÇ and
bhakti is the best and only way to obtain You. The four
types of desirable goals such as mokṣa are easily
attained by performing bhakti, just as water
continuously flows from a reservoir. When one performs
bhakti, one is automatically situated in knowledge, so
one need not endeavour to obtain jñāna separately. Those
who abandon the path of bhakti and engage in distressing
endeavours to achieve jñāna obtain only suffering and
nothing else, just as those who beat empty husks have no
reward but their own fruitless hard labour. They do not
obtain any rice.”

Furthermore:

ye ‘nye ‘ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho ‘nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

(Srīmād-Bhāgavatam 10.2.32)

“O lotus eyed one! Those who are not your devotees may
consider themselves to be liberated by their performance
of sense-control and severe sādhana, but their
intelligence is not pure because they are devoid of the
sentiments of unalloyed devotion towards You. As a
result of neglecting Your lotus feet, which are the only
shelter, they again fall down to a degraded condition.”

The four Kumāras and Śrī Śukadeva previously worshipped
the nirguṇa nirākāra Brahman. However, by the mercy of
Pitāmaha (grandfather of the world) Brahmā and Kṛṣṇa-
dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa, they became attracted to the
worship of the mithuna-brahma Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala.
The special qualities and sweetness of this conjugal
Brahman are so attractive that even brahma-jñānīs
(seekers of empiric knowledge) give up their previous
condition of being ātmārāma (absorbed in the pleasure of
the ātmā) and become blissfully engaged in the worship
of Śrī Śrī Rādhā Kṛṣṇa mithuna-tattva.

ātmārāmāś ca munayo nirgranthā apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim itthaṁ-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ

                          351
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017


(Srīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.10)

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī has personally testified in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam “I was firmly situated in the worship
of nirguṇa Brahman, but by the mercy of Śrīla Vyāsadeva
I was inspired to engage in the worship of Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala, which is full of rasa.”

pariniṣṭhito ‘pi nairguṇye uttama-śloka-līlayā

gṛhīta-cetā rājarṣe ākhyānaṁ yad adhītavān

(Srīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.9)

The result of worshiping nirguṇa Brahman is mukti. An
aikāntika bhakta never accepts such mukti, even if it is
offered by Bhagavān. He desires to be incessantly
engaged in the loving devotional service of Bhagavān
forever. Great brahma-jñānīs occasionally attain mukti
by their hard austerities and severe sādhana, yet that
same mukti is attained very easily by outright demons
when they are killed by Bhagavān Himself. So who but a
fool would vainly endeavour to achieve such a condemned
and low class of mukti? Wise devotees never accept such
undesirable mukti even if Bhagavān Himself offers it to
them.

Verse 8

śrī vinoda-bihārī yo rādhayāḥ milito yadā

tadāhaṁ vandanaṁ kuryyaṁ sarasvatī-prasādataḥ

“By the causeless grace of my Gurudeva Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda, I pray to
Śrī Vinoda-bihārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa, when, upon meeting with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, He becomes one with Her.”

Tattva-prakāśikā-vṛtti

This verse reveals yet another of its author’s
confidential moods. The purport of ‘when Śrī
Vinodabihārī is in union with Śrīmatī Rādhikā’ has been
thoroughly explained in the first verse. When Kṛṣṇa is
deeply absorbed in remembering Śrīmatī Rādhikā, His
splendour is endowed with a golden hue. Alternatively,
the poet is bowing down again and again to the form of
Kṛṣṇa whose bluish effulgence has been covered by the
golden lustre of Śrīmatī Rādhikā when She embraces Him
in union after separation. The underlying meaning is to
pray exclusively to mithuna-brahma Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Vinodabihārī the śrī vigrahaḥ of rasarāja-mahābhāva.
Sarasvatī prasādataḥ means ‘by the causeless mercy of my
Gurudeva.’ The name of his Gurudeva is Śrī
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. The word ‘Sarasvatī’ has two
meanings:

(1) the presiding deity of aparā vidyā (worldly
knowledge);

(2) the presiding deity of parāvidyā (transcendental
knowledge).


                             352
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrī Sarasvatī Ṭhākura is non-different from the
presiding deity of parāvidyā. Thus, without his mercy it
is impossible to worship Śrī Rādhāliṅgita vigraha.

Another confidential meaning is tadāhaṁ śrī vinoda-
bihārī vandanaṁ kuryat: “I worship Śrī Vinodabihārī
Rādhāliṅgita śrī vigraha.” The name Śrī Vinodabihārī has
been given to the poet by his Gurudeva. In addition to
this, the name of his eternal spiritual form is Śrī
Vinoda Mañjarī. This is evident from his pranāma-mantra:

gaurāśraya-vigrahāya kṛṣṇa kāmaika-cāriṇe

rūpānuga-pravarāya vinodeti svarūpiṇe

Thus, in this prayer the poet aspires to be eternally
engaged in his siddha-svarūpa in the permanent sevā of
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is embraced by Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

The realization of such a rarely fulfilled aspiration is
impossible without the mercy of Śrīla Gurudeva, the
condensed embodiment of mercy and compassion.

śrī-guru-caraṇe rati ei se uttamā-gati

je prasāde pūre sarva āśā

Verse 9

iti tattvāṣṭakaṁ nityaṁ yaḥ pathet śraddhayānvitaḥ

kṛṣṇa-tattvam abhijñāya gaurapade bhavenmatiḥ

“Whoever daily recites this tattvāṣṭakam with great
faith will fully comprehend Śrī Kṛṣṇa tattva, and become
immersed in affectionate meditation upon the lotus feet
of Śrī Gaurasundara.”



Śrī Maṅgala-ārati

We stated earlier that our most revered Śrīla Guru-
pādapadma was a rasika poet as well as a self-realised
philosopher. We shall now present some of his verses of
maṅgala-ārati, from which we can easily understand how
rasika a poet he really was. In this maṅgala-ārati he
has described Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s niśānta-līlā in a
confidential way. Ordinary sādhakas cannot imbibe these
profound emotions into their heart; only some rāgānuga
Vaiṣṇavas can understand these meanings.

The eternal pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā Kṛṣṇa have been
divided into eight periods (aṣṭakālīya-līlā) so that
rāgānuga sādhakas can remember and contemplate them: 1)
niśānta (the end of the night); 2) prātaḥ (dawn); 3)
pūrvahna (morning); 4) madhyāhna (midday); 5) aparahna
(early afternoon); 6) sāyaṁ (evening); 7) pradoṣa (first
part of the night); 8) madhya-rātri-līlā (pastimes in
the middle of night).

Maṅgala-ārati is connected with niśānta-līlā, the
pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala which take place
in the last part of night before dawn. The description

                            353
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

of niśānta-līlā has been given in Śrī Sanat-Kumāra
Saṁhita, in Padma Purāṇa (pātāla khanḍa) and in the
books of the Gosvāmīs. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has described
these eightfold pastimes in a condensed (sūtra) form,
while Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has described
them in detail in his Śrī Govinda-līlāmṛta, as has Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravarti Ṭhākura in his Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
bhāvanāmṛta. Here, we shall give a very brief overview
of niśānta-līlā.

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala are tired after Their
midnight pastimes, and are sleeping in a charming kuñja
(forest bower). Some special sakhīs, carrying in their
hands the articles and ingredients required for their
service at that time, are waiting for Śrī Yugala-Kiśora
to wake up. The cool and gentle early morning breeze,
kissing each and every flower, has become intoxicated
with the fragrance and is now moving unsteadily. Buzzing
bumblebees also wake up quickly, and kiss the flowers in
turn, leaving them for new flowers. The whole atmosphere
of Vṛndāvana is becoming enchanted by the aroma of these
blossoming flowers.

Śrī Vṛndā-devī becomes worried when sees Yugala Kiśora-
Kiśori still sleeping. “Aho! The sun is just about to
rise now, and this Couple is still sleeping, happily
bound to each other in Their tight embrace.” Seeing
this, she becomes worried and tells the birds of
Vṛndāvana such as the parrot, the she-parrot, the
cuckoos, peacocks and papihās, “Wake Them up with your
sweet songs, otherwise They will be put to shame when
everyone else wakes up.” As soon as the birds hear Śrī
Vṛndā-devī’s orders, they all sing in their sweet voices
about the pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala and
begin to wake Them up.

Meanwhile, some of the prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhīs become
enchanted while peering through a small opening in the
bushes of the kuñja. In their jubilation on seeing the
incomparable, lustrous beauty of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa,
they begin to perform ārati with their eyes. Although
the Couple have been awakened by the sweet chirping of
the birds, They do not want to get up from Their bed,
for fear of losing the happiness of Their deep embrace.
At last, on the request of the śuka (parrots) and sārī
(female parrots), They get up and sit on the bed. At
that time svādhīna-bhartṛka3 Śrīmatī Rādhikā requests
Her dearmost Śrī Kṛṣṇa to rearrange Her śṛṅgāra
(ornaments and garments), and dhīra-lalita Kṛṣṇa
complies with Her request.

At that time the sakhīs also come into the kuñja.
Melodiously describing the pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa Yugala, they approach the Divine Couple and start
performing their respective services. Suddenly, the
female monkey named Kakkhaṭī loudly calls out the name
‘Jatilā’. Upon hearing this, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa become
anxious due to the mellow of transcendental fear and
longing. They return to Their respective homes, and
sleep for a while. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s sūtra śloka is as
follows.

rātryante trastavṛnderitabahubhiravairbodhitau kīraśārī


                          354
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

padyairhṛdyairahṛdyairapi sukhaśayanādutthitau tau
sakhībhiḥ

dṛṣṭau hṛṣṭau tadātvoditaratilalitau kakkhaṭīgīḥsaśaṅkau

rādhākṛṣṇau satṛṣṇāvapi nijanijadhānyāptatalpau smarāmi

Many different vaiṣṇava ācāryas in the Śrī Gauḍīya
Sampradāya have written maṅgala-āratis of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa Yugala. However, my Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva’s
maṅgala-ārati has its own unprecedented and unique
speciality. By singing this maṅgala-ārati one is infused
with the bhāvas of the niśānta-līlā of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa in a way which can not be found anywhere else. The
whole maṅgala-ārati is as follows:

maṅgala śrī guru-gaura maṅgala mūrati

maṅgala śrī rādhā-kṛṣṇa yugala pīriti (1)

maṅgala niśānta līlā maṅgala udaye

maṅgala ārati jāge bhakata hṛdaye (2)

tomāra nidrāya jīva nidrita dharāya

tava jāgaraṇe viśva jāgarita haya (3)

śubha dṛṣṭi kara ebe jagatera prati

jāguka hṛdaye mora sumaṅgalā rati (4)

mayūra śukādi sāri kata pikarāja

maṅgala jāgara hetu kariche virāja (5)

sumadhura dhvani kare jata śākhī-gaṇa

maṅgala śravaṇe bāje madhura kūjana (6)

kusumita sarovare kamala-hillola

maṅgala saurabha bahe pavana kallola (7)

jhāñjhara kāṅsara ghaṇṭā śaṅkha karatāla

maṅgala mṛdaṅga bāje parama rasāla (8)

maṅgala ārati kare bhakatera gaṇa

abhāgā keśava kare nāma-saṅkīrtana (9)

“Glories to the auspicious forms of Śrī Guru and Gaura
and all glories to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s auspicious amorous
love.

“All glories to Their auspicious niśānta-līlā which
heralds the end of night and to Their auspicious
awakening, which brings auspiciousness to all! Glories
to maṅgala-ārati which awakens the devotees’ hearts.

“While You sleep, the jīvas lie sleeping deep in their
ignorance, but upon Your rising, the whole world
awakens. (If you manifest in their hearts, then all

                          355
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

tattva and all siddhānta will be revealed to them).

“Please bestow Your kind glance upon the world and
awaken in my heart that most auspicious rati.

“The peacocks, parrots, śuka, sāri and cuckoos all exist
solely to sing for Your auspicious awakening.

“Sitting in the branches of the trees, all the birds
sing their supremely sweet morning melodies which
resound throughout the forest. Those sweet, soft,
auspicious sounds grace everyone.

“Varieties of flowers, with lotuses in the centre, fill
the pond and sway with the waves. Breezes carry
auspicious aromas of pure delight and joy everywhere.

“Large cymbals, gongs, bells, conches, karatālas and
auspicious mṛdaṅgas play the supreme rasa.

“Performing maṅgala ārati in the company of devotees,
Śrī Keśava dāsa sings nāma-saṅkīrtana.”

The jīva is constitutionally a servant of Bhagavān.
Unfortunately, the jīva who has fallen into this
illusory world, being averse to Bhagavān since time
immemorial, is burnt by the three-fold miseries in the
cycle of repeated birth and death. Only by great fortune
does the jīva take shelter at the lotus feet of a sad-
guru and follow the path of śuddha-bhakti. At that time
he realizes that Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī Gaurasundara, and Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala are the embodiment of
auspiciousness for the whole world. The ultimate goal of
the jīva is to attain prema for the lotus feet of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. The life of that person in whose heart
prema for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa has arisen is actually
significant, meaningful and profitable. This condition
is the ultimate good fortune of all jīvas.

By the mercy of the all-auspicious Bhagavān and His
devotee, when a practitioner of bhakti goes on
practising uttama-bhakti, he gradually crosses the
successive stages of śraddhā, niṣṭhā, ruci and āsakti.
At that time śuddha-sattva, which is the combined
essence of the hlādinī and saṁvit aspects of the
svarūpa-śakti, becomes self-manifest in the heart. Then
that fortunate sādhaka’s pure intrinsic spiritual form,
name, mood and other aspects also become manifest in his
heart. By the association of tattva-jña and rasika
bhaktas, he is naturally attracted to perform nāma-
kīrtana with bhāva and to remember the aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā
(eight-fold pastimes). Only in the heart of a jīva who
has received such good fortune is maṅgala niśānta-līlā
manifested. The same love-laden maṅgala-ārati which the
priya-narma-sakhīs perform in the transcendental abode
of Vṛndāvana during Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala’s
niśānta-līlā is specifically bestowed in the heart of
such a sādhaka.

This auspicious rati does not manifest without the mercy
of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa or Their associates, and until
this auspicious rati is manifested, the transcendental
maṅgala-ārati will also not manifest itself. Therefore
the bhakti-sādhaka prays piteously in great distress to

                          356
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

receive such good fortune (verses 1-4).

This prayer causes the auspicious ārati of Śrī Śrī Rādhā
Kṛṣṇa Yugala to manifest in the heart of the rāgānuga-
sādhaka. Losing external consciousness of his body and
this world, he sees with his eternal form 'mayūra śukādi
sāri kata pikarāja maṅgala jāgara hetu kariche virāja'
(verse 5).

The time of dawn is quickly approaching. In some
pleasure grove such as Saṅketa, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala are still asleep, bound by each others’ embrace.
Afraid that everyone will soon wake up, Vṛndā-devī
inspires the birds such as peacocks, male and female
parrots, cuckoos, and papīhā to awaken Śrī Yugala. At
that time, all the birds in the water and on land start
calling in their sweet voices. The description of this
pastime in Śrī Govinda-līlāmṛta touches the heart:

drākṣāsu sāryyaḥ karakeṣu kīrāḥ jaguḥ pikībhiśca pikā
rasāle

pilau kapotāḥ priyake mayūrāḥ latāsu bhṛṅgāḥ bhuvi tāmra
cūḍā

“Female parrots sitting on the grape-vines, parrots on
the pomegranate trees, cuckoos on the branches of the
mango trees, male and female pigeons on the pīlu trees,
male and female peacocks on the kadamba trees, male and
female bumblebees on the creepers and roosters on the
ground—all are produing their sweet sounds.”

The male and female peacock start crying their sweet Ke!
Ka! The male peacocks call out Ke! — “The patience,
shyness and chastity of Śrīmatī Rādhikājī, who is the
personification of mahābhāva, are like a tall mountain.
Who can crush that mountain to powder? Only Kṛṣṇa!” Then
the peahens reply Ka! —”Śrī Kṛṣṇa is like a mad
elephant, sporting with His beloved in the waves of
prema. Who can control that maddened elephant with the
aṅkuśa (goad) of Her love? Only Śrīmatī Rādhikā!”

Swarms of bumblebees blow Cupid’s conch as they buzz
from one flower to another. Parrots like Dakṣa and
Vicakṣaṇa, and female parrots such as Śubhā and
Mañjubhāṣiṇī awaken Śrī Yugala by heralding the
auspicious dawn. Although Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are awakened by
the sweet calling of these birds, They still keep
themselves bound in Their embrace with Their eyes
closed, fearing that the pleasure of that embrace may
vanish.

Here the line ‘maṅgala śravaṇe bāje madhura kūjana’
(verse 6) can have many profound purports. The first
meaning is that the sweet calls of the birds on the
branches of different trees enters the auspicious ears
of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa as a sweet but indistinct sound.
The second meaning is that the sweet sound of the birds
enters the ears of the priya-narma-sakhīs, who are
waiting for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa to wake up. There is
another very confidential meaning of the word kūjana. At
the time of the rati-vilāsa (amorous pastimes) of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, They converse together and exchange
sweet joking words. When this kūjana enters the ears of

                          357
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

priya-narma-sakhīs, it enchants them with love.

Intoxicated bumblebees are humming everywhere in
Vṛndāvana, which is full of many different types of
flowers such as belī, camelī, jūhī, yuthikā, mallikā,
mālatī, jāti and kunda. The clear ponds of fresh, sweet
water are full of lotuses over which swarms of
bumblebees are humming. These lotuses sway at the touch
of the cool, gentle breezes, and they dance in
overwhelming jubilation when waves arise in the pond.

In the midst of all this, everyone hears the word
‘Jaṭilā!’ Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala and Their sakhīs,
full of suspense and eagerness, immediately get ready to
leave the kuñja to go to Their respective palaces.

At this very moment, the internal absorption of the
sādhaka breaks and he regains his external
consciousness. He becomes overwhelmed with grief, but
just then the bell starts ringing in the temple room for
the ārati of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. The doors open
and the devotees start performing the ārati of Śrī Śrī
Yugala Kisora very affectionately. As the devotees dance
and sing maṅgala-ārati, their melodious voices combine
with the sweet sounds of jhāñjhara, kāṅsara, ghaṇṭā,
śaṅkha, karatāla, and mṛdaṅga. Inspired by his previous
absorption in niśānta-līlā, the author of this poem also
starts to perform nāma-saṅkīrtana with the other
devotees. As he sings each verse of the kīrtana, the
bhāvas of niśānta-līlā appear in his heart, soothing his
grief.

I have tried to reveal some of the heart-felt moods of
Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva, following the śākhā-candra-
nyāya (logic of the moon and the branch), and but I know
that I am incapable of collecting even one drop from his
fathomless, endless ocean of rasa. May Śrīla
Gurupādapadma bestow his causeless grace upon this
useless servant, so that I one day may become qualified
for this.



Śrīla Prabhupāda’s ārati

Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva has composed an
exquisite ārati in honour of his worshipful Gurudeva,
Śrīla Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda. When it was
published in Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā, all the disciples and
grand-disciples of Śrīla Prabhupāda became delighted and
ecstatic to read it. Everyone started giving thanks,
either in person or indirectly. Some of the ācāryas of
the Śrī Gauḍīya Matha could not curb their greed to
publish it in their respective magazines, omitting Śrīla
Gurudeva’s name. From then onwards, all the Gauḍīya
Maṭha devotees began to sing Śrīla Gurudeva’s ārati-
kīrtana at the time of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s ārati.

jaya jaya prabhupādera ārati nehārī

yoga māyāpura-nitya sevā-dānakārī (1)

sarvatra pracāra-dhūpa saurabha manohara


                           358
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

baddha mukta alikūla mugdha carācara (2)

bhakati-siddhānta-dīpa jāliyā jagate

pañca-rasa-sevā-śikhā pradīpta tāhāte (3)

pañca mahādīpa yathā pañca mahājyotiḥ

triloka-timira-nāśe avidyā durmati (4)

bhakati vinoda-dhārā jala śaṅkha-dhāra

niravadhi bahe tāhā rodha nāhi āra (5)

sarva-vādya-mayī ghanṭā bāje sarva-kāla

bṛhat-mṛdaṅga vādhya parama rasāla (6)

viśāla lalāṭe śobhe tilaka ujjvala

gala deśe tulasī mālā kare jhalamala (7)

ājānu-lambita bāhū dīrgha kalevara

tapta kāñcana-baraṇa parama sundara (8)

lalita-lāvaṇya mukhe sneha-bharā hāsī

aṅga kānti śobhe jaiche nitya pūrṇa śaśī (9)

yati dharme paridhāne aruṇā vasana

mukta kaila medhāvṛta gauḍīya gagana (10)

bhakati-kusume kata kuñja viracita

saundarye-saurabhe tāra viśva āmodita (11)

sevādarśe narahari cāmara ḍhūlāya

keśava ati ānande nirājana gāya (12)

“All glories, all glories to the ārati ceremony of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda, which bestows
eternal service at the Yoga-pīṭha in Māyāpura on those
who observe it. (1)

“Like the enchanting fragrance of incense, his preaching
has spread everywhere, astonishing all devotees, both
liberated and conditioned, and all living entities, both
moving and non-moving. (2)

“He lit up the entire world with the lamp of the perfect
conclusions of pure devotion. This lamp is composed of
five brilliantly glowing flames which represent service
in the five primary rasas. (3)

“The five flames of the ārati lamp are like five radiant
lights which represent the five rasas, and which destroy
the darkness of ignorance and crooked intelligence
throughout the three worlds. (4)

“The water in the conch shell is the conception of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhakura, which flows continually and which

                          359
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

cannot be checked by anyone. (5)

“Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, which is accompanied by karatālas, bells
and other instruments, resounds for all time, but really
it is the printing press, known as the bṛhat-mṛdaṅga,
which distributes the supreme rasa. (6)

“Resplendent tilaka adorns his broad forehead, and
around his neck shines a necklace of tulasī beads. (7)

“His long arms extend to his knees and his golden
complexion is supremely beautiful. (8)

“His charming, lovely face displays a smile which is
full of affection, and his bodily complexion is like a
perpetually full moon. (9)

“Attired in daybreak-coloured cloth, which signifies the
religious principles of sannyāsa, he nullifies the
misconceptions which were like clouds covering the clear
Gauḍīya sky, and establishes the doctrine of pure
bhakti. (10)

“The different stages of bhakti (bhāva, prema, sneha,
etc.) are like very fragrant flowers which comprise a
splendid kuñja, and the beauty and fragrance of this
kuñja delights the entire universe. (11)

“As Narahari Prabhu, the ideal servant, fans Śrīla
Prabhu-pāda with a cāmara, Keśava dāsa sings this ārati
song with great delight. (12)”

Among the tridaṇḍi-sannyāsīs who took shelter of
Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhupāda, Pūjyapāda Tridaṇḍisvāmī
Śrīmad Bhakti Bhūdeva Śrautī Mahāraja, was very
prominent. He was expert in scriptures such as the
Vedas, the Upaniṣads, the Purāṇas, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
Gītā, and he was deeply respected in the Sārasvata
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya. When he read this ārati-
kīrtana, he immediately came to Śrīdhāma Navadvipa from
his maṭha in Jhāḍagrāma Medinīpura and congratulated
Śrīla Gurudeva: “Mahāraja! It is very surprising that we
could not recognize you until now, although we have been
living closely together in guru-gṛha (Śrīla Gurudeva’s
āśrama) for such a long time. Your heart is so full of
pure bhakti and such guru-niṣṭhā (profound and
unflinching faith for Śrīla Gurudeva) but we could not
catch even the slightest scent of it. We thought that
you were only expert in managing and other worldly
tasks, but all our conceptions about you have been
proved to be mistaken. Today, by great fortune, it seems
that Śrīla Prabhupāda is adoring your incomparable guru-
niṣṭhā and the unmatched quality of your bhakti. I think
that he is personally sitting in your heart and
manifesting through you these wonderful moods of pure
bhakti, which are full of beautiful siddhāntas. You are
glorious. We hope that you will continue to bestow
limitless benefit on the world by composing more
unprecedented poems, prayers, essays, and articles in
the future.”

We will now explain some of the deep moods contained in
the stanzas of this ārati.


                          360
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

Verse 1. Yoga māyāpura-nitya sevā-dānakārī. The topmost
part of Goloka is called Vraja, Vṛndāvana or Gokula and
next to this is Svetadvīpa or Navadvīpa. In the heart of
this Navadvīpa-dhāma is Śrīdhāma Māyāpura. Here
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the form of Śrī
Śacīnandana Gaurahari relishes various types of bhāvas
with His eternal associates, having accepted the bodily
lustre and intrinsic moods of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. It is
very rare for jīvas to attain the great fortune of
entering the most munificent Śrī Gaura līlā. Nayaṇa
Mañjarī of Śrī Kṛṣṇa līlā is Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Ṭhākura in Śrī Gaura līlā. His eternal
form is described in his praṇāma-mantra.

śrī-vārṣabhānavī-devī-dayitāya kṛpābdhaye

kṛsṇa-sambandha-vijñāna-dāyine prabhave namaḥ

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura as Śrī Nayaṇa
Mañjarī is the most dear sakhī of Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the
embodiment of unnatojjvala-madhura-rasa.To those who
take shelter of him, he awards the rare gift of eternal
service to the ocean of compassion, Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari. Śrīla Prabhupāda, who is the best among the
followers of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, also mercifully bestows
the rarely obtained service of Śrī Gaurahari on those
who perform or even witness this ārati. This ārati is
extraordinary and transcendental, and has unique and
distinctive features which cannot be seen in other
āratis.

Verse 2. Śrīla Prabhupāda propagated śuddha-bhakti and
established preaching centres all over the world by
sending his brahmacārīs, sannyasīs, disciples and grand-
disciples to the nine islands of Navadvīpa, and then to
all the important cities, and even to mountains and
forests, all over India and around the globe. By the
aroma of his nectarean preaching, all kinds of
conditioned and liberated jīvas were and are attracted
to follow śuddha-bhakti. In ordinary arcana, incense is
offered first to śrī vigraha. The fragrance of that
incense is confined to the temple, whereas the aroma of
the preaching of śuddha-bhakti delights and attracts the
whole world. This is the transcendental distinction of
the incense of preaching śuddha-bhakti.

If Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda had not propagated śuddha-
bhakti everywhere, then the whole world would have been
completely deprived of the benefit of śuddha-bhakti, and
thus would have remained inauspicious. People from West
Bengal and other parts of India would also have been
completely deprived of śuddha-bhakti, that is rāgānuga-
bhakti and especially rupānuga-bhakti. His means of
preaching, which was to publish and distribute bhakti
literature, is unprecedented; it was never heard of or
seen before. In this way, he created a new wave of the
bhakti revolution throughout the world. Far from India,
in large and small countries of the western and eastern
world, small children, young boys and girls, men, women
and old people can be seen completely immersed in the
Vedic culture. One can see them everywhere in these
countries, holding japa-mala in their hands, and wearing
tilaka and śikhās. Jumping and dancing to the beat of

                          361
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

mṛdaṅga and karatālas they perform nāma-sankīrtana in
their homes, in their temples and on the streets. Huge
temples of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda,
Śrī Jagannatha-Baladeva-Subhadra and other śrī-vigraha
have been established in these places. All this is the
contribution of the mahā-puruṣa, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda.

Verse 3. In arcana of śrī-vigraha, the dīpa (ghee lamp)
is offered after the incense. In this unique arcana, the
wicks of the amp are the siddhāntas of bhakti. The
bhakti doctrines are ten in number (daśa-mūla-tattva):

i) Scriptures such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam which have been
accepted by guru-parampara are the best pramāṇa
(authentic evidence).

ii) Vrajendranandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Absolute Truth.

iii) He is sarva-śaktimān, the possessor and master of
all potencies.

iv) He is the reservoir of all the rasas.

v) Both the conditioned and liberated souls are His
vibhinnāṁśa-tattva, His separated parts and parcels.

vi) Conditioned souls are controlled by māyā.

vii) Liberated souls are free from māyā.

viii)The spiritual and material worlds are
manifestations of Śrī Hari, and are inconceivably and
simultaneously one with Him and different from Him.

ix) Bhakti is the only means of sādhana.

x) Love of Kṛṣṇa is the only goal.

These ten doctrines of bhakti are like roots and
medicinal herbs and the essential juice of these roots
and herbs is the ghee which burns in the wicks of this
ghee lamp. The five great wicks are the five types of
sthayī-bhāva, and the five types of rasa—śānta, dāsya,
sakhya, vātsalya and madhura—are the five flames.

Verse 4. The rays of these effulgent flames are the
constituents of bhakti-rasa, namely vibhāva, anubhāva,
sāttvika and vyabhicārī. The darkness of ignorance of
the three worlds is destroyed forever by the powerful
effulgence of this ghee lamp, characterized by the five
transcendental tongues of flame. When the conditioned
souls see this effulgence, the darkness of their wicked
intelligence and aversion to Kṛṣṇa is dispelled. Thus
the effect of this extraordinary lamp completely
destroys darkness or avidyā. Who lit this lamp in the
present age? The lamp of the siddhānta of bhakti was
ignited by Śrī Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.

Verse 5. After incense and the ghee lamp, water is
offered in a conchshell. Here, the conchshell is bhakti-
vinodana, the transcendental delight (vinodana) of
bhakti. (In other words, the conch shell is Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura). The water in the conchshell is

                          362
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

the pure and fragrant flow of śrī rūpānuga-bhakti
released by Bhakti-Bhagīratha Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura. The current flows from this conchshell
eternally and uninterruptedly, like an unbroken stream
of oil, and will continue to flow in the future as well;
this current of bhakti will never be interrupted. The
stream of water from this conch shell will continue to
shower fortunate souls in this world, so that they drown
in bhagavat-rasa.

Verse 6. The bell is very important in the arcana of śrī
vigraha. It is essential to ring the bell, which is
sarva-vādya-mayī (the sum total of all musical sounds),
while offering incense, lamp and other ingredients. The
role of the bell which keeps ringing eternally in this
extraordinary ārati is also quite unique. This
transcendental bell is powerful hari-kathā. The whole
life of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura was
permeated with hari-kathā; in fact he is the embodiment
of hari-kathā. His hari-kathā would never stop, even for
a moment. It would automatically start to flow, even
when he saw innocent children or plants and bees. His
hari-kathā was so potent and effective that anyone who
heard it would immediately become inspired with bhakti.

Kīrtana is also essential during the performance of
arcana. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has written in his Bhakti-
sandarbha, yadyapy anyā bhakti kalau karttavyā tadā
kīrtanākhyā bhakti saṁyogenaiva: “If anyone executes
other limbs of bhakti, he should perform harināma
saṅkīrtana at the same time. In Kali-yuga, performing
any sādhana independent of saṅkīrtana will not bear any
fruits.” Thus it is essential to perform kīrtana while
doing arcana. Saṅkīrtana is divided into different types
such as nāma-kīrtana, rūpa-kīrtana, guṇa-kīrtana and
līlā-kīrtana. Amongst these, nāma-kīrtana is the best of
all: tāra madhye sarva śreṣṭha nāma-saṅkīrtana.

The mṛdaṅga is another essential part of saṅkīrtana. The
contribution of the bṛhad-mṛdaṅga—that is, the printing
press— is of the utmost importance in the ārati
propagated by Śrīla Prabhupāda. The sound of an ordinary
mṛdaṅga is very limited, but the bhakti literatures
published by the bṛhad-mṛdaṅga reach every corner of the
world. They enter the hearts of sādhaka bhaktas, and
make them dance in the ecstasy of harināma-saṅkīrtana.
The sound of this bṛhad-mṛdaṅga never stops. It
eternally arises in the hearts of the devotees, and
keeps inspiring them. All glories and victory to the
ārati of Śrīla Prabhupāda, who has established this
bṛhad-mṛdaṅga!

Verses 7 and 8. Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva has
described the divine beauty of Om Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīla
Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s transcendental
body, in this ārati-kīrtana. “My most worshipful Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda is most dear to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā as Śrī Nayana Mañjarī. However, out of
humility, he has manifested his name in this world as
Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī, covering
his previous name, form and so on. Thus he has shown the
ideal of tṛṇād-apisunīca, becoming more humble than a
blade of grass.


                          363
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

“His broad forehead is beautified by urddhva puṇḍra
tilaka. Three strands of tulasī beads shine brilliantly
around his neck. His long arms reach down to his knees,
his stature is tall, he has beautiful and well-built
limbs, and his bodily complexion defeats the lustre of
pure gold. All these symptoms of a mahā-purusa announce
in unison that he is a great personality.

Verses 9-12. “An affectionate smile is always playing on
his charming and lustrous lips. He has adopted saffron-
coloured garments such as dora-kaupīna, bahirvāsa and
uttarīya according to sannyāsa-dharma. The illuminating
light from these garments has destroyed the dense
darkness of the clouds which covered the Gauḍiya sky
after the disappearance of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura and Baladeva Vidyābhuṣaṇa Prabhu. He has
established preaching centres of śuddha-bhakti all over
India and abroad. These preaching centres are like the
vilāsa-kuñjas (pleasure groves) of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa.
Fashioned from the flowers of the bhakti-latā, their
beauty and fragrance delights the whole world.

This ārati of Śrīla Prabhupāda is eternally present in
Māyāpura Dhāma. His dearmost Śrī Narahari Sevā-vigraha
Prabhu is fanning Śrīla Prabhupāda with a cāmara. In
this way, Śrī Keśava is blissfully performing the ārati-
kīrtana”.

Today, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas everywhere affectionately sing
this beautiful ārati-kīrtana which Śrīla Gurudeva
composed.



Śrī Tulasī parikramā and ārati

For some time the Śrī Gauḍīya Sārasvata Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya had no kīrtana to sing at the time of Śrī
Tulasī parikramā and ārati. Some devotees used to sing
Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa’s ‘tulasī kṛṣṇa preyasī namo namaḥ/
vilāsa-kuñja diyo vāsa.’ This is appropriate for highly
elevated rāgānuga-sādhakas, but not for vaidhī-bhakti-
sādhakas, who do not possess the greed to reside in
vilāsa-kuñja.

Others used to sing Candraśekhara’s ‘namo re namo re
maiya namo nārāyaṇi.’ This is appropriate for Vaiṣṇavas
of the Śrī Rāmānuja Sampradāya, because in this song
Tulasī-devī is addressed as the queen of Śrī Nārāyaṇa
(or Śrī Śālagrāma) who resides in Vaikuṇṭha. Śrī Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas worship Śrī Vṛndā-devī as the most dear sakhī
of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. She is the adhiṣṭhātrī-devī
(presiding Deity) of Vṛndāvana Dhāma, the topmost
section of Goloka, and she is expert in arranging for
the līla-vilāsa of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa there. She
gave her beautiful land of Vṛndāvana to her most dear
sakhī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The intimate
meetings of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Their other pastimes
in the kuñjas become successful only by the help of Śrī
Vṛndā-devī. Tulasī, who is dear to Śrī Nārāyaṇa in
Vaikuṇṭha, is the vaibhava-prakāśa expansion of Vṛndā-
devī. The original Vṛndā-devī can never be the queen of
Śrī Nārāyaṇa or of Śrī Śālagrāma. Thus, Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas worship her in the form of Vrajendra-nandana

                          364
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved sakhī in Vṛndāvana.

For all these reasons, Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva felt
the need for an appropriate prayer which ordinary
sādhakas of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya could
offer at the time of Tulasī parikramā and ārati. Śrī
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas accept Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala and Śrī
Gaurahari as one non-dual para-tattva, and Śrīla
Gurudeva has included this siddhānta in the beautiful
prayer which he composed. The whole of the Sārasvata
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya has accepted this prayer,
which is complete in all respects, and is brimming with
philosophical conclusions. The prayer is as follows:

namo namaḥ tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ)

rādhā-kṛṣṇa nitya-sevā — 'ei abhilāṣī' (1)

je tomāra śaraṇa loya, sei kṛṣṇa sevā pāya,

kṛpā kori koro tāre 'vṛndāvana-vāsī'

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (2)

tomāra caraṇe dhari, more anugata kari,

gaurahari-sevā-magna rākha divā niśi

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (3)

dīnera ei abhilāṣa, māyāpure/navadvīpe dio vāsa,

aṅgete mākhiba sadā dhāma dhūli rāśi

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (4)

tomāra ārati lāgi, dhūpa, dīpa, puṣpa māṅgī,

mahimā bākhāni ebe hau more khuśī

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (5)

jagatera jata phūla, kabhu nahe samatula,

sarvatyaji kṛṣṇa tava patra mañjarī vilāsī

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (6)

ogo vṛnde mahārānī!

tomāra pādapa tale, deva ṛṣi kutūhale,

sarvatīrtha loye tāṅrā hana adhivāsī

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (7)

śrī-keśava ati dīna, sādhana-bhajana-hīna,

tomāra āśraye sadā nāmānande bhāsi

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (8)

Verse 1. First of all, obeisances are offered to Śrī
Tulasī or Vṛndā-devī as the beloved of Kṛṣṇa. She has

                          365
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

been described as a very compassionate sakhī who bestows
the eternal service of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala.

Verse 2. “To those who take shelter of you, you kindly
award Kṛṣṇa sevā and the fortune of eternal residence in
Vṛndāvana.”

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has glorified
Śrīmatī Vṛndā-devī in his Śrī Vṛndādevyāṣṭakam:

samasta-vaikuṇṭha-śiromanau śrī

kṛṣṇasya vṛndāvana-dhanya-dhāmni

dattādhikare vṛṣabhānu-putryā

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam

tvad-ājñayā pallava-puṣpa-bhṛṅga-

mṛgādibhir mādhava-keli-kuñjāḥ

madhv-ādibhir bhānti vibhūṣyamānā

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam

tvadīya-dutyena nikuñja-yūnor

atyutkayoḥ keli-vilāsa-siddhiḥ

tvat-saubhagaṁ kena nirucyatām tad

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam

rāsābhilāṣo vasatiś ca vṛndā-

vane tvad-īśāṅghri-saroja-sevā

labhyā ca puṁsāṁ kṛpayā tavaiva

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam

tvaṁ kīrtyase sātvata-tantra-vidbhir

līlābhidhānā kila kṛṣṇa-śaktiḥ

tavaiva mūrtis tulasī nṛ-loke

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam

bhaktyā vihinā aparādhra-lakṣaiḥ

kṣiptaś ca kāmādi-taraṅga-madhye

kṛpāmayi! tvāṁ śaranaṁ prapannā

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam

“Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-rāja-nandinī Śrī Rādhikā has given you
authority over the most sacred abode of Kṛṣṇa,
Vṛndāvana, which is fully endowed with unlimited
qualities and is the crown jewel of all the Vaikuṇṭha
planets. On your order the loveliness of the spring
season eternally maintains the supreme beauty of Śrī

                          366
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa’s Vṛndāvana pleasure groves, which are decorated
with different types of leaves and fragrant flowers, and
are full of bumblebees, deer, peacocks, male and female
parrots, and other birds and animals.

“The pleasure pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who are
always eager to relish such loving exchanges, are only
made successful by your assistance as an extremely
skilled envoy. In other words, you become a duti (a
female messenger) just to arrange Their union, which
would otherwise be very difficult. You assist in many
different ways to bring about the success of Their līlā-
vilāsa. Who in this world can describe the limit of your
fortune? I repeatedly offer my praṇāmas at your lotus
feet.

“He Vṛnde! By your mercy the greed to have darśana of
śrī rasa-līlā arises in the heart of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees.
By your mercy they obtain residence in Śrī Vṛndāvana-
dhāma, and receive service to the lotus feet of their
Praṇa-vallabha Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Madhava. I repeatedly offer
obeisances at your lotus feet.

“He Vrnde! In the tantra literature composed by devotees
such as Śrī Nārada, expert and learned scholars have
described you as the līlā-śakti (pastime potency) of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. You expand yourself in this world as the renowned
Śrī Tulasī-devī. I offer my obeisances unto you again
and again.

“O compassionate Devī! I am devoid of bhakti, and I am
full of hundreds of offences, and because of this I am
sinking in the waves of lust, anger and all base
qualities in this ocean of material existence. I
surrender at your lotus feet because I have no other
alternative. Please be merciful and deliver me from the
impassable material ocean. I offer my obeisances at your
lotus feet again and again. O Vrnde! Beloved of Kṛṣṇa!
Please be merciful to this surrendered soul and give me
residence in Vṛndāvana.”

Verse 3. Śrīla Gurudeva continues in his ārati-kīrtana,
“O Vrnde! We pray at your lotus feet again and again.
Please give us your anugatya (guidance) and bestow upon
us the service of Śrī Gaurahari, who is Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself, endowed with the internal mood and effulgent
lustre of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, so that we may be immersed
day and night in that service.”

Someone may raise the question, “Śrīmatī Tulasī is the
beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and she can bestow Kṛṣṇa sevā. How,
then, can she give the service of Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari?” The answer is, “Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are abhinna-para-tattva (non-different
Absolute Truth). Līlā-puruṣottama Śrī Kṛṣṇa is rasika-
śekhara and parama-karuṇa. He adopts the mood and
complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and appears in the form of
Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari to distribute rāgamarga-bhakti
and to fulfil his own three internal desires. These are:
(1) to know the greatness of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s love; (2)
to know the sweetness of His form, qualities, flute and
pastimes, which Śrīmatī Rādhikā relishes through Her
love; and (3) to know the happiness that Śrīmatī Rādhikā
derives on tasting His sweetness. Therefore Śrī Tulasī-

                          367
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

devī is also very dear to Śrī Gaurahari and can
certainly give service to Him and love for Him”.

Almost all the associates of Kṛṣṇa appeared with Śrī
Gaurahari in male forms; very few appeared in female
forms. In Kali-yuga, Śrī Vṛndā-devī has also appeared in
the form of the tulasī tree to make Kṛṣṇa bhakti more
easily attainable. Śrīla Advaita Ācārya, who is the
avatāra of Mahāviṣṇu, adopted the easiest and most
effective process to entreat Śrī Kṛṣṇa to advent in this
world. The method of worship was to offer some tulasī
leaves with Ganges water to Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
and with great eagerness to chant the name of Kṛṣṇa
loudly. Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared in this world
by the influential and infallible worship of Śrī Advaita
Ācārya. Thus, Śrī Tulasī Mahārāṇī can give the service
of Śrī Gaurahari.

Verse 4. “O Vṛnde! O beloved of Kṛṣṇa! I repeatedly
offer obeisances unto your lotus feet. Please be
merciful to this insignificant and destitute soul who
has surrendered unto you, and allow me to have some
place to reside in Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrī Māyāpura or Śrī
Navadvīpa Dhāma. Then I will be able to smear the dust
of these transcendental dhāmas profusely on my body and,
maddened with prema, I may perform kīrtana of the names
of Śrī Gaurahari or Kṛṣṇa.

Verse 5. “O Tulasī-devī! Beloved of Kṛṣṇa! I have
collected sixteen items of worship such as incense, a
lamp, flowers and naivedya (offerings of edibles) to
perform your ārati, and I am affectionately performing
your ārati with these items. At the same time, I am
glorifying you with saṅkīrtana. You are the līlā-śakti
(pastime potency) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and you are most dear to
Him. You are capable of giving prema-bhakti for Śrī
Gaurahari and Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. May you be
pleased with me. This is my repeated prayer at your
lotus feet.

Verse 6. “O Tulasī-devī! Beloved of Kṛṣṇa! There are
varieties of beautiful flowers in the world, such as
belī, camelī, jūhī, kevaḍa and kamala, but they are
insignificant compared with you. Śrī Kṛṣṇa rejects all
these different flowers and accepts only your leaves and
mañjarīs. Kṛṣṇa enjoys pastimes with His beloved Śrīmatī
Rādhikā in your Vṛndā kuñja. According to Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, the four Kumāras became enchanted by the
aroma of the honey of the tulasī leaves which were
offered at the Lord’s lotus feet, and that is why they
came to Vaikuṇṭha to have His darśana. All other flowers
lack this wonderful power. The makaranda (honey) and
aroma of Śrī Tulasī attracts even Kṛṣṇa Himself.”

Once, Śrī Kṛṣṇa visited Kurukṣetra at the time of the
solar eclipse with His 16,108 queens and all the Dvārakā
vasīs. After taking bath for the last time at the end of
the eclipse, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dear Satyabhāmā wanted to weigh
Kṛṣṇa on a scale against a heap of gold and then give
that gold to Śrī Nārada in charity. Śrī Kṛṣṇa sat on one
pan of the scale and Satyabhāmā put all her gold
ornaments on the other pan. After that, His other queens
put all their ornaments on the pan, and then more and
more golden pots were added, but the pan with the gold

                          368
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                     5/5/2017

was still far too light. The queens did not know what to
do, but by Śrī Nārada’s inspiration they surrendered to
Vṛndāvaneśvari Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Śrīmatī Rādhikā removed
the pile of gold from the pan and replaced it with one
tulasī leaf dipped in Her tears. No sooner had She done
that than Kṛṣṇa’s pan lifted and the pan with the tulasī
leaf sank down and touched the ground. Everyone was
struck with wonder to see the glories of this one tulasī
leaf. In this way we see that the leaves and mañjarīs of
tulasī are superior to all other leaves and flowers.
There is no doubt of this conclusion.

Verse 7. Śrīla Gurudeva goes on: “O Tulasī! Beloved of
Kṛṣṇa! All the devatās and ṛṣis, along with all the
places of pilgrimage, eagerly reside under your
purifying shade just to attain your mercy. You can
fulfil all their desires. I am very insignificant and
quite worthless. I simply surrender unto you and offer
you my praṇāmas again and again.”

There are many authetic statements in śāstra to prove
that all the devatās and sages worship tulasī to attain
bhagavad-bhakti and that all the pilgrimage places
reside under the shade of the divine tulasī tree. Śrī
Tulasī-devī is served in various ways.

dṛṣṭā spṛṣṭā tathā dhyātā kīrtitā namitā stutā

ropitā sevitā nityaṁ pūjitā tulasī śubhā

navadhā tulasīṁ devīṁ ye bhajanti dine dine

yugakoṭi sahastrāni te vasanti harer gṛhe

“Śrī Tulasī is very auspicious and she bestows unlimited
good fortune upon those who take her darśana, touch her,
meditate upon her, sing her glories, offer praṇāms to
her, hear her glories, plant , serve or worship her.
Those who serve Tulasī in these nine ways reside in Śrī
Hari’s abode for thousands of yugas (i.e. eternally).”

Hence this tulasī parikramā and ārati kīrtana which our
most revered Śrīla Gurudeva has composed is of great
benefit to all kinds of bhakti-sādhakas.



Śrī Caitanya Pañjikā (Śrī Māyāpura Pañjikā)

(Paramārādhya Śrīla Gurudeva’s opinion about Śrī
Caitanya Pañjikā)

Jagadguru Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhu-
pāda is the founder of Śrī Caitanya Pañjikā (calendar),
which protects Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s line. This
pañjikā expounds the proper concepts and conduct
according to the pure siddhānta of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, following exclusively in the footsteps of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. This is why, in short, we have called
this pañjikā ‘Śrī Caitanya Pañjikā.’ Another name for
this is ‘Śrī Māyāpura Pañjikā’, because Śrī Māyāpura is
the place of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s appearance.
Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhu-pāda has written that Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is actually the great person who

                          369
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                    5/5/2017

initiated the tradition of ‘Śrī Caitanyābda.’

Today there are many pañjikās which have been popular
for many years. However, they cannot be called complete
paṅcāṅga in all respects, for they have many
deficiencies. They do not even mention any appropriate
vaiṣṇava titles for the time periods. Not only that, but
the ascertainment of time in connection with vratassuch
as fast days, the consideration of śuddha (pure) and
biddha (mixed) periods, and the system for ascertaining
auspicious times for travelling cause impediments. We
clearly see the absence of the pure guidance of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīla Prabhupāda in these
pañjikās, and there is certainly a dire need for an
authentic vaiṣṇava pañjikā, exactly following in their
pure line. Śrī Caitanya Pañjikā has appeared to fulfil
this purpose. For the information of the people in
general, we are presenting the titles of the different
divisions of time, which are found in the Viṣṇu-
dharmottara and Hayaśīrṣa Pañcarātra. We are providing a
list of these titles for the devotees of Viṣṇu.

(A) The two Movements of the Sun

(i) Northern, uttarāyaṇa—Balabhadra

(ii) Southern, dakṣiṇāyana—Kṛṣṇa

(B) The Six Seasons

(i) summer—Puṇḍarīkākṣa

(ii) rainy season—Bhogaśāyī

(iii) autumn—Padmanābha

(iv) hemanta—Hṛṣīkeśa

(v) winter—Devatrivikrama

(vi) spring—Mādhava

(C) The Two Phases and Additional Month (malamāsa)

(i) kṣaya or malamāsa—Puruṣottama

(ii) dark fortnight (kṛṣṇa-pakṣa)—Pradyumna, Kṛṣṇa

(iii) light fortnight (śukla-pakṣa)—Aniruddha, Gaura

(D) The Twelve Months

(i) Vaiśākha—Madhusūdana

(ii) Jyeṣṭha—Trivikrama

(iii) Āṣāḍha—Vāmana

(iv) Śrāvana—Śrīdhara

(v) Bhādra—Hṛṣīkeśa

(vi) Āśvina—Padmanābha


                            370
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

(vii) Kārtika—Dāmodara

(viii) Agrahāyaṇa—Keśava

(ix) Pauṣa—Nārāyaṇa

(x) Māgha—Mādhava

(xi) Phālguna—Govinda

(xii) Caitra—Viṣṇu

(E) Days of the Week

(i) Sunday—Sarva—Vāsudeva

(ii) Monday—Sarvaśiva—Sāṅkarṣaṇa

(iii) Tuesday—Sthānu—Pradyumna

(iv) Wednesday—Bhūta—Aniruddha

(v) Thursday—Ādikāraṇodaśāyī

(vi) Friday—Nidhi—Garbhodaśāyī

(vii) Saturday—Avyaya—Kṣīrodaśāyī

(F) The Sixteen tithis

(i) First day of the lunar cycle—pratipadā—Brahmā

(ii) Second day of the lunar cycle—dvitīyā—Śrīpati

(iii) Third day of the lunar cycle—tritīyā—Viṣṇu

(iv) Fourth day of the lunar cycle—caturthī—Kapila

(v) Fifth day of the lunar cycle—pañcamī—Śrīdhara

(vi) Sixth day of the lunar cycle—ṣaṣṭhī—Prabhu

(vii) Seventh day of the lunar cycle—saptamī—Dāmodara

(viii) Eighth day of the lunar cycle—aṣṭamī—Hṛṣikeśa

(ix) Ninth day of the lunar cycle—navamī—Govinda

(x) Tenth day of the lunar cycle—daśami—Madhusūdana

(xi) Eleventh day of the lunar cycle—ekādaśī—Bhūdhara

(xii) Twelve day of the lunar cycle—dvādaśī—Gadī

(xiii) Thirteenth day of the lunar cycle—trayodaśī—
Śaṅkhī

(xiv) Fourteenth day of the lunar cycle—caturdaśī—Padmī

(xv) Full moon day and dark moon day—purṇimā and

amāvasyā—Cakrī

(G) Twenty-seven Constellations (nakṣatra)

                            371
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


(i) aśvinī—dhātā

(ii) bharaṇī—kṛṣṇa

(iii) kṛttikā—viśva

(iv) rohiṇī—viṣṇu

(v) mṛgaśirā—vaṣaṭkāra

(vi) ārdrā—bhūtabhavyabhavat prabhu

(vii) punarvasu—bhūtabhṛt

(viii) puṣyā—bhūtakṛt

(ix) aśleṣā—bhāva

(x) maghā—bhūtātmā

(xi) purvaphālgunī—bhūtabhāvana

(xii) uttara phālgunī—avyakta

(xiii) hastā—puṇḍarīkākṣa

(xiv) citrā—viśvakarmā

(xv) svāti—śuciśravā

(xvi) viśākhā—sadbhāva

(xvii) anurādhā—bhāvana

(xviii)jyeṣṭhā—bharttā

(xix) mūlā—prabhava

(xx) pūrvāṣāḍhā—prabhu

(xxi) uttarāṣāḍhā—īśvara

(xxii) śravaṇā—aprameya

(xxiii)dhaṇiṣṭhā—hṛṣīkeśa

(xxiv) śatabhiṣā—padmanābha

(xxv) purvabhādrapada—amaraprabhu

(xxvi) uttarabhādrapada—agrāhya

(xxvii)revatī—śāśvata



Statement about Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā

The nature of Śrī Patrikā

(An article by Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja
from the first edition of Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā, 14th
March, 1949)

                            372
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā4 is the journal of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti. Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti is wholly and
solely dedicated to the service of the Navadvīpa-dhāma
Pracāriṇī Sabhā, which was founded by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, and of the Śrī Viśva Vaiṣṇava Rāja Sabhā which
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī founded. Since the Samiti is the
foremost and very dear servant of both these assemblies
(sabhās) it is their non-different personification.
Hence we should understand that the journal of Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti is the journal of both
assemblies.

The form of Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā is non-different from
Śrī Sajjana-toṣaṇī, the journal of the Navadvīpa-dhāma
Pracariṇī Sabhā, and from Sāptāhika-gauḍīya, the journal
of the Viśva Vaiṣṇava Rāja Sabhā. Therefore the mood,
language, and line of Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā is non-
different from the mood, language, and line of Śrīla
Prabhupāda and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. In short, Śrī
Gauḍīya Patrikā exclusively promotes the message of
Śrīla Rūpa and Raghunātha.

The circulation period of Sajjana-toṣanī and Gauḍīya

Śrī Sajjana-toṣanī was first published approximately
about 67 years ago, under the editorial guidance of
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. He continued it for about
seventeen years, after which Śrīla Prabhupāda became the
editor for seven years, so the publication of Sajjana-
toṣanī went on for about twenty-four years.

Later, in 1922, the current director of Śrī Gauḍīya
Patrikā5 began to publish a weekly magazine called
Gauḍīya as the non-different form of the monthly
Sajjana-toṣanī magazine. This journal also maintained
its publication for about 24 years, disappearing in
about the year 1946.

The cause of the appearance of Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā

After the disappearance of Śrīla Prabhupāda, his staunch
and intimate servants preached pure hari-kathā,
following his internal moods. However, owing to various
types of divine and demonic incidents, they were unable
to continue the real service of the weekly Gauḍīya and,
while feigning dependence on guru, they actually became
independent. From then on, the principles on which
Gauḍīya was based were changed without any check or
opposition. It simply supported the policy, ūṅcī dukāna
phīkī pakarāṇ: “The shop is great but the food is
tasteless.” In other words, a third class product was
distributed on the strength of the Gauḍīya’s good name.
Many people tried to save the skeletal body of the
Gauḍīya with poisonous and foul-smelling oil, but their
hearts were completely devoid of the real essence, and
the Gauḍīya gradually wasted away. The real food of the
Gauḍīya is the siddhānta of bhakti following in the
footsteps of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and dedicated to the
service to Śrī Hari, guru and Vaiṣṇavas. It is
impossible for the Gauḍīya to stay alive in the absence
of this food. There were countless preparations of
inedible and improper foodstuffs, but since they were
imbued with siddhāntic misconceptions and were rooted in

                          373
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

disloyalty to śrī guru, they were useless and failed to
save the life of the Gauḍīya.

After surviving somehow or other for twenty-four years
of its publication, the Gauḍīya disappeared because of
offences committed by its so-called managers. The
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava world was then deprived of the fortune
of plunging into the stream of pure rūpānuga-
bhaktivinoda, as practised and propagated by Śrīla
Prabhupāda. Now Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā has appeared to
bestow this fortune once again.

The purpose of Śrī Patrikā

Nowadays, there are many different journals in the world
of religion, but Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā is completely
different from all of them. This journal will never make
compromises in the fearless and impartial propagation of
the truth. We have found many journals and books which
imitate the pure bhakti-dharma, but which are filled
with misconceptions. Their points of view are opposed to
the transcendental conception of pure śrī rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇavism, as we will show in each respective case.
Some invent the principle of observing festivals by
mixing transcendental smṛti-śāstra with the mundane
smṛti-śāstra. They do not know that the transcendental
substance is never accessible to the mundane senses.
Many other journals discuss illusory conceptions on the
pretext of hari-kathā, and thus actually deal only with
mundane subject matter. These periodicals can give no
pleasure to the hearts of the followers of Śrī
Gaurahari. In some places they cause quarrels and
alliances by relating stories which are opposed to
bhakti, and elsewhere they are filled with self-praise.
In this way they go miles away from pure hari-kathā, and
can bring no happiness to the hearts of devotees.

Some think that they can make the path of bhakti more
advanced or modern by following the conception of
materialistic people, and trying to hide śuddha-bhakti.
Others destroy the beauty of śuddha-bhakti by making
concessions to a particular mundane sampradāya. Śrī
Gauḍīya Patrikā will stay far away from such journals.
When sentiments which are actually opposed to śuddha-
bhakti are unknowingly allowed in bhakti-kathā, they can
prevent service from being revealed in the hearts of the
devotees. With this apprehension, the Patrikā will
always try to caution its readers away from mundane
topics. Those whose hearts are full of masses of non-
devotional conceptions cannot perceive the happiness of
bhakti because of their diseased condition. Śrī Patrikā
will not be able to bring any delight to the hearts of
such readers.

The connection of various ethics with Śrī Gauḍīya

Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā will always engage in critical
analysis of the current of Indian thoughts and in
assessing the extent to which it is connected with the
world of dharma. This Patrikā will have no connection
with political, social, economic and educational
behaviour and activities. At the same time, it will not
silently allow inauspiciousness to appear in the world,
when these ethics create an impediment in the behaviour

                             374
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

and ideas which originate in the ethics of the eternal
sanātana-dhāma.

When we assess the history of India before independence,
we find that the ethics of dharma are the root and
foundation of all ethics. Our indifference towards that
dharma is the main cause of our falldown, but when we
adhere to it, we can attain sovereignty of this world.
Śrī Patrikā will warn all Indians by explaining and
giving examples of this indifferent attitude in every
aspect. Dharma is the speciality of India, and it is
also the life of India. Only because of dharma has India
commanded a place at the head of the world. The key
mantra which unfolds independent India’s victory flag at
the head of the entire world is the best verse of Śrī
Mahāprabhu’s Śikṣāṣṭakā:

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

Śrī Patrikā will always perform kīrtana boldly to teach
the people of the whole world the purport of this verse.

Dharma is India’s prestige and

the bestower of peace

It is India’s honour to be a nation governed by dharma.
Dharma has guided India since immemorial time. The word
‘dharma’ does not indicate any sort of narrowness,
deficiency or uselessness. Dharma is not the same as the
semblance of dharma. It is not proper to be
disrespectful towards dharma, after seeing the false and
narrow activities of the supposed flag carriers of
dharma. Mortal conceptions degrade human beings and
immerse them in the ocean of grief. Mere arrangements of
food, lodging and clothing, however luxurious, cannot
give eternal peace. Even those who have reached the
ultimate limit of sense enjoyment are also immersed in
the deepest anxiety. There is no need to explain this to
everyone. Peace is a separate principle. The things of
this world can never bring about peace.

The language of Śrī Patrikā

Articles in every regional language will be published in
this patrikā, so that it will receive honour in all
parts of India. Those in languages such as Bengali,
Sanksrit, Hindi, Āsāmī, Oriya and English will get first
preference. This patrikā presents itself before the
people of the world with a heavy weight of
responsibility and its success depends on the internal
sympathy and well-wishing of the residents of India.

Statements about Śrī Bhagavata Patrikā, June 5th, 1955

History

Jagadguru Oṁ Viṣṇupāda 108 Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Yatirāja (the king of the sannyasīs)
is the crown-jewel of the dynasty of divine swans. On
9th November, 1931 (Gaurābda 445, Vikram Samvat 1988),
at Śrī Paramahaṁsa Maṭha at Naimiṣāraṇya, he started the

                          375
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

publication of a fortnightly journal named Bhāgavata, in
order to initiate the flowing stream of the topmost
dharma teachings in the Hindi language. The day on which
he started publication was the day of Kṛṣṇa, the new
moon of Kartika month and thereafter this fortnightly
journal was published on the day of each full moon and
each new moon. Publication of this patrikā continued
regularly for a few years and then stopped.

Following in Jagadguru Śrīla Prabhupāda’s footsteps, Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti vowed to serve this patrikā, and
at Śrī Keśavaji Gauḍīya Maṭha, Mathurā published Śrī
Bhagavata Patrikā in Hindi every month from June 1955
(Gaurābda 469, Vikram Saṁvat 2012) to May 1974 (Gaurābda
488, Vikram Saṁvat 2031). Then it disappeared again by
the desire of providence. Fortunately, however, it has
manifested itself once again to promote the flow of
dharma as practised and propagated by the most merciful
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who advented to purify
the age of Kali. We humbly request intelligent readers
to make their lives successful by bathing in this Gaṅga
of prema.

Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja has
presented the following thoughts regarding the purpose
of the patrikā—

Eternality

‘Bhāgavata’ is an eternal truth. There is no obstruction
to its eternality whether it appears fortnightly,
monthly, yearly or even daily, hourly or anupalika (at
every blink of an eye). These are just divisions of
endless time. For those who do not have a conception of
ananta (endlessness) and pūrṇatā (completeness), a part
brings them towards the whole. Still an aṁśa (part) is
forever a part and pūrṇa (whole) is eternally the
complete whole. An aṁśa never becomes the whole or
attains equality with it. Those who cannot comprehend
the eternal truth perceive it as appearing and
disappearing, and as being subject to birth and death,
but this perception is simply false and imaginary.
Vṛndāvana and Mathura Dhāma, for instance, are eternal,
but they seem to appear and disappear. Only the
Gauḍīyas, the followers of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, can
understand the truth of the appearance and disappearance
of the eternal abode. Vaiṣṇavas who belong to other
sampradāyas, or to no sampradāya at all, cannot
understand these subject matters. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is
the only source of evidence for this, and the
fortnightly or monthly appearance of the eternal
Bhāgavata is the spreading of the unlimited and eternal
beauty of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

For this reason, the crown jewel of the Gauḍīya dynasty,
Jagadguru Yatirāja Samrāta6 Śrīla Prabhupāda, published
Śrī Bhagavata Patrikā in the Gaura-pakṣa (waxing phase
of the moon) and the Kṛṣṇa-pakṣa (dark phase of the
moon). The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is explained, dis cussed,
practised, honoured and supported in both the light and
the dark phases of the moon. In other words, Śrī
Bhagavata Patrikā is particularly essential to convey
the purport of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to the sampradāyas who
lack faith and conviction in the topmost viṣṇu-tattva

                          376
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

i.e. bhāgavat-tattva in the form of Śrī Gaurahari.

‘Śrī’ and ‘Patrikā’

The use of the word ‘Śrī’ before the word ‘Bhāgavata’
implies the eternality of Bhāgavata. Thus eternality is
Śrī of Bhāgavata. The word ‘Patrikā’ means ‘the carrier
of the message or the discussion’, so the use of the
word ‘Patrikā’ after the word ‘Bhāgavata’ means that
this patrikā is the bearer of the conductÇ conceptions
and discussion based on the doctrines of Bhāgavata. Śrī
Bhāgavata Patrikā therefore presents itself to the
readers as the carrier of the eternal message of
Bhāgavata. Temporary, perishable, changing and false
conceptions or articles will not be published in it.
There will never be a place in Śrī Patrikā for any
subject matter which gives rise to absurd and useless
talk about eating, sleeping, mating, defending and so
on. Compositions, philosophy, poems and articles which
assist or enhance the happiness derived from sense
enjoyment cannot be given the title of ‘Śrī Patrikā.’
Thus viśrī (that which is without śrī) is not worthy of
respect. Śrī alone is a transcendental reality. We will
distribute the transcendental message which is endowed
with the śrī of the Vaikuṇṭha world and we will oppose
the material conceptions of the present world which are
devoid of śrī. This patrikā has adopted the national
language Hindi as the vehicle for the distribution of
the eternal message.

National language

Language is the expression of our sentiments, which are
the distinctive tendency of the heart. Hence, since its
quality determines the quality of the expression; the
expression of sentiment is not completely achieved if
the vehicle is weak. The thoughts of the heart will be
perceived clearly, and will influence society, only to
the degree that the language is pure, exalted and
advanced. We propose to express the sentiments of
Vaikuṇṭha in the national language, in the hope that the
present national language will prosper and fully express
the sentiments of all the jīvas.

The Hindi language

The majority of ancient Indian languages are derived
from the Vedic Sanskrit language, which is our first
language. Distorted forms of Sanskrit are found in
various languages according to differences of time,
place and people. The native people of Hindustan use the
language called Hindi to exchange the sentiments of
their hearts. The words ‘Hindu’ or ‘Hindi’ are not
original Vedic words, nor are they found in the Sanskrit
language. The word ‘Hindu’ was used by the residents of
Phārasa region to address the people who lived near the
banks of river Sindhu. Although everyone accepts that
the Vedic or ancient scriptural Sanskrit language is our
root language, still we have adopted Hindi in its
current form as our national language.

The discipline of language

Since language expresses sentiments, the sentiments of a

                             377
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

people will influence the language in which they express
them. Previously the only language used in our country
was the Vedic language, and the manifestations of viṣṇu-
tattva were the only worshipful objects for every living
entity. The Sanskrit language was used to exchange
sentiments as recently as the medieval period. Today, in
the same country, Hindi has been established as the
vehicle with which to conduct the system of
administration. In any case, whatever system is
presently manifest, and whatever becomes manifest in the
course of time and the ceaseless flow of change, we will
adopt it if it is favourable for the service of the
Bhāgavata.

laukikī vaidikī vāpi yā kriyā kriyate mune

hari-sevānukūlaiva sā kāryā bhaktim icchatā

“Any activity, whether it is Vedic (spiritual) or
laukikā (mundane) must be performed in a manner which is
favourable to bhakti.”

This is the proper perspective on the transformations of
matter in time, and it is only found in the Vedic system
of thought. No situation past, present, or future can
possibly exist beyond the scope of the Vedas or śāstras.
Therefore, we consider all stages to be transformations
of the Vedic stage, and in a favourable mood we propose
to discuss the eternal vaikuṇṭha-tattva in the Hindi
language.

Jurisdiction of the national language

Śrī BhāgavataPatrikā will publish a message which will
free from māyā the jīvas of that section of the world
which is governed by the Hindi-speaking nation. Which
part of the world is ruled over by a nation? Only a
small part of the body and mind are ruled to some
extent. But Śrī Bhāgavata Patrikā will not even glance
upon issues which are maintained, administered or
protected by the body and mind. This whole world will
pass in time, and nations will pass with it. Śrī
Bhāgavata Patrikā goes beyond the activities of the
perishable and ceaselessly changing body and mind, and
will publish in the present national language Hindi
descriptions of the culture and constitution of the
Vaikuṇṭha world. This is why Śrī Bhāgavata Patrikā is
heralded as the exclusive carrier of the transcendental
message of Vaikuṇṭha.

Request

We humbly submit a request at the lotus feet of our
readers, that they should benefit themselves by eagerly
studying the subject matter of this Patrikā. The
language and conceptions of the Vaikuṇṭha world differ
from the ordinary language born from the stream of
worldly consciousness, and are far more profound.
Consequently, some parts of the Patrikā may not be
easily understood at first. Still, it will become
sweeter and sweeter upon repeated reading, just as the
tongue afflicted by jaundice gradually tastes the
sweetness of sugar candy. Your sympathy with our bona
fide endeavour, and your assistance in our undertaking,

                          378
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

will make us feel successful. To achieve this great
purpose, we will publish in this Patrikā the writings of
previous mahājanas (spiritual authorities) and living
mahā-purūṣas (great souls). We will always beware of the
writings of modern conditioned souls, which are full of
various faults such as error and negligence. This is the
unique speciality and pride of Śrī Bhāgavata Patrikā.
What need is there to say more?



Literature on śuddha-bhakti compiled, published, written
and edited by Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja

1) Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Prabandhāvalī; 2.
Śaraṇāgati (Yāmunabhāvāvalīsaha); 3. Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu His Life & Precepts: 4. Prema-pradīpa
(transcendental novel); 5. Śrī Navadvīpa-bhāvataraṅga;
6. Jaiva Dharma; 7. Sahajiyā-dalana;

8. Sahajiyā-dalana (Hindī); 9. Śrī Caitanya-pañjikā; 10.
Śrī Gauḍīya-patrikā (Bengali, monthly journal); 11. Śrī
Bhāgavata-patrikā (Hindī, monthly journal); 12. Śrī
Gauḍīya-gīti-guccha; 13. Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam; 14. Śrī
Rūpānuga-bhajana-sampat; 15. Śrī Mahāprabhu kī Śikṣā;
16. Sāṅkhya-vāṇī; 17. Śrī Navadvīpa-śatakam; 18. Śrī
Navadvīpa dhāma parikramā; 19. Māyāvāda kī Jīvanī or
Vaiṣṇava Vijaya; 20. Jaiva Dharma (Hindī); 21. Śrī
Navadvīpa dhāma māhātmyam (pramāṇa khaṇḍa); 22.
Vijanagrāma and Sannyāsī (ancient poetry).

Thus ends the Seventh Part of The Life and Teachings of
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī by Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.




Eighth Part




The disciples of Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja to whom he bestowed tridaṇḍa-
sannyāsa and bābājī-veṣa

Tridaṇḍa-sannyāsa

1) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja (Śrī Sajjana-
sevaka Brahmacārī), Tuesday, 11.3.1952

2) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja (Śrī
Rādhānātha Dāsādhikārī), Tuesday, 11.3.1952

3) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja (Śrī Gaura-
nārāyaṇa Bhaktabāndhava), Tuesday, 11.3.1952

4) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Viṣṇu Mahārāja (Śrī Ānanda-
gopāla Dāsādhikārī), Saturday, 28.2.1953

5) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Paramārthī Mahārāja (Śrī

                          379
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

Pūrṇānanda Dāsādhikārī), Saturday, 28.2.1953

6) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Śānta Mahārāja (Śrī Kṛṣṇasundara
Brahmacārī), Saturday, 28.2.1953

7) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Parivrājaka Mahārāja (Śrī
Paramadharmeśvara Brahmacārī), Friday, 19.3.1954

8) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja (Śrī
Jayādvaita Brahmacārī), Friday, 19.3.1954

9) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja (Śrī Abhaya-
caraṇāravindam Bhaktivedānta), Wednesday, 19.9.1959

10) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Muni Mahārāja (Śrī Sanātana
Dāsādhikārī), Wednesday, 19.9.1959

11) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Rāddhānti Mahārāja (Śrī
Bhāgavataprasāda Vrajavāsī), Monday, 19.3.1963

12) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Harijana Mahārāja (Śrī
Prabuddhakṛṣṇa Brahmacārī)

13) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Urddhvamanthi Mahārāja (Dr.
Vrajānanda Vrajavāsī), Monday, 11.3.1963

14) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Paryaṭaka Mahārāja (Śrī
Cidghanānanda Brahmacārī), Friday, 19.3.1965

15) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Tridaṇḍi Mahārāja (Śrī Rasika-
mohana Vrajavāsī), Friday, 19.3.1965

16) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Daṇḍī Mahārāja (Śrī Guruśaraṇa
Dāsa), Friday, 19.3.1965

17) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Bhikṣu Mahārāja (Śrī Haridāsa
Vrajavāsī), Friday, 19.3.1965

18) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Paramādvaitī Mahārāja (Śrī
Rohiṇīnandana Vrajavāsī), Friday, 19.3.1965

19) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nyāsī Mahārāja (Śrī Hari
Brahmacārī), Tuesday, 28.3.1967

20) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Viṣṇudaivata Mahārāja (Śrīvāsa
Dāsādhikārī), Tuesday, 28.3.1967

21) Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Sajjana Mahārāja (Śrī Sudāma
Sakhā Brahmacārī), Tuesday, 28.3.1967

Bābājī-veṣa—

1) Śrīmat Triguṇātītadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja (Śrī
Triguṇātīta Brahmacārī), Friday, 11.5.1951

2) Śrīmat Puruṣottamadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja (Śrī Pūrṇa-
prajña Vrajavāsī), Thursday, 8.9.1966

3) Śrīman Navīnakṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja (Śrī Nitāīdāsa
Brahmacārī), Thursday, 8.9.1966

4) Śrīmad Vaṁśīvadanānandadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja (Śrī
Govindadāsa Brahmacārī), Thursday, 8.9.1966


                          380
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

5) Śrīmad Govindadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja (Śrī Govindadāsa
Brahmacārī), Tuesday, 28.3.1967

6) Śrīmad Advaitadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja (Dr. Advaitadāsa
Brahmacārī), Tuesday, 28.3.1967

7) Śrīmad Gorācāṅdadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja (Śrī Gorā-
cāṅdadāsa Brahmacārī), Tuesday, 28.3.1967

8) Śrīman Mṛtyuñjayadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja (Śrī Madana-
mohana Dāsādhikārī), Tuesday, 28.3.1967

9) Śrīmad Raghunāthadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja (Śrī Raghunātha
Dāsa Vrajavāsī), Tuesday, 28.3.1967



Parikramās organised by Śrīla Ācārya Kesarī

Parikramā year

Navadvīpa Dhāma yearly

Vrajamaṇḍala 1944

Kṣetramaṇḍala 1945

Dvārakā 1948

Rāmeśvaram (South India) 1950

Vrajamaṇḍala 1951

Kedāranātha, Badrinātha 1952

Avantikā and Nāsika 1953

Entire India 1961



Preaching centres of śuddha-bhakti established by Śrīla
Ācārya Kesarī

1) Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha (original maṭha and main
preaching centre), Tegharipāḍā, P.O. Navadvīpa (Nadiyā)

2) Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha, Caumāthā, P.O. Chuchura
(Hooglī)

3) Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, 33/2 Bospāḍā Lane,
Calcutta-3

4) Śrī Siddhavāḍī Gauḍīya Maṭha, Sidhāvāḍī, P.O. Rūpa-
nārāyaṇapura (Varddhamāna)

5) Śrī Pichladā Pādapīṭha, Pichladā, P.O. Īśvarapura
(Medinī-pura)

6) Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha, Kaṁsaṭīlā, Mathurā (U.P.)

7) Śrī Golokagaṅja Gauḍīya Maṭha, P.O. Golokgaṅja
(Goyāla-pāḍā), Assam


                           381
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                      5/5/2017

8) Śrī Kṛṣṇacaitanya Gauḍīya Āśrama, Harikhāli Bāzāra,
P.O. Iṭānagarā (Medinīpura)

9) Śrī Pichladā Gauḍīya Maṭha, Pichladā, P.O.
Āśutiyāvāḍa, Dist. Medinīpura (West Bengal)

10) Śrī Narottama Gauḍīya Āśrama, Caḍāikholā, P.O.
Vicanadai, Dist. Goyālapāḍā, Assam

11) Śrī Yāvaṭa Gauḍīya Maṭha, Jāvaṭa, P.O. Kālnā, Dist.
Varddhamāna (West Bengal)

12) Śrī Gopālajī Gauḍīya Preaching Centre, Koranṭa, P.O.
Rāndiyāhāṭa, Dist. Bāleśvara (Orissa)

13) Śrī Gauḍīya Sevāśrama, Purānā Kāchārī Road, P.O.
MāthābhāṅgÇ Dist. Kucabihāra (West Bengal)

14) Śrī Jagannātha Gauḍīya Āśrama, Guḍadaha, P.O. Śyāma-
nagara, Dist. Caubīs Paraganā (West Bengal)

15) Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī, Tegharipāḍā, P.O.
Navadvīpa, Dist. Nadiyā (West Bengal)

16) Śrī Gauḍīya Charity Clinic, Tegharipāḍā, P.O.
Navadvīpa, Dist. Nadiyā (West Bengal)

17) Śrī Vāsudeva Gauḍīya Maṭha, P.O. Vāsugāon, Dist.
Goyālapāḍā (Assam)

18) Śrī Rājarājeśvapura Gauḍīya Maṭha, P.O.
Viśvanāthapura, Dist. Caubīs Paraganā (West Bengal)

19) Śrī Triguṇātīta Samādhi Āśrama, Gadakhāli, P.O.
Navadvīpa, Dist. Nadiyā (West Bengal)

Maṭhas established by the Governing Committee

20) Śrī Keśava Gosvāmī Gauḍīya Maṭha, Śaktigaḍha, P.O.
Śilīguḍī (Darjeeling)

21) Śrī Nīlacala Gauḍīya Maṭha, Gauravāṭaśāhī,
Svargadvāra (Purī) Orissa

22) Śrī Meghālaya Gauḍīya Maṭha, P.O. Turā (Gārohils)
Meghālaya

23) Śrī Vinodabihārī Gauḍīya Maṭha, 28 Haldara Bāgāna
Lane (Calcutta-4)

24) Śrī Narottama Gauḍīya Maṭha. Aravinda Lane,
Kucavihāra (West Bengal)

25) Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana Gauḍīya Maṭha, Dāngalī, Vṛndāvana
(Uttar Pradesh)

26) Śrī Gopīnātha Gauḍīya Maṭha, Rānāpati Ghāṭa,
Vṛndāvana (Uttar Pradesh)

27) Śrī Bhaktivedānta Gauḍīya Maṭha, Sannyāsa Road,
Kankhala, Haridvāra (Uttar Pradesh)

28) Śrī Kṛtiratna Gauḍīya Maṭha, Śrī Caitanya Avenue,
Durgāpura, Varddhavāna (West Begal)

                          382
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


29) Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha, Raṅgapura,
Śilacara-2 (Kāchāḍa)

30) Śrī Nimānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha, Gāḍīkhāna Road,
Vidhāpāḍā, Dhubaḍī (Assam)

31) Śrī Mādhavjī Gauḍīya Maṭha, 1 Kālītalā Lane,
Vaidyavāṭī (Hooglī)

32) Śrī Madana Mohana Gauḍīya Maṭha, Māthābhāṅgā,
Kocavihāra

33) Śrī Kṣīracorā Gauḍīya Maṭha, Bāleśvara, Orissa

34) Śrī Durvāsā Ṛṣi Gauḍīya Āśrama, Īśāpura, Mathurā
(Uttar Pradesh)

35) Śrī Gour Govinda Gauḍīya Maṭha, Birmingham, England

36) Śrī Vinod Bihārī Gauḍīya Maṭha, Houston

37) Badger

38) Perth



Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja's
Upadeśāvalī

1) Our very life is the service of Kṛṣṇa, which is
performed for His pleasure with a favourable attitude,
which is devoid of all other desires, which is not
covered by jñāna and karma, and which is performed by
the body, mind, words, and all of the senses.

2) Bhagavat-bhakti is attained by viśrambha-seva
(intimate service) to the lotus feet of Śrī Guru.

3) Actual guru-sevā is honest service to Śrī Hari, Guru
and Vaiṣṇavas.

4) The aṅga of bhakti known as kīrtana is the best and
most complete limb of bhakti.

5) Only through the medium of kīrtana are the other
limbs of bhakti accomplished.

6) Actual solitude is the renunciation of bad
association, and the actual meaning of solitary bhajana
is performing bhajana in the company of sādhus and
vaiṣṇavas.

7) Real hari-kīrtana is preaching hari-kathā always and
everywhere.

8) Real silence is to speak hari-kathā always and
everywhere, or to be absorbed in speaking about services
related to Śrī Hari.

9) Līla-smaraṇa is not different from offenceless nāma-
bhajana or loud kīrtana of pure nāma, whether keeping
count of a fixed number of rounds or not.

                          383
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


10) The actual vipralambha-bhajana of Śrī Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa is the performance of Gaura bhajana in the mood of
rūpānuga.

11) By the word ‘Vāsudeva’ we understand Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
son of Nanda Mahārāja. Vāsudeva appeared; He was not
born. The birth saṁskāras such as the cutting of the
umbilical cord were not performed for Vāsudeva. However,
Kṛṣṇa took birth from the womb of mother Yaśodā. Only
rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas can comprehend the subtle difference
between birth and appearance. Therefore we pray to all
the bhaktas of Kṛṣṇa to bless us so that we can become
rūpānuga.

12) Śrī Vigraha should not be seen for the satisfaction
of the eyes: “I will be pleased beholding Śrī Vigraha.”
Rather, the attitude, “Śrī Vigraha will be pleased by
seeing me” is supremely beneficial. Bhagavān cannot be
be perceived by mundane senses.

13) The idea that Īśvara has no shape, no form, no
qualities and no śakti is all deceptive imagination. The
voidist philosophy of the Buddhists and the atheism
which is against the Vedas is a part of this concoction.
To accept the eternal form (svarūpa) of Īśvara, however,
is theism. Those who do not accept His eternal form are
certainly atheists.

14) The forceful influence of jaḍa-śakti (māyā)
obstructs our propensity for service to Śrī Jagannātha.
As long as we have a mundane conception, we cannot
develop inclination for the transcendental conception of
Jagannātha. The sole purpose of the Rathayātrā festival
is to engage the whole world in the service of
Jagannātha.

15) Only those who use every part of their existence to
follow the instructions and teachings of Śrī Gurudeva
are actually disciples. Those who disregard his
instructions are opposed to guru-paramparā, have
deviated from the path, and are pretentious gurus.

16) Śrī Gurupādapadma is not a mortal being. His entity
is established equally in both the prakaṭa (manifest)
and aprakaṭa (unmanifest) states. His appearance and
dis-appearance have the same purpose. Therefore
separation caused by his memories during his appearance
and the jubilation of union in his disappearance are
both possible at the same time.

17) It is imperative to worship dīkṣā-guru at the first
place. When we deliberate deeply, we see that the guru
who bestows mantras is indeed the most prominent. Only
those who give the instruction to serve dīkṣā-guru are
actually śikṣā-gurus. Those who are averse to giving
instruction regarding service to dīkṣā-guru can never be
called śikṣā-gurus. In fact, they are not even
Vaiṣṇavas, for they forsake their responsibility to
instruct others to give due respect to dīkṣā-guru.

18) Bengali literature is celebrated as the foremost
throughout India, because it exclusively follows the
Sanskrit literature. It is a matter of great regret that

                          384
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017

the Bengali language is now being dissociated from
following the Sanskrit language. The root causes for
this are a lack of faith in the Sanskrit language, and
disrespect for the age-old Indian conception described
in the Vedas, Upaniṣads, Purāṇas etc.

19) All problems can be solved by adopting ṛṣi-nīti, the
moral principles set forth by ṛṣis (sages), in the
fields of politics, social science, economics etc. To
adopt the ṛṣi-nīti we have to study and discuss the
ancient Sanskrit literatures. In this regard, it is
essential to do away with the indifferent attitude of
the education department towards the Sanskrit language.

20) In order to attain knowledge about any entity, it is
first of all necessary to take the assistance of śruti
or the hearing process (śravaṇa). Therefore, in the
Vaiṣṇava sampradāya the śabda which is accessible
through śravana (the hearing process) is accepted as the
fundamental and foremost evidence.

21) Those who only observe ūrjā-vrata and neglect the
rest of cāturmāsya-vrata cannot attain the full
devotional fruit of cāturmāsya. Rather, by such an
attitude they only express disrespect to cāturmāsya.

22) It is essential for baddha-jīvas to perform bhajana
under the guidance of a society of pure Vaiṣṇavas.
Neither goṣṭhānandīs nor bhajanānandīs actually perform
nirjana-bhajana. Those who are bhajanānandīs assist
gosṭhānandīs in their preaching of śrī nāma prema by
nourishing a favourable mood.

23) Every one’s house is an āśrama. One must live there
for the sole purpose of cultivating his Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. The house whose occupants live there only
for eating, sleeping and so on is like a door to hell.
When the jīva accepts tamasic foodstuffs, his thoughts
and attention becomes mostly averse to Bhagavān.
Therefore such foodstuffs are completely forbidden.

24) We are sannyāsīs, and as part of our service we have
accepted the reformation of society, which is a
necessary part of the propagation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness
(dharma-saṁskāra). We have a right to correct the
educated society with regard to their unmindful
activities. Preaching of the absolute truth may cause
pain in someone’s heart.

Thus ends the Eighth Part of The Life and Teachings of
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī by Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.



Table of Contents

First Part

Second Part

Third Part

The departure of Śrīla Narahari Sevāvigraha Prabhu

                          385
Param_Gurudeva_Biography.txt                   5/5/2017


Fourth Part

Fifth Part

Sixth Part

Seventh Part

Eighth Part




Table of Contents

First Part

Second Part

Third Part

The departure of Śrīla Narahari Sevāvigraha Prabhu

Fourth Part

Fifth Part

Sixth Part

Seventh Part

Eighth Part




                          386
