Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                        5/5/2017

The Pinnacle of Devotion



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Tags: Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja Pinnacle of Devotion
Chaitanya Mahāprabhu hari-kathā

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja Pinnacle of Devotion Chaitanya
Mahāprabhu hari-kathāttt



* * *




* * *




The Pinnacle of Devotion



Contents

THE GLORIES OF SĀDHU-SAṄGA

THE ROLE OF THE ŚIKṢĀ-GURU

MĀDHAVA-TITHI: MOTHER OF PREMA BHAKTI

THE GURU AS MANIFESTATION OF KṚṢṆA

THE PURPOSE OF LORD CAITANYA’S DESCENT

AUSPICIOUS INVOCATION

THE GOPĪS’ SELFLESS LOVE

SUPREME CHASTITY

ADVAITA ĀCĀRYA AND THE LORD’S DESCENT

WITHOUT THIS THE WORLD IS USELESS

LORD CAITANYA AS THE PERFECT BHAKTA

NO ONE BUT KṚṢṆA




                             1
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017

THE GLORIES OF SĀDHU-SAṄGA




Come along with me to Vṛndāvana. Here, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī used to write in the solitary
atmosphere of the Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira in Sevā-kuñja.
Sevā-kuñja is a place of perfection (siddha-sthalī),
because it is here that Śrī Kṛṣṇa came to serve Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. He played here, and the foot-dust of all the
gopīs is here. Most importantly, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s foot-
dust is here. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also served Śrīmatī Rādhikā at
Vaṁśīvaṭa and Nidhuvana. At these places, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
Śrīmatī Rādhā and the gopīs are controlled by prema
personified. We do not aspire for Kṛṣṇa, but we aspire
for kṛṣṇa-prema. Kaṁsa, Jarāsandha, Śiśupāla, and other
demons wanted Kṛṣṇa, but they did not possess prema,
affection, for Him.



kṛṣṇa, guru, bhakta, śakti, avatāra, prakāśa

kṛṣṇa ei chaya-rūpe karena vilāsa



Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoys by manifesting Himself as the
spiritual masters, the devotees, the diverse energies,
the incarnations, and the plenary portions. They are all
six in one. [Cc. Ādi 1.32]



Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja is explaining that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
manifests Himself in this world in six features: Kṛṣṇa
Himself, two kinds of guru, bhakta, śakti, avatāra, and
prakāśa. I will try to explain it very briefly in order
to complete the Third and Fourth Chapters of Caitanya-
caritāmṛta during my visit in Australia. The Third and
Fourth Chapters explain the purpose for which Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the ācāryas in our paramparā
have come. But first, this background information of
understanding Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s manifestations is necessary.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja begins by explaining:



mantra-guru āra yata śikṣā-guru-gaṇa

tāṅhāra caraṇa āge kariye vandana



I first offer my respectful obeisances at the lotus feet
of my initiating spiritual master and all my instructing
spiritual masters. [Cc. Ādi 1.35]



Mantra-guru means dīkṣā-guru. The śikṣā-guru teaches us
how to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who we are, what is bhakti, what

                             2
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

is jīva-tattva, and how a jīva, a conditioned soul, can
achieve bhāva-bhakti and then prema-bhakti. Real bhakti
is prema-bhakti, pure service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu [1.11] Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states:



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-śīlanaṁ bhaktir-uttamā



One should render transcendental loving service to the
Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for
material profit or gain through fruitive activities or
philosophical speculation. That is called pure
devotional service.



It is the duty of a person wanting to attain bhakti to
remember this śloka, and to repeat it once daily. He
should try to enter deeply into its meaning and practice
to develope it's understanding. Such a practice is
called sādhana-bhakti.[i]1 When, by practicing with the
senses, a spiritual mood manifests, it is called bhāva-
bhakti, and it is this bhāva-bhakti which soon blossoms
into prema-bhakti. According to a devotee’s level, he
will be eligible to perform sādhana-bhakti, bhāva-
bhakti, or prema-bhakti. A person can be called a
sādhaka, or one who is performing sādhana-bhakti, only
when his practice is aimed at attaining bhāva-bhakti
and, ultimately, prema-bhakti.

A guru who is not realized in sādhana-bhakti, bhāva-
bhakti, and prema-bhakti cannot give bhakti, although he
may appear to do the work of a guru. This is supported
by all śāstras, including Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the
Upaniṣads, and by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself. We should understand this principle:



tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam



Any person who is seriously desirous of achieving real
happiness must seek out a bona fide spiritual master and
take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of
a spiritual master is that he must have realized the
conclusion of the scriptures by deliberation and
arguments and thus be able to convince others of these
conclusions. Such great personalities, who have taken
complete shelter of the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside
all material considerations, are to be understood as
bona fide spiritual masters. [Bhāg. 11.3.21]

                           3
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017




In order to achieve real bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, have real
happiness, and realize who you are and how you can
progress in this life, go to a self-realized soul and
hear his realizations from him. He will surely help you.

There are three symptoms of a bona fide guru. The first
is śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ. What is the meaning of śabde?
He is perfect in his knowledge of Veda, Upaniṣads,
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, etc. However, knowledge of śāstra and
the ability to argue based on that knowledge is not
enough to qualify him as a guru. If one has no
realization of Kṛṣṇa, if he is not absorbed in bhajana,
[ii]2 if his bhakti is not very developed, then he is
not a guru.

The second symptom is that he is detached from worldly
desires (upaśamāśraya). These first and second symptoms
are external. The svarūpa, or internal symptom, of the
bona fide guru is pare ca niṣṇātaṁ brahmaṇy. [Bhāg.
11.3.21] Who is Parabrahman? Kṛṣṇa Himself. He is param-
brahman, pūrṇa-brahman, sanātana-brahman. A guru should
have some internal realization of this, otherwise he may
fall down. If he only knows sastric arguments, but he is
not absorbed in bhajana, it is not sufficient to keep
him from falling down. One may also know all the
arguments to support the sastric viewpoint, and
sometimes be outwardly performing some kind of
devotional practice. Yet, if he is not detached from
material desires and objects, he will fall down. If the
guru falls, it causes a big problem for the disciple,
disturbing his whole life. Therefore we should be very
cautious to approach devotees who will not fall.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja has written: mantra-guru āra
yata śikṣā-guru-gaṇa. What has Śrīla Swāmījī[iii]3
written? You should all hear this very carefully. It is
very important.



Devotee reads:

Text: I first offer my respectful obeisances at the
lotus feet of my initiating spiritual master, and unto
all my instructing spiritual masters.

Purport: Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his thesis Śrī Bhakti-
sandarbha [202] has stated that uncontaminated
devotional service is the objective of pure Vaiṣṇavas,
and that one has to execute such service in the
association of other devotees. By associating with
devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa one develops a sense of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness and thus becomes inclined towards loving
service of the Lord. This is the process of approaching
devotional service, approaching the Supreme Lord by
gradual appreciation of devotional service. If one
desires unalloyed devotional service, one must associate
with devotees. [Cc. Ādi 1.35]




                           4
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes. Mark these words. If you
want unalloyed devotional service, you must associate
with Vaiṣṇavas. Otherwise you will get asat-saṅga
(association with materialists). This will be the
result. So try to follow Śrīla Swāmījī’s line of
thought. I am following the same line as Swāmījī. A
person who says that I am not in the same line is
himself not in that line. I will never speak anything
different from that which was spoken by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Swāmījī.

If you want unalloyed devotional service to Kṛṣṇa, you
should boldly follow the directions and instructions
which we have mentioned. If your preference is for
making money, and you see that this will be hampered by
associating with high-class Vaiṣṇavas, then you will not
be inclined to follow these instructions. If you aspire
to be like Prahlāda Mahārāja, then you should associate
with the statements in Swāmījī’s purports. Read the last
line again and continue.



Devotee reads:

If one desires unalloyed devotional service, one must
associate with devotees of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. By such
association only can a conditioned soul achieve a taste
for transcendental love, and thus revive his eternal
relationship with God in a specific manifestation and in
terms of a specific transcendental mellow or rasa that
one has internally inherent in him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: If you follow this instruction
to associate with pure devotees, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will manage
everything for you. Don’t fear. Kṛṣṇa has created you.
He is the Supreme Controller, so why should you have any
fear? All problems will be solved by following this
instruction, and Kṛṣṇa will manage everything.

If you want unalloyed service to Kṛṣṇa, have courage in
your heart, be bold, and make an effort to associate
with qualified Vaiṣṇavas. Its' importance is stressed
not only once, but three times: sādhu-saṅga, again
sādhu-saṅga, again sādhu-saṅga.



sādhu-saṅga sādhu-saṅga—sarva sastre kaya

lava mātra sādhu saṅga sarva siddhi haya



The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that by even a
moment's association with a pure devotee, one can attain
all spiritual success. [Cc. Madhya 22.54]



What is the meaning of this verse? It is that unalloyed
service to Kṛṣṇa can be attained through sādhu-saṅga,
and following this instruction is our first duty. Go on.


                           5
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



Devotee reads:

The secret is that one must submissively listen to those
who know perfectly the science of God and one must begin
the mode of service regulated by the preceptor or
teacher. A devotee already attracted by the name, form,
qualities, etc. of the Supreme Lord may be directed to
his specific manner of devotional service. He need not
waste time by approaching the Lord through logic.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes. Don’t try to achieve Kṛṣṇa
through the method of logic. Logic itself is
insufficient. If it is the type of logic that is
presented in śāstras, like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or
ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta, and which is predominated by
devotion, then it may be accepted, otherwise it should
not be.

Devotee reads:

The expert spiritual master knows well how to engage his
disciples’ energy in the transcendental loving service
of the Lord, and thus he engages a devotee in a specific
devotional service according to his special tendency.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: One symptom of a bona fide
śikṣā or dīkṣā-guru is that each of his disciples feels
such affection coming from the guru that he thinks his
guru loves him the most. When coming into the guru’s
presence, all Vaiṣṇavas, even those who are not
disciples, feel that the guru loves them the most. I
have seen this quality in my Guru Mahārāja, and also in
Swāmījī. I think that so many disciples of Swāmījī have
also experienced this.

We have heard from the disciples of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda that
everyone, from small children to superiors, used to
think, “I am loved so much by my Guru Mahārāja.” The
disciples experience this symptom of a bona fide guru
because he does not desire material profit from them. He
only wants to reside in their hearts and inject them
with kṛṣṇa-prema. Unless he is perfect in his own
realization of kṛṣṇa-prema, he cannot give it. The guru
never takes the heart of the disciple as his own
property. Rather, he makes it soft, sweet and fragrant—
suitable to be offered to the Divine Couple. The
disciple first offers his heart unto the lotus feet of
his beloved guru, who will in turn give it to his guru,
and so on, until it is placed at the lotus feet of Rūpa-
mañjarī. She will give it to Lalitā and Viśākhā, who
will offer it at the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā will then engage that person in service
to Kṛṣṇa and Herself.

If a guru does not have this symptom, then his disciple
may humbly request the guru to allow him to take the
association of an elevated soul who does. The guru,

                           6
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

without envy, and admitting that he cannot satisfy his
disciple, will direct him to take shelter of Vaiṣṇavas
who are of the caliber of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, or Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. He will not
complain that the disciple is taking shelter of a
superior Vaiṣṇava. A sad-guru (self-realized guru) never
desires worldly gain. If he does, he is not actually
guru. Śyāmānanda Prabhu was instructed by his dīkṣā-
guru, Hṛdaya Caitanya of Kuliyā-grāma, to journey to
Sevā-kuñja, Vṛndāvana, and take shelter of the lotus
feet of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. “He will make you qualified
to serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.” Apparently Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī had no śiṣyas (disciples), but actually he gave
his śikṣā (instructions) to all the inhabitants of this
world. This is the symptom of a real guru.



Devotee reads:

A devotee must have only one initiating spiritual
master, because in the scriptures acceptance of more
than one is always forbidden. There is no limit,
however, to the number of instructing spiritual masters
one may accept. Generally a spiritual master who
constantly instructs a disciple in spiritual science
becomes his initiating spiritual master later on.

One should always remember that a person who is
reluctant to accept a spiritual master and be initiated
is sure to be baffled in his endeavor to go back to
Godhead. One who is not properly initiated may present
himself as a great devotee, but in fact he is sure to
encounter many stumbling blocks on his path of progress
towards spiritual realization with the result that he
must continue his term of material existence without
relief. Such a helpless person is compared to a ship
without a rudder, for such a ship can never reach its
destination. It is imperative therefore that one accepts
a spiritual master if he at all desires to gain the
favor of the Lord.

If there is no chance to serve him directly, a devotee
should serve his spiritual master by remembering his
instructions. There is no difference between his
instructions and he himself. In his absence, therefore,
his words of direction should be the pride of the
disciple. If one thinks that he is above consulting
anyone, including his spiritual master, he is at once an
offender of the Lord. Such an offender can never go back
to Godhead. It is imperative that a serious person
accepts a bona fide spiritual master in terms of the
sastric injunction. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī advises that one
should not accept a spiritual master in terms of
hereditary or customary, social and ecclesiastical
convention. One should simply try to find a genuinely
qualified spiritual master for actual advancement in
spiritual understanding.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: It is clear that Swāmījī is a
follower of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. To have such a fully
qualified guru is very rare; very rare. If, in this

                           7
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

life, due to some spiritual piety (sukṛti) we have
accepted even a kaniṣṭhā-adhikārī-guru, some impressions
of Vaiṣṇavīsm are made on the heart. Then, in our next
birth, we may then have the qualification to choose a
bona fide guru. And how do we choose? We surrender
ourselves at the lotus feet of the caitya-guru (Kṛṣṇa in
the heart), and pray to Him. Residing in our heart, He
will hear our plea. He will always hear. If one prays,
“O Kṛṣṇa, I sincerely desire to become your servant.
Please direct me to the lotus feet of a qualified guru,”
He will surely arrange this. One who neglects such
prayer, and has confidence in his own ability to select
and examine his guru, will be disturbed in his spiritual
life.

Kṛṣṇa says:



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ



Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender
unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions.
Do not fear. [Bg.18.66]



Kṛṣṇa will arrange a guru for one who surrenders
sincerely, without desire for material gain. So be like
that. Then we can easily receive the mercy of that rare
guru. Everything depends on Kṛṣṇa.

A bona fide guru is rare in this world, and śastra
describes that more rare than him is a bona fide
disciple who surrenders fully, as Arjuna or Sudāmā Vipra
did to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The Vedas, Upaniṣads and Puraṇas cite
many examples of the ideal guru and the ideal disciple,
but the examples of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, and his full
surrender to the lotus feet of Śrīla Rūpa and Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmīs, are the most exalted.

Who is the guru of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī and Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī? Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī had prayed to Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu in the maṅgalācaraṇa of each of his books.
But when did Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu initiate Śrīla Rūpa
and Śrīla Sanātana? Have we heard of a fire sacrifice
being performed for their initiation, and mantras being
given to them?

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu instilled everything in their
heart. They accepted him as guru within their heart.
This is most important—to follow gurudeva internally and
externally. If our heart is given very naturally at a
Vaiṣṇava’s lotus feet, this means he is our guru—
regardless of whether or not mantras are given, or
whether or not a fire yajña is done. These are external

                           8
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

and not as important as the surrendering of one’s heart.
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has given some examples of this in
his books.

There are two kinds of disciples, and therefore there
are two kinds of dīkṣā (initiation)—anuṣṭhānikī and
vidvat-rūḍhī. Anuṣṭhānikī means the external formality
of a fire yajña and the giving of dīkṣā (gāyatrī)
mantras. If one thinks, “I have sacrificed so much, my
head is shaven, and I have received my mantras; I am now
initiated,” this is external. Of course, formal
initiation is essential, but it is not complete without
vidvat-rūḍhī.

Vidvat-rūḍhī refers to an internal initiation wherein
the disciple completely gives his heart at his guru’s
lotus feet, knowing that his guru will make him
qualified to serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Gurudeva
gives all kinds of divya-jñāna (transcendental
knowledge) about kṛṣṇa-tattva, guru-tattva, vaiṣṇava-
tattva, and prema-tattva.

The guru also teaches what is māyā. He teaches that
under the spell of the illusory energy one sees a man or
woman as a source of one’s own sense gratification. Such
consciousness has created many problems between husband
and wife, especially in Western countries. People are
sometimes married and divorced several times, and there
is no concern for the children. Marriage means that both
are together for life, and small problems should not
cause divorce. The guru will teach his followers to be
neither attached nor detached, but to perform their
duty, and in this way to see themselves, their wives and
their children as Kṛṣṇa’s servants. He will teach them
their duty in such a way that they develop their Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.

The guru instructs us how to practice bhakti, and how to
develop our honor, affection and service for Kṛṣṇa. This
is divya-jñāna. Śrī guru also destroys all our sinful
reactions:



divyaṁ jñānaṁ yato dadyāt

kuryāt pāpasya saṅkṣayam

tasmād dīkṣeti sā proktā

deśikais tattva-kovidaiḥ



By dīkṣā one gradually becomes disinterested in material
enjoyment and gradually becomes interested in spiritual
life. [Bhakti-sandarbha 283]



Kuryāt pāpasya saṅkṣayam. Material life means all the
problems arising from attachment to worldly affairs. In
material life one is full of lust, anger, greed,
madness, illusion and envy, and thinks himself to be the

                            9
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

enjoyer. Gurudeva destroys the four stages of sin:



1) prārabdha—fructified karma. The reactions to previous
actions which are presently being suffered and enjoyed;

2) kūṭa bīja—sins which have not yet been performed, but
the tendency to perform them is in the heart;

3) aprārabdha—those reactions which will fructify in our
next body;

4) avidyā—ignorance whereby one forgets Kṛṣṇa and thinks
himself to be the enjoyer. From this all problems arise.



If our dīkṣā-guru is not of such a caliber that he is
capable of doing this for us, then we should accept a
śikṣā-guru who is more advanced. Pray to Kṛṣṇa and
gurudeva to help you solve your difficulties. A bona
fide guru will advise you to seek shelter of advanced
Vaiṣṇavas who are of the caliber of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. If
the guru is showing jealousy or envy that his disciples
are associating with a śikṣā-guru, or if he is opposed
to Vaiṣṇavas and their teachings, then the disciple
should consider giving him up.



śrī rūpa sanātana bhaṭṭa raghunātha

śrī jīva gopāla bhaṭṭa dāsa raghunātha

ei chaya guru—śikṣā-guru ya āmāra

tāṅ sabāra pāda-padme koṭi namaskāra



The instructing spiritual masters are Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaṭṭa
Raghunātha, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. These six are
my instructing spiritual masters, therefore I offer
millions of respectful obeisances unto their lotus feet.
[Cc. Ādi 1.36-37]



Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī first prays to his
śikṣā-gurus. In this section of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
he has explained so many things about guru. Who are his
śikṣā-gurus? Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī,
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī. There is one point that we should consider
here. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja has not mentioned the
name of his dīkṣā-guru. He has taken śikṣā directly from
both Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, and at the end of each chapter he offers
special praṇāmas to them. Some say his dīkṣā-guru is

                           10
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, but I have not seen any
evidence of this. I have never read in any śāstras about
the identity of his dīkṣā-guru. But I have drawn the
conclusion that both he and his brother took dīkṣā
during their household life, before he finally left his
family and went to Vṛndāvana, and at that time he
received the name Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja. Without
dīkṣā he would not have received the name Kṛṣṇadāsa. For
some reason or other he has not revealed the name of his
dīkṣā-guru but has only named the six Gosvāmī associates
of Mahāprabhu as his śikṣā-gurus. In their forms in
Vraja-līlā, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is Rūpa mañjarī, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī is Labaṅga mañjarī, Śrīla Raghunātha
Bhaṭṭa is Rāga mañjarī, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī is Vilāsa
mañjarī, Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa is Guṇa mañjarī, and Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa is Rati mañjarī. They each have two
eternal forms, one as an associate of Kṛṣṇa and the
other as an associate of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

If anyone has direct association with a bona fide śikṣā-
guru, he will surely become a bona fide disciple. Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja is proud to be a disciple of the Six
Gosvāmīs. Tāṅ’ sabāra pāda-padme koṭi namaskāra. He
offers innumerable dandavat praṇāmas at their lotus feet
and he then prays to the bhaktas (devotees), like
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, who in Kṛṣṇa’s līlā is in the form of
Nārada Muni.



bhagavānera bhakta yate śrīvāsādi pradhāna

tāṅ sabāra pāda-padme sahasra praṇāma



There are innumerable devotees of the Lord, of whom
Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura is the foremost. I offer my respectful
obeisances thousands of times unto their lotus feet.
[Cc. Ādi 1.38]



There are two kinds of bhaktas—the realized soul and the
sādhaka. In his former life Nārada was a sādhaka-bhakta,
and then he became a realized bhakta, a premi-bhakta.
Here, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja is referring to all
realized bhaktas: Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda, Sikhi Mahiti, Mādhavī-devī, Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya, etc. There are six prominent śikṣā-gurus
(the Six Gosvāmīs), and they are all realized bhaktas as
well.

There are also direct manifestations of the Supreme
Lord: Śrī Advaita Ācārya is the plenary incarnation of
Mahā-Viṣṇu and Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu is svarūpa prakāśa.
Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita (who is Śrīmatī Rādhikā) and Śrī
Jagadānanda Paṇḍita (who is Śrīmatī Satyabhāmā) are
śakti. Why was it that Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita was in such
a humble service mood to Śrī Caitanya? After all, He was
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, chief of all the left-wing gopīs who
freely express their māna (transcendental anger) towards
Śrī Kṛṣṇa? The answer is that in the form of Śrī
Caitanya, Kṛṣṇa stole Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mood and color,

                           11
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                          5/5/2017

and Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita was simply always watching,
simply taking the role of a teacher, to see if He was
playing the part of Śrīmatī Rādhikā correctly. If Kṛṣṇa,
as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, made a mistake, then Śrī
Gadādhara Paṇḍita would immediately correct Him. For
example, when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu first met Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu in Nandanācārya’s house, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu was weeping and He recited this śloka from
the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:



barahāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ

bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantiṁ ca mālām

randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopa-vṛndair

vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada-ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ



The gopīs began to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa within their minds.
Accompanied by his cowherd boyfriends, Kṛṣṇa entered the
charming forest of Vṛndāvana. His head was decorated
with a peacock feather. He wore yellow karṇikāra flowers
over His ears, a golden-yellow garment on His body, and
a beautiful, fragrant vaijayantī garland about His neck.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa exhibited His supremely captivating
appearance, just like the best of dancers performing
upon a stage. He filled up the holes of His flute with
the nectar of His lips. The cowherd boys followed behind
Him singing His glories which purify the entire world.
In this way, the forest of Vṛndāvana manifested even
greater splendor than Vaikuṇṭha, due to being beautified
by the marks of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. [Bhāg.10.21.5]



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu described the beautiful form of
Kṛṣṇa, yet He could not completely respond in the way
that Śrī Rādhikā would have, when She recited the same
śloka. There was something lacking. Therefore, from
behind a curtain, Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita recited the
śloka, playing the role of Śrīmatī Rādhikā marvelously,
weeping loudly with tears running down His cheeks, and
melting everyone’s heart. He did this in such a manner
that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who was playing the role
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, understood that He had not played
the part correctly.

After explaining Kṛṣṇa’s other manifestations, Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja describes Śrī Caitanya as Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself, Svayam Bhagavān:



śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu svayaṁ-bhagavān

tāṅhāra padāravinde ananta praṇāma

sāvaraṇe prabhure kariyā namaskāra

ei chaya teṅho yaiche—kariye vicāra

                           12
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017




Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the Personality of Godhead
Himself, therefore I offer unlimited prostrations at His
lotus feet. Having offered obeisances unto the Lord and
all His associates, I shall now try to explain these six
diversities in one. (Cc. Ādi 1. 42-43)



Thus, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja has described the six
manifestations of Kṛṣṇa:



yadyapi āmāra guru—caitanyera dāsa

tathāpi jāniye āmi tāṅhāra prakāśa



Although I know that my spiritual master is a servitor
of Sri Caitanya, I know Him also as a direct
manifestation of the Lord. (Cc. Ādi 1.44)



Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraih. The deep meaning of
hari-tvena is that the spiritual master possesses the
quality of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but he is not viṣaya Kṛṣṇa,[iv]4
he is Kṛṣṇa dāsa. Gurudeva is the embodiment of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s quality of mercy, but it is incorrect to
consider gurudeva to be viṣaya Kṛṣṇa.

Even the karmīs, jñānīs and tapasvīs consider guru to be
nondifferent from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but we should not super-
impose our incorrect conception upon guru, supposing him
to be God. This superimposition, in Sanskrit, is called
aropa. For instance, to present a young mango tree as
one that gives sweet fruit is not correct. But if we say
that it will give fruit in time, then this is correct.
If we suppose the unreal to be real, we are incorrect,
and this is called aropa.

In regard to developing our bhakti, however, we need to
perform aropa. This is essential and it is technically
called aropa-siddha-bhakti. The beginner practices it in
the following way. The Deity is nondifferent from Kṛṣṇa.
He is Kṛṣṇa Himself. In our conditioned state we see the
Deity as a stone statue, and yet we superimpose the
correct conception that He is Kṛṣṇa. We cannot serve Him
as if He were Kṛṣṇa Himself, but as our affection for
Him increases, we will perceive the Deity in the same
way that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu did: sākṣād vrajendra-
nandana vigraha (the direct personal form of Vrajendra-
nandana). The Deity will reveal His actual nature to us.




THE ROLE OF THE ŚIKṢĀ-GURU


                             13
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017




kṛṣṇa, guru, bhakta, śakti, avatāra, prakāśa

kṛṣṇa ei chaya-rūpe karena vilāsa



Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoys by manifesting Himself as the
spiritual masters, the devotees, the diverse energies,
the incarnations, and the plenary portions. They are all
six in one. [Cc. Ādi 1. 32]



Come with me as we enter into the same subject we began
yesterday—Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja’s Caitanya-
caritāmṛta. He has explained that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, although
one, manifests in six features. This is acintya-
bhedābheda-tattva. He has also explained that his śikṣā-
gurus are the Six Gosvāmīs—Śrīla Rūpa, Śrīla Sanātana,
Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa, Śrīla Jīva, Śrīla Gopāla
Bhaṭṭa, and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa. He revealed that Śrī
Advaita Ācārya (prabhura aṁśa avatāra), as an
incarnation of Mahā-Viṣṇu, is therefore a partial
incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. Nityānanda Prabhu (prabhura
svarūpa prakāśa) is an eternal manifestation of both
Kṛṣṇa and Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Therefore Nityānanda
Prabhu is called prakāśa (manifestation). Also, by His
mercy Kṛṣṇa and Caitanya Mahāprabhu are manifest. In
other words, without the mercy of Nityānanda Prabhu, no
one can realize Caitanya Mahāprabhu or Kṛṣṇa. He is the
complete embodiment of guru-tattva.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadasa Kaviraja Gosvāmī is describing his
spiritual good fortune. He says, “I have received the
mercy of the Six Gosvāmīs and other exalted Vaiṣṇavas. I
have also received the mercy of Govinda, Gopīnātha and
Madana-Mohana, and I have taken darśana of Them. I have
seen and realized the glories of Vṛndāvana-dhāma. And
all this is the mercy of Nityānanda Prabhu. So I am His
dāsa, servant, and He is my guru.” Next, he explains
that Kṛṣṇa’s śakti manifests as Gadādhara. Kṛṣṇacandra
is Kṛṣṇa Himself, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu is that self-
same Kṛṣṇa, Vrajendra-nandana, Śyāmasundara, with the
golden beauty and mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. So, He is
like Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā combined.

· ·

guru kṛṣṇa-rūpa hana śāstrera pramāṇe

guru-rūpe kṛṣṇa kṛpā karena bhakta-gaṇe



According to the deliberate opinion of all revealed
scriptures, the spiritual master is nondifferent from
Kṛṣṇa. Lord Kṛṣṇa in the form of the spiritual master
delivers His devotees. [Cc. Ādi 1.45]



                           14
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


Dīkṣā-guru and śikṣā-guru are nondifferent—they are on
the same level. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī represents śikṣā-
guru, and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī represents dīkṣā-guru—
yet there is no difference between them. They can both
act as śikṣā and dīkṣā-gurus.

My most revered Gurudeva, Nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa Oṁ
Viṣṇupāda Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Mahārāja, is both
my dīkṣā and śikṣā-guru. Pūjyapāda Śrīdhāra Mahārāja and
Pūjyapāda Bhaktivedanta Swami Mahārāja are also my
śikṣā-gurus. Any disciple of Pujyapāda Śrīdhāra
Mahārāja, or Swāmī Mahārāja, who does not consider
Nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Mahā-
rāja to be in our line is not a Vaiṣṇava. We should not
associate closely with someone who does not pay proper
respect to Śrīla Bhatiprajñāna Keśava Mahārāja. He is
the sannyāsa-guru of Swāmī Mahārāja, who has so much
respect for him, both as a guru and as a friend.



śikṣā-guruke ta’ jāni kṛṣṇera svarūpa

antaryāmī, bhakta-śreṣṭha—ei dui rūpa



One should know the instructing spiritual master to be
the Personality of Kṛṣṇa. Lord Kṛṣṇa manifests Himself
as the Supersoul and as the greatest devotee of the
Lord. [Cc. Ādi 1.47]



Dīkṣā-guru is the rūpa (form) of Kṛṣṇa and śikṣā-guru is
the svarūpa (personal nature) of Kṛṣṇa. Which is
superior, rūpa or svarūpa? There is no difference
between them. Sva means 'mine', and so svarūpa may even
be more dear than rūpa, though essentially they are the
same.

Our dīkṣā-guru is our worshipable superior for whom we
have reverence. We pray to him and take the dust of his
lotus feet. But śikṣā-guru is like a brother, a friend.
Sometimes we can embrace him and speak with him frankly.
We can reveal our heart to him and tell him that we
desire to associate with Kṛṣṇa as the gopīs did. This is
very secret and sacred. We may hesitate expressing this
to our dīkṣā-guru, and therefore we need the śikṣā-guru.
He is like a bosom friend (laukika bandhu). With the
śikṣā-guru there is a mood of fraternity—no aiśvarya
bhāva (mood of awe and reverence in opulence).
Similarly, in the most advanced stages of bhakti, one
does not regard Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead but as one’s dear friend, dear son or most
beloved. He sees Kṛṣṇa as his, and sees himself as
Kṛṣṇa’s.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states that a disciple should also
serve his dīkṣā-guru with viśrambha-sevā (service in the
mood of intimacy), but due to constantly offering
praṇāmas it cannot always manifest. To your śikṣā-guru
you can admit an attraction to a very beautiful girl and

                           15
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

ask for his guidance. It may be difficult to tell this
to your dīkṣā-guru because he is worshipable, like a
father. His response may be very heavy and he may take a
big stick to beat you. But your śikṣā-guru will embrace
you and say, “O dear one, you should not do that. Try to
love Kṛṣṇa like this. Try to offer your heart in the
service of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s lotus feet. Don’t go to the
girls of this world. A girl of this world is not really
a girl—she is a burning fire, a poisonous ocean. Don’t
continue in this direction.”

Due to the open-hearted nature of the relationship, a
śikṣā-guru is needed. We can reveal everything to him.
Within our heart, our śikṣā-gurus, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī,
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and all of the previous ācāryas are
aware of our thoughts and actions. They have not died,
they are all omnipotent.

Śikṣā-guruke ta’jāni kṛṣṇera svarūpa. The śikṣā-guru is
the svarūpa of Kṛṣṇa and the dīkṣā-guru is the rūpa of
Kṛṣṇa. Yet there is no difference between Kṛṣṇa’s inner
nature and His outer body. Both are the same. One who
thinks there is a difference is a māyāvādī, advaitavādī,
and we should not associate with such a person.

Antaryāmī, bhakta-śreṣṭha—ei dui rūpa. There are two
types of śikṣā-guru. Antaryāmī is the śikṣā-guru in the
heart, the caitya-guru. He gives inspiration from
within. If one prays, “O Kṛṣṇa, You are my caitya-guru,
I have given You my entire heart. Please arrange for me
to take shelter of a qualified guru,” Kṛṣṇa will
certainly arrange it. By approaching Kṛṣṇa with a
sincere desire to have a guru, we will not have to
suffer the result of making an incorrect choice. We are
asking Śrī Kṛṣṇa to make all arrangements. But if we do
not pray at all and instead select our own guru, we will
repent our decision if our guru falls down; then our
life will be spoiled.



teṣaṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te



To those who are constantly devoted to serving Me with
love and devotion, I give them the understanding by
which they can come to Me. (Bg. 10.10)



To one who is always connected (yuktānāṁ) to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
serving Him with love and devotion, He gives the
intelligence (buddhi yoga) by which he can come to Him.
What kind of intelligence does He give? Transcendental
(aprākrit) intelligence, that intelligence which
connects us with Kṛṣṇa. “They then come to Me (upayānti

                           16
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

te), and I engage them in My service.” This demonstrates
how Kṛṣṇa acts as caitya-guru.




Once, in South India, there lived a beautiful prostitute
named Cintāmaṇi. She was 16 years old and danced and
sang kīrtana very sweetly. Everyone who saw her dance
became attracted. Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura was a pious and
religious brāhmaṇa, with a beautiful chaste wife, yet he
was allured by Cintāmaṇi. Cintāmaṇi, although a
prostitute, had an extraordinary quality. She was very
attached to singing songs in glorification of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and therefore many people were attracted. Bilvamaṅgala
Ṭhākura fell into her trap. He stopped all business and
service to his mother and father. He forgot his chaste
wife and children and became fully controlled by
Cintāmaṇi. He would go to her, especially at night,
taking some presents that he had procured by selling his
land or his wife’s ornaments, or by stealing money and
good cloth, hoping that in return she would love him.

Within time his father died and a ceremony was
conducted. On the final day, the thirteenth day of the
ceremony, hundreds and thousands of brāhmaṇas sat in his
courtyard, about to honor mahā-prasādam. Bilva-maṅgala
Ṭhākura went to the kitchen, took many delicious foods
and other objects, and wrapped them in a cloth. That
night he left his house, not caring if his guests took
prasādam or that his distressed mother and wife were
comforted. He left them all and went to that prostitute.

On that night, rain fell heavily. In order to reach the
prostitute’s house he had to cross a flooded river,
whose current ran swiftly. Helpless, and desperate to
find a means of crossing, he noticed something
resembling a log floating in front of him. Not seeing
that it was actually a half-rotten dead body of a girl,
he sat on it and crossed the river. Then, struggling
across slippery ground and finally reaching the
prostitute’s home, he found that the door was closed. He
knocked hard for a long time, but his sounds were not
heard. At last he walked to the back of the house and
saw what looked like a rope hanging from the rafters.
Grabbing hold of it, he attempted to climb it. It was
not a rope, however, but a snake, and Bilvamaṅgala
slipped and fell unconscious, making a loud sound on the
courtyard floor. Cintāmaṇi heard the noise and asked her
maidservant to find out what had caused the sound. “Oh,
Bilvamaṅgala has fallen down here.”

“But why? How did he come here?” She and the maidservant
then took the unconscious Bilvamaṅgala into the house
and warmed his body. When he woke up, Cintāmaṇi told
him, “My body is full of blood, urine, stool, bile and
mucus; yet you love it and have gone to so much trouble
to get here. If you had a little bit of love and
affection for Kṛṣṇa, your life would have become
successful. You are so lusty. I can no longer love you.
You should leave immediately.”

Her words penetrated Bilvamaṅgala’s heart more than an

                           17
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

arrow could, and he became very sober. He understood at
that point that he must develop his love for Kṛṣṇa. It
was because of his past impressions of bhakti that
Cintāmaṇi’s words penetrated his heart. Without this,
her words would not have reformed him and he would have
instead fallen at her feet, panting like a dog and
begging for her to accept him. But due to his past
impressions, he was able to change.

He then decided he should neither be with Cintāmaṇi nor
stay at his home, but should instead go to Vṛndāvana.
For the next five days he took no foodstuffs, living
solely on the chanting of the holy name. Then, desiring
to drink some water, he went to a well. There he saw a
very young, beautiful and newly married lady who was
hauling water. He asked her for a drink and he knelt as
she poured the water from her pot into his mouth. As he
drank the water he also drank in her beauty with his
eyes, taking it into his heart, and he then followed her
home. She went into her room and Bilvamaṅgala met her
husband who was standing at the door. Bilvamaṅgala asked
him, “Please call the girl who just walked past you.” He
called his wife, who came immediately. “How may I serve
you?” she asked. Bilvamaṅgala then told her that he
wanted two of her hairpins. She could not understand
why, but still she got them and gave them to him. As she
and her husband looked on, Bilvamaṅgala said, “These
eyes are my enemy, imprisoning me in lust. If there is
no bamboo there is no flute. Similarly, if my eyes are
removed, my lust will also go. I will cut this lust at
the root. If I am blind, then my eyes will no longer be
attracted to beautiful women and only attraction for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa will develop.” He then pierced his eyes with those
hairpins. Blood oozed from his eyes and he became
totally blind. He began to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Soon, a boy approached him and
asked, “Bābā, where are you going?” The voice of that
boy was so sweet. He was that black cowherd boy who was
not like any other.

Bilvamaṅgala answered, “I am going to Vṛndāvana. My dear
boy, who are You?”

“I am a cowherd boy, and I am going to Vṛndāvana. If you
want to go to Vṛndāvana, you can hold onto My stick and
come with Me. I will help you.” Vṛndāvana was about a
six-month journey by foot, but after a few days the boy
announced that they had reached there. As they had
walked, Bilvamaṅgala created very sweet poems about the
mercy of Kṛṣṇa. They were very pleasing to the ear of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and later became known as the book Kṛṣṇa-
karnāmṛta—nectar for the ear of Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu later found this book, Kṛṣṇa-karnāmṛta, in
South India and He presented it to the devotees.

The first poem in the maṅgalācaraṇam of that book is:



cintāmaṇir jayati somagirir gurur me

śikṣā-guruś ca bhagavān śikhi-piñcha-mauliḥ

yat-pāda-kalpataru-pallava-śekhareṣu

                           18
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


līlā-svayamvara-rasaṁ labhate jayaśrīḥ



All glories to Cintāmaṇi and my initiating spiritual
master, Somagiri. All glories to my instructing
spiritual master, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who wears peacock feathers in His crown. Under the shade
of His lotus feet, which are like desire trees, Jayaśrī
[Rādhārānī] enjoys the transcendental mellow of an
eternal consort. (Cc. Ādi 1.57)



Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura pays obeisances to Cintāmaṇi, who
had inspired him to take shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. What type
of guru was she? A vartma-pradarśaka-guru, one who says,
“Come with me to a realized Vaiṣṇava.” The vartma-
pradarśaka-guru shows the path. He may be kaniṣṭhā, that
is alright. But the initiating guru should not be less
than a madhyama-adhikārī.

What are the symptoms of madhyama-adhikārī? You need to
know these symptoms before accepting a dīkṣā or śikṣā-
guru. If you do not see these symptoms, you should not
accept a person as guru. Otherwise, there will be so
many difficulties in your devotional life. If that guru
falls down, your life will be ruined and you will cry
bitterly.

The first symptom is:



tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam



Any person who is seriously desirous of achieving real
happiness must seek out a bona fide spiritual master and
take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of
a spiritual master is that he must have realized the
conclusion of the scriptures by deliberation and
arguments and thus be able to convince others of these
conclusions. Such great personalities, who have taken
complete shelter of the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside
all material considerations, are to be understood as
bona fide spiritual masters. [Bhāg. 11.3.21]



Though all symptoms should be there in full, two are
prominent. The first symptom is śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ
brahmaṇy; the guru has complete knowledge of the
scriptures. The second symptom is upaśamāśrayam; he is
detached from material desires. He is always so happy
serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa. If he is unhappy and feels that his

                           19
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

life has so many problems, then he is not qualified to
be guru. Haridāsa Ṭhākura was beaten in twenty-two
marketplaces, almost to the point of death, but he did
not consider this a problem. He kept chanting Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. Prahlāda Mahārāja was tortured by his
father, yet he never felt he had a problem. Rather, he
stood on the head of all problems. A guru who chants and
performs the nine processes of bhakti, and who has taken
dīkṣā, but who laments that he has so many problems—that
his wife has cheated him, his children are not with him,
he cannot manage or make money, or that he has no
computer or no sufficient material facility—should be
rejected at once. The third symptom of guru is that he
is realized in kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Without his having this
realization, because he still has material desires, he
is bound to fall.

Besides these three symptoms, a madhyama-adhikārī will
have four additional qualities. The uttama-adhikārī is
of course superior and offers a superior result in
bhakti, but such a guru is rare in this world. In the
absence of such an uttama-guru, the madhyama-adhikārī
can be accepted as a śikṣā or dīkṣā-guru. But one should
see whether or not he has the following four qualities:



1) prema—He has love and affection for Kṛṣṇa.[v]5

2) maitrī—He shows friendship towards and offers service
to the Vaiṣṇavas. He has three kinds of relations with
three kinds of Vaiṣṇavas: he honors and obeys with a
mood of friendship one who is more advanced than himself
in bhakti. He relates to equals as friends, and he is
also friendly to those whose bhakti is less developed.
So he has maitrī (friendship) with honor for superiors,
maitrī with mitra (friends on an equal level), and
maitrī with kṛpā (compassion) for subordinates.

3) kṛpā—He shows mercy to those persons who honor and
have faith in Vaiṣṇavas. Such a person’s faith may even
be worldly—in other words, they may have some material
sentiments in relation to the guru and the Deity. It may
be that they have more affection for the Deities than
for the devotees; and therefore they may not like to
meet with devotees and hear their hari-kathā. Such
persons may understand that they should obey the
scriptures, but they cannot act in the four ways that a
madhyama-adhikārī can act. Such persons may be ignorant,
but they want to learn how to advance in devotional
service.

4) upekṣā—He neglects offenders, persons who are against
the Vaiṣṇavas or who do not honor them. He is aware that
relating or associating with such persons destroys all
traces of bhakti.

We have thus discussed the three main qualities, as well
as four additional ones, which are found in a madhyama-
adhikārī who is qualified to be guru. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
warns us in his Bhakti-sandarbha that one who accepts a
guru for worldly name, fame and gain, and a guru who
accepts disciples for the same reason, will both fall
down. Their destination will be naraka, hell.

                           20
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī writes:



avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ

pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam

śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyaṁ

sarpocchiṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ



One should not hear anything about Kṛṣṇa from someone
who is not a Vaiṣṇava. Milk touched by the lips of a
serpent has poisonous effects. Similarly, talks about
Kṛṣṇa given by someone who is not a Vaiṣṇava are also
poisonous. (Padma-purāṇa: quoted in Bhāg. 6.17.40)



Therefore, one who makes an external show of being a
Vaiṣṇava but who fails to honor the Vaiṣṇavas, giving
preference to worldly fame and gain, should be given up
without delay, even though you may have taken both
hariṇāma and dīkṣā from that person. Such a guru is a
so-called guru and should be given up. This has been
explained in the Mahābhārata and other scriptures. If
you do not reject such a guru, you will have to go to
hell. Be ready for that. No Vaiṣṇava should be
dishonored, even a kaniṣṭhā-adhikārī, and what to speak
of a madhyama and uttama. The association of one who is
dishonoring or criticizing them should be given up. If
he says that he is a bona fide Vaiṣṇava and that he is
the only bona fide disciple of his guru, yet he commits
this offense, then his own guru, if bona fide, will
reject him.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī gives all of us a very important
instruction. We should not criticize anyone. We should
not think that because there are quarrels in the
transcendental world, such as those between the
followers of Śrīmatī Candrāvalī and the followers of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, that we may also quarrel. We should not
take sides and criticize.

Although someone may say that there is a difference
between Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Mahārāja and Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja, it is not true. There is
no difference. They are in the same disciplic line.
Swāmījī preached in the West and my Gurudeva preached in
India, yet they spoke the same message. Their love for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the same. Their teachings are the same.
Their service for Śrī Mahāprabhu is the same. One was in
the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness and
the other in the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. But both are in
the family of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu (gaura-parivāra),
so there is no need for quarrel. One should never
dishonor them. We should follow the instructions of the
ācāryas and try to develop our Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



                            21
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017




[On Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s request, devotees sing
Nanda-nandanāṣṭakam and Rādhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-stava-rāja.]
[vi]6



You should daily sing these two songs in your sādhana-
bhajana. If you know the meaning and are praying
sincerely, it will be very beneficial. Even if you don’t
know the meaning, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā will
hear you. By singing Nanda-nandanāṣṭakam, which
glorifies Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā will be so pleased that
She will give you all benedictions, whether you want
them or not. And when singing Rādhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa, Kṛṣṇa
will be so pleased that He will give you any benediction
you desire. If you want Kṛṣṇa to write your name in the
register of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s maidservants (pālyā-
dāsīs), He will do so at once. He is at the gate,
writing the list of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s dāsīs—those who
want to serve Rādhikā. You should therefore add these
two kīrtanas to your daily routine of bhajana, followed
by the singing of śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya and the mahā-
mantra. In this way your bhakti will become strong.




MĀDHAVA-TITHI: MOTHER OF PREMA BHAKTI




Today is ekādaśī-vrata. I think that most of you have
observed it. To observe ekādaśī fully, like Ambarīṣa
Mahārāja, is very rare. He lived in Satya-yuga, and he
was so strong that he could have fasted without sleep,
standing on one leg, without even taking water or air.
In Kali-yuga we are neither strong nor advanced; but we
are fortunate. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has explained
that on ekādaśī if we are hungry, we may take some fruit
juice or milk. We should not eat continually. It is not
that we drink a litre of one type of juice, and half an
hour later another type of juice, and again within half
an hour we take boiled potatoes and other vegetables,
then a large drink of water, half a kilo of paneer with
sugar, and another half litre of rabarī. We should eat
only as much as is needed to allay sleep and idleness.

Remaining awake day and night, we should spend ekādaśī
chanting and remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as Ambarīṣa Mahārāja
did. He was the emperor of the whole world, a
householder, and he was externally entangled in material
attachments. Durvāsā Muni was a brāhmaṇa and a realized
yogī. He could curse someone to die, and also bring a
dead man back to life. He was a brahmaṛṣi, a brahmavādī
with great powers. He thought: “I am born in a
brahminical family and am in the dynasty of Śaṅkara.
Therefore I am a manifestation of Śaṅkara. I am the son
of Atri and Anasūyā, who are highly learned uttama

                           22
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇavas. My parents gave so many teachings to Rāma and
Sītā-devī, who is Lakṣmī herself, when They both visited
my parent’s cottage. I am the greatest man in this
world, and I am the most powerful.” However, Durvāsā
Muni never observed ekādaśī.

Once in Madhuvana, Mathurā, Ambarīṣa Mahārāja observed
mahā-dvādaśī, neither drinking water nor sleeping. He
absorbed himself day and night in chanting, remembering,
serving the Deities, and praying. The next day, after
worshipping Śrī Kṛṣṇa, when he was ready to break his
fast, Durvāsā Muni arrived at his palace. Durvāsā was
like a god, a realized brahmavādī, but he had not
observed ekādaśī. Ambarīṣa Mahārāja requested him to
break ekādaśī, by taking mahā-dvādaśī pārana, after
which he himself would honor prasāda. Durvāsā Muni
replied, “Yes, but first I will take bath nearby in the
Yamunā River. I won’t be very long.”

He took so much time, however, that only a few minutes
were left before the auspicious time for breaking
ekādaśī would be over. Ambarīṣa Mahārāja wondered what
to do. “A brāhmaṇa-ṛṣi, a siddha mahā-yogī, has come to
my door. He is not an ordinary person and I should first
respect him by offering him mahā-prasāda, before I
myself take it. Otherwise, I will be disobeying Indian
culture, and I may possibly go to hell. On the other
hand, I must observe my ekādaśī-vrata, which is not a
worldly activity. It is transcendental, and if I fail to
observe it by not taking mahā-prasāda at the proper
time, I may lose my bhakti. Should I honor this
brāhmaṇa, or honor bhakti?” After careful consideration,
he chose to honor bhakti. “I cannot act against bhakti
in any way. Even if I lose some material prosperity or
go to hell, I will not disrespect ekādaśī. I will break
it within the prescribed time.” He then drank a drop of
water that had been used in the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
(caraṇāmṛta).

If one observes ekādaśī without taking juice or water,
he can break the fast by taking caraṇāmṛta. But if
water, fruit, juice, milk or vegetables have been taken,
one will have to break it by taking some grain;
otherwise his ekādaśī is not complete. Ambarīṣa Mahārāja
thought, “I have not taken even water during my
observance of ekādaśī, so I can take caraṇāmṛta. In this
way, because I will not have taken any grains, I will
also be respecting the brāhmaṇa.”

After taking a drop of caraṇāmṛta, Durvāsā Muni
returned. “I know you. You are only a so-called bhakta.
I am a siddha brāhmaṇa. You know my parentage. You know
of my great powers, and yet you have dared to dishonor
me. I will immediately burn you to ashes.” He took one
jaṭā (dreadlock) from his hair, dashed it to the ground,
and ordered it to become a burning fire. The fire demon
then ran towards Ambarīṣa Mahārāja in an attempt to burn
him to ashes. At that moment the Sudarśana cakra
appeared. Śrī Kṛṣṇa had ordered His cakra to always
protect the Vaiṣṇavas, persons who have taken shelter of
Him; so Sudarśana burned the fiery demon to ashes and
then moved toward Durvāsā ¬ṣi, who fled, taking his legs
on his head,[vii]7 and cried, “Save me! Save me! Save
me!”

                           23
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


When the fire demon approached Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, the
king chanted and was fearless. He thought, “Whether I
live or die depends on Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” He depended fully on
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and Sudarśana cakra saved him. Durvāsā Muni,
however, though a powerful brāhmaṇa and realized yogī,
feared death and fled. He tried first to take shelter of
his father, Lord Śiva; but seeing him approach, Lord
Śiva called, “Go from here! You are in this predicament
because you have dishonored a Vaiṣṇava. I know how
influential Vaiṣṇavas are and I fear offending them. If
I give you shelter, Sudarśana will also attack me.”

Durvāsā Muni then went to Lord Brahmā, who also refused
to help him. After this he approached Lord Viṣṇu and
prayed, “O Viṣṇu! O Viṣṇu! Save me from Your weapon. I
am taking shelter of You.”

Lord Viṣṇu said, “I am powerless to protect you. I have
no freedom. I am bound to My bhaktas. They have given
their hearts to Me, and I have given Mine to them. I am
in no way independent of My devotees.”



śrī -bhagavān uvāca

ahaṁ bhakta-parādhīno

hy asvatantra iva dvija

sādhubhir grasta-hṛdayo

bhaktair bhakta jana-priyaḥ



The Supreme Personality of Godhead said to the brāhmaṇa:
I am completely under the control of My devotees.
Indeed, I am not at all independent. Because My devotees
are completely devoid of material desires, I sit only
within the cores of their hearts. What to speak of My
devotee, even those who are devotees of My devotee are
very dear to Me. [Bhāg. 9.4.63]



If someone gets a thorn in his foot, it cannot be
removed from his head. It must be removed from his foot.
So Lord Viṣṇu is saying, “The Vaiṣṇavas are everything
to Me. It is My vow to protect them. If you want to be
saved, you must go to Ambarīṣa Mahārāja. Do not see him
as a family man or a king. He is not an ordinary person,
he is My dear devotee. Offer him your obeisances. He is
bhakta-jana-priyaḥ. Worldly persons tend to think, ‘I am
so learned, rich, and powerful. These bogus Vaiṣṇavas
are useless and only chant Hare Kṛṣṇa.’ But you,
Durvāsā, should become a sincere Vaiṣṇava. Then Śrī
Kṛṣṇa will protect you and bestow upon you kṛṣṇa-prema.”

Ever since Durvāsā Muni had begun fleeing from the
Lord’s weapon one year earlier, Ambarīṣa Mahārāja had
not eaten anything. When Durvāsā ¬ṣi finally came before
Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, the king apologized to him with great

                              24
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

humility. “I am nothing—not even a devotee. I have
disobeyed and dishonored you by breaking my fast.”
Durvāsā Muni fell flat at the lotus feet of Ambarīṣa
Mahārāja, who then embraced him.

Ambarīṣa Mahārāja asked him to be merciful and honor
mahā-prasāda. Durvāsā replied, “Please save me from the
Sudarśana cakra. His heat is burning me.” Ambarīṣa then
prayed, “O Prabhu, O Lord, if I have ever performed
devotional service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then please save this
brāhmaṇa.” No sooner were these words spoken then the
Sudarśana cakra became cool and returned to Lord Viṣṇu.
Durvāsā then expressed his new realization that bhaktas
are more powerful than Kṛṣṇa Himself. “Kṛṣṇa has given
all of His power to the Vaiṣṇavas. But they hide this
and cheat others, presenting themselves as fallen
persons. Tṛṇād api sunīcena. Although they are powerful,
they are also dīna-hīna (meek), being both generous and
polite.”

Durvāsā ¬ṣi then gladly took mahā-prasāda, after which
Ambarīṣa Mahārāja also honored prasāda along with his
whole family.

So be like that: humble, with a strong faith in
devotional service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. We can give our head,
life and soul to observe ekādaśī. Ekādaśī is the mother
of prema-bhakti and she will protect us. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written: mādhava tithi bhakti
jananī jatane pālana kori.Ekādaśī is mādhava-tithi. Holy
days like ekādaśī are bhakti jananī, the mother of
prema-bhakti. We should try to follow it as purely as
possible, not eating and drinking many times throughout
the day. If possible, observe it without even drinking
water (nirjala), or take a little prasāda once in the
day if this is not possible. Many old people, who are
lean and thin, can observe nirjala ekādaśī; so why not
those of you who are young and strong? You should try to
observe it like this. However, if by such fasting your
head spins and you go to sleep, then what is the use?
Try to remember Kṛṣṇa, associate with Vaiṣṇavas, read
śāstra and offer prayers day and night, such as: he
kṛṣṇa karuṇā sindhu dīna bandho jagat pate gopeśa gopīkā
kānta rādhā kānta namo 'stu te. Observing ekādaśī gives
even more spiritual power than brahma-jñāna and brahma-
yoga-samādhi.




THE GURU AS MANIFESTATION OF KṚṢṆA




Now we shall continue our discourses from Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta. Yesterday I recited one śloka from the
maṅgalācaraṇam of Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta by Śrīla Bilvamaṅgala
Ṭhākura:




                           25
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

cintāmaṇir jayati somagirir gurur me

śikṣā-guruś ca bhagavān śikhi-piñcha-mauliḥ

yat-pāda-kalpataru-pallava-śekhareṣu

līlā-svayaṁvara-rasaṁ labhate jayaśrīḥ



All glories to Cintāmaṇi and my initiating spiritual
master, Somagiri. All glories to my instructing
spiritual master, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who wears peacock feathers in His crown. Under the shade
of His lotus feet, which are like desire trees, Jayaśrī
[Rādhārāṇī] enjoys the transcendental mellow of an
eternal consort. (Cc. Ādi 1.57)



Here he first offers his praṇāmas to Cintāmaṇi, who had
directed him towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He then offers praṇāma
to his dīkṣā-guru, Somagiri.

Cintāmaṇi also means that the guru is cintāmaṇi
(touchstone), because he gives us Śrī Kṛṣṇa. And Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is actually also his śikṣā-guru. How beautiful
this śikṣā-guru is—with peacock feathers in His crown,
with three-folds on His neck and on His abdomen, and
with a three-fold bending form. He sings so sweetly. His
lotus feet are kalpa-vṛkṣa, wish-fulfilling trees. His
feet are like soft leaves (pallava) and His toenails
shine very beautifully. The tips of His toes are more
beautiful than the rays of the moon (candra-kiraṇa). The
rays of His toenails are very fragrant. Līlā-svayaṁvara-
rasaṁ labhate jayaśrīḥ. Jayaśrī means Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
She gives Her heart, life and soul to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Offering Her whole life thousands of times over, She
offers ārati to the rays coming from His toenails, and
by this She feels the same bliss as if it were Her
svayaṁvara.

What is the meaning of svayaṁvara?



Devotee: A marriage ceremony where you choose your
husband.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Not quite. I will tell you
about the svayaṁvara of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Once Draupadī met all
the queens of Kṛṣṇa—Satyabhāmā, Rukmiṇī, Lakṣmaṇā, etc.,
—at Kurukṣetra. Draupadī asked the queens how they were
so fortunate as to have gotten a husband like Kṛṣṇa.
Lakṣmaṇā then told the story of how she became Kṛṣṇa’s
wife. She was the darling daughter of a powerful king
who, seeing her as an extremely beautiful and qualified
girl, wanted to be sure to give her an equally qualified
husband.

He placed a very high pillar in the earth and on the top
of that he placed a spinning cakra. Above the cakra was

                           26
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

an artificial fish. The king promised the hand of
Lakṣmaṇā to the one who, while looking down at a
reflection of the fish in some water, could shoot the
pupil in the eye of the fish with an arrow.

The world’s champion archers were invited to attend:
Kṛṣṇa, Baladeva, Karṇa, Duryodhana, Jarāsandha,
Śiśupāla, Bhīma, Nakula, Sahadeva, Arjuna, and others.
Each was confident that he would marry the beautiful
Lakṣmaṇā. Bhīṣma also came; he was thinking, “If I will
shoot that fish in its pupil, then this girl will be
married to Duryodhana.” However, every one of these
archers failed in his attempt.

Arjuna came forth very boldly, but his arrow only
touched the tail of the fish. Then Śrī Kṛṣṇa stepped
forward and moved so swiftly that no one could see when
He picked up His bow. He then shot the arrow and pierced
the pupil of the fish’s right eye. Lakṣmaṇā told
Draupadī, “I became overjoyed, and my friends (sakhīs)
gave me a garland to place on my husband.” To select a
bridegroom from lākhās and lākhās[viii]8 of suitors is
called a svayaṁvara, a tradition in ancient India. At
Lakṣmaṇā’s svayaṁvara there were lākhās and lākhās of
men who were the sons of kings (rāja-kumāras). Although
they were very handsome and qualified, she had given her
heart to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, having heard His glories. When Kṛṣṇa
shot the eye of the fish, her face glowed with
happiness, her hair stood on end, she trembled and began
to fall as she gave a sidelong glance towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
And Kṛṣṇa, who is always searching for beautiful girls,
glanced toward Lakṣmaṇā. Receiving this glance, she
became so overwhelmed that she could not raise her arms
to place the garland on His neck. Her sakhīs had to help
her. She became so overjoyed that she lost external
consciousness. This was the happiness of svayaṁvara.

Similarly, Śrīla Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura explained that
Śrīmatī Rādhikā becomes overjoyed to serve the rays
coming from Kṛṣṇa’s lotus toenails. On the other hand,
Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and
the Vaiṣṇavas in our disciplic line are not pleased to
hear about Śrīmatī Rādhikā serving Kṛṣṇa. Rather, they
prefer that Śrī Kṛṣṇa obtains His happiness by serving
the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. They want to see
Kṛṣṇa praying for this opportunity.

Who is Kṛṣṇa? Śrīla Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī writes:



vaṁśī karān-nipatitaḥ skhalitaṁ śikhaṇḍaṁ

bhraṣṭaṁ ca pīta-vasanaṁ vraja-rāja-sunoḥ

yasyāḥ kaṭākṣa-śara-phāta vimūrcchitasya

tāṁ rādhikāṁ paricarāmi kadā rasena



Struck by the arrows of Śrīmatī Rādhikā's sidelong
glance, the son of the King of Vraja loses external
consciousness. His flute falls from His hand, His

                           27
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

peacock feather askew, and His yellow garment in
disarray. When will I be able to render service to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā with the topmost devotion? [Rādhā-rasa-
sudhā-nidhi 39]



Once, as Kṛṣṇa was going to graze the cows, He saw
Śrīmatī Rādhikā in a beautiful grove, peering at Him
from the corner of Her eyes. Śrīmatī’s eyes were
crooked, like a bow shooting arrows of prema. From this,
Kṛṣṇa lost control of Himself. His flute fell from His
hands and His peacock feather fell from His head. He
lost external consciousness and His body trembled.
Seeing this, Madhumaṅgala nudged Him and asked, “O
friend, what are You doing? Nanda Bābā, Yaśodāmaiyā, and
many elders are here. You can’t behave like this in
front of them.” Kṛṣṇa immediately came to His senses. So
Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī is praying, “I want to
serve this Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Her veil, fragrant from
contact with Her body, carries this fragrance to Kṛṣṇa’s
nostrils, and upon taking it in, He loses all control.”

The love and affection of Śrīmatī Rādhikā is higher than
that of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Although Śrīla Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura
writes that Kṛṣṇa is superior, those in the line of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and
Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī desire that Rādhikā be
always victorious over Kṛṣṇa.

So Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura is praying to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, his
śikṣā-guru. What kind of śikṣā-guru? Caitya-guru. In His
pastimes, Kṛṣṇa Himself comes as the śikṣā-guru. For
example, He became guru for Arjuna and the gopīs. He is
so merciful that prayers to Him will not go in vain. The
first duty of the devotees is to have faith in Him.
Śrīla Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī are
examples of those who possess such faith.

Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī often discussed the
glories of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. On one such
occasion, Śrīmatī Rādhikā noticed that it was already
midday and they had not yet eaten. She came to them as a
teenage girl (kiśorī) and said, “You have not prepared
any foodstuffs today. Are you fasting? My mother has
given Me some milk, rice and sugar. You should make
kṣīra for yourselves.” But neither Rūpa nor Sanātana had
the time to make kṣīra, and so Śrīmatī Rādhikā offered
to make it for them. She brought some dry cow dung, and
by her mere desire a fire was manifested. In a moment
She made very beautiful, tasteful kṣīra, presented it to
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and said, “Please offer this kṣīra to
your worshipable Deity (iṣṭa-deva), then give some to
your brother, and then take some yourself.”

Now, Sanātana Gosvāmī began to wonder who the girl was.
He questioned Rūpa, “O Rūpa, have you prayed to Rādhikā,
requesting Her to come?”

“No, I have not.”

“But She came and cooked for us. Taste this kṛṣṇa-
prasādam. It could only have been cooked by Her.”


                           28
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

As they each took some kṣīra, they wept uncontrollably
and cried out to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, “Now You have
disappeared, and our opportunity has gone. We did not
offer obeisances or serve You. Instead, we have troubled
You by having You cook for us.” Then Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī told his brother, “Rūpa, don’t do anything like
this in the future.”

How marvelous their devotion is! Try to follow in their
footsteps. Remembering pastimes such as this, we should
try to serve the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja has explained that dīkṣā-guru
is the rūpa of Kṛṣṇa and śikṣā-guru is the svarūpa of
Kṛṣṇa. Although both are equal, sometimes śikṣā-guru may
be superior, sometimes dīkṣā-guru may be; but all are
liberated—uttama-adhikārī.

Now he will explain Kṛṣṇa’s manifestation as bhakta:



īśvara-svarūpa bhakta tāṅra adhiṣṭhāna

bhaktera hṛdaye kṛṣṇera satata viśrāma



A pure devotee, constantly engaged in the loving service
of the Lord, is identical with the Lord, who is always
seated in his heart. [Cc. Ādi 1.61]



Dīkṣā-guru and śikṣā-guru are nondifferent
manifestations of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Bhaktas are also not
ordinary. They are the abode of Kṛṣṇa. They are the
āsana (seat), vasana (clothing), and śayyā (bed) for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa can take rest in their hearts because their
hearts are pure, free from worldly desires. In their
hearts there are no sufferings or problems—as in the
hearts of Śrīla Rūpa and Śrīla Sanātana. They don’t want
anything from Kṛṣṇa. Therefore He can take rest in their
hearts and sleep very peacefully. The hearts of jñānīs,
karmīs and yogīs are full of material desires. “O Kṛṣṇa,
give me a very beautiful wife. O Kṛṣṇa, I have no son. O
Kṛṣṇa, I want liberation (mukti).” But Kṛṣṇa’s pure
devotees don’t want anything for themselves. Their only
desire is for their bhakti to increase—to serve Kṛṣṇa
more and more.[ix]9

These six manifestations—Kṛṣṇa, dīkṣā-guru and śikṣā-
guru, the devotees, the diverse energies, the
incarnations, and the plenary portions—are all Kṛṣṇa
Himself, but manifested separately for His pastimes
(vilāsa). They are bheda and abheda—different and
nondifferent. This is called acintya-bhedābheda-tattva.

Vadanti tat tattva-vidas, tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam,
brahmeti paramātmeti, bhagavān iti śabdyate. Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja is explaining who Kṛṣṇa is. Please read from
Swāmī Mahārāja’s purport.



                           29
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                          5/5/2017


Devotee reads:

Text: Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute
Truth say that it is nondual knowledge and is called
impersonal brahman, localized Paramātmā and the
Personality of Godhead.

Purport: This Sanskrit verse appears as the eleventh
verse of the First Canto, Second Chapter, of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, where Sūta Gosvāmī answers the questions of
the sages headed by Śaunaka ¬ṣi concerning the essence
of all scriptural instructions. Tattva-vidaḥ refers to
persons who have knowledge of the Absolute Truth. They
can certainly understand knowledge. (Cc. Ādi 2.1)



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Nārada, Vedavyāsa, Brahmā,
Śaṅkara, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī are all tattva-vit; they
know the essence of the Vedic scriptures.



Devotee continues reading:

They can certainly understand knowledge without duality
because they are on the spiritual platform. The Absolute
Truth is known sometimes as brahman, sometimes as
Paramātmā and sometimes as Bhagavān. Persons who are in
knowledge of the truth know that one who tries to
approach the Absolute simply by mental speculation will
ultimately realize the impersonal brahman, and one who
tries to approach the Absolute through yoga practice
will be able to realize Paramātmā, but one who has
complete knowledge and spiritual understanding realizes
the spiritual form of Bhagavān, the Personality of
Godhead.

Devotees of the Personality of Godhead know that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the son of the King of Vraja, is the Absolute
Truth. They do not discriminate between Śrī Kṛṣṇa's
name, form, quality and pastimes. One who wants to
separate the Lord's absolute name, form and qualities
must be understood to be lacking in absolute knowledge.
A pure devotee knows that when he chants the
transcendental name Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is present as
transcendental sound. . . .



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes. One thing you can
remember:



yāha, bhāgavata paḍa vaiṣṇavera sthāne

ekānta āśraya kara caitanya-caraṇe



“If you want to understand Śrīmad-Bhāg-avatam," he
[Svarūpa Dāmodara] said. "You must approach a self-

                             30
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

realized Vaiṣṇava and hear from him. You can do this
when you have completely taken shelter of the lotus feet
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." [Cc. Antya 5.131]



Do not try to know about spiritual life only from books.
Everything is in Vedānta, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, and in the books of Swāmījī; but the
knowledge is under lock and key—a very powerful lock and
key. Because we are not so qualified, we will not
understand the meaning simply by reading. Yāha,
bhāgavata paḍa vaiṣṇavera sthāne. There are two types of
bhāgavata—grantha-bhāgavata (śāstra) and bhakta-
bhāgavata (Vaiṣṇavas). The grantha-bhāgavata is under
lock and key, and the realized soul, bhakta-bhāgavata,
will reveal its meanings.

By reading Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and
Swāmī Mahārāja’s books in the association of superior
devotees, we can know their meaning and experience the
ocean of rasa contained within them. Without the help of
an advanced Vaiṣṇava, one may read these books many
times and, as we have seen, still fall down. Why?
Without proper association, one is unable to take the
essence.

Go to a bhakta-bhāgavata. They are more merciful than
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and under their guidance we can
realize the mercy of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Otherwise, it is not possible.

Try to listen attentively and take this into your heart.
Those who know this tattva, like Nārada, Vyāsa, Śaṅkara,
Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanātana, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, etc.,
have concluded that nothing is separate from Kṛṣṇa.
Nothing is independent (svādhīna). This is called
advaya-jñāna-tattva, and it is an essential fundamental
truth.

Everyone is subordinate to Kṛṣṇa—Baladeva and all other
incarnations, all demigods and all living entities down
to the ants and grass. Māyā is also subordinate. The
only one fundamental truth is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and all others
are subordinate to Him. Is there a living entity in this
world who is independent, in this or any other universe,
or even in Vaikuṇṭha or Goloka Vṛndāvana? No—only Kṛṣṇa
is independent. All that we see is a manifestation of
His power (kriyā-śakti). Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the power of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and Lakṣmī-devī is the manifestation of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. We jīvas in this material world are
also in Kṛṣṇa, and this is called unity in diversity.

Those who are tattva-vit see this fundamental truth:
that the Absolute Truth is Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja quotes this verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
[1.2.11]. Those with jñāna see this Absolute Truth as
brahman. What is that brahman? It is merely the
perverted reflection of the rays of Kṛṣṇa’s toenail. It
is without form, qualities or pastimes. Paramātmā is a
part of Kṛṣṇa’s sat and cit potency. He is a small
fraction of Kṛṣṇa; He is not independent.

So Kṛṣṇa is called advaya jñāna paratattva. Everything

                           31
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017

is in Him.



ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ

kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ

mṛḍayanti yuge yuge



All of the above-mentioned incarnations are either
plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions of
the Lord, but Lord Sri Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality
of Godhead. All of them appear on planets whenever there
is a disturbance created by the atheists. The Lord
incarnates to protect the theists. (Bhāg. 1.3.28)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is that Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Supreme Personality of Absolute Truth. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
and other śastras confirm this verse from Brahma-
saṁhitā:



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam



There are many personalities possessing the qualities of
Bhagavān, but Kṛṣṇa is the supreme because none can
excel Him. He is the Supreme Person, and His body is
eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. He is the primeval
Lord Govinda and the cause of all causes. (Brahma-
saṁhitā 5.1)



His manifestation is Baladeva Prabhu in Vraja. Baladeva
Prabhu is nondifferent from Kṛṣṇa. Only the color is
different—one white, one black.

From Baladeva Prabhu, Mūla Saṅkarṣaṇa, Mahā Saṅkarṣaṇa,
Mahā-Viṣṇu (who is also known as Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu),
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and Śesa have
manifested. So Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of the
Absolute Truth, advents as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and
His supreme power, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, comes as Śrī
Gadādhara Paṇḍita.

After Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes at the end of Dvāpara-yuga
were completed and He returned to His aprakaṭa
(unmanifest) Goloka Vṛndāvana, He began to think of the
pure devotion that He wanted to distribute, even to the
trees and creepers. Only Kṛṣṇa would be able to give
this. The yuga-dharma, the religious principles for each
age, can be given by Mahā-Viṣṇu (Advaita Ācārya)—and

                            32
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                          5/5/2017

this is His function—but He cannot give kṛṣṇa-prema.
Baladeva Prabhu also never gives it. He leaves it for
Kṛṣṇa to distribute. That very Kṛṣṇa, who can give love
and devotion to all, took the mood and color of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and became Śrī Gauracandra. Why did He do this?
Because His mercy is unparalleled and causeless. As the
ocean of rasa, He wanted to taste the fulfillment of His
three desires and also bestow that kṛṣṇa-prema, which
had not been distributed to the jīvas since the previous
day of Lord Brahmā.



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇah kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śrīyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥḥ



May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī Śacī-
devī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant spiritual
knowledge of the mellow taste of His service. (Cc. Ādi
1.4)



The meaning of this śloka is deep, and the complete
causeless mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is within it.
You should understand the essence of this śloka and
become very beautiful, qualified devotees. Without
understanding this properly, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa alone
will not be sufficient to receive the Lord’s full mercy.
By understanding this śloka the quality of your chanting
will enhance. With a clear understanding of this śloka
and its mood, we can focus internally while chanting—
otherwise we will not be able to do so. Māyāvādīs also
chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, but they go to hell. Karmīs also
chant, but with the desire to increase money, name and
fame. But one who chants under the guidance of a highly
qualified guru or Vaiṣṇava will develop a high-class,
superlative quality of chanting. Otherwise, this name
will fulfill your material desires, but bhakti will not
come. Try, therefore, to understand the essence of these
instructions.




THE PURPOSE OF LORD CAITANYA’S DESCENT




We shall continue our reading from Caitanya-caritāmṛta,

                           33
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Third Chapter, which explains who Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is, and how and why He came to this world.
Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja tells us that Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, Śacīnandana Gaurahari, is Kṛṣṇa Himself,
Svayam Kṛṣṇa. He is not only Bhagavān, but Svayam
Bhagavān,[x]10 Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa. This Kṛṣṇa is
eternally situated with all His attributes and with His
power, which is personified in the form of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Even if the sun could be separated from its
heat and light, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa can never be separated.

Kṛṣṇa played in Vṛndāvana for ten years. He took birth
in Mahāvana Gokula and played there for His first few
years. Then both His family and Rādhā’s family moved to
Vṛndāvana, where They enjoyed unlimited pastimes. The
place Nanda Bābā's family stayed at is called Chatikara,
and Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja stayed at Ral. They then moved to
Kāmyavana, then Khelanvana, and finally to Nandagāoṅ
Gokula and Varṣānā, respectively. In each dwelling place
They made a new village, and so Their villages were
always side by side. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa met at these places
and eternally performed Their topmost pastime of rāsa-
līlā, as well as other pastimes, there.

When Kṛṣṇa comes to this world, the whole of Vraja comes
with Him: His associates, the Yamunā River, Govardhana
Hill, Bhāṇḍīravana forest, and the entire eighty-four
krośas of Vṛndāvana. He comes once in a day of Brahmā,
in order to taste the five rasas of His pastimes—śānta,
dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, and mādhurya. Although He
enjoys these rasas, He still has three unfulfilled
desires; to fulfill these is the essential reason for
His appearance as Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Also, because He
is an ocean of causeless mercy and an ocean of rasa, He
wanted to sprinkle drops of special mercy on the jīvas,
so that they would come to Him and serve Him forever.



Devotee reads:

In this chapter of the epic Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has stressed that Lord
Caitanya appeared for three principal purposes of His
own. The first purpose was to relish the position of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is the prime reciprocator of
transcendental love of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Lord Kṛṣṇa is the
reservoir of transcendental loving transactions with
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. The subject of those loving
transactions is the Lord Himself, and Rādhārāṇī is the
object. Thus the subject, the Lord, wanted to relish the
loving mellow in the position of the object, Rādhārāṇī.

The second reason for His appearance was to understand
the transcendental mellow of Himself. Lord Kṛṣṇa is all
sweetness. Rādhārāṇī's attraction for Kṛṣṇa is sublime,
and to experience that attraction and understand the
transcendental sweetness of Himself, He accepted the
mentality of Rādhārāṇī.

The third reason that Lord Caitanya appeared was to
enjoy the bliss tasted by Rādhārāṇī. The Lord thought
that undoubtedly Rādhārāṇī enjoyed His company and He
enjoyed the company of Rādhārāṇī, but the exchange of

                           34
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

transcendental mellow between the spiritual couple was
more pleasing to Srimati Rādhārāṇī than to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Rādhārāṇī felt more transcendental pleasure in the
company of Kṛṣṇa than He could understand without taking
Her position, but for Sri Kṛṣṇa to enjoy in the position
of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was impossible because that
position was completely foreign to Him. Kṛṣṇa is the
transcendental male, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the
transcendental female. Therefore, to know the
transcendental pleasure of loving Kṛṣṇa, Lord Kṛṣṇa
Himself appeared as Lord Caitanya, accepting the
emotions and bodily luster of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

Lord Caitanya appeared to fulfill these confidential
desires and also to preach the special significance of
chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare
/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, and to
answer the call of Advaita Prabhu. These were secondary
reasons.

Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī was the principal figure
among Lord Caitanya's confidential devotees. The records
of his diary have revealed these confidential purposes
of the Lord. These revelations have been confirmed by
the statements of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his various
prayers and poems.

This chapter also specifically describes the difference
between lust and love. The trans-actions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and Śrīmatī Rādhikā are completely different from
material lust. Therefore the author has very clearly
distinguished between them. (Cc. Ādi 4 intro.)



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: While Śrī Kṛṣṇa was thinking
how to fulfill His desires, the time came in Kali-yuga
to preach the yuga-dharma, the religion of the age. At
the same time, Advaita Ācārya came to prepare a platform
for the descent of Kṛṣṇa and His associates. Advaita
Ācārya wanted to give kṛṣṇa-prema, but He could not—
because this was not the function of Mahā-Viṣṇu. This
was not even possible for Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, Kalki, Vāmana,
or Paraśurāma. All of these avatāras could establish the
yuga-dharma, but they could not give to plants, animals,
creepers, or anyone what Svayam Bhagavān, Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, could give—prema-bhakti.

Baladeva Prabhu can give this special prema, but does
not. He reserves it for Kṛṣṇa to give and He Himself
simply assists. Similarly, in the pastimes of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, Nityānanda Prabhu can also distribute that
special kṛṣṇa-prema, mādhurya-prema, but He never does.
He leaves it for Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His
associates, like Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda, Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Raghunātha Go-svāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī and
others like them. Nityānanda Himself distributes general
prema.

So there are four reasons for Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
appearance—two external and two internal. The external
reasons were: firstly, to establish yuga-dharma, and
secondly, to satisfy Advaita Ācārya who, offering tulasī
leaves, called for Kṛṣṇa to descend.

                           35
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


By His love, Advaita Ācārya induced Kṛṣṇa to come to
this world. If any devotee takes very soft leaves of
tulasī, with a mañjarī in the middle, and offers it to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, while weeping and praying to Him, Kṛṣṇa will
not be able to refuse that devotee. He will have to
leave Goloka Vṛndāvana and at once come to him. To
inspire Kṛṣṇa to hear us, we should also worship tulasī
daily, as Advaita Ācārya has done. By this method we can
certainly please Kṛṣṇa, even if we are unable to please
Him in any other way. By this method Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and all Their
associates will enter our hearts.

Actually, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śacīnandana Gaurahari, is
Kṛṣṇa Himself, and Nityānanda is Baladeva Prabhu.
Through saṅkīrtana, the yuga-dharma, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
bestowed His prema to all types of living entities. Even
Kṛṣṇa could not have induced the forest inhabitants to
chant and dance as Caitanya Mahāprabhu did. Serpents,
elephants, tigers, she-goats—everyone became inspired by
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He sang, “Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa he. Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, rakṣa mām. Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, pāhi mām. Rāma Raghava, Rāma
Raghava, Rāma Raghava, rakṣa mām. Kṛṣṇa Keśava, Kṛṣṇa
Keśava, Kṛṣṇa Keśava, pāhi mām.” At this time, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu was not in His external senses. He was
weeping and sometimes rolling on the ground.
Overwhelmed, all the animals, creepers and trees began
to chant along with Him.

So, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu distributed this rare prema,
which He did not even give to Brahmā, Śaṅkara, Uddhava
and Nārada, to all who came to Him. He made serpents
into Vraja serpents, deers into Vraja deers, and cows
into Vraja cows. After receiving Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
mercy, they all developed intense affection for Kṛṣṇa.

When Kṛṣṇa came to this world He was also merciful, but
He gave kṛṣṇa-prema according to the quality of the
devotee’s surrender and devotional practice—not less,
not more, but in the same quantity, like a scale.



ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ



As all surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly.
Everyone follows My path in all respects, O son of
Pṛthā. (Bg. 4.11)



An analogy may be given about a pot. This pot represents
our qualification for kṛṣṇa-prema. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa was

                             36
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

present, He never gave a pot to anyone. He said, “Oh,
bring your pot. According to the type and size of your
pot, I will give you that much prema.”

Without your qualification, Kṛṣṇa will not give you
prema. If you have committed many offenses, He will not
give prema. But Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is giving the
pot—and the prema. He and Nityānanda Prabhu are so
merciful. They have no scale at all. Because Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, Śacīnandana Gaurahari, is the son of Śacī-
devī, He is so merciful that whoever comes to Him
receives His mercy. Without a scale He says, “Come on,
come on. Do you have a pot?” “No, I have no pot. No
qualification.” “Oh, alright then. I will give you the
pot and also this nectar, kṛṣṇa-prema.”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave prema to so many, but this
is only a secondary reason for His appearance. The
primary cause for Kṛṣṇa’s descent as Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu was to taste the three moods of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, which only She could taste. He therefore
borrowed Her internal mood and beauty, and became
tadātmā with Her. Tadātmā means 'oneness'. For example,
when iron is placed in fire it can burn. Iron does not
burn; only fire has this power. But, when placed in
fire, the iron becomes tadātmā with it, and can
therefore also burn. Similarly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa became tadātmā
with Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and forgot that He is Kṛṣṇa.

When Caitanya Mahāprabhu met Rāya Rāmānanda at Godāvarī,
He learned rasa-tattva from him. Rāya Rāmānanda is
Viśākhā, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, in the
form of Śrī Caitanya, made Śrīmatī Viśākhā-devī His
guru, to help Him develop the mood and beauty of Rādhā.
After that, Kṛṣṇa, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu, became
mahābhāva-rasarāja-svarūpa. Without accepting Viśākhā as
His guru, this would not have been possible. So, after
meeting with Rāya Rāmānanda, Śrī Caitanya tasted these
three moods in the Gambhīrā at Jagannātha Purī. He is
therefore very grateful to Viśākhā and also to Lalitā.
Without their help Kṛṣṇa cannot taste Rādhikā’s three
moods.

Because Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Krsna, He can
distribute vraja-prema, especially parakiya-bhāva (love
between a paramour and the beloved). This is called
unnatojjvala-rasa. Unnata means 'highest', and ujjvala
means 'brilliantly shining'. Rasa means the mellow of a
specific relationship with Kṛṣṇa.

The brilliance of unnatojjvala-rasa is unparalleled. All
of our ācāryas in the Gauḍīya sampradāya have come to
this world to teach this. They did not come to taste
what Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to taste, but to
distribute this same rasa which Mahāprabhu came to
distribute. The distribution of unnatojjvala-rasa is the
main reason, but not the foremost supreme reason, for
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s advent. It is the second
internal reason. The first was to taste Rādhā’s mood,
and the second internal reason was to distribute the
service to that mood. He wanted to distribute that
prema, which is rare even for Brahmā, Śaṅkara and
Nārada, upon the jīvas. This is Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s mission and can only be done by the power

                           37
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

of Kṛṣṇa in the form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Similarly, all our ācāryas—like Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana
Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, Viśvanātha Cakravarti Ṭhākura,
Śyāmānanda Prabhu, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Baladeva Vidyābhuṣaṇa,
Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura,
Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and Śrīla
Bhaktivedanta Swāmī Mahārāja—have not come only to
preach the glories of chanting the holy name. This can
also be done by the associates of Mahā-Viṣṇu. Try to
understand this point. The expansions or manifestations
of Mahā-Viṣṇu, like Advaita Ācārya, can preach and
distribute the holy name, but They cannot preach vraja-
prema through nāma-prema-saṅkīrtana. There is a vast
difference between the nāma-saṅkīrtana of this Kali-yuga
and that of other Kali-yugas. This is a specialty of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, His followers and associates.

Incarnations of Mahā-Viṣṇu—like Advaita Ācārya and
associates like Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanātana, Sanat
Kumāra, Viśvaksena, and all the associates of Viṣṇu—can
perform and establish nāma-saṅkīrtana and yuga-dharma,
but that nāma-saṅkīrtana will not give kṛṣṇa-prema,
vraja-prema. The nāma-saṅkīrtana of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and His associates has a special power that
can give this. Unnatojjvala-rasa is the special mood of
Śrīmatī Radhika. It can be tasted by Kṛṣṇa as Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, but cannot be distributed.

What then did Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu give? He did give
unnatojjvala-rasa, but unnatojjvala-rasa is of two
kinds: kāmātmikā (which He tasted) and tat-tad-
bhāvecchātmikā (which He distributed). Kāmātmikā is the
mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Lalitā, Viśākhā and the other
eight principal gopīs, and all other gopīs like them.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā has five kinds of sakhīs (gopī friends):
sakhī, nitya-sakhī, prana-sakhī, priya-sakhī and priya-
narma-sakhīs. Priya-narma-sakhīs are also known as
parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs.[xi]11



1) Sakhīs—Daniṣṭhā is an example. These sakhis love and
serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Krsna, but they are slightly
more inclined towards Kṛṣṇa.

2) Nitya-sakhīs and 3) prana-sakhīs—The only two kinds
of sakhīs who are in the category of tat-tad-
bhāvecchātmikā. It is their service that Śrī Caitanya
Mahaprabhu ultimately came to give the jīvas. These
sakhis serve both Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, with a
tendency to favor Śrīmatī Rādhikā and render service to
Her. They obey only Her. The prana-sakhīs, like Rūpa
mañjarī and Rati mañjarī, being even more intimately
connected with Her, are naturally the leaders of the
nitya-sakhīs.

4) Priya-sakhīs and 5) priya-narma-sakhīs—Lalitā and
Viśākhā are examples. Among the sakhīs, the priya-sakhīs
and the priya-narma-sakhīs are most dear, and they both
serve yugāla-kiśora, the divine youthful couple, but

                           38
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

with a slight tendency towards Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Both
these sakhīs have so much power that they can sometimes
chastise Rādhikā and at other times chastise Kṛṣṇa.



The difference between the nitya and prana sakhīs, and
the priya and priya-narma sakhīs is that the nitya-
sakhīs and prana-sakhīs are called mañjarīs. They do not
do anything for their own personal relationship with
Kṛṣṇa. They do everything for Śrīmatī Rādhikā. They have
no desire to taste anything for themselves. This bhāva,
which is called tat-tad-bhāvecchātmikā, is also
unnatojjvala-rasa. It is this type of unnatojjvala-rasa
that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to distribute. This is
a very high topic and I am speaking it for only a very
few, rare persons.

One may ask why I am speaking about it at all. In this
śloka it is explained that to do sādhana we must first
be clear about our objective. For example, if we want
money, we may have to serve the government, get a job,
or do business. If you do not do business, you might
steal; and if you are not expert in stealing, you might
get a group of dacoits and forcefully attack with swords
like the āsuras (demons). Śrī Kṛṣṇa also forcefully
attacked Bhīṣmaka’s kingdom, where lākhās and lākhās of
kings and their armies waited in full force to protect
Rukmiṇī from Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa, like a lion entering a
group of jackals, took Rukmiṇī on His chariot and rode
to Dvārakā where He married her.

If someone’s goal is to accumulate money and if, by
begging, he doesn’t get it, he will get it by hook or by
crook. Standing outside a sweet shop a dog will drool as
he watches people eat rasagullā and rasamalai. He will
not enter the shop, which the owner guards with a stick,
but runs to lick from the leaf cups when they have been
thrown away. And while he is licking the cups, he will
try to guard them from any other dog in the vicinity.

Similarly, in spiritual life our objective should first
be fixed, and then we can decide how to achieve it. This
practice is called sādhana and the goal is called
sādhya. Without the sādhya one cannot determine his
sādhana. This is why Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja presents the
sādhya in the first śloka after the maṅgalācaraṇa of Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 1.4).

Is your objective to accept what Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
came to give—that vraja-prema, that unnatojjvala-bhāva?
If it is, then come to me. You should go to the school
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, read all the Gosvāmī’s
literature, and learn how to develop greed for it. There
are no rules and regulations for how this greed will
come. By associating with and hearing from a bona fide
Vaiṣṇava, greed can come. By śastric arguments alone,
this greed will not come.

A very ordinary, ugly, deformed, and poor person may see
Princess Diana of England. He may have some greed to
make her his wife. Although to make her his wife is
absurd, to have this greed, no wealth, no qualification
is required. Greed cannot be controlled. Spiritual greed

                           39
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                          5/5/2017

is acquired by hearing. Hearing about what? The beauty
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the affection of the gopīs for Him as
described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also
describes how Kṛṣṇa was controlled by the gopīs, praying
to place His head on Their feet and beg for mercy.

By hearing the topics of Caitanya-caritāmṛta and the
books of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī from a pure devotee, a greed
may come whether one is otherwise qualified for it or
not, whether one is a pure devotee or not. When greed
comes, one becomes qualified to choose his means of
practice (sādhana). He immediately achieves ruci and
gallops toward his goal.

Those who practice sādhana-bhajana of Kṛṣṇa out of fear
of going to hell are practicing what is called vaidhī-
bhakti-pravṛtti. Practicing because greed has arisen in
the heart is called rāgānuga.

There is a difference between rāgātmikā and rāgānuga
devotees. Those in this world who have rāga
(attachment), and who are just reaching the stage of
bhāva, are rāgānuga. And those devotees who have not
reached this stage, but who are developing some greed
(rāgānuga-pravṛtti), will eventually be qualified to
practice rāgānuga-bhakti. They are not practicing
rāgānuga yet, but they are approaching it. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came only to give this greed; and to those
who already have greed, to give them bhāva; and to those
who have bhāva, to give them prema. What kind of prema
does He give? Not Śrīmatī Rādhā’s mood. Not
unnatojjvala-kāmātmikā-bhāva, but unnatojjvala-tat-tad-
bhāvecchātmikā. Try to understand. Although all of you
will not understand, try to understand. After ten years
or twenty years, or in a future life, by being in the
association of unnata (elevated) Vaiṣṇavas you can
realize something. I am also trying to develop this
greed. I am not a rāgānuga Vaiṣṇava but I pray that in
this life, or if I am not qualified, then in a thousand
lives from now, that I may receive the mercy of a
rāgānuga Vaiṣṇava. I want nothing other than this—
nothing else. I don’t mind dying, but I do mind taking
water from anywhere other than Keśī-ghāṭa or Mānasa-
gaṅgā-ghāṭa—or any ghāṭas, or bathing places of the
gopīs—tat-tad-bhāvecchātmikā-gopīs.

Now I will explain the mūla-śloka:



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇah kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sada hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥh



May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī Śacī-
devī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His

                           40
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant spiritual
knowledge of the mellow taste of His service. [Cc. Ādi
1.4]



This śloka is from the maṅgalācaraṇa of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s Vidagdha-mādhava. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
inspired Rūpa Gosvāmī in Prayāga to fulfill His desire
to distribute unnatojjvala-parakiya-bhāva and, along
with this, to distribute knowledge to the jīvas about
what Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu tasted. This bhāva is
unparalleled even in Goloka Vṛndāvana, what to speak of
this world. This prema is the nitya-dharma (eternal
religion) of all living entities—not just those in human
bodies.

If a husband who has affection for his wife sees that
his wife has affection for another man, he will be
upset. Similarly, if the wife knows that her husband
internally loves someone else, she will be upset. Either
way, their whole life together will be upset. We see
this relationship between husband and wife, lover and
beloved, not only in humans, but creatures, creepers and
trees. Without this love one cannot live.

The perverted reflection of prema is the desire to
satisfy the body, and this is called kāma (lust).
Because it is not pure, it will cause pain, suffering
and problems. In this world it is seen that a man cannot
fully satisfy any woman and vice versa. After one month,
two months, or one or two days, he or she will look for
someone else. Because of lust we are imprisoned in the
material world, seeking satisfaction in wife, husband,
children, mother, father, friends and worldly objects.
And Kṛṣṇa arranges for us to taste the result of
material attachment and lust.

When Rāma came with Sītā, He taught us the result of
lust. Sometimes a husband becomes controlled by his
wife’s lust. When Rāma, Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa were in the
jungle, the demon Maricī came in the shape of a golden
deer. Sītā saw him and told Rāma, “I want this deer. You
can catch it alive, or You can shoot it and bring his
skin.” Lakṣmaṇa warned Rāma not to follow the deer. “He
is actually a demon, and he will cause You many
problems. Don’t go. Disobey Your wife.” Although Rāma is
Bhagavān Himself and is therefore not controlled by
māyā, He is showing what can happen when a man comes
under the control of a woman. Rāma said, “I must carry
out the order of My wife, even if the deer is a demon.”

Rāma went after the deer and, as a result, He had to
leave Sītā twice. Finally, He left her forever, only due
to others doubting her purity after her being with
Rāvaṇa for some days. She was pure, but because others
doubted, Rāma had to follow them. He sent her into the
forest and lamented deeply. Although He lived in a royal
palace and Sītā lived in the forest in the āśrama of
Valmiki, sleeping on a grass mat and cutting wood for
cooking, it was Rāma who repented. “I have sent Sītā to
the jungle, so I will also live as a renunciate and not
taste any pleasures.” He stayed alone in His palace,

                           41
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

sleeping on a mat on the floor. Sītā slept easily. Rāma
could not. He would always weep, “Sīte, Sīte, Sīte, I
have made a mistake by trying to satisfy my subjects.”
Sītā was consoled by Vālmīki, but there was no one to
console Rāma, no one to wipe His tears. So He wept
constantly, and one who knows the heart of Rāma will
also weep bitterly.

Once, Rāma performed a rājāsuya-yajña (sacrifice) on the
bank of the river near Naimiṣāraṇya. All of His
subjects, including His mothers, brothers, monkeys
(including Hanumān and Sugrīva), and Vibhīṣaṇa etc.,
were assembled there. The yajña would be conducted from
early morning to ten o’clock, and in the middle of the
day all assembled to hear kathā from the Purāṇas.

One day the twin sons of Rāma and Sītā, Lava and Kuśa,
arrived in that assembly. They were eight or nine years
old, very beautiful, and closely resembling Rāma
Himself. No one knew who they were or from where they
had come. Playing a vīṇā, they began to recite the
Rāmayaṇa that they had heard in the āśrama of Vālmīki.
They sang in such a marvelously melodious tune, as with
a vīṇā, where high sounds trembled down to low ones in a
rāga suitable for karuṇa-rasa (spiritual lamentation).
The tune was so sweet that all present were stunned in
pindrop silence as they sang the pastime, where Sītā,
Rāma, and Lakṣmaṇa in the dress of sannyāsīs left
Ayodhyā for the forest under the order of Kaikeyī—and
where Daśaratha, lamenting, “Ha Rāma! Ha Rāma!” died
immediately.

As Lava and Kuśa sang, Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata, Kaikeyī,
Hanumān, Sugrīva and the entire audience were moved and
wept bitterly, as if the pastime was taking place before
their eyes.

As the day drew to a close, Rāma sent Lakṣmaṇa to give
Lava and Kuśa a donation of a pot of golden coins, fine
silken cloth and golden ornaments. Lakṣmaṇa descended
from His throne and called, “My dear boys, please tell
Me your father’s name and where you are from. Lord Rāma
wants to know your identity.”

The boys first became silent and then said, “You know
the Vedas. You are a learned person, You must therefore
know that it is not proper etiquette to inquire from a
brāhmacārī or sannyāsī about their father and mother,
wife, daughters or sons. We are two brāhmacārīs. You may
therefore inquire about the name of our Gurudeva, the
whereabouts of our āśrama, or request us to speak hari-
kathā. We are disciples of Vālmīki.”

Lakṣmaṇa became silent and felt ashamed that He had
asked this question. “Please accept these golden pots
containing jewels and golden ornaments.”

The boys replied, “We are simple brāhmacārīs. What use
do we have of such opulent gifts? We eat fruit and
without the use of a vessel we drink water from our
hands. Please return these gifts to Rāma, who is a king
and has use for them.”

Lava and Kuśa returned to their mother, who had been

                           42
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

anxiously waiting for them. Taking the boys in her arms,
one in her left, the other in her right, she caressed
them and asked, “O sons, why have you come home so late
today?”

“Today, mother, we went far away to the assembly of a
king.” They did not know the king’s name. “There we sang
the pastimes of Sītā and Rāma. We don’t know why, but
everyone present was weeping—the king Himself, His
brother, and even the monkeys. While there, we saw
something very unusual: a golden statue that looked
exactly like you—the same face and same beauty—but
whereas you speak, this statue did not.”

Sītā began to weep bitterly but could not explain to
Lava and Kuśa Rāma’s banishment of Her.

The next day, Rāma said to Valmiki, “I know Sītā is
staying in your āśrama. Immediately bring her to
Ayodhyā. I can’t live without her.”

The next day, Sītā arrived in Ayodhyā. Looking down at
the ground as she walked, and with Lava and Kuśa holding
her hands, they followed Vālmīki and silently entered
Rāma’s kingdom, wondering what was going to happen.
Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Hanumān, Kauśalyā and others eagerly
gazed at the sight of Sītā returning to Ayodhyā. They
assumed that the two boys must be the sons of Rāma.
Because they were so beautiful, they could be the sons
of no other.

Rāma spoke to Sītā, “I want proof that you are pure,
that you have never been touched by Rāvaṇa.”

Sītā responded in a mild voice with honor for Rāma, “Do
You not accept the proof of my purity from Daśaratha
Mahārāja and Agnideva? I will now give you proof.” And
she prayed, “O Pṛthivī, you are my mother. If I am pure,
if I have never known anyone except Rāma, if my heart
has never been attracted even for a moment to someone
else, please open and take me in your lap.” She said
this three times. At once the earth divided in two and a
beautiful golden chariot appeared. Pṛthivī-devī took
Sītā on her lap and the earth closed.

Rāma immediately jumped up crying, “Sīte! Sīte! Sīte!
You have left Me! O mother-in-law, Pṛthivī-devī, return
My Sītā or I will shoot you and break you into pieces. I
want to see Sītā at once!”

Vālmīki appeared and said, “Rāma, don’t be so
distressed. You should go to Sītā. She is waiting for
You.”

So Rāma is showing the world the result of lust. “Don’t
do as I have done, or there will be so many problems.”
To be happy, try to attain pure love for Kṛṣṇa. Material
love is an endeavor to gratify selfish desires, whereas
pure kṛṣṇa-prema is the opposite, free from the
slightest taint of selfishness. To distribute our sva-
bhāva-nitya-dharma (eternal religion), Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu descended to this world. Don’t waste this
good opportunity to practice bhakti-yoga in the
association of pure devotees who are free from politics,

                           43
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017

hypocrisy, duplicity and diplomacy. We should understand
that this prema is our sva-bhāva-nitya-dharma and, to be
happy forever, we will have to achieve it. Don’t let
lust create a disturbance in your life. If you are
married, that is alright, there is no harm. Treat your
wife as Kṛṣṇa-priya, serving her with love and
affection, but reserving your real inner affection for
Kṛṣṇa. This world is a training center. Take training
but don’t become entangled, or you will have so many
problems. Do your duty, maintain your wife and children.
Wealth is not bad if properly utilized. Don’t think your
family is there to fulfill your lust. Practice bhakti,
serve your family and make this world like Vaikuṇṭha.




AUSPICIOUS INVOCATION




anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ



May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī Śacī-
devī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant spiritual
knowledge of the mellow taste of His service. (Cc. Ādi
1.4)




VIDAGDHA-MĀDHAVA & LALITA-MĀDHAVA



This śloka was composed by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī as the
maṅgalācaraṇa, the auspicious invocation, of his
Vidagdha-mādhava, an authentic book written by him to
fulfill the wishes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

While Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī was traveling from Vṛndāvana to
Jagannātha Purī, he came to a village named
Satyabhāmāpura. There, in the final part of the night,
he had a dream. If at this time of night a person wakes
from a dream, the dream may be true. For high-class
devotees—all their dreams are true. Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
dreams, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dreams, and the dreams of pure
devotees are never false.

                           44
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī dreamt that a divya-rūpa-nārī, a
celestially beautiful lady, came and gave him an order:




āmāra nāṭaka pṛthak karaha racana

āmāra kṛpāte nāṭaka haibe vilakṣaṇa



“Write a separate drama about me,” she said. “By my
mercy, it will be extraordinarily beautiful.” (Cc. Antya
1.42)



“Do not make one book, make two books—one for Vraja, and
one for Dvārakā. Do not mix them.” Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
realized that this was actually Satyabhāmā herself
speaking to him.



After having that dream, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī considered,
“It is the order of Satyabhāmā that I write a separate
drama for her. I have brought together in one work all
the pastimes performed by Lord Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana and in
Dvārakā. Now I shall have to divide them into two
dramas.” [Cc. Antya 1.43-44]



When he arrived in Purī, he met Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
who gave him the same instruction: “Do not take
Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa out of Vṛndāvana.”



On the next day, when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu went to
see Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the omniscient Lord spoke as
follows: “Do not try to take Kṛṣṇa out of Vṛndāvana, for
He does not go anywhere else at any time. ’The Kṛṣṇa
known as Yadu-kumāra is Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa. He is different
from the Kṛṣṇa who is the son of Nanda Mahārāja. Yadu-
kumāra Kṛṣṇa manifests His pastimes in the cities of
Mathurā and Dvārakā, but Kṛṣṇa the son of Nanda Mahārāja
never at any time leaves Vṛndāvana.’”

After saying this, Caitanya Mahāprabhu went to perform
His noontime duties, leaving Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī somewhat
surprised.

“Satyabhāmā ordered me to write two different dramas,”
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī thought. “Now I understand that this
order has been confirmed by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
Formerly I wrote the two dramas as one composition. Now
I shall divide it and describe the incidents in two
separate works. I shall write two separate invocations
of good fortune and two different introductions. Let me
think deeply about the matter and then describe two

                           45
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

different sets of incidents." (Cc. Antya 1.65-71)



What is the meaning? One should not take Vṛndāvana Kṛṣṇa
to Dvārakā and Mathurā. In tattva[xii]12 they are all
one; there is no difference at all. But by rasa-vicāra,
by the vision of rasa,[xiii]13 Vrajendra-nandana and
Vasudeva-nandana are not the same. An ordinary person, a
kaniṣṭhā-adhikārī, could not have understood this, but
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī grasped the meaning at once. Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī is an uttama-adhikārī and of course all
tattvas are revealed to him, but even a madhyama-
adhikārī, if he is actually in the line of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, can understand this principle.

In his first book, Vidagdha-mādhava, he wrote this
maṅgalācaraṇa.




ŚRĪLA RŪPA GOSVĀMĪ’S WRITING



While Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī lived in Purī, he stayed in the
cottage of Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Haridāsa Ṭhākura was so
humble that he would not go to the Jagannātha Mandira
for darśana. Instead, he did sāṣṭāṅga praṇāma from afar.
“I am so wretched,” he thought. “As a Muslim, I have no
good qualities and am impure.” Following the humble
mentality of Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
considered, “Because I am the servant of a Muslim king,
I am also like a Muslim.”

One day Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to Haridāsa
Ṭhākura’s cottage with all His associates, such as
Nityānanda Prabhu, Advaita Ācārya, Svarūpa Dāmodara and
Rāya Rāmānanda, to meet with Rūpa Gosvāmī. Theirs was a
very learned assembly. Rāya Rāmānanda asked, “What books
are you writing? Please show me. You should recite the
first śloka, the maṅgalācaraṇa.”



Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya said, “Now please recite the
description of the glories of your worshipable Deity.”
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, however, hesitated due to
embarrassment because Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was
present. The Lord, however, encouraged Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, saying, “Why are you embarrassed? You should
recite it so the devotees can hear the good fruit of
your writing.” [Cc. Antya 1.129-130]



Although Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī was very learned, because of
his humility he was ashamed and did not want to show his
writing. But when the devotees asked repeatedly, he
agreed and recited the śloka.



                           46
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017


anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ



May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī Śacī-
devī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant spiritual
knowledge of the mellow taste of His service. [Cc. Ādi
1.4]



Everyone became so happy. “How beautiful,” they all
said. “This śloka is full of siddhānta.[xiv]14 We have
never heard anything like this. We have heard so many
ślokas, but never one like this.”



When Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī thus recited his verse, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu disapproved of it because it
described His personal glories. He expressed the opinion
that it was an exaggerated explanation. (Cc. Antya
1.131)



Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, “It is not a good śloka. The
first three lines of this śloka are so beautiful, but
sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ is like poison in milk. It
has spoiled the whole thing.”

Svarūpa Dāmodara disagreed. “This fourth line has made
the verse like condensed milk with camphor or miśrī
(sugar candy). This fourth line has made it so much more
tasteful.”

Then Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu told all the devotees, “Be
merciful to Rūpa Gosvāmī so that he may know My heart
and fulfill all My desires.”




RARE AND VALUABLE



Why did Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja take this as one of the
maṅgalācaraṇa ślokas of his own Caitanya-caritāmṛta? He
was such a learned person that he could write hundreds
of ślokas in a very short time—in a moment. He has
written so many other ślokas in Caitanya-caritāmṛta and

                           47
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

he has also written Govinda-līlāmṛta which contains more
than a thousand ślokas. Also in other books he has
written so many good ślokas. Why then did he use this
śloka written by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī?

Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja humbly thought, “I am such an
ordinary person, I have no bhakti at all. Undoubtedly,
Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is Rūpa mañjarī,[xv]15 is a siddha-
mahāpuruṣa. So if he glorifies and prays to Kṛṣṇa, then
his prayer will be more effective, more powerful than
mine.”

In the same way, if we recite the prayers of devotees
like Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Rūpa
Gosvāmī and Svarūpa Dāmodara, it will be more powerful
than if we invent our own. We should not sing kīrtanas
of persons who are not qualified and who have no
devotion. Even though they may be able to create very
ornamental language in English, Hindi, Bengali or
Sanskrit, still we should not sing their songs. We
should only sing the songs of authentic Vaiṣṇavas. By
singing and praying like this, surely our iṣṭadeva, our
worshipable Deity, will be happy.

Anarpitam-carīṁ cirāt. Anarpita means 'not given'; cirāt
means 'for a long time'. What is it that has not been
given? And what is that long period? That long period is
Lord Brahmā’s one day, which contains so many years.
Four lākhās, thirty-two thousand years (432,000 years)
is the duration of Kali-yuga. Twice this (432,000 x 2 =
864,000 years) is the duration of Dvārupa-yuga, thrice
this (432,000 x 3 = 1,296,000 years) makes Tretā-yuga,
and four times this (432,000 x 4 = 1,728,000 years)
makes Satya-yuga. These four yugas taken together are
called a catur-yuga. One catur-yuga lasts for 4,320,000
years.

This same cycle of four yugas multiplied by seventy-one
is one manvantara (4,320,000 x 71 = 306,720,000 years),
and there are 14 manvantaras[xvi]16 in a day of Brahmā.
There are therefore so many years in one day of Brahmā
(4,294,080,000 years); and the same period is the length
of his night.

It had been this long since Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had
come and given this unalloyed unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-
bhakti-śriyam. We are very lucky to have taken birth
only five hundred years after Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
and His followers. It is only four hundred years since
the time of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī,
and two hundred fifty years since Narottama Ṭhākura and
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
lived one hundred years ago. And Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura left this world in 1937; it is
therefore only sixty years since he has disappeared. It
is only thirty years since our Gurudeva Śrīla
Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Mahārāja passed on, twenty years
since Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja passed away,
and Śrīla B.R. Śrīdhara Mahārāja left only ten years
ago.

We are therefore very fortunate. If we don’t understand
and follow the teachings of our ācāryas and try for this
unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam, then perhaps

                           48
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

lākhās and lākhās of births will pass until we again get
this opportunity. On the other hand, if in this birth we
go to a bona fide guru and become qualified, then we may
take our next birth on the planet and in the place where
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu enacted His pastimes only two
hundred years before—that is, at the time of Narottama
dāsa Ṭhākura or Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Our birth
after that may be where and when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
Himself is performing His pastimes with His associates.
We should try to understand these points and not think
that this śloka (anarpita-carīṁ cirāt) is only
propaganda, for it is as bona fide as Kṛṣṇa Himself.

Now, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau. In
Kali-yuga, Kṛṣṇa as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to this
world along with His associates, during the seventh
manvantara.[xvii]17 Twenty-seven catur-yuga cycles of
Satya-yuga, Tretā-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga and Kali-yuga had
passed, and it was during the twenty-eighth catur-yuga
cycle that He came.

Why did He come? Samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-
bhakti-śriyam. Samarpayitum means 'to give'. What did
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu come to give? Something very
precious and rare. Even Brahmā, Śaṅkara, Nārada and
Śukadeva Gosvāmī want to have this, but to this day they
have not received it.




THE MOOD OF VṚṆDĀVANA



Uddhava also wants this. He went to Vṛndāvana, where he
realized the glories of Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā and the gopīs
—especially Śrīmatī Rādhikā. On one hand he became very
happy, but at the same time he felt hopeless. We may be
pleased to see Mt. Everest, which is about thirty
thousand feet high, but we cannot imagine what it would
be like to be that high. We would become hopeless if we
tried to compare ourselves with such a height.
Similarly, when Uddhava came to Vraja from Mathurā and
saw the gopīs, Yaśodāmaiyā and Nanda Bābā exhibit the
height of love for Kṛṣṇa, he could not imagine such
love. When he entered Nanda Bābā’s home, he saw him
weeping in separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whom he thought
his own son.

Uddhava considered, “How is this? Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He is greater than
Nārāyaṇa, Rāma, and all other incarnations. He has
mercifully come to Nanda’s house and is like a son to
him, but actually He is not the son of anyone. He is
neither the son of Vasudeva nor Nanda nor Yaśodā. How
strange that Nanda thinks Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be his son!”

Nanda Bābā then asked Uddhava, “Will Kṛṣṇa come? Does He
remember us?” And he began to weep loudly. “I want to
forget Kṛṣṇa,” he said. “And for this reason I go to the
bank of Yamunā. But I see there so many trees and
creepers and Yamunā-devī Herself—all telling me the

                           49
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

history of Kṛṣṇa’s childhood. Every place and every
living creature there reminds me of Kṛṣṇa.”[xviii]18

Nanda Bābā explained how he wanted to console his heart
and forget Kṛṣṇa, how he left his home and went to
various places in Vṛndāvana. He lamented that because
all the trees in these places were continually crying,
“Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!”—they made him think of Kṛṣṇa even more
intensely. He explained how he went to Rāsa-līlā-sthalī,
Vaṁśīvaṭa, Bhāṇḍīravana, Kālīya-hrada-ghāṭa and then to
Govardhana, which was previously lifted by Kṛṣṇa, but
all these places were themselves crying. Even the
particles of dust were crying for Kṛṣṇa. Nanda Bābā had
been weeping so continuously that he could never take
any rest.

Hearing all this, Uddhava told Nanda Bābā how fortunate
he and Yaśodāmaiyā were to consider Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as their very loving son. “And
you are very affectionate to Him,” he said. “Sometimes
you chastise Him, bind Him, tie His hands and rebuke
Him. You are so fortunate.”

Nanda Bābā replied, “Previously I had thought that
because you have Kṛṣṇa’s association you must be a very
qualified person, but now I see that you are ignorant
and foolish with no knowledge at all. You say I am so
fortunate, but actually I am the most wretched person in
this world. You say that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. If this is so, it means that I
could not please that Supreme Personality when He was
living with me, and this is why He left me and went to
Mathurā. Then, to make matters worse, I could not die of
separation, crying out my son’s name as Mahārāja
Dāsaratha did. I am not a good father.” And again Nanda
Bābā began to weep.

Uddhava then told Yaśodāmaiyā, “Oh, I should not have
spoken to Nanda Bābā like this. It was certainly foolish
of me.”

Uddhava, the most exalted personality in the Vṛṣṇi
dynasty, was very intelligent and sharp in decision
making. He was Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s private secretary, His mantrī
(Prime Minister), His servant and His loving friend. But
now he was confused as to whether he had acted correctly
or not. “I have come to console Nanda Bābā, Yaśodāmaiyā
and the Vraja-vāsīs, but their bitter weeping is their
good fortune. I know that it is not wrong, because
scripture confirms that if even one tear comes in the
eye of someone crying for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he is certainly
fortunate. Nanda Bābā is weeping, and so he is truly
fortunate. To tell him to stop would be against śāstra.
But I have also made a mistake in encouraging him to
weep for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, because when he weeps he suffers so
much.[xix]19 How can I console him? What should I do?”

This was a very critical moment for Uddhava, who is our
authority, a great devotee, but who had now become
completely dumbfounded.




                           50
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017


GOPĪS’ SEPARATION



Uddhava spent the entire night speaking with Nanda Bābā
and Yaśodāmaiyā. Then, in the morning, he went to
console the gopīs in a nearby garden. This garden is
presently called Uddhava-kyārī.

When the gopīs saw Uddhava, they thought he was Akrūra.
The only ‘outsider’ they had seen before was Akrūra, so
they thought this outside person must be that same
Akrūra. The word ‘Akrūra’ means not cruel-hearted, but
the gopīs thought it ironic that his name was Akrūra
because they considered him very cruel for taking Kṛṣṇa
away. “Akrūra has again come to this place,” they
considered, “but he has already taken Kṛṣṇa to Mathurā.
Kṛṣṇa is not here, so what is his purpose in coming here
again in the same golden chariot? Oh, Kṛṣṇa has sent him
to let all the gopas and gopīs know that He is no longer
their son, but the King of Mathurā, Emperor of Mathurā.
He has sent Akrūra on that golden chariot to show us
that He is an important person; He is no longer a mere
cowherd boy, poor and without shoes and other opulent
apparel. To show off His grandeur He has sent His
servant.”

One gopī said, “I see that he is śyāma (of blackish
color)—but he is not Śyāma.[xx]20 He’s black, but he’s
not that same black person. He has taken Kṛṣṇa’s color,
ornaments, pītāmbara (yellow cloth), and other
paraphernalia, but he is not Kṛṣṇa.”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is always in mahābhāva-daśā,[xxi]21
did not actually see Uddhava. She began to speak with a
bumblebee, thinking that he, the bee, was the dūta
(messenger) of Kṛṣṇa.

“You have come drinking wine,” She said to the
bumblebee.



Bumblebee, you are accustomed to drinking honey from the
flowers, and therefore you have preferred to be a
messenger of Kṛṣṇa, who is of the same nature as you. I
have seen on your mustaches the red powder of kuṅkuma
which was smeared on the flower garland of Kṛṣṇa while
He was pressing the breast of some other girl who is My
competitor. You feel very proud because of having
touched that garland, and your mustaches have become
reddish. You have come here carrying a message for Me,
anxious to touch My feet. But My dear bumblebee, let Me
warn you—don't touch Me! I don't want any messages from
your unreliable master. You are the unreliable servant
of an unreliable master. (Kṛṣṇa, The Supreme Personality
of God-head ch. 46)



Sometimes Śrīmatī Rādhikā was laughing, sometimes
joking, and sometimes She was criticizing Kṛṣṇa that He
was guilty of leaving them and going to Mathurā. Kṛṣṇa,

                           51
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

who was present in the form of the bee, tasted Her mood
of ecstatic separation.

Therefore we see that Śrī Kṛṣṇa tasted the moods of both
separation and meeting. He tasted dāsya-rasa, sakhyā-
rasa, vātsalya-rasa and śṛṅgāra-rasa (mādhurya-rasa). He
tasted everything, and this has all been described in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So why did Kṛṣṇa come to this world?
He was already enjoying in Goloka Vraja.




TWO KINDS OF VRAJA



There are two kinds of Vṛndāvana. One is Goloka
Vṛndāvana, and the other is Vraja on this earth, Bhauma
Vṛndāvana. In this universe there are many millions of
planets. We cannot count them. Even Brahmā cannot count
them, nor Saṅkarṣaṇa (a manifestation of Balarāma) who
is the father of all, the creator of all. Even if He
could, no other personality can do so. In every universe
Vraja is manifested, and each Vraja is called Bhauma
Vṛndāvana.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is always in Goloka Vṛndāvana, sporting with
all His associates—Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Lalitā, Viśākhā,
Citra, Candrāvalī, Śyāmalā, Bhadrā and all others. He
plays with friends like Śrīdāma, Sudāma, Vasudāma,
Stoka-kṛṣṇa, Labaṅga and Arjuna, and He also performs
pastimes with His parents like Nanda and Yaśodā. All
these devotees are present in Goloka Vṛndāvana, and at
the same time they are also present with Kṛṣṇa in
various universes, traveling with Him like a roadshow.
[xxii]22

There is no difference between all the manifestations of
Vraja in this material world and Vraja in Goloka. They
are nondifferent—and different at the same time. This is
acintya-bhedābheda-tattva. The Vrajas in this world are
real. They are manifestations of that Goloka Vraja. They
are not unreal. Yet, if they are real, and if they are
nondifferent, why do we want to go to Goloka Vṛndāvana?

There is a difference, and you should very carefully
understand it. In this Bhauma Vṛndāvana, siddha[xxiii]23
(fully perfected devotees) and asiddha (not yet perfect)
devotees—all saw Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Duryodhana could also
see some pastimes, but he could not understand who Śrī
Kṛṣṇa was. He Śrī Kṛṣṇa as an ordinary son of a gopa, an
ordinary cowherd boy.

Nārada Muni sees Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and always offers Him praṇāma. But when he went
to Vraja, Bhauma Vṛndāvana, Yaśodāmaiyā brought her
lāla, her darling son, to him and placed Him at the feet
of Nārada Muni. Yaśodāmaiyā took his foot-dust and said,
“Your foot-dust will save Kṛṣṇa.” What did Nārada Muni
think by hearing this from Yaśodāmaiyā? He thought, “I
should not make any problems for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes by
showing that I consider Him the Supreme Lord. Let them

                           52
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

go on.” Seeing the glories of Nanda Bābā, Yaśodāmaiyā
and the gopīs, he was trembling, fearing he might make
an offense. He feared that if he told Yaśodāmaiyā that
Kṛṣṇa was God, Kṛṣṇa might become angry because His
nara-līlā (human-like pastimes) would be disturbed.
Yaśodāmaiyā knew more tattva than Nārada, but due to the
influence of Yogamāyā, she considered Kṛṣṇa her little
boy who needed to become healthy and intelligent, and
who needed to have any inauspiciousness driven away by
the dust of Nārada’s feet.

Different classes of devotees can enter in the Lord’s
pastimes in this Bhauma Vṛndāvana, Bhauma Mathurā-
maṇḍala—whether they are siddha or not. But after some
years, the pastimes disappear and are no longer seen by
persons of this world. Only siddha devotees—those whose
love and affection have been perfected—can go to Goloka
Vṛndāvana where they will stay forever and never have to
return to this world. Being in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s association,
any spiritual being—whether kāya-vyūha (expansion),
sādhana-siddha or nitya-siddha—will never, never, never
take a material body in this world. They will never be
opposed to Kṛṣṇa. Because there is no māyā in Goloka
Vṛndāvana, they can never forget Kṛṣṇa. Only Yogamāyā is
there, helping the devotees to increase their prema for
Kṛṣṇa by arranging an opportunity for them to serve Him.
Because there is no chance of falling from Goloka
Vṛndāvana, siddha-bhūmi, no conditioned soul has ever
come from there. Rather, they have come from the
taṭasthā line,[xxiv]24 from Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu.

In order to help the jīvas by bestowing samarpayitum,
His causeless mercy, Śrī Kṛṣṇa comes as Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. I have given the explanation of this one
word, samarpayitum. Once in Brahmā’s day, Kṛṣṇa comes to
give a rare, special prema.




THE HIGHEST DEVOTION

YAŚOMATĪ-NANDANA



This song, Yaśomatī-nandana braja-baro nāgara gokula-
rañjana kāna,[xxv]25 contains very deep meanings. All of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s important pastimes are present in it. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written this song while he was
doing his bhajana[xxvi]26 in the middle of the night. In
fact, he wrote all his songs while absorbed in Kṛṣṇa’s
beautiful pastimes.

Yaśomatī-nandana—He is the son of Yaśomatī. Who is this
son of Yaśodāmaiyā? Braja-baro nāgara—nāgara means
beloved of the gopīs; there is no equivalent word in
English, or in any language in the entire world. These
are very special words, and those who are reading and
understanding Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi[xxvii]27 can actually
have some realization of them. Although this song is
actually for uttama-adhikārīs, we can hear it and sing
it—and perhaps a greed to serve Yaśomatī-nandana will

                           53
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

manifest. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has mercifully
appeared to give this greed.[xxviii]28

Yamunā-taṭa-cara gopī-basana hara rāsa-rasika kṛpāmoya.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is always wandering on the banks of the
Yamunā. Why? Sometimes He goes with the gopas for
cowherding, but it is not essential that they go to the
Yamunā for that; there are many other places they could
go. He particularly goes there because the beautiful
gopīs, carrying pots on their heads, will come there to
take water. The gopīs have many servants and
maidservants in their homes, but they think, “We should
bring the water ourselves.”

Yamunā water is not actually water. It is the love and
affection of the gopīs, and in it Śrī Kṛṣṇa takes bath.
The gopīs come there with the bahāna (excuse) that they
want water, but they are merely cheating their family
members. They actually only want to meet Kṛṣṇa, and to
do this they have given up everything—worldly religion,
duties toward their husbands, duties toward their
children, and all other household duties. They have even
given up their shame.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā:



ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ



As all surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly.
Everyone follows My path in all respects, O son of
Pṛthā. (Bg. 4.11)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa has promised that He will love anyone who is
loving Him. In whatever way one loves Him, He repays
that person. But He cannot repay the gopīs. He can repay
His friends, His servants like Hanumān, devotees like
Sanaka and Sanandana, and all the associates of
Rāmacandra. He can also somewhat repay His father,
Daśaratha Mahārāja, His mother, and all other friends;
but He cannot repay the gopīs. To try to repay them, He
goes to the banks of the Yamunā.

Sometimes the gopīs do not come, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa waits for
them the entire day. His eyes are roaming, always
searching for them. If anyone asks, “Why are You roaming
here and there?” He answers, “Oh, I have lost one of my
calves, and I am searching for him.” He knows many
tricks and He will play any of them.

Kadamba-kānana rāsa-parāyana.[xxix]29 These songs are so
beautiful and marvelous. When we associate with mature
Vaiṣṇavas, and our love and affection also matures, we

                             54
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

will realize and taste all these meanings. In this stage
we cannot taste them.

Fortunately for us, Caitanya Mahāprabhu has kindly come
to bestow His mercy. Somehow He will make arrangements
for us to increase our eagerness, or greed, for this
prema. If there is greed, then gradually the path will
also manifest.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu ordered Śrīla Rūpa, Śrīla
Sanātana and Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmīs to write
about pure bhakti. Unripe, immature, unqualified persons
will not read about this subject. Although the neem is a
very bitter tree and its small yellow fruits are also
very bitter, crows fly there and relish their taste.
Only the cuckoos will sit on the mango tree and taste
the very beautiful sweetness of the mangos.



arasa-jña kāka cūṣe jñāna-nimba-phale

rasa-jña kokila khāya premāmra-mukule



Those who are devoid of all mellows are like the crows
that suck the juice from the bitter fruits of the nimba
tree of knowledge, whereas those who enjoy mellows are
like the cuckoos who eat the buds of the mango tree of
love of Godhead. [Cc. Madhya 8.258]



I am therefore going to explain the Third and Fourth
Chapters of ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta. If anyone who hears
this develops some taste and eagerness, some greed for
what these chapters are offering, then our association
is successful.




THE BHAKTI-LATĀ-BĪJA



Anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau. You should
note in your heart that all of our guru-paramparā
ācāryas were rāgānuga[xxx]30 Vaiṣṇavas, rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇavas. None of them were practicing vaidhī-bhakti
only. They have come to this world to give this same
rāgānuga-bhakti, but they saw that, unfortunately, there
was a very large jungle of māyāvāda, karma, jñāna, yoga
and tapasya. In the beginning they had to cut all these
jungles, and much of their time was spent doing this.
Their real aim, however, was to give this nectar of
vraja-prema to the jīvas of this world; and we must have
some eagerness for this. Once that greed has manifest,
our path to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness will be clear.

The desire to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the seed of bhakti, the
bhakti-latā-bīja, and it is externally manifest as

                           55
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017

śraddhā, faith. The external activities of śraddhā can
be seen, but if this vāsana (desire to serve Kṛṣṇa) is
not there, then nothing is there. Gurudeva plants this
seed in the heart of the sincere Vaiṣṇava and we also
see externally that the disciple has great śraddhā, or
honor, for gurudeva, for śāstra and for Vaiṣṇavas.

When we cut the jungles of such worldly desires as
kuṭīnāṭī[xxxi]31 this bhakti seed (which is the tendency
or desire to serve Kṛṣṇa) can grow. Gradually the plant
of bhakti crosses the worldly jurisdiction of karma,
jñāna, yoga, tapasya, and all other impediments. It also
crosses Brahma loka and the desire to taste mukti,
eternal salvation.

By sādhu-saṅga and watering of the bhakti-latā, its
growth will be unstoppable—and it grows beyond even the
territory of Lakṣmī-pati (the husband of Lakṣmī),
Nārāyaṇa-loka, and crosses Ayodhyā, Goloka and Dvārakā.
Finally it reaches Vṛndāvana, where it takes shelter of
Kṛṣṇa (Vrajendra-nandana, Rādhā-kānta, Rādhānātha); and
here the creeper develops beautiful tasteful fruits. The
mālī (gardener), taking shelter (ālambi) of the creeper,
also reaches the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, and there he
tastes that sweet fruit of bhakti-rasa.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu explained to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
that another mālī is gurudeva—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
representative—and he gives the fruits to pure Vaiṣṇavas
to distribute among all the world’s devotees. Nityānanda
Prabhu, Advaita Ācārya, Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya
Rāmānanda also try to distribute this fruit, but the
number of fruits is endless—instead of decreasing, they
are always increasing.



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ



May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī Śacī-
devī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant spiritual
knowledge of the mellow taste of His service. (Cc. Ādi
1.4)



I will explain the general meanings of this śloka, and
this will give you some understanding of what Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu has taught to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.
All His teachings are in this śloka, and it is the sāra
(essence) of all His siddhāntas, or philosophical
conclusions. Because this śloka is the maṅgalācaraṇa-

                           56
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017

śloka, the rest of Caitanya-caritāmṛta is spoken just to
explain it.

Anarpita-carīṁ cirāt. Anarpita means 'has not been
given'. Cirāt means 'for a long time'. I have explained
that in Brahmā’s day Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu comes soon
after Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s appearance in this world. This prema
was given before—lākhās and lākhās of years before, and
since then so many Indras and Manus have come and gone.

Avatīrṇaḥ kalau samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-
bhakti. This Kali-yuga is glorious because Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu Himself came and gave what was not given for
thousands and thousands of yuga cycles—Satya-yuga,
Tretā-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga, Kali-yuga. He came to give
samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam.

What is unnatojjvala-rasa? There are five kinds of rasas
—śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya.

Sanaka, Sanātana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumāra were
devotees of śānta-rasa. They have so much niṣṭhā
(steadiness) in Kṛṣṇa but no relationship with Him—no
‘worldly’ relation of friendship, parenthood, etc. As
liberated souls they are with brahman or Nārāyaṇa, and
they have transcended the suffering and sorrows of this
world; but they have no human-like relation with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. They consider that because Kṛṣṇa is God, He has
no appetite, no thirst, and no fatigue. From their point
of view there would be no need to massage or wash His
feet, and because Śrī Kṛṣṇa has no appetite, there is no
need of offering Him sweet foodstuffs. They see Him as
the most self-satisfied of all ātmārāmas. Śānta-rasa
devotees are satisfied in themselves, but not in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. They think, “I am brahman.” They do not serve,
yet they are beyond worldly requirements.

There are many śānta-rasa bhaktas,   but it is rare to
find one in dāsya-rasa. Koṭiṣv api   mahāmune.[xxxii]32
Out of crores and crores[xxxiii]33   (hundreds of
millions) of Vaiṣṇavas, a Vaiṣṇava   like Hanumān is very
rare.

In this world there are two kinds of entities—sthāvara
and jaṅgama (non-moving and moving, respectively). Those
on the level of immovable trees do not have developed
senses. They feel sorrow, happiness and other emotions,
but they cannot express themselves. Among those entities
who can move here and there, like insects, birds,
animals and men, most are below human beings. This human
form is very, very rare. Even most of those who have the
form of men are still like dogs, asses and other animals
—if they are not favorable to Kṛṣṇa. Those who are
unmukha, favorable to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, are very, very rare.
Among crores and crores of unmukha persons, those with
intelligence and knowledge of how to serve properly are
rare. And among crores and crores of intelligent people,
those who serve Lord Nārāyaṇa are even more rare. Among
those who want to be devotees, a siddha (perfect)
Nārāyaṇa bhakta is very rare. Among them the Kṛṣṇa
bhakta is more rare, and those with the vraja-bhāva of
sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya-bhāva are more rare. Up to
vātsalya-bhāva, there is no ujjvala-rasa.


                           57
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Mādhurya-rasa is of two kinds. In Nārāyaṇa-loka,
paravyoma Vaikuṇṭha, there are only two and a half rasas
—śānta, dāsya, and half of vātsalya or sakhya. The
vātsalya-rasa of devotees like Daśaratha Mahārāja and
Kauśalyā are also half because their love is mixed with
aiśvarya-bhāva (awe and reverence). There is a great
difference between the son of Kauśalyā and Daśaratha and
the son of Yaśodāmaiyā and Nanda Bābā. Sometimes
Kauśalyā thought, “Oh, Rāma is God Himself,” and then
she began to pray to Him, but Yaśodāmaiyā never prayed
to Kṛṣṇa as God.

Once, looking inside Kṛṣṇa’s very little mouth while He
was yawning, Yaśodāmaiyā saw the whole universe along
with lākhās and lākhās of Brahmās, Śaṅkaras, and Viṣṇus.
She thought, “O Bhagavān, why am I seeing this? Kṛṣṇa is
only a little boy. There must be a ghost—or some magic.
Am I dreaming?” She pinched herself. “No, I am not
dreaming,” she concluded. “Then why am I seeing all
this?” She never considered that Kṛṣṇa is God.

She immediately ran to Nanda Bābā and asked, “Why am I
seeing these scenes? Bring Gargācārya and Sandilya ¬ṣis
so that they may perform a ceremony to protect Kṛṣṇa.”
When the brāhmaṇas came, Nanda Bābā and Yaśodāmaiyā gave
large amounts of wealth and cows as dakṣiṇā to them.
Gargācārya and Sandilya ¬ṣi then told Nanda Bābā to
bring a black cow. Mixing the urine and dung of that cow
to make a paste, they then took hold of its tail and
used it as a brush to apply the paste on Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Then
they chanted: lalāṭe keśavaṁ rakṣet/ nārāyaṇam athodare
rakṣet/ vakṣaḥ-sthale mādhavaṁ rakṣet/ govindaṁ kaṇṭha-
kūpake rakṣet/ viṣṇuṁ ca dakṣiṇe rakṣet/ bāhau ca
madhusūdanam rakṣet/ trivikramaṁ kandhare rakṣet/
vāmanaṁ vāma-pārśvake rakṣet/ śrīdharaṁ vāma-bāhau
rakṣet/ hṛṣīkeśaṁ kandhare rakṣet/ pṛṣṭhe ca padmanābhaṁ
rakṣet/ kaṭyāṁ dāmodaraṁ rakṣet.

“Now don’t fear,” they said. “Don’t fear.” They then
asked Nanda Bābā to again give dakṣiṇā in the form of
cows and other valuables, and everyone became happy.

On the other hand, when Arjuna saw Viśvarūpa (the
universal form), he was frightened and began to pray, “I
have committed so many offenses to You. I have called
You ‘friend,’ I have called You ‘Kṛṣṇa,’ and I have
ordered You to take my horses and be my sārathi
(charioteer). I have therefore dishonored You. Please
excuse me. I will never offend You again. Please
withdraw this universal form and show me Your human-like
form. I want You to be my friend in my chariot.”

Daśaratha Mahārāja and Kauśalyā also did not have the
same mood as Yaśodāmaiyā and Nanda Bābā, therefore the
Vraja mood is better than the mood in Ayodhyā.

In Vaikuṇṭha and Ayodhyā there is śuddha-dāsya (unmixed
servitorship), but in Vraja there is no such thing. In
Vraja, dāsya mixes either with friendship rasa or
parental rasa. There are unlimited servants of Nanda
Bābā who think, “Kṛṣṇa is my child.” They kiss Him, take
Him on their shoulders and play with Him. Sometimes they
also rebuke Him, “Oh, You are very dirty.” The servants
of Vaikuṇṭha and Ayodhyā cannot do this.

                           58
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


The relationship of Kṛṣṇa and His servants in Vraja is
very beautiful, but it is not called unnatojjvala-rasa.
Although it is more intimate than the pure dāsya-rasa of
Vaikuṇṭha and Ayodhyā, still it is called dāsya-rasa.

Sakhya-rasa (friendship) is higher than dāsya-rasa. It
is so intimate that Kṛṣṇa’s friends can wrestle with
Him. Hanumān cannot wrestle with Rāma, but Śrīdāma,
Subala, Madhumaṅgala, Arjuna, and all Kṛṣṇa’s friends of
Vraja can defeat Him; and in defeating Him, His
happiness greatly increases. He wants to always be
defeated by these friends. If Śrī Kṛṣṇa is defeated they
will be happy, and seeing this Kṛṣṇa becomes still more
happy. Then, when they see Kṛṣṇa more happy, their
happiness again increases.

By comparison, Hanumān cannot be so free with Rāma. When
Sītā-devī is present at night with Rāma, Hanumān is
bound to leave. So the friendship rasa, sakhya-rasa of
Vraja, is indeed very high and sweet. But still, it is
not called unnatojjvala-rasa.

Next we come to vātsalya-rasa, which is much more
elevated than friendship rasa. Yaśodāmaiyā can rebuke
Kṛṣṇa and tie Him with ropes. She can pull His ears and
say, “O naughty boy, You are always telling lies. Have
You eaten this earth?”

“Mother, I have never taken.”

“Oh, You have never taken? All the boys are saying You
did.”

“They are naughty. They want to see you punish Me. That
is why they are telling so.”

“Oh, I want to see inside Your mouth,” she said, and she
looked inside.

Yaśodāmaiyā can chastise Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but even that is not
called unnatojjvala-rasa.



· · · ·



There is a break in the class and all the devotees sing
Śrī Nanda-nandanāṣṭakam.[xxxiv]34



Come with me to a place very far from here. We are going
to beautiful Gokula Vṛndāvana, where the Yamunā is
flowing. We have now reached Brahmānanda-ghāṭa. There
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Nandanandana, Yaśodā-nandana, a boy of two
and a half years. He is wearing no clothing, except for
the peacock feather Yaśodāmaiyā put in His hair and a
very beautiful golden belt with dangling bells that she
tied around His waist. When He moves, there is a very
sweet tinkling sound. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is very happy, playing
with Śrīdāma, Subala, and all other boys nearby, and

                           59
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

some servants are guarding them so they do not fall into
the Yamunā.

All of a sudden the boys, especially Madhumaṅgala and
Śrīdāma, begin to clap very loudly. Kṛṣṇa wonders what
happened, why it is that everyone is clapping and
laughing for no apparent reason.

He asked, “Why are you clapping and laughing?” Joking
with Kṛṣṇa they said, “You are very black. Your mother
is so beautiful, with a golden complexion, and Your
father is also very golden. It is absurd to think that a
black son like You could have come from them. You are
not really the son of Nanda and Yaśodā.” They again
clapped, along with Baladeva. Kṛṣṇa was alone and the
others had teamed up against Him. They were making funny
faces, twisting their mouths, clapping and irritating
Kṛṣṇa by their different poses.

Kṛṣṇa became unhappy and began to weep. “Oh, I am not
the son of Yaśodā. Then where have I come from?”

They said, “Perhaps some lady has given birth to You,
and she could not support You; so on the day You came
from her womb, she put You in the hole of a tree. Then,
either Nanda Bābā or Yaśodāmaiyā saw You and very
mercifully brought You from there. You have certainly
not come from Yaśodā’s womb.”

Weeping very bitterly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa returned home and went
to His courtyard. Unable to control His tears, He began
rolling on the earth. That day He did not run into His
home calling, “Mother, Mother,” He was simply weeping.
Yaśodāmaiyā came at once and tried to put Kṛṣṇa on her
lap, but He pushed her away. He was very angry and very
sad. Yaśodāmaiyā asked, “My dear boy, my dear son. What
happened that You are weeping so much that You won’t
come on my lap?”

“Oh, I am not your son. Why are you calling Me your son?
I am not your son.”

“Why are You speaking like this?”

“All the boys are clapping and laughing and joking and
teasing Me. They say I am not your son, so I must now go
away to the forest.”

“Who is telling You this?”

“All the boys are saying it. Baladeva is also saying it;
He is taking their side and clapping.”

Yaśodāmaiyā somehow took weeping Kṛṣṇa on her lap and
said, “I promise You on the name of Nārāyaṇa, I am not
telling a lie. You are my son and You have come from my
womb.” After telling Kṛṣṇa this three times, He became
somewhat consoled. This beautiful vātsalya-rasa is not
in Vaikuṇṭha, Ayodhyā, or even in Dvārakā. It is not
even in Mathurā.

Once Nārada Muni came to the courtyard of Yaśodāmaiyā
and saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa rolling on the earth and weeping.
“Mother, Mother, Mother,” He cried. “I want to be on

                             60
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

your lap.”

But Yaśodāmaiyā said, “I will not take You on my lap.
You are such a dirty and naughty boy. You go to
neighborhood gopīs and steal their butter and other
things. You are like a monkey. I will not pick You up.”

Nārada was struck with wonder. “Yaśodamayī is so
fortunate,” he thought. “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is īśvaraḥ paramaḥ
kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ/ anādir ādir govindaḥ
sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam. Govinda, Kṛṣṇa, is the cause of
all causes. He is the primal cause, and He is the very
form of eternity, knowledge and bliss, and Yaśodā is
treating Him like her own son. Śrī Kṛṣṇa wants to come
on her lap, and she is saying, ‘Don’t come. Go away. I
do not like naughty boys.’”

Who can do this? Nārada, Śaṅkara, and Brahmā cannot.
Vasudeva and Devakī also cannot. Daśaratha and Kauśalyā
certainly cannot. Only Yaśodāmaiyā can. Nanda Bābā can
somewhat, but not exactly like Yaśodāmaiyā. So the
affection of Yaśodāmaiyā is also superior to his. But
still, it is not called unnatojjvala-rasa.



· · · ·



Now come with me to Dvārakā and see one of the two kinds
of mādhurya-rasa—svakīya-rasa. The other is parakīya. In
Dvārakāsvakīya is the best rasa of all. Who are those in
this rasa? Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s 16,108 queens. Of them eight are
most prominent. Among them Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā are
prominent, and among those two Satyabhāmā is the best.

Rukmiṇī was very beautiful, pativratā-dharma, a
perfectly chaste wife, but she was always in the mood of
serving Kṛṣṇa in a “rightest” or submissive mood.
Satyabhāmā, on the other hand, sometimes had so much
māna (transcendental jealous anger).

Kṛṣṇa was once sitting on the bed of Rukmiṇī-devī.
Lākhās and lākhās of maidservants were there to serve
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and Rukmiṇī-devī asked them all to leave the
room. She took the cāmara in her own hand and fanned
Kṛṣṇa with love and affection. On that same day,
however, Kṛṣṇa was very, very grave. He told Rukmiṇī-
devī, “I have done something wrong. I have disturbed
your subhāga (fortune). All the very beautiful, young
and qualified princes of the world wanted to marry you.
As far as I am concerned, I am black and not very
beautiful. In fact, I have no qualification at all. I am
nirguṇa (having no qualities). Because you are so
qualified, the sons of the richest persons in the world
wanted to marry you. You are the most beautiful lady in
the world. There is no one equal to you—no comparison at
all. You are the daughter of a very big king, but I am
not a prince. I am a very ordinary person. Only poor
persons have affection for Me. Those who are neglected
by everyone take shelter of Me—and I am also
affectionate to them. Rich, qualified and beautiful
persons do not like Me, and I am also not disposed

                           61
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

toward them. But all of them want you. So I think that
it would be better for you if I take you to a person who
is as beautiful, wonderful and qualified as you. If you
order Me, I will take you to that person. I do not want
you to have to stay with a person as unqualified as
Myself.

“You may argue that, ‘No one will marry me because I am
already married,’ but I assure you that everyone is
still eager to marry you. Śiśupāla wants to defeat me in
every way; so he would certainly marry you. In fact, all
the princes of the world want to defeat Me. So order Me
to whom to give you, with whom you will be very happy.”

After hearing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s words, the cāmara fell from
Rukmiṇī’s hands and she fainted. Śrī Kṛṣṇa was alarmed.
Trying to see whether she was still alive, He took some
cotton and put it under her nose. She was breathing very
slowly, as though she would die at any moment. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
then put His mouth near her ear and said, “O priyatama
(dearmost), Rukmiṇī, you are My life and soul. I was
only joking. If I knew that you were so soft and
sensitive, I would not have said these things to you. I
used to joke with the gopīs, and they would joke twice
as much back. They would tell Me, ‘Get out of this
kuñja. I don’t want to see the face of any black person.
All black persons are like You—always cheating others.
At once go from here.’

“I thought that you would be somewhat like the gopīs. I
never thought that you would be so sensitive that you
would almost die. You should know that in the
relationship between husbands and wives, the husbands
are always laboring very hard to maintain the family. In
the evening they are tired and return home—for the sole
purpose of seeing and hearing the sweet voices of their
little children and the sweet behavior of their wives.
Without this they would die.

“When husband and wife remain for a long time at home
they become like two vessels. When two or three vessels
come together they make sounds as though they are
quarreling. In the same way, this is the only rasa in
this householder life. I wanted to see your face when
you are angry, to taste its sweetness. I never thought
that you would be so devastated. You are My life and
soul. I will never joke with you like this in the
future. If you were to die, I would also die.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa wept as He spoke, and Rukmiṇī-devī regained
consciousness. When she gathered her senses she also
began to weep and said, “You are telling the truth. You
are nirguṇa because worldly satya, rajas and tama guṇas
(material goodness, passion and ignorance) are not in
You. I know You are God of gods. Only poor, neglected
persons worship You and serve You because rich persons,
with much material knowledge and coming from an exalted
family, are śrutā-śrībhir edhamāna.[xxxv]35 They are
always drowning in the ocean of false ego, thinking, ’I
am so learned, I have received all the degrees of all
the universities of the world. I am an elite Ph.D. with
so many credentials. I am from a very rich family and I
am so beautiful.’ If one is beautiful, he thinks, ‘I am
monarch of all I survey,’ and neglects his wife and

                           62
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

everyone else. Such materialistic persons cannot serve
You nor can they chant Your names. I think that only
persons neglected by the world, who know this world to
be full of birth, death and other miseries, can come to
You and serve You. I myself am under the modes of
nature, satya, raja and tama guṇas, and therefore
worldly persons like me; but they are unfortunate.

“I want to serve Your lotus feet as a maidservant of the
maidservant of Your maidservant, washing Your pots,
sweeping, and always serving in some way or other. I
want to serve those same lotus feet which the gopīs have
served. I do not want anything more. If You tell me to
leave You, I will die at once.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “I will never speak like this again. I
was only joking.”

All rasas are within Rukmiṇī-devī. But even this
affection is not called unnatojjvala-rasa.

In these topics we find such elevated siddhāntas. Try to
understand them all, because they are the siddhāntas of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.




THE GOPĪS’ SELFLESS LOVE




By his unconditional mercy Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came
to this world to give unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-
śriyam. Although the affection and service Kṛṣṇa
receives from His friends and Yaśodāmaiyā and Nanda Bābā
is very elevated, it is not unnatojjvala-rasa.

I have already discussed the pastime from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam where Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s wife, Rukmiṇī, fully gave
her heart to Him. The following story illustrates a
pastime of Satyabhāmā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s most dearly beloved
queen. Although very exalted, the love of Satyabhāmā and
Rukmiṇī for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is still not unnatojjvala-rasa.




SATYABHĀMĀ’S TRANSCENDENTAL ANGER



Once Śrī Kṛṣṇa and all His queens were sitting in His
assembly hall. Some fanned Him with a peacock fan, some
fanned Him with a cāmara and some served Him in various
other ways. At that time Nārada Muni[xxxvi]36 arrived,
holding a pārijāta flower from heaven. The pārijāta was
so beautiful, so fragrant, and so sweet that it made all
of Dvārakā fragrant. Nārada Muni approached Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and requested, “I am giving this flower to You. In my

                           63
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

presence I would like You to give it to Your most
beloved queen.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa thought, “Nārada is very tricky and now he
wants to create a problem for Me.” He knew that if He
gave the flower to any queen, His other wives would be
upset and angry with Him. He thought, “Why is Nārada
doing this? What shall I do?”

Nārada Muni repeatedly requested Śrī Kṛṣṇa to give the
flower to His favorite queen, saying that it would make
him very happy. Kṛṣṇa therefore saw no means of escape.
He thought, “I cannot cheat Nārada because he is so
expert at cheating others.”[xxxvii]37 He took the
pārijāta flower and looked towards all His beautiful
queens. They were all thinking, “Kṛṣṇa loves me most of
all.” They were all sure of this because whenever He met
with any queen Śrī Kṛṣṇa would tell her, “Oh, you are My
dearest queen.” Each was convinced therefore that she
would receive the flower.

Because Rukmiṇī was the seniormost queen, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
placed the pārijāta flower in her hand, and she became
very happy. “I am so fortunate to be Kṛṣṇa’s most
beloved,” she thought. “Now it is clear that I am His
favorite.”

Seeing this, the lips of the other queens began to
quiver, especially Satyabhāmā’s. She became like a very
poisonous snake which becomes highly disturbed when
provoked with a stick and begins to hiss.

While Nārada Muni relished this scene, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
considered that He was in very big trouble. Now He
wondered what to do. Satyabhāmā was so angry that she
could not control or hide her emotions. She immediately
left the assembly and, removing her very beautiful royal
garments and ornaments, stormed into the ‘anger room.’

Previously in India, the king’s palace had a kopa-
bhavana (anger room). When any queen was in an angry,
sulky mood, she would take off her royal garments, put
on old, dirty, worn and torn clothes, and enter there.
Sitting or laying—not on a bed but on the ground—she
would weep and lament. Then if the king heard her, he
would come to her, find the cause of her anger, and
satisfy her.

In the kopa-bhavana Satyabhāmā wept loudly, taking many
long breaths. Kṛṣṇa was aware of the seriousness of the
problem and He left the assembly. He silently entered
the room. Then, sitting by her side He tried to caress
her feet, but she reacted like a furious snake and
kicked His hands away.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa was very expert at how to deal with angry
ladies, because He had had so much experience in
Vṛndāvana with the gopīs. Because He had pacified
Śrīmatī Rādhikā so many times, it was easy for Him to
pacify Satyabhāmā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa did not need His flute in
Dvārakā, however, because the queens’ anger was not so
high that Kṛṣṇa needed it to pacify them. If He simply
showed some anger in response to theirs, they would
become submissive. Once Kṛṣṇa was glorifying the gopīs

                           64
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

in the royal assembly. Satyabhāmā could not tolerate
this and left. Śrī Kṛṣṇa became angry and announced to
the entire assembly. “She should get out of My palace,”
He said. “I don’t want to see her. Her father, Satrājit,
is wicked, and she is also wicked.” Someone went and
told her what Kṛṣṇa had said and she immediately
returned—her anger subsided and she was in a mood of
submission.

The gopīs, on the other hand, were not living in Kṛṣṇa’s
palace, nor was He supporting them with food, clothing,
and so on. Therefore they were not in any way
subordinate to Him. Rather they were svatantra,
independent like Him. They could chastise Him, whereas
He could not chastise them. They would say, “Go from
here. You do not support us. We take nothing from You.”
He could not pacify them very easily.

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa would fail in His attempts to pacify the
gopīs, He took the help of Lalitā and Viśākhā. If this
also failed, He would take the help of Subala. If that
failed, He would take His vaṁśī and play a tune steeped
in karuṇa-rasa, lamentation due to separation. Through
His flute He would tell the gopīs, “I cannot live
without you. I am dying, I am dying,” and then they
would accept Him.

Once, because of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s behavior, Śrīmatī Rādhikā
was experiencing so much māna (transcendental jealous
anger) that She would not come to meet Him. Many days
passed. Śrī Kṛṣṇa was lamenting greatly and wanted to
find a way to pacify Her. He therefore took shelter at
the lotus feet of Lalitā and Viśākhā, who whispered some
suggestions into His ear. Following their advice, He
came in the morning to Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s home in Yavaṭa,
dressed as a student begging alms. Wearing a sacred
thread, wooden sandals, and carrying an umbrella made of
palm leaves, He called, “I am a brahmacārī, a śiṣya
(disciple) of Gargācārya. I remain at a house only as
long as it takes to milk a cow. If I leave empty handed,
many calamities may befall you. Your cows may die, or
the master of the cows may die along with all the
members of your household.”

Jaṭilā, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mother-in-law, saw this very
beautiful student, as brilliant as the sun, calling out,
as māyāvādī-sannyāsīs do, the name of impersonal nirguṇa
brahman, “Alaka nirañjana! Alaka nirañjana!”

Seeing that He was begging alms, Jaṭilā wanted to give
Him a donation, but He refused to take anything from
her. “I cannot tell if you are married, unmarried, or if
you are a widow. If there is a chaste lady who has the
symptoms of marriage,[xxxviii]38 only then will I accept
any alms.”

Jaṭilā went inside the house and told Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
“Dear daughter, a very powerful student yogī has come,
and the rays emanating from His body are like the
effulgence of the sun. He looks like a scholar of the
Vedas. Don’t disobey or dishonor Him. Please give Him
some alms.”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā refused. “Because you always accuse Me

                           65
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

of being unchaste and speaking with boys, I will not go
even if He is a scholar or a yogī, or even if He has all
other good qualities.”

Jaṭilā repeatedly requested Her, but Śrīmatī Rādhikā was
not willing to go. Jaṭilā then told Lalitā and Viśākhā,
“She will not obey me. If She does not give alms to that
boy, all of our cows will die, and my son Abhimanyu will
also die. Please help me.”

Lalitā and Viśākhā went to Śrīmatī Rādhikā and told Her,
“You should obey your mother-in-law and give alms to
that scholar.” Somehow they made Her agree. She took
some grains, āṭā (flour), ghee, dahl, golden coins, and
other valuable objects and placed them in a golden pot.
Then, completely covering Her face with Her veil so that
it could not be seen, She came out of Her room with the
help of Her sakhīs and approached the place where Śrī
Kṛṣṇa was standing. She began to place the alms in His
begging cloth, but Kṛṣṇa refused. “I cannot accept
this,” He said, “My sole reason for coming here from
afar is to beg You to put Your anger in My cloth. If You
simply smile and give Your anger, I will be satisfied.
Otherwise I will die.”

A very slight smile appeared on Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s face
as She upturned the pot, not in His cloth but on His
head. Laughing, She immediately returned home with Her
sakhīs, and Kṛṣṇa was satisfied.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa had to try in so many ways to pacify Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and the gopīs. If His vaṁśī failed, if Lalitā
and Viśākhā failed, if Śrīdāma and Subala failed, and if
He Himself failed, then He had to discover a new method.

In Dvārakā, however, Śrī Kṛṣṇa had no use for His vaṁśī,
Lalitā, Viśākhā, the gopīs, Subala or Śrīdāma. His
chastising words were threatening enough for the queens.
But that was His final weapon. Here, He spoke in a very
mild voice to Satyabhāmā.

“Why are you so angry?” He asked Satyabhāmā. “I merely
gave Rukmiṇī one flower. I will give you a tree full of
pārijāta flowers and plant it in your courtyard. Please
don’t be angry.”

Satyabhāmā said, “Go away, I don’t want to see You. You
are a liar and a cheater. I cannot believe a word You
say. Several times You have told each one of us that we
are Your dearmost beloved. You say this, but You don’t
mean it. You cheat us all.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “I am not cheating you. Have faith in
Me. Test Me. Please give Me another chance.”

“Yes, I will give You one more chance. If, as You have
said, You can plant a pārijāta tree full of flowers in
my courtyard, then I will be happy.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa then sat with Satyabhāmā on the back of Garuḍa
and they traveled to Indra’s kingdom—and on the way He
killed the demon Narakāsura. When they arrived in
heaven, Śrī Kṛṣṇa told Lord Indra, “You always say that
I am your friend. Now I am asking you for one pārijāta

                           66
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

tree. I will take it to earth and plant it in the
courtyard of Satyabhāmā. Nandana-kānana is full of
pārijāta trees. Be pleased with Me and give Me one tree
from there.”

Lord Indra replied, “Oh, You are so daring. Leave heaven
at once and return to earth. Not even one flower from
the pārijāta tree can be given to worldly persons, what
to speak of a whole tree. How is it that You were able
to come here? One cannot enter heaven without performing
austerities for lākhās and lākhās of years. You should
go now.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “I have come here with the sole purpose
of taking the tree, which I will now uproot.”

When Indra still flatly refused, Kṛṣṇa, carried by
Garuḍa, went to Nandana-kānana, uprooted a pārijāta tree
and began His return journey to Dvārakā. Halfway back,
Indra, with his son and all his soldiers, attacked Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in an attempt to take back the tree. Kṛṣṇa’s son,
Pradyumna, came and defeated the son of Indra, Jayanta.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself defeated Lord Indra and his soldiers,
and then He returned to Dvārakā.

He then called all of the queens to the home of
Satyabhāmā and, in front of them all, planted the
pārijāta tree in her garden. Satyabhāmā now became so
happy and she tried to honor all of Kṛṣṇa’s other
queens. If Śrī Kṛṣṇa had given the tree to Rukmiṇī,
Satyabhāmā would never have gone to Rukmiṇī’s palace.
But here we see that Rukmiṇī was present at Satyabhāmā’s
palace, and she was so grave. Although she thought, “Oh,
Kṛṣṇa is more pleased with Satyabhāmā, who is now His
most beloved wife,” she did not reveal any symptom of
her unhappiness.

Although apparently there is some envy in Dvārakā,
actually there is no chance of any inimical emotion
there. Rather, this is one stage of aprākṛta-prema
(transcendental love) to please Śrī Kṛṣṇa.[xxxix]39 Yet,
although in one sense Satyabhāmā’s affection and service
to Kṛṣṇa is so high class, it is not unnatojjvala. This
is unique to the gopīs.




UNIQUE TO THE GOPĪS



Though there are so many kinds of gopīs, they can be
said to be in two categories—nitya-siddha and sādhana-
siddha:



1. Nitya-siddha. The nitya-siddha (eternally perfect)
gopīs are also of two kinds:

(1) kāya-vyūha—direct bodily expansions of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā;

                           67
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


(2) nitya-siddha-jīvas—eternally perfect living entities
manifested from Baladeva Prabhu and having gopī forms.
They never at any time come in contact with the material
energy.

1. Sādhana-siddha. The sādhana-siddha gopīs are also of
two categories:

(1) Ayautikī, those who are not in groups, but who came
to prakaṭa Vṛndāvana either individually or in a pair;

(2) Yautikī, those in groups, who can be further divided
into three categories:

(i) ṛṣi-cārīs or muni-cārīs—the sages of Daṇḍakāraṇya
forest.

(ii) śruti-cārīs—coming from the group of personified
Vedas and śruti-mantras.

(iii) those coming from Janakapura. When Rāma went to
Janakapura to marry Sītā, the unmarried princesses there
had a desire to marry Him.



Having performed sādhana for many lives, the sādhana-
siddhagopīs completely gave up their anger, lust, greed
and worldly desires while still in the stage of sādhana
(sādhana-avasthā), many lives previous to their having
become perfect. Gradually they received niṣṭhā, then
ruci, then āsakti. Eventually, śuddha-sattva from the
heart of rāgātmikā-gopīs entered their hearts and they
attained bhāva, and then prema. This is very, very rare.

The devotees in prakaṭa Vraja (where Kṛṣṇa’s manifest
pastimes are being performed in this world) are so rare.
They have no worldly desires, pains, sufferings or
sorrows; they are not even aware of them, having become
freed from them in their stage of sādhana.[xl]40 Then
they attained bhāva. Now having reached the most
advanced stage of bhāva, they have taken birth in Vraja.
The kāya-vyūha (bodily expansions) of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
directly entered rāsa-līlā in the groves of Vṛndāvana.
No obstacles prevented them, and Yogamāyā made all
arrangements. The nitya-siddha gopīs also freely
entered. The sādhana-siddhagopīs, however, who had for
the first time taken birth in earthly Vraja during
Kṛṣṇa’s manifest pastimes, were stopped.

Who are the sādhana-siddha gopīs? Some had worshipped
Kātyāyanī with the hope of receiving a benediction that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa would become their husband. They prayed,
“kātyāyanīmahāmāyā, mahā-yoginy adhīśvari nanda-gopa-
sutaṁ devi patiṁ me kuru te namaḥ. Please give me the
benediction that Kṛṣṇa will become my husband.” They
therefore took birth in Vraja from the womb of gopīs and
were each married to one of the gopas, but due to
hearing the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa from others, they
developed great affection for Him and a desire to meet
Him. On the night of the rāsa-līlā, when they heard the
sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, they made an attempt to meet Him
but were stopped by their husbands.

                           68
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


Many other sādhana-siddha gopīs who had had the
association of nitya-siddha gopīs went to meet Śrī Kṛṣṇa
without restriction. Only those who had recently arrived
there, the ladies who may have had children and had had
some relation with their husband, were checked.

Why were they checked? A slight kaṣāya[xli]41 remained
in their hearts which had to go. When their husbands
checked them, their hearts burned in the fire of
separation. The intensity of that feeling of separation
burnt any remaining aśubha (inauspicious) and śubha
(auspicious) not their hearts. In their meditation they
took Śrī Kṛṣṇa into their hearts and embraced Him so
tightly that in that milana (meeting) with Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
śubha also went away.

What was this kaṣāya? It had nothing to do with anything
material or the fulfillment of any material desire. What
were the śubha and aśubha elements in their hearts? The
gopīs themselves did not burn. Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī and all our ācāryas agree that it was their
auspicious and inauspicious moods which burned.

When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu met Jagāi and Mādhāi, He
did not cut off their heads. No weapon was used; only
their moods were changed, and they began a new life.
They did not continue their past activities, because all
results of their sinful and pious activities were
burned. We should understand that both worldly pious and
impious activities are binding. They will impede one in
rendering service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In one’s sādhana stage,
reactions to both these good and bad activities are
destroyed. In Sanskrit they are called pāpa (sins) and
puṇya (pious activities). The fruit of bad activities is
pāpa (sins) and the fruit of good activities is puṇya
(piety). With these reactions awaiting us, we will have
to take birth again and again. So, both have to be given
up. Then we will attain āsakti, then bhāva.

The sādhana-siddhagopīs who had recently taken birth in
Vraja had passed through all these stages and entered
into the wombs of gopīs. If there were no pious and
impious activities, no puṇya or pāpa, then what was
burned?

In their past life these gopīs had performed many
austerities to please Goddess Kātyāyanī, so that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa would become their husband. But it is absurd to go
to Vraja with a desire to have Kṛṣṇa as one’s husband.
It is svakīya-bhāva. When Lord Rāma went to Janakapura,
the rāja-kumārīs saw His beauty and were very attracted.
When they understood that Rāma had married Sītā, they
were very happy; but at the same time in their hearts
they felt something lacking. Each thought, “Why have I
not been given in marriage to Rāma? I want that Rāma
should be my husband.”

Rāma was God Himself, a manifestation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
therefore nondifferent from Him. So He noted all of
their moods and told them, “In this life I cannot make
you My wives. Internally I have accepted you, but you
will have to wait for your next birth. I have instructed
Yogamāyā to arrange your next birth in the wombs of

                           69
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

gopīs in Vraja. There, while still young, you will get
the association of the nitya-siddha sakhīs (the kāya-
vyūha of Śrīmatī Rādhikā), after which you will be
qualified to be My beloved, and you will enjoy Our
relationship there.”

This mood of svakīya-bhāva had, to a slight extent,
remained in their heart. Although it was ‘pious,’ it was
a problem for them. They had to wait for their svakīya-
bhāva to evaporate so that they could enter parakīya-
bhāva. They wanted to love Kṛṣṇa as a paramour, but
their chastity was an obstacle. There was no problem for
the nitya-siddha gopīs, or kāya-vyūhagopīs, but it was a
problem for the gopīs who had newly arrived who had
never met Śrī Kṛṣṇa; they had only seen Him from afar.
Some came originally from Indraprastha and were newly
married to Vraja gopas, having lived in Vraja for only a
few months or a few years. Some came from other parts of
Vraja and had recently come to Nandagāoṅ and Yāvaṭa
through their marriages. They wanted to freely meet with
Kṛṣṇa, but they could not. So when they took Śrī Kṛṣṇa
into their hearts and strongly embraced Him, they
immediately entered pure parakīya-bhāva.

Another reason they could not meet Kṛṣṇa was that they
had children. This meant they had met with their
husbands. Those who had even a slight affection for
their children and husband (and in the consciousness
that “He is my husband”) could not go to Kṛṣṇa. None of
the nitya-siddha gopīs, on the other hand, had any
connection with their husbands.




A TRICK BY YOGAMĀYĀ



When the gopīs were young and of marriageable age,
Yogamāyā played a trick. Entering the mind of Brahmā,
she made him desire to see for himself whether or not
Śrī Kṛṣṇa was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He
then began to think, “If I steal His calves and cowherd
boyfriends, what will He do?” He skillfully stole them
and put them in a cave for one year. At the end of that
time he came to see what Kṛṣṇa was doing, and he became
quite puzzled. Kṛṣṇa was playing as usual. He had
expanded Himself into lākhās and lākhās of calves and
cowherd boys, and He was playing with them daily as He
always had, as if nothing had happened. Kṛṣṇa then gave
Brahmā the mercy to realize that all the calves and
friends were Kṛṣṇa Himself.

Why did Śrī Kṛṣṇa perform this pastime with Brahmā? It
was because all the cows and mothers of Vraja had wanted
Kṛṣṇa to be their son. They had desired it, and so Śrī
Kṛṣṇa had to fulfill their desire.

More importantly, all the girls of Vraja wanted Kṛṣṇa as
their husband, their beloved, and He therefore took the
individual forms of lākhās and lākhās of cowherd boys.
Paurṇamāsī told everyone that that year was auspicious

                           70
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

for everyone’s marriages, and the gopīs were thus
married to those gopas who were actually Kṛṣṇa. But
those gopīs who had no association of nitya-siddha
gopīs, or even of sādhana-siddha gopīs who were senior,
could not freely meet Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Actually, because they
had some tendency to desire Kṛṣṇa as their husband, they
should not have been allowed to enter Vraja at all.
Usually those who have this mood have to go to Dvārakā,
but because Śrī Rāma was unconditionally merciful, He
gave them this opportunity.




A LESSON



Therefore, don’t perform materially pious or impious
activities. Try to engage all your activities in Kṛṣṇa’s
service. Don’t perform activities with the aim of
receiving good karma. If you perform activities for
yourself, or for the pleasure of others to do good for
them, these will be called ‘pious activities.’ This will
create problems in your spiritual development. If you
make a temple to show the world that you are performing
such great work, and if you think, “I am the creator of
this mandira. I will receive so much name and fame,” it
will be an obstacle for your bhakti. Act only to please
Kṛṣṇa, gurudeva, and pure devotees. Only on rare
occasions should you go out of your way to please
others. Otherwise it becomes a problem, an impediment to
your advancement.

As far as the sādhana-siddha gopīs were concerned, their
only problem was that they wanted Śrī Kṛṣṇa as their
husband. But Kṛṣṇa and the nitya-siddha gopīs were so
merciful that all obstacles were removed. If in sādhana-
avasthā you engage in activities other than pleasing
Kṛṣṇa, your sādhana is hampered and you will not go to
Vraja. At best, you will go to Vaikuṇṭha or Dvārakā.




WE DO NOT KNOW SĀDHANA



Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī explains sādhana.
Unfortunately, we are not really acquainted with what it
is. Sometimes we chant harināma with our hearts full of
worldly desires and anarthas.[xlii]42 We don’t know what
is sādhana-bhajana or what is love and affection for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. We only chant because our guru has told us that
by chanting harināma everything will be achieved. This
is correct, but harināma should be pure and with some
realization of our relationship with Kṛṣṇa. We should
give up all worldly desires, anarthas and aparādhas;
even the desire for Kṛṣṇa to be our husband should be
given up. Then there will be real sādhana.


                           71
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-śīlanaṁ bhaktir-uttamā.



One should render transcendental loving service to the
Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for
material profit or gain through fruitive activities or
philosophical speculation. That is called pure
devotional service. [Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.1]



All kinds of worldly desires or desires to achieve
Vaikuṇṭha or Dvārakā should be given up. Don’t cover
your bhakti by taking the help of karma and jñāna. Have
no abhilāṣitā (desire) other than to please Kṛṣṇa and
His pure bhaktas, and to attain pure bhakti. Engage your
body, mind and words (tanū, mana, vacah) in Kṛṣṇa’s
service. And serve Him by your moods—nirvṛtyātmikā and
pravṛtyātmikā. What is pravṛtyātmikā? Performing
devotional activities by body, mind and words. Never act
against bhakti. This is nirvṛtyātmikā. Don’t do anything
that will create an obstacle for your bhakti. Then there
will be sādhana.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja explains in Caitanya-
caritāmṛta:



kṛti-sādhya bhavet sādhya-

bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya

prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā



When transcendental devotional service by which love for
Kṛṣṇa is attained is executed by the senses, it is
called sādhana-bhakti, or the regulative discharge of
devotional service. Such devotion eternally exists
within the heart of every living entity. The awakening
of this eternal devotion is the potentiality of
devotional service in practice. [Cc. Madhya 22.105]



Try to remember this siddhānta, keeping it in your
heart. Pray to be qualified to understand it, and if you
do not, you can inquire from senior Vaiṣṇavas who do. If
you are still not satisfied, come to me with your
questions and I will try to answer them. These meetings
are very good and rare opportunities to discuss these
highest of topics. If you lose this opportunity, it may
be lost forever. It is very rare to have this
association, so try to make it successful. Do not miss
even a word. Then you’ll see that you will develop so

                             72
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

much good bhakti.




SUPREME CHASTITY




When we first enter devotional service, we are not aware
of our specific relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. We only
know that “Kṛṣṇa is my prabhu (master) and I am His
servant.” Later, gurudeva helps us develop that
particular relationship which is inherent in our heart.




GOAL OF CHANTING



Unless one has a proper relationship with a bona fide
guru and realization of his relationship with Kṛṣṇa,
kṛṣṇa-prema will not be attained for hundreds and
millions of births. Koṭi janma kare yadi śravaṇaṁ
kīrtana tabu tanu pāya kṛṣṇa pade prema dāna. One pure
holy name chanted by a devotee who has taken initiation
in a proper way, and has at least somewhat realized his
relationship with Kṛṣṇa and His associates, is superior
to three lākhās of holy names chanted by someone who has
not.

Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura was a pure devotee and he chanted
three lākhās of holy names daily. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu gave him the title ‘nāmācārya Haridāsa
Ṭhākura’ and greatly honored him. He daily gave him His
darśana at Siddha-bākula (Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s āśrama) and
daily sent him His remnants with Govinda, His servant.
Another devotee, a boy named Rūpa, was very junior to
Haridāsa Ṭhākura. He was not an ācārya, nor did he chant
three lākhās daily. This was because whenever he began
to chant he became so absorbed in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes that
sometimes he lost external consciousness and would
simply weep in ecstasy. He was also writing books that
explained the inner moods of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
that the Lord had given him in Prayāga.[xliii]43 By his
preaching and writing he taught and established caitanya
mano ’bhīṣṭaṁ (the inner desire of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu) in this world.

Therefore, who is superior? Ordinary persons consider
Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura superior to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
but those who know all tattvas (philosophical truths)
understand that Rūpa Gosvāmī is Rūpa mañjarī, and
Haridāsa Ṭhākura is both Brahmā and Prahlāda Mahārāja.
Therefore Rūpa Gosvāmī is far superior. But these
tattvas are unimaginable to people in general, and only
those who do bhajana seriously can realize them.

We should try to enter deeply into kṛṣṇa-bhakti, taking

                           73
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017

initiation (dīkṣā) in a real way,[xliv]44 so that we can
have a permanent connection with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. We should
also honor a person who has not yet received dīkṣā but
is chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name, for he is trying to be part of
Kṛṣṇa’s family. Even if he rebukes us, we should still
honor him. We should only criticize our undeveloped,
unconscious mind. The mind is so wicked. Each morning we
should take a broom and beat the mind by saying, “O
mind. Be pure and try to serve Kṛṣṇa.”

My humble request to everyone is to honor all senior
Vaiṣṇavas—senior in years spent with gurudeva, as well
as senior in bhakti. We cannot realize who is senior or
junior in bhakti unless we ourselves are advanced.
Sometimes we may be able to, but generally we are only
qualified to consider who is senior or junior in years
with gurudeva. This is good, but the consideration on
the basis of bhakti is superior.



jena vaiṣṇava ciniyā laiya ādara karibe jabe

vaiṣṇavera kṛpā tāhera sarva siddhi avaśya pāyibe tabe



When one will be able to recognize a Vaiṣṇava and offer
respect to him, then one will undoubtedly attain all
perfection by his mercy. [Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s
Vaiṣṇava Vijñapti]



Those who are qualified to realize who is kaniṣṭhā-
adhikārī, who is madhyama-adhikārī, and who is uttama-
adhikārī are themselves surely above madhyama-madhyama-
adhikārī. Similarly, it is to our benefit to also try
and give respect according to this standard—considering
the stages of one’s real advancement in devotion. It is
not correct to honor everyone in the exact same way.
Rather, we should consider whether one is kaniṣṭhā,
madhyama or uttama-adhikārī, and tender honor
accordingly.[xlv]45 Our bhakti will then greatly
develop, and our lives will be successful.




CAITANYA MAHĀPRABHU TASTING UNNATOJJVALA-RASA

·

anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ




                           74
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī Śacī-
devī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant spiritual
knowledge of the mellow taste of His service. [Cc. Ādi
1.4]



I have discussed the unnatojjavala-rasa that Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted to taste—the mood of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā—as well as the unnatojjvala-rasa that He wanted
to distribute among all qualified souls. There is some
difference. The three moods of Śrīmatī Rādhikā which Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted to taste are actually
unnatojjvala-rasa, and what He distributed by nāma,
through nāma-prema, is a part of that.

I want to give a very vivid explanation so that you will
know the difference between these two. Until now I have
explained that the mood of dāsya, sakhya, and even
vātsalya is not unnatojjvala-rasa. Even the svakīya mood
of Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as well as
that of Sītā-devī towards Śrī Rāmacandra, is not
unnatojjvala-rasa. Though I will give many explanations,
most persons will not be able to understand. But those
whose hearts are pure, who have served an elevated
Vaiṣṇava and are associating with him, may understand.

Even Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not
give this understanding to all, and so I also cannot
give it to all. But I think that those who have come to
hear surely have past impressions (impressions made on
the heart from previous lives of devotional activities)
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s philosophy. That is why
they have come to join us from different parts of the
world like England, America, Australia, Holland, Canada,
etc., and are traveling with me to various countries.
They must have some impression of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s family of devotees.[xlvi]46 If they
continue associating, then by hearing all these truths
they can gradually understand and realize them.
Certainly a very strong impression will be made in their
hearts. Those who have no interest in this, on the other
hand, will not understand it, and so they will not come
to hear.




SPIRITUAL CHASTITY



I have explained that the mood of Satyabhāmā is svakīya-
mādhurya-rasa—not unnatojjvala-rasa. In Vedic culture
there was a shadow of that unnatojjvala-rasa in the
lives of married couples. When a qualified man and a
chaste girl married, they recited Vedic mantras and had
the sākṣi (witness) of fire, air, water (especially
Gaṅgā water), tulasī, śālagrāma, brāhmaṇas and devotees.

                           75
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

After this they were generally not allowed to reject
each other except in some extraordinary situation where
the spouse lost faith in Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His associates,
or in chanting harināma. In that case he or she could be
rejected—otherwise not.

This is similarly true with gurudeva. He also cannot be
rejected in any way; but if he is like the above-
mentioned spouse, he can be given up. But if he is not
very beautiful, if he is ugly, if he rebukes, if he
sometimes gives a slap, or if he controls us for our
benefit—not for his own benefit—he should not be given
up.

The above-mentioned personalities are witnesses during
the marriage ceremony. After this the wife is considered
half of the husband’s body (ardhāṅgiṇī). She becomes
saha-dharmiṇī, which means she always helps her husband
in dharma (religion), in bhakti, and all other
activities. In Indian culture we do not take the wife as
a maidservant; she is saha-dharmini. Nowadays, things
have changed. The married couples follow Western culture
and give up religious activities, such as respecting
guru, brāhmaṇas, elders, neighbors, etc. But if marriage
is followed in the Vedic way—with Vedic mantras, under
the guidance of guru and Vaiṣṇavas, and witnessed by
fire, śālagrāma, water, air, etc.—then the married
couple becomes svakīya, which is itself a shadow of
parakīya-unnatojjvala-rasa.

Those who from the beginning of their marriage have no
affection for their husband but who love another person
are called parakīya. In the material world this is very
bad. But Uddhava says in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and Śrīla
Vyāsadeva and Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī also say: kvemāḥ
striyo vana-carīr vyabhicāra-duṣṭāḥ [Bhāg. 10.47.59].
Those who have no connection with Kṛṣṇa, even if they
are chaste in their marriage relationship, are like
prostitutes (vyabhicāra). Whether one is married or not,
if she is serving Kṛṣṇa, chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names,
remembering Kṛṣṇa, and thinking Kṛṣṇa to be her beloved,
her chastity is considered superior to all goddesses and
other chaste ladies.




MOST CHASTE LADIES



You have heard the names of Arundhatī, Sāvitrī and
Damayantī; there were so many chaste ladies like them in
Indian culture. But you also have heard the names of
Draupadī, the wife of the five Pāṇḍavas; Kuntī, the
mother of the Pāṇḍavas; Mandodarī, the wife of Rāvaṇa;
Ahalyā, the wife of Gautama ¬ṣi;[xlvii]47 and Tārā, the
wife of both Sugrīva and Vali.

At first Tārā was married to Vali, but when he was shot
and killed, she became the wife of Sugrīva. Mandodarī
was the wife of Rāvaṇa, but after he was killed by Lord
Rāmacandra, she lived with Vibhīṣaṇa. Kuntī had five

                           76
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

husbands—the sun-god, Pāṇḍu, Yamarāja (Dharmarāja), Vāyu
and Indra—but still she is considered superior to all
other chaste ladies. Draupadī also had five husbands,
but still she is celebrated as kanyā, a sacred unmarried
girl. Although these five ladies were apparently married
to someone else, and although they even had more than
one husband, they always thought, “Kṛṣṇa is my beloved,
my heart and soul.” Their marriages were therefore not
obstacles to their bhakti. These ladies are glorified
and honored as kanyā because they loved Kṛṣṇa or Rāma
more than their husbands.

Among all chaste ladies the gopīs are the most superior.
Ordinary ladies have the mood that someone other than
Kṛṣṇa—someone in this body made of earth, water, fire,
air, stool, urine and so many other abominable things—is
their pati (husband). Pati means he who saves one from
all sufferings, sorrows and death, and who supports with
prema and knowledge. Such a person is actually pati. Our
husbands cannot do this. They cannot save us from
becoming old and they cannot save us from our hair
turning white.

So, actually, our beloved, our husband, our all-in-all
is Śrī Kṛṣṇa. There is no impediment for those who think
like this, even if they are married.

As I explained yesterday, these gopīs of Vṛndāvana were
married by the trick of Yogamāyā. They are nondifferent
from Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
hlādinī-śakti, svarūpa-śakti of Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
are like the sun and its heat or water and its liquidity
—They cannot be separated. The gopīs who easily took
part in rāsa-līlā and served Śrī Kṛṣṇa are kāya-vyūha,
manifestations of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Though externally
they are married to other gopas (cowherd men), those
marriages are false and are only meant to create a mood
in the gopīs that “we are wives of other gopas.” Because
they love Kṛṣṇa, they have no connection with their
husbands—nothing. This is called parakīya. Parakīya-rasa
means that the gopīs are married to other persons, but
their affection and love is only for Kṛṣṇa. Whether they
are actually married to anyone else or not,[xlviii]48
they are all parakīya and are far superior to any other
chaste lady.




UDDHAVA’S LESSON IN VṚṆDĀVANA



Uddhava, Kṛṣṇa’s friend and prime minister in Dvārakā,
was not married. From boyhood he was brahmacārī (bāla-
brahmacārī), as were Nārada Muni and Śukadeva Gosvāmī.
But these elevated devotees all wanted to take the foot-
dust of the gopīs. Why? Uddhava prayed:



āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-jusām ahaṁ syāṁ


                           77
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

yā dustyajaṁ svajanam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām



The gopīs of Vṛndāvana have given up the association of
their husbands, sons and other family members, who are
very difficult to give up, and they have forsaken the
path of chastity to take shelter of the lotus feet of
Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa, which one should search for by Vedic
knowledge. Oh, let me be fortunate enough to be one of
the bushes, creepers or herbs in Vṛndāvana because the
gopīs trample them and bless them with the dust of their
lotus feet. [Bhāg. 10.47.61]



vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ

pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ

punāti bhuvana-trayam



I repeatedly offer my respects to the dust from the feet
of the women of Nanda Mahārāja’s cowherd village. When
the gopīs loudly chant the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
vibration purifies the three worlds. (Bhāg. 10.47.63)



Uddhava went to Vṛndāvana, where he realized the glories
of the gopīs. He had previously thought, “I am superior
to all other devotees.” But when he came to Vṛndāvana he
understood that “Kṛṣṇa has sent me to learn something in
this prema school, the devotional school of the gopīs.
Now I see that I am not even qualified to take
admission. Why has Kṛṣṇa sent me here? I am not even
qualified to submit my name to that school. The standard
of the gopīs’ devotion is so very far from me. I cannot
give to Kṛṣṇa as the gopīs have given.

“Because they have given up everything to serve Kṛṣṇa, I
want to glorify them by taking their foot-dust. They
have given up their shame, their fame, and their service
to their husbands. They have forgotten to take meals and
to decorate themselves, and they have even forgotten
their own bodies. If I am not qualified to even enter
their school, then how will I get the chance to obtain
their foot-dust?”

Uddhava therefore felt hopeless—quite hopeless. He
continued to think, “I am not qualified to touch their
lotus foot-dust, not even one dust particle. So I will
simply offer praṇāmas in their direction.”

There were millions of gopīs and Uddhava could neither
count them, nor could he understand their moods. How

                            78
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

could he pray then for the dust of all of their feet?
There would be no end to his praying. Finally he
resolved, “I should take only one dust particle from one
of the gopīs. Then by attaining the mercy of that one
prominent gopī, I will automatically achieve the mercy
of all.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa encouraged him in his heart, “O Uddhava, if
you like you can surely select one gopī from whose feet
you want to take one dust particle.”

Who did he select? Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He wanted just one
of the lākhās and lākhās of dust particles at Her lotus
feet. He thought, “If I can pray even from far away, for
one dust particle, my life will be successful.”[xlix]49

In a garden near the border of Nandagāoṅ, Uddhava
realized the glories of the gopīs. He saw the gopīs
feeling so much separation that sometimes there was no
activity of their outer senses. He thought, “My life has
become successful simply by coming to the school of the
gopīs, even though I was not admitted. Just by breathing
the air that comes from that school my life is
successful.”

It is this love of the gopīs, which was glorified by
Uddhava, that is called unnatojjvala-rasa.




LORD ŚIVA BECOMES GOPĪŚVARA



Śrī Nārada Muni, Lord Brahmā and Śaṅkara prayed in the
same way as Uddhava. Śaṅkara even wanted to become a
gopī. He performed austerities, and when Paurṇamāsī
Yogamāyā became pleased and appeared before him, he
prayed to join rāsa-līlā. Paurṇamāsī mercifully dipped
him in Brahma-kuṇḍa and he immediately assumed the form
of a teenage gopī. He thus went to the rāsa-līlā and hid
in a grove. The gopīs and Kṛṣṇa sensed that someone of a
different mood (vijātīya) had come. They asked each
other, “Why are you not so happy today? What is the
matter?”

After searching they discovered the new gopī and asked
‘her’, “Who are you? What is your name? Who are your
parents? What is your husband’s name? Where is your in-
laws’ house?”

When Śiva could not reply, they began to slap ‘her’ so
much that ‘her’ cheeks became swollen and ‘she’ began to
cry, “Yogamāyā, Yogamāyā. Save me. I will never again
come to Vṛndāvana, and I will never dare take part in
rāsa-līlā.”

Paurṇamāsī came and requested the gopīs to show Lord
Śiva mercy. “She’s my kṛpa-pūtra, the object of my
mercy,” she told them.

The gopīs therefore accepted ‘her’ as a gopī and Kṛṣṇa

                              79
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

named ‘her’ Gopīśvara (she whose īśvaras, controllers,
are the gopīs) and blessed ‘her’ to become the guard of
the rāsa-līlā. “Without ‘her’ sanction, no one would be
able to enter.”




DEFINITION OF UNNATOJJVALA



This love of the gopīs is called unnatojjvala. Unnata
means 'highest', and ujjvala means 'more shining than
the sun', charming Kṛṣṇa with one’s heart, and pleasing
Him in every respect. The sun shines only outside. It
cannot shine in the heart. But this rasa shines in the
heart. The affection of Śrīmatī Rādhikā exhibits the
highest mood of this unnatojjvala-rasa. In Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu [1.1.1] there is a śloka explaining this
uttama-bhakti:



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-śīlanaṁ bhaktir-uttamā



Bhaktir-uttama denotes this highest affection of the
gopīs’ parakīya-bhāvaunnatojjvala-rasa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa came in the form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu to
taste this topmost mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He could not
distribute this mood because it is the wealth of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā alone. Even Śrīmatī Lalitā and Śrīmatī Viśākhā
do not have Her mood of mādana, the highest platform of
unnatojjvala-rasa. They can have up to mohana or modana,
which is a little less.[l]50

In these moods Śrīmatī Rādhikā became so absorbed in
Kṛṣṇa that when Uddhava came She did not see him at all.
Instead She thought that a bee, flying around Her feet,
was Kṛṣṇa’s messenger. Sometimes angry, sometimes
favorable—in so many moods—Śrīmatī Rādhikā spoke with
that bee. Perhaps Kṛṣṇa had actually come in the form of
that bee to taste all Her sentiments. She told the bee,
“You are a madman and very impure. Go away from here. Do
not try to touch My feet. Why have you come in this
shape? I think you have done so to make us more angry.
You are so foolish that you cannot think properly how to
come to pacify the anger of the gopīs. You don’t know
how to pacify us?”

By seeing the gopīs Uddhava thought, “Oh, this is the
real mood of devotion. I do not know anything about
this.” He heard all Her talks from very far away, and
somewhat realized unnatojjvala-rasa. In fact he was not
able to experience even a spark, a sprinkle, of this
rasa. He could not become any entity of Vṛndāvana—not
even a cow or a calf. The cows loved Kṛṣṇa much more
than Uddhava did. Kṛṣṇa would approach the cows like

                             80
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

their son, He came to the calves as their friend, and
stroked and hugged them just as one friend is
affectionate with another. Sometimes He massaged their
legs and put very soft, sweet grass in their mouths,
saying, “My friend, take it.”

Uddhava could not love like this, and that is why he was
not qualified to remain in Vṛndāvana and had to return
to Mathurā.

Unnatojjvala-rasa is especially the mood of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa was very anxious to taste it. If
one does not have such love and affection, he cannot
realize Kṛṣṇa, how sweet He is, how beautiful He is, and
how He sings so beautifully. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
came to give some sprinkles, some very little particles,
of this to the jīva. The jīva would not be able to
withstand the unnatojjvala-rasa He tasted. They have no
capacity, no qualification, to have such a high class of
affection. Only Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her kāyavyūha can
experience this. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has not come to
give this type of unnatojjvala-rasa.




CAITANYA MAHĀPRABHU’S GIFT



Then what has He come to give? Unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-
bhakti-śriyam. In this connection there is more emphasis
on the final words, sva-bhakti-śriyam. Sva means 'own'—
own bhakti. Whose own? Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s own. Kṛṣṇa’s
bhakti means Rādhikā’s bhakti, because Rādhikā is
Herself the personification of Kṛṣṇa’s bhakti. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
wanted to taste the essence of supreme devotion to
Himself, which is Rādhikā’s love, and He wanted to
distribute to the qualified jīva His bhakti-śriyam. Sva
means Rādhikā. Bhakti means Rādhikā’s bhakti, and Śri
means śobhā, or beauty. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted
to give the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s unnatojjvala-
rasa.

The following example will help us to understand.
Imagine a tree. If that tree has no leaves, no fruits
and no flowers, then it has no beauty. There are so many
very green leaves, and so many flowers here and there on
each branch; there are also mañjarīs, and some very
sweet and delicious reddish or golden mangos. Cuckoos
always eat these mangos and sing very sweetly. If the
air touches and plays with that tree, all the leaves
become happy and begin to dance, and at this time the
mañjarīs also dance with happiness. This is the beauty
of that tree.

But if the tree has no leaves, no mañjarīs and no
fruits, then the air will not play with its branches. It
will have no taste to play. If we see a tree playing
with the air, its leaves going here and there and always
dancing, that is the beauty of that tree. Similarly, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted to give the beauty of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s unnatojjvala-rasa.

                             81
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


The tree represents Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself. And what is
the beauty? Her sakhīs. If there are no sakhīs, then
there is no beauty at all. Therefore Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
always surrounded by gopīs, four kinds of sakhīs—
svapakṣa, vipakṣa, taṭastha and suhṛda. The svapakṣa
gopīs are those who are on the side of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
and they are Her intimate sakhīs. The sakhī Candrāvalī
and all her sakhīs are vipakṣa, opposed to Rādhikā. Of
course the ‘opposition’ in Vṛndāvana is not like that of
the material world. In Vṛndāvana the feelings of
‘opposition,’ as well as all other sentiments, are
varieties of prema, transcendental love.

Other sakhīs are in the middle. They are neutral and are
called taṭastha. Still others are called suhṛda,
friends. They are not svapakṣa, not vipakṣa, and not
taṭastha. With Rādhikā they are friends, and with
Candrāvalī and other vipakṣa-sakhīs they are taṭastha.
The taṭastha of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sakhīs are suhṛda of
Candrāvalī.

What is the meaning of śrīya, or beauty? Among the
svapakṣa-sakhīs of Rādhikā there are five divisions—
sakhī, nitya-sakhī, prāṇa-sakhī, priya-sakhī and parama-
preṣṭha-sakhī. Although the sakhīs are associates of
Rādhikā, they sometimes have an inclination towards
Kṛṣṇa—but at the same time they always have the tendency
to serve yugala (both). They are neither taṭastha, nor
suhṛda, nor vipakṣa. They are svapakṣa, but they have an
inclination towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Those svapakṣa gopīs who
are inclined towards Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and are very near
and dear to Rādhikā, are called priya-sakhis and parama-
preṣṭha-sakhīs—like Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citrā, etc. The
parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs are also known as priya-narma-
sakhīs. Those whose sole inclination is towards Rādhikā—
who think that without Rādhikā they cannot live, who
think that Rādhikā is their life and soul—are called
nitya-sakhīs and prāṇa-sakhīs.

Among the nitya-sakhīs, the prāṇa-sakhīs, like Rūpa
mañjarī and Rati mañjarī, are prominent. They always
serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā. If Kṛṣṇa is defeated by Śrīmatī
Rādhikā (at various sports and games), they are very
glad and clap. If Śrī Kṛṣṇa defeats Rādhikā, then they
themselves feel defeated and they make a sad or sour
face. (Those like Lalitā may laugh and enjoy, but they
will also be somewhat sorrowful.) These nitya and prāṇa-
sakhīs are always with Rādhikā. Lalitā, Viśākhā and
other similar sakhīs will not always enter the kuñja
when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are performing certain confidential
pastimes, but these sakhīs have the freedom to enter at
any time. They have a ‘free pass’ to serve there.
Lalitā, Viśākhā, and sakhīs will hesitate, but those
like Rūpa mañjarī and other prāṇa-sakhīs and nitya-
sakhīs will not. They can do any service at any time.

When Kṛṣṇa meets with Śrīmatī Rādhikā, these sakhīs
taste whatever Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa taste together, even when
they are far away from Them. They taste everything, and
they have no need at all to meet Kṛṣṇa separately. These
nitya-sakhīs and prāṇa-sakhīs are called mañjarīs, and
they are the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.[li]51


                           82
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has come to give the mood of
these gopīs, and the jīva can never expect more than
this. They cannot be like Lalitā, Viśākhā and others
like them. But do not think this a small thing. It is
unnatojjvala-rasa, tat-tad-bhāvecchātmikā. Such gopīs
don’t want to directly meet Śrī Kṛṣṇa themselves or
serve Him directly, but instead they become happy seeing
the ānanda of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given this mood of service
to Śrīmatī Rādhikā through harināma-saṅkīrtana, and He
Himself has tasted unnatojjvala-rasa—the three moods of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. One with the mood of a mañjarī can
taste the beauty and sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute
song, and every other feature of Kṛṣṇa. If he has no
such prema, he cannot.

So Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has mercifully come to give
this unnatojjvala-rasa-sva-bhakti-śrīyam. Before this,
sakhya-rasa, dāsya-rasa and vātsalya-rasa had been
somewhat given by Madhvācārya, ¬āmānuja, and all other
ācāryas. But the śri of sva-bhakti-śriyam unnatojjvala-
rasa had not been given for a long time, since Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came previously—in the previous day of
Brahmā.

This is the highest benediction. If anyone has some
greed, even a little taste by reading Caitanya-
caritāmṛta and by hearing these subjects, then he will
give up everything at the lotus feet of his gurudeva,
his śikṣā-guru, or any pure devotee, and try to collect
this nectar.



kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ

krīyatāṁ yadi kuto'pi labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate



Pure devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be
had even by pious activity in hundreds and thousands of
lives. It can be attained only by paying one price—that
is, intense greed to obtain it. If it is available
somewhere, one must purchase it without delay. [Cc.
Madhya 8.70]




ADVAITA ĀCĀRYA AND THE LORD’S DESCENT




PREPARATION FOR THE LORD’S ADVENT


                           83
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



Today is the Appearance Day of Advaita Ācārya, who is
Mahā-Viṣṇu. Some manifestations of Mahā-Viṣṇu are
present in all yugas. Why then did Advaita Ācārya call
for Kṛṣṇa Himself to descend? As sarvajñā, one who is
aware of past, present and future, He knew that His
Prabhu wanted to taste vraja-prema. He knew Caitanya
Mahāprabhu would advent Himself, but He did not know
exactly when. He wondered why He had not yet appeared.
He worshipped Śrī Kṛṣṇa by offering tulasī and Gaṅgājala
to His lotus feet, and by crying with His heart, “O
Kṛṣṇa, come at once.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa will not hear our prayers by worship alone but
by our heartfelt crying out like Advaita Ācārya. This is
real kīrtana. The kīrtana of Advaita Ācārya shook the
whole world, and therefore Śrī Kṛṣṇa decided to come
immediately.

When Caitanya Mahāprabhu took birth in Śrī Māyāpura,
Advaita Ācārya Prabhu was more than sixty years old—
possibly seventy-five years old. Before the Lord’s
birth, Advaita Ācārya passed many years touring the holy
tīrthas in North, South, East and West India, including
the pastime places of Kṛṣṇa in Śrī Vṛndāvana.




MEETING VIDYĀPATI



From Vṛndāvana, Advaita Ācārya went to Mithila, the
birthplace of Sītā-devī in Janakapura. When He reached
the outskirts of the city, He saw a very effulgent old
man lying down, resting his head on the root of a tree.
The man was absorbed in an internal mood and not
influenced by his external senses. Tears streamed from
his eyes and in a very heartfelt way he sang a kīrtana:



tātala saikate bāri-bindu-sama

suta-mitra-ramaṇī-samāje

tohe visari mana tāhe samarpala

ab majhu habo kon kāje



O Lord, completely forgetting You, I have offered my
mind unto the society of women, children and friends—but
this experience has been just like offering a drop of
water unto the burning hot sands of the beach. How can I
possibly be relieved of this great misery? [Śrīla
Vidyāpati]




                           84
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

He is saying here that his heart feels like a desert. We
can see the example of deserts, such as those in
Australia, Africa and the Arab countries. The summer sun
makes the sand so hot that if you plant a seed it pops
immediately, like muri (puffed rice). In that condition,
animals such as deer cannot survive. They die at once.
And when a drop of rain falls on the desert, it
vaporizes and burns like steam, just as a sprinkle of
water will sizzle, splash and burn us when it falls on
boiling oil. Similarly, our heart is like a desert. Any
drop of happiness coming from our spouse or children may
seem pleasant at first, but like boiling steam or water,
it burns us.

So, this effulgent person was weeping, “O Kṛṣṇa, having
forgotten You, I am under the illusion that these
poisonous attachments are natural for me. Throughout the
day I am absorbed in my wife and children. I waste all
my time in useless, silly, nonsensical and destructive
activities. Now I have become old and I do not know how
to do bhajana. O Kṛṣṇa, save me, save me!”

From a distance Advaita Ācārya stood silently, taking
that man’s darśana. He could see that the man was a
mahāpuruṣa, a fully self-realized soul, otherwise he
could not have expressed such spiritual emotions.
Advaita Ācārya walked over and offered him praṇāma. “Who
are you?” He asked.

“I am a bogus person. I have wasted my life, my whole
life. Now I am a hundred years old. What will I do?”

Previously, this great person had been a special kavi
(poet) in the king’s council—as Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya
was—and had received great respect even from kings. He
also had enjoyed a beautiful wife and many children. But
in his last days he lamented that he had wasted his
life. At that time, he wrote many songs describing
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to
hear these songs when He lived in the Gambhīrā. There,
He was particularly inspired by the songs of Caṇḍīdāsa
and Vidyāpati; and this person was Vidyāpati.

I think that Advaita Ācārya would also have met with
Caṇḍīdāsa and other great devotees. He was so powerful.
We therefore pray at His lotus feet to kindly bestow His
mercy. By His mercy we can know Caitanya Mahāprabhu, His
teachings, and the purpose of His descent. In this way
our hearts may melt.

·

·

MAHĀPRABHU’S GIFT OF BHAKTI



I am again discussing Ādi-līlā, Chapter One, Verse Four.
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu mercifully came to distribute
unnatojjvala-rasa, the same prema He gave when He last
advented on earth long, long ago in the previous day of
Brahmā.


                              85
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

By increasing the quality of our chanting we will
develop pure affection for Śrī Kṛṣṇa and bhakti will
enter into our heart. Then we will have realization of
this unnatojjvala-rasa—otherwise not. All of our ācāryas
have warned us not to depend on our worldly
intelligence, because it will not help us attain our
goal of life. We must try to increase our love and
affection by chanting, remembering and performing
devotional activities. Thus śuddha-sattva will descend
from Goloka Vṛndāvana and enter our heart, and we will
then understand everything clearly.

Try to hear, but also try to have realization of what
you are hearing—by your practice of bhakti. Sometimes we
trust our mental calculations and speculations, but
these will not help us attain our goal. Śaṅkarācārya has
taught:



bhaja govindaṁ bhaja govindaṁ

bhaja govindaṁ mūḍha-mate

samprāpte sannihite khalu maraṇe

nahī nahī rakṣati ḍukṛṇ-karaṇe



You intellectual fools, just worship Govinda, just
worship Govinda, just worship Govinda. Your grammatical
knowledge and word jugglery will not save you at the
time of death.[lii]52



One of Śaṅkarācārya’s many disciples was about one
hundred years old. One day he was repeating the dhātu
grammer rules—saḥ, tau, te (prefixes of vyākaraṇa,
grammar). Śaṅkarācārya told him, “Your hair has become
white, your teeth have fallen out, your eyesight has
gone, and now you are foolishly reciting all these rules
of vyākaraṇa, anusvāra and visargaḥ. But this will not
save you. You should chant ‘bhaja govindaṁ bhaja
govindaṁ bhaja govindaṁ.’”

There is no value in depending on our intellectual
capacity or any other material facility. Our success is
in associating with bona fide Vaiṣṇavas, bona fide
gurus. And if we see that our guru is not qualified,
then we may take any mahā-bhāgavata devotee as a śikṣā-
guru. If we have faith in that pure Vaiṣṇava, we should
give our heart to him at once and take dīkṣā and śikṣā.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu went to Gaya and gave His heart
at the lotus feet of Śrī Īśvara Purī, saying, “Having
taken initiation from you, and having received your
association, I am satisfied. My whole life has become
successful.”

There will be many problems in our life, but solving
them will not help us fulfill our goal. Our primary
problem is how to achieve pure bhakti. If this is not

                            86
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017

solved, then we will become absorbed in party spirit,
money-making, and acquiring name and fame. This will
also not help or protect us—even if we are in a big
party. So try to do as Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Advaita
Ācārya have done. Follow all the teachings of Śrī
Caitanya, Śrīla Rūpa, Śrīla Sanātana and the other
Gosvāmīs.




THE MEANING OF HARI



From this same śloka I am now going to explain the last
two lines:



hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ

(Cc. Ādi 1.4)



Śacīnandana is Hari Himself. Hari means Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Here, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī refers to Him not as Hari, but as Śacīnandana.
Śacī Mā was very merciful to everyone, so it must be
concluded that her son, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, also
has that quality. He may have sometimes appeared to be
very hard-hearted—as in His pastimes with Choṭa
Haridāsa, Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa and Pratāparudra Mahārāja, to
whom He would not give His darśana. At that time He was
not interested in taking the advice of Advaita Ācārya,
Nityānanda Prabhu, Rāya Rāmānanda, Svarūpa Dāmodara, or
even Paramānanda Purī, who was on the level of his guru.
He told them, “I am living in Purī in the renounced
order of life. If you desire wealth and reputation, you
can associate with Pratāparudra Mahārāja, but I have no
interest in these things.”

Unless we are like Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we cannot
achieve pure bhakti. Still, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī prays, “O
Prabhu, if you evaluate my qualification, my situation
is forever hopeless. But I know that as the son of Śacī
Mā You are by nature kind-hearted, and because You
cannot give up this quality, You will therefore not
consider whether or not I am qualified for Your mercy.”

Amongst all qualities, vātsalya-bhāva (the parental
mood) is a most superior quality of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in the sense that They are always
kind. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is therefore praying, “O Śacī-
nandana, You are Hari Himself, with the beauty and mood
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. You are so merciful. You want to
give Your mercy to all living entities, even if they are
like Jagāi and Mādhāi, fallen souls who have no
qualification at all.


                           87
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Hari puraṭa sundara. Hari has so many meanings. Hari
means Kṛṣṇa Himself, who takes the heart and mind of
everyone. Hari means monkey. Here, it means a very
powerful lion.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī therefore prays, “O Śacī-nandana,
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, as mad elephants flee when a lion
roars, so when You roar with Your harināma-saṅkīrtana,
the mad elephants of the results of past sinful
activities and offenses committed to Vaiṣṇavas, which
can immediately uproot the creeper of bhakti and dry it
up forever, also flee". Our offenses are like mad
elephants. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam explains that if one
offends any pure devotee, by criticizing him, abusing
him, beating him, not being very happy to see him, or by
not welcoming or showing respect to him by standing as
he enters or leaves a place—such a person is committing
an offense. Like a mad elephant, this offense will
destroy all his power, piety, beauty, knowledge,
intelligence, wealth, etc. Such an offender is not even
qualified to go to hell. A bigger and more miserable
hell will have to be created—just for him. We should try
to understand this.

Hari, the lion-like Caitanya Mahāprabhu, lives in a very
dark cage—our heart. If we remember, glorify and perform
kīrtana for Him, His roar will destroy all mad elephants
(elephantine offenses). Without His mercy it is not
possible to become free from sinful reactions. Not even
Śrī Kṛṣṇa can make this possible. But this same Kṛṣṇa,
as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, can do it. Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
taken mercy from Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the most
merciful. Her mercy combined with Kṛṣṇa’s mercy can
destroy all offenses.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is therefore praying that this
Śacīnananda will come into our heart. The mercy of
Gaurāṅga, who is Kṛṣṇa Himself, covered by the beauty
and golden color of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, is incomparable. No
one can compare to His heart’s affection and love for
all. He is only comparable to Himself.

Rūpa Gosvāmī has given the meaning of the entire Fourth
Chapter in this śloka, describing the purpose of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s advent. Now I want to hear the
explanation and meaning given by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja:



Devotee reads:

Text: May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacī-devī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
core of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has descended in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation has ever
offered before: the most elevated mellow of devotional
service, the mellow of conjugal love.

Purport: This is a quotation from the Vidagdha-mādhava,
a drama compiled and edited by Śrīla ¬ūpa Gosvāmī. [Ādi-
līlā: 3.4]


                           88
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Text: I have given the essential meaning of the fourth
verse: this incarnation descends to propagate the
chanting of the holy name and spread love of God.

Text: Although this is true, this is but the external
reason for the Lord's incarnation. Please hear one other
reason—the confidential reason—for the Lord's
appearance.

Purport: In the Third Chapter, fourth verse, it has been
clearly said that Lord Caitanya appeared to distribute
love of Kṛṣṇa and the chanting of His transcendental
holy name, Hare Kṛṣṇa. That was the secondary purpose of
Lord Caitanya's appearance. The real reason is
different, as we shall see in this chapter. (Cc. Ādi
4.5-6)



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Try to hear this. This is
Swāmījī’s glory—that he is an intimate associate and
follower of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.



Devotee reads:

Although this is true, this is but the external reason
for the Lord's incarnation. Please hear one other reason
—the confidential reason—for the Lord's appearance. (Cc.
Ādi 4.6)



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: It is important for us to try
to read Caitanya-caritāmṛta again, and become more
familiar with this information. It is not that devotees
should not understand all these explanations. All
respectable and serious Vaiṣṇavas must know them. They
are not meant to simply collect money and make plans.
Everyone must do some service according to his tendency,
but all dignified devotees should also carefully
understand Swāmījī’s purpose for coming to this world.



Devotee reads:

Summary: In this chapter of the epic Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has stressed that
Lord Caitanya appeared for three principal purposes of
His own. The first purpose was to relish the position of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is the prime reciprocator of
transcendental love of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Lord Kṛṣṇa is the
reservoir of transcendental loving transactions with
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. The subject of those loving
transactions is the Lord Himself, and Rādhārāṇī is the
object. Thus the subject, the Lord, wanted to relish the
loving mellow in the position of the object, Rādhārāṇī.

The second reason for His appearance was to understand
the transcendental mellow of Himself. Lord Kṛṣṇa is all
sweetness. Rādhārāṇī's attraction for Kṛṣṇa is sublime,
and to experience that attraction and understand the

                           89
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

transcendental sweetness of Himself, He accepted the
mentality of Rādhārāṇī.

The third reason that Lord Caitanya appeared was to
enjoy the bliss tasted by Rādhārāṇī. The Lord thought
that undoubtedly Rādhārāṇī enjoyed His company and He
enjoyed the company of Rādhārāṇī, but the exchange of
transcendental mellow between the spiritual couple was
more pleasing to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī than to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Rādhārāṇī felt more transcendental pleasure in the
company of Kṛṣṇa than He could understand without taking
Her position, but for Śrī Kṛṣṇa to enjoy in the position
of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was impossible because that
position was completely foreign to Him. Kṛṣṇa is the
transcendental male, and Rādhārāṇī is the transcendental
female. Therefore, to know the transcendental pleasure
of loving Kṛṣṇa, Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself appeared as Lord
Caitanya, accepting the emotions and bodily luster of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

Lord Caitanya appeared to fulfill these confidential
desires and also to preach the special significance of
chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/
Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, and to
answer the call of Advaita Prabhu. These were secondary
reasons.

Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī was the principal figure
among Lord Caitanya's confidential devotees. The records
of his diary have revealed these confidential purposes
of the Lord. These revelations have been confirmed by
the statements of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his various
prayers and poems. This chapter (Chapter 4, which is a
commentary on Ādi-līlā: 1.4) also specifically describes
the difference between lust and love. The transactions
of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā are completely different from
material lust. Therefore the author has very clearly
distinguished between them. (Cc. Ādi 4)



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: For whom has Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja written this? He wanted his books distributed
so that anyone desiring to understand them will approach
a superior Vaiṣṇava by whose association he will try to
become qualified. If Swāmījī had thought that no one was
qualified, nor would there ever be anyone qualified to
read and understand, then why did he write like this?
Some say that no one in the world is qualified to
realize these truths about Lord Caitanya. They say that
one who tries to understand is a sahajiyā. By using this
logic, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
must also be sahajiyā because these words of Caitanya-
caritāmṛta are theirs. Don’t accept such logic.

Actually, any person reading Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the association of Vaiṣṇavas, and
chanting Gaura-Nityānanda Prabhu’s holy names, certainly
becomes qualified. We are all recipients of Mahāprabhu’s
mercy because we have given up all other lines to take
shelter in His disciplic succession.

The number of interested devotees in the world is so
small that they can be counted on one’s fingers. I think

                           90
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017

those who have taken shelter at the lotus feet of
Caitanya Mahāprabhu or His associates will certainly one
day be qualified. Don’t feel hopeless. I see rays of
hope everywhere. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s mercy will be
among you.




WITHOUT THIS THE WORLD IS USELESS




vāñchā kalpa tarubhyaś ca

kṛpā sindhubhya eva ca

patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo

vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ



Vaiṣṇavas are like desire trees who can give anything,
even kṛṣṇa-prema. They can also give the service of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, which is very rare. Never criticize any
Vaiṣṇavas; always try to honor all of them.




PRAYING THE ĀCĀRYAS’ PRAYERS



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ



May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī Śacī-
devī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant spiritual
knowledge of the mellow taste of His service. [Cc. Ādi
1.4]



I have explained the general meanings, and we are now
going to discuss something special which Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī has given. We have also heard a very
wonderful explanation in the line of Rūpa Gosvāmī,

                            91
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura, and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja. He has
clearly explained the deep meanings of Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī’s ślokas.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja gives the meaning of this śloka
in his other Bengali payāras (verses or ślokas), and we
will take the help of Swāmījī’s explanation of Caitanya-
caritāmṛta to explain his mood.



pūrṇa bhagavān kṛṣṇa vrajendra-kumāra

goloke vrajera saha nitya vihāra



What is Swāmījī’s explanation?



Devotee reads:

Text: Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of the King of Vraja, is the
Supreme Lord. He eternally enjoys transcendental
pastimes in His eternal abode, Goloka, which includes
Vraja-dhāma.

Purport: In the previous chapter it has been established
that Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vrajendra (the King of Vraja), is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead with six opulences.
He eternally enjoys transcendentally variegated
opulences on His planet, which is known as Goloka. The
eternal pastimes of the Lord in the spiritual planet
Kṛṣṇa-loka are called aprakaṭa, or unmanifested
pastimes, because they are beyond the purview of the
conditioned souls. Lord Kṛṣṇa is always present
everywhere, but when He is not present before our eyes,
He is said to be aprakaṭa, or unmanifested. (Cc. Ādi
3.5)



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī is elucidating on the purport of this śloka,
anarpita-carīṁ cirāt, written by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Why
did he quote this śloka here? He thought, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa may
not hear my prayer, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā also may not
hear, but They cannot avoid hearing the prayer of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī.”

Our mood must be always ānugatya, under the guidance of
Vaiṣṇavas. Don’t try to be the supreme, thinking, “I am
the controller, I am controlling all.” Instead think, ”I
am a servant. I am the servant of the servant of the
servant of the servant of the servant of the servants of
your servants. I am the last servant’s foot-dust.” This
is humility. We are making so many prayers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, but They may overlook them.
They may not take them seriously.




                           92
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

ṣad-aṅga śaraṇāgati hoibe jāhāra

tāhāra prārthanā śune śrī-nanda-kumāra



The youthful son of Nanda Bābā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, hears the
prayers of anyone who takes refuge in Him by this six-
fold practice known as śaraṇāgati. (Śaraṇāgati by Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa hears the prayers of those who have the six
kinds of śaraṇāgati (surrender) at His lotus feet.
Śaraṇāgati is the door, or entrance, to bhakti. If we
don’t have these six qualities, we cannot enter. They
must be there in our heart.



ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ prātikūlya vivarjanaṁ

rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso goptṛtwe varaṇaṁ tathā

ātma-nikṣepa kārpaṇye ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ



There are six symptoms of self-surrender an unalloyed
devotee possesses: (1) ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ (accepting
only what is favorable for prema-bhakti); (2) prātikūlya
vivarjana (rejecting everything unfavorable for prema-
bhakti); (3) rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāsa (firm faith that Kṛṣṇa
is the only protector, knowing that no other activity
can provide protection); (4) goptṛtve varaṇa (no doubt
that Kṛṣṇa is the only guardian and maintainer); (5)
ātma-nikṣepa (offering one’s whole self to the Lord,
feeling incapable of doing anything independently from
Kṛṣṇa’s desire); and (6) kārpaṇya (humility, feeling
insignificant and very fallen). Possessing all these
attitudes is called śaraṇāpatti. [Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu-bindu]



If we want to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa, first we should fully
offer ourselves at Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. There will be
some symptoms that we have done this; simply speaking
about it will not do. What are the symptoms?

Ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ: We will only adopt that service
which is favorable to Kṛṣṇa, and we will forever avoid
anything unfavorable.

Prātikūlya vivarjana: We should immediately give up all
that which is unfavorable—association, food, society,
and bad activities.

Rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāsa: We will have very strong faith
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is always protecting us and that He is
the only protector. We are not the protectors, nor can
money protect us. In this whole world no scientist, no
doctor, no one—nothing—can help us. Only Kṛṣṇa can. If

                           93
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

we are trying to do bhajana and at the same time
hankering, “O Kṛṣṇa, save me. I am penniless, help me,
help me,” or “I am helpless and suffering so much,” then
we do not actually have much faith in Kṛṣṇa and we
cannot really do bhajana. There are many kinds of
problems we cannot solve, so we should have strong faith
that Kṛṣṇa is our only protector and He will surely save
us.

Why worry? We should simply serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Problems
will come and Kṛṣṇa will solve them—and if He does not,
no harm. Then it will be said that He is not very
merciful. All will defame Him, saying, “Now He has given
up His merciful nature and has become so cruel-hearted.”
He cannot give up His qualification of protecting the
Vaiṣṇavas.

Kṛṣṇa protected Ambarīṣa and Prahlāda Mahārāja. He
protects everyone. So be fearless. There is actually no
problem at all. If a problem comes in bhakti, Kṛṣṇa will
at once manage everything. Why fear? “If I am alone and
the whole world is against me, I do not care.” Be solid
like this; otherwise how can you progress in your Kṛṣṇa
consciousness? Never think, “If I simply do bhakti, so
many problems may come. Perhaps my big society will
reject me and because everyone will be upset and opposed
to me, I will have to move from my house. What will I
do?” If we want to do bhakti, we must be like Prahlāda
Mahārāja and Haridāsa Ṭhākura.

The Mohammedan king prohibited Haridāsa Ṭhākura from
chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa and ordered him to chant “Allah,
Allah, Allah. Hudā, Hudā, Hudā.” But Śrīla Haridāsa
Ṭhākura refused. He told them, “If Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, Allah,
and Hudā are the same then why are you troubling people?
Why are you trying to make them Mohammedan by force? Why
chant only Hudā and Allah? If Kṛṣṇa and Rāma are Allah
and Hudā, then what is the harm in chanting Kṛṣṇa?”

They replied, “We will cut you into lākhās and lākhās of
pieces and give your body to the dogs.”

“I have no fear,” Haridāsa said, and he began to chant
very loudly on the main road. The Mohammedans tried to
kill him but could not. Haridāsa said, “Even if someone
cuts me into pieces, I will not give up my chanting of
Kṛṣṇa’s name.”

If, like this, you become bold and strong in your Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will at once come or He will
send His Sudarśana-cakra. Or He can send Garuḍa,
Hanumān, or come Himself in a form like Nṛsiṁha Bhagavān
to protect you. Why fear? Do not fear at all.

Śreyāṁsi bahu bighnāni: In the first stage of bhakti so
many problems come. Try to jump over them just as
Hanumān did when he crossed over the sea. He chanted,
“Jaya Śrī Rāma,” jumped over the sea and went to Laṅkā.
Be like this. Right now, at this moment, give up
thinking about problems and be faithful knowing that
Kṛṣṇa is always our protector.

Goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā: Kṛṣṇa is always protecting. We
should surrender our whole self—body, mind, soul and

                           94
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

everything—and think, “I will not do anything which
Kṛṣṇa does not like. I am surrendering everything at His
lotus feet.” This is śaraṇāgati. If we do śaraṇāgati
like this, then the door to kṛṣṇa-bhakti-līlā will be
opened and we will easily enter. This is of primary
importance.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī explained:



pūrṇa bhagavān kṛṣṇa vrajendra-kumāra

goloke vrajera saha nitya vihāra



Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of the King of Vraja, is the Supreme
Lord. He eternally enjoys transcen-dental pastimes in
His eternal abode, Goloka, which includes Vraja-dhāma.
(Cc. Ādi 3.5)



The Supreme Personality of Godhead is Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He is
always playing in Vṛndāvana with the go (cows), gopas
(cowherd boys), gopīs, and all the beings of Vṛndāvana,
Vraja. He especially feels pleasure in the society of
gopīs there.

The upper part of the Vaikuṇṭha region is called Kṛṣṇa-
loka, and the lower part is called Vaikuṇṭha paravyoma.
In paravyoma Vaikuṇṭha are all the incarnations and
manifestations of Kṛṣṇa, like Rāma, Nṛsṁha and Nārāyaṇa.

There are separate divisions in Vaikuṇṭha, and they are
all endless in every way. Kṛṣṇa’s mouth is very little,
like a baby’s, but in it Yaśodāmaiyā saw all the worlds,
including Goloka Vṛndāvana. Even a dust particle of
Vṛndāvana is endless. By the wish of Kṛṣṇa it may appear
very little, or very big. Because in Vṛndāvana, each
grain of dust is Baladeva Prabhu Himself, every grain of
dust of Vṛndāvana has this power.

Kṛṣṇa-loka, or Goloka, is divided into three sections,
and the combination of all three is called Goloka. The
boundary line is also called Goloka. The first part, the
lower part, is called Dvārakā; the middle part is called
Mathurā; and the upper part is called Vraja, Vṛndāvana
and Gokula. They are all the same, but there is also
some speciality in each.

In Vṛndāvana there are twelve forests and twelve sub-
forests. The first is Gokula, where Kṛṣṇa’s vātsalya-
līlā pastimes are performed; in Vṛndāvana Kṛṣṇa’s
paugaṇḍa and kiśora-līlā are performed. It is spread
over sixteen crores, or thirty-two miles. Actually, from
Yamunā to Govardhana Hill, Nandagāoṅ and Varṣāna—all are
in the greater Vṛndāvana, and this is superior to
Gokula. In Vṛndāvana, Govardhana is topmost; at
Govardhana, Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are the most
superior.

Why has Kṛṣṇa-loka been divided into three? It is

                           95
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

divided according to the stages of prema of the
devotees. In Dvārakā there is some knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s
opulence as Bhagavān. In Mathurā there is less opulence,
awe and reverence, and there is still less in Vṛndāvana.
On the other hand, prema is more developed in Vṛndāvana,
less in Mathurā, and less again in Dvārakā. So in a
large part of Goloka, devotees have knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s
bhagavattā (opulence) and see Him as Bhagavān. In the
Goloka border area there is even a planet where Śrī Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa live in the mood of svakīya-bhāva. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is always present as God Himself, even more
opulent than Nārāyaṇa. In Goloka He is neither the son
of Nanda Bābā and Yaśodāmaiyā, nor Vasudeva and Devakī.
He is like a husband, but there is no marriage ceremony.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is there, but She is always doing
praṇāma at His lotus feet, like Lakṣmī.

In Dvārakā this aiśvarya mood is somewhat covered, and
Kṛṣṇa becomes a friend of the Dvārakā-vāsīs, and the
husband of all the queens. There His marriage
arrangements take place. Sometimes Satyabhāmā may be in
māna (transcendental anger), and Kṛṣṇa, although the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, will try to pacify her
anger. He may tell her, “I have made a mistake.” In
Goloka this display of human subservience by Śrī Kṛṣṇa
would never happen.

In Mathurā this aiśvarya-bhāva is more covered. Still,
Kṛṣṇa became four-handed at the time of His appearance,
and Vasudeva and Devakī prayed to Him, “You are God
Himself. We remember that we pleased You in our past
births and so received the benediction that You will
become our son. This is why You have now come here.”
They saw Him holding śaṇkha (conch), cakra (disk), gadā
(club), and padma (lotus flower). He was in the prime of
youth, with wavy hair and many golden ornaments like the
kaustubha jewel. Then, when He became a two-handed baby,
they became very worried about how to protect Him. If
Vasudeva knew that Śrī Kṛṣṇa was Bhagavān Himself—that
He could protect all—and that He could kill Kaṁsa in a
moment—why would he have taken Him to Gokula? It is
because at that time he forgot Kṛṣṇa’s Godhood. On one
hand, opulence, bhagavattā, is there, but, on the other
hand, madhura is there. In Dvārakā there is more
opulence than madhura.

In Vraja no one knows that Kṛṣṇa is God Himself. The
elderly gopīs tell Him, “Can You bring your father’s
shoes?” Kṛṣṇa, who is two-years-old and quite naked,
very gladly goes, as if dancing. He puts His father’s
shoes on His head and, still dancing, comes to the
gopīs. Eager to see Kṛṣṇa’s greed to taste laḍḍus, the
gopīs tell Him that they will give Him one if He sings
and dances. Then, looking at them with very greedy eyes
and outstretching His arms as if dancing, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
sings sweetly. The gopīs say, “Very good,” and give Him
a laḍḍu.

So, in Vṛndāvana, any and all bhagavattā is covered by
madhura-bhāva. What is madhura-bhāva? They think Kṛṣṇa
is their worldly brother, worldly friend, or worldly
beloved—whether opulence is manifest or not.

Kṛṣṇa held Govardhana Hill at the age of only seven

                           96
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

years old. He was neither a giant nor four-handed. He
was smiling, playing His flute and telling jokes with
all the gopas and gopīs there. The gopas and elderly
persons who are like Kṛṣṇa’s fathers and mothers say
that Nanda Bābā has certainly performed austerities for
Nārāyaṇa, and for that reason Nārāyaṇa has now entered
the body of Kṛṣṇa and is holding Govardhana Hill.

And what about the gopīs? They are staring at
Govardhana. “O Govardhana, stay where you are. Don’t be
heavy for Kṛṣṇa, otherwise we will curse you.” They
think that Govardhana stays up because of their strong
words. As for Śrīmatī Rādhikā, She is always on Kṛṣṇa’s
left side. Ācāryas in our line have concluded that
because Kṛṣṇa is holding Govardhana with the tip of the
little finger of His left hand, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, as the
complete potency or power of Kṛṣṇa, actually lifted
Govardhana.

The supreme manifestation of opulence is in Vṛndāvana,
but it is covered with so much madhura-bhāva it is not
noticed at all.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja explains that Kṛṣṇa is always
playing in Goloka, but not in Dvārakā, Mathurā, or the
outer part of Goloka. He is in Goloka Vṛndāvana, Gokula,
Rādhā-kuṇḍa, etc. with His many associates. All moods
are there in Vṛndāvana:



pūrṇa bhagavān kṛṣṇa vrajendra-kumāra

goloke vrajera saha nitya vihāra



Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of the King of Vraja, is the Supreme
Lord. He eternally enjoys transcen-dental pastimes in
His eternal abode, Goloka, which includes Vraja-dhāma.
[Cc. Ādi 3.5]



In India, a sahajiyā named Rādhānātha has written a
lengthy commentary on Caitanya-caritāmṛta, saying that
there is no mood of parakīya-bhāva in Vraja. But his
argument is not valid. If a mood has no seed in the
original abode, then how can it be manifest in this
world?[liii]53

Everything is there, in Vraja Vṛndāvana, so Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja is saying: pūrṇa bhagavān kṛṣṇa
vrajendra-kumāra goloke vrajera saha nitya vihāra.

Parakīya-bhāva and all other moods are present in
Vṛndāvana. Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His parikaras, associates,
descend with these moods to Bhauma Vṛndāvana in each and
every universe. Bhauma Vṛndāvana and Goloka Vṛndāvana
are practically the same, and yet there is some
difference. No ordinary person can see and realize that
Kṛṣṇa is always playing in Bhauma Vṛndāvana, but if
anyone develops such perfect prema, he can go to Goloka
Vṛndāvana where he will always see Kṛṣṇa playing.

                           97
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


Those who say that in Goloka Vṛndāvana there is no
parakīya-bhāva, no birth of Kṛṣṇa, and that Kṛṣṇa is
always of kiśora age are wrong. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura has given the correct commentary on this śloka
(Cc. Ādi 3.5). He explains that Kṛṣṇa is eternally
playing in that sixteen crore prakoṣṭha (division)
called Gokula Vṛndāvana, and He descends from there once
in a day of Brahmā.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa has five kinds of associates in Goloka
Vṛndāvana—śanta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, and mādhurya.
When He comes to this world, He brings all the residents
of Vraja-bhūmi, including the ever-liberated mayūras
(peacocks) and all other birds, cows, associates (like
friends, parents, and beloveds), the Yamunā River,
Govardhana Hill—everything. He lives in Vraja until nine
or ten years of age, then He goes to Mathurā, and then
Dvārakā; and still, to this day He is performing
pastimes with all of His associates there.

If we have no bhakti, we cannot see; and sādhāraṇa-
bhakti (ordinary bhakti) will not be sufficient to help
us see. When we come to the stage of bhāva, then from
time to time we will experience this—otherwise not. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa comes to this world to sprinkle His mercy on all
jīvas—to those who are doing sādhana, and to those who
are not, to those who have already matured up to bhāva,
and to those who have reached prema. He descends to
elevate them all.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa comes once in each day of Brahmā—only once.
And when His pastimes are over, He disappears with all
of His associates and the pastime places of Vraja. After
His disappearance, when He is in Goloka Vṛndāvana, He
thinks:



cira-kāla nāhi kari prema-bhakti dāna

bhakti vinā jagatera nāhi avasthāna



What is the purport of Swāmījī?



Devotee reads:

Text: For a long time I have not bestowed unalloyed
loving service to Me upon the inhabitants of the world.
Without such loving attachment, the existence of the
material world is useless.

Purport: The Lord seldom awards pure transcendental
love, but without such pure love of God, freed from
fruitive activities and empiric speculation, one cannot
attain perfection in life. (Cc. Ādi 3.14)



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Many devotees have Caitanya-

                           98
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

caritāmṛta, and throughout Caitanya-caritāmṛta we have
Swāmījī’s purports. But still we rarely have the
opportunity to hear clear explanations of his words. If
we ourselves cannot properly explain this, it means we
have no real interest. To develop interest in this
beautiful and powerful mission that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has come to give, we must try to associate
with Vaiṣṇavas who have a great interest in these topics
—not in worldly topics.

We have not come to this world with worldly possessions,
and when we leave this body we will have to give up
whatever we have accumulated. So why should we worry for
material comforts and prosperity?

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī has come for the same purpose
as Caitanya Mahāprabhu—to give that prema which the Lord
Himself came to give—but I think that only very rare
persons realize this. Swāmījī was cutting jungles of
māyāvāda and other false philosophies, and devotees
joined him in this; but we should not think, “Jungle
cutting is the highest service in this world.” We cut
jungles in a particular place in order to construct a
building or reside there. That construction is the
construction of bhakti. We should not simply continue to
cut jungles for lākhās and lākhās of births. There are
certainly jungles everywhere, but it is useless to spend
our lives cutting them. Here, Swāmījī is teaching the
world: bhakti vinā jagatera nāhi avasthāna. What has he
written in the purport?



Devotee reads:

Purport: Without such loving attachment, the existence
of the material world is useless.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Useless. So the cutting of
jungles is also useless if one’s mood is not to
construct bhakti in the hearts of devotees. This is the
main thing. We have not come to this world to make so
many material constructions for our comfort. Our
Gosvāmīs and ācāryas are very powerful and have also cut
jungles. But we are not so powerful. If we concentrate
on trying to cut the jungles of sahajiyās,māyāvādīs and
viṣayīs (sense enjoyers)—even in the name of ‘making
devotees’—we will be affected by those same
contaminations.

Here is one example. Someone saw a person drowning in
the current of a very big river, and although he himself
did not know how to swim, he at once jumped into the
river to save the drowning man. The drowning man then
caught hold of him, and both drowned. So, first we
should know how to swim; we should know the art of
saving ourselves, and then we can save others. We should
throw a rope from the shore. The drowning man will then
catch hold of the rope and we can save him. Only if we
can swim can we jump in, otherwise we will also die.

We must know all these bhakti-siddhāntas, and develop

                           99
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                          5/5/2017

the bhakti in our heart by practicing śravaṇaṁ,
kīrtanaṁ, etc., then we can save others.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is thinking, “For a very long time I have not
distributed to the jīvas the affection of the residents
of Vraja, with sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya-bhāva. When
I previously came in the form of Gaurāṅga, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, Śacīnandana, I gave this affection. Now a
very long, long period has passed, and so I should give
it again. Without prema-bhakti, the world will be
destroyed.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa continues:



sakala jagate more kare vidhi-bhakti

vidhi-bhaktye vraja-bhāva pāite nāhi śakti

What is the meaning?



Devotee reads:

Text: Everywhere in the world people worship Me
according to scriptural injunctions. But simply by
following such regulative principles one cannot attain
the loving sentiments of the devotees in Vraja-bhūmi.
[Cc. Ādi 3.15]



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: What is the purport? You can
say it in your own words.



Devotee: In the discussion with Śrīla Rāmānanda Rāya and
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Madhya-līlā, Rāmānanda Rāya
explains that even if one follows the principles of
vaidhī-bhakti, the rules and regulations of devotional
service, one cannot get vraja-bhakti.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: But you should also know that
pure vaidhī-bhakti and impure vaidhī-bhakti are
different. What we are doing, is not vaidhī-bhakti.
Śravaṇaṁ and kīrtanaṁ, etc., performed only to please
Kṛṣṇa, is actually vaidhī-bhakti. If we are
concentrating simply on money-making, we are not
practicing bhakti. A pure practitioner of vaidhī-bhakti
is very rare. If we look in our heart, we may see that
we are performing activities for our own gain and
reputation. This is not pure bhakti. It is not even pure
vaidhī-bhakti. We should try to follow vaidhī-bhakti.

But Kṛṣṇa says here, “I am not even satisfied by real
vaidhī-bhakti.” He is rejecting even that.

What is that pure bhakti? To serve Kṛṣṇa in sakhya,
vātsalya and mādhurya-bhāva as the Vraja-vāsīs do. To
associate with someone who can teach us Kṛṣṇa’s real
moods is very rare—even in Bhauma Vṛndāvana. There are

                           100
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

so many paṇḍitas there who will cheat you, and there are
many tortoises and monkeys who will harass you.

Try to realize all these ślokas in very beautiful and
powerful association. I think that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, Kṛṣṇa and Swāmījī are themselves looking
upon us. They are very happy. Swāmījī himself is now
saying that I wanted to give you this, so I am inspiring
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja to give it.




LORD CAITANYA AS THE PERFECT BHAKTA




OFFERING OBEISANCES



vande 'haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn
vaiṣṇavāṁś ca

śrī-rūpam sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁs taṁ sa-
jīvam

sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya
devaṁ

śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa lalitā-śrī-
viśākhānvitāṁś ca



This one śloka offers praṇāma, obeisances, to gurudeva,
to śikṣā-guru, to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His
associates, and to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Their
associates. When we are in a hurry and do not have time
to recite the praṇāma-mantra for each personality, we
can say this prayer because it includes everyone.

There is another very short praṇāma, shorter than this
one, which is also important to recite daily—especially
when we do not have much time:



gurave gauracandrāya

rādhikāyaya tad-ālayaya

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa bhaktāya

tad-bhaktāya namo namaḥ



I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī Gaura-candra,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her associates, to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
devotees, and to all Vaiṣṇavas. [Nectar of Govinda-līlā]

                           101
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017




KṚṢṆA PROTECTS HIS DEVOTEES



To teach us how to attain pure bhakti to the Lord and
His associates, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam relates the story of
Prahlāda Mahārāja and his demoniac father Hiraṇyakaśipu.
Hiraṇyakaśipu told his commanders, “Search everywhere,
and if you notice a person who is in any way favorable
to Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu or Hari, rob him at once and burn his
home, and then either murder him or banish him from my
kingdom. And because cows give milk, butter and ghee
which are used in sacrifices for Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure, kill
them also. Mango, banana and other fruits are used in
Viṣṇu’s service, so cut down all fruit trees. In fact,
if you see anyone or anything that has any relation to
Hari, Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa or Rāma, you should destroy it at
once.”

Hiraṇyakaśipu thought he could kill Kṛṣṇa and His
devotees, but instead he and his evil associates were
killed. Kaṁsa gave similar orders, and for this reason
Aghāsura, Bakāsura, Pūtanā, and other demons went to
Vraja. The result however was the opposite, and they
were all destroyed.

When one aspires to love and serve Kṛṣṇa, so many
troubles come. There is nothing to worry about, however,
because historically we see that Kṛṣṇa always protects
His devotees, and to date He has not changed His mood.
He is causelessly merciful. If we are sincere in our
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, He will surely save us. Troubles
may come, but they are temporary. So do not be worried
by them. By śaraṇāgati, surrender, we can remain strict
and strong. If we surrender like Prahlāda, Dhruva,
Haridāsa Ṭhākura and Sītā-devī, Kṛṣṇa will certainly
protect us. We can also be clever, like Akrūra, who
tricked Kaṁsa by pretending to be one of his servants.
That is also good. However, by concealing His identity
(as one of Kṛṣṇa’s party), he was not as surrendered as
those who fearlessly and directly served Śrī Kṛṣṇa—and
depended on Him for the results.

If you surrender, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will say, “Oh, for Me he is
in distress and is suffering so much.” His heart will
melt and He will at once give kṛṣṇa-prema. If you see a
sincere devotee experiencing some suffering, try to help
him both internally and externally. Do not miss the
occasion to help such a devotee with any kind of
problem.




NOT SIMPLY BY REGULATIVE PRINCIPLES




                           102
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017

· ·Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī explains the verse
anarpita-carīṁ cirāt in Bengali ślokas called payāras.
One such payāra is:



sakala jagate more kare vidhi-bhakti

vidhi-bhaktye vraja-bhāva pāite nāhi śakti



Everywhere   in the world people worship Me according to
scriptural   injunctions. But simply by following such
regulative   principles one cannot attain the loving
sentiments   of the devotees in Vraja-bhūmi. [Cc. Ādi
3.15]



After disappearing from His Bhauma Vṛndāvana pastimes,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa considered that people in this world generally
have no connection with Him and do not believe in Him.
Dharmeṇa hīna paśubhiḥ samānāḥ. They are like the lowest
of animals such as hogs, dogs, and asses who, although
experiencing so much suffering, are attached to the
cause of their suffering. Although the male donkey is
repeatedly kicked by the hind legs of the female donkey,
he continues to follow her. In the rainy season a moth
wants to taste fire, and he therefore flies into it and
is burnt at once. We are also like this.

Atheists do not know of God or Kṛṣṇa, and they have no
relationship with Him. Their policy is, “Eat, drink and
be merry.” After drinking large quantities of alcohol,
such a person may fall down in an alleyway by the sewer.
Dogs come and lick his mouth, but he is so intoxicated
that he thinks, “Oh, I am king of the entire world.” He
does not realize his wretched condition. Although he is
mad, he thinks everyone else is mad.

Out of all these atheists, a person who worships
demigods like Durgā, Kālī, Gaṇeśa and so forth, is rare.
More rare is a Nārāyaṇa bhakta, and among lākhās and
lākhās of Nārāyaṇa bhaktas it is rare to find a Kṛṣṇa
bhakta. Among Kṛṣṇa bhaktas, those who are properly
doing vaidhī-bhakti are rare, and among them it is very
rare to find those who have an interest in the mood of
rāgānuga, with some greed to serve Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. So
Kṛṣṇa says here: vidhi-bhaktya vraja-bhāva pāite nāhi
śakti.

What is vaidhī-bhakti? Śravaṇaṁ, kīrtanaṁ, viṣṇu-
smaraṇaṁ, pāda-sevanam, arcanaṁ, vandanaṁ, dāsyaṁ,
sakyam, ātma-nivedanam. Even if this is properly
performed, and even if we have a very bona fide guru
like Nārada, the guru of Dhruva and Prahlāda, this
vaidhī-bhakti will never lead us to vraja-bhāva.



aiśvarya-jñānete saba jagat miśrita

aiśvarya-śithila-preme nāhi mora prīta

                            103
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


[Cc. Ādi 3.16]



If the whole world performs vaidhī-bhakti in the real
sense, with a bona fide guru, they will still achieve
only maryādā-mayī-bhakti, service mixed with awe and
reverence and with knowledge that Nārāyaṇa is
sarvaiśvaryaśālī, the controller of everything, Bhagavān
Himself. They will never achieve service in Vṛndāvana.

Aiśvarya-jñānete saba jagat miśrita. Among those who are
practicing vaidhī-bhakti, only one percent, half a
percent or one-hundredth of a percent will develop some
greed for vraja-bhāva. It is that rare.

Aiśvarya-jñānete saba jagat miśrita/ aiśvarya-śithila-
preme nāhi mora prīta. Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “What do I give
to those practicing vaidhī-bhakti? I only give them
mukti, or service to Vaikuṇṭhanātha. Even if they are
chanting three lākhās of names daily like Haridāsa
Ṭhākura, even if they are always hearing the Purāṇas,
the Upaniṣads, and the Vedānta-sūtra, and even if they
are practicing bhakti like Prahlāda Mahārāja, I only
give them entrance into Vaikuṇṭha.



aiśvarya-jñāne vidhi-bhajana kariyā

vaikuṇṭhake jāya catur-vidha mukti pāñā

sārṣṭi, sārūpya, āra sāmīpya, sālokya

sāyujya nā laya bhakta jāte brahma-aikya



By performing such regulated devotional service in awe
and veneration, one may go to Vaikuṇṭha and attain the
four kinds of liberation—sārṣṭi [achieving opulences
equal to those of the Lord], sārūpya [having a form the
same as the Lord’s], sāmīpya [living as a personal
associate of the Lord] and sālokya [living on a
Vaikuṇṭha planet]. Devotees never accept sāyujya,
however, since that is oneness with brahman. [Cc. Ādi
3.17-18]



They attain one of the four kinds of mukti in Vaikuṇṭha—
sārṣṭi (having the same opulence as the Lord), sārūpya
(having the same bodily features as the Lord), sāmīpya
(being a personal associate of the Lord), and sālokya
(living on the same planet as the Lord). They reject the
fifth type of liberation which is sāyujya (annihilation
of the soul by merging with Kṛṣṇa’s effulgence).

After Ajāmila associated with the Viṣṇudūtas, he
practiced vaidhī-bhakti: hearing and chanting the name
of Nārāyaṇa and meditating on His form. Those bhaktas
who practice like Ajāmila can go to Vaikuṇṭha, but they
will not be able to serve Kṛṣṇa in Vraja.

                           104
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


You can read the meaning and purport.



Devotee reads:

Text: Knowing My opulences, the whole world looks upon
Me with awe and vene-ration. But devotion made feeble by
such reverence does not attract Me. [Cc. Ādi 3.16]



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: What is the meaning of ‘the
whole world?’ It does not mean demons, animals, demigod-
worshippers, and all others. It refers only to those
practicing vaidhī-bhakti.



Devotee reads:

Text: Knowing My opulences, the whole world looks upon
Me with awe and veneration. But devotion made feeble by
such reverence does not attract Me.

Purport: After His appearance, Lord Kṛṣṇa thought that
He had not distributed the transcendental personal
dealings with His devotees in dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya
and mādhurya. One may understand the science of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead from the Vedic literature
and thus become a devotee of the Lord and worship Him
within the regulative principles described in the
scriptures, but one will not know in this way how Kṛṣṇa
is served by the residents of Vraja-bhūmi. One cannot
understand the dealings of the Lord in Vṛndāvana simply
by executing the ritualistic regulative principles
mentioned in the scriptures. By following scriptural
injunctions one may enhance his appreciation for the
glories of the Lord, but there is no chance for one to
enter personal dealings with Him. Giving too much
attention to understanding the exalted glories of the
Lord reduces the chance of one's entering personal
loving affairs with the Lord. To teach the principles of
such loving dealings, the Lord decided to appear as Lord
Caitanya.

Text: By performing such regulated devotional service in
awe and veneration, one may go to Vaikuṇṭha and attain
the four kinds of liberation. [Cc. Ādi 3.16-17]



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes. There is no difference
between nāma (the name) and nāmī (the possessor of the
name, Kṛṣṇa Himself). Kṛṣṇa mercifully comes as śabda-
brahma, or His holy names such as Madana-mohana and
Govinda.

There are two kinds of holy names—prominent and
secondary. Jagannātha, Brahma, Īśvara, Paramātmā and
Allah are secondary names; whereas the prominent names
are Kṛṣṇa, Nṛsiṁha, Rāma and Nārāyaṇa. Of these, the
most superior prominent names are Rādhānātha, Rādhā-

                           105
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

kāntā, Madana-mohana, Govinda, Rāsa-bihārī and Rāsa-
dhārī, and so on.

If someone still has anarthas as a result of offenses,
even if he chants three lākhās of names daily and
performs the nine limbs of bhakti such as śravaṇaṁ,
kīrtanaṁ etc., he will not get vraja-prema. He will not
even attain vaikuṇṭha-prema or mukti. He will only get
some worldly opulence like name, fame and money. If his
chanting is nāmābhāsa, it can give him mukti. And if a
little prema comes by performance of vaidhī-bhakti, that
prema will lead him to Vaikuṇṭha—but not Vraja.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not controlled by vaidhī-bhakti, even if it
is performed perfectly. He is only controlled by the
sakhya-bhāva, vātsalya-bhāva and mādhurya-bhāva of
Vraja. Without one of these bhāvas we will not reach
Vraja in lākhās and lākhās of births of Brahmā, what to
speak of hundreds of millions of our births. After
lākhās and lākhās of births of Brahmā, we will still
have no connection with Kṛṣṇa. Our greatest fortune in
this birth is our opportunity for a connection with
vraja-bhakti. If we lose this, we are losing everything.



yuga-dharma pravartāimu nāma-saṅkīrtana

cāri bhāva-bhakti diyā nācāmu bhuvana



I shall personally inaugurate the religion of the age—
nāma-saṅkīrtana, the congregational chanting of the holy
name. I shall make the world dance in ecstasy, realizing
the four mellows of loving devotional service. [Cc. Ādi
3.19]



I will inaugurate yuga-dharma. And cāri bhāva-bhakti
diyā nācāmu bhuvana; I will give the four kinds of
bhakti in vraja-bhāva—dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and
mādhurya, and I will make the whole word dance. ‘The
whole world’ means where Vaiṣṇavas are relating to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, and where Kṛṣṇa, in the form of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, will appear even to wild animals. ‘The whole
world’ means those who come to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.




KṚṢṆA PRACTICES WHAT HE PREACHES



Here, Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “I will have to first practice
that rare bhakti Myself.”



āpani karimu bhakta-bhāva aṅgīkāre


                           106
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

āpani ācari' bhakti śikhāimu sabāre



I shall accept the role of a devotee, and I shall teach
devotional service by practicing it Myself. [Cc. Ādi
3.20]



When Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “I will take the mood of a bhakta,”
He refers to Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Then He says, “I will
teach others by following the code of Vaiṣṇava behavior
and I will manifest all the Vaiṣṇava qualities.
Otherwise, no one will receive vraja-prema".

The following story illustrates an important principle.
A father was very worried about his son who had
developed the habit of eating an Indian sweet called
guḍa, which made sores and boils break out on the boy’s
body. His father told him that the boils were due to the
number of sweets he ate, but the boy did not listen.
Finally, the father went to his gurudeva and requested
his help. “When I tell my son to stop eating sweets, he
pays no attention; but if you tell him, he may listen to
you.”

His gurudeva said, “Bring your boy back in three days.”

In three days the father returned with his son, and his
gurudeva instructed the boy, “O my darling boy, you
should not take these sweets; they are so harmful for
you. Do you understand?”

“Yes,” the boy replied.

“You please obey me.”

“Yes. I will obey you,” the boy said, and he gave up his
bad habit.

Later the boy’s father went to his gurudeva and asked,
“Why couldn’t you tell him to stop on the first day? Why
did you wait for three?”

He replied, “At that time I myself was taking sweets, so
if I had told him to stop, my words would have had no
potency and he would not have obeyed me.”

So, practice bhakti-yoga yourselves, be bona fide and
then try to preach; otherwise your words will have no
potency and your preaching will be ineffective. You may
speak about Kṛṣṇa the same way I do, or the same way
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī did, but whereas people
listened to him, and they listen somewhat to me, they
will not listen to one who is not practicing pure
bhakti. If Nārada says to someone, “Control your mind at
once; give up all your worldly desires”—he could do it
at once. I am saying the same thing and slowly you are
giving them up, but if the instruction were to come from
Nārada, you would immediately have the strength and
energy to follow.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu stressed the importance of

                           107
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

practicing oneself in order to successfully preach. “I
am the Supreme Personality of Godhead,” He said. “The
viṣaya (enjoyer) of bhakti-yoga, but to preach I must
become the āśraya[liv]54 and follow the process of
bhakti-yoga.”

This is why Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to worship Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and perform all nine kinds of
bhakti. Here, Kṛṣṇa is saying:



āpane nā kaile dharma śikhāna nā yāya

ei ta' siddhānta gītā-bhāgavate gāya

(Cc. Ādi 3.21)



If we are not following, we are not qualified to preach
to another person. This has been explained clearly in
the Gītā and Bhāgavatam. What does Swāmījī say?



Devotee reads:

Text: Unless one practices devotional service himself,
he cannot teach it to others. This conclusion is indeed
confirmed throughout the Gītā and Bhāgavatam. (Cc. Ādi
3.21])



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes. Nowadays people think
preaching is easy, and distributing is more important
than practicing. But if one does not know the śāstra, or
the ABC’s of preaching, then what is he doing? One may
collect money by distributing books, keep seventy-five
percent for himself and give twenty-five percent to the
Maṭha (temple). Although he thinks, “I am a very good
preacher,” or “We are preaching to the whole world”—all
he is really doing is taking mahā-prasādam and living in
the Maṭha. His ‘preaching’ is so-called only. If one is
not actually practicing, then after a few days, months
or years, he again takes to bad habits; and when found
guilty of this, he is driven from the temple, or he
himself leaves bhakti altogether.

Preaching successfully is not cheap. If you are
following the process and are having some realization,
then try to give it to others. The soul becomes very
blissful by practicing bhakti-yoga and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
manifests in your heart. So, first you should be
satisfied yourself by chanting and remembering, and when
your faith is strong you can properly preach. Yenātmā
samprasīdati. Otherwise you are cheating, and we see in
this world that persons who cheat others are themselves
cheated by Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says:



yāre dekha, tāre kaha `kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

                           108
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa



Instruct everyone to follow the orders of Lord Kṛṣṇa as
they are given in Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
In this way become a spiritual master and try to
liberate everyone in this land. (Cc. Madhya 7.128)



He was so powerful. He gave this instruction and then
empowered others. You should realize that you can only
have an effect on others if you sincerely obey the order
of guru. Then you will be like a postman, and the
message you carry will be heard.

So, as previously explained, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is thinking:



yuga-dharma-pravartana haya aṁśa haite

āmā vinā anye nāre vraja-prema dite



My plenary portions can establish the principles of
religion for each age. No one but Me, however, can
bestow the kind of loving service performed by the
residents of Vraja. (Cc. Ādi 3.26)



The yuga-dharma (the religious system) for the age of
Satya-yuga is meditation, the yuga-dharma for Tretā-yuga
is yajña, for Dvāpara-yuga it is Deity worship, and in
Kali-yuga it is nāma-saṅkīrtana.

In all these yugas the yuga-dharma can be preached by an
aṁśa-avatāra (partial avatāra) like Mahā-Viṣṇu, but He
cannot give vraja-prema. Nārāyaṇa cannot give it. Rāma
cannot give it. By general consideration all the
incarnations are the same as Kṛṣṇa in tattva, but in a
deeper consideration there is some difference. Some
incarnations, for example, are plenary (full) parts of
Kṛṣṇa and some are partial parts. In rasa-vicāra, as
well, their functions are also divided. Therefore, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa alone can give this vraja-prema.




NO ONE BUT KṚṢṆA




yuga-dharma-pravartana haya aṁśa haite

āmā vinā anye nāre vraja-prema dite


                           109
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



My plenary portions can establish the principles of
religion for each age. No one but Me, however, can
bestow the kind of loving service performed by the
residents of Vraja. (Cc. Ādi 3.26)



Within His heart, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is considering coming again
to this world to distribute a sprinkle of unnatojjvala-
rasa. “This unnatojjvala-rasa has not been given since
the last day of Brahmā, when I previously came as
Caitanya Mahāprabhu.” Āmā vinā anye nāre vraja-prema
dite. The yuga-dhama can be established by My plenary
portions, the yuga-avatāras. All yuga-avatāras come from
Śrī Advaita Ācārya, or Mahā-Viṣṇu. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and His dvitīya,
second body, is Baladeva Prabhu. The only difference
between Them is in Their bodily color. Baladeva Prabhu
expands further as Mūla Saṅkarṣaṇa in Dvārakā, and He
expands as Mahā Saṅkarṣaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha. From Mahā
Saṅkarṣaṇa comes Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and from
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu comes Mahā-Viṣṇu Advaita Ācārya.
From one aṁśa (limb) comes another, then another, then
another and so on.

Mahā-Viṣṇu (Advaita Ācārya) is in charge of establishing
the yuga-dharma, which, in Kali-yuga, is nāma-
saṅkīrtana. Although Advaita Ācārya is the head of this
department, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is thinking that, besides Himself,
no one can establish vraja-prema.



caturtha ślokera artha ei kaila sāra

prema-nāma pracārite ei avatāra

satya ei hetu, kintu eho bahiraṅga

āra eka hetu, śuna, āche antaraṅga

I have given the essential meaning of the fourth verse:
this incarnation descends to propagate the chanting of
the holy name and spread love of God. Although this is
true, this is the external reason for the Lord's
incarnation. Please hear one other reason—the
confidential reason—for the Supreme Lord's appearance.
(Cc. Ādi 4.5-6)




HOW TO CHOOSE A GURU



Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī is requesting us to
listen very carefully so that we can establish the aim
of our chanting and meditation. First, we have to
determine the main objective of our sādhana and bhajana,
and then we can fix our minds on that goal. Why did we

                           110
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

decide to take shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and our gurudeva? If we have determined that
our goal is vraja-bhāva, serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa like the
gopīs and others in Vraja, we will seek the āśraya
(shelter) of the highest guru. If our goal is not clear,
and if we also want money, name and fame and material
fortune, we will seek a guru with the same conception of
spiritual life—and we will be cheated. Such a guru may
say, “If you take initiation from me, your worldly
desires will all be fulfilled very easily, and by the
potency of the mantra I give you, you will make money
and have name and fame.” In this way he will cheat us,
as he has himself been cheated, and together both will
go to hell.

Those who want vraja-prema, kṛṣṇa-prema, and who have
impressions from previous lives of association or
initiation by a Vaiṣṇava, will be able to consider and
properly decide where to take shelter. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu went to Gayā and associated with Śrī Īśvara
Purī. Having surrendered everything—His mind, heart and
body—at His Gurudeva’s lotus feet, He declared that His
life was now successful. He received the gopāla-mantra
from Śrī Īśvara Purī, and by chanting it He saw a very
beautiful boy playing on a vaṁśī (flute). This boy had a
three-fold bending form, a peacock feather in His hair,
three lines on His abdomen and neck, and He spoke in a
very sweet voice. Maddened with love, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu ran after that naughty boy who went into a
kuñja (grove) and disappeared. In deep separation
Caitanya Mahāprabhu fell to the ground, rolling about
and crying, “O Kṛṣṇa, where are You? Where are You?”

By His own actions Śrīman Caitanya Mahāprabhu
established what should be the objective of our life.
With this elevated goal in mind we should consider who
will be most helpful in our attainment of that goal.
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has explained that one who is
ignorant of his goal will be deprived of the highest
association.

In the fourth śloka of Ādi-līlā—anarpita-carīṁ cirāt—
Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī established that Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to bestow upon the conditioned
souls unnatojjvala-rasa, the beauty of the gopīs’ full
love and affection for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. How can this
prema, which is extremely rare in lākhās and lākhās of
universes, be attained by us? When, by chanting Kṛṣṇa’s
names, will we fall down on the earth and roll about,
tears streaming from our eyes and our hair standing on
end? How will it ever happen?

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī is explaining: prema-
nāma pracārite ei avatāra. In the fourth śloka, he
established the goal for all jīvas. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came to fulfill three desires by which He
could taste Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s love for Kṛṣṇa, but we
have nothing to do with that. Later on we should learn
what He tasted and how He tasted it, but now we should
concentrate on choosing our objective. Then we can
proceed in fulfilling it. How can we do this? By
chanting one or two rounds of Kṛṣṇa’s nāma each day, or
by performing arcana of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Gaura Nityānanda
Prabhu, Jagannātha, Baladeva, Subhadrā, śālagrāma-śilā,

                           111
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Nṛsiṁhadeva Bhagavān, Rāmacandra, Lakṣmaṇa, Sītā, and
others at the same time on the one altar?

In the beginning, when our śraddhā is like a very small
sprout, we may think like this. We think according to
our association. Although in the beginning we are not
able to properly follow a mahā-bhāgavata, or even a
madhyama-adhikārī, gradually, by his association, we
will be able to completely follow him. Many of you have
traveled thousands of miles from America, Canada,
England and other places to hear how to become clear
about the objective and how to attain it. I think,
therefore, that your hearts must have had some
impressions from past lives and this life. These
discussions are not for new devotees, that is, those who
have no such impressions (saṁskāras).




LOVING KṚṢṆA LIKE THE VRAJA-VĀSĪS



Now I shall give the essence of what Swāmījī wanted to
give. Later, when we have more time, I will try to
further explain how to attain our highest goal: what
rules and regulations to follow, and what our practices
should be. I will then explain Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Śrī
Upadeśāmṛta, Manaḥ-śikṣā of Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, and Śikṣāṣṭakam of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, among
others. I will begin with A,B,C,D: from śraddhā, niṣṭhā,
ruci, āsakti, bhāva, prema and then higher. If we do not
have greed (a spontaneous desire to serve Kṛṣṇa in the
mood of the Vraja-vāsīs), we should at least know from
śastrā that Kṛṣṇa’s three-fold bending form is so
beautiful. Although He is Yaśodāmaiyā’s small son, He is
the God of gods, the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
īśvara parama kṛṣṇa sac-cid-ānanda vigraha. Even Brahmā
and Śaṅkara cannot fully understand who He is.

Brahmā has four heads, Śaṅkara has five heads,
Saṅkarṣaṇa and Sahasraśīrṣā Viṣṇu have unlimited mouths
and heads. But even they cannot fully glorify baby
Kṛṣṇa, who is on the breast of Yaśodā. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa
lies down, He is so weak and helpless that He cannot
roll over; yet at the same time He is so powerful that
He supports the entire cit and acit, conscious and
unconscious, universe.

Loving Śrī Kṛṣṇa as do the gopīs and Vraja-vāsīs is our
ultimate goal. With this in mind we will see in the
books of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī (such as Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu), Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and Swāmījī how
it can be easily attained.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī states that Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came to distribute the name with prema. This
is the explanation of the fourth śloka: anarpita carīṁ
cirāt. Nāma-saṅkīrtana alone can be established by Maha-
Viṣṇu, but He cannot give vraja-prema. When Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came, He not only preached the yuga-dharma
but gave this very rare prema that no one else can give.

                           112
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

He gave both nāma and prema.

Prema comes through the yuga-dharma, which in this age
is chanting the Lord's name. If the yuga-dharma was
arcana, then He would have given prema through arcana;
and if it was meditation, then He would have given it
through meditation. In this way Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
established the yuga-dharma, and He said that there is
no need at this time for a separate yuga-avatāra to come
and establish it. “I Myself will establish it, and at
the same time I will give that special prema that no
yuga-avatāra can give.” He called Nārāyaṇa, Mahā-Viṣṇu,
Mula-Saṅkarṣaṇa, Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa, Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu,
and all His aṁśa (expansions), and They combined in His
body.

It was not Śrī Kṛṣṇa who killed Kaṁsa and Pūtanā, but
Mahā-Viṣṇu who was within Kṛṣṇa’s body. Although we
usually hear that it was Kṛṣṇa, this is not His duty to
establish religion. It is the duty of Mahā-Viṣṇu.
Because Kṛṣṇa’s expansions are combined in His body,
Their separate duties may appear to be performed by Him.
Kṛṣṇa’s actual pastimes are in Vṛndāvana—tasting dāsya,
sakhyā, vātsalya, and mādhurya-rasa. In the form of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is Kṛṣṇa Himself covered by the
beauty and mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa tastes the
bliss She receives from serving Him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “I
am so beautiful, but when I see the beauty of Rādhikā I
become controlled by Her. I am so lovely, but Śrīmatī
Rādhikā is more lovely. I have so much prema, but
Rādhikā’s prema is greater. She is therefore My prema-
guru. When I consider deeply, I see that My form has a
special quality that drives Śrīmatī Rādhikā mad. What is
that quality?”

Kṛṣṇa cannot fully understand and taste His own quality
without experiencing Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sentiments.
Therefore He must come as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to
appreciate and give a sprinkle of that appreciation to
others. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu He can preach about nāma
and give this special prema.



svayaṁ-bhagavānera karma nahe bhāra-haraṇa

sthiti-kartā viṣṇu karena jagat-pālana



To take away this burden, however, is not the work of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The maintainer, Lord
Viṣṇu, is the one who protects the universe. (Cc. Ādi
4.8)



Svayaṁ Bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa. Nārāyaṇa, Rāma, Dvārakādhīśa,
Golokapati, Nṛsiṁha and all of the incarnations of Kṛṣṇa
are Bhagavān, but only Kṛṣṇa is Svayaṁ Bhagavān. Bhāra-
haraṇa means to take away the burden of Pṛthivī-devī
(the Earth), and this is not the duty of Kṛṣṇa. Sthiti-
kartā viṣṇu karena jagat-pālana. It is the duty of Mahā-
Viṣṇu, or Advaita Ācārya.

                           113
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


So what is Kṛṣṇa’s duty? What is His own speciality?



prema-rasa-niryāsa karite āsvādana

rāga-mārga bhakti loke karite pracāraṇa



ei dui hetu haite icchāra udgama



The Lord's desire to appear was born from two reasons:
He wanted to taste the sweet essence of the mellows of
love of God, and He wanted to propagate devotional
service in the world on the platform of spontaneous
attraction. Thus He is known as supremely jubilant and
as the most merciful of all. (Cc. Ādi 4.15-16)



Rāga-mārga bhakti loke karite pracāraṇa is a very
important line, and it is the essence of Caitanya-
caritāmṛta. This is explained in Rāyā Rāmānanda saṁvāda,
Svarūpa Dāmodara explains it at the Ratha-yātrā
festival, and some aspects are also explained in the
dialogues Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had separately with
Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī. This was the main
objective of their discussions.

Rāga-mārga-bhakti is separate from vaidhī-bhakti. When
we read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, especially the upā-kyāna
(stories) of Ajāmila, Vṛtrāsura, Kapila and Devahūti, we
become fearful that we will go to hell if we do not
serve Bhagavān.

We may be faithful servants of our father, mother,
husband and children, and we may perform pious
activities. Nowadays, to serve the motherland is given
high regard, and there are examples of this in every
country. In India Bhagat Singh, Gandhi, and others gave
their lives for this purpose. If we serve our country’s
people, but not Kṛṣṇa, our original father, we will go
to hell. Knowing this, we serve Kṛṣṇa. But if a pravṛtti
(tendency) to serve Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu, Rāma, and so forth,
comes from a fear of suffering, it is vaidhī-bhakti. On
the other hand, if by hearing pastimes of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa from a pure devotee,
or by reading in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta about the service of the gopīs and Vraja-
vāsīs a tendency or greed comes to serve Kṛṣṇa as they
do, this is rāgānuga-bhakti.

While Śrī Kṛṣṇa is sucking the breast of Yaśodāmaiyā,
she puts Him on the ground. Kṛṣṇa then rolls around on
the earth crying, “Mother, Mother! I want to be in your
lap!” But Yaśodāmaiyā threatens Him, “Naughty boy. At
this very little age You steal mākhana (butter) and roll
on the earth making Your body and cloth dirty. I will
never take You in my lap.”


                           114
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

While Nārada Muni was visiting Vraja, he saw this
pastime. He thought, “Oh, Yaśodāmaiyā is such a high-
class Vaiṣṇavī. What pious activities and rigorous
austerities did she perform in her previous lives to
have Kṛṣṇa Himself, the God of gods, as her son? Did she
bathe in many pure tīrthas (holy places) and give great
quantities of wealth in charity? Kṛṣṇa as a baby has now
come into her lap and she is chastising Him. I could
never be as elevated as her.”

Yaśodāmaiyā noticed Nārada Muni standing nearby, so she
took her son and put Him at Nārada Muni’s lotus feet.
Nārada was astonished and wondered what to do. “If I
don’t give my foot-dust to Him, it will be clear that He
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This will put an
end to His human-like pastimes and this will make Him
very angry with me.” Yaśodā took Nārada Muni’s foot-
dust, first sprinkling it over her own body, and then on
Kṛṣṇa’s head and body. Nārada Muni was silent. He could
not stop her because he did not want to make Kṛṣṇa
angry.

Yaśodā, however, does not mind if Kṛṣṇa is angry and
cries. She gives Kṛṣṇa a slap, and if He continues to
cry bitterly, she says, “Oh, You are not becoming quiet?
I will give You another slap.” She then slaps Him again
and says, “Oh, be quiet.” Who else could do this?

When one hears pastimes such as this, and a desire
arises in one’s heart to serve Kṛṣṇa as a mother, this
is rāgānuga-bhakti in vātsalya-bhāva.

Another devotee may hear the pastimes describing how Śrī
Kṛṣṇa obeys the gopīs and places His head at their lotus
feet, especially those of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and says,
“Excuse Me, but I cannot repay you in lākhās and lākhās
of births.” That devotee will then wonder about the
glories of the gopīs and desire to become their foot-
dust. This is rāgānuga-bhakti in mādhurya-bhāva. Uddhava
said:



āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

vŽndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

yā dustyajaṁ svajanam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām



The gopīs of Vṛndāvana have given up the association of
their husbands, sons and other family members, who are
very difficult to give up, and they have forsaken the
path of chastity to take shelter of the lotus feet of
Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa, which one should search for by Vedic
knowledge. Oh, let me be fortunate enough to be one of
the bushes, creepers or herbs in Vṛndāvana because the
gopīs trample them and bless them with the dust of their
lotus feet. (Bhāg. 10. 47. 61)



                           115
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


In Vṛndāvana Uddhava went to a ‘school’ where he learned
about the highest love and affection for Śrī Kṛṣṇa—the
school of the gopīs. Sometimes they chastised Kṛṣṇa,
calling Him dhūrta (cunning, or cheater), and other
times they declared, “We should not mention His name. He
is ungrateful and we want to forget Him. How could He
forget His mother Yaśodā, His father Nanda and His
friends Subala and Śrīdāma? How could He forget Girirāja
Govardhana and Yamunā-devī, where He played for several
years during His boyhood, and how could He forget us—
especially Śrīmatī Rādhikā?”

Hearing the gopīs’ words, Uddhava became dumb-founded
like a wooden stick and prayed, “I want to become the
dust at the gopīs’ lotus feet. I pray to be even one
particle of that dust, that I may stay in Vṛndāvana and
for a long time perform so many austerities that I will
be qualified to pray for that.” This is why, for the
fulfillment of this prayer, Uddhava is presently at
Uddhava-kuṇḍa near Kusuma-sarovara in Vṛndāvana, waiting
for that mercy.

How glorious is the gopīs’ service to Kṛṣṇa! This should
be our ultimate goal, and we should consider how to
attain it. If we are prepared to do anything to get it,
that greed is called rāgānuga-bhakti.

Persons practicing rāgānuga are very rare. If we are
only able to do vaidhī-bhakti, we should continue to do
so. If by some subhāga (good fortune) we get the
association of a rasika Vaiṣṇava, a self-realized
devotee who is experiencing his relationship with Kṛṣṇa
(like Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Nārada Muni, Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, or Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and his
line of disciplic descendants), then a very little greed
for this will awaken within our hearts and we may become
qualified.




CONCLUDING WORDS

On February 18, Śrīla B.V. Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja concluded
his final Caitanya-caritāmṛta class in Vraja-vallabha’s
home in Uki, N.S.W. with the following affectionate
words.



Tomorrow we will leave here for Brisbane. Then, after
two or three days, we will go to Bali, and then
Singapore. After that our group will return to India.
The devotees who live here have served all the visiting
devotees so well. There was no problem at all. You have
all helped in my preaching, and so I am very indebted to
you. I am especially obliged to the devotees who have
come from such a great distance, like America and
Canada, to help me.

I have come here to serve my Gurudeva, Śrīla
Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, as well as my

                           116
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

śikṣā-guru Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Maharājā. I am
happy that to some extent I am successful in my mission.
So many sincere devotees, who were feeling themselves so
far from Kṛṣṇa consciousness, have come in my
association; and I have tried to help them all.

For some reason, however, some people are opposed to my
preaching activities. In that regard there is nothing I
can do; I am helpless. I can only beg forgiveness from
them. I had no intention to do anything wrong to them. I
came only to preach this real philosophy of life, which
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted to give, and which
Swāmījī wanted to give. But even in these auspicious
activities of preaching, some may be upset. They are
thinking that they are serving their Guru Mahārāja,
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, by such opposition; but actually
they are ignorant, not understanding that my mission is
the same as that of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja. I want to give
them an opportunity to understand properly. And I pray
that Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu will help them. I had no
intention to disturb anyone, but as they are feeling
some pinching in their heart, some suffering by my
coming here, then I beg their pardon. I pray that by
approaching them, they will be very kind to me and
forgive me. I want to gather all devotees, wherever they
may be in the world, and without consideration of caste
and creed, I want to help them all. This is actually the
duty of all devotees.

So I am very much obliged to you all, that you are
enduring so many discomforts here. Although you are all
rich and have so many material facilities in your own
homes, you gave up all these things and are meeting with
me in these forests and hills. These three weeks have
passed as a moment’s dream, and I am indebted to you
all.



KṚṢṆA TEACHES THROUGH HIS PASTIMES

THE STORY OF VṚTRĀSURA



In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Sixth Canto, Śrīla Śukadeva
Gosvāmī explained to Parīkṣit Mahārāja the history of
Vṛtrāsura. He described how Vṛtrāsura, although in the
body of a demon, was able to offer such elevated prayers
to Kṛṣṇa that even Indra was astonished.



ajāta-pakṣā iva mātaraṁ khagāḥ

stanyaṁ yathā vatsatarāḥ kṣudhārtāḥ

priyaṁ priyeva vyuṣitaṁ viṣaṇṇā

mano 'ravindākṣa didṛkṣate tvām



O lotus-eyed Lord, as baby birds that have not yet

                           117
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

developed their wings always look for their mother to
return and feed them, as small calves tied with ropes
await anxiously the time of milking when they will be
allowed to drink the milk of their mothers, or as a
morose wife whose husband is away from home always longs
for him to return and satisfy her in all respects, I
always yearn for the opportunity to render direct
service unto You. (Bhāg. 6.11.26)



Vṛtrāsura, engaged in battle with Indra, asked him, “Why
have you not yet killed me? You should take your vajra
(thunderbolt) and use it. Hurry up, hurry up!” Indra
hesitated, thinking, “How can I kill him? Vṛtrāsura is
such an elevated devotee.” But Vṛtrāsura persistently
requested, “In this body of a demon I cannot serve my
Lord Kṛṣṇa, so better you kill me.” Indra had previously
attacked him, but Vṛtrāsura was so powerful that he
caught Indra’s gadā (club) and used it to strike the
head of Indra’s elephant Airāvata. Airāvata then fell
with Indra on his back and soon after that, being again
attacked by Vṛtrāsura, Indra’s thunderbolt fell from his
hands. Then Vṛtrāsura said:



paśya māṁ nirjitaṁ śatru

vṛkṇāyudha-bhujaṁ mṛdhe

ghaṭamānaṁ yathā-śakti

tava prāṇa-jihīrṣayā



O my enemy, just look at me. I have already been
defeated, for my weapon and arm have been cut to pieces.
You have already overwhelmed me, but nonetheless, with a
desire to kill you, I am trying my best to fight. I am
not at all morose, even under such adverse conditions.
Therefore you should give up your moroseness and
continue fighting. (Bhāg. 6.12.16)



“Why are you not killing me?” Vṛtrāsura asked. “Again
pick up your thunderbolt, take your seat on Airāvata and
try to kill me!”

Detached from his body, even during the battle Vṛtrāsura
prayed to Kṛṣṇa: “O Kṛṣṇa! I want to ask You for
something.”

Kṛṣṇa appeared in Vṛtrāsura’s heart and said, “Yes, I
want to offer you a benediction.”

Vṛtrāsura said, “I am not praying that You fulfill my
material desires. I only want that my tongue always be
engaged in chanting Your names, my mind always absorbed
in meditation on You, and my body always engaged in Your
service.”


                           118
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                          5/5/2017



ahaṁ hare tava pādaika-mūla-

dāsānudāso bhavitāsmi bhūyaḥ

manaḥ smaretāsu-pater guṇāṁs te

gṛṇīta vāk karma karotu kāyaḥ



O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, will I
again be able to be a servant of Your eternal servants
who find shelter only at Your lotus feet? O Lord of my
life, may I again become their servant so that my mind
may always think of Your transcendental attributes, my
words always glorify those attributes, and my body
always engage in the loving service of Your Lordship?
(Bhāg. 6.11.24)



This is a very high class of prayer.

We only have three possessions—our body, mind and
tongue. It is only by the body, mind and tongue that we
can perform activities. Like Vṛtrāsura, our only desire
should be to use the tongue to sing about Kṛṣṇa’s name,
fame, glories and pastimes. This tongue has no backbone.
But although it is spineless, it is so powerful that it
can perform greatly destructive activities. The battle
of Mahābhārata was fought only because Draupadī did not
control her tongue. She had told Duryodhana, “Your
father, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, is blind, and you are also like a
blind man.” Because she insulted him in the assembly of
great kings, Duryodhana wanted to take revenge by taking
off her sārī in public. As a result of this evil deed by
Duryodhana, the battle was fought.

Do you know why the battle was fought between the armies
of Rāma and Rāvaṇa? It was because Sītā had not
controlled her tongue and had abused Lakṣmaṇa. When the
demon Mārīca came in the form of a golden deer, Sītā
begged Rāma, “O beloved Rāma, please bring me this deer,
either dead or alive.” As Rāma was leaving to fulfill
her request, He told Lakṣmaṇa to protect her in every
possible way. Then, after Rāma pursued and shot the
deer, Mārīca, in the same voice as Rāma’s, cried out,
“Lakṣmaṇa! Lakṣmaṇa! Come and help Me.”

Sītā told Lakṣmaṇa, “Rāma must be in danger. Why are You
not going?”

Lakṣmaṇa replied, “I know it is impossible for Rāma to
be in danger. He is the Lord of lords. Do not be worried
about Him.”

But Sītā repeatedly insisted, “Go! Go at once!”

Lakṣmaṇa warned her, “If I leave, demons will come and
steal you away.”

Sītā replied, “Oh, I know why You are not going. You are

                           119
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

an agent of Bharata. Concealing Your real purpose, You
have come with Us, hoping to somehow or other kill Rāma
and become my husband. But it will never happen! I will
die before I accept anyone other than Rāma as my
husband. You are behaving like a demon.”

Lakṣmaṇa began to weep. “I accept you as my mother. Do
not speak such harsh words. I will go, but I will not be
responsible for whatever happens to you.” He took his
bow, drew a circle on the ground, and told her, “Do not
cross the line of this circle.”

If Lakṣmaṇa had remained with Sītā, she would never have
been kidnapped, and thus no battle would have been
fought. The battle was fought only because of her sharp
words.

So, always try to control your tongue. In the beginning
of devotional life we often do not control our tongues,
and this results in so many nonsense activities. We may
disobey our gurus, or even abuse them and other
Vaiṣṇavas. So many kinds of offenses are committed due
to an uncontrolled tongue. To control the tongue
therefore is a devotee’s first duty. How can we control
it? Only by constantly chanting the holy name. Then the
tongue will have no time for chattering. We should try
not to laugh frivolously or make jokes about anyone, for
by such joking we may commit offenses. We should try to
be grave—by always chanting and remembering Kṛṣṇa.
Unfortunately, we do not follow this and thus suffer the
consequences.

How can we make our mind strong and controlled? If we
always remember Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Nityānanda Prabhu and Their pastimes,
then there will be no time for the mind to wander. It
will become so strong that the tongue and other senses
will automatically be controlled, and we will not commit
offenses. The mind is only controlled by always
remembering Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and always
praying to Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana
Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Nityānanda Prabhu and
Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

To control the body, always engage it in the service of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas; otherwise, we
will quarrel with them. I once heard of a disciple in
India who took an axe and threw it at his guru as he
slept. That particular night the guru was sleeping in
the opposite direction—with his feet where he usually
placed his head. The axe thus landed between his legs,
and he was saved. Because the guru was a pure devotee,
Nityānanda Prabhu and Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva saved him.

We should try to engage this body in such a way that it
always serves the Vaiṣṇavas: by cooking, going to holy
tīrthas, cleaning the temple or the abode or bhajana-
kuṭīra of gurudeva and Vaiṣṇavas, and by offering
praṇāmas with eight parts of the body (aṣṭāṅga-praṇāma).
By always engaging the body in this way, it will be
automatically controlled.

Vṛtrāsura therefore prayed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa:


                           120
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



ajāta-pakṣā iva mātaraṁ khagāḥ

stanyaṁ yathā vatsatarāḥ kṣudhārtāḥ

priyaṁ priyeva vyuṣitaṁ viṣaṇṇā

mano 'ravindākṣa didṛkṣate tvām



Ajāta-pakṣā iva mātaraṁ khagāḥ means like a baby bird
who cannot yet fly. “O lotus-eyed Lord, as baby birds
that have not yet developed their wings always look for
their mother to return and feed them. . .” The baby
bird’s father and mother have gone to collect food, and
he chirps as he waits and wonders, “When will my mother
come? When will my mother come?” But why does he want
his mother? First, the mother will bring him something
to eat and, second, he is afraid that crows and owls may
seize him and eat him. When the mother comes, his fear
disappears and he also gets something to eat.

Initially Vṛtrāsura prayed like this, but being
unsatisfied he corrected himself. In the next part of
his prayer he said, ‘like a calf’: stanyaṁ yathā
vatsatarāḥ kṣudhārtāḥ. “As small calves tied with ropes
await anxiously the time of milking when they will be
allowed to drink the milk of their mothers. . .” In the
morning a mother cow goes to the pastures to graze. Upon
her return, because the calf is tied up, he cannot go to
her to take her milk. So he is mooing, and although
bound, he is jumping about as calves do. Then the master
of the cow comes and unties the calf, who jumps up and
runs to his mother, taking her udder in his mouth and
drinking. The reason he had mooed so loudly was that he
wanted his mother to come and give him milk.

What is the difference between the prayer of the bird
and the prayer of the calf? The bird wants an insect or
worm, which is outside the body of the mother, and he
also wants his fear to go away. In the second example
the calf is calling, “Mother, mother,” and the cow comes
and gives her own milk. But the calf only wants the
milk. The defect here is that the calf gives up his
mother when his stomach is full. He then playfully
wanders here and there, and when he is again hungry he
returns to his mother.

Vṛtrāsura felt that something was still lacking in his
prayer. The hungry calf wept only for milk, and when
satisfied had no further need for his mother. Vṛtrāsura
knew this and did not want to be like that. He therefore
offered a third prayer: priyaṁ priyeva vyuṣitaṁ viṣaṇṇā—
“As a morose wife whose husband is away from home always
longs for him to return and satisfy her in all respects.
. .” In the absence of her beloved husband, a wife is
always thinking of him and talking to her sons about
him. She glorifies her husband’s qualities to them,
expresses her concern for his welfare, and how she will
serve him upon his return—by cooking for him and
offering him fresh sweet water. There are three aspects
to her service to her husband: uttering his name, always

                           121
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

meditating on him, and serving him with her body. This
third prayer is complete in devotion. In it the word
‘husband’ has not been used but, rather, ‘beloved.’
Their relationship is even more than that of husband and
wife—it is not one of duty but, rather, of love.

Although Vṛtrāsura played the role of a demon, he
expressed his great desire to have love for Kṛṣṇa. Just
as a chaste lady who chants and remembers her husband’s
glories, without any reason or desire for personal gain,
so the pure devotee serves Kṛṣṇa. This is a very
important teaching of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and we should
try to learn it. If we do not, we are not actually
reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam which itself states that this
story of Vṛtrāsura, as well as that of Prahlāda
Mahārāja, are two very significant histories. Hearing
about them, we should try to imbibe their qualities.




KṚṢṆA’S BIRTH



After reading the first nine Cantos of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, we come to the Tenth Canto descriptions of
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. This Tenth Canto begins by explaining
how, in Goloka Vṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa entered the wombs of
both Yaśodā-devī and Devakī.



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham



Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious
practice, O descendant of Bhārata, and a predominant
rise of irreligion—at that time I descend Myself. (Bg.
4.7)



When demoniac people are engaged simply in fulfilling
worldly desires—‘eat, drink and be merry’—then Kṛṣṇa
Himself or His incarnations come to establish ātma-
dharma, devotion to Kṛṣṇa. At the end of Dvāpara-yuga,
Duryodhana, Kaṁsa, Jarāsandha and Dantavakra were
present on the earth. Although they dressed as
kṣatriyas, they were actually demons, always engaged in
stealing others’ wives, murdering and fighting battles.
To protect the world from such demons, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
advented.

Second, Kaśyapa Muni and Aditi performed great
austerities to have Kṛṣṇa as their son, and Droṇa and

                           122
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Dharā also performed austerities to have God as their
beautiful and special son, so they could love and serve
Him. Kaśyapa and Aditi wanted God as their son, but not
with a specific desire to serve Him with love and
affection. For this reason, although Kaśyapa and Aditi
became Vasudeva and Devakī, and although Kṛṣṇa came as
Devakī’s son, she and Vasudeva could not serve Him. On
the very day Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared to Vasudeva, Vasudeva
had to take Him from the prison of Kaṁsa to Gokula. In
Gokula Kṛṣṇa had taken birth from the womb of Yaśodā, so
when Vasudeva reached Yaśodā’s bedside and put Kṛṣṇa on
her bed, Vasudeva Kṛṣṇa merged into Yaśodā’s Kṛṣṇa.

Years later, on the order of Kaṁsa, Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva
traveled with Akrūra from Nandagāoṅ to Mathurā. When
They arrived at the Vṛndāvana-Mathurā border near the
Yamunā at Brahma-hrada, Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva sat on the
chariot while Akrūra went to take bath in the river. At
that time Kṛṣṇa, the son of Yaśodā, and Balarāma, the
son of Rohiṇī, got down from the chariot and returned to
Vraja, and Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma who were the sons of
Vasudeva got up on the chariot. Akrūra then returned to
the chariot and all three journeyed to Mathurā.
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, the son of Yaśodā, and
Baladeva, the son of Rohiṇī, do not go an inch out of
Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa is always fully the son of Yaśodā, and
He is only in part the son of Vasudeva. This is because
when He was in the womb of Devakī, He was in His
manifestation of Nārāyaṇa, and Nārāyaṇa is only a part
of Kṛṣṇa.



jayati jana-nivāso devakī-janma-vādo



All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa who resides in the heart of all
living entities and who is referred to as the son of
Devakī (although He is factually the son of Yaśodā).
(Bhāg. 10.90.48)



In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is proclaimed not only to the
Mathurā-vāsīs, the residents of Mathurā, that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is the son of Yaśodāmaiyā and Nanda Bābā, but also to
Akrūra, Uddhava, Nārada, and the whole world. Although
they may see Kṛṣṇa as the son of Devakī and Vasudeva,
what will Yaśodāmaiyā say? “He is my son.” All gopīs,
all cowherd boys and all Vraja-vāsīs will say that Kṛṣṇa
is the son of Yaśodāmaiyā.

Which source is most authoritative—the Mathurā-vāsīs or
the gopīs? The gopīs, headed by Śrīmatī Rādhikā, are
superior to Uddhava, Nārada, Akrūra, and the Mathurā-
vāsīs. The words of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the Vraja-vāsīs
are true to the highest extent. Those who say that Kṛṣṇa
is the son of Vasudeva and Devakī are only telling a
partial truth—not the full truth.

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa took birth at midnight in Gokula, He
simultaneously appeared from the womb of Devakī. It is
not stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that he ‘took birth’

                           123
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

from the womb of Devakī. He appeared, not as a baby, but
as a sixteen-year-old, full grown youth—with long hair,
a Kaustubha-maṇi necklace, golden ornaments and a crown.
But in Gokula He had no long hair, no crown, no
ornaments—nothing. He was like a normal little baby,
crying, “Waa-waa-waa.”

Kṛṣṇa’s birth pastime therefore took place in Gokula—not
in the prison in Mathurā. Fifteen minutes after the
birth of Kṛṣṇa, a baby girl was also born from the womb
of Yaśodā. Two babies were born from Yaśodā—Kṛṣṇa and
His younger sister, Yogamāyā. Vasudeva put Kṛṣṇa down on
Yaśodāmaiyā’s bed and took that baby girl back to
Mathurā. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes Kaṁsa grabbing the
feet of Yogamāyā, in the form of a newborn baby, in
order to dash her on a stone and kill her. She
immediately took her own form, flew into the sky, and
kicked Kaṁsa on the head. Kaṁsa was astonished to see
that this was his ārādhya-devī, worshipable deity,
Durgā-devī. Durgā told him, “He who will kill you has
already taken birth in another place.”

Śukadeva Gosvāmī explains here that the younger sister
of Kṛṣṇa, Yogamāyā, then departed from Kaṁsa’s palace.
[lv]55 Therefore, it is Gokula Kṛṣṇa who is the elder
brother of this Yogamāyā.

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared from Devakī’s womb, Vasudeva
wanted to give some donation in charity to the
brāhmaṇas, but because he was in prison he could not.
Only in his mind, therefore, could he give away his ten
thousand very beautiful cows and calves decorated with
gold and silver. (Later, when he came out of prison, he
was able to do this practically.)

On the same day, everyone in Vraja saw that Yaśodā had
given birth to a very beautiful son, who was the color
of a fresh monsoon cloud—and they became very happy.
News of His birth traveled like wild fire, and all
Vraja-vāsīs, well decorated and carrying ghee, rabrī,
curd, milk and butter, went to visit Yaśodā and her new-
born child. All the gopīs, the wives of the gopas,
gathered in the courtyard of Nanda Bābā and Yaśodāmaiyā
and sang this kīrtana—nanda ke ānanda bhayo jaya
kanhaiyā-lāla. “When Kṛṣṇa was born, Nanda Bābā became
very blissful.”

Nanda Bābā held a very big utsava, festival, and gave
many chariots and horses and lākhās and lākhās of cows
decorated with gold and silver, as well as other
valuables in charity. He gave away everything in his
house, and everything he gave was replenished.

Mixing yogurt and tumeric, the Vraja-vāsīs made a paste
and put it on the cows, calves and other people—so much
so that the house of Yaśodā became like mud. Everyone
was happy because Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā, although more
mature, had become the parents of such a beautiful son.

Every day there were different kinds of festivals at
Nanda Bābā’s house. On the third day Nanda Bābā went to
Mathurā to pay taxes to Kaṁsa. Before Kṛṣṇa’s birth,
having no son, he was like one in the renounced order,
absorbed in thought of Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa. But as soon as

                           124
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

he had a child, Kṛṣṇa Himself, Nanda Bābā gave up his
absorption in Bhagavān and became worried about how he
would support his boy. He thought, “Now I need wealth,
many cows, and a palatial building.”

If Kṛṣṇa is our son, we can rightfully possess wealth,
opulence, chariots, many calves and cows, gardens, etc.
Otherwise, like one in the renounced order, we should
always be engaged in serving and remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and performing kīrtana.

Before Kṛṣṇa’s birth, when Nanda Bābā was detached, he
sometimes went to pay taxes, and sometimes did not. He
felt he had nothing to lose or gain by paying or not
paying. But now he was worried that if he did not pay
taxes, Kaṁsa would retaliate and some harm might come to
his son.

On this same day, however, Kaṁsa called his demoniac
associates and told them, “My ārādhya-devī, Durgā-devī,
told me that Viṣṇu has taken birth somewhere else. I
want all of you to find that boy and kill Him.” The
demons thus traveled here and there to fulfill Kaṁsa’s
order.

Pūtanā, one of the strongest demons, was like a sister
to Kaṁsa. He personally requested her, “O sister, I am
fearful because the person who is destined to kill me
has now taken birth and is present on earth as a little
baby boy. Can you save me?”

“Oh, why not?” she answered, and taking the form of a
very beautiful gopī, she flew to Gokula.

Pūtanā came to Bhauma Vṛndāvana, the Vṛndāvana of this
world. Bhauma Vṛndāvana has nothing to do with māyā. It
is sat-cit-ānanda, as are Yaśodā-bhavan and other
places. So how is it that this demon could go there?
Demons cannot go to Goloka Vṛndāvana, and similarly they
should not be able to go to Kṛṣṇa’s dhāma in this world.
So how did it happen that Pūtanā went to sat-cit-ānanda
Bhauma Vṛndāvana, to the courtyard of Yaśodāmaiyā?

In her past birth Pūtanā was the daughter of Bali
Mahārāja. When Lord Vāmanadeva came to Bali Mahārāja, He
was very beautiful. Because this daughter had no son,
she began to think, “If a son like this comes into my
womb, I would have so much affection for Him.”
Vāmanadeva knew her mind and agreed. He contemplated,
“Yes, I will again come as a boy.” Later, when this lady
saw how Vāmanadeva was harshly treating her father,
threatening him by taking big steps and binding him in a
nāgapāśa, snake rope, she became furious. “Oh, if You
were my son, I would poison You,” she cried. Vāmanadeva
also accepted this and within His mind He said, “Yes,
you may do. You will come within My touch, and then I
will purify you and engage you always in My service.”

There is also another reason that Pūtanā could enter
Vṛndāvana. It was Yogamāyā who actually called her
there. By Yogamāyā’s arrangement the pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa are everfresh. Usually, if a man and his beloved
are always together, their affection for each other
wanes. But this is not the case in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

                           125
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Yogamāyā arranged for Pūtanā to take Śrī Kṛṣṇa in her
arms and put poison in His mouth. Kṛṣṇa then sucked out
not only the poison but also her soul, and she was thus
liberated. She tried, with all her strength, which was
equal to that of ten thousand elephants, to push Śrī
Kṛṣṇa off her breast, but she could not. Flying into the
sky, she cried, “Oh, save me! My brother Kaṁsa save me!
Save me!” However, because Kṛṣṇa has declared in the
scriptures that He will never give up those who come to
Him, He would not let her go and He would not allow her
to leave Vraja. Her body fell down in Kṛṣṇa’s garden and
smashed it, and she could not go to Mathurā and tell
this fact to Kaṁsa. Kaṁsa was worried that his sister
had not yet returned—and she never did.




KṚṢṆA’S BABY PASTIMES



After this incident Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed many other
pastimes and killed many demons, such as Tṛṇāvarta and
Śakaṭāsura. As a baby he simply played with His feet as
babies do, sometimes sucking His thumb, sometimes
sucking His toes, and sometimes playing in a bed.
Śakaṭāsura, the cart demon, came, and Kṛṣṇa playfully
upturned the cart in which he was hiding and killed him.

Sometimes Kṛṣṇa would put His hands in the mouths of
dogs, and sometimes He would wrestle with the horns of
large bulls and climb on the bulls’ backs.




DĀMODARA-LĪLĀ



Then there was Dāmodara-līlā. At two and one-half years
old, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was very beautiful and would go
everywhere naked. While the Vraja-vāsīs were going about
their daily activities and while at social functions,
Kṛṣṇa would steal butter from various homes with other
little boys. The Vraja-vāsīs would therefore complain to
Yaśodāmaiyā that Kṛṣṇa and the others were very naughty.

Why did they complain to Yaśodā? Do you know? The
activities of Kṛṣṇa were so pleasing that all the gopīs
wanted Him to come daily to their houses and play there.
In that way they could relish His pastimes. Seeing that
Yaśodā was not able to enjoy these particular boyhood
sports, they wanted to give her the opportunity to see
them—by ‘complaining’ to her about them. “O Yaśodā, your
boy is so beautiful, how sweet are His movements, and
how sweetly He plays. You should try to see all this.”

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa denied their accusations, all the gopīs
would ask, “Oh? Why does Your mouth have yogurt and
butter around it? Why?”

                           126
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


Śrī Kṛṣṇa would then answer, “A monkey came and he was
trying to take butter from My hand, but I wouldn’t give
it to him. I was actually guarding your house and so I
tried to drive the monkey away. But he was naughty and
he smeared My face with butter.”

“But why are Your hands full of butter?”

“Oh, you don’t know? My mother has given Me a very
valuable gold and pearl bracelet, which became warm on
My wrist. It became so warm that I felt a burning
sensation, and so I put My hand in the butter pot to
cool it down. I have not taken your butter.”

Once, a gopī who was hiding in her room saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa
stealing her butter. While His hands were still in the
pot, she caught hold of Him and said, “What are You
doing? Are You stealing butter?”

“No, mother.”

“Then what are You doing?”

“Oh, My calf has fallen into this pot. I am searching
for him.”

“Oh, where is Your calf? A calf cannot fall down in this
little vessel.”

“I will show you.” Kṛṣṇa then pulled out His hands,
which were now holding a marble calf. “My father has
given this toy[lvi]56 to Me. I was playing with him, and
he fell down in the butter pot.”

Sometimes the gopīs complained to Yaśodāmaiyā, “Kṛṣṇa is
so naughty. By His stealing butter and yogurt from our
houses, and doing so many other mischievous acts, He
will surely have a bad character in the future. So you
should try to control Him.”

One morning while Kṛṣṇa was sleeping, Yaśodāmaiyā was
churning curd. She was very beautiful, otherwise how
could Kṛṣṇa have been so beautiful? When Kṛṣṇa woke up,
He thought, “Where is My mother?” and He began to cry.
While she churned, Yaśodāmaiyā was absorbed in chanting,
“Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti.” Her voice was very sweet,
and the sound of her rhythmic churning was like the
playing of a mṛdaṅga— dhik gā, dhik tān. It was as
though that sound was singing, “Dhik, fie on those who
do not serve Kṛṣṇa, fie on them, fie on them.”

Yaśodāmaiyā was so absorbed in churning that, although
Kṛṣṇa was crying, “Mother! Mother!”, she could not hear
Him. He therefore climbed out of bed and cried more and
more. As He rubbed His eyes the kājala on them ran down
His cheeks, and it was as though the Gaṅgā and Yamunā
Rivers were falling from His eyes. Quite naked, and with
a peacock feather in His hair, He ran to Yaśodāmaiyā,
but she still could not hear Him. Grabbing her churning
rod with one hand and her belt with the other, He
stopped her churning. “Who is this?” she thought. “O,
Kanhaiyā.” And taking Him on her lap, she stroked and
caressed Him with much love and affection. Tears poured

                             127
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

from her eyes and milk flowed from her breast. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
was hungry and He sucked with much intensity.

While feeding Kṛṣṇa, Yaśodāmaiyā noticed that the milk
on the stove was boiling over. She thought, “This milk
wants to serve Kṛṣṇa, but He is taking my milk.” We
should understand that Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu’s samudra
(ocean) of milk has come from the breasts of
Yaśodāmaiyā. Wherever there is milk, it has come from
her and her milk ocean is endless and deep. The entire
universe is in Kṛṣṇa’s mouth, and in His stomach lies
all the worlds. Even if there were lākhās and lākhās of
oceans of milk and if He were to drink them, they would
all finally empty. Yet Yaśodāmaiyā’s milk supply was so
endless that hundreds of Kṛṣṇas or lākhās of Kṛṣṇas
could never exhaust it.

In the meantime the milk on the stove was thinking that
it had no chance to serve Kṛṣṇa. “What use is my life?”
it considered. “I should give it up.”

Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura also says in his prayers,
“Without serving Kṛṣṇa I am so unfortunate, and in this
life I have not served Him. I am always absorbed in
useless worldly activities to collect possessions, but I
am not happy. Although my material goals are like
poison, I give up the nectar of bhakti, kṛṣṇa-prema, in
pursuance of them. I should die. Why do I remain alive?
Why am I maintaining my life?”

Thinking like this, that milk wanted to give up its
life. We should also think like this. “If I am not
serving and not doing proper sādhana-bhajana, then what
is the use of this life? The human body is endowed with
a greater capacity than animals for taking to spiritual
life. Although I have higher intelligence and an
opportunity for good association, I neglect it and take
poison. So why should I not die? Lord Brahmā has made my
heart harder than stone, and for this reason I do not
die.”

Before going to bed each night, we should consider our
spiritual development. “Has my faith increased today?
Has my knowledge and service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa increased?” We
do this in business, when we close our shop or office in
the evening—we calculate our gains and losses.
Similarly, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda
used to say that every night we should calculate if our
bhakti has increased, if it is the same, or if it has
decreased. Daily we should do this.

If our association is good, it will increase; and if
not, it will decrease. If we have taken asat-saṅga
(worldly association) then we will have a taste for
sense enjoyment. If we have taken sat-saṅga (good
association) on the same level as ourselves and viṣayi-
saṅga (association of sense enjoyers) as well, then our
service will be external and we will also have some
taste for material enjoyment.

Suppose we have taken initiation twelve years or twenty-
four years ago. Now we should calculate the growth of
our service to Kṛṣṇa. Is our sādhana-bhajana the same as
when we first joined? Has it diminished, or has it

                           128
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

developed? If we sincerely consider such points, we can
progress quite easily. If we have not made much progress
from the time of joining the mission, if we have a taste
for viṣaya, and if we are simultaneously taking asat-
saṅga along with sat-saṅga, this is due to some offense.
We should know then that our bhakti is decreasing.

I think you can understand this. When you first came to
your Gurudeva you were so enthusiastic. Similarly, with
good association you will maintain your enthusiasm. If
you do not have enthusiasm, it is due to bad
association, offenses and anarthas. An attempt should be
made to correct the situation. A boy cannot remain in
the same class for twenty years. If he does so, it means
that he is not really in class. He is not studying, but
rather playing soccer, cricket, and so on, and taking
bad association. He has not actually been in school. We
should calculate our progress, otherwise we cannot
improve.

While the milk was thinking in its humble way,
Yaśodāmaiyā considered, “I should try to save this
milk.” She immediately started to put Kṛṣṇa down, but He
tightly caught hold of her with His hands and feet, like
monkeys do, and He firmly held onto her breast with His
mouth. He cried, “I am still hungry! Where are you
going?” Kṛṣṇa held onto her with all His strength
(sarva-śaktimān). So Yaśodāmaiyā gave Him a slap and,
removing Him from her lap, she sat Him down beside her.
Pūtanā had the strength of ten thousand elephants and
she used all of that strength to try to remove Kṛṣṇa
from her breast, but she could not do so. In a moment,
however, with one push, Yaśodā made Śrī Kṛṣṇa sit down.
In the presence of Yaśodā’s love and affection, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa became controlled. Though angry, He sat there.

Why did Yaśodā push Kṛṣṇa away? Did she love the milk
more than Kṛṣṇa? Was she acting against bhakti? No, she
did not love the milk more. And this Dāmodara-līlā
actually illustrates the meaning of bhakti. Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī has said:



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-śīlanaṁ bhaktir-uttamā

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.1)



You should all try to remember this śloka. Bhakti means
to please Śrī Kṛṣṇa. But here we see that Kṛṣṇa became
angry, and He later broke the yogurt vessel. So, were
Yaśodāmaiyā’s actions bhakti or not? Yes, they were.
Why? Because she is thinking, “My milk alone cannot
serve Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa also likes mākhana (butter), yogurt,
curd, and so.” She acted for the well-being of Kṛṣṇa,
and whether He cried or not did not affect her. Because
her action was for Kṛṣṇa’s welfare, it was bhakti.

The two wrestlers of Kaṁsa, Cāṇūra and Muṣṭika, were
also giving pleasure to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in vīra-rasa (the

                           129
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

mellow taste of chivalry) because Śrī Kṛṣṇa loves to
wrestle. But their wrestling with Him was not bhakti,
because they wanted to kill Him. It was prātikūlya
(unfavorable), not anukūlya (favorable). Yet, even when
Yaśodāmaiyā pulled Kṛṣṇa’s ears to chastise Him, her
action was bhakti. Kṛṣṇa may have cried and wept, but
her action was bhakti—because it was done with a motive
to please Him.

Sprinkling water on the milk until the boiling subsided,
Yaśodāmaiyā thought, “Oh, I will give you to Kṛṣṇa. I
will engage you in Kṛṣṇa’s service.”

Gurudeva is like Yaśodāmaiyā, giving all devotees help
and a chance to serve Kṛṣṇa. The guru even gives up his
own service. What does this mean? The guru is always
remembering Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes and serving them. Being an
uttama-bhāgavata, he resides in Goloka Vṛndāvana. But he
gives this up and comes down to the stage of madhyama-
adhikārī to help the devotees. Some devotees are
kaniṣṭhā and some are madhyama—generally they are
kaniṣṭhā. The guru ‘comes down’ to tell them, “You
should not do this, you should do this.” And he sings,
‘Saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka,’ ‘emona durmati,’ and
‘āmāra-jīvana’kīrtanas. Because he is always giving his
mercy, gurudeva is like a mother.

Being angry at Yaśodāmaiyā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa took a rolling pin
and made a hole in the bottom of the butter pot. Why in
the bottom? First, He tried to tip it over, but He could
not because He was a little boy. He could take
Govardhana on His finger, but He could not shake that
pot. He tried to make a hole on the upper side, but the
pot was too thick there. Then, aware that the bottom of
the pot was thinner, He made a hole there so that all
the butter would fall out.

Kṛṣṇa then gave that butter to the monkeys. Why? He
wanted to teach something. “Curd and mākhana which are
not sweet should be given to monkeys and animals. I will
only take sweet love and affection.” One who loves Kṛṣṇa
for His own gain makes bitter offering, and Kṛṣṇa gives
that offering to the monkeys. He will not taste it
because He considers only devotion sweet. If you give
your heart which is so sweet, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will accept and
taste it—otherwise not. Bhakti mixed with jñāna and
karma, or any worldly desires, becomes bitter. This is
Kṛṣṇa’s instruction here.

When Yaśodāmaiyā understood that Kṛṣṇa had stolen the
butter and was distributing it to the monkeys, she tried
to catch hold of Him. By the power of their mind, great
karmīs, jñānīs and yogīs cannot touch the lotus feet of
Kṛṣṇa. Jarāsandha and Kālayavana could neither follow
nor catch Him. Even Sanaka, Sananda, Sanātana and Sanat-
kumāra (the four Kumāras) cannot touch Kṛṣṇa by the
power of their mind. But this Yaśodā, a gopī, and a
little fat, ran faster than Śrī Kṛṣṇa. After catching
Kṛṣṇa, Yaśodāmaiyā said, “I will teach You a lesson.”

“No, no mother don’t do so! Don’t do so!” And Kṛṣṇa
began to weep.

“Then why did You break the pot?”

                           130
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


“I have never broken the pot.”

“Then who broke it?”

“You yourself.”

“How?”

“You were running so fast that your ankle bells hit the
bottom of the pot, and it broke. You could not see it
because you were in a hurry, but I saw.”

“Oh, You are a very big liar and a very naughty thief.”

“Mother, I am not a thief. In My dynasty, the dynasty of
Nanda Bābā, there were never any thieves, perhaps there
are many thieves in your dynasty.”

Yaśodāmaiyā began to tie Kṛṣṇa’s waist with some rope,
but she could not wrap the rope around Kṛṣṇa—not even
once. She tied another rope to it, and another, and
another, until it was more than one mile long. But still
the rope was always two fingers’ length too short to go
around Śrī Kṛṣṇa, even one time.

The gopīs began to laugh and clap. Yaśodāmaiyā was very
embarrassed because, even though Kṛṣṇa was born from her
womb, she could not bind Him. Her face reddened and
tears danced in her eyes. At the same time she prayed to
Lord Nārāyaṇa. “O Nārāyaṇa, please keep my shame. Why
should I not be able to tie my child? Please help me.”

Aware that His mother was praying like this, Kṛṣṇa
allowed her to bind Him.

Why is it that Yaśodāmaiyā could not bind Him at first?
What is the significance of the two fingers? One finger
represents Yaśodā’s own effort, and this means that
Kṛṣṇa cannot be controlled by our efforts in sādhana-
bhajana alone. We cannot even see Him, what to speak of
control Him. The second finger represents Kṛṣṇa’s mercy.
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy is everywhere, but we may not be engaging
in the correct process to receive it.

These are the two means of success: (1) Kṛṣṇa’s mercy,
and (2) our sādhana-bhajana. An example is given of the
cat and the monkey. Kittens only need to weep, “Meow!
Meow!” and their mothers will come, take them in their
mouths, and carry them here and there. The baby monkey,
on the other hand, does all the work, while the mother
does nothing. If the mother wants to go somewhere, she
simply looks at her child, who will come running and
tightly catch hold of her. She will then jump from one
tree to another, or from one house to another. She will
not hold onto the baby. If her baby falls, she will give
him up forever, never again taking that child with her.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa may not appear to us, despite our practice of
sādhana-bhajana. Nor will He appear if we are not doing
any sādhana, despite the availability of His mercy. Both
are needed—our hard endeavor and Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. If
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy is there, yet we are not doing proper
sādhana and bhajana, we will not be successful. If both

                           131
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

are there, only then can we see Kṛṣṇa. We should try to
weep, and try our best to receive Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, guru's
mercy, and the uttama-adhikārī’s mercy. If we follow
these two methods properly and sincerely, Kṛṣṇa’s mercy
will come and we can control Him like Yaśodāmaiyā.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa thought, “If Yaśodāmaiyā binds Me, then I
can’t go out and play with My friends. Śrīdāma, Sudāma,
Vasudāma, Stoka-Kṛṣṇa, Labaṅga and Arjuna are all
waiting for Me.”

All the cows were also waiting for Kṛṣṇa—“When will
Kṛṣṇa come? Only He can take our milk, no one else.” The
calves were present, but the cows would not give them
their milk. Pushing their calves away, they waited for
Kṛṣṇa to come and milk them. With their udders full of
milk they cried, “Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!”

Kṛṣṇa thought, “How can I let this happen? The cows will
not give milk, and if they are not milked they will die.
I must go there. All the calves will also die if I don’t
go there. And the gopīs like Rādhikā, Lalitā and Viśākhā
(then only two years old) are waiting for Me to play
with them. If My mother binds Me, I won’t be able to
play with them all.”

Immediately Yogamāyā came. The rope was growing longer,
and although Kṛṣṇa’s waist was only twelve fingers long,
He could not be bound. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is powerful, full of
hundreds and thousands of various energies, śaktis, but
of these kṛṣṇa-kṛpā-śakti (His mercy energy) is the most
prominent. So, when He saw that His mother, who had been
working so hard to bind Him, was about to weep, and when
He saw her reddish face and her embarrassment before the
elderly gopīs who were clapping their hands and
laughing, His kṛpā-śakti came, His heart melted and
Yaśodāmaiyā easily bound Him, simply with the soft rope
used for binding her hair. After this she tied Him to
the okhalal (grinding mortar).

Śrī Kṛṣṇa was weeping, and His tears, blackened by
kājala (eye cosmetic), ran down His cheeks. Rubbing His
eyes and taking very long breaths, He looked so
beautiful. He was weeping, but so sweetly. The face of
Kṛṣṇa, the body of Kṛṣṇa and the mood of Kṛṣṇa, weeping
and naked and fearing His mother, was so sweet. Anyone
who sees this will feel its sweetness.



namāmīśvaraṁ sac-cid-ānanda-rūpaṁ

lasat-kuṇḍalaṁ gokule bhrājamānam

yaśodā-bhiyolūkhalād dhāvamānaṁ

parāmṛṣṭam atyantato drutya gopyā



Satyavrata Muni prays, “Oh, may that very form, with His
eyes full of tears and taking long, long breaths, come
into my heart.” This is Dāmodara-līlā. Everything about
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is so sweet. His movements are so sweet; when

                           132
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

He looks crookedly at someone, His eyes are so sweet;
His pastimes are sweet; His mother is sweet; His gopīs
are sweet; His Vraja is sweet. Everything about Him is
so sweet.




THE PURE NAME IS KṚṢṆA

The following is a discussion at the Devānanda Gauḍīya
Maṭha in Navadvīpa during the Gaura Pūrṇimā festival,
March 15, 1997.




Devotee: Who is Bhakti-devī?



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: She is svarūpa-śakti, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Svarūpa-śakti has two components—samvit and
hlādinī.[lvii]57 When these two are combined, the sāra,
essence, is called bhakti-śakti.

Vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam.[lviii]58 Kṛṣṇa Himself, or
nāma[lix]59 Himself, is like the husband or the beloved.
And who is loved? Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the beloved of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Prema-bhakti is Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself and one
of Her expansions is Bhakti-devī. Bhakti-devī has form
and attributes, and she is full of mercy. Like Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, she is independent. She can make Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
dance, she can manifest Them in our heart and she can
also make us dance. She can engage us in the service of
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa conjugal (the Divine Couple).




nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ



The holy name of Kṛṣṇa is transcendentally blissful. It
bestows all spiritual benedictions, for it is Kṛṣṇa
Himself, the reservoir of all pleasure. Kṛṣṇa's name is
complete, and it is the form of all transcendental
mellows. It is not a material name under any condition,
and it is no less powerful than Kṛṣṇa Himself. Since
Kṛṣṇa's name is not contaminated by the material
qualities, there is no question of its being involved
with māyā. Kṛṣṇa's name is always liberated and
spiritual. Because the name of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa Himself
are identical His name is never conditioned by the laws

                            133
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

of material nature. (Cc. Madhya 17.133)



Devotee: On one hand, śāstra states that if we chant the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra in the association of non-devotees,
nāma will not come. But this śloka says: pūrṇaḥ śuddho
nitya-mukto ‘bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ—“The name of God
and God Himself are equally pūrṇa, perfect, complete,
uncontaminated and eternal.” So, when somebody who has
anarthas or commits aparādhas chants the holy name, the
name is coming but covered by clouds of anarthas? Or is
there no name at all?



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: It will be nāmāparādha or
nāmābhāsa.[lx]60 Kabhu nāmābhāsa sadāya nāmāparādha. By
constant chanting all anarthas will disappear and
śuddha-nāma (the pure name) will appear. The sādhaka
will then have realization of Kṛṣṇa Himself. Kṛṣṇa will
come to him at this time.



Devotee: Somebody may say that when one is chanting
nāmāparādha or nāmābhāsa, nāma (Kṛṣṇa Himself, who is
nondifferent from His name) is present, but covered.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: No.



Devotee: But it is said that nāma is pūrṇaḥ-śuddho,
always pure.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:Nāma is always pure. This is
correct. But we have no conception of the pure name. Our
level of attainment depends on how and why we are
chanting or calling the holy name. If you are not pure,
nāma will not come. The result of nāmāparādha will be
material position, reputation, wealth and other worldly
desires.



Devotee: But I have heard that the shadow (nāmābhāsa) is
only there due to the presence of the sun (śuddha-nāma)
and it is only due to clouds (anarthas) that one cannot
see the sun.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: With this logic one can say
that the clouds are themselves the sun. Similarly, if
you are a nāmābhāsī or a nāmāparādhī, you may think,
“Oh, this is nāma.” But it is not nāma; it is a cloud.
It may even be darkness. Neither are nāma.
Nāmākṣara[lxi]61 bahir haya baṭe nāma nāhi haya. If one
chants offensively, it is not nāma at all. It is merely

                           134
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

worldly syllables that sound like the real name. Just as
imitation gold is not gold, so what appears as the holy
name chanted with offenses is not actually the holy
name.



Devotee: If one is careful not to commit offenses, can
he achieve śuddha-nāma simply by hearing the sound
vibration of the holy name. Is that not sufficient?



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Only if one receives the
unconditional mercy of guru, or any realized devotee, or
Gaurāṅga, or Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. With such mercy
śuddha-nāma is easily realized. Otherwise, attaining it
is very difficult.



Devotee: So it can be attained only by the mercy of Śrī
Guru and Gaurāṅga?



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes. There are two kinds of
mercy, the mercy of a bhakta and the mercy of Bhagavān.
For us to receive the mercy to chant śuddha-nāma, the
bhakta must be fully-realized, like Nārada, Śukadeva
Gosvāmī, or Śrīla Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs. Otherwise,
by our practice alone it is not possible to attain
śuddha-nāma. The only way to attain it is to always weep
for Their mercy, and to take shelter in the real sense.
Having come to Gaura-dhāma, Navadvīpa, there is hope for
us, but we will have to always hanker that Kṛṣṇa will
arrange for us to have the association of a pure
Vaiṣṇava. Then, very easily, the pure name will come.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: There are many austerities in
doing navadvīpa-maṇḍala-parikramā. The hot sun shines on
our head, and the earth and dust are also very hot. Many
devotees who usually remain in their home, who are not
accustomed to these kinds of austerities, do this
parikramā—walking not just one mile, but up to forty
miles in the blazing heat. They perspire, their faces
turn red, their feet burn, their heads burn, and there
is insufficient water. Sometimes the road is so hot that
their feet blister. When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu sees
that even in this stage they are performing such
austerities, His heart melts and He is bound to bestow
His mercy. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu will say, “Oh, you have so much attachment for
this dhāma.” Surely They will give Their mercy. I have
seen with my own eyes that devotees are so hot and tired
that they cannot even smile. But still they continue
their parikramā, chanting harināma-kīrtana with the
Deity of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu on a palanquin, and a
party of thousands of devotees. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
is bound to give His mercy by bestowing upon them kṛṣṇa-
prema—either in this life or in a future life.


                           135
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

If there is śraddhā, advancement will come despite the
presence of anarthas. There may be lākhās and lākhās of
anarthas, as well as many offenses committed
unknowingly, but if we have śraddhā, they will gradually
disappear.

Śraddhā is of two kinds—śuddha-śraddhā and laukikī-
śraddhā (faith which is based on custom or tradition).
Everything depends on śraddhā. There is śuddha-śraddhā
(pure), or parāmārthika-śraddhā (spiritual), and abhāsa
(semblance). Abhāsa is of two kinds—pratibimbābhāsa
(reflection) and chāyābhāsa (shadow). Pratibimbhābhāsa
is not good, but chāyābhāsa is somewhat better.

What is śuddha-śraddhā? It is the full faith that by
serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa, doing parikramā, chanting the holy
name, and serving gurudeva and the Vaiṣṇavas, one’s life
will surely be successful.

The progress of one with deep śraddhā will not be
hindered by anarthas. But that śraddhā must be pure. If
we do parikramā to fulfill a worldly desire, it
indicates that śraddhā is not pure.

What is the symptom of pāramārthikī-śraddhā? One will
think, “I may be cut to pieces, but I will never give up
chanting the holy name or performing devotional
activities. Never.”



Devotee: On one hand, I have heard it said that
nāmābhāsa and nāmāparādha are nāmākṣara (syllables), and
this is supported by the verse:



ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ



No one can understand the transcendental nature of the
name, form, quality and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa through
his materially contaminated senses. Only when one
becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service
to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality
and pastimes of the Lord revealed to him. (Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.234)



This śloka says that the material tongue and senses
cannot touch the name. But, on the other hand, there is
the verse:



nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇas

                           136
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ

(Cc. Madhya 17.133)



The name is pūrṇa-śuddha; it is always pure. Some people
say that when persons perform harināma, the nāma is
present even if the chanters are māyāvādīs who chant
nāmāparādha. They say a cloud of anarthas or aparādhas
obscures pure nama and therefore respect should be given
to nāma, but one should not stay in that māyāvādī
association and receive its poisonous effects.

The name is present wherever someone is chanting. So,
sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adhaḥ means
that if one has the desire to chant, nāma will appear on
his tongue, even though there is some aparādha or
anartha.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Śuddha-nāma is Kṛṣṇa Himself.
Abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ. “Kṛṣṇa’s name and Kṛṣṇa
Himself are not separate.” But when it comes, when
śuddha-sattva comes, it descends from Goloka Vraja into
our hearts—when our hearts are free from anarthas and
aparādhas. More specifically, śuddha-sattva always
resides in the hearts of the associates of Kṛṣṇa. From
their hearts it comes into our hearts. Śuddha-sattva is
the essence of hlādinī and samvit combined, and śuddha-
nāma appears with the descent of śuddha-sattva into our
hearts. Then it will be abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ. Nāma
(the holy name) and nāmī (the possessor of the name)
will then be perceived as one and the same.

There are two stages prior to śuddha-nāma—nāmā-bhāsa and
nāmāparādha. We should try to understand nāmābhāsa. It
is not nama, but nāmākṣara. It occurs or appears when
the chanter has some śraddhā, but his heart is still
full of anarthas. There are two types of nāmābhāsa as
described in Jaiva-dharma by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
and in Harināma-cintāmaṇi by Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura.
These two types are pratibimba-nāmābhāsa and chāyā-
nāmābhāsa.

First try to understand pratibimba-nāmābhāsa. The sun is
there in the sky. It is lākhās and lākhās of miles from
the Earth, but its reflection is seen in a water pot.
Similarly, the real name is situated lākhās and lākhās
of miles away. What we experience is only a reflection
(pratibimba), and that reflection is not the same as the
pure name.



Devotee: So, if nāmābhāsa is a reflection, then where is
śuddha-nāma?


                            137
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:Nāma is śuddha-citta sūrya. It
is in the heart of pure devotees and also in Goloka
Vṛndāvana. From there the reflection is coming.
Sometimes those who are third-class devotees (kaniṣṭhā-
adhikārīs) mistake this pratibimba to be Kṛṣṇa, but it
is not. The reflection of the sun is not the sun itself,
and pratibimba-nāmābhāsa is not śuddha-nāma.

Māyāvādīs and others like them also chant nāma. They see
that the śuddha-bhaktas are chanting and receiving so
much honor, and so they think, “We should chant like
this and mukti will be easily available.” They do not
acknowledge the shape or attributes of Kṛṣṇa or any of
His manifestations. Rather they think they can chant
kalpana-nāma (an imaginary name with imaginary
attributes), and ultimately they will realize the
qualityless God. That nāma is called pratibimba-
nāmābhāsa. The real name is not present.

The second type of nāmābhāsa is chāyā-nāmābhāsa (shadow
nāmābhāsa). Hear the example of this very deeply. In the
final hours of the night, at 4-5 a.m., some andhakāra,
darkness in the Eastern direction, begins to decrease.
Neither the sun nor its rays have risen, and there is no
light—only a mild dissipation of darkness. This is the
abhāsa of the sun which will soon rise. The sun itself
will not rise immediately—that will take one hour. You
are seeing something which is still not the sun. You are
just about to see the sun, but you have not seen it yet.
This is chāyā-nāmābhāsa. It is nearer to the sun than
the reflection, but it is not the sun.

So, if anyone is doing nāmābhāsa, it is okay. Chāyā-
nāmābhāsa can give mukti and wealth. It can also give
dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa. It can also give the path
to Vaikuṇṭha, as shown in the example of Ajāmila;
[lxii]62 but it cannot give kṛṣṇa-prema.

In the lower part of the Vaikuṇṭha region there is
Brahma-loka. There one gets sāyujya-mukti (annihilation
of the self). There are also four higher kinds of mukti
(liberation)—sārūpya (to have the same bodily features
as the Lord), sāmīpya (to associate with the Lord),
sālokya (to live on same planet as the Lord) and sārṣṭi
(to have equal opulence like the Lord). All these four
are available by chāyā-nāmābhāsa. Those who chant chāyā-
nāmābhāsa have faith that Kṛṣṇa has form, attributes and
power. By continually chanting even chāyā-nāmābhāsa, and
not committing aparādha, pure nāma will come quickly.

Chāyā-nāmābhāsa itself, however, is also not the real
name. When not even a part of the sun is visible but one
can clearly see some dim glimmer of light, this is
called abhāsa. So, in both stages of nāmābhāsa
(pratibimba and chāyā), the sun cannot be seen. The pure
name is not there. Which of these a person [in
nāmābhāsa] chants depends on his śraddhā. If one’s
śraddhā is pratibimbha-śraddhābhāsa, his chanting of
nāma will be pratibimba-nāmābhāsa and it will give him
the results of his māyāvāda conception.

And if one’s śraddhā is chāyā-śraddhābhāsa, then his

                           138
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

chanting of nāma will be chāyā-nāmābhāsa. The name
chanted in chāyā-nāmābhāsa by one who receives very
high-class sādhu-saṅga, will one day turn into the pure
name, just as one hour after brahma-muhūrta, if there
are no clouds in the sky (or in other words no
nāmāparādha or nāmābhāsa), the sun will automatically be
seen. In śuddha-nāma there are no anarthas or aparādhas.

Because the sun is practically unlimited, it is not
possible for it to be covered by clouds. Rather the
clouds and fog cover our eyes. In the same way, anarthas
and aparādhas cover the soul’s śraddhā, so much so that
even if he chants for millions of births, koṭi koṭi
janme kare yādi śravaṇa kīrtana tabuta na pāya kṛṣṇa
pade prema dhana. If one commits these offenses, then he
will not achieve the desired goal, which is kṛṣṇa-prema.
That is, because of the presence of the clouds, the sun
will not be seen.

When we see the abhāsa of light (not even the rays of
the sun, but an abhāsa of the rays) during brahma-
muhūrta, we know that soon the sun will rise. But
pratibimba-abhāsa is when there is neither the presence
of direct sun, nor is there any ray—only the sun’s
reflection. In the same way, there is no real kṛṣṇa-
nāma.



Devotee: How does pratibimba come about? Why would one
chant pratibimba?



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Because he has no sādhu-saṅga
or guru. Or, even if he has a bona fide guru, he may not
have his saṅga. Or if he has a third-class bogus guru
who has no real knowledge, the disciple will not be able
to receive śuddha-nāma nor will he be able to have all
the siddhāntas clearly explained. Therefore the chanter
can only do pratibimba-nāmābhāsa.



Devotee: Someone may say that Kṛṣṇa is absolute, so His
reflection, which is also Him, is also absolute.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes, just as the sun is also
sunlight. But at night we do not perceive the sun. In
the morning, light is seen coming from the sun’s rays.
The sun is always giving light and heat, but at night
you do not see it. Similarly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Absolute; but
our anarthas, aparādhas and ajñāna (ignorance), which
are like clouds, fog and night, block our vision like a
wall.

Devotee: But nāma is always pūrṇa, always śuddha, always
pure.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: But our nāma is not nāma,

                           139
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

although we may think it is. I gave two examples.



Devotee: We cannot say we chant impure nāma. Nāma is
always pure. It is my heart which is not pure.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: When we take nāmāparādha and
nāmābhāsa as the name, it is like pointing into the air
and saying, “This light is the sun. This is the sun.”
But what is it really? The sun may be absolute, it may
be there in the sky, but what we are pointing to is not
the sun.



Devotee: Even if one is chanting lākhās and lākhās of
holy names, is it only through the mercy of guru that he
can have pure nama?



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: By the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
śuddha-bhakta, the pure devotee. What you are telling,
what you are understanding, what you are thinking is
name—that nāma is not the holy name. This is not the sun
[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja points to a light bulb]. Those
who have no superior sādhu-saṅga, whose hearts are not
pure, who have not received the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
do not have the help of a guru will not be able to chant
this pure name. It is only words from a dictionary. No
nāma is there.[lxiii]63 When nāma illuminates Himself in
your heart, then Kṛṣṇa has come. Then you cannot check
your tongue or your mind from chanting continuously.
Automatically, day and night, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu
did, you will chant spontaneously.



Devotee: Gurudeva, at that time does one see Śrī Kṛṣṇa?



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: One śuddhakṛṣṇa-nāma will give
prema.



Devotee: When we chant pure nāma, will Śrī Kṛṣṇa appear
before us?



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: We cannot make Śrī Kṛṣṇa appear
by our chanting endeavor. Kṛṣṇa Himself will appear on
our tongue and dance there. This is śuddha-nāma. Having
śraddhā, you should try to do nāmābhāsa.

Those who do not read the books of our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas, like Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, will not be
able to explain this vividly. If disciples are only
crying, “Guru, guru, guru,” they will not understand

                           140
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017

this principle. If one thinks you should only know your
own guru, and that by knowing Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, our
Gurudeva Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Mahārāja, Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, or
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī you cannot know Kṛṣṇa, this is
offensive thinking.



Devotee: One must weep for the mercy of guru and
Vaiṣṇavas to be able to chant the pure name. But as
conditioned souls, proud and full of anarthas and
aparādhas, how do we develop a weeping mood for the
mercy of the Lord?



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: By always serving śuddha-guru,
śuddha-vaiṣṇavas, śuddha-nāma, and engaging in
devotional practices, in no time you will be a pure
devotee. You should not give time for anarthas and
aparādhas. In other words, you must be so engaged that
you do not have time to dwell on past anarthas and
aparādhas, nor do you have time to commit new ones.

With a mood of service to Śrī Guru, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,   and the
Vaiṣṇavas, and an understanding that this name   is Kṛṣṇa
Himself, one should serve them by chanting day   and
night. If we serve and hear from those who are   chanting
śuddha-nāma, our chanting of nāmābhāsa will go   away and
the pure name will come.



A LIFE SKETCH OF ŚRĪLA B.V. NĀRĀYAṆA MAHĀRĀJA

His Divine Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is
the disciple of Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktiprajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who was one of the foremost
leading disciples of Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja was born in a village named
Tewaripur, located near the bank of the sacred Ganges
River, where Lord Rāmacandra and Viśvamitra Muni came
and killed the Taraka demon. He was born on the Amāvasyā
(new moon) day of February, 1921, in a very religious
Trivedi brāhmaṇa family. Throughout his childhood he had
many opportunities to regularly accompany his father
when he would go to attend kīrtana and pravacaṇ
assemblies.

In February of 1947, he had his first meeting with his
Gurudeva in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, West Bengal. He had
traveled there from his village after meeting a disciple
of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, named Śrīla
Narottamānanda Brāhmacārī, who was touring and preaching
the message of Śrī Caitanyadeva in the area. After
initial discussions with this devotee, he was convinced
of the paramount position of the philosophy given by the
ācāryas in the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda,
and within days he left home to join the mission of his
spiritual master and surrender his life.

                           141
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


When he arrived in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, the annual
parikramā was under way and he joined with the group.
Upon its completion on Gaura-pūrṇimā, he was given both
hariṇāma and gāyatrī initiations by Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna
Keśava Mahārāja, and received the name Śrī Gaura
Nārāyaṇa. Very soon afterward, his Gurudeva also awarded
him the title Bhaktabāndhava, which means 'friend of the
devotees,' because he was always serving all of the
Vaiṣṇavas in a very pleasing manner.

He traveled extensively, along with Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna
Keśava Mahārāja, on preaching tours throughout India
over the next five years, and in 1952, on Gaura-pūrṇimā,
his beloved Gurudeva awarded him initiation into the
sacred order of sannyāsa. In 1954, Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna
Keśava Mahārāja posted him in charge of the newly-opened
temple in Mathurā, named Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha.
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja began to spend part of the year
in Mathurā, and the other part in Bengal, engaging in
extensive services in both areas, and this continued for
fourteen years. He was also appointed by Śrīla
Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Mahārāja as Vice-President of his
institution, the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, and Editor-
in-Chief of its Hindi publications and the monthly
magazine Śrī Bhāgavata Patrika. In 1968, Śrīla
Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Mahārāja passed away from this
world, and Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja performed all the
necessary ceremonial rituals for his samādhi burial.

During this time period, as a humble servitor of the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja began to
organize the annual Karttika Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā,
which he continues to carry on up to the present day.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja was requested by his Gurudeva to
translate the books of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura from
Bengali into his native language, Hindi. He has carried
out this request by translating some of the Ṭhākura’s
most prominent books, such as Jaiva-dharma, Caitanya-
śikṣāmṛta, Bhakti-tattva-viveka, Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-
māla, to name only a few. These books are presently
being translated into English by his followers. He also
continues to lecture in Hindi, Bengali and English
throughout India and, now, abroad. All of his discourses
are tape-recorded and are gradually being transcribed,
as well as translated into English for publication.

A significant relationship in the life of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja was his association with His Divine Grace Śrīla
A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja Prabhupāda, the world-
famous preacher of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavīsm and Founder-Ācārya
of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.
They first met in Calcutta in 1947, on the occasion of
the inauguration of a new branch of the Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti on Ghosh Para Lane, where they had both come to
render their services. Their association continued a few
years later when Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja accompanied
Śrīla Bhaktiprañāna Keśava Mahārāja to Jhansi, where
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja had been attempting
to start a Vaiṣṇava society named The League of
Devotees. A few years later, in the early 50s, Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja came to reside at Mathurā
in Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha, by invitation of his

                           142
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Godbrother, Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Mahārāja, where
he stayed for some months. By having regular devotional
exchanges with him and deep discussions on Vaiṣṇava
siddhānta, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja developed a very
intimate relationship with him during this time period,
regarding him both as his śikṣā-guru, as well as his
friend.

In 1959, Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Mahārāja initiated
him into the sacred sannyāsa order, giving him the
sannyāsa name and title Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja. The ceremony of Vedic fire yajña and all the
rituals were performed by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja was already residing
in Vṛndāvana during this period, first at the Vaṁsi
Gopāla Mandira and a few years later at the Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja would
often go there to visit him. He would cook for him,
honor the prasāda with him, and have intimate
discussions on Vaiṣṇava philosophy.

When Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja went to preach
in the West, and succeeded in starting the first Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa temple in America, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja sent
the first mṛdaṅga drums and karatālas to him to be used
for saṅkīrtana. He also sent Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deities and his
Sanskrit books for translation. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja maintained regular correspondence every
month or two with Śrīla Bhaktiprajñāna Keśava Mahārāja
and Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja up until 1968, when Śrīla
Keśava Mahārāja entered nitya-līlā. And after that, he
continued to write Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja until his own
departure.

Toward the end of his life, he personally requested
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja several times to kindly give his
association to his Western disciples and help them to
understand the deep truths of Vaiṣṇava philosophy in the
line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja humbly agreed to honor his request, considering
him to be his worshipable śikṣā-guru.

He also requested Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja to take
complete charge of performing all the rituals for his
samādhi burial after his departure. Both of these
requests by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja
demonstrated clearly the firm and utter confidence that
he held in Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.

For a period spanning almost two decades since his
departure in November 1977, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has
been providing insightful guidance and loving shelter to
all who come to him seeking such. And through the medium
of his English books he is now giving his purifying
association and divine realizations to sincere searchers
of truth all over the globe, especially to those who are
followers of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja.



1) sucāru-vaktra-maṇḍalaṁ sukarṇa-ratna-kuṇḍalam

sucarcitāṅga-candanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam

                           143
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                          5/5/2017


2) sudīrgha netra-paṅkajaṁ śikhi-śikhaṇḍa-mūrdhajam

anaṅga-koṭi-mohanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam

3) sunāsikāgra-mauktikaṁ svacchanda danta-paṅktikam

navāmbudāṅga-cikkaṇaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam

4) kareṇa veṇu-rañjitaṁ gatī-karīndra-gañjitam

dukūla-pīta śobhanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam

5) tri-bhaṅga-deha-sundaraṁ nakha-dyuti-sudhākaram

amūlya ratna-bhūṣaṇaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam

6) sugandha-aṅga-saurabham-urovirāji-kaustubham

sphuracchrī-vatsalāñchanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam

7) vṛndāvana-sunāgaraṁ vilāsānuga-vāsasam

surendra-garva-mocanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam

8) vrajāṅganā-sunāyakaṁ sadā sukha-pradāyakam

jagan-manaḥ pralobhanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam

9) śrī-nanda-nandanāṣṭakaṁ paṭhed ya śraddhayānvitaḥ

tared-bhavābdhiṁ dustaraṁ labhet tadaṅghri-yugmakam




TRANSLATION



1) I offer praṇāma to Nandanandana, whose face is
extremely delightful, in whose beautiful ears hang
jeweled earrings, and whose entire body is anoint-ed
with fragrant candana.

2) I offer praṇāma to Nandanandana, whose eyes are more
beautiful than the fully bloomed lotus, whose head is
beautifully adorned with an arrangement of peacock
feathers, and who enchants millions of Cupids.

3) I offer praṇāma to Nandanandana, from whose beautiful
nose hangs an elephant-pearl, whose teeth are immensely
effulgent, whose bodily complex-ion is more beautiful
and lustrous than a fresh raincloud.

4) I offer praṇāma to Nandanandana, whose lotus hands
hold the flute, whose lingering gait defeats even that
of an impassioned elephant, and whose dark limbs are
beautified by a yellow shawl.

5) I offer praṇāma to Nandanandana, whose threefold-
bending posture is exquisitely elegant, the effulgence
of whose toe-nails puts to shame even the moon, and who

                           144
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                          5/5/2017

wears invaluable jewels and ornaments.

6) I offer praṇāma to Nandanandana, whose body exudes an
especially beautiful fragrance, and whose broad chest is
adorned with the kaustubha jewel and the mark of
śrīvātsa.

7) I offer praṇāma to Nandanandana, the expert lover of
Vṛndāvana who performs immaculate pastimes and who is
attired in clothes which are suitable for those
pastimes, and who pulverized the pride of Indra.

8) I offer praṇāma to Nandanandana, who as the lover of
the Vraja gopīs perpetually delights them and who
enchants the minds of all living entities.

9) Whoever regularly recites this Śrī Nanda-
nandanāṣṭakam will easily cross the seemingly
insurmountable ocean of material existence and attain
eternal residence at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.

1) munīndra-vṛnda-vandite tri-loka-śoka-hāriṇī

prasanna-vaktra-pañkaje nikuñja-bhū-vilāsini

vrajendra-bhānu-nandini vrajendra-sūnu-saṅgate

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

2) aśoka-vṛkṣa-vallarī-vitāna-maṇḍapa-sthite

pravāla-vāla-pallava-prabhā ’ruṇāṅghri-komale

varābhaya-sphurat-kare prabhūta-sampadālaye

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

3) anaṅga-raṅga-maṅgala-prasaṅga-bhaṅgura-bhruvāṁ

savibhramaṁ-sasambhramaṁ dṛganta-bāṇa-pātanaih

nirantaraṁ vaśī-kṛta-pratīti-nanda-nandane

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

4) taḍit-suvarṇa-campaka-pradīpta-gaura-vigrahe

mukha-prabhā-parāsta-koṭi-śāradendu-maṇḍale

vicitra-citra-saṅcarac-cakora-śāva-locane

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

5) madonmadāti-yauvane pramoda-māna-maṇḍite

priyānurāga-rañjite kalā-vilāsa-paṇḍite

ananya-dhanya-kuṇja-rājya-kāma-keli-kovide

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

6) aśeṣa-hāva-bhāva-dhīra-hīra-hāra-bhūṣite

prabhūta-śāta-kumbha-kumbha kumbhi-kumbha-sustani

                           145
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                          5/5/2017


praśasta-manda-hāsya-cūrṇa-pūrṇa-saukhya-sāgare

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

7) mṛṇāla-vāla-vallarī-taraṅga-raṅga-dor-late

latāgra-lāsya-lola-nīla-locanāvalokane

lalal-lulan-milan-manojña-mugdha-mohanāśrite

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

8) suvarṇa-mālikāñcita-tri-rekha-kambu-kaṇṭhage

tri-sūtra-maṅgalī-guṇa tri-ratna-dīpti-dīdhite

salola-nīla-kuntale-prasūna-guccha-gumphite

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

9) nitamba-bimba-lambamāna-puṣpa-mekhalā-guṇe

praśasta-ratna-kiṅkiṇī-kalāpa-madhya-mañjule

karindra-śuṇḍa-daṇḍikā-varoha-saubhagoruke

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

10)aneka-mantra-nāda-mañju-nūpurā-rava-skhalat

samāja-rāja-haṁsa-vaṁśa-nikvanāti-gaurave

vilola-hema-vallarī-viḍambi-cāru-caṅkrame

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

11)ananta-koṭi-viṣṇu-loka-namra-padmajārcite

himādrijā-pulomajā-viriñcajā-vara-prade

apāra-siddhi-ṛddhi-digdha-sat-padāṅguli-nakhe

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpa-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

12)makheśvari! kriyeśvari! svadheśvari! sureśvari!

tri-veda-bhāratīśvari! pramāṇa-śāsaneśvari!

rameśvari! kṣameśvari! pramoda-kānaneśvari!

vrajeśvari! vrajādhipe! śrī rādhike namo ’stu te!

13)iti mam adbhutaṁ-stavaṁ niśamya bhānu-nandinī

karotu santataṁ janaṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam

bhavet tadaiva-sañcita-tri-rūpa-karma-nāśanaṁ

bhavet tadā-vrajendra-sūnu—maṇḍala-praveśanam



1) Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Your louts feet are worshipped by

                           146
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

the host of sages and You drive away the grief of the
three spheres. Your joyful face blooms like a lotus and
You delight in pastimes in the kuñjas of Vraja. The
daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja and the mistress of
Vraja-kumāra’s heart—O, when will You bestow upon me
Your merciful sidelong glance?

2) You dwell in a mandira composed of creepers climbing
upon aśoka trees. Your soft lotus feet are like lustrous
red coral, newly-sprouted leaves, and the rising sun.
Your lotus hands, always eager to fulfill the cherished
desires of Your devotees, grant the benediction of
fearlessness. You possess infinite opulence—O, when will
You bestow upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?

3) On the stage of loving playfulness, in an occurrence
of immense auspicious- ness, Your curved eyebrows
suddenly emit showers of arrow-glances which constantly
overpower Nandanandana—O, when will You bestow upon me .
. .

4) The glistening, fair complexion of Your limbs is like
lightening, gold, and campaka flowers, the shining
brilliance of Your face defeats even the effulgence of
millions of autumnal full moons, and Your eyes, which
are restless like cakora birds, display strange and
wonderful scenes at each new moment—O, when will You
bestow upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?

5) You are intoxicated in the beauty of Your own youth
and are always adorned with Your preeminent ornament,
Your delightful sulking mood. Dyed in Your darling one’s
love, You are supremely expert in the art of loving
affairs. In various exalted kuñjas You’re the most
learned in the study of all love’s novelties—O, when
will You bestow upon me Your merciful . . .

6) Adorned simultaneously with the ornament of Your
amorous flirtation & with Your gravity, which is like a
necklace of diamonds, Your lovely breasts are like twin
water-urns composed of pure gold, also like the cranial
globes of Jaya-nandini. Displaying Your acclaimed mild
smile You are an ocean of divine bliss—O, when will You
bestow upon me Your merciful . . .

7) Your soft arms are like fresh stems of lotuses
swaying on a body of water. Just as a creeper dances in
a gust of wind, Your restless bluish eyes flash an
enthralling glance. Your charm entices Mohana Himself to
follow after You, & when meeting, You steal away His
mind, then give Him shelter in His spell-bound condition
—O, when will You bestow upon me Your merciful . . .

8) Your neck, as beautiful as a lovely conch, is
decorated with golden neck- laces & three lines,
ornaments composed of three colors of glistening jewels
swing from Your trisūtra, & Your black tresses, which
are woven with clusters of the best flowers, slowly
oscillate—O, when will You bestow upon me . . .

9) Your hips are adorned with a waistband studded with
swinging golden flower-gems. The acclaimed jingling of
those gems is exceedingly enchanting. Your beautiful
thighs taper like the sloping trunk of the king of

                           147
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

elephants—O, when will You bestow upon me Your merciful
sidelong glance?

10) The varieties of Vedic mantras sweetly resounding
from Your golden anklets resembles the chirping of a
flock of noble swans. As You walk along, the beauty of
Your limbs resembles undulating golden creepers—O, when
. . .

11) You are worshipped by Śrī Lakṣmī, the goddess of
unlimited millions of Vaikuṇṭha planets. Śrī Pārvati,
Indrāṇi, and Sarasvatī all worship and attain
benedictions from You. Meditation on even one of the
nails of Your lotus feet grants an infinite host of
perfections—O, when will You bestow upon me . . .

12) You are the Svāminī of all kinds of sacrifices &
actions, of Svadhā-devī (symbolization of sacrificial
offerings presented to deceased ancestors) & the host of
demigods, of the words of the three Vedas, of all the
scriptures including those which delineate law and
logic, of Śrī Ramā-devī (fortune-devī) & Śrī Kṣamā-devī
(forgivenesss-devī), and especially of the delightful
kuñjas. When will You mercifully make me Your dāsī and
grant me the qualification to render service to Your
amorous pastimes with the prince of Vraja? O Rādhikā,
supreme goddess of Vraja, I offer You praṇāma again &
again.

13) Hey Vṛṣabhanu-nandinī! Upon hearing this wonderful
prayer, please make me the perpetual object of Your
merciful glance. Then, by the influence of Your mercy,
all the reactions to my karma will be destroyed and,
realizing my internal identity as a mañjarī, I will
enter the circle of the parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs to
participate in Kṛṣṇacandra’s eternal pastimes.




* * *




[i] 1 Sādhana-bhakti is of two kinds—vaidhī and
rāgānugā. When uttamā-bhakti is accomplished through the
medium of the senses of the baddha-jīva (conditioned
soul), it is called sādhana-bhakti. That bhakti which is
accomplished through the function of the senses, and by
which bhāva-bhakti is obtained, is called sādhana-
bhakti. . . . In this connection the characteristics of
sādhana-bhakti have been described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.2.2). In this verse, sādhana-bhakti is
referred to as sādhya-bhāva. In other words, the
sādhana, or practice of bhakti by which bhāva-bhakti is
attained, is called sādhya-bhāva. (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu-bindu)




                           148
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


[ii] 2 Bhajana is a complete internal and external
absorption in the spiritual practices of worshipping
Kṛṣṇa—such as śravaṇaṁ, kīrtanaṁ, smaraṇaṁ, etc. with a
mood of intense affection and attachment.




[iii]


3 It is tradition in the Gauḍīya Maṭha that all ācāryas
and sannyāsīs refer to one another by their given
sannyāsa names. Because Śrīla Prabhupāda’s sannyāsa name
is “Swāmī,” Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja refers to him as
such, adding the suffix “jī.” “Jī” denotes great regard,
as well as intimacy and affection. Since besides being
the siksa disciple of Śrīla Prabhupāda, prior to Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s coming to the West, they related with one
another as intimate friends. Also, as they both took
sannyāsa from the same guru, they have a Godbrother
relationship as well. Sometimes Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
refers to Śrīla Prabhupāda as Swāmījī, and sometimes as
Swāmī Mahārāja, sometimes as Prabhupāda, and sometimes
as Śrīla Prabhupāda.




[iv] 4 The living entity is āśraya, always subordinate,
and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is viṣaya, the
supreme objective, the goal of life. (Bhāg. 7.10.6 pp)




[v] 5 Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes in his
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam commentary that a madhyama-adhikārī
cannot have real prema. But by thinking of how the gopīs
loved Kṛṣṇa, he may receive a shadow of their prema.
Thus he achieves the level of āsakti, attachment for
Kṛṣṇa.




[vi] 6 See pages 227-229 for the words to these songs.




[vii] 7 “Taking his legs on his head” is a Hindi
expression to illustrate one who flees at lightning
speed.




                           149
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


[viii] 8 A lakh is one hundred thousand.




[ix] 9 Caitanya-caritāmṛta [Ādi 5.123] explains that
Baladeva expands as the āsana (seat), vasana (cloth),
jāra (vehicle or chariot), pādukā (wooden shoes or
sandals), chatra (umbrella), cāmara (fan), upavit
(sacred thread), śayyā (bed), and busana (ornaments) of
Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. Because bhaktas are manifestations of
Baladeva Prabhu, they can also serve Kṛṣṇa in these
ways.




[x] 10 Svayam Bhagavān means the original form of
Godhead, from whom all other incarnations emanate.




[xi] 11 It is said that the gopīs are divided into five
groups, namely the sakhīs, nitya-sakhīs, prāṇa-sakhīs,
priya-sakhīs and parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs. All these fair
complexioned associates of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the Queen
of Vṛndāvana-dhama, are expert artists in evoking erotic
sentiments in Kṛṣṇa. The parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs are eight
in number, and in the ecstatic dealings of Kṛṣṇa and
Rādhā they side sometimes with Kṛṣṇa and at other times
with Rādhārāṇī, just to create a situation in which it
appears that they favor one against the other. That
makes the exchange of mellows more palatable. (Cc. Ādi
4.217)




[xii] 12 Tattva means philosophical truth, or spiritual
truth. It is not a superficial understanding.




[xiii]


13 Rasa means the mellow taste of one’s personal
relationship with Kṛṣṇa.




[xiv] 14 Correct philosophical conclusions.



                           150
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017




[xv] 15 In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (text 180) Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī is described to be the gopī named Śrī Rūpa
mañjarī. (Ādi 10.84 pp)




[xvi] 16 Manvantara means the change of Manus. (Bhag.
2.10.1)

All the Manus are empowered incarnations of Kṛṣṇa
(manvantara-avatara). There are fourteen Manus in one
day of Brahmā and 420 in one month. All the Manus are
directors of human society. (Bhāg. 4.24.42 pp)

Each Manu lives 4,320,000 years multiplied by 71. The
present Manu has already lived for 4,320,000 years
multiplied by 28. (Bhāg. 4.30.49 pp)




[xvii] 17 According to astronomical calculations, we are
now in the twenty-eighth yuga of Vaivasvata Manu (also
known as Śrāddhadeva). Each Manu lives for seventy-one
yugas, and fourteen such Manus rule in one day of Lord
Brahmā. We are now in the period of Vaivasvata Manu, the
seventh Manu, and the eighth Manu will come into
existence after many millions of years. (Bhāg. 8.13.11
pp)




[xviii] 18 For example, Nanda saw in one place Kṛṣṇa’s
footprints. In another place he remembered how Kṛṣṇa
came there with the cows and they gave milk
automatically without being milked.




[xix] 19 Uddhava’s knowledge of the scriptures,
describing the fortune of those who cry for Kṛṣṇa, was
only theoretical—not practical. Therefore he thought it
incorrect to encourage Nanda to continue weeping. He
thought this great ecstasy to be suffering.




[xx] 20 Śyāma is another name for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It means
that He is blackish, like a fresh rain cloud.




                           151
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



[xxi]


21 There is a supreme symptom of ecstatic love which is
called mahābhāva. This mahābhāva expression was possible
only in Rādhārāṇī, but later on when Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya
appeared to feel the mode of love of Rādhārāṇī, He also
expressed all of the symptoms of mahābhāva. Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī says in this connection that when the symptoms
of ecstatic love become the most bright, that stage is
accepted as mahābhāva. (NOD ch. 28)

A person engaged in devotional service becomes heartsick
when singing the glories of the Supreme Lord. Because
the Lord is very dear to him, when he glorifies the
Lord's name, fame and so on, he becomes almost like an
insane man, and in that condition he sometimes laughs,
sometimes cries and sometimes dances. He continues in
this way without even considering his situation. By
gradually developing his love of Godhead, he increases
his affection, his emotion and his ecstasy. Such
attachment, mahābhāva, is the highest stage of
devotional love. It may be likened to sugar candy, which
is the most powerful form of sugar. Love of Godhead can
gradually develop in such a way that transcendental
pleasure is increased to the highest stage for the real
devotee. (TLC ch. 13)




[xxii] 22 Lord Kṛṣṇa as He is appears once every twenty-
four hours of Brahmā's time (or after a lapse of
8,640,000,000 solar years) in each and every universe,
and all His transcendental pastimes are displayed in
each and every universe in a routine spool. (Bhāg.
1.14.8.pp)




[xxiii] 23 The ultimate goal is to understand Kṛṣṇa's
pastimes in Vṛndāvana. Gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi. But
first of all, you should become siddha. Without becoming
siddha, you cannot understand. As long as you are
asiddha, imperfect, you cannot understand Kṛṣṇa—satāṁ
prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-
rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ. You have to understand Kṛṣṇa in the
association of mahātmās. And who is mahātmā? Mahātmānas
tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ. Mahātmā is not in
this material world. He is in the spiritual world.
(Śrīla Prabhupāda's lecture on Bg: 9 August, 1974)

If one wants to understand the science of Kṛṣṇa, he
should associate with the satāṁ, those who are pure
devotees. Satāṁ prasaṅgān. When discussions take place
between pure devotees, the potency of spiritual
knowledge, as they are depicted in the scriptures and
sacred books, becomes revealed. Armchair speculators
discussing on Bhagavad-gītā is useless, futile. If it is

                           152
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

discussed in the association of pure devotees, then the
potency of that spiritual language will be revealed.
When it is heard from the lips of devotees, it becomes
hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ, very pleasing to the ear and to the
heart. (Śrīla Prabhupāda's lecture on Bg: 20 December,
1966)




[xxiv] 24 According to Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Bhagavad-gītā and
all other Vedic literatures, the living entities are
generated from the taṭasthā energy of the Lord, and thus
they are always the energy of the Lord and are not the
energetic. (Bhāg. 3.7.9.pp)




[xxv] 25 This song is called Śrī Nāma-kīrtana and is
from Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Gītāvalī.




[xxvi] 26 Bhajana is a complete internal and external
absorption in the spiritual practices of worshipping Śrī
Kṛṣṇa—śravaṇaṁ, kīrtanaṁ, smaraṇaṁ, etc.—with a mood of
intense affection and attachment.




[xxvii]


27 Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi is a book by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.




[xxviii] 28 The Lord's desire to appear was born from
two reasons: He wanted to taste the sweet essence of the
mellows of love of God, and He wanted to propagate
devotional service in the world on the platform of
spontaneous attraction. (Cc. Ādi 4.15-16)




[xxix] 29 This is a phrase from Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s song, Vibhāvarī Śeṣa, which is found in his
Kalyāṇa-kalpataru.




                           153
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

[xxx] 30 One has to serve Kṛṣṇa according to these
regulative principles, but if one develops spontaneous
love for Kṛṣṇa as exhibited in the activities of those
who live in Vraja-bhūmi, one attains the platform of
rāgānugā-bhakti. One who has developed this spontaneous
love is eligible for elevation to the platform enjoyed
by the inhabitants of Vraja-bhūmi. (Cc. Madhya 8.221 pp)

The original inhabitants of Vṛndāvana are attached to
Kṛṣṇa spontaneously in devotional service. Nothing can
compare to such spontaneous devotional service, which is
called rāgātmikā-bhakti. When a devotee follows in the
footsteps of the devotees of Vṛndāvana, his devotional
service is called rāgānugā-bhakti. (Cc. Madhya 22.149)




[xxxi] 31 Kuṭīnāṭī, or diplomatic behavior, cannot
satisfy the ātmā, the soul. It cannot even satisfy the
body or the mind. The culprit mind is always suspicious;
therefore our dealings should always be straightforward
and approved by Vedic authorities. If we treat people
diplomatically or duplicitously, our spiritual
advancement is obstructed. (Cc. Madhya 19.159)




[xxxii] 32 This phrase is from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(6.14.5).




[xxxiii]


33 A crore is ten million.




[xxxiv] 34 The words to this song are on page 227.




[xxxv] 35 Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir/ edhamāna-madaḥ
pumān/ naivārhaty abhidhātuṁ vai/ tvām akiñcana-gocaram.
My Lord, Your Lordship can easily be approached, but
only by those who are materially exhausted. One who is
on the path of (material) progress, trying to improve
himself with respectable parentage, great opulence, high
education and bodily beauty, cannot approach You with
sincere feeling. (Bhāg. 1.8.26)




                             154
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



[xxxvi] 36 Śrī Kṛṣṇa ordered Yogamāyā to inspire Nārada
to come and assist Śrī Kṛṣṇa in performing new pastimes.
Nārada was very pleased to come to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
mission.




[xxxvii] 37 Śrī Kṛṣṇa wanted to give away the flower
after some time and thus ‘cheat’ Nārada, but He allowed
Nārada to cheat Him. This increased His pleasure because
He is bhakta-vatsala. Because Śrī Kṛṣṇa wants to please
His devotee, He wanted to be ‘defeated’ by Nārada.
Nārada Muni knew that Kṛṣṇa wanted to create new
pastimes and he wanted to fulfill Kṛṣṇa’s desire to kill
Narakāsura and deliver the 16,000 imprisoned princesses,
and he wanted to see these pastimes.




[xxxviii] 38 In Vedic culture sindhu, bindi, conchshell
bracelets, and red lac painted on the feet are some
signs that a lady is married.



[xxxix] 39 When the queens exhibit māna, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
to pacify them. This gives Him great pleasure because,
if He can make His devotees happy, His own happiness
increases. His happiness is in giving happiness to His
devotees.



[xl] 40 Sādhana-bhakti is of two kinds—vaidhī and
rāgānugā. When uttamā-bhakti is accomplished through the
medium of the senses of the baddha-jīva (conditioned
soul), it is called sādhana-bhakti. That bhakti which is
accomplished through the function of the senses, and by
which bhāva-bhakti is obtained, is called sādhana-
bhakti. . . . In this connection the characteristics of
sādhana-bhakti have been described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu [1.2.2]. In this verse, sādhana-bhakti is
referred to as sādhya-bhāva. In other words, the
sādhana, or practice of bhakti by which bhāva-bhakti is
attained, is called sādhya-bhāva. (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu-bindu)



[xli] 41 In this world kaṣāya means 'fault'. For the
gopīs there was no material fault on their part because
there was no offense.



[xlii] 42 Anarthas are of four kinds: (1) svarūpa-bhrama
(illusions about spiritual identity), (2) asat-tṛṣṇā
(thirst for that which is unreal—that is, material

                           155
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

enjoyment), (3) aparādha (offenses), and (4) hṛdaya-
daurbalya (weakness of heart). (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-
bindu)



[xliii] 43 Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu taught Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī the ultimate limit of the truth about Lord
Kṛṣṇa, the truth about devotional service and the truth
about transcendental mellows, consummating in conjugal
love between Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. (Cc. Madhya
19.115)



[xliv]

44 That religious undertaking which bestows divya-jñāna,
or transcendental knowledge, and destroys pāpa (sins),
papa-bīja (the seed of sin), and avidyā (ignorance) to
the root is called dīkṣā by learned authorities in the
absolute truth. (Hari-bhakti-vilāsa)

Divya-jñāna is transcendental knowledge contained within
a mantra which reveals the form and identity of the
Supreme Lord (bhagavat-svarūpa) as well as the knowledge
of the sādhaka-jīva’s particular relationship with the
Lord. (Bhakti-sandarbha, Anuccheda 283)



[xlv] 45 One should mentally honor the devotee who
chants the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, one should offer
humble obeisances to the devotee who has undergone
spiritual initiation (dīkṣa) and is engaged in
worshipping the Deity, and one should associate with and
faithfully serve that pure devotee who is advanced in
undeviated devotional service and whose heart is
completely devoid of the propensity to criticize others.
(Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, text 5)



[xlvi] 46 There are millions of universes. When the
fortunate soul wandering through these universes in his
various births gets association with Lord Caitanya’s
followers, then by their mercy, in this birth, one gets
the association of very high-class devotees.



[xlvii] 47 Ahalyā, though the wife of Gautama ¬ṣi, also
had some connection with Indra. But she loved only Lord
Rāmacandra and was delivered by Him.



[xlviii] 48 According to the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
commentaries of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, even the
gopīs who were not yet married, although knowing they
would eventually marry other gopas, considered Kṛṣṇa
their beloved and they also joined in Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā.



                           156
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


[xlix] 49 Uddhava appreciated the exalted position of
the gopīs and wished to fall down and take the dust of
their feet on his head. Yet he dared not ask the gopīs
to offer the dust from their feet; perhaps they would
not be agreeable. Therefore, to have his head smeared
with the dust of the gopīs' feet without their
knowledge, he desired to become only an insignificant
clump of grass or herbs in the land of Vṛndāvana.
(Kṛṣṇa, The Supreme Personality of Godhead ch. 46)

The gopīs control Śrī Kṛṣṇa by their exalted love. Dust
from the lotus feet has many meanings, and one meaning
is follower of the gopīs. Uddhava wanted the blessing to
become the follower of the followers of the gopīs, so
that he could learn how to love Śrī Kṛṣṇa like the gopīs
—so much so that his love could also control Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



[l] 50 Highly advanced ecstasy is divided into two
categories—mādana and mohana. Meeting together is called
mādana, and separation is called mohana. (Cc. Madhya
23.58)

On the mādana platform there are kissing and many other
symptoms, which are unlimited. In the mohana stage,
there are two divisions—udghūrṇā (unsteadiness) and
citra-jalpa (varieties of mad emotional talks). (Cc.
Madhya 23.59)

In the highest transcendental ecstasy there is a feeling
of being enchanted in the presence of the enchanter.
When the enchanter and the enchanted become separated,
mohana, or bewilderment, occurs. When so bewildered due
to separation, one becomes stunned, and at that time all
the bodily symptoms of transcendental ecstasy are
manifested. When they are manifest, one appears
inconceivably crazy. This is called transcendental
madness. In this state there is imaginative discourse,
and one experiences emotions like those of a madman.
(Cc. Madhya 1.87 pp)



[li] 51 "Although manifest, happy, expanded and
unlimited, the emotional exchanges between Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa can only be understood by the damsels of Vraja or
by their followers." (Govinda-lilāmṛta: 10.17) The
personal associates of Rādhārāṇī are called sakhīs, and
Her near assistants are called mañjarīs. It is very
difficult to express their dealings with Kṛṣṇa because
they have no desire to mix with Kṛṣṇa or to enjoy Him
personally. Rather, they are always ready to help
Rādhārāṇī associate with Kṛṣṇa. Their affection for
Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī is so pure that they are simply
satisfied when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are together. Indeed,
their transcendental pleasure is in seeing Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa united. The actual form of Rādhārāṇī is just like
a creeper embracing the tree of Kṛṣṇa, and the damsels
of Vraja, the associates of Rādhārāṇī, are just like the
leaves and flowers of that creeper. When a creeper
embraces a tree, the leaves and flowers of the creeper
automatically embrace it. Govinda-lilāmṛta (10.16)

                           157
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

confirms that Rādhārāṇī is the expansion of the pleasure
potency of Kṛṣṇa and is compared with a creeper, and Her
associates, the damsels of Vraja, are compared to the
flowers and leaves of that creeper. When Rādhārāṇī and
Kṛṣṇa enjoy Themselves, the damsels of Vraja relish the
pleasure more than Rādhārāṇī Herself. Although the
associates of Rādhārāṇī do not expect any personal
attention from Kṛṣṇa, Rādhārāṇī is so pleased with them
that She arranges individual meetings between Kṛṣṇa and
the damsels of Vraja. Indeed, Rādhārāṇī tries to combine
or unite Her associates with Kṛṣṇa by many
transcendental maneuvers, and She takes more pleasure in
these meetings than in Her own meetings with Him. When
Kṛṣṇa sees that both Rādhārāṇī and Her associates are
pleased by His association, He becomes more satisfied.
(TLC ch. 31)



[lii] 52 At the end of his life, Śrīla Śaṅkarācārya
composed many poems glorifying Vṛndāvana-līlā and the
worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This was his last composition of
poetry.



[liii] 53 Janmādy asya yato 'nvayād itarataś cārtheṣv
abhijñaḥ svarāṭ. I meditate upon Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa because
He is the Absolute Truth and the primeval cause of all
causes of the creation, sustenance and destruction of
the manifested universes. He is directly and indirectly
conscious of all manifestations, and He is independent
because there is no other cause beyond Him. (Bhāg.
1.1.1)



[liv] 54 Viṣaya and āśraya are two very significant
words relating to the reciprocation between Kṛṣṇa and
His devotee. The devotee is called the āśraya, and his
beloved, Kṛṣṇa, is the viṣaya. Different ingredients are
involved in the exchange of roles between the āśraya and
viṣaya, which are known as vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika
and vyabhicārī. Vibhāva is divided into the two
categories ālambana and uddīpana. Ālambana may be
further divided into āśraya and viṣaya. In the loving
affairs of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Rādhārāṇī is the āśraya
feature and Kṛṣṇa the viṣaya. The transcendental
consciousness of the Lord tells Him, "I am Kṛṣṇa, and I
experience pleasure as the viṣaya. The pleasure enjoyed
by Rādhārāṇī, the āśraya, is many times greater than the
pleasure I feel." Therefore, to feel the pleasure of the
āśraya category, Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared as Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. (Cc. Ādi 4.135)



[lv] 55 Sā tad-dhastāt samutpatya/ sadyo devy ambaraṁ
gatā/ adṛśyatānujā viṣṇoḥ/ sāyudhāṣṭa-mahābhujā. The
child, Yogamāyā-devī, the younger sister of Lord Viṣṇu,
slipped upward from Kaṁsa's hands and appeared in the
sky as Devī, the goddess Durgā, with eight arms,
completely equipped with weapons. (Bhāg. 10. 4. 9 text)


                           158
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

Kaṁsa tried to dash the child downward against a piece
of stone, but since she was Yogamāyā, the younger sister
of Lord Viṣṇu, she slipped upward and assumed the form
of the goddess Durgā. The word anujā, meaning ‘the
younger sister,’ is significant. When Viṣṇu, or Kṛṣṇa,
took birth from Devakī, He must have simultaneously
taken birth from Yaśodā also. Otherwise how could
Yogamāyā have been anujā, the Lord's younger sister?
(Bhāg. 10. 4. 9 pp)



[lvi] 56 Śrī Kṛṣṇa often carried His toy calf when He
left His home to play. He may have dropped it in the
butter pot so He would not be found guilty.



[lvii] 57 The transcendental potency by which He (Kṛṣṇa)
knows Himself and causes others to know Him is called
samvit. The transcendental potency by which He possesses
transcendental bliss and causes His devotees to have
bliss is called hlādinī. (Cc. Ādi 4.62 pp)




[lviii] 58 Vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam (from Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s Śikṣāṣṭakam) means ‘the life and soul of
the wife in the form of transcendental knowledge.’



[lix]

59 Nāma means 'the holy name'.



[lx] 60 Mukti, freedom from all sinful reactions, is
obtained even by nāmābhāsa, or a glimpse of the light of
the holy name before its full light is perfectly
visible. The nāmābhāsa stage is between that of
nāmāparādha, or chanting of the holy name with offenses,
and pure chanting. There are three stages in chanting
the holy name of the Lord. In the first stage, one
commits ten kinds of offenses while chanting. In the
next stage, nāmābhāsa, the offenses have almost stopped,
and one is coming to the platform of pure chanting. In
the third stage, when one chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra
without offenses, his dormant love for Kṛṣṇa immediately
awakens. This is the perfection. (Bhāg. 5.24.20 pp)



[lxi] 61 Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja.... Prema-
pumartho mahan. That is wanted. There is one word by
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, nāmākṣara bahir haya nāma nāhi
haya: ‘Simply the alphabets are coming, but that is not
nāma.’ Nāmākṣara, Hare Kṛṣṇa, the alphabets, are coming
out, but it is not the holy name. (room conversation
Māyāpura 25-2-7)


                           159
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



[lxii] 62 After Ajāmila saw the Viṣṇudūtas he went to
Haridvāra, performed bhakti and then attained Vaikuṇṭha.
So chāyā-nāmābhāsa gives a chance for good association
(like the Viṣṇudūtas).



[lxiii] 63 This is why our ācāryas—like Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura and
others—petition the Lord for His mercy in their prayers
about begging for the holy name. For example, in the
song Jīva-jāgo, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes,
“Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda fell at the lotus feet of Lord
Gaurāṅga, and after begging for the holy name he
received that mahā-mantra.” In the song Emona Durmati,
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura also prays, “O Lord, I am falling
at the soles of Your feet, weeping and weeping for the
holy name.”




Table of Contents

THE GLORIES OF SĀDHU-SAṄGA

THE ROLE OF THE ŚIKṢĀ-GURU

MĀDHAVA-TITHI: MOTHER OF PREMA BHAKTI

THE GURU AS MANIFESTATION OF KṚṢṆA

THE PURPOSE OF LORD CAITANYA’S DESCENT

AUSPICIOUS INVOCATION

THE GOPĪS’ SELFLESS LOVE

SUPREME CHASTITY

ADVAITA ĀCĀRYA AND THE LORD’S DESCENT

WITHOUT THIS THE WORLD IS USELESS

LORD CAITANYA AS THE PERFECT BHAKTA

NO ONE BUT KṚṢṆA

[i]

[ii]

[iii]

[iv]

[v]

[vi]

[vii]

                             160
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt         5/5/2017


[viii]

[ix]

[x]

[xi]

[xii]

[xiii]

[xiv]

[xv]

[xvi]

[xvii]

[xviii]

[xix]

[xx]

[xxi]

[xxii]

[xxiii]

[xxiv]

[xxv]

[xxvi]

[xxvii]

[xxviii]

[xxix]

[xxx]

[xxxi]

[xxxii]

[xxxiii]

[xxxiv]

[xxxv]

[xxxvi]

[xxxvii]

[xxxviii]



                           161
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt                 5/5/2017




Table of Contents

THE GLORIES OF SĀDHU-SAṄGA

THE ROLE OF THE ŚIKṢĀ-GURU

MĀDHAVA-TITHI: MOTHER OF PREMA BHAKTI

THE GURU AS MANIFESTATION OF KṚṢṆA

THE PURPOSE OF LORD CAITANYA’S DESCENT

AUSPICIOUS INVOCATION

THE GOPĪS’ SELFLESS LOVE

SUPREME CHASTITY

ADVAITA ĀCĀRYA AND THE LORD’S DESCENT

WITHOUT THIS THE WORLD IS USELESS

LORD CAITANYA AS THE PERFECT BHAKTA

NO ONE BUT KṚṢṆA

[i]

[ii]

[iii]

[iv]

[v]

[vi]

[vii]

[viii]

[ix]

[x]

[xi]

[xii]

[xiii]

[xiv]

[xv]

[xvi]

[xvii]

[xviii]

                             162
Pinnacle_of_Devotion.txt         5/5/2017


[xix]

[xx]

[xxi]

[xxii]

[xxiii]

[xxiv]

[xxv]

[xxvi]

[xxvii]

[xxviii]

[xxix]

[xxx]

[xxxi]

[xxxii]

[xxxiii]

[xxxiv]

[xxxv]

[xxxvi]

[xxxvii]

[xxxviii]




                           163
