Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

Sri Prabandhavali



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:    ★★★★★

Tags: Sri Prabandhavali

Sri Prabandhavalittt



* * *




* * *




Pure Devotees




Śrī Prabandhāvalī




A Collection of Devotional Essays

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




Contents

Introduction




Maṅgalācaraṇa




Chapter One The Appearance Day of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta

                           1
Prabandhavali.txt                                 5/5/2017

Vāmana Mahārāja




Chapter Two The Disappearance Day of Śrīla A.C.
Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda




Chapter Three The Disappearance Day of Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī




Chapter Four The Disappearance Day of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda




Chapter Five The Disappearance Day of Śrīla Gaura-kiśora
dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja




Chapter Six The Disappearance Day of Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī




Chapter Seven Advaita Saptamī




Chapter Eight Nityānanda Trayodaśī




Chapter Nine Simply a Quality of Bhakti




Chapter Ten From Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Śrī Bhajana-
rahasya




                           2
Prabandhavali.txt                                5/5/2017



Chapter Eleven The Final Day of Kārttika-vrata




Introduction




It is a matter of great happiness that we can now
present this second edition of Śrī Prabandhāvalī before
our Vaiṣṇava readers. This book is a compilation of
lectures spoken originally in Hindi by our most
worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva, oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata
Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. The first
edition of this book was published in 1996, just before
Śrīla Gurudeva’s first preaching tour of Western
countries.

Observing the festival days outlined in the Vaiṣṇava
calendar is an important aspect of devotional practice.
Śrīla Gurudeva always speaks on the appropriate topic on
such days, whether it be the appearance or disappearance
day of a prominent Vaiṣṇava ācārya, the appearance day
of an incarnation of Bhagavān, or any other significant
day. Of the eleven lectures included within this book,
nine are lectures that he spoke on significant dates
from the Vaiṣṇava calendar. The word prabandha means an
essay and āvalī means a collection. We are confident
that devotees will find this Śrī Prabandhāvalī helpful
in their sincere efforts to honour these important days.

The material herein was spoken during 1989 and 1991 at
Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā and Śrī Rūpa-
Sanātana Gauḍīya Maṭha in Vṛndāvana. The only exception
is the chapter on Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swami
Prabhupāda, which was compiled from three separate
lectures spoken in English in the early 1990s.



In this second edition a glossary has been added to
assist readers unfamiliar with Sanskrit terminology.
Also, the book has been redesigned and typeset to a
higher standard. Acknowledgment goes to Lavaṅga-latā
dāsī for copy-editing this second edition, to ¬ṣabhādeva
dāsa and Śānti dāsī for proofreading the final
manuscript, to Atula-kṛṣṇa dāsa for checking the
Sanskrit, to Kṛṣṇa-prema dāsa for designing the new
cover and to Subala-sakhā dāsa for providing the new
photograph of Śrīla Gurudeva. This publication is yet
another manifestation of Śrīla Gurudeva’s great mercy.
Together we offer it into his hands and pray that he
will bless us with the necessary qualification to
continue serving him in this way. Hare Kṛṣṇa.




                           3
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017


An aspiring servant of the Vaiṣṇavas,



Prema-vilāsa dāsa



Guru-pūrṇimā

13th July, 2003

Gopīnātha-bhavana, Śrī Vṛndāvana




Maṅgalācaraṇa



vande ‘haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ

śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca

śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthān-

vitaṁ taṁ sa-jīvam

sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ

kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ

śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-

śrī-viśākhānvitaṁś ca


I offer praṇāma unto the lotus feet of śrī gurudeva —
which includes the dīkṣā-guru, the bhajana-śikṣā-guru,
the superlative succession of gurus predominated by Śrī
Madhvācārya and Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, and the Vaiṣṇavas
of all four yugas — to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, his elder
brother Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
Jīva Gosvāmī and their associates, to Śrī Advaita
Ācārya, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
and all of His associates, and to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
accompanied by all of Their sakhīs and mañjarīs headed
by Śrī Lalitā and Viśākhā.

Śrī Guru-praṇāma



oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ


                           4
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017


I offer my most humble daṇḍavat-praṇāma unto śrī guru,
who with the torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes,
which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance.


nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya



ācārya-siṁha-rūpiṇe




śrī śrīmad bhakti-prajñāna-



keśava iti nāmine




atimartya-caritrāya



svāśritānāṁ ca pāline




jīva-duḥkhe sadārttāya



śrī-nāma-prema-dāyine




I offer praṇāma unto my most worshipful śrī gurudeva,
the lion-like ācārya jagad-guru oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-
śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī, who is a
thoroughly transcendental personality, who nurtures with
great affection those who have taken shelter of him, who
is always sad to see the sufferings of souls inimical to
Kṛṣṇa, and who bestows love for the holy name.

Śrīla Prabhupāda-vandanā



nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya



kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale


                              5
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017




śrīmate bhaktisiddhānta-



sarasvatīti nāmine




śrī-vārṣabhānavī-devī-



dayitāya kṛpābdhaye




kṛṣṇa-sambandha-vijñāna-



dāyine prabhave namaḥ




I offer praṇāma time and again unto the master who
bestows the science of Kṛṣṇa, who is very dear to Kṛṣṇa,
who is the recipient of Śrī Vārṣabhānavī-devī Rādhikā’s
mercy, who is an ocean of mercy and who appeared on this
earth as oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Gosvāmī.


mādhuryojjvala-premāḍhya-



śrī-rūpānuga-bhaktida



śrī-gaura-karuṇā-śakti-



vigrahāya namo ‘stu te




I offer praṇāma unto he who is the embodiment of that
rūpānuga-bhakti which is radiant with the amorous love
of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and who is the personification of
Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu’s mercy potency.


                            6
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017


namas te gaura-vāṇī



śrī-mūrtaye dīna-tāriṇe



rūpānuga-viruddhāpa-



siddhānta-dhvānta-hāriṇe




I offer praṇāma unto he who is the embodiment of
Mahāprabhu’s teachings, who is the deliverer of the
fallen and who is the annihilator of the darkness
arising from misconceptions opposed to the philosophy
enunciated by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Śrīla Gaura-kiśora-vandanā

namo gaura-kiśorāya



sākṣād-vairāgya-mūrtaye



vipralambha-rasāmbhodhe



pādāmbujāya te namaḥ



I offer praṇāma unto the lotus feet of Śrīla Gaura-
kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, who is renunciation
personified and an ocean of vipralambha-rasa.



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda-vandanā

namo bhaktivinodāya



saccidānanda-nāmine



gaura-śakti-svarūpāya



rūpānuga-varāya te


                             7
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017




I offer praṇāma unto Saccidānanda Śrī Bhaktivinoda, who
is the foremost of rūpānuga devotees and the embodiment
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s śakti.

Śrīla Jagannātha-vandanā

gaurāvirbhāva-bhūmes tvaṁ



nirdeṣṭā sajjana-priyaḥ



vaiṣṇava-sārvabhauma-śrī-



jagannāthāya te namaḥ




I offer praṇāma unto Vaiṣṇava-sārvabhauma Śrī Jagannātha
dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, who verified the precise location
of Śrī Gaurasundara’s appearance and who is dear to all
saintly persons.



Śrī Vaiṣṇava-vandanā

vāñchā-kalpatarubhyaś ca



kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca



patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo



vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ



I offer praṇāma unto the Vaiṣṇavas, who just like desire
trees can fulfil the desires of everyone and who are
full of compassion for conditioned souls.



Śrīman Mahāprabhu-vandanā



namo mahā-vadānyāya



                            8
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017


kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te




kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-



nāmne gaura-tviṣe namaḥ




I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is
Kṛṣṇa Himself. He has assumed the golden hue of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and is munificently distributing kṛṣṇa-prema.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa-praṇāma



he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho



dīna-bandho jagat-pate




gopeśa gopikā-kānta



rādhā-kānta namo ‘stu te




I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is an ocean of
mercy, the friend of the distressed and the source of
creation. He is the master of the gopas and the lover of
the gopīs headed by Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



Śrī Rādhā-praṇāma

tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi



rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari




                           9
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017



vṛṣabhānu-sute devi



praṇamāmi hari-priye




I offer praṇāma unto Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose complexion
is like molten gold and who is the queen of Vṛndāvana.
She is the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja and is very
dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Śrī Sambandhādhideva-praṇāma

jayatāṁ suratau paṅgor



mama manda-mater gatī




mat-sarvasva-padāmbhojau



rādhā-madana-mohanau




All glories to the supremely merciful Śrī Rādhā-Madana-
mohana! Although I am lame and foolish, They are my
refuge, and Their lotus feet are my everything.

Śrī Abhidheyādhideva-praṇāma



dīvyad-vṛndāraṇya-kalpa-drumādhaḥ



śrīmad-ratnāgāra-siṁhāsana-sthau



śrīmad-rādhā-śrīla-govinda-devau



preṣṭhālībhiḥ sevyamānau smarāmi



                           10
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017



I meditate upon Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrīmān Govindadeva,
who are seated on an effulgent siṁhāsana beneath a
desire tree in a temple composed of jewels in the
supremely beautiful land of Śrī Vṛndāvana, accepting
service from Their beloved sakhīs headed by Lalitā and
Viśākhā.

Śrī Prayojanādhideva-praṇāma



śrīmān rāsa-rasārambhī



vaṁśī-vaṭa-taṭa-sthitaḥ




karṣan veṇu-svanair gopīr



gopīnāthaḥ śriye ‘stu naḥ




May that Śrī Gopīnātha, who originated the
transcendental mellow of the rāsa-līlā and who stands at
Vaṁśīvaṭa attracting the gopīs with the melody of His
flute, bestow His benediction upon me.



Śrī Tulasī-praṇāma



vṛndāyai tulasī-devyai



priyāyai keśavasya ca




kṛṣṇa-bhakti-prade devi



satyavatyai namo namaḥ




                            11
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

I offer praṇāma time and again to Tulasī-devī, who, also
known as Vṛndā and Satyavatī, is very dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and bestows kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

Śrī Pañca-tattva-praṇāma



pañca-tattvātmakaṁ kṛṣṇaṁ



bhakta-rūpa-svarūpakam




bhaktāvatāraṁ bhaktākhyaṁ



namāmi bhakta-śaktikam




I offer praṇāma to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in His five
features as bhakta, bhakta-rūpa, bhakta-svarūpa, bhakta-
avatāra and bhakta-śakti.

Pañca-tattva Mahā-mantra

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya




prabhu nityānanda




śrī-advaita gadādhara




śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda




Mahā-mantra

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa




                            12
Prabandhavali.txt                                  5/5/2017



kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare




hare rāma hare rāma




rāma rāma hare hare




Chapter One

The Appearance Day of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja




Vyāsa is the personality who delineated the glories of
the names, form, qualities and pastimes of Bhagavān in
this world. The ceremony to honour the ācārya who,
sitting on a throne in the service of Bhagavān, preaches
His glories and attracts people towards Him is called
Vyāsa-pūjā. Another name for Vyāsa-pūjā is guru-pūjā. In
India, the general convention is that guru-pūjā is
observed on the day of Guru-pūrṇimā. It is considered
Vyāsa’s appearance day, and on that day all sampradāyas
worship their respective gurus. But in accordance with
the scriptures, the primary ācārya of modern times, Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda,
established special worship of the guru on that guru’s
own specific appearance day. Real guru-pūjā is when, on
his appearance day, the guru worships his whole guru-
paramparā and instructs his disciples on how to do the
same.

In the scriptures, the glories of the guru have been
described extensively. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
hākura has written:



yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo

yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto ’pi




Śrī Gurvaṣṭaka (8)




                           13
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

By the mercy of the guru, one receives the mercy of
Bhagavān. And if one doesn’t receive the mercy of the
guru, he will never attain the kṛpā of Bhagavān. In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.17.27) Śrī Kṛṣṇa says:




ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān

nāvamanyeta karhicit

na martya-buddhyāsūyeta

sarva-deva-mayo guruḥ



One should know the guru as the āśraya-vigraha and non-
different from Me. One should never disrespect him or
attribute faults to him by perceiving him with material
vision, for he is the embodiment of all the demigods.


There are numerous demigods and goddesses, and amongst
them Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are primary. The guru is
the embodiment of Brahmā, the embodiment of Viṣṇu, and
also the embodiment of Maheśa. He is compared to Brahmā
because just as Brahmā creates this world, the guru
creates bhakti by sowing the seed of devotion in our
hearts. Viṣṇu is the maintainer, and gurudeva is he who
maintains our bhakti. As long as we haven’t attained the
stage of prema, he continues to strengthen our devotion.
As conditioned souls, we cannot even imagine how much
endeavour he makes for even one disciple. And as Maheśa
is the destroyer, the guru destroys all of our anarthas
and aparādhas. This is why the guru is said to be the
embodiment of all the demigods.



There are so many jīvas in this world, and although some
are inclined towards Bhagavān, most are averse to Him.
Their intrinsic forms are as eternal servants of Kṛṣṇa,
but forgetting this, they are wandering in material
existence. Without bhakti they will never possess any
auspiciousness. Therefore sometimes Kṛṣṇa Himself
descends into this world, sometimes He assumes different
incarnations, and sometimes He sends His śakti in the
form of the guru. Otherwise it would be impossible for
the jīvas to ever receive auspiciousness. Only by bhakti
can they attain their ultimate good fortune; yet bhakti
is not a thing of this world. Inside the eternally
perfected associates of Kṛṣṇa, the essence of the
saṁvit- and hlādinī-śaktis is always present in the form
of prema-bhakti. Until the jīva receives that essence,
he will not possess any real auspiciousness. The guru is
a resident of the spiritual world, and he descends into
this world. He brings the prema of Goloka Vraja to this
world and bestows it upon the conditioned souls. Such a
great personality, an eternally perfected rāgātmikā
devotee who possesses vraja-prema and brings it to this
world, is known as a śuddha-guru.


                           14
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

As the current of the Gaṅgā carries water from the
Himālayas down to the ocean, there is a current flowing
through our guru-paramparā which, beginning from Kṛṣṇa
Himself, has come down to the modern ācāryas and is
presently flooding the entire material world with kṛṣṇa-
prema. This is the primary function of the guru. If
someone is not able to give this prema, then he is not
really a guru at all. Being capable of bestowing kṛṣṇa-
prema is the primary attribute of a genuine Vaiṣṇava
guru.

Today is the appearance day of such a guru, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja, who serves as the present
ācārya of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. He took birth
in 1916 in the district of Jessore in East Bengal, which
is now Bangladesh. His boyhood name was Santoṣa, and his
paternal uncle was one of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Prabhupāda’s first disciples, Nṛsiṁha Mahārāja. Vāmana
Mahārāja’s mother was also a disciple of Prabhupāda, and
she was very strict; she would even discipline her
husband. If her husband had been eating any prohibited
food, she would not allow him to enter the house, and
she disciplined the children in the same manner. Vāmana
Mahārāja was the oldest of her four sons, and she was
very concerned about him being influenced by his father.
So when Vāmana Mahārāja was only nine years old, she
took him to Prabhupāda’s maṭha in Māyāpura where Nṛsiṁha
Mahārāja was already staying. When they arrived there,
Nṛsiṁha Mahārāja led them to our gurudeva, Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja, who was the temple commander
at that time. Residing in the maṭha from that day on,
Vāmana Mahārāja received harināma initiation directly
from Prabhupāda and has remained a lifelong naiṣṭhika-
brahmacārī.

Our Guru Mahārāja immediately put Vāmana Mahārāja in
school and would say to him, “I will give you some
chocolate if you will recite just one śloka for me.” In
this way he learned many ślokas, and Gurudeva was always
extremely affectionate to him. At that young age Vāmana
Mahārāja learned how to seat Vaiṣṇavas for taking
prasāda by giving them a leaf to eat from and some salt
and water. And after all the Vaiṣṇavas had finished
taking prasāda he would clean everything. He also
learned how to cook there, and he could very quickly
prepare first-class offerings.

After some time Prabhupāda departed from this world, and
then our Guru Mahārāja established the Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti in 1943. I joined the mission in 1946, and at
that time I saw how Vāmana Mahārāja was doing
everything: writing letters, managing the temple,
cooking, and travelling for preaching. Together with my
godbrother Śrīla Trivikrama Mahārāja, we received
sannyāsa from Guru Mahārāja on Gaura-pūrṇimā in 1954.
Vāmana Mahārāja is a great scholar just as our gurudeva
was. It has been said that he is like a dictionary of
ślokas because he knows so many verses from the
scriptures. When while lecturing Gurudeva would
sometimes forget a śloka, Vāmana Mahārāja would always
supply it from memory. Once, when we went to Āssām for
preaching, Gurudeva boldly declared that the mouths of
the people there who ate meat and fish were like the
drains of sewers. One of the sects there was virtually

                           15
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

prepared to stone us, and they challenged us by saying,
“You say that Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Bhagavān Himself,
but what evidence is there of this?” Guru Mahārāja
turned to Vāmana Mahārāja and said, “Speak.” Then Vāmana
Mahārāja recited fifty ślokas one after the other from
different scriptures as evidence, and those people were
silenced.

Guru Mahārāja placed the entire responsibility of
editing and publishing our Bengali magazine exclusively
upon Vāmana Mahārāja. From his boyhood Vāmana Mahārāja
studied Bhāgavatam verses and their commentaries, and as
a result he can speak on Vaiṣṇava philosophy for hours
without stopping. He is such a great scholar, and he is
a very sweet person as well. With children he is very
affectionate, and he speaks with them concerning things
like ghosts that they enjoy hearing about. He attracts
everyone to spiritual life, and even in an assembly of
scholars, he is always the greatest scholar. He refutes
others’ misconceptions, but he does it in such a way
that their feelings are not hurt, as if carefully
performing a surgical operation.

Vāmana Mahārāja is very grave and quiet, and there is
another special quality that he possesses: I have seen
many people, myself included, who give explanations from
the scriptures and enjoy taking praise from others for
it. But having known Vāmana Mahārāja for almost fifty
years, I have never seen him do this, not even by
accident. He is also very tolerant. As if taking poison
and digesting it, he may see the faults in others, but
he never speaks about them. He has so much eagerness to
preach the instructions of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and he
has preached in all the villages of West Bengal and
Āssām. Bhagavān has especially empowered this great
personality with many transcendental qualities. Today I
pray to Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja that he will mercifully
allow me to always remain as his shadow, thereby
enabling me to always follow him. I consider him to be
my śikṣā-guru, because since the day I joined the
mission he has given me whatever I required with great
affection.




Chapter Two

The Disappearance Day of Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swami
Prabhupāda




Śrī Kṛṣṇa chose for His pure devotee, A.C. Bhaktivedānta
Swami Mahārāja, to appear on the very auspicious day
known as Nandotsava. This is the day after Janmāṣṭamī
and the anniversary of the day on which Nanda Mahārāja
held a great festival to celebrate Kṛṣṇa’s birth. This
fact alone signifies that Śrīla Swami Mahārāja was
appearing for the purpose of performing some very
important activities. His parents were very pious and

                           16
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

therefore gave him the name Abhaya Caraṇa. Abhaya means
“fearless”, and caraṇa means “the lotus feet of the
Lord”, so Abhaya Caraṇa is a name of Kṛṣṇa because only
Kṛṣṇa can grant real fearlessness in this world. Thus
Swamijī was meant to give fearless shelter to the entire
world. The giving of this name was very significant and
nothing less than a divine arrangement.

I first met Swamijī in 1950 when I was staying with my
gurudeva in our temple in Calcutta. Generally all
devotees would show great respect to my gurudeva, but
one day I saw Gurudeva himself show great respect to a
householder devotee who had arrived from Allahabad. He
spoke to him with great love and affection. At the first
opportunity I asked my gurudeva, “Who is that devotee?”
He replied, “He is Abhaya Caraṇāravinda. [Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī] Prabhupāda gave him the title
ëBhaktivedānta’, and although he is a gṛhastha, he is
very learned, especially in English and Bengali. He is a
very qualified devotee.” Then, when Swamijī saw that I
was rendering so much service to my gurudeva, he was
attracted to me. He called me over and asked me where I
was from, what my name was and so on.

When Swamijī first came to Mathurā, I personally
requested him to take sannyāsa. He replied that when he
was initiated by Prabhupāda, he was instructed to
publish an English magazine and several books, and
around the same time he read this verse from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.88.8):



yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi

hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ

tato ’dhanaṁ tyajanty asya

svajanā duḥkha-duḥkhitam



[Śrī Kṛṣṇa said:] O King, when I favour someone, I
gradually deprive him of all his wealth. In other words
when a person, although desirous of giving up material
sense gratification, is somehow engrossed in the sense
objects present before him, he is afflicted with
distress. For such a person the removal of these objects
is itself a manifestation of My favour. When his wife,
sons and relatives find him to be an abject failure
beset with repeated misery, they reject the impoverished
man.



Swamijī said to me, “For me, the meaning of this verse
has come true. All of my business ventures failed, and
my family turned against me. They used to say, ëYou are
a mad person. You are good for nothing and have spoiled
everything.’ So I have spoiled everything, I am
penniless, and now you are telling me that I should take
sannyāsa.”


                             17
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

I used to joke with him, saying, “You desire to love
your children and your wife, but they are not
interested.” I told him at that time that he should not
endeavour any longer for these material concerns because
Kṛṣṇa and Prabhupāda desired that instead he should do
many very important things, like preach in Western
countries. A few days after that, my gurudeva also came
to Mathurā. I requested Gurudeva to persuade him to take
sannyāsa. Swamijī and my gurudeva were very intimate
friends who had lived together for some time. They were
both intellectual giants from high-class families. Then
Gurudeva called him and said, “Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and all
the boys here in the maṭha are saying that you should
take sannyāsa, and I support them. It will be very
beneficial.” He agreed, saying, “The meaning of that
verse from the Bhāgavatam has come directly upon my
head, and now I must accept sannyāsa.” When the
auspicious day for his initiation came, I personally
prepared his outer cloth for sannyāsa and showed him how
to wear it. I also prepared his daṇḍa and performed the
sannyāsa-yajña with my own hands. Kṛṣṇa dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja was also present there, and as he led the
congregational chanting of the mahā-mantra and I recited
the mantras for the yajña, my gurudeva gave Swamijī the
sannyāsa-mantra.

After that Swamijī and I spent a great deal of time
together, first in Delhi and then at the Rādhā-Dāmodara
Temple in Vṛndāvana. In those days he was mostly
translating and writing. I saw at that time how he was
niskiñcana, possessionless. He didn’t even have a decent
cādar, so I would give him mine to sit on and we would
talk about Kṛṣṇa and how to do bhajana. We would also
converse about Rūpa Gosvāmī and he would show me what he
was writing. Then at midday we would make capātīs
together — he would roll them and I would put them on
the fire. He was so qualified in every respect. He was
expert at playing the mṛdaṅga, performing kīrtana and
arcana, writing, and giving lectures with word-for-word
explanations of Sanskrit verses. He was always writing,
chanting, and thinking about spiritual things, and he
never wasted a moment.

He expressed to me his plan: “I will go to Western
countries, start a hostel, and if necessary I will
distribute eggs, meat and wine also, having full faith
that by chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, within a very
few days Western people will abandon all these bad
habits.” Due to that faith and determination, in no time
his mission was spread around the entire world. I have
never seen an ācārya do anything like this before. Even
Śaṅkarācārya took quite some time to spread his
doctrine, and that was only in India. But in a very
short time, from 1966 to 1977, he started so many
centres for the worship of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Jagannātha in Western countries, in
India, in Eastern countries — everywhere. He not only
established these centres, but he also attracted many
thousands of very good boys and made them into scholars,
brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs. As if with a magic wand he
also attracted such qualified girls, ladies and
children. He made true the prediction of Bhaktivinoda
hākura that Westerners would one day take tulasī-mālās
and mix with their Indian brothers, chanting, “Hare

                           18
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma,
Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.”

Through the years he wrote me over one hundred letters
from Western countries, describing how he was preaching
and what he was doing. On his request I shipped all of
his books to him from Delhi to America, and I also sent
him mṛdaṅgas, karatālas, deities of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and many
other items. He even wrote in one letter requesting me
to send him a milksweet named Mathurā peḍā. He was very
fond of this sweet, so I used to send it to him. And
when he first returned from America to India, I was the
first person to greet him at the airport.

There have been many preachers like Vivekānanda and
others who went to Western countries, but they could not
give what Swamijī has given there. They took only their
own theories, but Svāmījī gave what Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu Himself wanted to give to this world, the
holy name within prema-sūtra:1



nāma-prema-mālā gāṅthi’ parāila saṁsāre




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.40)



He wove a wreath of harināma and prema with which he
garlanded the entire material world.



Caitanya Mahāprabhu was mahā-vadānya, the most
munificent incarnation, and similarly, Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Sanātana Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Viśvanātha Cakravartī
hākura, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa and Bhaktivinoda hākura
were all very munificent because they distributed that
which Mahāprabhu Himself wanted to give. Prabhupāda sent
Swamijī to Western countries, knowing that he was a very
great personality and that he could give what was within
Prabhupāda’s own heart. Vivekānanda and all of the other
preachers went there and gave only these four things:
dharma (religiosity), artha (economic development), kāma
(sense gratification) and mokṣa (liberation). But they
didn’t really give even mokṣa, so they gave only three
things. Some preachers may have tried to give mokṣa
there also, but not kṛṣṇa-prema.

Because Swamijī had little time, he mostly emphasised
vaidhī-bhakti. There are so many stages of bhakti, but
ultimately bhakti means only rāgānuga-bhakti. He also
wanted to preach in Western countries that which Rūpa
Gosvāmī has given in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, and that which
has been written by ācāryas like Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
and Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, but he could not do it
at that time. He had so little time, only ten or eleven
years. So he tried to give śraddhā, then niṣṭhā, then
ruci. We should know what niṣṭhā is. We are executing

                           19
Prabandhavali.txt                                5/5/2017

śravaṇam, kīrtanam, viṣṇu-smaraṇam, pāda-sevanam,
arcanam, vandanam, dāsyam, sakhyam and ātma-nivedanam,
as well as nāma-kīrtana, sādhu-saṅga, bhāgavata-śravaṇa,
mathurā-vāsa and śrī mūrti-sevā, but we should go deeply
into all of these activities. What is the meaning of
niṣṭhā? When all anarthas are eradicated. And what are
anarthas? Those things which entangle us in worldly
intoxication. Svarūpa-bhrama (not knowing our real
form), asat-tṛṣṇā (desire for temporary things), hṛdaya-
daurbalya (weakness of heart), and nāma-aparādha,
vaiṣṇava-aparādha, sevā-aparādha and dhāma-aparādha —
all these anarthas are mentioned in Viśvanātha
Cakravartī hākura’s Mādhurya-kādambinī. When all of a
devotee’s anarthas are eradicated, then niṣṭhā comes to
him. Although we know that chanting the name of Kṛṣṇa
and hearing about Kṛṣṇa are very beneficial, we do not
possess the determination by which we can constantly
perform these activities and steadily progress in
bhakti. When one possesses such unwavering
determination, it is called niṣṭhā. “I may die, but I
cannot leave kṛṣṇa-bhakti” — this is niṣṭhā. And when we
reach the stages of ruci and āsakti, it will seem that
we simply cannot live without taking Kṛṣṇa’s name or
hearing hari-kathā.

There are two kinds of śraddhā: vaidhī and rāgānugā.
Swamijī gave only vaidhī-bhakti because at that time it
was not appropriate for him to explain rāgānuga-bhakti.
He had written something of it in his books, but because
most readers were not qualified enough to learn it at
that time, he did not explain it in detail. But by
practising vaidhī-bhakti we can eventually enter into
rāgānuga-bhakti, which arises from that śraddhā which is
full of “greed”. Caitanya Mahāprabhu descended
especially to give sva-bhakti-śriyam:



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.4)



May Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari, resplendent with the
radiance of molten gold (having adopted the splendour of
the limbs of Śrīmatī Rādhikā), forever manifest Himself
within your hearts. He has descended in the age of Kali
out of His causeless mercy to bestow upon the world that
which had not been given for a long time, the most
confidential wealth of His devotional service, the
highest mellow of amorous love.




                           20
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

The meaning of this verse is very deep. Mahāprabhu came
solely to give this, and Swamijī also came solely to
give this. But first he had to prepare the soil for the
seed, and so much time passed in doing that. He said
that if the philosophies of māyāvāda or advaitavāda were
not defeated first, then bhakti could not be
established. He came to this world, as did Prabhupāda
before him, to fulfil the mission of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, which is to bestow the parakīya-bhāva of
Vraja. They did not come to give the unnatojjvala-rasa
spoken of in this verse because that is the property of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā alone. Caitanya Mahāprabhu descended to
taste this, not to give it to others.

In this verse, the word sva means Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and
bhakti means Her prema. Having stolen the inner bhāva
and complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa Himself
descended in Kali-yuga as Śacīnandana. Why is He known
as Śacīnandana? Because He was very dear to His mother
Śacī, and His mother was very humble and merciful. Rūpa
Gosvāmī is saying in this verse that as the mother,
being so merciful, gives her breast to her child,
Caitanya Mahāprabhu has come to give prema to us. He is
Kṛṣṇa in the form of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and Rādhikā is
also so merciful, even more than Kṛṣṇa. All of Kṛṣṇa’s
mercy is embodied in Rādhikā. So here, Śacīnandana means
He who is extremely merciful. What did He give? He could
not give the mahābhāva of Rādhikā because no one can
taste the beauty of Kṛṣṇa, the sweetness of His form,
and the sweetness of His pastimes as She does.
Mahāprabhu wanted to taste only these things as She
does, so what did He want to give? Sva-bhakti-śriyam:
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is sva-bhakti, the hlādinī potency plus
the saṁvit potency. Here the word śrī means mañjarī. So
Rūpa Mañjarī, Anaṅga Mañjarī, Tulasī Mañjarī, Lavaṅga
Mañjarī, Vinoda Mañjarī, Kamala Mañjarī, Nayana Mañjarī
and all other mañjarīs are the śrī of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta it has been stated that
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the root creeper, and all the gopīs
are the flowers, leaves and buds. When the wind blows,
all of the buds and leaves will quiver. So if Kṛṣṇa and
Rādhikā meet, and Rādhikā is in a very pleasing mood,
then all of the leaves and buds are also pleased. If
Kṛṣṇa draws any pictures on Her face or anywhere else on
Her, all the mañjarīs will have those same designs on
them. This is bhakti-śriyam, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
Rūpa Gosvāmī, Prabhupāda and Swamijī all came solely to
give this: sva-bhakti-śriyam, or mañjarī-bhāva.

But they all had to first prepare the soil by
endeavouring to remove all of the weeds which are very
harmful to that creeper. I have heard that Prabhupāda
said he had come to this world solely to give rādhā-
dāsya, but to accomplish this he had to do so much that
his whole life was spent only in the preparatory work of
cutting away the jungle, because at that time there was
only māyāvāda philosophy here. Similarly, when Swamijī
went to the Western countries, he faced much opposition
from Christians. Many ācāryas went there, but their
endeavours were not fruitful and Prabhupāda was not
satisfied. But since Swamijī went, hundreds of thousands
of editions of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam have been published and
distributed around the entire world.


                           21
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

In a very short time he accomplished all of this, but he
really wanted to give mañjarī-bhāva, so we shouldn’t be
satisfied merely with what we received from him at that
time. I feel that if he were present here today, he
would be instructing us on rāgānuga-bhakti. He is
omnipotent and he will inspire everything in our hearts
as the caitya-guru. He is not far away from us; we
should know that gurudeva is always with us. We should
try to enter into the realm of this rāgānuga-bhakti, but
we should not imitate. If we imitate, all will be
ruined, so we must be careful not to behave as the
sahajiyās do concerning rāgānuga-bhakti. In Śrī Vilāpa-
kusumāñjali, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has prayed for the
same bhakti that Viśvanātha Cakravartī hākura has prayed
for in Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma. But we shouldn’t try to go
at once into that ocean of govinda-līlāmṛta — we’ll be
doomed. By thoughtfully executing vaidhī-bhakti, we will
slowly but steadily enter into the realm of rāgānuga-
bhakti. Rāgānuga-bhakti is the ultimate goal, but we
should approach it very carefully by following the
ordinary principles that Prabhupāda and Swamijī have
taught.

Just before Swamijī departed this world, he begged my
forgiveness for anything he may have said or written in
the course of his preaching that may have offended me.
For the same reason he also asked me to beg forgiveness
from his godbrothers on his behalf. He said that he had
brought many new devotees to the Gauḍīya line from
Western countries. He said that since he was unable to
give them everything in the short time he was present
here, he wanted me to give them further instruction on
bhakti and to always help them in any way I could. He
also asked me to perform the ceremony to place him into
samādhi.

I know that Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swami Mahārāja was
no ordinary devotee because, if he was, he would not
have been able to preach all around the world the way he
did in such a short period of time. I consider him my
śikṣā-guru, and he always lives in the temple of my
heart because I had such an intimate friendship with
him. I think that he is always present here with us, and
I pray to him that he will bestow mercy upon us so that
we will all enter into rāgānuga-bhakti and prema-bhakti
in this very lifetime.




Chapter Three

The Disappearance Day of Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī




Our Guru Mahārāja appeared in a family of landowners in
the famous village of Banaripara in the district of
Jessore in East Bengal. When he was born, his body was
very soft and beautiful, and because he had a golden

                           22
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

complexion, his mother and all the local ladies gave him
the nickname Jonā (meaning “glow-worm”). His actual name
was Bhīma. For approximately three or four months he
didn’t speak or cry at all, and his family was very
worried. Then one day a Muslim mendicant who came to
their home begging said to Gurudeva’s mother, “Your son
is not speaking?”

She replied, “How did you know that? If you can, please
make him speak somehow.”

The mendicant replied, “Do one thing. In the village
there are some ëuntouchables’, persons from the śūdra
class who work in the cremation grounds. They eat low-
grade rice that is left soaking overnight. Beg some of
this rice from them, feed it to your child, and then he
will speak.”

Guru Mahārāja’s mother was a very hard-working lady, who
mostly looked after their land. She would discipline her
children very strictly, and they would never go anywhere
without her permission. Everyone respected her. When she
approached one of these śūdra families and asked for
some of this rice, they said, “How can you take this? It
has been touched by us!”

She replied, “Don’t worry; just give me some of it.”
Obtaining some of this rice, she took it back to her
home and put it before the child, and at once he started
crying, “Mā! Mā!” and began speaking from that point on.

In his boyhood our gurudeva was very close to his
father, who was especially affectionate towards him. At
that time the people of East Bengal were very religious,
and there would always be readings from Bhagavad-gītā
and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam going on. Then the Partition came,
and it was as if the very heart of Bengal was torn out.
From early childhood Gurudeva would grasp his father’s
finger and accompany him to religious programmes, and if
it was dark, he would sit on his father’s shoulders.
Thus religious philosophy became his interest. There is
a Hindi proverb, honahāra viravāna ke hota cīkane pāta,
which means that when a sapling will grow to be
fruitful, its leaves are very big and beautiful. Coming
events cast their shadow, and from his childhood the
symptoms were there that he would become a great
personality.

As he grew up, he spent most of his time in the company
of a great mahātmā who had an āśrama in the village.
There he would hear readings from the Gītā, Bhāgavatam
and Vedānta. When he was at school, at a very young age
he started his own magazine, and its language was very
literary. He was also an excellent speaker, and when he
would speak in a large assembly, there would be no need
of a loudspeaker. He didn’t know as many ślokas as some
devotees, but he would give such beautiful explanations.
There is one verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11) of
which he would give an especially beautiful explanation:



vadanti tat tattva-vidas


                           23
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

tattvaṁ yaj j—ānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate



The para-tattva is bhagavat-tattva. From brahma there is
Parabrahma, from ātmā there is Paramātmā, and from Viṣṇu
there is Mahā-Viṣṇu. But for Svayam Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa there
is no necessity of the words “Param Svayam Bhagavān”,
because Kṛṣṇa is the supreme tattva, and brahma and
Paramātmā are His reflection and plenary

portion, respectively. Brahma cannot actually be called
an object, because any object must necessarily have
qualities. Brahma is the potency of an object, and can
be said to be the shelter of an object, but brahma
itself is not an object. The names brahma, Paramātmā and
Bhagavān are synonymous, but Bhagavān is to be
worshipped, not brahma, because brahma is formless.

When I first joined the maṭha, I received such special
mercy from Bhagavān that I had the opportunity to
accompany our gurudeva to many big programmes where he
would speak, and he always kept me with him. He gave my
senior godbrother Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja the
responsibility for printing and, being a very qualified
man, he has since printed many books and magazines one
after the other. In order to help with the magazine and
cooking, and to look after many services, Gurujī would
keep me with him. His style of speaking and writing was
wonderful, and it was my great fortune to hear so much
from him. I always took notes and stayed with him like
his shadow. Vāmana Mahārāja, just as now, was very quiet
and didn’t speak much, but my dear godbrother Trivikrama
Mahārāja and myself were very talkative. We were always
engaged in debating about this and that, and when Gurujī
would become tired of us, he would say, “Take this book
— the answer is there.” These days devotees don’t
discuss topics of tattva much. Instead they speak about
the type of clothing they wear and what kind of food
they eat. When two Vaiṣṇavas meet, they should discuss
tattva, and it was our great fortune to hear talks on
bhakti-tattva from very learned devotees. But these days
hardly anyone takes the time to discuss the meaning of
the scriptures.

Gurujī was so intelligent and had so much potency in
speaking that he could change yes to no and no to yes.
It was amazing; without such devotees, preaching simply
would not go on. If one of us wants to write and publish
something, we have to look in many, many books and do so
much editing, and even if five of us are working
together, we still may have difficulty writing
something. But what would Guru Mahārāja do? At the
annual Navadvīpa parikramā, five to seven thousand
devotees would come to offer praṇāma to him and he would
speak with many of them. Somehow, in the midst of all
this commotion, he would simultaneously dictate an
article for his magazine to Vāmana Mahārāja. There would
not even be any necessity to check it; at once it was
ready to go to press. It was amazing how he would never

                             24
Prabandhavali.txt                                5/5/2017

have to look in any book. When one of us is preparing to
speak something, we have to first look in so many books.
And when we listen to someone speak or when we read
something, we have to take notes in order to retain it.
But Guru Mahārāja in his whole life never took any
notes. He read so many books — his library is here in
the maṭha [in Mathurā] — but he never took any notes.
And he knew so much history; no ācārya knew more history
than him. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Prabhupāda called him a
“Vedāntic paṇḍita”.

Guru Mahārāja went from East Bengal to study at a very
old and famous college near Calcutta. Many great
scholars studied there and admission was not granted to
everyone. But due to his superior intelligence he was
awarded admission. In his very first year the dean and
professors would call him to read Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta to them. Caitanya-caritāmṛta was composed in
Bengali, but there is no Sanskrit book that can match
its highly poetic and philosophical language.



jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya – kṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’

kṛṣṇera ‘taṭasthā-śakti’, ‘bhedābheda-prakāśa’




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 20.108)



The inherent form of the jīva is that of an eternal
servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The jīva is the marginal potency
of Kṛṣṇa, and is therefore simultaneously one with and
different from Him.



The dean and professors were unable to explain this
verse. Even in our sampradāya you will find very few
devotees who can properly explain it. So our gurudeva
would have philosophical discussions with them, and in
the end he left that college, saying, “Even the
professors here understand nothing, so what will they
teach me?” At that time Gandhi had started his movement
to oppose the British government, saying, “The English
must leave India; they will not impose the salt tax.”
All over India the people revolted against the British.
So many big names like Balagangadhara Tilaka, Gorakle,
C.R. Das, P.C. Raya and Lala Laja-patarai joined the
opposition movement. It was as if the blood of India’s
youth was boiling, and at once all of India’s industry
stopped. Then the English thought, “Gandhi has so much
influence?” Our gurudeva joined as well, but when Gandhi
withdrew his movement due to violence, Gurujī along with
many others joined the revolutionary party of Subash
Candra Bose. Taking a knife and a rifle, he remained
hidden within the forests and jungles for some time. At
that time the British government issued a warrant for
his arrest. He later joined the Gauḍīya Mission, and
then ten years afterwards, the British government

                           25
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

finally came to know of his whereabouts. One day some
agents came to Māyāpura with a warrant for Gurujī’s
arrest, and they approached Prabhupāda about it.
Prabhupāda told them, “But look how he has completely
changed. He has become a sādhu, a mahātmā.” After
discussing the matter with Prabhupāda and considering
further, they withdrew the warrant.

Gurujī was a champion footballer, and he was proficient
in all subjects; he was an “all-rounder”. He was
proficient in sports, in studying, in fighting, in
managing people and in speaking sweetly. At the age of
only sixteen he was managing all the tenants on his
father’s land. He first came to the Caitanya Maṭha in
Māyāpura at that age, and desired to receive harināma
and dīkṣā from Prabhupāda. For some time he returned to
his home and went to college, but at the age of eighteen
he returned to the maṭha with his aunt. She was a very
scholarly lady, and together they would compose very
beautiful poems and essays. Once when they were
conversing in Māyāpura, Prabhupāda said, “We will go on
parikramā of the entire planet and establish one maṭha
after the other. In England, America, and all of the
holy places of India such as Haridwara, Prayāga,
Vṛndāvana, Kāśī and South India, preaching will go on.”

Then Gurujī’s aunt said, “You are seeing a very big
dream! You are like the poor man who begged a torn bag
from someone, placed it under his head and fell asleep.
While sleeping he dreamed, ëOh, I am a millionaire! I am
an emperor!’ Who will see to all of this?”

Prabhupāda replied, “Vinoda1 will see to it.”

After this Guru Mahārāja began staying in the maṭha and
did not return to his home again. He had all of the
symptoms of a great personality on his body. His form
was softer than butter, his arms extended down to his
knees, and all auspicious signs were on his hands. He
had “artist’s fingers”, very thin and long. In the
morning he would eat just a little simple rice with some
salt and then go out and work hard collecting donations
for the maṭha all day. He would collect one paisā from
each person, rather than taking a large amount from
anyone. He would go to places where there were large
crowds such as the bus and train stations, speak about
Mahāprabhu’s doctrine to people, and take just one paisā
from each person. He would keep this money locked up in
a box that had a slot on top for the coins, and the key
was left with Prabhupāda. He would do this every day
until sunset, without even eating anything else.

One time Prabhupāda was being driven along in his car in
Calcutta and he saw Vinoda resting under a tree with
that money box placed under his head as a pillow. Tears
came to his eyes and he said, “Such a beautiful young
boy from a wealthy family, only eighteen years old; and
for me, for the service of Bhagavān, he has left his
parents and is undergoing such hardships?” When Gurudeva
returned to the maṭha that night, Prabhupāda called him
and said, “Vinoda, you were sleeping on the ground at
Garimaṭa? You are undergoing so much hardship.”

Gurujī replied, “No, this hardship is a matter of great

                           26
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

happiness if only you will be satisfied with me. This is
my everything. What more could I desire? If the guru is
pleased, then Bhagavān is pleased. There is nothing
greater than this.”

Prabhupāda would call Gurujī “Tū” or “Tūi”. There was
only one other disciple for whom Prabhupāda used this
affectionate name, and that was Paramānanda Prabhu, who
was always with Prabhupāda. Gurujī was very intimate
with Prabhupāda and would sleep only near him. Even if
he went to take rest at one or two o’clock in the
morning, he would knock on the door to Prabhupāda’s
room. The other devotees would complain, but Prabhupāda
would always get up and open the door for him.

Once Guru Mahārāja was out collecting with Siddha-
svarūpa Brahmacārī, who later became Śrīla Bhakti
Śrīrūpa Siddhāntī Mahārāja. They had collected one large
bag completely full with vegetables, and another half
full. They got off the train at Howrah station, which
was about five miles from the maṭha. There was no public
transportation which covered the entire distance at that
time, and there was no money available in the maṭha for
taking a rickshaw. Gurudeva lifted up the full bag and
said, “Let’s go!” But Siddhāntī Mahārāja said, “No! You
are my older brother and my śikṣā-guru. Therefore I will
take the full bag!”

Gurujī replied, “No, you are a small boy, my younger
brother. I will take it!” Snatching it back and forth
from one another, finally Gurujī convinced Siddhāntī
Mahārāja and carried that weight all the way to the
maṭha. This is how he did guru-sevā. Whenever any
necessity arose, Prabhupāda would say, “Where is
Vinoda?”

After Guru Mahārāja’s father passed away, his mother was
crying for her son Vinoda day and night, even though she
had three other sons in the house. One was a high school
headmaster who later also became Prabhupāda’s disciple
and the ācārya of the Gauḍīya Mission, Śrīla Audulomī
Mahārāja. He was fluent in English, and was a very
talented speaker and writer. Vinoda was the youngest of
the brothers. His mother sent a letter to Prabhupāda
saying, “Please send Vinoda for some time to attend to
some work here on our land, and when it is completed, he
will return to you.” There were some Muslim tenants who
had refused to pay their rent for about five years, so
Prabhupāda sent him there. Amongst the tenants there was
one guṇḍā (hooligan) who was a very large man and the
worst of them all. Gurujī ordered one of his family’s
hired workers to apprehend this man and bring him to the
house. The man was beaten three or four times, and after
this all the tenants began paying their rent.

On Prabhupāda’s land in Māyāpura also there were Muslims
who were not paying their rent. Prabhupāda was thinking
to sell the land, but Gurujī pleaded with him to allow
him to try and procure the rent money from these people.
Prabhupāda said, “What will you do? You are only a boy
of eighteen years.” Eventually Prabhupāda agreed, and
Gurujī had the ringleader apprehended, tied to a
jackfruit tree and beaten. Immediately all the tenants
there became frightened and began paying their rent, and

                           27
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

Gurujī offered that money as puṣpāñjali at the feet of
Prabhupāda. But Gurujī would care for those people whom
he respected more than he would for his own life.
Everyone respected him like a father.

At the end of her life, Guru Mahārāja’s mother sent
another letter to Prabhupāda saying, “Please send my
dear son Vinoda home for a little while.” He called
Vinoda and told him, “Your mother is dying; you must go
to her immediately.” Instead of going, Gurujī went and
hid somewhere in the maṭha for a whole day and night.
When Prabhupāda came to know of it, he sent for Gurujī
and told him, “Your mother is very ill. You should go to
her. I instructed you to go, so why haven’t you gone?”

Guru Mahārāja replied, “Prabhu, after so many births I
have attained the shelter of your feet. By your mercy, I
have finally come to bhagavad-bhakti after so many
births. Suppose I go to my mother, and while she is
taking her last breath she places her hand on my head
and says to me, ëI am going now. Who will look after our
property? You must do it.’ What will I do then? Having
left your lotus feet, I will again be trapped in māyā.”
Falling at Prabhupāda’s feet, he began crying, and
Prabhupāda bestowed plentiful blessings upon him. Until
one’s determination is like this, he does not have the
qualification to leave his home and family. One must
have the understanding of a madhyama-adhikārī that the
bodily relations of this material world are meaningless.
Otherwise, even without being requested, one will
automatically return to his home and family. And if he
does continue to stay in the maṭha, it will only be for
procuring money, women and prestige. He will have only
gone in a circle and will end up back where he started.
Therefore one cannot leave his home and family until he
has this qualification.

There was a disciple of Prabhupāda named Rāma-govinda
Vidyāratna, who was a scholar of Vedānta, the Bhāgavatam
and all the scriptures. He was a very good devotee and
later became Naimi Mahārāja. Once, he desired to have
darśana of Prabhupāda’s guru, Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja, and Gurujī also wanted to go; so taking
Prabhupāda’s permission, they went. At that time, to
avoid the trouble that ordinary people were giving him,
Bābājī Mahārāja had locked himself in a latrine for
about a week and was just chanting, “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Kṛṣṇa...” The news reached the district magistrate and
the police superintendent, and at once they all came
running there. Seeing that the door was locked from
inside, they approached with folded hands and said,
“Bābājī Mahārāja, we will construct you a very nice hut
for bhajana.”

He replied, “No, this is very nice.”

“Why?”

“Because the stench of the lust of materialistic people
does not come here. I prefer the stench of stool to
that.”

“Alright, Mahārāja, we will supply you with one boy to
keep those people away from you.” Day and night they

                           28
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

were trying to persuade him to come out, but he would
only say, “For me, this is Vaikuṇṭha.” So many times
they asked him to please open the door, but time and
again he would reply, “I am not well; I am unable to do
it.” He would not open the door for those people, and he
just continued chanting “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa...” Then Gurujī approached the door and said,
“Bābājī Mahārāja, we are

disciples of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī.” Hearing the
name of Prabhupāda, Bābājī Mahārāja at once stood up.
Opening the door, he let them in and again locked the
door. The two boys offered praṇāma and, grasping the
feet of Bābājī Mahārāja, Gurujī said, “Please give us
your blessings.” Then Bābājī Mahārāja told him, “I will
take all of your hardships and impediments away so you
can always perform bhajana freely — this is my
blessing.” Later on, Gurujī would say on many occasions
that although difficulties may have come to him from
time to time, by the mercy of Bābājī Mahārāja, nothing
could ever disturb him.




Chapter Four

The Disappearance Day of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda




Today is the anniversary of the day of separation from
nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. It
is the day of pañcamī, and he also appeared on pañcamī.
He took birth in the home of Bhaktivinoda hākura, who is
an eternal associate of both Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Just as the sage Bhagīratha brought the
Gaṅgā to this world, Bhaktivinoda hākura was the great
personality who brought the current of bhakti to this
world in the modern era. When the so-called gosvāmīs
were making a business out of bhakti while engaging in
varieties of worldly enjoyment, when in the name of
Mahāprabhu so many kinds of bogus philosophies were
prevalent, such as sakhī-bekī, smārta-jāti, sahajiyā,
etc. — at that time Śrīla Bhaktivinoda hākura came.
After that, Prabhupāda appeared in the form of his son,
Bimalā Prasāda. If these two great personalities had not
appeared, then śuddha-bhakti would not exist in the
world today. And from the time that they disappeared,
society began reverting back to its previous condition.
At first there were thirteen known sahajiyā cults, then
our Guru Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī,
counted thirty-nine. And how many there are now, no one
knows.

I am also seeing how things are gradually changing. We
saw how renounced the devotees were before. For
instance, we never used to see socks on the feet of any
Vaiṣṇava, and we never saw devotees wearing such

                           29
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

sweaters and cādaras as we do now. They only wore the
bare necessities of clothing and a cheap blanket, even
as they attended maṅgala-ārati in the morning cold. It
is only after the disappearance of Prabhupāda that
devotees can be seen to wear these other things. They
would live with such simplicity, eating only śāk, rice
and a thin dahl, but in comparison to them, just look at
the way we are living! And I speak for myself also —
their knowledge, their renunciation and their spiritual
conception were of such a high standard that in
comparison to them we are so inferior.

The period between Viśvanātha Cakravartī hākura and
Bhaktivinoda hākura was an age of darkness for Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism. Living at that time were some real Vaiṣṇavas
who performed real bhajana, but mostly, just as we still
see sometimes today, the so-called Vaiṣṇavas only
performed rituals for wages. When someone would die,
people would call the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava bābājīs, who
would come and chant some ceremonial kīrtana and perform
other rituals for wages. And there was so much
misconduct in their behaviour. Seeing this, Bhaktivinoda
hākura thought, “These people are Vaiṣṇavas? The
conception of Mahāprabhu has completely vanished. What
can be done?” He was very worried. Bhaktivinoda hākura
endeavoured to his utmost, but changes did not come
about in his lifetime to the degree that he would have
liked. He went from town to town and village to village
inaugurating the nāma-haṭṭa. In each village he would
assemble four or five of the religious men, form a
committee and hold programmes for harināma-kīrtana on
Sundays. Gradually it spread from one village to the
next, but overall his preaching was limited to
Navadvīpa, Calcutta and the rest of Bengal.

He published the magazine Sajjana-toṣaṇī, and through
its medium he gradually published Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta and other books in instalments. He made a
circle of devotees, and also revealed Navadvīpa-dhāma
through his writings, although the scholars of society
and the sahajiyās didn’t accept his ideology. Then
Prabhupāda appeared in Purī. Because Bhaktivinoda hākura
was a district magistrate, he would be transferred here
and there, but he would always keep Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu and Caitanya-caritāmṛta with him and explain them
to his son. Prabhupāda received so much instruction from
him, but we should understand that Prabhupāda is an
eternally liberated soul; there was no one in the world
like him. Without being educated in school or college he
learned all subjects very quickly and became a great
scholar in Sanskrit. His English was so high that even
professors of English could not understand it. I have
been told by some learned Western devotees that when
reading his Brahma-saṁhitā, they must repeatedly consult
the dictionary. And his Bengali was also of such a high
standard that even eminent scholars found it difficult
to follow. He said that spiritual language should be
like that; it shouldn’t be so simple to understand. As
one progresses spiritually by remaining in the company
of Vaiṣṇavas, he will be able to understand spiritual
vernacular.

At the age of seven or eight, Prabhupāda began
worshipping a deity of Kūrmadeva, and Bhaktivinoda

                           30
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

hākura gave him the mahā-mantra and other mantras for
his pūjā. At the age of eighteen, all of the scholars of
astronomy in Bengal gave him the title “Sarasvatī”.
After that he attended college but quarrelled with the
professors, saying, “Will I learn from you, or teach
you?” When he abandoned his studies, Bhaktivinoda hākura
and other family members became concerned, so they took
him to Purī where he began studying at Satāsana Āśrama,
which is where Svarūpa Dāmodara and Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī had lived. Vaiṣṇavas used to regularly meet
there, and now Śrīla Siddhāntī Mahārāja has a maṭha at
that very place. There Prabhupāda began giving readings
from Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Present there were some
bābājīs who considered themselves rasika, and when they
heard Prabhupāda’s explanations, they became inimical to
him. Seeing this, Bhaktivinoda hākura took him away from
there and had him begin teaching the son of the king of
Tripura.

Prabhupāda had a great library of Vaiṣṇava literature,
and having read through it thoroughly, he began teaching
the son of the king in such a way that the boy accepted
a chanting mālā and began wearing tilaka. He became
detached from the world, and gradually, hearing hari-
kathā became his sole interest. Seeing this, the queen
became very annoyed and said to the king, “This boy will
become useless! Then, after your demise, what will
happen? Who will make offerings to our departed souls?
He will become a renunciate, and everything will be
ruined! Quickly get rid of this teacher. Give him four
hundred rupees to go — we don’t need money, we need a
son!” That was approximately one hundred years ago, so
you can imagine how much four hundred rupees was worth
then. The queen put so much pressure on her husband that
in the end he approached Prabhupāda and very humbly
said, “It is a matter of great unhappiness that our
family members are not in favour of you; they are afraid
that the boy will take up bhakti and become a
renunciate. I consider that it has been our great good
fortune to have met a person like you and had our son
educated by you, but the others don’t understand.” The
king approached Bhaktivinoda hākura and offered the
money to him, but without accepting it they left there.

Then Bhaktivinoda hākura started a homeopathic shop.
When the shop was unsuccessful, he thought, “I was not
made to run a shop anyway,” and he went and purchased
some land in Māyāpura. After locating the birthplace of
Mahāprabhu, he installed deities there of Gaura,
Viṣṇupriyā and Lakṣmīpriyā, as well as small Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
mūrtis. After Bhaktivinoda hākura’s disappearance,
Prabhupāda was determined to follow the Navadvīpa-dhāma
parikramā that his father had written, and to attract
people he invited great kīrtana performers to attend. He
set up a large tent, thousands of people came for the
parikramā, and there the kathā of śuddha-bhagavad-bhakti
commenced.

Gradually, qualified youths of only sixteen, seventeen
and eighteen years, whose hearts were soft and pure,
came forward, and Prabhupāda made them into brahmacārīs
and sannyāsīs. With great ease he was able to train
them, but those who were over fifty years old, like
parrots could not be taught anything new. Then devotees

                           31
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

like our Guru Mahārāja, Bon Mahārāja, Bhakti Pradīpa
Tīrtha Mahārāja, Bhakti Vilāsa Tīrtha Mahārāja, Araṇya
Mahārāja and Narahari Prabhu came. In the beginning
there in Māyāpura, Narahari Prabhu would offer ārati
while Prabhupāda played the hand-held gong, and
gradually the preaching started. The convention of
tridaṇḍi-sannyāsa was established, and the result is
that today the name and conception of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu are being vigorously preached. Within eleven
years, from 1926—37, preaching was spread everywhere,
but before that, so much time was spent in merely
setting the foundation. Prabhupāda published many
magazines — daily, weekly, monthly — in the Sanskrit,
Bengali, Hindi, Orissan, English and Assamese languages,
and very easily we have all inherited the fruit of his
endeavour. He established the Gauḍīya line very strictly
with great endeavour, and there were so many
difficulties in his preaching campaign that we cannot
even imagine them. There was so much opposition to
Prabhupāda’s preaching at that time that his disciples
were not even allowed to enter the mandiras in Vṛndāvana
or Navadvīpa.

Prabhupāda began culturing the creeper of devotion by
cutting off all of the unnecessary branches and sub-
branches. How? First of all he revised the guru-
paramparā. He said that we are of Mahāprabhu’s line, and
he removed the names of those who were not fully
perfected. After establishing the names of Brahmā,
Nārada and Vyāsa, he went straight to Madhva. Prabhupāda
accepted the names of those from whom the people of this
world would get the most benefit, and mostly they were
brahmacārīs. For the most part he didn’t accept the
names of those who had been gṛhasthas for a long time.
After Madhva, he recognised some special personalities,
and then he went to the name of Mādhavendra Purī.
Everyone accepts him, and then from him there is Ṝśvara
Purī, Svarūpa Dāmodara, the Six Gosvāmīs, and then
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī. At this point some had
divided into the lines of Nityānanda Prabhu, Advaita
Ācārya, Gadādhara Paṇḍita, Vakreśvara Paṇḍita, Lokanātha
Gosvāmī and others, but Prabhupāda said, “We accept in
our line those who are fully perfected souls, who know
the correct siddhānta and who are rasika, wherever they
are.” In this way all of the various lines were
represented in our paramparā in one place or another.

There are so many lines of disciplic succession, but
Prabhupāda said that we will recognise the guru-
paramparā, not the disciplic succession. The guru-
paramparā is composed solely of those who were
bhāgavata-gurus, even if they made no disciples and
there is therefore no direct

disciplic line coming from them. Some of them may not
have initiated any disciples at all, but still they are
jagad-gurus. In this way, with all-pervading vision he
collected all the mahājanas and made what is known as
the bhāgavata-paramparā or guru-paramparā.

After the departure of Viśvanātha Cakravartī hākura, so
many familial disciplic lines arose, but Prabhupāda
ignored them and gave recognition to Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, and then Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī. He

                           32
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

accepted only those in whom he detected the real
spiritual siddhānta. Simply receiving the mantra in
one’s ear and wearing a dhotī or other cloth given by
the guru does not qualify one as the guru’s successor.
Bhaktivinoda hākura did not receive any mantra from
Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, so how was he his
disciple? He was a disciple of his conception: his

feelings towards Kṛṣṇa, his conception of rasa and his
conception of tattva. This is a disciple. Most people
can’t understand this, but being able to see with such
insight, Prabhupāda declared this to be our line. Gaura-
kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja was also not an initiated
disciple of Bhaktivinoda hākura, but he embraced all of
Bhaktivinoda hākura’s sentiments and conceptions, and
due to this his name appears next in the succession. At
this point, all of the bābājīs said, “Whose disciple is
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī? Who gave him sannyāsa? Why
doesn’t he wear the same cloth as Sanātana Gosvāmī did?
In our sampradāya, after Nityānanda Prabhu and Svarūpa
Dāmodara, everyone wore white cloth, but we see that he
wears saffron cloth and has accepted a daṇḍa. How can he
do this?” But what relation does wearing either orange
or white cloth have with bhakti? Is there any relation?



kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya



yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei ‘guru’ haya




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.128)



Whether one is a brāhmaṇa, a sannyāsī or a sūdra, if he
knows kṛṣṇa-tattva, then he is a guru, so what to speak
of being a Vaiṣṇava? Prabhupāda was thinking, “We are
not qualified to accept the dress that was worn by such
great personalities as Rūpa, Sanātana, Jīva and
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja. We will remain in the ordinary dress
of sannyāsīs and will not accept the dress of
paramahaṁsa-bābājīs. Remaining within the varṇāśrama
system as brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs, we will keep the
ideal of that paramahaṁsa dress above our heads.
Otherwise, if we accept that dress and commit sinful
activities, it will be aparādha at the feet of Rūpa and
Sanātana.” Some bābājīs criticised him for training
brahmacārīs and giving them the sacred thread, but our
Guru Mahārāja said that those bābājīs were all fools,
like animals. They wore paramahaṁsa dress and gave the
elevated gopī-mantra to anyone and everyone who came,
yet Prabhupāda was only training brahmacārīs and giving
them instructions on how to control the senses — so
which is correct? First Prabhupāda wanted us to
understand what is siddhānta, i.e. jīva-tattva, māyā-
tattva and bhagavat-tattva, and how to avoid māyā in the
forms of kanaka (wealth), kāminī (women) and pratiṣṭhā

                           33
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

(prestige) — these are the beginning instructions. Gopī-
bhāva is very elevated; first we must understand that “I
am kṛṣṇa-dāsa” and begin taking harināma. But these
bābājīs immediately give their conception of gopī-bhāva
to whoever approaches them; then they all chant “I am a
gopī, I am a gopī” and in this way create a disturbance
in society.

Every morning in our maṭha we sing the song in which
Prabhupāda established the bhāgavata-paramparā: kṛṣṇa
haite catur-mukha... In his composing of this song, he
accepted all of the great, perfected personalities from
different lines and declared, “This is the line of
Gaura.” If Prabhupāda had not come, then today would the
name of Mahāprabhu and talks from Bhagavad-gītā and
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam be found anywhere? Here in Mathurā, in
Vraja and everywhere else, gaura-kīrtana and hari-kathā
are still going on and have not vanished. Therefore the
world will forever remain indebted to Prabhupāda for his
preaching. He never approached wealthy people, but he
would take one paisā from each person he met. And our
Guru Mahārāja did the same. Although he was from a
wealthy family, he would take a wooden box with a slot
in it into the market and also onto the trains, trams
and buses. He would speak with people from all classes,
and in this way the preaching spread in all directions.
We should also engage in such a pure form of preaching,
and not just remain idle after hearing this. As if
giving an injection, you should all encourage others to
start taking harināma and hearing this conception,
whether you are a man or lady, married or unmarried. And
don’t think that because one is not educated he cannot
do it. Did Haridāsa hākura have any college degree? Did
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and others? But their activities
were first class, and their conceptions were extremely
high.

We are regularly hearing tattva from scriptures such as
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, but how will
others also get the opportunity to hear it? After
hearing it we should take it to many other people, and
this is the duty of each and every one of us. With great
love we should take harināma and encourage others to
chant it. We should hear siddhānta ourselves and then
help others to understand it; that will give Prabhupāda
great pleasure. To the very end of his life Prabhupāda
said, “We are mere labourers; we are the peons of
bhagavat-kathā.” He never made himself a permanent
living situation in an opulent temple, but always kept
moving. These days we do things a little differently,
but we should always try to follow not only Prabhupāda’s
philosophical conception but the ideal he showed through
his own behaviour as well.

These ideas serve as the very foundation of bhakti, and
if this foundation is not established, then we will fall
from hearing the higher levels of kathā. For instance,
Bhaktivinoda hākura has written a song entitled
Vibhāvarī Śeṣa, which includes lines such as:



yāmuna-jīvana, keli-parāyaṇa,


                           34
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

mānasa-candra-cakora

nāma-sudhā-rasa, gāo kṛṣṇa-yaśa,

rākho vacana mana mora



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the life of the Yamunā, He is always
engaged in amorous pastimes and He is the moon of the
gopīs’ hearts. Sing the glories of He whose name is pure
rasa – O mind, always remember these words.



In our maṭha we sing this every day, and there is
certainly some benefit in it, but do we understand the
complete bhāva contained within it? Nothing remains
outside these lines — not the rāsa-līlā, not the
Bhramara-gīta, not the Veṇu-gīta, nothing. Everything is
there, and all of the previous lines of this song are
similarly saturated with both rasa and tattva. Phula-
śara-yojaka kāma — what is the meaning? The complete
kāma-gāyatrī has come here. Śara means an arrow, an
arrow of kāma (desire) which Kṛṣṇa places on His bow.
How many of these arrows does Kṛṣṇa have? Five: His
sidelong glances and His eyebrows, cheeks, nose and
smile. So tell me, is there anything remaining outside
these lines?

Helping the people of the world to understand these
topics is the real task of the guru-paramparā — those
who are conversant with rasa, the dīkṣā- and śikṣā-
gurus. If we examine one line of this song after
another, then for so many days so many lectures could be
given, and our hearts would become full of rasa and
divine bliss upon hearing their full meaning. So much
bhāva has been put into each word by Bhaktivinoda
hākura, and it is the same with the compositions of
Narottama hākura and Viśvanātha Cakravartī hākura. To
understand what our ācāryas have given, great
intelligence and bhāva are required. And if we have such
a bhāva in our hearts by which we can understand the
poetry and the special characteristics of ācāryas like
Prabhupāda, then wherever we may go, it will always
remain with us.

In explaining the line paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtanam from the first verse of Mahāprabhu’s
Śikṣāṣṭaka, Prabhupāda wrote that this is the Gauḍīya
Maṭha’s mode of worship. There are three stages: the
beginning stage of sādhana, the intermediate stage of
bhāva, and the final attainment produced by that bhāva,
which is called prema. Sādhana is that practice by which
śuddha-sattva-bhāva arises, and if it does not arise,
what one is practising cannot be called sādhana. We can
all examine ourselves and see if we are practising the
sādhana that makes bhāva arise or not. Are the symptoms
there, or not? We may not even have the proper aim in
our sādhana. If someone is striking a match, what is his
aim? To obtain a flame; and if after striking one match
a flame is not obtained, then he will take another match
and try again. Our endeavour to reach the sādhya (final
attainment) through the practice of sādhana is like

                           35
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

that. Kṣud-anuvṛtti (spiritual “hunger”), tuṣṭi
(satisfaction) and puṣṭi (strength) — these three things
should appear, and if they don’t, then we are not really
practising sādhana and cannot be called real sādhakas.
Whatever we do should be done with this vision: “By
performing this activity, bhāva for Kṛṣṇa will arise.”
Is the match producing a flame or not? If we see that
our sādhana is producing attachment for material results
such as pratiṣṭhā, then we are moving in the wrong
direction. Therefore we should understand this point
well: the sole aim of kīrtana is to make bhāva arise.

Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam: in our practice of nāma-
saṅkīrtana, have our minds become purified or not? Are
our minds going towards wealth, material enjoyment and
prestige? Do we consider material enjoyment to be
poisonous or favourable to us? Material enjoyment is
poison. Haridāsa hākura was taking harināma in a
solitary place when a very beautiful woman approached
him and said, “Prabhu, you will no longer have to cook
for yourself. You won’t have to fetch water, and I will
also serve your tulasī plant. You can just chant
harināma all day and I will perform all of your tasks.
And if you become fatigued, I will massage your feet.”
But did Haridāsa hākura accept her?

All types of material enjoyment should be understood to
be poison, whether one is a man or a woman. If we
consider things like luxurious food and accommodation to
be favourable to us, then the mirror of the mind will
not be cleansed and the reflection of one’s own
spiritual form will not be visible. The mirror should be
made pure; there should be no dust or anything on it. We
should be able to see what is our illusory body, what is
our spiritual body and what all of our faults are; but
it is our great misfortune that instead we only see
others’ faults. The first type of contamination
affecting our minds is thinking that we are the material
body. We are eternal servants of Kṛṣṇa, but the most
prevalent dust on the mirror of the mind is thinking
that we are the material body. Endeavouring for the
happiness of the body is dust on the mirror, or
contamination on our minds.

There are so many anarthas: svarūpa-bhrama (bewilderment
concerning one’s actual form and nature), asat-tṛṣṇā
(desire for temporary things), hṛdaya-daurbalya
(weakness of heart) and aparādha (offences). Besides
these, described in Viśvanātha Cakravartī hākura’s
Mādhurya-kādambinī, are utsāhamayī (false confidence),
ghanataralā (sporadic endeavour), vyūḍha-vikalpā
(indecision), viṣaya-saṅgarā (combat with the senses),
niyamākṣamā (inability to uphold vows) and taraṅga-
raṅgiṇī (delighting in the material facilities produced
by devotion).

Then there are four types of aparādha: duṣkṛtottha
(arising from previous sins), sukṛtottha (arising from
previous piety), aparādhottha (arising from offences in
chanting) and bhaktyuttha (arising from imperfect
service). When all of these are eradicated, then our
real selves, the ātmā, will reflect in the mirror of the
mind; but for now our vision is distorted. We consider
the pain and happiness of the material body to be our

                           36
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

own, and our worldly relations and worldly loss and gain
to be related to our very selves. Bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-
nirvāpaṇaṁ: this is the forest fire of material
existence in which we are time and again taking birth.

When the mirror of the mind is purified, then this great
fire will be extinguished and we will progress along the
path of sādhana for uttama-bhakti, that devotion which
is free from any tendencies towards karma or jñāna. That
devotion will be kleśa-ghnī, that which burns away so
many types of difficulties. It will not happen all at
once, but gradually. First there is śraddhā, then
niṣṭhā, and then we will move towards ruci and āsakti
when our anarthas will have been mostly eradicated.
However, those anarthas may still exist in root form.
One may shave his head, but has even one hair completely
disappeared? Its roots are still there, and hair will
again appear after a couple of days. In the same way,
when we have reached the stage of āsakti, only the roots
of anarthas will remain; externally they will not be
visible. If a favourable environment is given to them —
that is, if we keep bad company or offend a Vaiṣṇava —
then they will reappear. But upon reaching the stage of
bhāva, they will be finished forever.

Then there is śubhadā, which is of many varieties. In
the worldly sense, śubha means having wealth, good
progeny, position, fame and knowledge, and keeping the
body healthy so that the effects of old age will not
come prematurely. But what is real śubha? Having ruci
for the name and līlā-kathā of Bhagavān and for the
limbs of bhagavad-bhajana-sādhana. Having eagerness for
these things is śubha, and that śubha is the lotus
flower described by the words śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-
vitaraṇam. If the rays of the moon fall upon it, it will
bloom purely and without blemishes. How will such pure
bhakti arise in the heart? The śakti of harināma is like
the rays of the moon which make the lotus of the heart
gradually bloom, taking it through the stages of niṣṭhā,
ruci, āsakti and bhāva. When it fully blossoms, that is
the stage of prema. But for the śakti of harināma to act
in this way, our interest must be drawn away from
material life. In the same way as two swords will not
remain together in one scabbard, māyā and bhakti will
not remain together in one’s heart.

Vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam: nāma-saṅkīrtana is the very life of
vidyā-vadhū. Vidyā is that by which we can know jīva-
tattva, māyā-tattva, and ultimately Kṛṣṇa; it does not
mean knowledge of mundane science or how to make money.
Real vidyā is bhakti and ultimately assumes the form of
the vadhū, or consort, of Kṛṣṇa. First there is sādhana-
bhakti, then bhāva-bhakti, and finally prema-bhakti.
After entering prema-bhakti, one’s devotion develops
through the stages of sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga,
anurāga, bhāva and finally mahābhāva. The embodiment of
mahābhāva is Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the vadhū, or
consort, of Kṛṣṇa. Over and above the sandhinī-śakti,
the saṁvit- and hlādinī-śaktis fully manifest as rādhā-
bhāva. This is vidyā-vadhū, and if even one ray of this
transcendental potency enters into our hearts, it is
called bhāva.

Ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padam: if we are chanting

                           37
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

harināma with this bhāva, then with every step we will
experience increasing ānanda, divine joy. In the mahā-
mantra, there is kṛṣṇa-nāma and also Hare, which means
She who attracts Kṛṣṇa away to the kuñja, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. This bhāva is so deep that it has no end, and
this is the nāma, so saturated with rasa, that Caitanya
Mahāprabhu brought to this world. When we chant the
mahā-mantra with this bhāva, then every step will
submerge us deeper into the ocean of divine bliss.
Pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanam — what is pūrṇāmṛta, the complete
nectar? Prema, and one will perpetually relish it.
Absorbed in chanting the name in this way, our ācāryas
such as Jayadeva Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī and
Bhaktivinoda hākura could envision divine pastimes and
compose such nectarean literatures. And sarvātma-
snapanam — one will never desire to resurface from that
ocean of nectar where there is not even a trace of māyā,
meaning that they have entered into svarūpa-siddhi. This
is the explanation of the first verse of Mahāprabhu’s
Śikṣāṣṭaka given by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda, whose return to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
pastimes we are commemorating on this day.




Chapter Five

The Disappearance Day of Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja




We cannot touch Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja’s renounced lifestyle and high standard of
bhajana, but we can at least accept and follow whatever
lower principles that he established for us and
practised in his own life. After making sufficient
spiritual progress, we may be able to accept the higher
things, but we should not desire to follow them in our
present condition. Who can possibly follow his extreme
renunciation, such as eating the clay of the Yamunā and
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and remaining completely dependent on
Bhagavān? He felt that if he lived in a mandira many
people would come and disrupt his bhajana, so instead he
lived in a latrine. People would come seeking his
blessings for the purpose of attaining some material
benefit, but he considered the stench of the latrine to
be preferable to the stench of those people’s words. For
us this is impossible, even for one minute. Therefore a
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī will not easily be able to understand
the life of this great uttama-bhāgavata Vaiṣṇava. The
higher things have been prohibited for us, but we should
accept from his life whatever will be favourable for
progress in the madhyama-adhikārī stage.

As long as we have not attained the mercy of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Nityānanda Prabhu and Navadvīpa-
dhāma, we will not be able to enter into Vraja.
Therefore most of our previous ācāryas who were
performing bhajana in Vṛndāvana left there and went to

                           38
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

Navadvīpa to attain prema. Only after submerging
themselves in the Gaṅgā of Mahāprabhu’s prema in
Navadvīpa did they return to Vṛndāvana to drown in the
ocean of kṛṣṇa-prema. First they performed the bhajana
of Gauracandra, and from that what did they attain? The
prema of the amorous pastimes of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Therefore, in the beginning Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja performed bhajana in Vṛndāvana at Sūrya-kuṇḍa,
Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Nandagrāma, Varṣāṇā and many other places;
but in his heart came the feeling that, “The type of
prema that I desire is not being attained here.” He was
performing kīrtana with great prema, calling out “Rādhā,
Rādhā! Where have You gone? Protect my life because I
will die without You! Rādhā, Rādhā!” Although he cried
out with extreme vipralambha-bhāva, he felt that his
yearning was not being fully satisfied, so he left
Vṛndāvana and went to Navadvīpa. There, to avoid having
to come in contact with worldly people, he lived in a
latrine. He was such a mahātmā that he didn’t even
construct himself a hut.

Once, the aristocratic landholder of Kasima Bazar was
organising a conference of all the prominent Vaiṣṇavas,
and he approached Bābājī Mahārāja to request him to
preside over this conference. He said, “Bābājī Mahārāja,
I am organising a conference of Vaiṣṇavas, and everyone
desires that you be the president of this assembly.
Being merciful, please give sukṛti to us by accepting
this entreaty, and I will take you there and bring you
back in my own car.”

Bābājī Mahārāja asked him, “For what purpose are you
organising this conference? What is the necessity of
doing it?”

The man replied, “It is for the preaching of vaiṣṇava-
dharma, so people will hear talks describing Bhagavān
and be inspired to take up bhajana.”

Then Bābājī Mahārāja said, “Alright, then you do one
thing: first you do bhajana and forget about others.
Leave your home, wife and children, and come to me. I
will furnish you with a pair of kaupīnas and then you do
bhajana. First make your own life meaningful, and then
worry about others. Otherwise your conference will only
be for your own self-aggrandisement, and there will be
no benefit in it for others anyway. First you should
come to me and do bhajana for some time; then you should
organise your conference.” Hearing this strong answer
from Bābājī Mahārāja, the man was rendered speechless
and went away.

Another time, one man went to Bābājī Mahārāja and said,
“Bābājī Mahārāja, please be merciful to me! Please be
merciful to me!” Again and again he said it. Bābājī
Mahārāja became a little annoyed and said, “You want
mercy? Then here — take mercy!” and he handed the man a
pair of kaupīnas. What is the purport of giving the man
a pair of kaupīnas? When a guru gives sannyāsa to
someone, what does he give him? A pair of kaupīnas and
the mantra. Then that person will at once become
renounced, leave all worldly attachments and fully apply
his body, mind and words to the service of Kṛṣṇa. If the
guru gives this to someone, what greater mercy could

                           39
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

there be? “Here — take mercy!” Hearing this from Bābājī
Mahārāja, that man became frightened, ran away and never
returned.

On another occasion a young boy from a wealthy family
ran away from home and came to Bābājī Mahārāja. He said
to Bābājī Mahārāja, “I want to stay with you and just do
bhajana.” Bābājī Mahārāja did not reply, so the boy
began staying with him. He would bring water for Bābājī
Mahārāja and do other services for him also, and he
began telling the people, “I am a disciple of Bābājī
Mahārāja.” But in reality Bābājī Mahārāja had no
disciples other than Prabhupāda. This boy stayed with
Bābājī Mahārāja for some time but didn’t attain what he
expected, so he thought, “I should return to material
life.” Many people go to live in a maṭha, stay for one
or two months, and then return to material life, get
married and become busy in household duties. Some men
leave renounced life even after ten or twenty years, but
only because they desired to attain the same things as
worldly people: kanaka (wealth), kāminī (women) and
pratiṣṭhā (prestige). They apparently leave their homes
to engage in bhajana, but they are really only
interested in material gain.

Feeling that he had attained nothing by staying with
Bābājī Mahārāja, the boy left and after about two weeks
returned to Bābājī Mahārāja with a beautiful young girl
from a wealthy family whom he had married. He offered
praṇāma to Bābājī Mahārāja and said, “Bābājī Mahārāja, I
have entered the saṁsāra, the material world.
Bhaktivinoda hākura has written in his Gītāvalī:
ëkṛṣṇera saṁsāra kara chāḍi’ anācāra — we should give up
our offences and perform bhajana as family men.’
Therefore I have collected a kṛṣṇa-dāsī. Please be
merciful to her and to me also so we can engage in
bhajana and have a successful material life as well.”

Bābājī Mahārāja replied, “You have done so well! I am so
pleased! You have collected one kṛṣṇa-dāsī? Then you
should do one thing: you should offer pūjā to this
kṛṣṇa-dāsī. Every day you should cook an offering for
her and offer her praṇāma and some flowers saying, ëYou
are a kṛṣṇa-dāsī and very dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.’ But
beware: don’t try to enjoy her, otherwise everything
will be destroyed for you and you will descend into
hell! Beware — don’t try to enjoy her!”

Hearing this, the boy was astonished and was rendered
speechless. Frightened, he called his “kṛṣṇa-dāsī” and
quickly left. Was deceiving Bābājī Mahārāja an easy
thing? It was not possible to deceive him.

Bābājī Mahārāja vowed that he would never accept any
disciples, but it was Prabhupāda’s resolution that, “If
I accept a guru, it will be him only.” Prabhupāda wrote
in his Gauḍīya Patrikā, “At that time I was very proud.
I was thinking that there was no scholar equal to me,
that there was no tattva-jñānī equal to me, no speaker
equal to me and no philosopher equal to me. This
paramahaṁsa Vaiṣṇava, Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja,
understood this; so he ignored my requests for
initiation. Three or four times he told me that he would
not accept disciples. He said, ëWhat? You are the son of

                           40
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

Bhaktivinoda hākura! You took birth in such a high
family that you are worshipful to me! You are such a big
scholar, your appearance is so beautiful and you possess
all good qualities; so what is the necessity of you
becoming my disciple?’ In this way he pulverised my
pride. People said that he was illiterate, but he
possessed all real knowledge and was a jagad-guru.”

Three or four times Bābājī Mahārāja ignored him, but
Prabhupāda had vowed that he would accept initiation
only from Bābājī Mahārāja. In the end he was performing
severe austerities to attain Bābājī Mahārāja as his
guru, and seeing that his son’s face was withered as if
he would die, Bhaktivinoda hākura requested Bābājī
Mahārāja, “Please be kind to him.” After this, Bābājī
Mahārāja finally accepted Prabhupāda as his only
disciple.

Bhaktivinoda hākura’s āśrama was situated on the banks
of the Gaṅgā, and upon hearing “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma,
Hare Hare” being chanted very loudly, Bhaktivinoda
hākura would know that Bābājī Mahārāja was coming. He
would chant so loudly that his voice could be heard
across the Gaṅgā, and upon arrival at the āśrama, he
would hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other kṛṣṇa-kathā from
Bhaktivinoda hākura.

Bābājī Mahārāja didn’t associate with other bābājīs very
much. Generally he would only wear a laṅgoṭī and nothing
more, but one day he begged a good quality dhotī, a
kurtā, a walking stick and a nice turban from someone.
Wearing these, he went to Bhaktivinoda hākura’s āśrama,
and upon seeing him, Bhaktivinoda hākura thought, “See
how Bābājī Mahārāja’s appearance has changed! He has
taken the ordinary dress of a gṛhastha. He is wearing
nice clothes now and is carrying a walking stick like a
landlord. What has happened to him?”

Bābājī Mahārāja offered praṇāma and sat down, and
Bhaktivinoda hākura asked him, “Bābājī Mahārāja, today I
see that your appearance is of a different type. Why is
this?”

Bābājī Mahārāja replied, “These days there are so many
bābājīs, and many of them are such hooligans that if one
even mentions their names it will be sinful. They are
engaged in such misconduct that a gṛhastha is thousands
of times superior to them. In the name of parakīya-
bhajana they engage in mundane activities and they will
all go to hell for it. When a bābājī obtains some
rasagullās or any good quality foodstuff, he should just
offer it to a cow. Bābājīs should not go to any
festival, but people invite them and off they go to
these festivals simply to enjoy a good meal. Feeding the
dogs of the dhāma is more beneficial than feeding them.
Therefore I think that I shouldn’t remain a bābājī. I
will wear the cloth of a gṛhastha, and then people will
not look upon me as one of these bābājīs.”

Bhaktivinoda hākura said, “You have spoken correctly.”
At that time the misconduct of these bābājīs was so
widespread that people hated to even hear the good
Vaiṣṇava name, so there was a necessity for a great

                           41
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

personality who could preach the pure prema-dharma of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in the world. Then came such a
great personality, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda. He preached saṅkīrtana in such a way that in
no time the world opinion had changed, and scholars,
gentlemen and everyone began to accept vaiṣṇava-dharma.
If there had been no Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī, then
there would have been no Prabhupāda. And if there had
been no Prabhupāda, then the pure prema of Mahāprabhu
would not be preached all around the world as it is now.
Therefore the original great personality was our
father’s father’s father, our great grandfather, Gaura-
kiśora dāsa Bābājī. Today with great pride we declare
that he was the guru of our parama-guru, and it is our
supreme good fortune that he came to this world.

According to our qualification we will follow the
instructions for bhajana and renunciation that he gave,
and those who sincerely follow them will be offering the
real puṣpāñjali to his feet. Otherwise, if we don’t
offer this real puṣpāñjali, then we will be just like
those people that he sent away. We should not desire to
have material pleasures and at the same time beg for
mercy as they did. For really achieving his mercy, we
should offer this genuine puṣpāñjali to his feet, follow
his instructions in a pure manner, and then we may be
able to enter into real bhajana. He is never far away
from us; he is with us at all times, and he will
certainly bestow his plentiful mercy upon us. Calling
out his name, our gurujī would cry and say, “He took all
of my hardships away.” Similarly he will remove all of
our hardships so we will be able to perform bhajana, and
to really engage in bhajana there must be no other
desire whatsoever in our hearts. But if we leave sādhu-
saṅga, all will be lost. Therefore, remaining in the
association of devotees we will perform bhajana and
always remember the ideal that Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja showed in his life. Then our lives will be
meaningful, and from our bhajana we will get the real
benefit. So today we offer a prayer to his feet that he
will always be merciful to all of us.




Chapter Six

The Disappearance Day of Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī




Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is an eternal associate of
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and also of Kṛṣṇa, but in the
pastimes of Mahāprabhu he showed the sādhana-bhajana for
attaining the elevated devotional stages of bhāva and
prema. If a sādhaka sincerely desires to engage in
bhajana to achieve the direct association of Bhagavān
without delay — perhaps in only one or two births — then
he should engage in bhajana just as Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī did. But doing that type of bhajana is very,
very difficult. How he left his home and family, how he

                           42
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

engaged in very strict bhajana, how in his final days he
went without eating and drinking and just cried day and
night in divine separation — all of this would be very
difficult for us. But for those who really desire prema,
it is not so difficult.

This world is a reflection of the spiritual world; there
is some similarity between them. If we see that this
world is a place of instruction rather than a place for
enjoyment, then we will be benefited. But only those who
have taken sincere shelter at the feet of a guru will
take such instruction; not everyone will be able to
accept it. Dattātreya understood that this world is a
place of instruction, and therefore he accepted twenty-
four gurus. When we can fully understand the twenty-four
gurus that have been mentioned, we will see that the
entire world is our guru. Why has it been said that
there are twenty-four gurus? Because there is nothing in
all of existence from which some instruction cannot be
taken. For an intelligent person, all the objects of the
world will give some kind of instruction.

Someone may argue that the world is a prison-house which
is full of unlimited misery.



tāvad rāgādayaḥ stenās

tāvat kārā-gṛhaṁ gṛham

tāvan moho ’ṅghri-nigado

yāvat kṛṣṇa na te janāḥ




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.36)



For those who are not devotees of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
bewilderment of material attachment serves as the
handcuffs and foot-shackles that bind them in the prison
of māyā.



But the material world will not be a prison for those
who are not infatuated with it. Here rāga means material
attachment, which is like a thief and is the cause of
our bondage. If this attachment is removed, then
liberation will be attained. In this regard, Mahāprabhu
told Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī:



sthira ha—ā ghare yāo, nā hao vātula



krame krame pāya loka bhava-sindhu-kūla


                           43
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 16.237)



For now, return home and remain in household life. Don’t
behave irrationally. Eventually you will be able to
cross the ocean of material existence.



If Bhagavān could be attained just by leaving home, then
so many people would leave their homes because they
couldn’t get along with the other members of the
household, or because of poverty or some other reason of
this type. But would they attain the association of
Bhagavān just by going to another place? Bhagavān is not
attained merely by abandoning one’s home and family.
Especially if one abandons his home and family in an
immature stage, it will be very detrimental to his
welfare, and his condition may become even worse than
that of an ordinary materialist. Bhagavān is attained
only through abandoning material attachments and
engaging in real bhajana. Therefore Mahāprabhu told
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, “For now return home and be
patient, and when the right time comes, you will
automatically be able to leave everything.” There is
nothing in the material world that is inherently bad; it
is only a question of proper or improper utilisation.



antare niṣṭhā kara, bāhye loka-vyavahāra



acirāt kṛṣṇa tomāya karibe uddhāra




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 16.239)



Externally you should behave in an ordinary fashion with
your family members, but internally you should have
niṣṭhā. Then Kṛṣṇa will deliver you very soon.



But is having niṣṭhā an easy thing? What is niṣṭhā?
Immovable, firm resolution. When there is firm
confidence that whatever is said by guru, Vaiṣṇava and
śāstra is correct, then that is called śraddhā. When
this śraddhā becomes firm, it is called niṣṭhā. “I will
give up my very life, but I will never leave the bhajana
of Bhagavān. If I live at home or wherever, I will
always engage in bhajana” — such resolution is called
niṣṭhā. Honouring this instruction of Mahāprabhu,

                           44
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī returned home and began taking
harināma and studying the scriptures, and at the same
time attending to all of his worldly duties. Eventually
his niṣṭhā increased more and more, and after attaining
the mercy of Nityānanda Prabhu, he was able to leave his
home permanently. He had tried to leave before and was
unsuccessful, but Bhagavān could see the desire within
him and therefore made the arrangement for him to leave.

When Bhagavān sees that there is sincere desire within
us, He will make all arrangements for us to come to Him.
Otherwise, if we try to make the necessary arrangements
ourselves, we won’t be able to enter into bhajana proper
and we will eventually fall down. Therefore Bhagavān
makes the arrangement for us, just as we see that He did
for Gopa-kumāra in Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. In the form
of caitya-guru in the heart He sees what is necessary
and sends the dīkṣā-guru and the śikṣā-guru to us. Who
gave Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī the company of Haridāsa
hākura? Did Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī meet him of his own
accord? The arrangement was made by Bhagavān. Haridāsa
hākura used to visit the home of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
— why? What was the necessity of his going there?
Haridāsa hākura was a supreme renunciate; every day he
would chant three lākhas of harināma. Therefore he could
see the natural love and devotion for Bhagavān that the
young boy Raghunātha dāsa possessed, so he would go to
his home and teach him how to take harināma. Of course,
Raghunātha dāsa had the previous saṁskāra of a perfected
soul, but here we can see how Bhagavān makes the
arrangement for a sādhaka to acquire the association of
a great personality. And He also sent Yadunandana
Ācārya, a disciple of Advaita Ācārya, to become
Raghunātha dāsa’s dīkṣā-guru.



sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo ’jita jito ’py asi tais tri-lokyām




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.3)



Even while remaining within their respective social
positions, fortunate souls get the opportunity to hear
hari-kathā from great personalities, and becoming
inspired to dedicate their body, mind and words, they
conquer He who is otherwise unconquerable by anyone
within the three worlds.



Bhagavān made this arrangement for Raghunātha dāsa, and
within a short time intense eagerness arose within his
heart and he thought, “How will I attain the direct
association of Bhagavān? What kind of sādhana-bhajana
should I perform?” Then he went to Pānihāṭi where he
received the darśana of Nityānanda Prabhu. On the order
of Nityānanda Prabhu, Raghunātha dāsa arranged a big

                              45
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

festival; and by the power of his meditation Nityānanda
Prabhu, called Mahāprabhu Himself to attend it. When
Raghunātha dāsa received the darśana of the two brothers
taking prasāda together, this increased his desire even
more. Then Nityānanda Prabhu placed his lotus feet on
Raghunātha dāsa’s head and said, “Now all your
obstructions will disappear.” So by the mercy of
Nityānanda Prabhu he was able to leave his home and
travel to Purī where he attained the shelter of
Mahāprabhu’s feet. This time Mahāprabhu gave him another
type of instruction:



‘mane’ nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana



rātri-dine kare vraje kṛṣṇera sevana




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.157)



“Internally a perfected soul thinks day and night of
serving Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, and Svarūpa Dāmodara will
teach you this very special activity.” Mahāprabhu didn’t
personally give Raghunātha dāsa so much instruction, but
He handed him over to one of His eternal associates from
whom he received all instruction. And what did Svarūpa
Dāmodara teach him? To perform the high standard of
bhajana that he himself did.

Svarūpa Dāmodara would compose ślokas describing the
ontological position of Mahāprabhu, and he also kept a
diary describing the daily pastimes of Mahāprabhu. For
instance, he wrote that one night, when the waves of
bhāva were powerfully flowing through Mahāprabhu’s
heart, He somehow managed to pass through three bolted
doors. He mistook the ocean for the Kālindī, and
thinking the waves to be due to the sporting of Kṛṣṇa
with the gopīs, He jumped in. Floating farther and
farther away, He came into the net of a fisherman at
Ārkatīrtha. When the fisherman brought the devotees to
Mahāprabhu, they saw that all of His joints were
dislocated, His limbs were all elongated and He was
rolled up into a round shape. This is a symptom of
mahābhāva. This will not happen in the stages of prema,
sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga or even anurāga. Sometimes
this will not even happen in mahābhāva, but only in the
higher stages of ruḍha, adhiruḍha, madana and citra-
jalpa. But this may not even come within citra-jalpa,
which is where Śrīmatī Rādhikā, in the madness of divine
separation, was speaking to a bee about Kṛṣṇa. We don’t
find any description of Her ever displaying the symptoms
that Mahāprabhu did here.

Svarūpa Dāmodara recorded these pastimes in his diary
and revealed them all to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. Then
later Raghunātha dāsa revealed them to Kṛṣṇadāsa

                           46
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

Kavirāja Gosvāmī. Murāri Gupta, who was an incarnation
of Hanumān, also kept a diary. But since his feelings
were for dāsya-rasa, he found other pastimes of
Mahāprabhu to be more tasteful, and therefore he
described them. Svarūpa Dāmodara was Lalitā herself, so
in his poetry he described the mahābhāva and higher
conditions of Mahāprabhu. Just see what an excellent
arrangement Mahāprabhu made for Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī:
He handed him over to Svarūpa Dāmodara who taught him
all of these things. If we ever receive such a good
opportunity, then we should understand that it was
arranged by Bhagavān Himself. For a sādhaka who is
especially sincere, He will make such an arrangement,
but one who is not so eager will not receive such good
fortune.

At first Mahāprabhu instructed Raghunātha dāsa to remain
at home, and this instruction was in relation to vaidhī-
bhakti. The instruction that He gave later — that a
perfected soul deeply remembers Kṛṣṇa day and night —
was on the rāgānugā level, and Raghunātha dāsa
harmonised both of these in his life. Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda also gave
instructions related to vaidhī-bhakti, such as
instructions for arcana, while at the same time drawing
forth the sentiments of rāgānugā from the poetry of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He combined them in his preaching in
this world. Regardless if people were qualified or
unqualified, Prabhupāda accepted everyone. Previously
there was a prohibition that only those who were
especially qualified could leave their homes and
families and come to engage in bhajana; but everyone
received a good opportunity from Prabhupāda. He created
a school in which even those who were unqualified could
come and learn, and gradually progress upwards.
Otherwise we would not have the qualification to come in
this line, but he opened the door for everyone.

These days society has become somewhat degraded. Young
boys no longer honour the conventions of society or
accept the guidance of their parents as they did
previously. They sometimes fall into bad company and
become thieves and dacoits, and then it becomes almost
impossible for them to be rectified and find the correct
path. But Prabhupāda made schools and centres in
Māyāpura and all over India in which these boys could
come. Perhaps they only had a little taste for spiritual
life, but he saw their potential to eventually have
complete taste. They learned something there and made
substantial progress in the direction of pure bhajana,
sometimes even up to the point of becoming brahmacārīs.
Those who desired to do so could after some time return
to their homes, marry and perform bhajana there;
Prabhupāda didn’t impose any restriction on that. In
this way Mahāprabhu’s mission was spread throughout
India.

As long as Mahāprabhu remained within this world,
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī stayed near Him, and when He
disappeared, Raghunātha dāsa became so disturbed that he
at once gave up eating. Then in a short time Svarūpa
Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda and Gadādhara Paṇḍita all left
this world. Because everything then appeared void in
Purī, all the remaining devotees left there. The very

                           47
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

things there that had previously been so dear to
Raghunātha dāsa now pained him like thorns. His
condition was like that of the residents of Vraja after
Kṛṣṇa had departed for Mathurā. When Kṛṣṇa was in
Vṛndāvana, the sakhās and sakhīs loved Nanda-bhavana
very dearly. The gopīs loved the Yamunā’s Gopī-ghāṭa so
much because there they would meet Kṛṣṇa. They loved
Govardhana so much because there were so many beautiful
gardens and kuñjas there where they would make flower
garlands for Kṛṣṇa. Blissfully they would go to these
places, but when Kṛṣṇa departed for Mathurā, Nanda-
bhavana appeared empty and lifeless. The gopīs’
remembrance of Kṛṣṇa became so intense that they no
longer desired to go there, and everywhere they cast
their vision drowned them in vipralambha-rasa. Food was
no longer prepared there, the utensils were just lying
around and there were cobwebs everywhere. Who would they
prepare food for? Mother Yaśodā had become almost blind
in separation. In an attempt to forget Kṛṣṇa, Nanda Bābā
left there, but there was no place in Vraja that would
allow forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa. Everything just brought
more remembrance of Him.

After Mahāprabhu left this world, the devotees in Purī
were in exactly the same condition. For Raghunātha dāsa,
going to the Gambhīrā was like entering a fire, and day
and night he only cried and cried. This is real bhajana,
and until one’s bhajana is of this standard, it is only
ābhāsa, or the shadow of real bhajana. Unless one has
experienced such intense feelings of separation from
Kṛṣṇa, guru and the Vaiṣṇavas, they have not entered
into real bhajana. Mahāprabhu Himself showed the way: He
was always lamenting, “Where can I find Vrajendra-
nandana? Where has He gone?” Day and night He was
crying, feeling the full impact of divine separation.

Sometimes we also cry, but for what reason? Because we
have just received some indication that our material
attachments and enjoyment may be taken away from us.
Inside we should be feeling intense separation from
Mahāprabhu, from Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and if not
directly from Them, then from our own guru. But we have
no experience of these feelings of the upper world, and
instead we only desire material happiness. But really we
belong exclusively to Them, and with that understanding
we should approach this line of devotion. Therefore,
first there should be deep attachment for bhajana, and
then for bhajanīya, those whom we are worshipping. In
our conditioned state we are not as much concerned about
chanting our daily prescribed number of rounds as we are
about things like, “What will I eat? Where will I live?”
But how did Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī perform bhajana? His
only anxiety was: “How will I do bhajana? How can I make
sure that this life is not wasted, and how will I attain
Bhagavān in this very life?”

For those of us aspiring for rāgānuga-bhakti, the life
of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is very instructive, and if
we can assimilate into our lives even one iota of his
eagerness for bhajana, we will surely become successful.
Regardless of whether we are renunciates or
householders, we should have some of the eagerness for
bhajana that he did. If we have that eagerness, all of
our endeavours will automatically become crowned with

                           48
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

success.




Chapter Seven

Advaita Saptamī




Advaita Saptamī is the day that Advaita Ācārya appeared
in this world. Advaita Ācārya, the cause of the material
world, comes first; after that Nityānanda Prabhu comes
on the day of trayodaśī; and then Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu Himself comes on pūrṇimā, descending into
this world with the effulgence of rādhā-bhāva. In this
way the pastimes of Mahāprabhu begin.



vande taṁ śrīmad-advaitā-

cāryam adbhuta-ceṣṭitam

yasya prasādād aj—o ’pi

tat-svarūpam nirūpayet




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 6.1)



I pray to Advaita Ācārya, who performs especially
wonderful pastimes, that by his mercy I may be able to
describe this difficult tattva easily. What are these
wonderful pastimes? Seeing Nityānanda Prabhu, Advaita
Prabhu began complaining: “Where has this avadhūta come
from? Today he has come to our home and thrown prasāda
in all directions! He has no knowledge of what class he
belongs to; actually he has no class at all! We are
brāhmaṇas, we are the best of society, and he has
dropped prasāda on the bodies of everyone here!”

Then Nityānanda Prabhu said, “Hey, aparādhī! You are
committing an offence to mahā-prasāda. You consider it
to be mere food, and that it is merely being thrown
around? You can’t see that it bestows good fortune, and
that whoever’s body is touched by this prasāda at once
crosses over māyā.”

In this way, there was generally some quarrelling
between them. When they would go for bathing, then
certainly there would be quarrelling. At that time
Nityānanda Prabhu was very young. Mahāprabhu was the
youngest, next came Nityānanda, and the oldest of all
was Advaita Ācārya, whose thoughts are sometimes very
difficult to understand. He sent a mysterious sonnet to

                            49
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

Mahāprabhu.



bāulake kahiha, – loka ha-ila bāula



bāulake kahiha, – hāṭe nā vikāya cāula




bāulake kahiha, – kāye nāhika āula



bāulake kahiha, – ihā kahiyāche bāula




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 19.20–1)



One madman is sending a message to another madman. There
is no longer necessity for rice in the marketplace, so
it is time for the shop to be closed.



No one could understand this sonnet. Upon reading it,
Mahāprabhu was a little indifferent. Only Svarūpa
Dāmodara could understand a little of Advaita Ācārya’s
mood; no one else could understand. And he said that one
madman — Advaita Ācārya, who is mad with kṛṣṇa-prema —
is sending a message to another madman — Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, the one who made the world mad with kṛṣṇa-
prema, the original madness. “There is no longer
necessity for rice” means that prema has been given to
everyone, and now the task is completed. “Therefore the
shop should be closed” means “Your pastimes in the
material world should now come to a close.” But no one
understood this; only Svarūpa Dāmodara could know
something of its meaning. In this way Advaita Ācārya’s
pastimes were mysterious and wonderful.

Although the gist of Bhagavad-gītā advocates bhakti, at
the time of Advaita Prabhu’s appearance no one was
explaining it in that way. The message of the Gītā is
full of devotion — viśate tad anantaram (Bhagavad-gītā
(18.55)): “Ultimately he enters into Me.” Advaitavādīs
interpret this to mean that Bhagavān and the jīva merge
in Brahman and become one. They say that by chanting
“ahaṁ brahmāsmi” and practising meditation, the apparent
individuality of the souls merge in the end, and that
the material world is false. Advaita Ācārya first of all
gave the explanation of bhakti from these verses:
satataṁ kīrtayanto mām (Bhagavad-gītā (9.14)); ananyāś
cintayanto māṁ, ye janāḥ paryupāsate (9.22); and bhakti
labhate parām (18.54) — in the end, we will attain
bhakti. By the medium of the precepts described in these

                           50
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

verses, then viśate tad anantaram — we enter into
bhakti. Not that we meet Bhagavān in Brahman, entering
into undifferentiated light. Viśate means that we enter
into His dhāma and attain His service, but some people
were trying to change the meaning.

After some time, Advaita Ācārya went to Śāntipura and
also started explaining the meaning of viśate tad
anantaram as “ahaṁ brahmāsmi: all souls will merge in
Brahman.” Hearing of this, Mahāprabhu went there and
pulled his beard and beat him until Sītā-devī, Advaita
Ācārya’s wife, came and protected him. This is also
wonderful because having been beaten, Śrī Advaita became
very pleased and started dancing. Previously, Mahāprabhu
was offering praṇāma to him and offering him respect
befitting one’s guru because Advaita Prabhu was a
disciple of Mādhavendra Purī. Mahāprabhu was thinking,
“He is a disciple of My parama-guru, so it is My duty to
offer praṇāma and sevā to him. He is worshipful to Me,
and therefore I should serve and worship him.”

For ridding Himself of this service, Advaita Ācārya gave
the impersonalist nirviśesavāda explanation of Bhagavad-
gītā. When Mahāprabhu became angry and started beating
him, Advaita Ācārya said, “Today my life has become
successful. I wanted You to accept service from me,
because You are senior to me. Who can possibly be senior
to You?” Mahāprabhu then became shy.

Another time, Mahāprabhu said to His mother Śacī-devī,
“I will not show love to you anymore because you have
disrespected a devotee. You have committed vaiṣṇava-
aparādha. You told Advaita Prabhu that, ëYour name
Advaita (meaning non-dual) is not suitable; rather your
name should be Dvaita (dual). You are not advaita, you
are dvaita.’ What you said was that Advaita Ācārya
brings ëduality’, separation in relationships — that he
separates a mother from her son, a father from his son,
a brother from his brother. Advaita Ācārya explains the
path of devotion, thereby breaking the chains that bind
one to the material world. A mother has natural
affection for her offspring, but if Advaita Prabhu is
able to increase someone’s spontaneous attraction
towards Kṛṣṇa, then what could be greater than that? If
someone is giving the instruction that the jīva has
forgotten Bhagavān for millions of births, and then
establishes sambandha (knowledge of our true
relationship with Bhagavān) and sādhya (the final
attainment), and gives instruction for bhajana that cuts
the chains that bind us to the material world, what
could be greater than that?”

Śacī-devī replied, “He separated me from my beloved
Viśvarūpa. He gave such instruction that it separated me
from Viśvarūpa, who left home and became a sannyāsī.
Therefore ëAdvaita’ means that person whom having met
once, one will not desire anything within this world. So
his name should be ëDvaita’ instead.”

Mahāprabhu said, “Since you spoke to a devotee in this
way, none of us will show you love anymore.”

As she stood there, everyone told her that because she
had committed an offence at the feet of Advaita Ācārya,

                           51
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

they could not show any love to her. Then Śacī-devī went
to beg forgiveness from Advaita Ācārya, but instead he
fell at her feet and said, “You are the mother of the
entire world. It is not possible for you to commit any
offence. But alright, if someone says that there has
been some offence, then I say it is hereby forgiven.”
Then Śacī-devī returned to Mahāprabhu and everything was
set right. Many wonderful pastimes like this were
performed by Śrī Advaita Prabhu.

Advaita Ācārya was also instrumental in bringing Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu to this world. At the end of
Dvāpara-yuga, upon completing His pastimes in this world
and returning to Goloka Vṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra
thought, “I have three desires that have not yet been
fulfilled. Understanding the glories of Rādhikā’s love,
discovering the sweetness that She finds within Me, and
tasting that sweetness — without assuming the sentiment
of Rādhikā Herself and the effulgence of Her form, it
will not be possible to experience these three things. I
have tasted sakhya-rasa, vātsalya-rasa and mādhurya-
rasa, but as yet I have been unable to experience what
Her happiness is upon seeing Me, and what is the nature
of Her prema for Me. In order to experience this, I must
again go to the material world.”

At that time it was necessary for the yuga-dharma to be
given. The age of Kali, which lasts for 432,000 years,
had come. Ordinarily, at the end of each yuga an
incarnation of Bhagavān comes, just as at the end of
Tretā-yuga, Rāmacandra came, and at the end of Dvāpara-
yuga, Kṛṣṇa came. Such a yuga-avatāra comes when the
disorder in the material world has reached its highest
limit.



dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge




Bhagavad-gītā (4.8)



In order to re-establish the principles of religion, I
appear millennium after millennium.



Bhagavān thinks, “Just see how much sinful activity is
increasing and how the chaos is escalating due to the
demons. When should I descend?”

So there are actually four reasons for Mahāprabhu’s
descent. Two are primary, and two are secondary. The
most primary reason is for tasting the prema of Rādhikā,
and the second reason is:




                           52
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.4)



By His causeless mercy He appears in the age of Kali to
bestow what no incarnation has ever offered before:
unnata ujjvala-rasa – the most sublime amorous mellow in
His own service.



Mahāprabhu wanted to give a specific wealth of prema to
the jīvas that had never been bestowed by any previous
incarnations: unnata-ujjvala-rasa — the parakīya-bhāva
of the gopīs. There are two kinds of unnata-ujjvala-
parakīya-rasa. One kind, the sentiment of Rādhikā, is
not “giveable”. But the other, the sentiment of the
nitya-sakhīs and the prāṇa-sakhīs who serve Rādhā, and
who, following Her, also serve Kṛṣṇa — that unnata-
ujjvala-rasa can be given. Therefore to bestow the
highest prema upon all jīvas and to taste the prema of
Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa comes.

His third reason for coming is to preach the yuga-
dharma, nāma-saṅkīrtana; and the fourth reason is:



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham




Bhagavad-gītā (4.7)



Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious
practice, O descendent of Bharata, and a predominant
rise of irreligion – at that time I descend.



These are the four reasons.

Kṛṣṇa was thinking, “When should I go? To establish the
yuga-dharma, descending at the end of the yuga is
alright, but if instead I preach nāma-saṅkīrtana at the
beginning of the yuga, the degrading influence of the
yuga will have a lesser effect on the jīvas. When should
I give the sentiment of the gopīs, and when should I

                              53
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

taste the love of Rādhikā?” He was considering all of
these things.

Meanwhile Advaita Ācārya saw that bhakti was gradually
disappearing from the world, and he thought, “Now is the
appropriate time for Kṛṣṇa’s incarnation. If He doesn’t
come now, what will happen later?” At the same time, he
was also thinking this in the form of Kāraṇodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu. He was pondering in that place where sattva,
rajas and tamas are all in the same position. There are
two causes of the world: one is upādāna, the ingredient
cause, and the other is nimitta, the efficient cause.
Mahā-Viṣṇu himself is the nimitta cause, and his part,
Advaita Ācārya, is the upādāna cause.

Suppose I were to point to someone and say, “This man is
a hooligan, thief and liar. Grab him and throw him
outside; he should never be allowed in here again.” Now
you may not know him, but by my saying this, you throw
him out. So who is the cause of him being thrown out? By
my order you grabbed this man and ejected him, so you
are the upādāna cause, and I am the nimitta cause. But
who is the real cause of the man being ejected? By his
own misbehaviour, the man himself is the cause; and this
is exactly the situation regarding the creation of the
material world.

Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu assumes two forms to create the
material world: as the efficient cause and the
ingredient cause. When the two of them come together,
countless brahmāṇḍas are generated. But if Bhagavān did
not inject His desire, then what? In any activity, there
is first the desire for it to take place. Therefore the
desire of Mahā-Viṣṇu is the primary cause, and dependent
on His desire is the desire of Advaita Ācārya, which is
the secondary cause. In this way Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu
performs the activity of creating the world, and His
incarnation is Advaita Ācārya.



advaita-ācārya gosā—i sākṣāt īśvara



yāṅhāra mahimā nahe jīvera gocara




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 6.6)



Śrī Advaita Ācārya is directly the Ṝśvara Himself. His
glories cannot be comprehended by ordinary living
beings.



From mahat-tattva, false ego arises. From false ego
comes sound, touch, form, taste and smell. Next come the
eleven senses, and next are the five material elements.

                           54
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

That makes twenty-two, and with the intelligence and
mind it makes twenty-four. Then adding prakṛti, puruṣa,
ātmā and Paramātmā makes twenty-eight aspects of tattva
altogether. Leaving aside Bhagavān and jīvātmā, only the
remainder are accepted by the sāṅkhya and the nyāya
schools of thought.



ye puruṣa sṛṣṭi-sthiti karena māyāya



ananta brahmāṇḍa sṛṣṭi karena līlāya



icchāya ananta mūrti karena prakāśa



eka eka mūrte karena brahmāṇḍe praveśa



se puruṣera aṁśa – advaita, nāhi kichu bheda



śarīra-viśeṣa tāṅra – nāhika viccheda



sahāya karena tāṅra la-iyā ’pradhāna’



koṭi brahmāṇḍa karena icchāya nirmāṇa




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 6.8–11)



Mahā-Viṣṇu performs the function of creation of all the
material universes, and Advaita Ācārya is directly an
incarnation of him. Creating and maintaining these
countless universes by his external energy is his
pastime, and by his own will he expands into countless
forms and enters into each and every universe. Advaita
Ācārya is a non-different part and parcel of Mahā-Viṣṇu,
or in other words, another form of him.



Some say that nature enacts the process of creation by
itself, and they give this example: “A cow eats grass,
and automatically milk is produced. What is the
necessity of anyone else in this process? In this way
nature does everything by itself.”


                           55
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

To refute this, an innocent, less-educated Vaiṣṇava
said, “The cow eats grass and then gives milk, so why
then doesn’t the bull eat grass and also give milk? Does
he need to eat more grass?”

The paṇḍita of the sāṅkhya school had to think for a
moment. Then he said, concerning the upādāna cause, “To
make a house, all elements such as bricks are
necessary.”

Then the Vaiṣṇava said, “So if by bricks or cement a
house will be made, then here we will place one thousand
kilos of cement, ten thousand bricks, an entire lake of
water, and wood and marble also. Will that make a house?
By the upādāna only it will not happen because it needs
the nimitta cause. There may be a pen and paper, but by
themselves will they write? Therefore, by the material
nature alone creation will not take place as long as the
desire of Bhagavān is not there.”

No action can take place by itself in the material
world, so therefore this prakṛtivāda philosophy is
erroneous. Prakṛti means matter, puruṣa is conscious,
and when both come together there is creation. In
prakṛti there is no action, no innate desire — it is
inert matter. But when it is activated by the puruṣa,
then automatically the task is accomplished. The
communists say, “What is the need of God in this? Nature
creates by itself,” but there is no one in the world who
can create by himself.

A lame man and a blind man were going somewhere together
and the lame man said, “Take me on your shoulders.
Seeing with my eyes, I will tell you to go right, left
or straight on the path, and with your legs we will go
there. Otherwise you will not be able to go there, and
neither will I.” Working together, they reached their
desired destination. In this example the lame man is
conscious, and the blind man is also conscious, and both
being conscious, the work was done. But in creation only
Bhagavān is conscious, and nature is not. Without at
least one conscious being no work in the world can be
done. These issues may seem a little dry, but they are
very important and tasteful points related to bhakti,
and Vaiṣṇavas should make an effort to understand them.

In all of this tattva, the root cause of the material
world is Kṛṣṇa because originally He injects His desire.
He becomes two kinds of Saṅkarṣaṇa: the root Saṅkarṣaṇa
and Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa. From Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa He becomes
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and subsequently He becomes
Advaita Ācārya and the upādāna cause. Some people say
that the upādāna cause is separate from Bhagavān, that
the upādāna cause of the material world is not Bhagavān.
They say that He may be the nimitta cause, but He cannot
be the upādāna cause. But besides Kṛṣṇa there is
nothing, so from where has the material world come? From
where has the mahat-tattva come? It has also come from
the desire of Kṛṣṇa. There is nothing in all of
existence that is separate from Him. Kāraṇodakaśāyī
manifests the creation, and the mahat-tattva, nature
herself, is thus non-different from Him. To correct the
souls that have forgotten Bhagavān, prakṛti is manifest
by His desire and gives the jīva an external form. The

                           56
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

jīva may consider his placement in that condition of
life to be an opportunity for great happiness, but
actually it is punishment. Just like when a crazy man
dances around naked — people will beat him, and without
eating or drinking he wanders around. He says, “I am the
king” or “I am the prime minister” and he thinks himself
to be happy. Our condition is exactly like that. We may
consider ourselves happy, but in reality we are not in a
happy condition at all.

Thus Advaita Ācārya was thinking, “The world has become
atheistic. One after another, people are forgetting
Bhagavān, and for me to rectify them alone is not
possible. To bring devotion to the non-devotees will be
very, very difficult work. Without the śakti of Kṛṣṇa
Himself, it simply cannot be done.”

Besides devotees, there are so many people in the world
who are preaching, but they are all preaching māyā. They
are preaching twisted philosophies, and seeing this, Śrī
Advaita thought, “They have no relation with Bhagavān
and they do not preach bhakti. Even when they do preach
from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Bhagavad-gītā, they express
only the desires of their minds. They are indifferent to
sanātana-dharma and pure devotion, and all of them —
especially the māyāvādīs — will only hear what they want
to hear. Defeating Rāvaṇa was not a very difficult
thing, and killing Kaṁsa was also not a difficult thing.
These actions could have been done by a Viṣṇu
incarnation, but changing the thinking of these
māyāvādīs is very difficult. Only if Kṛṣṇa Himself comes
into this world will it be possible.”

Since Advaita Prabhu was at least sixty years old when
Mahāprabhu appeared, he was the oldest of all of
Mahāprabhu’s associates. Nityānanda Prabhu was
approximately five years older than Mahāprabhu.
Mahāprabhu’s plan was that He would first arrange for
His devotees to appear in this world, and then He would
descend Himself. Advaita Ācārya appeared first, and
seeing the condition of the world, he thought, “How will
I call Kṛṣṇa? There are so many types of worship of
Kṛṣṇa, but amongst all of these, the glories of tulasī
are the greatest. Kṛṣṇa will be so pleased with anyone
who offers Him a tulasī leaf and Ganges water that it
will overpower Him.” Thus he took a tulasī bud — two
soft leaves with a mañjarī in the middle — and, with
great prema and tears flowing from his eyes, worshipped
Kṛṣṇa beside the Ganges.

Kṛṣṇa was originally thinking, “When will I descend?
Maybe in ten or twenty thousand years, or maybe even
after one hundred thousand years.” But upon hearing
Advaita Ācārya’s prayer, He came at once. Therefore
Advaita Ācārya is another primary reason for the descent
of Mahāprabhu.

At birth, Śrī Advaita was given the name Kamalākṣa
because his eyes were as beautiful as lotus petals. He
appeared at Srihatta in East Bengal. Staying sometimes
in Navadvīpa and sometimes in Śāntipura, he began
preaching bhakti. He was there in Navadvīpa when
Mahāprabhu took birth. Viśvarūpa attended Advaita
Prabhu’s school. One day Mother Śacī told Nimāi to go

                           57
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

and call His brother; so when He arrived at the school,
Nimāi glanced in the direction of Advaita Ācārya and
said, “What do you see? You called Me here and you don’t
recognise Me? When the proper time comes, you will
certainly recognise Me.”

There are unlimited incarnations of Viṣṇu and they are
all non-different from Kṛṣṇa, but their activities and
pastimes are different. Therefore, because Advaita
Ācārya is non-different from Hari, he is advaita, and
because he manifested bhakti in all directions, he is
known as ācārya. How did he preach bhakti? If anyone was
born in a śūdra family, a Muslim family or any family,
and performed bhagavad-bhajana, Advaita Prabhu
considered him better than a brāhmaṇa who didn’t engage
in bhajana. If there is someone who has taken birth in a
high brāhmaṇa family, is an eminent scholar, of good
conduct, speaks the truth and never lies, but does not
engage in bhagavad-bhajana, then he is inferior to one
who has taken birth in a śūdra family or in a family of
cremation-ground workers, if that person just cries out
“Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!” and does no other spiritual activity
whatsoever. That śūdra is superior to a caturvedī-
brāhmaṇa: Advaita Ācārya proved this point and preached
it.

Haridāsa hākura was born in a Muslim family. At the
śrāddha ceremony for Advaita Ācārya’s father, the
highest seat and prasāda were to be offered first to the
most elevated person. Advaita Ācārya was performing the
ceremony when the moon was in the appropriate place in
the month of Āśvina. All the high-class brāhmaṇas were
there — Bhaṭṭācārya, Trivedī, Caturvedī, Upādhyāya — and
all of them were great scholars. After washing their
feet, Advaita Ācārya showed them to their respective
seats. In front was an elevated seat, and Advaita Prabhu
was standing and thinking, “Who will I seat here?”

All of the scholars were thinking, “I know so many
scriptures; certainly I will be offered that seat.”
Silently they were all aspiring for it. Advaita Ācārya
then went outside the house and saw Haridāsa Thākura,
wearing a laṅgoṭī and sitting at the door. Haridāsa was
thinking, “The brāhmaṇas will take their meal here, so
Advaita Ācārya will certainly give us a little of their
prasāda.” He had so much humility that he was thinking
that if he went inside, the house would be contaminated.
At once Advaita Ācārya embraced him, and Haridāsa hākura
said, “Oh, you are a brāhmaṇa and I am a Muslim! Having
touched me, you must now go and bathe.” But grabbing him
and taking him inside, Advaita Ācārya sat him on the
elevated seat, at which time there was a great outcry in
all directions. The brāhmaṇas said, “By bringing a
Muslim in here, you have contaminated this place and
insulted us! We will not eat here!” Taking their water
pots, they all stood up and left. They were abusing
Advaita Ācārya, saying, “You are opposed to the
principles of dharma!”

But Advaita Ācārya said, “Today my birth has become
successful, and today my father has attained Vaikuṇṭha.
By giving respect to one Vaiṣṇava, today millions of my
ancestors have crossed over māyā. If Haridāsa hākura
will eat here, then that is greater than feeding

                           58
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

millions of brāhmaṇas.”

Haridāsa hākura was crying, thinking, “Because of me,
all these brāhmaṇas have been insulted and are not
eating.” But Advaita Ācārya said, “Haridāsa, today you
will certainly take prasāda here. That will be our great
good fortune.” Then he said to the brāhmaṇas, “He will
stay, and none of you will get prasāda. Actually, you
should all leave here quickly, because just seeing your
faces is a great sin. Haridāsa has great regard for
mahā-prasāda, and therefore he is included within the
Vaiṣṇava class. Anyone who doesn’t accept this is an
atheist, and one who judges a Vaiṣṇava by his birth is
an atheist. You can all go away from here and then your
offences will leave with you. You are offending
Haridāsa, and offending me as well.”

All the scholars left the house, but outside, as they
were going, they began speaking amongst themselves.
“Advaita Ācārya is no ordinary personality. He is a
great scholar, he knows all of the scriptures and he is
an exalted preacher of bhakti.” They continued
deliberating, and after fully reconsidering, they
returned, fell at Advaita Prabhu’s feet and begged
forgiveness.

Advaita Ācārya had many sons, of which one was named
Acyutānanda, but because some of his other sons didn’t
engage in bhajana, he didn’t consider them his sons at
all and he renounced them. Only those sons who performed
bhajana of Bhagavān did he make his successors.
Especially because of one incident in Jagannātha Purī,
Acyutānanda was made his successor. The Ratha-yātrā was
going on, and at that time Acyutānanda was just a small
boy. Some

Vaiṣṇavas came and asked Advaita Ācārya, “What is the
name of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s guru?” He replied,
“Keśava Bhāratī.”

At that time, Acyutānanda was sitting in his father’s
lap, and upon hearing this he began shivering with
anger. He was just a small boy! Nevertheless, he got up
from his father’s lap and started to walk away, saying,
“You cannot be my father if you have such an idea. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the guru of the entire world! Who
can possibly be His guru?”

Tears came to the eyes of Advaita Ācārya, and he said,
“You will really be known as my son. What you have said
is correct: Mahāprabhu is the guru of the entire world,
but for His pastimes in human form He must set the
example for others. Otherwise what would happen? How
would the people of this world know that it is necessary
to accept a guru?”

In this way Advaita Ācārya did many wonderful things. He
was an assistant to all of the pastimes of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Therefore today we will offer a special
prayer to the feet of Advaita Ācārya that he may be
merciful upon us so that we can make steady progress in
bhakti and ultimately attain the direct service of Śrī
Gauracandra.


                           59
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017




Chapter Eight

Nityānanda Trayodaśī




Once there was a barber who was going here and there
giving out invitations. In previous times barbers
performed this task for families. If there was to be a
marriage or a festival, he would go and distribute the
invitations to everyone, and for doing this he would
earn a little extra money. But he would not go anywhere
without his instruments such as a razor, scissors and a
comb.

Starting on his way, this barber entered a jungle where
he saw a lion resting on the path. The lion did not
attack him, but instead was merely lifting up its paw
and licking it. At first the barber was frightened, but
then he thought, “It seems that there is something stuck
in his foot, and that is why he is not attacking.” So
the barber went a little nearer and saw that a very
large thorn was stuck in very deeply, and due to this
the lion was suffering greatly. Therefore, with the help
of his instruments, the barber manipulated the thorn a
little and carefully removed it. Some blood had been
coming from the wound, so he also applied some
antiseptic, wrapped the lion’s paw in some medicinal
leaves, and then left.

Three or four years went by. Then one day that same
barber was mistakenly arrested for some very serious
crime such as murder. His case was brought before the
king, who said, “Several days ago in the jungle we
captured a lion. Throw the criminal into the lion’s
compartment. The lion will eat him — finished. For him
there can be no other punishment. Throw him in!”

The barber was thrown into the lion’s cage, and at once
the lion got up, roaring. But as he came near the
barber, he began to purr and sat down. This was the same
lion from which the barber had removed the thorn, and
after so many years the lion recognised the barber and
therefore did not attack him. The king said, “This
fierce animal is not attacking him? What is this?” Then
he thought, “Now I understand. Because I have made a
mistake in arresting this man, the lion is not killing
him. If the lion is not carrying out this punishment,
then I also should not punish him.” The king released
the barber, showed him respect and asked for
forgiveness.

Even in an animal there is so much gratitude, and
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī says that Nityānanda Prabhu’s
gratitude is just like this. For one minute that barber
removed a thorn from the lion, and for so many years the
lion remained grateful. That animal, which is so fierce
that it kills innumerable other animals and people also,

                           60
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

remained grateful for its entire life, and we see the
same quality of gratitude in the life of Nityānanda
Prabhu.

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī
gives an example of how Nityānanda Prabhu, being
Bhagavān Himself, is merciful to someone. He says that
on one occasion there was to be a festival with kīrtana
going on continuously all day and night. Vaiṣṇavas who
lived both nearby and far away were invited, and they
all came. Amongst them was an eternal associate of
Nityānanda Prabhu named Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa. His nature
was such that his mercy could not be easily recognised,
but those who understood him could see it. Generally, if
some dear person comes, one offers praṇāma. But instead
he would hit someone with the flute which he always kept
in his hand, and that person would understand it to be
great mercy. When he would place his foot on the head of
someone, they would consider that there would be good
fortune in their lives from that day on. Sometimes he
would slap someone and say, “Where have you been all
these days?” But those who understood knew that,
“Whoever he has struck today will receive the direct
mercy of Nityānanda Prabhu.” So the kīrtana was going
on, and when Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa came, everyone stood
up, offered praṇāma to him, and welcomed him. He climbed
on the shoulders of one person, hit another with his
flute, and slapped another on the back. Tears were
always flowing from his eyes, and he was always roaring
out, “Nityānanda Prabhu kī jaya!”

The pūjārī there was somewhat educated, and when
Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa entered, while everyone else had
stood and offered praṇāma, this pūjārī didn’t stand, and
he also wouldn’t speak to him. So, laughing, Mīnaketana
Rāmadāsa said, “Here we find the second Romaharṣaṇa!”, 2
and then he became absorbed in singing the glories of
Nityānanda Prabhu. Everyone performed very loud kīrtana,
and when it was finished, Kavirāja Gosvāmī’s brother
said, “You are always singing about the glories of
Nityānanda Prabhu, but why don’t you sing the glories of
Caitanya Mahāprabhu instead?” Hearing this, Mīnaketana
Rāmadāsa became somewhat unhappy.

That man considered that there was some difference
between Nityānanda Prabhu and Caitanya Mahāprabhu. But
there are so many stories and glories of Nityānanda
Prabhu, and they are all related to Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
If someone is singing the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
then are they not also singing the glories of Kṛṣṇa?
Rādhikā is the dearmost of all to Kṛṣṇa, and Her service
is the best of all. In singing the glories of Rādhikā,
one must necessarily be glorifying Kṛṣṇa. And similarly,
if someone is describing the glories of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, in doing so they cannot but be glorifying
Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Kavirāja Gosvāmī’s brother continued, “Such a person you
are: all the time chanting ëNityānanda, Nityānanda,’ and
not glorifying Mahāprabhu. Always ëNityānanda,
Nityānanda,’ but he married, whereas Mahāprabhu took
sannyāsa, leaving His home and family.”

Hearing this, Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa broke his flute and

                           61
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

left that place. He was so unhappy that he broke his
dearmost possession and left. At that time Kavirāja
Gosvāmī thought to himself, “Now something inauspicious
will certainly happen to my brother. How can there be
any auspiciousness in his life after this?”

Gradually everything was destroyed for his brother. What
do we mean by “destroyed”? His bhakti disappeared. By
the mercy of saints one obtains bhakti, but if those
saints are displeased, will our interest in bhakti
remain? No. Everything was destroyed for him and he
became an atheist, so Kavirāja Gosvāmī thought, “I will
not keep company with such an atheist. I no longer
consider him my brother. If one is not favourable
towards kṛṣṇa-bhakti, then a friend is not a friend, a
mother is not a mother, a father is not a father, and a
relative is not a relative. I will not have any contact
with him at all.” Later that very night, at about three
or four o’clock, he made the decision to leave, and very
unhappily he went away from there.

Arriving at Jhamatpur village, Kavirāja Gosvāmī sat down
to rest and began thinking, “I cannot stay here. Where
will I go?” While thinking over his situation, he dozed
off. Then Nityānanda Prabhu appeared to him in a dream.
In his hand was a golden stick. His form was very large
and had a glossy, dark lustre. He had an earring in one
ear, and his beauty was marvellous, just like Baladeva’s
in kṛṣṇa-līlā. He said, “Why are you crying? Why are you
upset? Get up, get up! Go to Vṛndāvana! And there place
the feet of Rūpa and Sanātana on your head. Go! You left
your brother for me? I am very pleased with you. A real
brother is one who can give bhakti, a father is one who
can give instructions regarding bhakti, and a mother is
one who can inspire kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Your dear brother
insulted me a little, and for that you left him forever?
I am very pleased. Go to Vṛndāvana. There you will
receive darśana of Govinda, Madana-mohana and Gopīnātha.
You will receive the mercy of Rūpa and Sanātana, and
also the mercy of Vṛndāvana-dhāma itself. Go!”

So Kavirāja Gosvāmī has written, “All I did was leave my
brother, and for that Nityānanda Prabhu gave me such
immense mercy! By that mercy, I have obtained darśana of
Vṛndāvana-dhāma.”

What kind of darśana did he obtain — like ours? This is
the kind of darśana he received: he saw Kṛṣṇa taking the
cows out to graze, the gopīs looking for Kṛṣṇa with
thirsty eyes, and the līlā of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And
what is the meaning of the mercy of Rūpa and Sanātana?
By Sanātana’s mercy Kavirāja Gosvāmī obtained sambandha-
jñāna and scriptural knowledge, but even when one
possesses this knowledge, there still may not be rasa.
By the mercy of Rūpa Gosvāmī he obtained the knowledge
of rasa, and then he could compose such books as Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta and Govinda-līlāmṛta, wherein so
much rasa is described. The mercy of Rūpa Gosvāmī has
made all this possible.

In this world, even an animal will remain indebted for
its entire life to someone who removes a thorn from it.
In the same way, we are indebted to our guru and the
Vaiṣṇavas. How can we be ungrateful to those who have

                           62
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

tried to remove the thorn of material attachment from
us, and have tried to entice us to drink bhakti-rasa?
Towards such gurus and Vaiṣṇavas we should always be
grateful. If on one day gurudeva is a little harsh with
us and in one minute we become ungrateful, thinking,
“Oh, he no longer has affection for me,” what ill
fortune that is. We will always remain indebted to
gurudeva and the Vaiṣṇavas, and we can never repay this
debt. If one doesn’t understand this statement of
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, then that is his great misfortune;
but one who understands this will never forget his
indebtedness for his whole life. Even upon dying, he
won’t forget it, and then again in his next birth he
will remember.

This gratitude is one of the main qualities of Bhagavān
himself. Although Nityānanda Prabhu is Bhagavān himself,
he becomes indebted to someone in the same way as Kṛṣṇa
became indebted to the gopīs:



na pāraye ’haṁ niravadya-saṁyujāṁ

sva-sādhu-kṛtyaṁ vibudhāyuṣāpi vaḥ

yā mābhajan durjara-geha-śṛṅkhalāḥ

saṁvṛścya tad vaḥ pratiyātu sādhunā




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.22)



Even within a long lifetime like that of the demigods I
would be unable to repay you, because you have all left
your homes and families to serve Me. Therefore please
let your own glorious deeds be your compensation.



Similarly Nityānanda Prabhu says, “He has broken out of
the shackles of material attachment and come to engage
in my service. He doesn’t care at all for worldly life.
Can I ever leave those who have left their family, money
and property to take up bhajana? I will never be able
to.”

Kavirāja Gosvāmī has also written:



saṅkarṣaṇaḥ kāraṇa-toya-śāyī

garbhoda-śāyī ca payobdhi-śāyī

śeṣaś ca yasyāṁśa-kalāḥ sa nityā-

nandākhya-rāmaḥ śaraṇaṁ mamāstu



                           63
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 5.7)



May Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu be my shelter. Saṅkarṣaṇa,
Śeṣanāga, Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and
Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu are His plenary portions and the
portions of His plenary portions.



In Vaikuṇṭha there are different sections on the same
level, and other sections that are on higher levels.
Incarnations such as Nṛsiṁha, Kalki and Vāmana are on
the same level in Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma. They share the same
“floor” but have their own special chambers. The lowest
point is the Virajā, then above that is Siddhaloka,
which is known as the outside part of Vaikuṇṭha. Those
enemies that are killed by Bhagavān are awarded that
destination. Siddhaloka is also for those who chant ahaṁ
brahmāsmi, thinking that the jīva ultimately merges into
Brahman. But the jīvas cannot lose their individuality.
That they ultimately become one is such a lie. Yes, they
meet together, just as devotees meet together and share
hari-kathā. As Kṛṣṇa comes together with the gopīs,
gopas, Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā, and as Rāmacandra comes
together with Hanumān — this meeting and coming together
is done, but meeting and becoming one? Nowhere can such
an example be found. Meeting, yes — but they will remain
individual. The jīva never becomes Brahman. Many
renowned paṇḍitas and scholars hold this theory and
thousands of people come to hear their lectures. They
say that there is nothing equal to kṛṣṇa-bhakti and that
the bhakti of the gopīs is the best of all, and that
anyone who attains devotion like that of the gopīs
becomes one with Brahman. This type of hari-kathā is
completely useless. They are deceiving people, and
therefore we should not attend any functions where they
say that we will become one with Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Above Siddhaloka is Sadāśivaloka, and above that is
Nārāyaṇa-dhāma, where the liberated four-armed devotees
reside. Sālokya, sāmīpya, sārūpya and sārṣṭi — the
devotees there possess these four kinds of liberation
and remain near to Nārāyaṇa serving him in aiśvarya-
bhāva, the mood of opulence. Nearby are millions of
special chambers, and in them are Varāha, Nṛsiṁha, Kalki
and all the other incarnations. When there is a
necessity, they come to this world; otherwise they
remain there all of the time, accepting service from
their devotees. Above that is the world of Rāmacandra
and above that is the world of Kṛṣṇa, which is known as
Goloka. In calling this Goloka, there may be some
confusion, so I will try to clarify it a little.

When Indra was performing the abhiṣeka of Kṛṣṇa, he
brought Surabhi there. So the residence of Surabhi is
Goloka, isn’t it? But don’t think that Indra brought her
from Goloka Vṛndāvana. In this brahmāṇḍa, and each and
every brahmāṇḍa, there is Hariloka, the residence of
Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. The demigods cannot directly have
Viṣṇu’s darśana, but sometimes in his meditation Brahmā

                           64
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

receives his darśana and attains the power to create and
the strength to protect the world. In this way each
brahmāṇḍa has its own Goloka, and this is also called
Surabhiloka or Śvetadvīpa. Indra can travel up to there,
and he brought Surabhi from there, saying, “You are go-
mātā, so please pray to Kṛṣṇa for me.”

Therefore this Goloka and Goloka Vṛndāvana are not one
and the same. Similarly, the Navadvīpa-dhāma that is
situated in the spiritual world is also known as
Śvetadvīpa, but it is separate from the Śvetadvīpa
included within this brahmāṇḍa wherein Kṣīrodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu resides.

The lower section of Goloka-dhāma, below Dvārakā, is
where there is svakīya-bhāva. Pastimes of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
take place there, but there Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are like
extensions of Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa in the mood of opulence.
This is the destination of those who perform arcana of
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa by vaidhī-bhakti. Those who perform arcana
of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa by vaidhī-bhakti combined with rāgānugā
sentiments go to either Mathurā or Dvārakā. And those
who have “greed” and fully follow rāgānugā in its pure
form go to Goloka Vṛndāvana. That realm is in the shape
of a lotus flower, and the centre of that lotus is the
home of Nanda. Devotees who are fully absorbed in
rāgānuga-bhakti attain positions there in the pastimes
of Kṛṣṇa, either accompanying Kṛṣṇa as He takes the cows
out to graze or as friends of Rādhikā. This is the
highest attainment.

There Kṛṣṇa is known as Vṛndāvana-bihārī, Govinda,
Śyāmasundara and Gopīnātha, and His first extension is
Baladeva. Kṛṣṇa’s stick, the peacock feather in Kṛṣṇa’s
crown, all of Kṛṣṇa’s paraphernalia, the gopīs’
paraphernalia, Vṛndāvana-dhāma — all of these are
manifest by sandhinī-śakti, and the embodiment of that
potency is Baladeva Prabhu. The embodiment of hlādinī-
śakti is Rādhikā, and Kṛṣṇa is the possessor of cit-
śakti. These three together are sac-cid-ānanda, the
complete form of Kṛṣṇa. Neither Rādhikā nor Baladeva are
separate from Him; together they are one.

From Baladeva Prabhu alone all the eternally perfected
devotees of Kṛṣṇa are manifest. When Kṛṣṇa goes to
Dvārakā, He becomes Vāsudeva, the son of Vasudeva. And
in Dvārakā, Baladeva also feels that he is the son of
Devakī, but in his original identity he is the son of
Rohiṇī, and ultimately Nanda Bābā is Baladeva’s father.
Not that anyone can actually be the father of Baladeva
as there are fathers and sons in this world, but Nanda
Bābā has the identity of being his father. Nanda Bābā
has the strongest identity of being the father of both
Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva — ordinary, worldly scholars cannot
accept this point. They cannot understand that in
whomever the identity of being Kṛṣṇa’s father is the
most intense, that person is ultimately considered to be
His father. Mostly they propound that Kṛṣṇa is the son
of Vasudeva and very few of them accept that He is
really Nanda-nandana.

Thus Baladeva Prabhu is the vaibhava-prakāśa of Kṛṣṇa,
and he renders service to Kṛṣṇa all the time. Service to
Kṛṣṇa is his everything, whether it is in Vṛndāvana,

                           65
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

Mathurā or Dvārakā. When they go to Mathurā and Dvārakā,
taking non-different forms, they become the first catur-
vyūha: Vāsudeva, Saṇkarṣana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.
Then there is a second catur-vyūha, and from the root
Saṅkarṣaṇa comes Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa. From Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa
comes Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, from Kāraṇodakaśāyī comes
Garbhodakaśāyī, and Garbhodakaśāyī becomes
Kṣīrodakaśāyī. Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu then expands into
countless forms as the witness in the hearts of all
living beings, Paramātmā. In our hearts, as the witness,
is that very Baladeva in his vyasti (expansion) as the
antaryāmī Kṣīrodakaśāyī. Kṣīra means milk, and just as
our mother nourishes us by feeding us milk, he also
sustains and nurtures us.

Near Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu are Brahmā and Śaṇkara, and by
his desire and power, creation and destruction of the
material universes take place. As Śeṣanāga he has
millions and millions of heads, and he is holding
millions and millions of universes on his heads as if
they were mustard seeds, while also taking the form of
the beds on which all three puruṣa-avatāras lie. These
are the six kinds of expansions of Baladeva Prabhu: from
his original form in Vṛndāvana comes the root Saṅkarṣaṇa
in Mathurā and Dvārakā, then Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa in
Vaikuṇṭha, then Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu, Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and finally Śeṣa. One who
knows these deep truths will never again have to enter
the cycle of birth and death.

The puruṣa-avatāra is called puruṣa because he is
related to the creation of the material world. He comes
into contact with māyā indirectly for the purpose of
creation and management, but he himself remains separate
from it. Yes, he is inside all souls, but at the same
time he is within no one. He does everything, and he
inspires others to do everything, but simultaneously he
does nothing. Therefore he is called a puruṣa-avatāra.
From this puruṣa-avatāra come the manvantara-avatāras,
yuga-avatāras and so many other incarnations. They come
from Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu or from Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu,
who can also be called avatārī, meaning that from them
avatāras come forth.

When Kṛṣṇa comes to this world in any of His forms, then
in the form of the dhāma and eternal associates,
Baladeva Prabhu will certainly come also. Before Kṛṣṇa
descends to perform pastimes in Vṛndāvana, Baladeva
enters into the heart of Devakī and is present in her
womb in the form of Saṅkarṣana; then Kṛṣṇa Himself can
manifest. Therefore Baladeva comes first in the form of
the dhāma and serves Kṛṣṇa in that way.

If someone says that Kṛṣṇa is an incarnation of
Kāraṇodakaśāyī and someone else says that He is an
incarnation of Garbhodakaśāyī, it will cause unnecessary
confusion. In some places you will find such
descriptions. Or sometimes Kṛṣṇa is described as being
born from the hair of Nara-Nārāyaṇa — Keśa-avatāra, an
incarnation of Nara-Nārāyaṇa. We may find such
statements, but actually:




                           66
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ

kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28)



All the incarnations of Bhagavān are either plenary
portions or parts of plenary portions of the puruṣa-
avatāras. But Kṛṣṇa is Svayam Bhagavān Himself.



When it is said that Kṛṣṇa Himself is an incarnation, it
is like a simple old lady who gives a blessing to the
prime minister by saying, “My son, may you one day
become the police commissioner.” In her understanding,
that is the highest post of all. The lady has said this
with love, but she doesn’t understand which position is
higher. Similarly, some say that Kṛṣṇa is an incarnation
of Garbhodakaśāyī or Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu.

When Śrī Rāmacandra descended, Baladeva came as
Lakṣmaṇa. Rāmacandra’s pastimes are so full of
separation and self-sacrifice that they make everyone
cry. For apparently no reason, he deserted Sītā-devī,
not only once, but twice. Lakṣmaṇa had not wanted Rāma
to go to the forest, and therefore, while they were
exiled, he said to Rāma, “I no longer consider Mahārāja
Daśaratha to be our father. Being excessively lusty, he
is controlled by a woman; and in his old age his
intelligence has diminished. I should kill him! Look —
someone is coming! If it is Bharata, I will kill him
also!”

Bharata was coming to appease Rāma, but when Lakṣmaṇa
climbed up a tree and saw the armies, he became very
angry. Taking his bow and arrow, he started towards
them. “Where are you going?” Rāma asked. “With whom will
you fight?”

Lakṣmaṇa said, “Bharata has come with great pride. He
wants to remove you so there will be no obstacle to him
becoming the king! Therefore I am going now, and with
one arrow I will finish them all!”

But Rāma was thinking that there was a misunderstanding,
so he told Lakṣmaṇa a story. Once there was a woman who
raised a mongoose for the purpose of protecting her
household from snakes. Each day, she put her children to
sleep on the bed and, placing the mongoose nearby, went
out. One day, while she was out, a snake came desiring
to bite the children. The mongoose had a great fight
with the snake, and with great difficulty the mongoose
killed it and protected the children. Then, being
pleased with itself, the mongoose was waiting outside
the house for its mistress, and there was still some
blood on its mouth from the fight. The woman returned,
and the mongoose went before her, saying “ku-ku-ku”. The
woman said, “Where has this blood come from? You

                             67
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

attacked the children and harmed them?” Hastily, she
picked up a stick and killed the mongoose. Then she went
inside the house and saw the children playing; the dead
snake was laying nearby. Realising her mistake, she
lamented.

So Rāma said to Lakṣmaṇa, “Your condition is exactly
like this. First wait and see; let Bharata come. Even
the Earth herself can be selfish, but Bharata can never
be selfish. Nowhere in this world is there an emblem of
love like Bharata. So let him come.”

When Bharata came, he fell at the feet of Rāma and began
to appease him. Seeing him offering praṇāma to Rāma,
Lakṣmaṇa realised his mistake. When Bharata was leaving,
Lakṣmaṇa approached him alone and fell at his feet. As
Bharata lifted him up and embraced him, Lakṣmaṇa said,
“I am a great offender at your feet. I have not been
able to be affectionate to you, to love you,” and he
began weeping bitterly.

Another time during the period when they were living in
the forest, Rāma ordered Lakṣmaṇa to bring wood when
Sītā desired to enter the fire. Lakṣmaṇa became very
angry, but Rāma said, “Service rendered in the forest is
the highest. You are always a servant.” Lakṣmaṇa
accepted the order of Rāma but thought, “I am making a
mistake following his order.” So he brought wood, and
Sītā-devī entered into the fire. Of course this was a
pretext by which the real Sītā came out and the false
Sītā disappeared, but still, in the end, Lakṣmaṇa took a
vow that, “I will not come again as your younger
brother, but only as your older brother. Then things
will be different, and you will not be able to treat me
like this.”

Therefore in the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa he came as Baladeva,
and in the pastimes of Mahāprabhu he came as Nityānanda
Prabhu, the older brother both times. So many pastimes
could be performed only as an older brother, which from
the position of a younger brother would not be possible.
If Nityānanda Prabhu were not present, then so many of
Mahāprabhu’s pastimes would have remained hidden. He was
Mahāprabhu’s servant, His brother and His guru also. How
was he Mahāprabhu’s guru? Mahāprabhu’s guru was Ṝśvara
Purī, the guru of Ṝśvara Purī was Mādhavendra Purī and
the guru of Mādhavendra Purī was Lakṣmīpati Tīrtha.
Nityānanda Prabhu was also a disciple of Lakṣmīpati
Tīrtha, but because his guru departed from this world
when he was at a young age, Nityānanda Prabhu received
nearly all of his instruction from Mādhavendra Purī.
Whoever gives instruction on bhakti is the
representative of Bhagavān, and therefore Nityānanda
Prabhu always considered Mādhavendra Purī to be his
primary guru. When Mādhavendra Purī became his guru,
then Ṝśvara Purī became his godbrother, and since
Nityānanda Prabhu was therefore on the level of
Mahāprabhu’s guru, Mahāprabhu respected him in that way.

Although we see that Nityānanda Prabhu had three
relationships with Mahāprabhu — as a servant, a brother
and a guru — still, Nityānanda Prabhu always considered
himself a servant. When Mahāprabhu was absorbed in
kīrtana, generally it was Nityānanda Prabhu who

                           68
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

protected Him. When Mahāprabhu was dancing in His usual
way, Nityānanda Prabhu would catch Him for His own
protection, and only when Mahāprabhu became absorbed in
rādhā-bhāva could Nityānanda Prabhu not touch Him.
Nityānanda Prabhu would engage in all types of service,
always following the order of Mahāprabhu. Mahāprabhu
told him, “Please go to Bengal! The brāhmaṇas there,
being very proud, don’t perform bhajana of Bhagavān.
Preach something to the brāhmaṇa class, but mostly
preach to those who are considered fallen in society,
because they are not really fallen. Each and every soul
has the right to perform bhagavad-bhajana. Please go.”
So Nityānanda Prabhu went there, preached from village
to village, and made disciples of everyone.

Once, Nityānanda Prabhu was going along the road with a
preaching party when they came across a village where
there lived a wealthy landowner named Rāmacandra Khān.
Nityānanda Prabhu entered the man’s home and sat down on
the altar of the durgā-maṇḍapa. Previously in Bengal the
wealthy people would have such maṇḍapas (canopies raised
for ceremonial purposes) for Caṇḍī, or Durgā. He was
thinking, “Night is falling, so where can we possibly go
now? Tomorrow morning we will continue on our way.”

Meanwhile Rāmacandra Khān sent one of his servants to
speak to Nityānanda Prabhu. Sarcastically the man said,
“There is not enough space for you here in the house,
but we have a gośālā which is a very pure place due to
the presence of cows and cow dung. Saints and sādhus
should stay there, so go to the gośālā.”

When Nityānanda Prabhu heard this, he became angry and
said, “Yes, you are right. This place is unfit for me.
It is fit for cow-killing meat-eaters.” Saying this, he
left that place. The next day Muslims attacked and
arrested Rāmacandra Khān and his entire family. They
also killed a cow, cooked the meat and ate it on that
very spot. The entire village was destroyed.

Nityānanda Prabhu has two aspects, just like a mother
lion. To her cubs the lion is very kind, but to others
she is very dangerous. Similarly Nityānanda Prabhu is
supremely merciful to the devotees and is the subduer of
atheists. Just as Baladeva Prabhu holds a plough and
club and killed Dvivida gorilla and others who were
inimical to Kṛṣṇa, Nityānanda Prabhu subdues the
atheists and increases gaura-prema in devotees.

We should never consider there to be any difference
between Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Nityānanda Prabhu; there
is a difference in body only. Nityānanda Prabhu is the
complete guru-tattva, and wherever there is guru, he is
there. Wherever the activities of guru are performed,
the message of Kṛṣṇa is given to the jīvas that by
bhakti only will there be real auspiciousness. This is
all manifested by Nityānanda Prabhu. Therefore on this
day we offer praṇāma unto he who is the most merciful
and the complete guru-tattva, and we pray that he will
always be merciful to us.




                           69
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017


Chapter Nine

Simply a Quality of Bhakti




Bhagavān has ordered that we should never give any
importance to whatever faults may be seen in the bodies
or natures of devotees who are engaged in His exclusive
bhajana. We should not criticise them, be envious of
them, or consider them to be of poor conduct. Suppose
there is a man who never lies, steals or engages in any
misconduct but doesn’t perform exclusive bhajana of
Bhagavān. Then there is another man who performs
exclusive bhajana of Bhagavān and has ruci for taking
harināma and hearing hari-kathā, but some bad qualities
or physical deformities can be detected in him. How
should we view these two men? Between them who is
superior? The Bhagavad-gītā states that the one who
performs bhajana is the best. But ordinarily people are
not taught this. What to speak of others, even Sītā, who
is Lakṣmī-devī herself, was not accepted by the
residents of Ayodhyā after Rāvaṇa had taken her to his
abode in Śrī Laṅkā. Rāma said, “No, she is pure; she
will stay with me in the palace.” But even though she
was actually the most exalted personality in Ayodhyā,
they sent her away without any remorse.

These conventions still exist today. If we see some
external fault in a person, we disregard them. These
days almost everyone sees with mundane vision. They
don’t see the tendency of bhakti inside others; they
only see external things and then judge others on these
considerations. Only those who have had abundant
association with sādhus, who are higher-level madhyama-
adhikārī Vaiṣṇavas, whose anarthas have disappeared, and
who are approaching the uttama-adhikārī stage, will
honour what Kṛṣṇa has said regarding this point. And
everyone else, who possess only mundane intelligence,
will say, “Oh, this devotee is not of good conduct and
is therefore a hypocrite.” They also do not properly
respect Nārada because he said, “There is no need for us
to understand what is religiosity and irreligiosity.”
There is also no necessity to honour worldly
conventions. What is our only necessity? Bhakti —
exclusive prema-bhakti for Kṛṣṇa is our only objective,
and our firm resolution is that besides this there is no
other meaning to life.



sva-pāda-mūlaṁ bhajataḥ priyasya

tyaktānya-bhāvasya hariḥ pareśaḥ

vikarma yac cotpatitaṁ katha—cid

dhunoti sarvaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ




                             70
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.42)



If someone has left their family, wife, children, money,
all worldly attachments and enjoyments, and is engaged
in the exclusive bhajana of Bhagavān, but somehow or
other he performs some sinful activity, then Bhagavān,
being situated within that person’s heart, at once
forgives him. But if there is a person of good conduct
who has spoken the truth throughout his entire life, who
has engaged in welfare activities for society and for
people in general, who has worshipped the demigods and
endeavoured for liberation, but has never engaged in
bhagavad-bhajana, then what real benefit has there been
for him? And if a devotee falls from the path of bhajana
in an immature stage, what is the loss for him?



śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe

yoga-bhraṣṭo ’bhijāyate




Bhagavad-gītā (6.41)



In his next life he will take birth in a pure or wealthy
family where there are devotees, and he will naturally
be attracted to bhakti again. And for the other man who
didn’t perform any bhajana? There is no real benefit for
him. Only to the degree that one can give his heart to
bhajana will he be benefited. So only a madhyama-
adhikārī Vaiṣṇava will be able to place emphasis on the
bhakti in others rather than on external considerations.



yadi kuryāt pramādena

yogī karma vigarhitam

yogenaiva dahed aṁho

nānyat tatra kadācana




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.25)



If an ordinary yogī somehow falls from his practice, he
will be finished. But if a bhakti-yogī accidentally
commits some detestable activity, then by his very
practice of bhakti-yoga he will again be set right. For
him there is no need of any other procedure. Continuing
to take harināma will be his only atonement. Devotees

                              71
Prabandhavali.txt                                5/5/2017

are not intentionally sinful, so therefore for them
there is no need of atonement. What has happened has
happened, but deliberately they wouldn’t commit sins.
Kṛṣṇa always forgives those who have bhakti for Him and
He makes their hearts pure in all ways.



aj—āne vā haya yadi ‘pāpa’ upasthita



kṛṣṇa tāṅre śuddha kare, nā karāya prāyaścitta




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.143)



If a devotee accidentally commits some sinful activity,
there is no need for him to undergo any atonement. By
continuing his practice of bhakti, his heart will be
purified. Those who know the tattva of bhagavad-bhakti
say that by the devotee’s continuing to take harināma
all impurities will leave him.



māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya

ye ’pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās

te ’pi yānti parāṁ gatim




Bhagavad-gītā (9.32)



[Śrī Kṛṣṇa said:] O son of Pṛthā, those who take shelter
of Me, though they be of lower birth – women, merchants
and manual labourers – can attain the supreme
destination.



Pāpa-yonayaḥ means those who are sinful by birth.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.4.18) has listed some of these
classes: Kirāta, Hūṇa, Āndhra. Kirāta live in the jungle
and kill and eat the flesh of animals and birds, even
pigeons. They keep goats, sheep and pigs, and after
fattening them up, they slaughter them and eat their
flesh. Yavana, Khasa and all similar tribes do this.
They are sinful from birth to death. Actually, for them
eating meat is nothing; they don’t even have any
conventions such as marriage for relationships between
men and women! From birth they eat meat, drink liquor

                              72
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

and freely unite with women. Striyo means women. Though
some are chaste, these days most women are unchaste. And
the śūdras kill the cow, eat its flesh and use its skin
to make shoes. Te ‘pi yānti parāṁ gatim: even these
people can attain the supreme destination through
executing bhagavad-bhakti, so what to speak of those who
engage in exclusive devotion but may have accidentally
fallen?

If one engages in bhakti-sādhana and takes shelter of
harināma and hearing hari-kathā, then birth after birth
the result from that will never be destroyed, as long as
there has been no vaiṣṇava-aparādha. The seed of bhakti
is within that sādhaka. Birth after birth his sukṛti
will become stronger and stronger, and eventually he
will attain para-bhakti. For those who have some special
eagerness, it may even be possible in only two or three
births. Bhagavān will lead us to Him — either today, or
after ten, twenty or one thousand births He will
eventually lead us to Him, as long as the seed within us
has not been destroyed. And there is only one thing that
does that — aparādha towards the guru or Vaiṣṇavas.

The jīva has independence, and by misuse of this
independence he becomes implicated in the reactions to
his own misdeeds. If by this independence one has
blasphemed or offended any Vaiṣṇava, then that is due to
the uncontrolled mind. We should never offend a Vaiṣṇava
because from the śakti of guru and Vaiṣṇavas we will get
the mercy of Bhagavān. What determines if we will do
bhajana or not do bhajana? Whose desire determines this?
Bhagavān’s? No, it is ours only. If we simply take up
bhajana, then guru and the Vaiṣṇavas will be merciful
and give us the necessary strength to achieve the direct
mercy of Bhagavān. But first of all the desire must come
from within us. And if while engaging in bhajana, the
desires for prestige and wealth exist within us, should
we think that Bhagavān put them there? “I am doing just
as Bhagavān inspires me” — we shouldn’t think like this
in regard to anarthas. Those things are due solely to
our own weakness. If we are unable to absorb our minds
in bhagavad-bhajana, whose fault is that? Ours only, and
not Bhagavān’s. Don’t think that “Bhagavān is doing this
to me.” Bhagavān is merely bestowing the reactions to
our own activities. Reactions to our previous pious and
sinful activities will come, and we will feel some
difficulty because of them. So it is correct to think
that He is bestowing the fruits of our karma, but
otherwise He has no direct relationship with our
difficulties.

If a devotee who practises exclusive bhajana is struck
by a serious disease, why has it happened? It is a
reaction to the sins of his previous lives. But
sometimes Bhagavān will even put such an apparent
obstacle in a sādhaka’s path in order to curb his pride.
He may try to increase that devotee’s humility by this
means. Therefore, beware! Don’t think ill of another
devotee because some fault may appear in his body or in
his nature. If we maintain such an attitude towards
devotees who are engaged in exclusive bhajana, we will
be expelled from the kingdom of bhakti. We should
consider all of these points and understand their
importance in our pursuit of bhakti. If someone is lame,

                           73
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

blind, a Kirāta, Āndhra, Pulinda or whatever, but has
become a devotee, then Bhagavān will bestow upon him all
good qualities and eventually take him up to Vaikuṇṭha.
Therefore we should never harbour any ill feelings
towards anyone who practises exclusive bhajana. And one
who behaves nicely, who has a very attractive appearance
and who has taken birth in a brāhmaṇa family but doesn’t
engage in bhajana — it is all useless and his life has
no meaning. Don’t think that this is an astonishing
thing; it is simply a quality of bhakti.

According to their natures some people may have many
faults, but we should always place emphasis on their
bhakti instead. It is not that an ill-behaved person
cannot take the name of Bhagavān, cannot do bhajana or
cannot hear hari-kathā. And it is not that only those
who have taken birth within the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya,
vaiśya and śūdra classes can take harināma. Whatever
condition one is in, even if he is as sinful as Ajāmila
was, he can chant Bhagavān’s name and hear hari-kathā,
and in this way become qualified to always remember Him.

Kirāta, Āndhra, Pulinda, Śumbha, Yavana — these are all
sinful classes of people from the time of the
Bhāgavatam. They still exist today but in different
forms. They all originate from the Hindu lineage. All of
the people that we see in India today, whether they are
Muslims, Christians, Buddhists or Jains, all had the
same source: Brahmā. So originally there was only one
class of humans, but some degraded and became sinful by
nature. In Āssām there is a class of people who smoke
different varieties of hemp with a water-pipe. Anytime
there is some important task to be accomplished, they
first all get together and smoke. They even engage their
children in smoking, so they are sinful from birth.
Others may take a good birth but become sinful later in
life. If either of these classes of sinful people
associate with sādhus and take shelter of a guru, they
can be purified and their faults will be destroyed.

But will they be able to leave all those faults at once?
If we see that someone is worshipping several demigods
and goddesses, and we say to him, “My friend, don’t
worship Durgā at this time of Navarātri. Instead worship
Kṛṣṇa,” then they will not come in our direction.
Therefore we should just let them come with whatever
conceptions they may have, and after they have sat and
heard something three or four times, it will start to
become natural for them. Even if they are sometimes
drinking wine, we should think nothing of it. Such a
thing is written in the Bhāgavatam:



loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā

nityā hi jantor na hi tatra codanā

vyavasthitis teṣu vivāha-yaj—a-

surā-grahair āsu nivṛttir iṣṭā




                              74
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.11)



It is not proper to drink liquor, but if a newcomer
takes a little wine at the time of a marriage or a
festival, we should think nothing of it. After hearing
more and more hari-kathā, they will automatically give
up these bad habits. But in the very beginning the
practice of strict bhakti-sādhana doesn’t always come
naturally.



aho bata śva-paco ’to garīyān

yaj-jihvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam

tepus tapas te juhuvuḥ sasnur āryā

brahmānūcur nāma gṛnanti ye te




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.33.7)



[Devahūti said to Kapiladeva:] How glorious are they
whose tongues are chanting your holy name! Even if they
were born in the families of dog-eaters, such persons
are worshipful. Those who chant your holy name must have
performed all kinds of austerities and fire sacrifices,
bathed at holy places of pilgrimage, studied the Vedas
and become fully qualified in all ways.”



For one who has ruci for chanting the name of Bhagavān
and for hearing hari-kathā, there is no necessity to
perform any separate austerities or sacrifices or to
study the Vedas. Even if his behaviour is opposed to
Vedic principles, people ordinarily think that his
bhakti will be destroyed, but it is not necessarily so.

In the first part of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, there is a
section where Nārada and Hanumān are conversing. Upon
hearing how dear Draupadī, Arjuna and all the Pāṇḍavas
are to Kṛṣṇa, Nārada became very pleased and began
dancing. Hanumān also danced with great happiness. In
such devotees there are no reservations or feelings of
shyness; their ānanda increased as they discussed this
topic and naturally they began dancing. Hanumān proposed
that Nārada should go to Hastināpura to have darśana of
the Pāṇḍavas and then spoke this verse:



bṛhad-vrata-dharān asmāṁs

taṁś ca gārhasthya-dharmiṇaḥ


                              75
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

samrāya-vyāpṛtan matvā

māparādha-vṛto bhava




Bṛhad-bhāgavatamāmṛta (1.4.114)



Please don’t commit the offence of thinking that we are
naiṣṭhika-brahmacārīs, whereas the Pāṇḍavas are mere
gṛhasthas busy in managing a kingdom.



Those who have the firm resolution to never become
householders are called naiṣṭhika-brahmacārīs. From
following this vow comes the qualification to follow
sannyāsa-dharma. The other type of brahmacārī is called
upakurvāṇa. They remain in white cloth and serve as
brahmacārīs, but those who desire to do so can return to
their homes and marry. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were
upakurvāṇa-brahmacārīs because after studying under
their guru, they returned to their home. Śukadeva
Gosvāmī, Nārada, the Kumāras and Hanumān never married
and were naiṣṭhika-brahmacārīs. Vyāsadeva, Janaka
Mahārāja and Ambarīṣa Mahārāja were all upakurvāṇa-
brahmacārīs who returned to their homes and performed
bhajana there.

Nārada was a naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī who had renounced
everything and didn’t accumulate anything at all,
whereas the Pāṇḍavas were followers of gṛhastha-dharma
engaged in managing the affairs of a kingdom; so between
them, who is superior? If Nārada goes to the palace of
the Pāṇḍavas, who will offer praṇāma to whom? The
Pāṇḍavas will offer praṇāma to Nārada, even though their
bhakti is higher than his, because they will honour the
regulations of their āśrama as defined within the
varṇāśrama system. Similarly, when Caitanya Mahāprabhu
was a young sannyāsī and went to the place of
Vallabhācārya, who was approximately ninety years old
and conversant in all the śāstras, Mahāprabhu fell at
his feet. Mahāprabhu behaved in the same fashion with
Advaita Ācārya, but internally Advaita Prabhu respected
Mahāprabhu as his master.

So Hanumān was saying that it is not proper to analyse
whether one is a brahmacārī or a gṛhastha because we may
become offenders. One who possesses the most prema for
Bhagavān is superior, and being a gṛhastha is no
obstacle to this. And even in some situations, without
becoming a gṛhastha, loving feelings towards Bhagavān
will not come. For example, a gopī will not be able to
have parakīya-bhāva in kṛṣṇa-līlā without becoming
married. But marrying is not necessary for vaidhī-
bhakti, and it is not beneficial for rāgānuga-bhakti
either. Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs were naiṣṭhika-
brahmacārīs, but will a naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī ever take
employment in a kingdom as they did? So even though in
the strictest sense we can’t say they were really
naiṣṭika-brahmacārīs, they were endowed with millions of

                           76
Prabandhavali.txt                                5/5/2017

transcendental qualities and were real paramahaṁsas.

Therefore Hanumān is saying that one should not minimise
the position of the Pāṇḍavas just because they are
gṛhasthas and are always busy in managing the affairs of
a kingdom. Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is an emperor, why? For
the preaching of bhakti. Why does he have a relationship
with Draupadī? Because she is very dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Why is he so fond of Arjuna? Because Arjuna is the dear
friend of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we should never minimise the
position of Yudhiṣṭhira. He has three relationships with
Kṛṣṇa: as His guru, meaning that he has affection for
Kṛṣṇa just as a father would, as His friend and as His
servant. We shouldn’t think less of any of the Pāṇḍavas,
because they all have their own glorious relationship
with Bhagavān. Kuntī gave birth to them, and through
them the glories of kṛṣṇa-bhakti were spread throughout
the world. Also, every part of Draupadī’s life is full
of prema-bhakti for Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore we mustn’t consider that just because one is a
naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī he must be necessarily given more
respect than a gṛhastha. The calibre of bhakti in a
person is the important thing, whether they be a
sannyāsī, brahmacārī, gṛhastha, woman, prostitute, dog-
eater or whatever.




Chapter Ten

From Bhaktivinoda hākura’s Śrī Bhajana-rahasya




(1)



From Bhaktivinoda hākura’s Śrī Bhajana-rahasya, we will
discuss the first stage of bhajana, which is called
śraddhā.



guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 19.151)



By the mercy of guru and Kṛṣṇa the seed of the creeper
of bhakti is bestowed upon a fortunate soul.




                           77
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

Śraddhā means faith in the teachings of guru, Vaiṣṇavas
and śāstra. Here we are not speaking on whether someone
is sincerely engaged in bhajana or not, or whether they
have overcome their anarthas or not. Before that
consideration can come, a neophyte devotee must possess
the śraddhā that “I will do as my guru, the Vaiṣṇavas
and the scriptures instruct me.” Then in sequence he
will progress through the different stages on the
devotional path. Besides sādhu-saṅga there is no other
way of receiving the seed of the bhakti creeper. This
seed comes exclusively from hearing the words of a
sādhu. First of all there will be śraddhā, then one will
engage in sādhana-bhakti, and then so many devotional
activities will be performed — taking shelter at the
feet of a guru, accepting instruction from him, serving
him intimately and performing all the other limbs of
bhakti. But first there must be sādhu-saṅga, and as that
increases in quality, śraddhā towards kṛṣṇa-nāma will
arise. At first there won’t be niṣṭhā (firm resolution
in sādhana), but some faith will be there. When that
faith becomes of good quality, one will understand that
in the age of Kali there is no other method for
spiritual success besides taking kṛṣṇa-nāma, and that
this method will enable one to cross over the ocean of
material existence and attain the direct service of
Bhagavān. Besides taking the name of Bhagavān there is
no other way — performing austerities, following vows,
travelling to holy places, or whatever — they are all
secondary, and performing them alone will not enable one
to cross over the ocean of material existence and fully
please Bhagavān.

Therefore the sole method is the chanting of the name of
Bhagavān; this is the instruction given by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. And amongst all the names of Bhagavān, in
Kali-yuga the mahā-mantra is the topmost. Entering the
garden of Bhagavān’s names, Caitanya Mahāprabhu
specially selected kṛṣṇa-nāma as the most beautiful,
fragrant, soft and sweet nāma, and threading these names
together as the garland of the mahā-mantra, He bestowed
it upon the jīvas. He bestowed it upon whoever came
across His path: “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.”
Bhaktivinoda hākura says that for ordinary people and
for new sādhakas, this is who is being addressed by each
name within the mahā-mantra: “O Hari, O Kṛṣṇa, O Hari, O
Kṛṣṇa, O Kṛṣṇa, O Kṛṣṇa, O Hari, O Hari, O Hari, O Rāma,
O Hari, O Rāma, O Rāma, O Rāma, O Hari, O Hari.” In the
chanting of these names there is no consideration of
time, place or circumstance. Anyone can chant these
names. But as one follows the process and advances, he
will take shelter of the feet of a guru, hear hari-kathā
from him, and continue taking harināma. Then his
anarthas will begin to dissipate and for him the meaning
of these names will change. He will begin to feel that
Hare means Śrīmatī Rādhikā who steals away the heart of
Kṛṣṇa, and then, when chanting the mahā-mantra, this is
who he will be calling: “O Rādhā, O Kṛṣṇa, O Rādhā, O
Kṛṣṇa, O Kṛṣṇa, O Kṛṣṇa, O Rādhā, O Rādhā, O Rādhā, O
Rādhā-ramaṇa, O Rādhā, O Rādhā-ramaṇa, O Rādhā-ramaṇa, O
Rādhā-ramaṇa, O Rādhā, O Rādhā.” Then the full meaning
of the mantra will continue to bloom until one arrives
at the stage of bhāva. In Jagannātha Purī, Gopāla-guru
and his disciple Dhyānacandra heard instructions from

                           78
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Svarūpa Dāmodara that made them
realise this meaning of the mahā-mantra. And through
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī a more special meaning
manifested. Meditating on this meaning one should chant
harināma-japa and kīrtana and thereby progress steadily
upwards.

The beginning stages of sādhana have been compared to
the darkness of night. If you try to walk anywhere in
the darkness, you may stumble or step into a ditch or
even upon a snake, so there is some fear. Or if you
enter a jungle you may be attacked by a tiger or lion.
There are also thieves and dacoits to be wary of.
Thieves don’t come in the first part of the night
because at that time most people have just settled in
and can be easily awakened, but they come nearer to
morning when most people are in deep sleep. There are
also such thieves and fearful adversaries in the
beginning stages of bhajana. At this point the stars in
the evening sky have not yet disappeared, meaning lust,
anger, greed, envy and madness have not disappeared from
our hearts. Our many anarthas, which have been compared
to tigers and snakes, are hidden in all directions. But
will the practice of sādhana alone make the sun of
spiritual perfection rise? When does the sun rise? When
the appropriate time comes, and not before. So here one
thing is possible: if a lamp is lit in the night, then
snakes and other fearful adversaries will flee. It is
the guru who lights this lamp for us by giving us
harināma and making us hear hari-kathā. Then the
anarthas which remain within us will begin to fade, but
is that alone enough to make the sun rise? The sun of
full realisation of the holy name will rise according to
its own sweet will; it is fully independent.



ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ




Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.234)



The material senses cannot perceive the names, form,
qualities and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Only when one is
fully absorbed in serving Him does the real nāma appear
on one’s tongue, bestowing full realisation of Him.



Just as the sun rises at precisely the appropriate time,
when the time is right the holy name will appear on a
devotee’s tongue and illuminate everything within his
heart. And just as when the sun rises there is no need
of any electric light or candle because everything is

                              79
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

automatically illuminated, when the holy name bestows
full realisation upon a devotee, he will have a clear
understanding of himself in his constitutional position,
and all of his fear will vanish.



‘eka’ kṛṣṇa-nāme kare sarva-pāpa nāśa



premera kāraṇa bhakti karena prakāśa




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 8.26)



Simply chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma without offences vanquishes
all sinful activities, and thus bhakti, which is the
cause of prema, becomes manifest.



By its mercy the holy name will fully reveal itself, but
as long as it hasn’t arisen in the heart, we can only
endeavour to make the darkness go away, meaning we must
continue executing sādhana in an effort to rid ourselves
of our anarthas.

Next Bhaktivinoda hākura says that after one accepts a
guru and the seed of the creeper of bhakti is planted in
his heart, the seed must be carefully cultivated and
then a seedling will appear. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam —
slowly the devotee’s consciousness is being purified.
The holy name is completely sac-cid-ānanda — it is not a
material vibration. We cannot manipulate it or control
it in any way; perhaps premī devotees can overpower it,
but in our present condition we cannot. We have been
bound by māyā since time immemorial. We have been
wandering in the material realm sometimes as kings,
sometimes as demigods, sometimes as insects, and in many
other species also. Wandering and wandering, by the
causeless mercy of Bhagavān we attain the company of
Vaiṣṇavas. One who has merit from previous lifetimes
will automatically attain very high quality Vaiṣṇava
association, and upon hearing their hari-kathā, his
anarthas will at once disappear and he will swiftly
enter into bhakti. But for one who doesn’t have this
previous merit, there will be some delay. Still, he
should remain patient and continue performing sādhana in
the company of Vaiṣṇavas, because whether the śraddhā
that has arisen in one’s heart is based on scriptural
regulations or of the nature of pure spiritual greed,
one must always remain in sādhu-saṅga.

The jīva is covered by a material body and a subtle
body, and as long as they remain, he thinks “I am this
body” or “I am mind, intelligence and ego.” Because
bhagavan-nāma is transcendental, it does not manifest to
the material senses. However, if one becomes fully pure,

                           80
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

then the sun of the holy name will arise in his heart.
But in our present condition everything is material —
our bodies, our minds, everything we do and say — so how
will this transcendental, sac-cid-ānanda bhagavan-nāma
appear in our hearts? Regarding this point, Bhaktivinoda
hākura says, “Listen to the method.” First one receives
sādhu-saṅga, and then he accepts a guru, but that
doesn’t just mean going through the ritual of
initiation. “Whatever Gurujī says, I will certainly do”
— one must have this determination, and for that three
things are necessary: paripraśnena (sincere inquiry),
praṇipātena (submission) and sevayā (service attitude).
With these three things we will begin hearing from the
guru. Gurujī will say, “Listen! You must overcome your
anarthas.”

Then the disciple will ask, “Gurujī, what are anarthas?”

Gurujī says, “That which has no artha (value), which is
not beneficial to our very selves, the soul, is called
an anartha.”

“Gurujī, please explain it in more detail. I have not
completely understood.”

“Then listen attentively — I will also tell you how you
can eradicate them.”



māyā-mugdhasya jīvasya

j—eyo ’narthaś catur-vidhaḥ

hṛd-daurbalyaṁ cāparādho

’sat-tṛṣṇā tattva-vibhramaḥ




Śrī Bhajana-rahasya (2.7)



Having prema for Bhagavān is our original artha, that
which is our real wealth. Kṛṣṇa-prema is our objective,
and within this kṛṣṇa-prema, rādhā-dāsya is our ultimate
objective. This is our artha, and that which hinders and
obscures this is called an anartha. There are four kinds
of them, and the first is called svarūpa-bhrama — being
in illusion concerning what our inherent form is, and
what the form of para-tattva, Bhagavān, is. Some say, “I
am Brahman” or “I am Bhagavān.” Others say that Indra is
Bhagavān, and others say that Gaṇeśa is Bhagavān. Others
say, “Both Indra and Gaṇeśa are Brahman, as are me, you,
your wife and children, and everyone else in the
universe: sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma. Since we are all
Brahman, is there any necessity of engaging in bhajana?
There is no necessity of it whatsoever.” This is all
bhrama, illusion. Therefore one must first understand,
“Who am I?” One should rid himself of the first stage of
illusion, which is thinking that he is the physical
body. Then he will realise that the activities which he

                              81
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

has been busily engaged in from dawn to dusk are all
anartha. Understanding ātma-tattva means to realise that
one is an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. And who is para-
tattva? Not Brahman, not even Paramātmā, but only Kṛṣṇa,
who is our supreme artha. This understanding is our
everything:



ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ

kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28)



Kṛṣṇa is Bhagavān Himself — this is para-tattva. And
what is His nature? He is sarva-śaktimān, the possessor
of all potencies, who can make the impossible possible.
Why should we worship Gaṇeśa, Brahmā or Śaṅkara when
they themselves worship Kṛṣṇa? And in what forms do we
worship Kṛṣṇa? As Madana-mohana, Govinda and Gopīnātha —
these three are one tattva. As Madana-mohana He
establishes our sambandha (eternal relationship), as
Govinda He accepts our service and then as Gopīnātha He
bestows our prayojana (ultimate objective), which is
prema. Therefore only Kṛṣṇa is para-tattva, and all
others are His parts, plenary portions, or shadow
potencies such as Brahmā.

There is also sādhya-bhrama, which is illusion in
regards to how one will attain his ultimate goal. How
will one meet Kṛṣṇa? Not by giving charity, not by
performing pious activity, not by travelling to holy
places, not by studying scriptures or by any other
method. The only way in Kali-yuga is performance of
harināma-saṅkīrtana. Our basic foodstuff may be roṭi,
but with that there should be some dahl, some sabjī and
also some milk. These other preparations are necessary
to make the meal complete. Therefore the instruction
“Only chant harināma!” is given, but understand that
included within the chanting of harināma are sixty-four
kinds of bhakti. Within this nāma is everything; nothing
remains outside of it. Taking shelter of the feet of a
guru, the sixty-four kinds of bhakti and all of the
thousands of devotional activities are included within
it. Don’t think that we will only take harināma and do
nothing more. But we can condense those sixty-four kinds
of bhakti into nine, and then again into five:



sādhu-saṅga, nāma-kīrtana, bhāgavata-śravaṇa

mathurā-vāsa, śrī-mūrtira śraddhāya sevana


sakala-sādhana-śrestha ei pa—ca aṅga

kṛṣṇa-prema janmāya ei pā—cera alpa saṅga

                             82
Prabandhavali.txt                                5/5/2017




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.128–9)



One should keep the company of sādhus, chant harināma,
hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, reside in Mathurā and serve the
deity of Bhagavān with faith. These five devotional
activities are superior to the rest because even a
slight performance of them awakens kṛṣṇa-prema inside
one.



Of these, three are primary: śravaṇam, kīrtanam and
smaraṇam. And then condensing it further, Rūpa Gosvāmī
says that attaching the mind to the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa
through smaraṇam, one should take harināma. And finally
it is told that by taking harināma alone all perfection
is attained. So within this one activity, there are
many; a line is made of so many dots. Included within
the performance of nāma-saṅkīrtana are the sixty-four
varieties of bhakti, the path of rāgānuga-bhakti, and
everything.

First of all there is śravaṇam — hearing from a sad-guru
about these four kinds of svarūpa-bhrama: being
illusioned concerning one’s own inherent svarūpa, being
illusioned concerning Bhagavān’s svarūpa, being
illusioned concerning the nature of one’s sādhana, and
not recognising things that are opposed to the healthy
cultivation of bhajana. The knowledge of these four
things constitutes the tattva of śuddha-sādhana. We must
know what is opposed to bhajana or we will be lost, like
the sahajiyās and so many others.

Next comes asat-tṛṣṇā. Tṛṣṇā means hunger or thirst, and
one should have hunger for keeping the company of
sādhus, and for hearing, meditating on and singing the
glories of Bhagavān.




prema-dhana vinā vyartha daridra jīvana




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 20.37)



Kṛṣṇa-prema is the only wealth; without it one’s life is
useless, and such a person can be said to be really
living in poverty. “Prabhu, please accept me as Your
servant and give me prema for You” — this is hunger in
its pure form. In relation to food, there are some
things that can be taken, such as certain tonics, which
increase one’s appetite, and there are other things,
such as tea and coffee, which diminish one’s hunger.

                           83
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

Similarly, there are certain activities, such as hearing
the glories of Bhagavān and taking His name, which
increase one’s hunger for prema, which is the real
tṛṣṇā. But those things which diminish our hunger for
prema are called asat-tṛṣṇā, and they are of four kinds:



aihikeṣv aiṣanā pāra-

trikeṣu caiṣaṇā ’śubhā

bhūti-vā—chā mumukṣā ca

hy asat-tṛṣṇāś catur-vidhāḥ




Śrī Bhajana-rahasya (2.9)



As long as these four remain, one will have no hunger
for the prema of Bhagavān, and bhakti will not come in
its pure form. Therefore we should make an effort to
keep these four at a distance. The first is aihika
viṣaya, which means worldly desires, and amongst them
three are primary: kanaka, kāmīni and pratiṣṭhā. As long
as the desire for these three exist within a devotee,
bhakti will not manifest within him.

The next kind of asat-tṛṣṇā is called pāratrika, which
means the desire for attaining heaven or liberation. We
should keep the desire for these far away because they
are detrimental for attaining bhakti. The next is bhūti-
vāñchā, which means the desire for mystic perfections.
We should simply offer our praṇāma to these perfections
from a distance and put our full faith in the name of
Bhagavān, which possesses all śakti. It possesses a
śakti that cannot be found in anything else.



muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitā—jaliḥ sevate ’smān

dharmārtha-kāma-gatayaḥ samaya-pratīkṣāḥ




Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (107)



Dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa and the eight yogic
perfections will remain standing behind a devotee
saying, “Prabhu, when will I acquire the good
opportunity to render service to you?” But we won’t ever
look in their direction. If we were to have access to
these perfections in our present condition, we would
certainly abandon our bhakti. Therefore, being kind,
Bhagavān won’t give us these perfections even though He
has invested all of His śakti in His name. What will not

                              84
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017

come from chanting the holy name? If a sincere devotee
requires some facility for his service, then Bhagavān
will certainly supply it. He will definitely fulfil such
desires for one who takes harināma purely. But for now
Bhagavān sees that we still have so many anarthas, and
therefore giving us any perfections would be detrimental
to our bhakti. It is like a small child who desires to
cut up some fruit to eat. Then his father takes the
knife and begins to cut it for him, but the child
insists, “No, no Father! I want to cut it myself!” But
the father says, “My son, if I give you the knife you
may harm yourself,” and he continues to cut the fruit
himself. We know that all śakti exists within the holy
name, it is cinmaya; therefore, even though the fruit of
taking the nāma may not be apparent to us now, we should
know that there is a very great fruit coming from it. It
is just that in our present condition we may not be
fully experiencing it. Don’t think that there is no
śakti in harināma, or that there is no śakti in hari-
kathā. It is there, but the guru and Bhagavān keep it a
little hidden from us so that we don’t make a mistake
and harm ourselves.

There are two categories of liberation, and we should
not desire either of them. The first is to think, “I am
Brahman,” and the second category includes sārūpya,
sārṣṭi, sāmīpya and sālokya. We should keep the desire
for all these at a distance as well. At first we are
told that we should leave the desire for worldly
pleasure and pursue the pleasure of prema, but really,
we should abandon the desire for that pleasure also!
When we have no desire whatsoever for our own happiness,
then our service will go directly to Kṛṣṇa. We won’t
desire to reside in any realm other than Vraja, where
Bhagavān is in His complete form. Everywhere else He is
in a partial form. All of this falls within asat-tṛṣṇā,
and next we will explain aparādha and hṛdaya-daurbalya.




(2)



Having faith in guru, Vaiṣṇava, harināma and śāstra is
the first part of the kingdom of bhajana. Included
within the second part are taking initiation from a
guru, serving him intimately and accepting instruction
from him concerning our sva-dharma — “How should I
perform bhajana? Who is our worshipful deity?” This
second part of sādhana-bhajana is compared to the
sunrise, which dissipates the darkness of ignorance. The
darkness is caused by these four kinds of anarthas:
svarūpa-bhrama, asat-tṛṣṇā, aparādha and hṛdaya-
daurbalya.

Bhaktivinoda hākura describes four types of aparādha.
The first is nāma-aparādha, and because most readers are
probably already familiar with the ten kinds of nāma-
aparādha, I won’t explain them here. The second type of
aparādha is the offence to the Vaiṣṇava, which is the
most serious. Very few people would intentionally offend

                           85
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

their guru, but in general people cannot recognise the
greatness of a real sādhu. There are many saints in this
world who are niṣkiñcana (possessionless), and who are
completely free from pride and any desire for prestige,
but to fully understand their greatness is very, very
difficult. Generally people just detect some apparent
faults in either their natures or appearances. But
understanding the full glory of a real saint is very
difficult even for the demigods, and unless one has
himself become an elevated soul, he will not be able to
understand. Sometimes it is even very difficult for
elevated Vaiṣṇavas to understand. One must first be able
to understand the gradation in Vaiṣṇavas, and upon
recognising a real saint, be prepared to serve him.
Otherwise one may consider a non-Vaiṣṇava to be a
Vaiṣṇava, and a Vaiṣṇava to be a non-Vaiṣṇava.

The third type of offence is aparādha towards the
svarūpa of Bhagavān. Because in our present condition we
have no direct relationship with Bhagavān Himself, there
is no possibility of committing offences to His svarūpa.
But the śrī vigraha is also directly Kṛṣṇa, and this
refers to offences committed in serving the deity. It is
possible for a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī Vaiṣṇava to commit
offences, but it is not possible for an uttama-adhikārī
Vaiṣṇava to commit an offence. But who will pass
judgement on what is an offence and what isn’t? Once a
saint fell asleep with his feet facing a mosque. Then a
Muslim priest came and said, “Hey! You are sleeping with
your feet pointing towards the mosque?”

The saint replied, “You please do one thing: place my
feet so that they are pointing in a direction where
there is no mosque and there is no Allah.”

Becoming a little worried, the priest said, “But Allah
and the mosque are only in that direction.”

The saint replied, “My friend, is there any place where
Allah is not?” That priest was bemused and just went
away. For an ordinary man to have done this would have
been an offence, but for such a mahātmā it was not. We
should not impose our own ideas of what is correct and
incorrect on them. The scriptures have benevolently
given rules that are favourable to our spiritual
welfare, but sometimes a devotee who has reached the
stage of bhāva may transgress them. Quarrelling and
fighting with Bhagavān is not proper, but sometimes it
is seen that an elevated devotee may do this. Vaṁśī dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja and Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja
would quarrel with their own object of worship.
Understanding this is very, very difficult. To do this
would certainly be aparādha for those of us who are
kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs and who have not yet passed through
the darkness of ignorance.

The fourth kind of offence is aparādha towards other
jīvas in general. Because Prahlāda Mahārāja was an
uttama mahā-bhāgavata Vaiṣṇava, he could see the
presence of his worshipful deity in the heart of every
living entity, and in his worshipful deity he could see
the presence of all living entities. This is the symptom
of a mahā-bhagavata; it is a very elevated stage. We
should never disturb another soul. If we do so for our

                           86
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

own profit, then we will not be able to engage in
bhajana. As kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs we should respect all
jīvas as the residences of Bhagavān, so what to speak of
the respect we will give to Bhagavān’s devotees? So we
should not commit any aparādha towards these four:
Bhagavān Himself (meaning the śrī vigraha), the holy
name, the Vaiṣṇavas and ordinary people. If one desires
to be a Vaiṣṇava and to experience the sunrise in his
bhajana, then all of these anarthas must be kept far
away.

Next Śrīla Bhaktivinoda hākura describes hṛdaya-
daurbalya (weakness of heart):



tucchāsaktiḥ kuṭīnātī

mātsaryaṁ sva-pratiṣṭhatā

hṛd-daurbalyaṁ budhaiḥ śaśvaj

j—eyaṁ kila catur-vidham




Śrī Bhajana-rahasya (2.11)



Those who are enlightened and elevated in bhajana have
said that hṛdaya-daurbalya is of four kinds. The first
is to leave Kṛṣṇa and bhagavad-bhakti and become
attached to any worldly object, whether it be gross or
subtle. Next is kuṭīnātī, which refers to the many
different kinds of prohibited activities, such as
keeping bad association. It can also mean dishonesty or
cheating, and the desire for liberation is the primary
form of this cheating.

The next kind of hṛdaya-daurbalya is mātsarya, which
means seeing the good qualities in another and silently
burning in envy. The last is pratiṣṭhā, the desire for
prestige. Once all the demigods were welcoming Indra.
Seating him on an opulent siṁhāsana, they offered him a
garland composed of very large, fragrant flowers while
repeatedly exclaiming, “Indra kī jaya ho!” Meanwhile
Indra’s guru, Bṛhaspati, approached and, seeing him
coming, Indra began to think, “If he enters this
assembly, then everyone will show respect to him and my
prestige will be diminished.” Understanding the feelings
within his disciple, Bṛhaspati left there and vowed to
never return. The demons came to know of this and said,
“Today Indra has offended his own guru! Therefore we
should attack immediately.” So they attacked, and Indra
fled away from heaven. But there was no place where he
could go to escape the reaction to his offence. He had
to take birth as a pig, and mate with female pigs. After
suffering this reaction he was again brought back to
heaven. Even Indra is affected by the desire for
prestige, so what to speak of an ordinary man? One may
be able to abandon everything else, but the desire for
prestige may still remain. Therefore with great care we

                             87
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

should endeavour to rid ourselves of this desire.

As one’s anarthas gradually begin to disappear,
exclusive sentiment for Kṛṣṇa will arise in the heart.
Respect will be given to all, but only Kṛṣṇa will be our
worshipful deity. But what else comes along with this?
In the same way that we will be remembering Kṛṣṇa, we
will also meditate on those who are near and dear to
Him; we should have so much respect for them. Ultimately
we should give even more importance to them than to
Kṛṣṇa Himself, and then He will be so pleased with us.
Otherwise bhakti will not come to us. There are many who
claim to be followers of Kṛṣṇa, yet they don’t respect
His devotees such as the gopīs. But Bhaktivinoda hākura
has gone as far as to say that those who worship Kṛṣṇa
without Rādhā are mere atheists. They will never attain
bhakti, not even ordinary bhakti. People who insist on
worshipping Kṛṣṇa alone become irritated when they hear
this, but this is what Bhaktivinoda hākura says. And if
someone worships all the forms of Bhagavān along with
Kṛṣṇa, then exclusive bhakti will never come to them
either. Rūpa Gosvāmī has given the process for attaining
exclusive bhakti:



tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya




Śrī Upadeśāmṛta (8)



One should engage the tongue in chanting nāma-kīrtana
and the mind in deeply remembering the descriptions of
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. And together with this, one should
have a strong feeling of one’s own lowliness — “I am
helpless; I am unable to meditate on Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. I
am not capable of ridding myself of my anarthas, and
lust, anger, greed, illusion and envy are swallowing me
up. The desire for prestige is destroying me. O
Gurudeva! O Vaiṣṇavas! O Gopīnātha! Hear my plea! Except
for You there is no one who can save me!” First
expressing these feelings sincerely, with tears in the
eyes, is so necessary. Actually being able to meditate
on Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes comes later; in the stage of bhāva
it starts to become possible. But without śravaṇa,
kīrtana and smaraṇa of Bhagavān, a devotee will not be
able to concentrate his mind in sādhana.

Sometimes we see that a devotee has some special niṣṭhā
for one of the nine limbs of bhakti. He doesn’t
disrespect the other limbs, but has attained Bhagavān
through exclusive practice of one of them. Prahlāda
Mahārāja did so by smaraṇa, Śukadeva Gosvāmī by kīrtana
and Parīkṣit Mahārāja by śravaṇa. But Bhaktivinoda
hākura says that unless engaged in hearing, chanting and
remembering, a neophyte devotee who aspires for the
exclusive prema of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa will simply not
be able to absorb his mind in bhajana.

                           88
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017


Service to the deity is of two types: arcana-pūjana and
bhāvamayī-sevā. The Gosvāmīs did both kinds, but they
taught that the glories of bhāvamayī-sevā are greater.
Rūpa Gosvāmī installed the Govindajī deity, and Sanātana
Gosvāmī installed Madana-mohana. In the morning they
would offer pūjā to the deity in a regulated manner, and
then after offering some prayers and praṇāmas, they
would go out.



rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭe kalinda-tanayā-tīre ca vaṁśīvaṭe

premonmāda-vaśād aśeṣa-daśayā grastau pramattau sadā

gāyantau ca kadā harer guṇa-varaṁ bhāvābhibhūtau mudā

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau




Śrī Íaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭaka (7)



Overwhelmed by the divine madness of prema and
exhibiting symptoms of intense separation, the Six
Gosvāmīs would constantly wander around Vraja singing
the glories of Śrī Hari in great ecstasy. Sometimes they
would be at the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, sometimes at the
shores of the Yamunā and sometimes at Vaṁśīvaṭa.



This is bhāvamayī-sevā. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī served a
govardhana-śilā, but by bhāvamayī-sevā. He saw Girirāja
as Kṛṣṇa, and the guñjā-mālā as Rādhā. Giving the guñjā-
mālā to Girirāja, what were his feelings? “Today I have
arranged for Rādhā to meet with Kṛṣṇa.” And how did They
meet? Where is the mālā placed? At the chest of Kṛṣṇa,
so he would feel, “Now Rādhā is at Kṛṣṇa’s chest.” With
great ecstasy and crying, sometimes he would hold
Girirāja up to his brow, and sometimes he would place
Him on his head. Sometimes he would hold Girirāja close
to his heart and bathe Him with his tears, and he was
completely indifferent to everything of this world. This
is bhāvamayī-sevā.

Bhaktivinoda hākura says that one should chant the mahā-
mantra and all other mantras given to us by our guru —
the guru-gāyatrī, the gaura-gāyatrī, the gopāla-mantra
and the kāma-gāyatrī — with great love and adoration.
They should be chanted with great feeling according to
one’s own particular rasa. Then the sun will begin to
rise, meaning that by the influence of sādhu-saṅga,
one’s ruci has increased. He has renounced everything;
he has abandoned his beloved wife and children, his
affectionate mother and father, his home, his money,
fine clothing and servants. But if he hasn’t abandoned
the cardinal anartha — pratiṣṭhā — he may again return
to all of those attachments. But if he has no desire for
pratiṣṭhā, yet still has some attachment for some other

                             89
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

thing, then there is nothing to worry about. To enter
the realm of bhajana, the desire for pratiṣṭhā must be
abandoned. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda
compared the desire for pratiṣṭhā to the stool of a pig.
For a sādhaka, abandoning the desire for pratiṣṭhā is
the most important thing. If he has done so, then soon
the sun will be rising, meaning that soon bhakti will be
arising within him. But if he has not rid himself of
this desire, then he will remain in the darkness of
night.

As one hears hari-kathā from scriptures like Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu in the company of
Vaiṣṇavas, then gradually his anarthas will disappear,
sambandha-jñāna will arise within him and he himself
will become an exclusive Vaiṣṇava. Then he will serve
Kṛṣṇa by bhāvamayī-sevā, and he will begin to meditate
on one particular form and pastime of Kṛṣṇa. In the
Dāmodarāṣṭaka, Satyavrata Muni prays to Kṛṣṇa as He is
being caught from behind by Yaśodā. Tying a rope around
Kṛṣṇa’s waist, she binds Him to the grinding mortar. He
is crying, and when the kājala that decorates His eyes
mixes with His tears, it is like the flowing currents of
the Gaṅgā and Yamunā. Kṛṣṇa is taking long breaths, and
due to this His earrings are swinging to and fro. His
neck is decorated by three lines, and He is wearing a
large flower-garland across His chest. Desiring to kiss
the face of Kṛṣṇa as Yaśodā and the gopīs do, intense
hankering arises in the heart of Satyavrata Muni.
Offering praṇāma to Kṛṣṇa hundreds of times, he prays
that realisation of the Bāla-gopāla form of Kṛṣṇa will
always flow in his heart, and that Kṛṣṇa will grant
darśana of that form to his eyes as well.

This type of meditation where one particular form and
pastime of Bhagavān is concentrated on is called
mantramayī-upāsanā. We can sing in glorification of only
one pastime, but so many other pastimes spring from that
one pastime, and the flow continues in all directions.
In a continuous flow one pastime finishes and another
begins. In the bāla-līlā of Kṛṣṇa, there are so many
pastimes, and when one meditates in this way,
realisation of all of those pastimes will come. This
principle especially applies to mādhurya-rasa. Deeply
remembering Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, the gopīs sat in
meditation. In their meditation they passed through the
stages of āsana, prāṇāyāma, dhyāna, dhāraṇā, dhruvāsmṛti
and samādhi, and reached a stage of samādhi where one’s
eyes remain open. This kind of samādhi is possible while
one is walking, sitting or whatever. They went to Kṛṣṇa
in the night, and He said to them, “You are all
supremely fortunate. You have come from afar, and you
have not been hindered by any obstacle. You all came for
My darśana, and you have received it. You have now seen
the beauty of the forest at night. So many beautiful
flowers are blooming, and all the birds are making the
beautiful ëkala-rava’ sound. The waves of the Yamunā are
gently flowing, and on them the lotuses are blooming.
And do you know that I am Bhagavān? Have you heard it
somewhere?”

“Yes, yes, we have heard it — from Garga ¬ṣi or
Paurṇamāsī or someone — we have heard it, but we don’t
believe it. How is it possible for such a debauchee,

                           90
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

thief and liar as You to be Bhagavān? We don’t believe
even one percent of it.”

“So you have received My darśana, now please return to
your homes. The supreme dharma for wives is to serve
their husbands. It is a very dark night, and there are
many

dangerous creatures lurking.”



rajany eṣā ghora-rūpā

ghora-sattva-niṣevitā




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.19)



Two meanings can be applied to what Kṛṣṇa says here.
When the Sanskrit words are separated in a different
way, ghora, meaning fearsome, becomes aghora, which
means harmless. In the second meaning He is saying,
“This forest is inhabited by harmless creatures such as
peacocks and deer, and therefore you should stay.” So He
is simultaneously teasing and enchanting them with His
clever words.

“You all return quickly! Otherwise your husbands will
come searching for you. If they see you with Me, it will
not be good for Me, and it will not be good for you
either. Your dharma will be ruined, so quickly go!”

The gopīs replied, “If You are really Bhagavān, then
with Your own mouth You have given this order:



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja




Bhagavad-gītā (18.66)



Abandon all dharma and surrender exclusively to Me.



So then what error have we committed? In another place
You have said that one should offer pūjā to the guru
before offering pūjā to Bhagavān. We have never heard
instructions as beautiful as those You have just given
us; therefore we accept You as our guru, so we should
stay with You and serve You first! Some say that You
have spoken the words of the scriptures, and others say

                           91
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

that the scriptures have emanated from Your breathing.
We don’t know which is true, but we have read in the
scriptures that only Bhagavān is the husband of all
husbands. So if You are really Bhagavān, then offering
pūjā to You is our sole duty. We have also heard that
those who serve Mukunda have no other debt upon them —
no debt to the demigods, to their mother or father, or
to anyone. If You do not accept our pūjā, then You will
be disregarding what has been said in the scriptures.
The reaction to this irreligiosity will come to You, and
You will fall down from the path of dharma. We have left
everything to be with You, and we have given three or
four reasons why we are not at fault. So please tell us
now what we should do.”

The gopīs rendered Kṛṣṇa speechless, and then they began
the rāsa-līlā. Then He vanished, and the gopīs began
searching for Him. They began deeply remembering Him,
like a sādhaka sitting in meditation. As they were
remembering Him, they tasted rasa in their hearts and
the ecstatic symptoms of pulakita, romāñca, anubhāva and
all the sattvika- and vyabhicāri-bhāvas manifested.
After some time Kṛṣṇa again appeared before them, and
they asked Him, “Prabhu, some people are affectionate
only to those who are affectionate to them, while others
show affection even to those who are inimical to them.
And then there are those who will not show affection to
anyone. Which of these types are You?”

Kṛṣṇa said, “The first kind of friends who show
affection to others only to benefit themselves are like
merchants. They have no real love, no dharma, and share
no real intimacy with others. When they perform bhajana
for Bhagavān, they expect Bhagavān to quickly give them
His direct darśana. And when He doesn’t, they throw the
deity of Bhagavān they were worshipping in the Yamunā.
This is not love, and this is not bhajana. The second
type, like parents and gurus who are naturally
affectionate, are real friends, and one can have
intimate relationships with them. And in the third
category are four types: those who are āptakāma, those
who are ātmārāma, those who are guru-drohī (inimical to
their superiors) and those who are akṛtajña
(ungrateful). Those who are āptakāma are ṛṣis who have
no necessity to love or not love; they have no desires.
Those who are ātmārāma, like the four Kumāras, are
satisfied on the plane of ātmā. It has no meaning to
them if others insult and abuse them, or if they are
offered respect. Another is guru-drohī. Their parents
and gurus have tried to give them everything, yet in
return these people only become inimical to them. And
finally, those who are ungrateful never honour the good
that others may have done to them. My dear sakhīs,
please understand! I am not even one amongst these six
types.”

The gopīs began laughing, and said, “No, You are not
just one of these six types; we see that You are all
six!”

Then Kṛṣṇa said, “O gopīs, you are the dearest to Me,
and I am the dearest to you. For the purpose of
increasing your prema for Me, I vanished from your
sight, and from a hidden position I listened to you

                           92
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

describe how much love you have for Me. It is like a
poor man who suddenly becomes wealthy, and is very
pleased. Then when someone takes his wealth away from
him, he laments. In the same way, I only did this to
increase your prema for Me. What to speak of one
lifetime, in thousands of the demigods’ lifetimes I will
never be able to repay My debt to you. I am bahu-niṣṭhā
(attached to many lovers), but you are all eka-niṣṭhā
(attached to only one lover). I have so many devotees
and dear ones from lower to upper whom I must see, but
you have abandoned everyone for My sake. Besides Me you
have no other, therefore in lifetime after lifetime I
will never be able to repay you.”

After this they again performed the rāsa-līlā, and Kṛṣṇa
Himself served them for the entire length of one of
Brahmā’s nights. This type of meditation performed by
the gopīs is called svārasikī. But first comes
mantramayī, which means worshipping Kṛṣṇa by the mantra
given by the guru. The higher type of meditation will
come in the morning time of sādhana, when the darkness
caused by one’s anarthas has completely disappeared. To
reach that stage one must practise numerous varieties of
sādhana and constantly chant nāma-saṅkīrtana.
Bhaktivinoda hākura says that one who desires to be an
exclusive devotee must engage in rāgānuga-bhajana.
Without rāgānugā, the sentiment of exclusiveness will
not come and one’s bhajana will be included within
vaidhī-bhakti. Then he will think, “Kṛṣṇa is Nārāyaṇa;
there is no special difference between Them. He is also
Rāmacandra and Nṛsiṁha.” Beyond that he may think that
there is no difference between Dvārakādhīśa and Govinda.
As long as one hasn’t come to know the special qualities
of Govinda, then exclusive sentiment will not come to
him.

Beyond this one may not be able to distinguish between
Bāla-gopāla and Kiśora-gopāla. Those of us who desire to
serve Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa will not serve a Bāla-gopāla
deity, considering Him to be our son. Therefore we must
understand what is exclusive sentiment, and to do that
we must understand what is rāgānugā, and before that we
must first understand what is rāgātmikā. Rāgātmikā
devotees are those who reside in the spiritual world,
and those who follow them while residing in this world
are called rāgānugā devotees. Bhaktivinoda hākura says
that rāga will arise through executing devotional
activities. The meditation of a rāgānugā devotee is not
opposed to the regulations of vaidhī-bhakti; it is only
the feelings that are different. With lobhamayī-bhakti
(devotion filled with spiritual “greed”) a devotee will
continue to perform all devotional activities and daily
rituals. Mahāprabhu gave this instruction to Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī:



bāhya, antara, – ihāra dui ta’ sādhana

‘bāhye’ sādhaka-dehe kare śravaṇa-kīrtana


‘mane’ nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana


                           93
Prabandhavali.txt                                5/5/2017

rātri-dine kare vraje kṛṣṇera sevana




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.156–7)



Rāgānuga-bhakti is executed both externally and
internally. Even though one may have attained
perfection, externally he should still follow the
regulations of sādhana such as hearing and chanting. But
internally, in his perfected form, day and night he will
be serving Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana.



Bhaktivinoda hākura says that if one engages in nāma-
kīrtana with great faith twenty-four hours a day, all of
his anarthas will disappear. By the mercy of Kṛṣṇa,
bhāva will arise inside him, and then performing bhajana
will become very easy and natural. This is compared to
the sunrise within a devotee’s sādhana. At this point,
Bhaktivinoda hākura moves a little upward in his
description. In his sādhana, a rāgānugā devotee will
deeply meditate on the morning pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and His
associates. As he remembers these pastimes more and
more, the sentiment of a particular rāgātmikā eternal
associate such as Lalitā, Viśākhā, Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā,
Subala, Śrīdāmā or Raktaka will begin to flow in his
heart like an electric current. But at present that
light is not lit in our hearts because the connection is
not there. The bulb is in our hearts, and our guru is
the one who makes the connection. The current comes
through the medium of those devotees who practise
lobhamayī-bhakti. When the guru presses the switch, at
once the current of bhāva begins to flow.

It is early morning, and Śrīmatī is in deep sleep. Kṛṣṇa
has returned to Nandagrāma after His evening pastimes
and is also sleeping. Meanwhile, in the course of
carrying out her morning duties, Rādhikā’s maternal
grandmother, Mukharā, approaches Her. She helped raise
Rādhikā from infancy and also arranged Her marriage.
Calling out, “My dear granddaughter, where are You?” she
entered Rādhikā’s home without any hesitation. There she
saw Lalitā, Viśākhā, and numerous other sakhīs and
mañjarīs sitting and waiting outside Rādhikā’s room,
meditating on their specific services to be performed
when Rādhikā awakens. A rāgānuga-sādhaka will also sit
in meditation like this in the morning while taking
harināma. The sakhīs said to Mukharā, “Hey! Don’t awaken
Her! Be quiet!” But because Mukharā is older than them,
she didn’t listen and kept calling. Then Rādhikā slowly
opened Her eyes; She was still very tired. Then Mukharā
said, “Hey! What is this? Yesterday I saw Śyāma wearing
this yellow shawl — how has it now come on the body of
Rādhikā? Alas!” and she began to worry.

Then Viśākhā said, “O fool, you have really become old!
Your vision is now distorted. The strong rays of the
rising sun have come, and they have made Her cloth
appear yellow.” Then Viśākhā pointed at the sun, and

                           94
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

while Mukharā turned her head to see, Viśākhā gave a
signal with her eyes to Rūpa Mañjarī indicating, “Take
away that cloth!” At once, within only one second, Rūpa
Mañjarī removed the yellow cloth and replaced it with
Rādhikā’s usual blue shawl. Then Viśākhā said to
Mukharā, “Just look! The light is better now — is Her
cloth yellow or blue?”

Mukharā replied, “Yes — it really is blue.” Being very
embarrassed, she forgot why she had come to awaken
Rādhikā in the first place and quickly departed. Then
all of the sakhīs began laughing, “Just see how our
priyā has belittled this old lady!” Then they said to
Rādhikā, “Get up quickly! We must go now for our sūrya-
pūjā. Quickly take Your bath; as soon as Your husband is
finished milking the cows, he will be coming. We must
clean the house.” Rādhājī arose, and at once all of the
sakhīs became present at Her side to render service.
They placed a beautiful golden pot full of scented water
from Mānasī-gaṅgā, Rādhā-kuṇḍa and the Yamunā there for
Her to wash Her hands and face.

Then they saw that Śyāmalā, who is a suhṛta (friendly)
sakhī, had come. Rādhikā stood up and embraced Śyāmalā,
saying, “By meeting such a sakhī as you, this has become
a very good morning indeed! And by your mercy it will
become an even better morning. I planted a seedling of
prema, and at once it grew into a big tree. It has very
beautiful green leaves and flowers on its branches, but
the fruit has not yet come; when will it bear fruit?”

Śyāmalā replied, “Oh, I think that You are not speaking
truthfully! I see that this tree has very beautiful
golden fruits, and that they are now ripe. I also see
that You have been eating so much of this fruit that
Your face has become discoloured. And it appears that
the juice of this fruit has made Your eyes turn red
(because You did not sleep last night). It also appears
that this juice has been dripping on Your cloth, and
that Your cloth has become dampened and stained. But You
are trying to tell me that Your tree has not yet given
any fruit?” In this way they discussed rasa between
themselves.

Rādhājī said, “You are merely applying salt to My
wounds. I am such a poor soul, and so unhappy. You are
supposed to be helping Me, but you are just giving Me
more misery. When the rainy season comes the clouds
become very dark, and in the amāvasyā (new moon) night,
there is no trace of the moon. When there is a flash of
lightning, everything is illuminated, but afterwards it
seems to be even darker than it was before. In the same
way, I met Kṛṣṇa; but after meeting Him, what happened
next, I simply don’t know. When I came to My senses, I
saw that I was sleeping in My home, and now I am more
unhappy than I was before.”

Śyāmalā said, “Oh, I understand. It is like when someone
is so thirsty that they very quickly drink to their
satisfaction, not paying any attention to the taste of
the water, but simply drinking to quench their thirst.
If anyone asks them, ëWhat did that water taste like?’
they will reply that they did not notice. In the same
way, You must have drank that rasa without tasting it,

                           95
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

so again You will have to approach that guru Śyāma and
this time pay attention to the taste. There is
theoretical knowledge and practical knowledge. You are
well-versed in theoretical knowledge, but You are not at
all experienced, so You must approach Him again to
learn.”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā replied, “I am very weak-minded and I
fear that black person. I don’t want to accept Him as my
guru and study from Him, but I see that you are so
qualified, so mature and, unlike Me, you understand both
theoretical and practical knowledge. So I think it would
be better if you were to go and learn from Him and then
return here to teach Me what you have learned.”

Hearing all of this, the sakhīs and mañjarīs were
tasting the same rasa that Rādhikā had tasted the night
before, only they were drinking it through their ears.
Then Śyāmalā embraced Śrīmatī Rādhikā and said, “Sakhī,
I see that Your tree is full of fruit, and even if You
are not seeing them now, within a few days You will
certainly see that so many beautiful and sweet fruits
have come.” After saying this, Śyāmalā departed,
laughing.

At that time Dhaniṣṭhā sent a sakhī to Śrīmatī Rādhikā
to inform Her of Kṛṣṇa’s position. That morning the news
was that after Yaśodā kissed Kṛṣṇa’s head, she said to
Him, “O my dear child, the cows and your friends are
waiting for You, but You are still sleeping!” Then she
noticed some marks on Kṛṣṇa’s mouth and thought, “These
naughty boys must have scratched Him while wrestling, or
perhaps while running after the cows He was scratched by
thorns.” At that moment Madhumaṅgala arrived calling, “O
sakhā, O Kanhaiyā!” Seeing Mother Yaśodā pondering the
scratches on Kṛṣṇa’s mouth, Madhumaṅgala said, “I know
where these marks have come from — He was playing with
the sakhīs.” In Sanskrit, the word sakhi can refer to
both male and female friends, so Yaśodā thought that he
was referring to Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd boyfriends. Behind
Yaśodā’s back, Kṛṣṇa placed His forefinger to His lips,
signalling Madhumaṅgala not to tell her, but
Madhumaṅgala signalled back indicating, “I will disclose
everything to her!” Kṛṣṇa was thinking that if
Madhumaṅgala were to disclose the truth, it would be
very shameful, so as Yaśodā went to fetch some water, He
pulled Madhumaṅgala close and said, “If you don’t
disclose the truth, I will give you a laḍḍu, but if you
do, I will certainly beat you!” and Madhumaṅgala laughed
and kept the truth concealed. Then Kṛṣṇa took the water
from Yaśodā, washed His mouth, drank something, ate some
sweets which were prepared with butter, and went to
Govardhana for the day.

As they were preparing Śrīmatī Rādhikā for Her daily
duties, the sakhīs and mañjarīs were bathing in this
hari-kathā being described by the sakhī sent by
Dhaniṣṭhā. This is a summary of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
morning pastimes as described in Govinda-līlāmṛta. We
will follow the path of rāgānuga-sādhana, not the path
of vaidhī-sādhana, and eventually the sun of full
realisation of these pastimes will arise in our hearts.



                           96
Prabandhavali.txt                                5/5/2017




Chapter Eleven

The Final Day of Kārttika-vrata




Today is the day on which we complete our vow of niyama-
sevā for the month of Kārttika. In the observance of
this niyama-sevā, by the mercy of Bhagavān and
especially by the mercy of guru, for the last month we
have performed hearing and chanting of hari-kathā and
taken darśana of all the primary places of Śrī Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vraja. Kārttika is the king of
months, and its queen is Śrīmatī Rādhikā. This month is
for the pleasure of Rādhikā, and whatever we have done
for Her pleasure during the last month, we should
continue doing for the remainder of the year. If in our
hearts we consider ourselves very low and genuinely feel
with great despair that “I have not yet attained Her
mercy,” then we have really been granted the fruit of
following this vow.

Every day during this month we have sung the glories of
Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara in the form of the Dāmodarāṣṭaka, and
tried to practise that sādhana which will awaken the
desire in our hearts to always serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
This is the final aim of all sādhanas. In the eleventh
and final verse of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
describes the supreme spiritual desire, and how that
desire can be fulfilled:



kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ praṇaya-vasatiḥ preyasībhyo ’pi rādhā-

kuṇḍaṁ cāsyā munibhir abhitas tādṛg eva vyadhāyi

yat preṣṭhair apy alam asulabhaṁ kiṁ punar bhakti-bhājāṁ

tat premedaṁ sakṛd api saraḥ snātur āviṣkaroti




Śrī Upadeśāmṛta (11)



There are so many who are dear to Kṛṣṇa, but amongst
them Rādhikā is the most dear to Him, and in the same
way that Rādhikā is dear to Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-kuṇḍa is also
dear to Him. There is no special difference between
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Rādhikā Herself. Even though generally
it is said that between Kṛṣṇa and kṛṣṇa-nāma there is no
difference, there is really a small difference in
mercifulness. The holy name is more merciful; Kṛṣṇa has
invested all of His śakti in His nāma, and it is
accessible to everyone at all times. By the mercy of the
nāma we will attain the direct company of Kṛṣṇa, so

                           97
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

therefore the holy name is more merciful. Similarly it
is correct to say that Rādhikā and Rādhā-kuṇḍa are one
and the same, but because this transcendental kuṇḍa
appears in a physical form, it is more accessible to the
conditioned jīvas of this world. Its water is accessible
at all times and in all ways for our bathing, for our
ācamana and for offering our prayers. Therefore the
glories of Rādhā-kuṇḍa are even greater than those of
Rādhikā Herself, and the munis have described it like
this in the Padma Purāṇa:



yathā rādhā priyā viṣṇos

tasyāḥ kuṇḍaṁ priyaṁ tathā

sarva-gopīṣu saivaikā

viṣṇor atyanta-vallabhā



Amongst all the gopīs, Rādhikā is the best and most
beloved of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore for someone to attain Her
mercy is very rare; even for great souls such as Nārada
it is rare. But if someone really desires that prema,
that rādhā-dāsya, which even Nārada is praying for while
performing austerities at Nārada-kuṇḍa, then if they
bathe just once with great devotion in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, the
kuṇḍa will bestow everything upon them. Is it not more
difficult than that? After all, anyone can go there and
bathe, but it must be ascertained whether or not we are
really bathing with feelings of bhakti. If we bathe with
great humility and faith, then those whose hearts are
impure will become a little pure, those whose hearts are
already a little pure will become a little more pure,
and those whose hearts are completely pure will attain
the direct service of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. The highest
ideal was shown by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī — how he left
everything, took exclusive shelter of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and
said, “We desire nothing besides the mercy of Rādhikā”:



tavaivāsmi tavaivāsmi

na jīvāmi tvayā vinā

iti vij—āya devi tvaṁ

naya māṁ caraṇāntikam




Śrī Vilāpa-kusumā—jali (96)



“O Srīmatī, I am Yours only, Yours only” — he wanted
Rādhikā to hear him say this twice. “I cannot live
without You, so please bring me to the shelter of Your
feet and appoint me to Your service.”

                              98
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017


If we bathe at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, our hearts will become
purified, an attraction for rādhā-dāsya will arise
within us, and if we have similar feelings of pleading
as Rūpa and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmīs had, then we will
certainly attain Rādhikā’s direct mercy. And this is
especially true if it is done within this month of
Kārttika.

Our goddess is Srīmatī; besides Her we have no other. In
another place Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmi prays:



he śrī-sarovara sadā tvayi sā mad-īśā

preṣṭhena sārdham iha khelati kāma-raṅgaiḥ

tvaṁ cet priyāt priyam atīva tayor itīmaṁ

hā darśayādya kṛpayā mama jīvitaṁ tam




Śrī Vilāpa-kusumā—jali (98)



O Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, in a ku—ja on your bank, immersed in
great prema our worshipful goddess Śrīmatī Rādhikā
sports with Her beloved Śrī Śyāmasundara. Since you are
the dearest of all to Them, please mercifully grant me
darśana of my mistress who is my very life and soul.



In one place, Rati Mañjarī, meaning Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, has referred to Kṛṣṇa as Nātha, meaning
“husband”, but why is she addressing Him as Nātha? “You
are the nātha of our worshipful goddess, Vṛndāvaneśvarī,
and because we are related to Her, we are referring to
You as Nātha also.”



hā nātha gokula-sudhākara su-prasanna-

vaktrāravinda madhura-smita he kṛpārdra

yatra tvayā viharate praṇayaiḥ priyārāt

tatraiva mām api naya priya-sevanāya




Śrī Vilāpa-kusumā—jali (100)



O Nātha! O nectar-moon of Gokula, whose cheerful lotus
face smiles sweetly! O crown jewel of the merciful! If
You are pleased with me, then give me this boon only:

                              99
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

for the purpose of rendering service to my mistress,
please take me to where You are lovingly sporting with
Your beloved.”



Here, taking the position of a sādhaka, he is praying to
Kṛṣṇa in order to attain Rādhikā’s service. All of the
Gosvāmīs have prayed in a similar way, as did the son of
Vallabhācārya, Viṭṭhalācārya:



śyāmasundara śikhaṇḍa-śekhara

smerahāsa muralī-manohara

rādhikā-rasika māṁ kṛpā-nidhe

sva-priyā-caraṇa-kiṅkarīṁ kuru


prāṇanātha-vṛṣabhānu-nandinī

śrī-mukhābja rasalola-ṣaṭpada

rādhikā-pada-tale kṛta-sthithiṁ

tvāṁ bhajāmi rasikendra-śekhara




Śrī Rādhā-prārthanā (2–3)



O Śyāmasundara! O You whose head is adorned with a
peacock feather! Your face always holds a playful smile,
Your flute-playing is enchanting and You are very expert
in enjoying rasa with Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Because You are
an ocean of mercy, please make me a kiṅkarī
(maidservant) at the feet of Your beloved. You are the
Lord of the life of the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu and are
always greedy to taste the nectar of Her lips. O Rasika-
śekhara, foremost of those who are rasika! I don’t
desire anything other than to always reside at the feet
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



Rūpa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Bhaktivinoda
hākura and all of our ācāryas have prayed to Kṛṣṇa for
this very thing, and have also prayed directly to
Rādhikā Herself for it. In one place Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī says:



anārādhya rādhā-padāmbhoja reṇuṁ

anāśritya vṛndāṭavīm tat-padāṅkaṁ

asambhāṣya-tad-bhāva-gambhīra-cittān

                            100
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017


kutaḥ śyāma-sindho rasasyāvagāhaḥ



If anyone desires to reside in Vṛndāvana, achieve the
mercy of Rādhikā and be appointed to Her service, they
must worship those places where the dust of Her feet is
lying, such as the many beautiful kuñjas of Vṛndāvana
where She has enjoyed pastimes with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Bhaktivinoda hākura has written in his Gītāvalī:



rādhikā-caraṇa-padma, sakala śreyera sadma,

yatane ye nāhi ārādhilo

rādhā-padmāṅkita-dhāma, vṛndāvana yāra nāma,

tāhā ye nā āśraya karila (1)



Aspirants for rādhā-dāsya must take shelter of those
places where Rādhikā has placed Her lotus feet, such as
Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Yāvaṭa, Prema-sarovara,
Saṅkeṭa, Nandagrāma and Varṣāṇā. Rūpa and Sanātana
Gosvāmīs would constantly wander around Vṛndāvana, and
by staying in each place for only one day and night, the
remembrance of different pastimes would always be
arising within them.



rādhikā bhāva-gambhīra, citta yevā mahādhīra,

gaṇa-saṅga nā kaila jīvane

kemane se śyāmānanda, rasa-sindhu-snānānanda,

labhibe bujhaha eka-mane (2)



Those who have not taken shelter of the dust of
Rādhikā’s feet by worshipping these places, and who have
not attained the association of a rasika mahā-bhāgavata
Vaiṣṇava who is always immersed in the grave and deep
bhāva of Rādhikā, will never become submerged in the
ocean of rasa. Therefore we should pray to the dhāma, to
Girirāja-Govardhana and the Yamunā, to the dust of
Rādhikā’s feet, to Viśākhā and Lalitā, to our guru-
paramparā, to Bhaktivinoda hākura and to our own
gurudeva that we never desire anything besides rādhā-
dāsya.



rādhikā ujjvala-rasera ācārya

rādhā-mādhava-śuddha-prema vicārya (3)



                             101
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

ye dharila rādhā-pada parama yatane

se paila kṛṣṇa-pada amūlya-ratane (4)


rādhā-pada vinā kabhu kṛṣṇa nāhi mile

rādhāra dāsīra kṛṣṇa, sarva-vede bale (5)



Those who very carefully worship Rādhikā’s feet will
meet Kṛṣṇa in the snap of a finger, but what does it
mean to meet Kṛṣṇa? Where is Kṛṣṇa complete? Without
Rādhikā is He complete? Therefore only where there is
the yugala-kiśora (youthful couple) is Kṛṣṇa complete.
Only by the mercy of Rādhikā will one be able to have
Their darśana and attain the qualification to serve
Them. Without the mercy of Rādhikā one will not be able
to meet Kṛṣṇa — this is correct, but what do the Vedic
scriptures declare? What to speak of just Rādhā, Her
dāsīs can also be very instrumental in helping one to
meet Kṛṣṇa. They will say, “Come — you can meet Him
here. Stay just here — you won’t meet Him anywhere
else!” Sometimes Kṛṣṇa says to these dāsīs, “I belong
solely to you. As you say, I will do.” So what to speak
of Kṛṣṇa’s feelings towards Rādhikā Herself, who is the
ācārya of ujjvala-rasa.

Sometimes when They play games like chess and tic-tac-
toe together, Rādhikā says, “You don’t know how to play,
therefore I will not play anymore!” Sometimes Kṛṣṇa
applies Her tilaka, and She says, “You haven’t applied
it correctly. It should be like this.” In this way She
instructs Him, and is therefore the ācārya of ujjvala-
rasa. Śrīmatī is the dearest to Kṛṣṇa, and without Her
mercy one will not be able to successfully meet Kṛṣṇa.
With this objective we worship Her during this month of
Kārttika, aspiring solely for rādhā-dāsya.

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī left his home and family at a
very young age, and with great eagerness walked the
entire distance from Kṛṣṇapura in Bengal to Jagannātha
Purī to be with Caitanya Mahāprabhu. His parents had
made so many plans to prevent him from going, but they
could not stop him. His mother said, “He is married to a
girl of heavenly beauty, and he has so much property and
wealth. If these things don’t keep him here, then he
should be chained and watched over by a guard. Then he
will never escape.” But having more insight, his father
said, “If being married to a girl of heavenly beauty
cannot bind him, having opulence equal to that of Indra
cannot bind him, our affection cannot bind him, and if
he has really adopted the temperament of Mahāprabhu’s
followers, then how can mere chains bind him?”

Upon Raghunātha dāsa’s arrival in Purī, Mahāprabhu
placed him under the care of Svarūpa Dāmodara. Then,
after witnessing more and more of Mahāprabhu’s līlā, his
tendency towards rādhā-dāsya became strengthened. Of
course, we are looking at him from the angle of vision
that he was a sādhaka, although he was an eternally
perfected soul. Everything he did was exemplary for
aspiring sādhakas. When after some time Mahāprabhu

                          102
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

returned to Goloka, Raghunātha dāsa gave up eating.
Then, in separation from Mahāprabhu, Svarūpa Dāmodara
also left this world. Then Raghunātha dāsa gave up even
drinking water and sleeping, and soon he took shelter of
Gadādhara Paṇḍita.

Day and night Gadādhara Paṇḍita was lamenting in
separation from Mahāprabhu. Raghunātha dāsa would come
and render service to him, and besides Gadādhara Paṇḍita
there was no other shelter for him. But the fire of
separation was burning very intensely in Gadādhara
Paṇḍita’s heart, and after a few days, calling out
“Gaurāṅga! Gaurāṅga!”, Gadādhara Paṇḍita also entered
into the eternal līlā. Then Raghunātha dāsa felt,
“Whatever strength I had has been taken away; now I will
certainly die. I will give up my life by either jumping
in the ocean or from a mountain-top.” But then he
thought again: “If I am to give up this life, why should
I do it by jumping in the ocean? Instead I will go to
Vṛndāvana where I will drown in the Yamunā. Or if I will
give up my life by jumping from a mountain, it will not
be from Caṭaka Mountain (in Purī). Instead I will go to
Govardhana and jump from there.”

When someone feels such intense separation from
Bhagavān, then it can be said that they are really
performing bhajana. Whereas we, on the contrary, are
mostly just eating, sleeping, joking and laughing all
day long. We should make an effort to understand what
the nature of these devotees’ feelings of divine
separation were. When a devotee is always thinking, “How
will I meet Bhagavān?” with great eagerness, then it can
be said that they are engaged in real sādhana. And we
cannot even express the degree of Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī’s tṛnād api sunīcena, his feelings of his own
lowliness.

His heart burning in divine separation, he left Purī and
walked all the way to Vṛndāvana, where he fell at the
feet of Rūpa and Sanātana. Offering his very self to
them, he said, “Now I cannot possibly be saved,” but
they showed him such affection that he was convinced not
to give up his life. He began living with them, and just
when the fire of his separation had cooled somewhat,
Sanātana Goswāmī left this world. Again he was left
feeling helpless. It seemed that whoever he tried to
take shelter of would leave him, and he was feeling more
separation than ever. Staying at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, day and
night he was lamenting in separation, and then he heard
that Rūpa Gosvāmī had also left this world. Now what
remained for him? He wrote:



śūnyāyate mahā-goṣṭhaṁ

girīndro ’jagarāyate

vyāghra-tuṇḍāyate kuṇḍaṁ

jīvatu rahitasya me




                           103
Prabandhavali.txt                               5/5/2017


Śrī Prārthanāśraya-caturdaśaka (11)



Now that I no longer have the sustainer of my life, the
land of Vraja has become empty and desolate. Govardhana
Hill appears like a great python, and Rādhā-kuṇḍa seems
like the gaping mouth of a ferocious tigress.



Just see what his condition of divine separation was
like! At that time he composed Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjali,
and this verse appears near the end:



āśā-bharair amṛta-sindhu-mayaiḥ katha—cit

kālo mayāti-gamitaḥ kila sāmprataṁ hi

tvaṁ cet kṛpāṁ mayi vidhāsyasi naiva kiṁ me

prāṇair vrajena ca varoru bakāriṇāpi




Śrī Vilāpa-kusumā—jali (102)



“I had so many hopes, but one by one they have all
vanished, and now everything is lost. All of the columns
that I was grasping onto seem to have disappeared one by
one, and now I am in a helpless condition. But if Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa would sprinkle just one drop of the
ocean of Their prema on me, then all of my hopes would
be completely fulfilled. What to speak of bathing in
that fathomless ocean of nectar, if just one drop of it
falls on my head or any of my limbs, then I will have
attained that sustainer of my life which I have been
longing for ever since I left my home and family. But
then Mahāprabhu left me, Svarūpa Dāmodara left me, and
when Gadādhara Paṇḍita also left me, I came here to
Vṛndāvana where I took shelter of Sanātana Gosvāmī. But
then he also left me, and now I am helpless. What was
the nature of Sanātana Gosvāmī?



vairāgya-yug-bhakti-rasaṁ prayatnair

apāyayan mām anabhīpsum andham

kṛpāmbudhir yaḥ para-duḥkha-duḥkhī

sanātanas taṁ prabhum āśrayāmi




Śrī Vilāpa-kusumā—jali (6)

                             104
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017




“I have never seen such an ocean of causeless mercy as
Sanātana Gosvāmī. He showered all of his mercy upon me,
and even though I had no desire to drink it, he made me
drink the nectar of bhakti that Mahāprabhu came to give,
which inspires one to fully renounce this world and
which bestows spontaneous affection for the lotus feet
of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. That inconceivably merciful
Sanātana Gosvāmī who gave me a drink of the ocean of
bhakti-rasa has left me, and now Rūpa Gosvāmī has also
left me. Who can describe how merciful he was? He would
always look after me with great care. Because I have
taken kṣetra-sannyāsa here at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, he would
regularly come here to give me his darśana. He was so
merciful to me that he would show me his writings on the
pretext of having me proofread them, and while reading
them I would shed so many tears that the pages would
become wet; but still I couldn’t stop reading. Whatever
I didn’t receive directly from Mahāprabhu and Svarūpa
Dāmodara, he bestowed upon me completely.

“Until now I have somehow sustained my life, but now
that Rūpa Gosvāmī has left me, I can no longer remain in
this world. This is my final condition. O Srīmatī! Now
all I have left is You and Your kuṇḍa; otherwise I am
completely helpless. For me to hold on to my life for
even one more moment is very, very difficult. Somehow or
other I have been sustaining it, but I can sustain it no
longer. O Srīmatī! If You are not merciful to me at this
very moment, I will give up this body at once! Why
should I remain in Vṛndāvana? In the absence of Rūpa and
Sanātana the dhāma appears like the gaping mouth of a
ferocious tigress which is ready to devour me. And if
You say that I should hold on to my life by reading
prayers to Kṛṣṇa, I say what necessity do I have for
Kṛṣṇa if I don’t receive Your mercy? Therefore please be
merciful to me at once.”

This Vilāpa-kusumāñjali was his final prayer, and after
completing it, he offered it to the lotus feet of
Rādhikā. Generally poets reveal their last desires in
their final compositions, and he desired nothing other
than rādhā-dāsya.

Rūpa Gosvāmī also composed so many verses for Rādhikā,
such as these:



rādhe jaya jaya mādhava-dayite



gokula-taruṇī-maṇḍala-mahite (1)




dāmodara-rati-vardhana-veśe




                          105
Prabandhavali.txt                                5/5/2017

hari-niṣkuṭa-vṛndā-vipineśe (2)




Rādhā’s appearance is so attractive from head to toe
that upon seeing Her, Kṛṣṇa is immersed in prema. She is
the increaser of rati in Dāmodara. The highest result of
all types of worship is rati for the lotus feet of
Kṛṣṇa, and the bestower of that rati is Rādhikā. In
reality Kṛṣṇa is āptakāma, meaning that He has no
unfulfilled desire, but upon seeing Rādhikā, not only
one desire, but millions and millions of desires arise
in Him. His quality of being āptakāma is demolished and
He is drowned in the waves of desire.



vṛṣabhānūdadhi-nava-śaśi-lekhe



lalitā-sakhi guṇa-ramita-viśākhe (3)




Rādhikā arose like a new moon from the ocean of
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, and is so wonderfully attractive
that it seems She showers nectar in all directions. Why
is the name of Vṛṣabhānu mentioned in this verse? The
vātsalya-bhāva of Yaśodā is stronger than that of Nanda
Bābā. From the time Kṛṣṇa took birth, Yaśodā raised Him
and He was the cynosure of her eyes. Therefore there is
more bhāva and sweetness in the name Yaśodā-nandana than
there is in the name Nanda-nandana, and even Nanda Bābā
himself accepted that Yaśodā’s love for Kṛṣṇa was
greater than his. Sometimes Yaśodā would scold Kṛṣṇa
and, taking very long breaths, He would begin crying. He
would run to the lap of Nanda Bābā, who would ask, “My
dear son, why are You crying? What happened? Did someone
hit You?” Whimpering, Kṛṣṇa would point in the direction
of Yaśodā. “Your mother hit You? Then beware! Don’t
return to her! She beats You!” Then what would Kṛṣṇa do?
With open arms He would run back to His mother and sit
in her lap; that’s how affectionate she was towards Him.
She could bind Him with her love, but Nanda could not
bind Him; He would only run back to His mother.

So in this song Rādhikā is referred to as Vṛṣabhānu-
nandinī rather than Kīrtidā-nandinī for a similar
reason. Because Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja first found Her lying
on a large lotus in the Yamunā, She always received more
affection from him. First She would run to sit in his
lap, and secondly to the lap of Kīrtidā. Śrīdāmā was
Kīrtidā’s dearest child, but Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja always
had more affection for Rādhikā.

Lalitā is a parama-preṣṭha-sakhī, and she even   instructs
Rādhikā. Without her mercy, it is not possible   to attain
rādhā-dāsya. To attain the position of serving   Rādhikā,
one must worship Lalitā, and if someone really   desires

                          106
Prabandhavali.txt                              5/5/2017

to enter Vraja as a dāsī in the camp of Rādhikā, then
Lalitā will be very merciful towards them. Guṇa-ramita-
viśākhe: in calling out to Rādhikā, Rūpa Gosvāmī has
also mentioned the name of Viśākhā because the same good
qualities that exist in Rādhikā are also found in
Viśākhā. They were born on the same day and are always
together. She always serves Rādhikā with great prema and
even instructs Her also. Without first approaching
Viśākhā, one will not be able to attain the favour of
Rādhikā Herself, so therefore her name has also been
mentioned here.



karuṇāṁ kuru mayi karuṇā-bharite



sanaka-sanātana-varṇita-carite (4)




Rādhikā is the very embodiment of karuṇā, kindness, and
every pore of Her every limb — indeed, every atom of Her
existence — emanates kṛṣṇa-prema. But why have the names
of Sanaka and Sanātana been mentioned? They are young
brahmacārīs, appearing to be only five years old, and
their hearts are very pure. They were exclusive devotees
of Nārāyaṇa, but after they heard a description of
Rādhikā’s aṣṭakālīya-līlā from Śaṅkara, hankering for
realisation of those pastimes arose within them. In the
Padma Purāṇa, Śaṅkara described Her aṣṭakālīya-līlā to
the Kumāras, and they in turn related it to Nārada ¬ṣi.
They appeared long before Rūpa Gosvāmī, at the beginning
of creation in Satya-yuga, and are well-known for being
expert in describing Rādhikā’s transcendental qualities.
They narrated Her aṣṭakālīya-līlā — what could be
greater than that?

Today we have made an effort to increase our “greed” for
the service of Rādhikā, and when that hankering becomes
complete, then our darśana of Vṛndāvana — including all
of the places such as Sevā-kuñja and Girirāja-Govardhana
that we visited this month — will have really become
complete. We are actually unqualified in all ways for
this, but if inside us a little of this hankering has
arisen, then today we will say a special prayer to
Lalitā, Viśākhā, all of the gurus in our paramparā, and
especially to our own guru-pādapadma, that by their
mercy this hankering will become complete. With this
very hope we will not conclude our vrata today, but
instead we will commence it: “How will I attain the
dāsya of Rādhikā? Wherever it is available, whether in
heaven or in hell, I will certainly go there.” Therefore
today we pray to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī and all of
Their devotees that our desire, the very aim of our
bhajana, will be fulfilled.



Table of Contents


                          107
Prabandhavali.txt                                5/5/2017

Chapter OneThe Appearance Day of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Vāmana Mahārāja

Chapter TwoThe Disappearance Day of Śrīla A.C.
Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda

Chapter ThreeThe Disappearance Day of Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī

Chapter FourThe Disappearance Day of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda

Chapter FiveThe Disappearance Day of Śrīla Gaura-kiśora
dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja

Chapter SixThe Disappearance Day of Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī

Chapter SevenAdvaita Saptamī

Chapter EightNityānanda Trayodaśī

Chapter NineSimply a Quality of Bhakti

Chapter TenFrom Bhaktivinoda hākura’s Śrī Bhajana-
rahasya

Chapter ElevenThe Final Day of Kārttika-vrata




Table of Contents

Chapter OneThe Appearance Day of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Vāmana Mahārāja

Chapter TwoThe Disappearance Day of Śrīla A.C.
Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda

Chapter ThreeThe Disappearance Day of Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī

Chapter FourThe Disappearance Day of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda

Chapter FiveThe Disappearance Day of Śrīla Gaura-kiśora
dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja

Chapter SixThe Disappearance Day of Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī

Chapter SevenAdvaita Saptamī

Chapter EightNityānanda Trayodaśī

Chapter NineSimply a Quality of Bhakti

Chapter TenFrom Bhaktivinoda hākura’s Śrī Bhajana-
rahasya

Chapter ElevenThe Final Day of Kārttika-vrata


                          108
Prabandhavali.txt         5/5/2017




                    109
