Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

Prema-sampuṭa, 2nd ed



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:   ★★★★★




* * *




* * *




Table of Contents

śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ

Foreword (translated from the Hindi edition)

The Life History of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

Refuting the opinions of the atibāḍī    Rūpa Kavirāja

Protecting the honour of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya
through Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa

Attainment of the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī by the
mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā

Re-establishing the doctrine of parakīyā

The glories and legacy of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura

Śrī Prema-sampuṭa – The Treasure Chest of Pure,
Transcendental Love




śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ


Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s

Śrī Prema-sampuṭa

The Treasure Chest of Pure,

Transcendental Love

                              1
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017



translated from the Hindi edition of

Śrī Śrīmad

Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Dedicated to my Holy Master

śrī gauḍīya-vedānta-ācārya-kesarī

nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa

oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata

Śrī Śrīmad

Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja

the best amongst the tenth generation

of descendants in the bhāgavata-paramparā

from Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu,

and the founder of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti

and its branches throughout the world




Foreword (translated from the Hindi edition)


Today I am most joyful to be able to present this Hindi
edition of Śrī Prema-sampuṭa to the faithful reader.
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, the highly exalted
preceptor and crown jewel of Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas, has masterfully crafted this incomparable
narrative poem in language that is simple, yet replete
with deep meaning.

Once, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, disguised in the attire of a heavenly
damsel, came to Śrīmatī Rādhikā and stood before Her
completely silent. The sight of this incredibly
beautiful celestial damsel filled Śrīmatī Rādhikā with
bliss and She became most eager to befriend Her. Śrīmatī
Rādhikā asked Her several questions, but the girl
offered no reply.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā thought the beautiful sakhī might not be
well, and that this was the reason for the damsel not
speaking to Her. Nonetheless, Rādhikā persisted in Her
attempts to communicate with Her, and finally the maiden
spoke. She said, “I heard of Your glories in the
heavenly planets and have come to this Earth to meet
You. When I arrived, I saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā being
performed at Vaṁśīvaṭa in Vṛndāvana. For some reason You
left the dance to go into the forest, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
abandoned all the other gopīs to follow You. After
spending some time with You, He disappeared. When He

                              2
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017

also left You, You began to cry bitterly. I saw Your
pitiful condition and became enraged with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It
is for this reason that I have now come to You.” The
disguised Śrī Kṛṣṇa then proceeded to describe Kṛṣṇa’s
many faults.

The heavenly damsel said, “It is true that Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
all good qualities, but He has one bad quality that
destroys all the good ones. You, Śrī Rādhā, have left
everything – Your father, mother, brother, friends,
husband, society, modesty and the orders of Your elders
– all so that You can love Kṛṣṇa. Yet He treats You so
cruelly that He even abandons You and disappears. I
cannot fathom this. In My opinion, You should not love
Him, for if You do, Your future will be full of
suffering.”

These words prompted Śrīmatī Rādhikā to explain to the
damsel the very nature of prema. This explanation is the
subject of Śrī Prema-sampuṭa.

Sampuṭa means “that place where precious jewels and
other valuable stones are carefully hidden from the
vision of people”. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
has revealed the unnata-ujjvala prema in Śrī Rādhā’s
heart, which is likened to a treasure chest, and
protected it in a box in the form of this book.
Therefore, the name of this book is Śrī Prema-sampuṭa.
Śrī Rādhā describes Her prema in the following two
verses (Verses 108 and 109):

ekātmanīha rasa-pūrṇatame ’tyagādhe

ekā susaṅgrathitam eva tanu-dvayaṁ nau

kasyiṁścid eka-sarasīva cakāsad eka-

nālottham abja-yugalaṁ khalu nīla-pītam

yat sneha-pūra-bhṛta-bhājana-rājitaika-

vartty agravartty amala-dīpa-yugaṁ cakāsti

tac cet are taratamo ’panudat parokṣa-

mānandayed akhila-pārśva-gatāḥ sadālīḥ

Śrī Rādhā’s body and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s body are separate, yet
there is no difference in Their nature (svarūpa). Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is by nature blissful (ānanda) and Śrī Rādhā is by
nature joyful (hlādinī). The truth according to the
Vedas is that the potency (śakti) and the holder of
potency (śaktimān) are non-different: śakti-
śaktimatorabhedaḥ. Although there is no difference
between the personality (svarūpa) and the personality’s
potency (śakti), when these transcendental pastimes are
savoured, it becomes apparent that each has unique
specialities and therefore, they differ in some ways.




The Life History of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

                           3
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura appeared in a family
of brāhmaṇas from the Rāḍhīya community of the Nadiyā
district in West Bengal. He was celebrated by the name
Hari-vallabha, and he had two older brothers, Rāmabhadra
and Raghunātha. During his childhood, he completed his
study of grammar in Devagrāma village. He then studied
devotional scripture at the home of his spiritual master
in the Śaiyadābāda village of the Murśidābād district.
While living in Śaiyadābāda, he wrote Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu-bindu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa and Bhāgavatāmṛta-
kaṇā. Soon after, he renounced household life and went
to Vṛndāvana, where he wrote many other books and
commentaries.

After the disappearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
the six Gosvāmīs of Vraja, the current of unalloyed
devotion (śuddha-bhakti) continued to flow through the
influence of three great personalities: Śrī Narottama
dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīnivāsa Ācārya and Śrī Śyāmānanda
Prabhu. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is fourth in
the line of disciplic succession coming from Śrīla
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura.

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura’s disciple, Śrīla Gaṅgā-
nārāyaṇa Cakravartī Mahāśaya, lived in Bālūcara Gambhilā
in the Murśidābād district. He had a daughter named
Viṣṇupriyā but no sons, so he adopted the devotee Śrī
Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa. Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa was the youngest son of
another disciple of Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura named
Rāmakṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭācārya, who was from the brāhmaṇa
community of Vārendra. Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa’s disciple was
Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa Cakravartī, the spiritual master of
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

In Sārārtha-darśinī, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he has
written the following verse at the beginning of the five
chapters describing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa dance (Śrī Rāsa-
pañcādhyāyī):

śrī-rāma-kṛṣṇa-gaṅgā-caraṇānnatvā gurūnuru-premnaḥ

śrīla-narottama-nātha śrī-gaurāṅga-prabhuṁ naumi

Here, the name “Śrī Rāma” refers to Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s spiritual master, Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa;
“Kṛṣṇa” refers to his grand spiritual master, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
caraṇa; “Gaṅgā-caraṇa” refers to his great grand
spiritual master, Śrī Gaṅgā-caraṇa; “Narottama” refers
to his great-great grand spiritual master, Śrīla
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura; and the word nātha refers to
Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura’s spiritual master, Śrī
Lokanātha Gosvāmī. In this way, he offers obeisances to
all those in his disciplic succession up to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu.




Refuting the opinions of the atibāḍī [1] Rūpa Kavirāja


                           4
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017


Hemalatā Ṭhākurāṇī was the learned Vaiṣṇavī daughter of
Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. Once, an estranged disciple of hers
named Rūpa Kavirāja concocted his own doctrine which
opposed the philosophical conclusions of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism. He taught that the position of ācārya could
only be occupied by one in the renounced order – never
by a householder. Rūpa Kavirāja disregarded the
necessity of following vidhi-mārga (the path of
regulated devotional practice) and propagated a so
called rāga-mārga (doctrine of spontaneous attraction)
that was undisciplined and disorderly. His new doctrine
stated that one could abandon the practices of hearing
and chanting and practise rāgānuga-bhakti by remembrance
alone. For this, Hemalatā Ṭhākurāṇī ensured that Rūpa
Kavirāja was expelled from the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
community. Since that time, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas have known
him as an atibāḍī.

Fortunately, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura was present at
this time, and he refuted Rūpa Kavirāja’s false
conclusions in his Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam’s Third Canto. Śrīla Cakravartī proved
unequivocally that qualified householder descendants of
an ācārya may act as ācārya. He said that it is unlawful
and contrary to the statements of scripture for unfit
descendants of ācārya families to adopt the title
“Gosvāmī” out of greed for disciples and wealth.

Householder disciples in the line of Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu’s son, Vīrabhadra, and descendants of the
rejected sons of Śrī Advaita Ācārya award and accept the
title “Gosvāmī”, an action considered improper by
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas. Although Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura
acted as an ācārya, he personally never used the title
“Gosvāmī”, in order to instruct the foolish and unfit
descendants of ācārya families of modern times.




Protecting the honour of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya
through Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa


In his old age, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
spent most of his time in a semi-conscious or internal
state, deeply absorbed in bhajana. During that time, a
debate broke out in Jaipur between the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
and Vaiṣṇavas who supported the doctrine of svakīyā, or
the Lord’s pastimes of wedded love.

The Vaiṣṇavas from the antagonistic camp [of the Śrī
Rāmānuja line] had led King Jaya Singh II of Jaipur to
believe that the worship of Śrīmatī Rādhikā with Śrī
Govindadeva is not supported by the scriptures. Their
contention was that Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s name is neither
mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam nor in the Viṣṇu
Purāṇa, and that She was never married to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
according to Vedic ritual.

The antagonistic Vaiṣṇavas further objected that the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas did not belong to a recognised

                           5
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017

sampradāya, or line of disciplic succession. From time
immemorial, there have been four Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas:
the Śrī sampradāya, the Brahma sampradāya, the Rudra
sampradāya and the Sanaka (Kumāra) sampradāya. In this
age of Kali, the principal ācāryas of these four
sampradāyas are, respectively, Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva,
Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī and Śrī Nimbāditya. The Rāmānuja
Vaiṣṇavas said that Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas were outside these
four sampradāyas and therefore without pure lineage.
Further, they argued that because Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas did
not have their own commentary on Brahma-sūtra (also
known as Vedānta-sūtra), they could not be following a
genuine Vaiṣṇava disciplic succession.

Mahārāja Jaya Singh knew that the prominent Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas of Vṛndāvana were followers of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, and he summoned them to Jaipur to take up
the challenge of the Śrī Rāmānuja Vaiṣṇavas. The elderly
Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura was fully absorbed in the
transcendental bliss of bhajana, so he sent his student
Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa to address the Jaipur
assembly. Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava vedānta-ācārya Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, the crown of the assembly of learned
scholars and the greatest among exalted teachers of
Vedānta, left for Jaipur accompanied by Śrīla Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s disciple Śrī Kṛṣṇadeva.

The caste gosvāmīs had forgotten their own connection
with the Madhva sampradāya and disrespected the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas’ doctrinal view, saying it has no connection
with Vedānta. This caused considerable disturbance to
the true Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. But Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa used irrefutable logic combined with
powerful scriptural evidence to prove the Gauḍīya
sampradāya to be a pure Vaiṣṇava sampradāya, called the
Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava sampradāya, coming in
the line of Śrī Madhvācārya. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Kavi Karṇapūra and other previous ācāryas also accepted
this as fact. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas accept Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam as the genuine commentary on Vedānta-sūtra.
For this reason, no one in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
sampradāya had written a separate commentary on Vedānta-
sūtra.

The name of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the personification of the
pleasure-giving potency (hlādinī-śakti) and the eternal
beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is mentioned in various Purāṇas.
Throughout Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, particularly the Tenth
Canto in connection with the description of the Lord’s
pastimes in Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is referred to
indirectly and discreetly. Only rasika and bhāvuka
devotees conversant with the conclusions of scriptures
can understand this confidential mystery.

In the learned assembly in Jaipur, Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa refuted the arguments and doubts of the
opposing party, and they were silenced by his
presentation. He established that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
are in the disciplic succession from Śrī Madhvācārya.
Despite his victory, however, the contesting party did
not accept the Gauḍīya sampradāya to be of pure Vaiṣṇava
lineage because the Gauḍīyas had no commentary on
Vedānta-sūtra. Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa therefore
composed the famous Gauḍīya commentary, Śrī Govinda-

                           6
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

bhāṣya. Once again the worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda
commenced in the temple of Śrī Govindadeva, and the
validity of the Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya sampradāya was
firmly established.

It was only on the authority of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was
able to write Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya and prove the
connection of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas with the Madhva
sampradāya. There should be no doubt in this regard.
This accomplishment of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, performed on behalf of the sampradāya, will be
recorded in golden script in the history of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism.




Attainment of the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī by the
mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā


In his Mantrārtha-dīpikā, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura describes a special event. Once, while reading
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, he came upon a verse (Madhya-
līlā 21.125) describing the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī-
mantra:

kāma-gāyatrī-mantra-rūpa, haya kṛṣṇera svarūpa,

sārdha-cabbiśa akṣara tāra haya

se akṣara ‘candra’ haya, kṛṣṇe kari’ udaya,

tri-jagat kailā kāmamaya

The kāma-gāyatrī is identical with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In this
king of mantras, there are twenty-four-and-a-half
syllables, and each syllable is a full moon. This
aggregate of moons has caused the moon of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to
rise and fill the three worlds with prema.

This verse establishes that the kāma-gāyatrī is composed
of twenty-four-and-a-half syllables, but despite deep
deliberation Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura could
not ascertain which syllable in the mantra was the half-
syllable. He scrutinised grammar books, Purāṇas,
Tantras, scriptures dealing with drama and rhetoric, and
other great texts. Among the vowel and consonant groups
in Śrī Harināmāmṛta-vyākaraṇa, the grammar methodology
of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, he found mention of only fifty
letters. He studied the arrangement of letters in texts
such as Mātṛkānyāsa, and in the Rādhikā-sahasra-nāma-
stotra of Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa he found that
Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā is also named Pañcāśad-
varṇa-rūpiṇī, one whose form is composed of fifty
syllables. In all the literatures he studied, however,
he found mention of only fifty vowels and consonants.
There was no mention of any half-syllable.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s doubt increased.
He wondered whether Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī may
have made a mistake in his writing. Of course this could

                           7
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017

not have been possible because Śrīla Kavirāja is
omniscient and therefore free from material defects such
as falling into illusion or error.

If the fragmented letter “t” (the final letter of the
kāma-gāyatrī) were taken as the half-syllable, then
Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī would be guilty of the
fault of disorder, for in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 21.126–8) he has given the following
description:

sakhi he! kṛṣṇa-mukha—dvija-rāja-rāja

kṛṣṇa-vapu-siṁhāsane, vasi’ rājya-śāsane,

kare saṅge candrera samāja

dui gaṇḍa sucikkaṇa, jini’ maṇi-sudarpaṇa,

sei dui pūrṇa-candra jāni

lalāṭe aṣṭamī-indu, tāhāte candana-bindu,

sei eka pūrṇa-candra māni

kara-nakha-cāndera ṭhāṭa, vaṁṣī-upara kare nāṭa,

tāra gīta muralīra tāna

pada-nakha-candra-gaṇa, tale kare nartana,

nūpurera dhvani yāra gāna

In these lines, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī
describes Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s face as the first full moon, His
cheeks are two further full moons, the dot of sandalwood
on the upper portion of His forehead is the fourth full
moon, and just below this is the moon of the eighth day
(aṣṭamī), in other words, a half-moon. According to this
description, the fifth syllable is a half-syllable. Yet
if the fragmented “t”, the final letter of the kāma-
gāyatrī-mantra, is seen to be a half-syllable, then the
fifth syllable cannot be seen as such.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was in a profound
dilemma because he could not decipher the mysterious
half-syllable. He concluded that if the syllables would
not reveal themselves, he would be unable to behold the
worshipful deity of the mantra. He decided that if he
could not obtain the audience of the deity of the
mantra, it would be better to die. Thinking this way, he
set out at night to the banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa to give
up his life.

After the second division of the night had passed, Śrī
Cakravartī Ṭhākura fell into light sleep when the
daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
appeared before him. “O Viśvanātha, O Hari-vallabha,”
She said affectionately, “do not lament. What Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja has written is the absolute truth. By
My grace, he knows all the inner sentiments of My heart.
Have no doubt about his statements. The kāma-gāyatrī is
a mantra to worship My dearly beloved and Me, and We
become revealed to the devotees through the syllables of

                             8
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

this mantra. No one can know Us without My kindness. The
half-syllable is described in the book Varṇāgama-
bhāsvat. It was after consulting this text that Śrī
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja determined the actual identity of the
kāma-gāyatrī. Study this book and broadcast its meaning
for the benefit of all faithful people.”

When he   heard this instruction from Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Śrīmatī   Rādhikā Herself, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura arose,
calling   out in great lamentation, “O Rādhā, O Rādhā!”
When he   regained composure, he proceeded to carry out
Śrīmatī   Rādhikā’s order.

According to Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s indication, the letter
“ya” preceding “vi” in the mantra is considered a half-
syllable, and all the other syllables are full
syllables, or full moons.

Thus, by Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mercy, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura became acquainted with the deep
meaning of the mantra. He attained the direct audience
of his worshipful deity, and in his internal, perfected
spiritual body (siddha-deha), he was able to participate
in the Lord’s eternal pastimes as His loving associate.
He established the deity of Śrī Gokulānanda on the bank
of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and while residing there, he
experienced the sweetness (mādhurya) of the eternal
pastimes of Śrī Vṛndāvana. It was at this time that he
wrote his Sukha-varttinī commentary on Śrīla Kavi
Karṇapūra’s Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campūḥ and stated therein:

rādhā-parastīra-kuṭīra-vartinaḥ

prāptavya-vṛndāvana-cakravartinaḥ

ānanda-campū-vivṛti-pravartinaḥ

sānto-gatir me sumahā-nivartinaḥ

Completely leaving aside all other things I, Cakravartī,
only desire to attain Śrī Vṛndāvana. Residing in a
simple hut on the bank of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, the topmost
place of Śrī Rādhā’s pastimes, I write this commentary
on Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campūḥ.

In his old age, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura spent most of
his time in a fully internal state or in a semi-
conscious state, deeply absorbed in bhajana. His
principal disciple, Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, took over
the responsibility of teaching the scriptures.




Re-establishing the doctrine of parakīyā


When a slight decline in the influence of the six
Gosvāmīs took place in Śrī Vṛndāvana, a controversy
arose around the doctrines of wedded love (svakīyāvāda)
versus paramour love (parakīyāvāda). To dispel
misconceptions regarding svakīyāvāda, Śrīla Cakravartī
Ṭhākura wrote Rāga-vartma-candrikā and Gopī-premāmṛta,

                             9
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

both of which are replete with scriptural philosophical
conclusions. Thereafter, in his Ānanda-candrikā
commentary on the verse laghutvam atra yat proktam, of
Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (1.21), he showed that the theory
of svakīyā was fallacious, and he established the
conception of parakīyā with scriptural evidence and
irrefutable arguments. Further, in his Sārārtha-darśinī
commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he gave strong support
to parakīyā-bhāva.

Certain scholars opposed the conclusions of Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura on worship in the mood of parakīyā.
When he defeated them with superior erudition and sound
reasoning they resolved out of envy to kill him. They
knew that Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura used to circumambulate
Śrī Vṛndāvana early each morning, so they hid in a dark,
dense grove and waited for him to walk by. As his
adversaries watched him approach, he suddenly
disappeared, and in his place, a beautiful young girl of
Vraja appeared, picking flowers with some of her
friends.

The scholars asked the girl, “Dear child, just a moment
ago a great devotee was coming this way. Did you see
where he went?” The girl replied that she had seen him,
but that she did not know where he had gone. Her
astonishing beauty, gentle smile, graceful manner and
sidelong glances captivated the scholars. Their hearts
melted, and all the impurities in their minds were
vanquished. They asked the girl who she was, and she
replied, “I am a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is
presently at Her in-laws’ house at Yāvaṭa, and She sent
me here to pick flowers.” Having spoken thus, the girl
disappeared, and in her place the scholars saw Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura once again. They fell at his feet and
prayed for forgiveness, and he forgave them all. There
are many such astonishing occurrences in the life of
Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

In this way, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura refuted the theory
of svakīyā and established the truth of pure parakīyā –
an achievement of great import for the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura not only protected
the integrity of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava dharma, but he
also re-established its influence in Śrī Vṛndāvana.
Anyone who evaluates this accomplishment will be struck
with wonder at his uncommon genius. Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas have composed the following verse in praise of
his extraordinary work:

viśvasya nātharūpo ’sau bhakti-vartma-pradarśanāt

bhakta-cakre vartitatvāt cakravarty ākhyayābhavat

He is known by the name Viśvanātha, lord of the
universe, because he indicates the path of bhakti; and
he is known as Cakravartī, or he around whom the circle
or assembly turns, because he always remains within the
assembly (cakra) of pure devotees. Therefore, his name
is Viśvanātha Cakravartī.

In about 1754, on the fifth day of the light phase of

                           10
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

the moon in the month of Māgha (January–February), when
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was around a hundred
years old, he left this material world in Vṛndāvana,
deeply absorbed in internal consciousness. Today his
samādhi stands next to the temple of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Gokulānanda in Śrī Dhāma Vṛndāvana.




The glories and legacy of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura


Following in the footsteps of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura composed an abundance of
transcendental literature on bhakti, thereby
establishing in this world the innermost desire of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s heart. He also refuted faulty
conclusions opposed to the genuine following of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī (rūpānuga) and is thus revered in the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava society as an illustrious ācārya and an
authoritative, self-realised soul. He is renowned as a
great transcendental philosopher and poet, and a rasika
devotee.

A Vaiṣṇava poet, Kṛṣṇa dāsa, has written the following
lines at the conclusion of his translation of Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Mādhurya-kādambinī:

mādhurya-kādambinī-grantha jagata kaila dhanya

cakravartī-mukhe vaktā āpani śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has blessed the
whole world by writing Mādhurya-kādambinī. In reality,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu has spoken this work
through the mouth of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

keha kahena-cakravartī śrī-rūpera avatāra

kaṭhina ye tattva sarala karite pracāra

Some say that Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura is an incarnation
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. He is expert in the art of
describing complex truths in a way that is easy to
understand.

ohe guṇa-nidhi śrī-viśvanātha cakravartī

ki jāniba tomāra guṇa muñi mūḍha-mati

O ocean of mercy, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. I
am a foolish person, so how can I understand your
qualities? (Therefore, kindly reveal your transcendental
qualities within my heart. This is my prayer at your
lotus feet.)

Few Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas have written as many books
as Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura. The following proverb
regarding three of his books is quoted among Vaiṣṇavas
to this day: “kiraṇa-bindu-kaṇā, ei tina niye
vaiṣṇavapanā – Having attained a proper understanding of

                           11
Prema-samputa.txt                                  5/5/2017

these three books, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa, Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu and Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā, one can
claim to be a Vaiṣṇava.”

Below is a list of his books, commentaries and prayers,
which comprise a storehouse of incomparable wealth of
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava devotional literature:

(1) Vraja-rīti-cintāmaṇi

(2) Śrī Camatkāra-candrikā

(3) Śrī Prema-sampuṭa (khaṇḍa-kāvyam)

(4) Gītāvalī

(5) Subodhinī (commentary on Alaṅkāra-kaustubha)

(6) Ānanda-candrikā (commentary on Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi)

(7) Commmentary on Śrī Gopāla-tāpanī

(8) Stavāmṛta-laharī, which includes:

(a) Śrī Guru-tattvāṣṭakam



(b) Mantra-dātṛ-guroraṣṭakam



(c) Parama-guroraṣṭakam



(d) Parātpara-guroraṣṭakam



(e) Parama-parātpara-guroraṣṭakam



(f) Śrī Lokanāthāṣṭakam



(g) Śrī Śacīnandanāṣṭakam



(h) Śrī Svarūpa-caritāmṛtam



(i) Śrī Svapna-vilāsāmṛtam



(j) Śrī Gopāladevāṣṭakam




                              12
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017

(k) Śrī Madana-mohanāṣṭakam



(l) Śrī Govindāṣṭakam



(m) Śrī Gopināthāṣṭakam



(n) Śrī Gokulānandāṣṭakam



(o) Svayam-bhagavattāṣṭakam



(p) Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍāṣṭakam



(q) Jaganmohanāṣṭakam



(r) Anurāgavallī



(s) Śrī Vṛndādevyāṣṭakam



(t) Śrī Rādhikā-dhyānāmṛtam



(u) Śrī Rūpa-cintāmaṇiḥ



(v) Śrī Nandīśvarāṣṭakam



(w) Śrī Vṛndāvanāṣṭakam



(x) Śrī Govardhanāṣṭakam



(y) Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ



(z) Śrī Nikuñja-keli-virudāvalī (virutkāvya)




                              13
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

(aa) Surata-kathāmṛtam (āryaśatakam)



(bb) Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍāṣṭakam



(9) Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam Mahākāvyam

(10) Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā

(11) Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa

(12) Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu

(13) Rāga-vartma-candrikā

(14) Aiśvarya-kādambinī (unavailable)

(15) Mādhurya-kādambinī

(16) Commentary on Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu

(17) Commentary on Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū

(18) Commentary on Dāna-keli-kaumudī

(19) Commentary on Śrī Lalita-mādhava-nāṭaka

(20) Commentary on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (incomplete)

(21) Commentary on Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā

(22) Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary on Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā

(23) Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

*****

My most revered Śrī Gurudeva, ācārya-keśarī aṣṭottara-
śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja,
guardian of the Śrī Gauḍīya sampradāya and founding
ācārya of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti and the Gauḍīya
maṭhas established under its auspices, re-published the
books of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and other previous
ācāryas in the Bengali language, along with publishing
his own works. Today, by his heartfelt desire,
enthusiastic blessings and causeless mercy, books such
as the following have been printed in Hindi, the
national language of India: Jaiva-dharma, Śrī Caitanya-
śikṣāmṛta, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu kī Śikṣā, Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa, Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā, Śrī Gīta-govinda,
Śrī Bhajana-rahasya, Śrī Gauḍīya-gīti-guccha, Śrīmad
Bhagavad-gītā, Śrī Veṇu-gīta, Bhakti-tattva-viveka,
Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā, Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā, Rāga-
vartma-candrikā, Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam, Gauḍīya-
kaṇṭhahāra and Śrī Camatkāra-candrikā. Gradually, other
books are being published as well.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura composed Śrī Prema-
sampuṭa in Sanskrit, and many editions have since been
published in Bengali. Among them, that of Śrī Hari-

                             14
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

bhakta dāsa of Śrī Dhāma Vṛndāvana is particularly full
of transcendental moods, and its language is also easy
to understand. This Hindi translation is based on that
edition.

I have full faith that rasika and bhāvuka sādhakas, and
sādhakas on the path of rāgānuga-bhakti eager to attain
vraja-rasa will hold this book in great veneration.
Faithful people who study it will be able to enter Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s prema-dharma, the eternal religion
of pure, transcendental loving service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

May my most worshipful Śrīla Gurupādapadma, who is the
embodiment of the Supreme Lord’s compassion, shower his
abundant mercy upon me. In that way, I may attain ever-
increasing qualification to fulfil his innermost desire
through my service. This is my humble prayer at his
lotus feet, which can bestow prema.

This first edition was produced with great speed, so
there may be minor faults: we request the faithful
readers to inform us of them so we can correct these
faults for future editions.

An aspirant for a particle of mercy from Śrī Hari, Guru
and the Vaiṣṇavas,

Humble and insignificant,

Tridaṇḍibhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa

Śrī Utthāna Ekādaśī

12 November 2005




Śrī Prema-sampuṭa – The Treasure Chest of Pure,
Transcendental Love


prātaḥ kadācid urarī-kṛta cāru-rāmā-

veśo hariḥ priyatamā-bhavana-praghāne

gatvāruṇāṁśuka-taṭena pidhāya vaktraṁ

nīcī na locana-yugaḥ sahasāvatasthe (1)

Loving attachment has a particular nature that is
extraordinary. Within the heart of the lover, a yearning
may spontaneously arise to hear from his beloved’s mouth
about the excellence of her love for him and the
inferiority of his love for her.

Early one morning, under the control of such love,
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Śyāmasundara, the unrestricted,
carefree enjoyer of rasa, disguised Himself as a young
woman of heart-stealing beauty, and went to the
courtyard of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the dear, darling daughter
of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja. Covering His lotus-like face with
a crimson veil, He appeared before Śrīmatī Rādhikā, His

                            15
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

eyes bashfully lowered.

*****

Previously, on the night of the rāsa dance on the banks
of the river Kālindī, Śrī Śyāmasundara had accepted
defeat in the midst of the gopīs. At that time He had
told them, “na pāraye ’haṁ niravadya saṁyujām... – I am
not able to repay My debt to you all.” Now He was
absorbed in the same mood of loving attachment He had
conveyed with those words. Thus desiring to hear His
beloved Śrī Rādhā speak proudly and unhesitatingly while
in Her affectionate sulky mood ( praṇaya-māna), He
disguised Himself as a lovely young lady. These are the
moods of the lover (nāyaka) and beloved (nāyikā) that
are specifically described in Śrī Prema-sampuṭa.

ārād-vilokya tam atho vṛṣabhānu-putrī

provāca hanta lalite! sakhi! paśya keyam

svasyāṁśubhir hari-maṇīmayatāṁ nināya

mat-sadma padma-vadanādbhuta-bhūṣaṇāḍhyā (2)

When Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrīmatī Rādhikā saw this charming
young woman in the distance, She addressed Her dear
friend, Śrī Lalitā. “O sakhī Lalitā, look, just look!
Who is this beautiful young woman adorned with
astonishing ornaments? The glow of Her lotus-like face
rebukes the lustre of lotus flowers, and the radiance of
Her śyāma-complexioned body illuminates our courtyard.
Our whole house appears to be decorated with sapphires.”

śrutvā sakhī-giram atho lalitā viśākhe

taṁ procatur drutam avāpya tadābhimukhyam

kā tvaṁ kṛśodari! kutaḥ kim u vātha kṛtyaṁ

brūhīty asau prativacas tu dadau na kiñcit (3)

On hearing Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s words, Lalitā and Viśākhā
quickly approached the young maiden and inquired, “O
slender-waisted girl, who are You? Where have You come
from and why have You come here? Please remove our
curiosity by answering these questions.” But that young
girl did not reply.

śrī-rādhikāpy atha vitarka-puraḥsaraṁ taṁ

papraccha kautuka-vaśād upagamya samyak

kā tvaṁ svarūpa-mahasaiva manoharantī

devāṅganāsi kim aho suṣameva mūrttā (4)

When She did not answer, Śrī Rādhikā became even more
curious. After careful thought, She came before the
disguised Śrī Kṛṣṇa and inquired, “O beautiful one, who
are You? The lustre of Your limbs has stolen our minds.
Are You a divine maiden? Upon beholding You, it seems
that You have appeared before us embodying the entirety
of the world’s beauty.”

                           16
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017


tūṣṇīṁ sthitaṁ tad api taṁ punar āha bhāvi-

nyātmānam āśu kathayātra yadi tvam āgāḥ

jānīhi nas tava sakhīḥ paramāntaraṅgāḥ

kiṁ śaṅkase nata-mukhiḥ! trapase ’tha kiṁvā (5)

Still, the pretty young maiden did not reply. “O Bhāvinī
(beautiful woman),” Śrī Rādhikā said, “it is You who
have come here to us, so please introduce Yourself at
once and remove our curiosity. O shy one, in our
company, there is no reason to be timid or reserved.
Please understand that we consider You to be our
intimate friend.”

niśvasya kañcana viṣādam ivābhinīya

vaktraṁ vivṛtya tam akhaṇḍita-mauna-mudram

sā prāha hanta rujam āvahasīti satyaṁ

jñātaṁ na tām ṛta ihedṛśatā tava syāt (6)

When the young maiden – Śrī Kṛṣṇa – heard Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s words, She sighed deeply. Actually, mere words
cannot describe Her response. She turned Her face away
and continued to remain silent. Upon seeing the girl’s
condition, Śrī Rādhā asked, “O beautiful one, I
understand that Your heart is certainly in pain,
otherwise You would not act like this.

taṁ brūhi kañja-mukhi! viśvasihi prakāmaṁ

mayy eva tat pratikṛtau ca yathā yateya

udgīrṇa eva suhṛd-antika eti śāntiṁ

yan-mānasa-vraṇa-vipākaja-tīvra-dāḥ (7)

“O lotus-faced one, with full trust in us, please openly
and clearly tell us about Your pain. I will try My best
to nullify the cause of Your anguish. When, within the
heart, a deep wound of despair opens, the unbearable
anguish one suffers can be mitigated by revealing it to
intimate friends.

kāntena kiṁ tvam asi samprati viprayuktā

tasyaiva vā viguṇatodayatḥ prataptā

kiṁ svāgasas tad avisahyatayā vibhesi

tat kiṁ nu kalpitam aho piśunair na satyam (8)

“Are You now suffering separation from Your beloved? Or
have You become exceedingly perturbed upon discovering
some shortcoming in him? Or have You committed some
great offence that has shattered the affection of Your
beloved? Is that why You are fearful? Perhaps, in order
to destroy the love and affection that Your beloved has
for You, some wicked person has falsely accused You of a
misdeed, although You have actually done no wrong. Is

                           17
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

that why You are unhappy?

kiṁvā vivoḍhari manaḥ sa ghṛṇaṁ tavābhū-

nmande rataṁ kvacana puṁsi-vare dūrāpe

tattvaṁ kaṭūkti paṭunā yata mādṛśīva

santarjjyase guru-janena tato ’si dūnā (9)

“Is it that You have realized that the one You have wed
is dull and unlucky? Is it that You would never have
married him if You had known before, and now that You do
know, You are disinclined toward him? Or has Your heart
become attached to a most wonderful person who is
unattainable? Alas, alas, do You feel dejected because,
like Me, You are subject to the constant harsh reproach
of scornful elders?”

kaccin nu tanvi! khara-vāk-śara-viddha-marmā

saubhāgya-leśa-madirāndha-dhiyaḥ sapatnyāḥ

sambhāvyate tvayi na caitad aho parā kā

tvatto vahatv atula saubhaga-cāru-carccām (10)

The continued silence of the beautiful young damsel only
served to increase Śrī Rādhā’s apprehension. “O comely
one,” She said, “has Your co-wife become proud,
intoxicated by her tiny drop of good fortune? Has her
intelligence become corrupt and as a result, has she
pierced Your heart with the arrows of her sharp words?
No, surely this could not happen to You. I cannot
believe there is a young woman in the entire universe
more fortunate than You. You could not possibly have a
co-wife. Why would a man who is married to a wife
endowed with all good qualities ever abandon her to
marry another?

tvaṁ mohinī śrutacarī kim u mohanārthaṁ

śambhor ivendu-mukhi! kasya haṭhād udeṣi

kiñ cekṣate yadi haris tad-apāṅga-viddha-

stvāṁ kautukaṁ bhavati tad-vyatimohanākhyam (11)

“O moon-faced one, we have heard from Bhagavatī
Paurṇamāsī-devī that there was once an incarnation of
the Supreme Lord named Mohinī, who was so
extraordinarily lovely that She could enchant the great
Śrī Mahādeva (Lord Śiva). Are You that Mohinī? Tell Me,
who is it that You hope to infatuate with Your
fascinating beauty by coming here unexpectedly? It is
true that Śrī Mahādeva was captivated by You, and that
You were not in the least attracted to him, but if Your
side-long glance were to pierce Śrī Hari, and if He were
to shoot a side-long glance back at You, You would
surely become utterly bewildered. There is nothing to
compare with Your beauty nor with the beauty of our Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, that crown jewel of the kings of gallants. If You
saw one another, You would both become so enamoured by
each other’s beauty that You would violate the

                            18
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

boundaries of self-composure, and an exceptional and
amazing rasa would appear from Your mutual attraction.”

śrutvottarīya-pariyantrita-sarva-gātraṁ

romāñcitaṁ tam upalabhya jagāda rādhā

hā kiṁ sakhi! tvam asi daihika-duḥkha-dūnā

vakṣo ’tha pṛṣṭham athavā vyathate śiras te (12)

As Śrī Kṛṣṇa disguised as a celestial damsel
continuously drank the nectarean words flowing from the
lotus mouth of inquisitive Śrī Rādhikā, He felt a
transcendental rapture well up in His heart, and the
hairs of His body stood up in ecstasy. In order to hide
this, He covered His limbs with His veil.

When Śrī Rādhikā saw this, She imagined that the damsel
must have some kind of bodily ailment. “O sakhī,” She
asked, “are You experiencing some discomfort in Your
body? Are You feeling some pain in Your chest, Your back
or Your head?”

vātsalyataḥ pitṛ-padair bahu-mūlyam eva

prasthāpitaṁ yad-akhilāmaya-śātanākhyam

tailaṁ tad asti bhavanāntarato viśākhe!

śīghraṁ samānaya tad āpaya sārthakatvam (13)

In this way, Śrī Rādhikā guessed about the young
maiden’s illness. “O friend Viśākhā,” She said, “My
honourable father fondly sent Me a precious medicinal
oil that is a sure remedy for all kinds of ailments.
Please quickly bring it from the house. The nature of
love and affection is such that if an article dear to
oneself is used for one who is near and dear, its very
existence becomes meaningful.

tailena tena kila mūrttimatā madīya-

snehena subhruvam imāṁ svayam eva sāham

abhyañjayāmy akhila-gātram apāsta-todaṁ

naipuṇyataḥ sakhi! śiro mṛdu mardayāmi (14)

“O sakhī Viśākhā, I feel a deep affection for this sakhī
who has just arrived. This oil, which removes all
diseases, is a manifestation of My father’s love for Me;
hence, I will use it to massage this beautiful girl’s
entire body with My own hands. I will also skilfully
massage Her head, then all Her suffering will be
relieved.

nairujya-kāri-vara-saurabha-vastu-vṛnda-

prakṣepa-cārutara-koṣṇa-payobhir eṇām

saṁsnāpayāmi vigatāruṣam āsya padma-

mullāsayāmy atha girāpi virājayāmi (15)

                           19
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017


“And listen, bring some warm water mixed with the finest
healing ingredients for Me to bathe Her in. I will
alleviate Her suffering and then Her lotus-like face
will appear happy. Perhaps then She will speak with Me.

vācā mayā mṛdulayātihita-pravṛttyā

snehena cānupādhinā paramādṛtāpi

no vakti kiñcid adhunaiva kaṭūkṛtāsyā

tiṣṭhed iyaṁ kapaṭinī yadi hanta sakhyaḥ (16)

“O sakhīs, I have spoken sweet and gentle words to this
girl, and I am ready to personally give Her an oil-
massage and other beneficial treatments. With an open
heart, I have honoured Her and shown Her sincere
affection. Still, I have not heard a single word from
Her lips. She is being deceptive about the nature of Her
ailment and just sits here with a doleful face.

asyā rujas tad-aparāṁ karavai cikitsāṁ

yāṁ prāpya tanva-sumano-nikhilendriyāṇām

vyādhiḥ praśāmyati bhaved atipuṣṭir eṣāṁ

dhanvantari-prahita-divya-rasair ivāddhā (17)

“Now I shall administer a new treatment for this lovely
girl’s disease. Just as the divine nectar-tonic given to
Me by Dhanvantari cures any disease, this remedy will
remove, within a second, all the diseases of Her body,
life force, mind and senses. It will especially serve to
nourish Her body.

kuñjādhirāja-kara-kañja-talābhimarṣa-

masyā urasy atitarāṁ yadi kārayāmi

seyaṁ hasiṣyati vadiṣyati sītkariṣya-

tyasmāṁś ca hāsayitum eṣyati kāñcid ābhām (18)

“Listen, and I will tell you more about this new
treatment. Until now, this sakhī has been sitting here,
overcome by some incurable disease and incapable of
uttering a single word. However, if Her whole chest were
touched by the lotus-like palms of the Lord of our
kuñja, She would soon start to talk, giggle and sob.
Having experienced the indescribable pleasure of the
touch of rasika-śekhara Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s hand, She would
murmur indistinct sounds. What more can I say? She would
assume such a radiance that we would all laugh without
end. Her body would manifest all the signs of having met
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and by His touch, all kinds of
exceptional symptoms would manifest. This would make us
happy.”

śrutvā giraṁ sa pihita-smita-hāsya-padma-

munnīya ramyatara-savya-karāṅgulībhiḥ


                           20
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

utsārya kiñcid alakā-nava-guṇṭhanañ ca

nyañcattaraṁ kiyad udañcayati sa mūrddhnaḥ (19)

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who was disguised as a heavenly damsel,
heard Śrīmatī Rādhikā speak in this way, a gentle smile
appeared on His face. He concealed His smile, and then
slightly raised His lowered lotus-like face. With the
charming fingers of His left hand, He gently brushed a
stray curl from His forehead, and pulled His veil down
over His head a little further.

kiñcij jagāda ramaṇī ramaṇīya-kaṇṭha-

sausvaryam eva racayan vacanaṁ yad eṣaḥ

sā tac cakora-lalaneva papau cirāya

kāñcic camatkṛtim avāpa ca sālipāliḥ (20)

The disguised Śrī Kṛṣṇa assumed the sweet voice of a
young lady and showered alluring words as sweet as
nectar upon all those present. Like cakorī birds, Śrī
Rādhā and Her sakhīs drank every word with eager hearts.
In this way, they experienced supreme bliss and felt
such astonishment that mere words cannot describe. Upon
hearing the sweet talk of the beautiful new girl, they
revelled in a bliss equalled only by the rapture they
felt upon hearing the talk of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.

devy asmi nāka-vasatiḥ śṛṇu yasya heto-

stām agamaṁ su-vadane vidhurī-kṛtātmā

kutrāpi me vividiṣāsti vivakṣite ’rthe

sampādayiṣyati parā tvad ṛte kutas tām (21)

The new sakhī said, “O beautiful Śrī Rādhā, I am a
damsel from the heavenly planets. Please hear why I have
come to You with such an agitated heart. I have a desire
to know something about a particular matter, and who but
You can fulfil My desire?”

naivābhyadhās tvam anṛtaṁ yad udeṣi devī-

tyasmābhir ittham adhunaiva hi paryaceṣṭhāḥ

yan-mānuṣīṣu katamāsti bhavat-sadṛkṣā

kāntyānayān upamayā tvam ivekṣase tvam (22)

Upon hearing these words, Śrī Rādhikā said, “O lovely
one, You have introduced Yourself as a heavenly damsel.
This is surely not false. In fact, I had guessed as much
even before You spoke, because no woman of this mortal
world can rival You in beauty. Your beauty is
incomparable and unprecedented; indeed, You are in a
class of Your own.

yat tvayy ahaṁ sarala-dhīr vitathaṁ vitarka-

vaividhyam apy akaravaṁ śarad-ambujāsye


                           21
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

tat paryahāsi-ṣamito ’stu na me ’parādha-

stvaṁ snihyasīha mayi yady abhavaṁ tvadīyā (23)

“O You whose face resembles an autumnal lotus, I have
considered many possible reasons for Your sadness, such
as feeling separation from Your husband, and I have told
You of them, but actually, I was joking. Please do not
take offence to My words. Now You have become
affectionate toward Me, and I have become Yours.”

kiṁ saṅkucasy ayi sakhī tvam abhūs tvadīyo

devījano ’py aham abhūvam iti pratīhi

tvaṁ prema-rūpa-guṇa-sindhu-kaṇānubhūter

dāsī bhavāmy aham apīti sadābhimanye (24)

The celestial damsel said, “Rādhā, You are My sakhī. Why
are You so reserved? Although I am a heavenly damsel, I
have become Your subordinate. Do not doubt it. I
constantly yearn to be Your maidservant so that I may
experience one drop of the ocean of Your love, beauty
and qualities.

yad vacy ahaṁ tad avadhehi yato viṣādo

durvāra eṣa tam apākuru saṁśayaṁ me

naivādhunāpi virarāma darāpi hṛd-bhu-

tāpas tvadīya-lapanāmṛta-sekato ’pi (25)

“Please listen carefully while I tell You why My heart
feels such anguish, and then dispel the doubt that
causes Me this despair. Your nectar-sweet words have
fallen like soft rain upon My heart, but they have not
even slightly soothed the distress within it.

vṛndāvane dhvanati yaḥ sakhi! kṛṣṇa-veṇu-

stad-vikramaḥ sura-pure prabalatvam eti

sādhvī-tater api manaḥ sa-ghṛṇaṁ yato ’bhūt

kaṇṭhopakaṇṭha-milana smaraṇe ’pi patyuḥ (26)

“O sakhī, the flute-song that is heard in Śrī Vṛndāvana
has also entered our heavenly abode. Its power is such
that the chaste ladies there no longer wish to embrace
their husbands. In fact, the mere thought of doing so
disgusts them. When the Lord of the universe, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
attracts their minds and hearts, their thoughts no
longer run toward their mortal husbands. Anything
connected with Śrī Kṛṣṇa has this power. The slightest
connection with Him completely removes the desire to
enjoy anything material.

śliṣṭveva muñcati suraḥ sa-vitarkam ātma-

kāntāṁ drutaṁ jvalad-alāta-nibhāṅga-yaṣṭim

hālāhalaṁ muralikā-ninadāmṛtaṁ yat

                           22
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017


pītvaiva sātanu-mahājvara-mūrcchitābhūt (27)

“This flute sound is as sweet as nectar, but it is mixed
with deadly poison. Anyone who hears it feels an
unprecedented joy as if they are tasting nectar; but
afterwards, when they have not attained Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they
suffer sharp pains as if they have been poisoned. The
moment that sound enters the ears of the heavenly
damsels, they desire to enjoy with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in every
way. Bewildered by the high fever of amorous love, their
bodies blaze like fiery coals. Their husbands embrace
their burning bodies but quickly release them. ‘What
sudden ailment is causing her high temperature?’ they
wonder. As soon as anyone hears the sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
flute, the desire to meet with Him manifests in their
heart, making them restless. This is the power of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s flute-song.

asmat-pure ’sti na hi kāpi jaraty ataḥ kā-

starjantu kā nu nikhilā api tulya-dharmāḥ

kā vā haseyur aparā yad imāḥ satītvaṁ

viplāvayan muralikā ninado vyajeṣṭa (28)

“One of the names of our heavenly city is Tridaśālaya,
meaning a place where the inhabitants experience only
three stages of life: childhood, adolescence and youth.
They never grow old. Since none of the women ever age,
they all feel attracted to the sound of the flute. Who,
then, is in a position to rebuke others or joke at their
expense? The sound of the flute destroys the heavenly
damsels’ chastity and defeats each and every one of
them.

evaṁ yadi pravavṛte prativāsaraṁ sa

veṇu-dhvaniḥ prabhavituṁ vibudhāṅganāsu

tarhy ekadā hṛdi mayaiva vicāritaṁ hā

ko ’yaṁ kutaś carati vādayitāsya ko vā (29)

“In this way, the influence of the flute-song spread day
by day among the heavenly damsels. Then one day, filled
with wonder, I thought to Myself, ‘From where does this
sweet sound come? Who is playing that flute?’

itthaṁ divaḥ samavatīryya bhuvīha sādhu

vaṁśīvaṭe ’vasam ahaṁ katicid dināni

dṛṣṭo harer anupamo vividho vilāsaḥ

kāntā-gaṇaḥ priya-sakhāly api paryyacāyi (30)

“After due consideration, I was able to trace the sound
of the flute from the heavenly planets, and in that way
I came down to this Earth. I happily stayed at Vaṁśivaṭa
for some days. There I witnessed the unequalled pastimes
performed by You and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and I became acquainted
with His dear, beloved sakhīs.”

                           23
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017


rādhā sa-narma-madhurākṣaram āha dhanye!

tvaṁ gaṇyase sura-pure vara-cāturī-bhāk

anyā punar balavad-utkalikā kṛpāṇī

kṛttendriyaiva sumanastvam apādapārtham (31)

After hearing the words of the heavenly damsel, Śrī
Rādhā spoke sweetly and jokingly. “O most fortunate one,
I consider You the most clever of all heavenly damsels
in the celestial realm, because only You, Your mind cut
asunder by the sword of Your strong eagerness to meet
the flute-player, are trying to find out the source of
the flute-song. The other damsels are not trying to
trace this source. For this reason, only You can really
be called Sumanā, for only You have an undisturbed mind.
(In other words, You are Sumanā because like Me, You
have become attached to para-puruṣa[2] Śrī Kṛṣṇa.)”

*****

The purport is that the demigoddesses are so intensely
eager to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa that their minds cannot remain
steady, and they are suffering all kinds of severe pains
because they always want to enjoy sensual pleasures.
Therefore, they cannot think of any solution to suspend
their eagerness [to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa]. For them to be
called Sumanā, “one with a beautiful mind”, is not
applicable. This heavenly damsel on the other hand, not
only became eager to meet with the flute-player, but She
decided to come here and suspend this eagerness by
meeting Him. Therefore, only She is blessed and only She
can appropriately be called Sumanā.

manda-bhramad-bhru madhura-smita-kānti-dhārā-

dhaute vidhāya radana-cchadane sa cāha

rādhe! parāṁ sva-sadṛśīṁ na hi viddhi kiṁ bhoḥ

śakye ’valokitum apīha pareṇa puṁsā (32)

When the celestial damsel heard Śrī Rādhā’s delightful
joking words, a sweet and effulgent smile came upon Her
lips, and Her eyebrows danced slightly. “Rādhā,” She
said, “do not consider other women to be like You. Do
not think that My attachment to Your lover Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
like Yours. Now that I am here, will Your lover, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, be able to control Me in the same way He controls
You?”

kiṁvā pareṇa puruṣeṇa harer vilāsa-

mevānvabhū rahasi sādhu yad-artham āgāḥ

tad brūhi kiṁ tava vivakṣitam atra madhye

narmātanomi yadi mām akaroḥ sakhīṁ svām (33)

Śrī Rādhikā replied, “I do not know Your reason for
coming here, but in any case, while You are here, please
try to experience Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s confidential, loving

                           24
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

pastimes. What is the need of a relationship with any
other man? Anyway, what was it that You wanted to ask
Me? Until now I have just been joking and playing with
You, because You have accepted Me as Your friend.”

narmātanudhva sakhi! narmaṇi kā jayet tvām

prāṇās tv abhūs tvam ayi me kiyad eva sakhyam

tvaṁ mānuṣī bhavasi kintv amarāṅgaṇās tā

mūrddhnaiva te guṇa-kathā puṇatīr namanti (34)

The heavenly damsel replied, “O sakhī, please continue
to joke. Who can defeat You in this art? O Rādhā, You
are more than just a friend to Me; You are as dear to Me
as My very life-air. It is true that You are only a
human being, but nonetheless, the young heavenly damsels
bow their heads when they hear about Your purifying
qualities.”

*****

The meaning here is that although Śrī Rādhikā manifests
a human-like form, desiring to relish the mellows of
different pastimes, She is not an ordinary person. In
fact, She is the embodiment of the complete potency of
the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of all
incarnations. It is therefore not surprising that the
young heavenly damsels bow down when they hear the
narrations of Her qualities.

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī’s description of the advent of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.1.17–23) is written
in the same mood as the above verse (34): Once, when
Mother Earth was distressed because of the atrocities of
deceitful demons who were dressed like kings, she took
the form of a cow and approached Śrī Brahmā. She cried
pitifully as she revealed her misfortune to Brahmā.
Hearing her narration full of sorrow, Brahmā took her
and the other demigods to the shore of the Milk Ocean.
There the Supreme Person Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu told Śrī
Brahmā, who was absorbed in meditation: “tat-priyārthaṁ
sambhavantu sura-striyaḥ ... – the wives of the demigods
should take birth in Vraja for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and His beloveds” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.1.23).
Therefore, it is not inappropriate for the heavenly
damsels, who are fit to be maidservants, to bow down.

neyaṁ stutis tava na cāpi taṭa-sthatā me

nāpi hriyaṁ bhaja vadāmy anṛtaṁ na kiñcit

sindhoḥ sutāpi girijāpi na te tulāyāṁ

saundarya-saubhaga-guṇair adhiroḍhum īṣṭe (35)

The heavenly damsel then said, “Sakhī, I will never lie
to You, so please do not be embarrassed by My praise. My
ornamented language was not spoken just to flatter You,
and I am not joking out of indifference to You. Really,
Your beauty, fortune and other qualities cannot be
equalled even by Pārvatī, nor by Śrī Lakṣmī, the
daughter of the ocean.”

                           25
Prema-samputa.txt                                  5/5/2017


*****

A similar sentiment is expressed in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.182–4) wherein Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda answers Śrī Gaurāṅga-sundara’s questions:

yāhāṅra saubhāgya-guṇa vāñche satyabhāmā

yāṅra ṭhāñi kalā-vilāsa śikhe vraja-rāmā

yāṅra saundaryādi-guṇa vāñche lakṣmī-pārvatī

yāṅra pativratā-dharma vāñche arundhatī

yāṅra sadguṇa-gaṇane kṛṣṇa nā pāya pāra

tāṅra guṇa gaṇibe kemane jīva chāra

In these verses he explains that even Pārvatī and Śrī
Lakṣmī pray to attain Śrī Rādhā’s beauty and other
qualities. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī also writes in Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (Śrī Hari-priyā-prakaraṇam, 3.18):

rāgollāsa-vilaṅghatārya-padavī-viśrāntayo ’py uddhura-

śraddhā-rajyad-arundhatī-mukha-satī-vṛndena vandyehitāḥ

āraṇyāpi mādhurī-parimalavyākṣipta-lakṣmī-śriya-

stās trailokya-vilakṣaṇā dadatu vaḥ kṛṣṇasya sakhyaḥ
sukham

Arundhatī and other eminent, chaste women reverentially
praise the vraja-gopīs’ behaviour, even though the
beautiful young girls of Vraja stray from the path of
chastity due to being overpowered by their love for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. The gopīs are country girls who dwell in the
forest, but their sweetness defeats the beauty of Śrī
Lakṣmī, the queen of Vaikuṇṭha. Within the three worlds,
the beloveds of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are most extraordinary. May
they bestow happiness upon you.

In this verse it is mentioned that because Śrī Rādhā is
the foremost of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds, Her mādhurya and
other qualities surpass the qualities of Śrī Lakṣmī. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa has unlimited potencies, of which three are
prominent: His internal spiritual potency (cit-śakti),
His external potency (māyā-śakti) and His marginal
potency (jīva-śakti). Of these three, the internal
potency, which is also known as svarūpa-śakti, is most
prominent. Sac-cid-ānanda Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s internal potency
has three divisions: transcendental bliss (ānanda), also
called hlādinī; transcendental, eternal existence (sat),
also called sandhinī; and transcendental knowledge
(cit), also called saṁvid.

The essence of hlādinī-śakti gives bliss to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and to His devotees, and it is called prema. The highest
essence of prema is mahābhāva, of which Śrī Rādhikā is
the embodiment.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is foremost among Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds,
and just as Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the source of all incarnations

                           26
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

of the Supreme Lord, so Śrī Rādhā is the source of all
the expansions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds, which include
the vraja-gopīs, the queens of Dvārakā and Mathurā, and
all the goddesses of fortune in each of His abodes.

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.83) Śrīla
Kavirāja Gosvāmī quotes Bṛhad-gautamīya-tantra:

devī kṛṣṇa-mayī proktā rādhikā para-devatā

sarva-lakṣmī-mayī sarva-kāntiḥ sammohinī parā

She who shines brilliantly and who is non-different from
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is most
worshipful and presides over all goddesses of fortune.
She possesses all splendour and completely bewilders Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. She is the supreme internal potency of the Lord.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.90, 92) explains
this verse (devī kṛṣṇa-mayī ...) as follows:

sarva-lakṣmī-gaṇera tiṅho hana adhiṣṭhāna

sarva-saundarya-kānti vaisaye yāṅhāte

sarva-lakṣmī-gaṇera śobhā haya yāṅhā haite

She is the abode of all goddesses of fortune. ... All
beauty and splendour rest in Her. All the goddesses of
fortune derive their beauty from Her.

These scriptural evidences establish that the qualities
and fortune of Śrī Pārvatī-devī or Śrī Lakṣmī cannot
equal those of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

premnā punas tri-jagad-ūrddhva-pade ’pi kācit

tat-sāmya-sāhasa-dhuraṁ manasāpi voḍhum

śaknoti nety akhilam eva mayā śrutaṁ tat

kailāsa-śṛṅgam anu haimavatī-sabhāyām (36)

The heavenly damsel continued, “Listen, and I will tell
You more. Is any woman as courageous as You in loving
affairs, even in the Vaikuṇṭhā planets far beyond the
three material worlds? Is there a woman who can even
imagine that she is Your equal? These words of praise do
not come from My imagination; I have heard Your glories
in the assembly of Pārvatī-devī atop of Mount Kailāśa.

śrutvā mahān ajani me manaso ’bhilāṣa-

stad-darśanāya samapūri sa cāpi kintu

tāpa-tad-antar iha yo rabhasād adīpi

tenāsphuṭan na kaṭhino hi mamāntarātmā (37)

“When I heard of Your qualities, I developed an intense
desire to meet with You. It is true that seeing You has
fulfilled My desire, but still My heart is burning with
distress. The only reason My heart has not shattered in
its fire is because it is so hard.”

                           27
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017


ko ’sau tam āśu kathayeti muhus tayokto

vaktuṁ śaśāka na sa bāṣpa-niruddha-kaṇṭhaḥ

aśru-plutekṣaṇa-mathāsya mukhaṁ svayaṁ sā

svenāñcalena mṛdulena mamārjja rādhā (38)

Śrī Rādhikā, who is most loving, heard the heavenly
damsel’s words, which were full of unbearable agony, and
asked, “My friend, what has caused Your intense and
intolerable suffering? Please tell Me straightaway.”

Tears flowed incessantly from the damsel’s eyes, Her
throat choked up and She was unable to speak. Śrī
Rādhikā gently wiped the damsel’s face and eyes with Her
own, soft veil.

*****

The intention behind Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s display of deep, inner
grief was to make a convincing show that His grief was
genuine.

sthitvā kṣaṇaṁ dhṛtim adhād atha tām uvāca

premā tavāyam atulo ’nupadhir valīyān

kṛṣṇe ’tikāmini babhūva kathaṁ dunoti

svāṁ svāṁś ca viśvasiti yo ’tyapade ’py abhijñaḥ (39)

The heavenly damsel remained in that mood for a moment,
and then calmly and patiently replied, “O innocent one,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is a licentious debauchee. How could You fall
in love with such a lusty person? In this world, Your
prema is unequalled. Because it is causeless, it is
indestructable, and because it is so powerful, nothing
can check it. Yet those who knowingly make something
that is unworthy the object of their loyalty only cause
distress to themselves and their dear ones.

saundarya-śaurya-vara-saubhaga-kīrtti-lakṣmī

pūrṇo ’pi sarva-guṇa-ratna-vibhūṣito ’pi

premāviveca-katamatvam asau vibhartti

kāmitva-hetukam asau śrayituṁ na yogyaḥ (40)

“Let Me tell You something more. It is true that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is complete with sweet beauty, bravery, matchless
fortune, fame and other opulences, and that He is
adorned with all jewel-like qualities; nevertheless, He
has one fault that nullifies all these opulences: He is
quite unable to discriminate in matters of prema,
because He has so many amorous desires. It is never
appropriate to find refuge in such a person.

tasmin dine bahu-vilasya muhuḥ prakāśya

premā tvayā sarabhasaṁ rajanau tu kuñje


                           28
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

saṅketa-gāmṛju-dhiyaṁ bhavatīṁ vidhāya

kāñcit parāṁ sa ramayan kapaṭī jahau tvām (41)

“Just listen. On that day, Śrī Kṛṣṇa played with You in
various ways. With eagerness, He repeatedly displayed an
articifical love for You. But later, O simple-hearted
woman, that falsehearted cheat abandoned You to enjoy
with another young woman, even though He had arranged to
meet with You that night in a kuñja.

yat tvaṁ tadā vyalapa eva sakhīs tudantī

vallīḥ patatri vitatīr api rodayantī

sarvaṁ tadāli! nibhṛtaṁ maya-kānya-bhāli

vaṁśīvaṭa-sthitatayā valitā ruṣaiva (42)

“Your sakhīs were distressed when   they heard You
lamenting, and even the creepers,   animals and birds of
the forest cried in pain. At that   time, I also became
filled with mental anguish, for I   was hiding at
Vaṁśīvaṭa, watching.”

*****

When Śrīmatī Rādhikā experiences separation from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, mohanākhya-mahābhāva arises within Her. In Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (Sthāyī-bhāva-prakaraṇam) it is stated
that mohanākhya-mahābhāva causes such an agitation
within the universe that even the non-human species cry.
That is why Śrī Kṛṣṇa is saying here (Verse 42) that the
trees, creepers and birds also cried.

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 2.43) it is
stated:

akaitava kṛṣṇa-prema, yena jāmbunada-hema,

sei premā nṛloke nā haya

yadi haya tāra yoga, nā haya tabe viyoga,

viraha haile keha nā jīyaya

Unalloyed kṛṣṇa-prema, like pure gold from the Jāmbu
River, does not exist in this world of man. If it
manifested in this realm, there would be no separation;
if separation occured, one’s life would cease to exist.

rāse tathaiva viharann aparā vihāya

prema tvayaiva sahasā prakaṭī cakāra

sthitvā kṣaṇaṁ sa bhavatīm amucad vanānta-

rekākinīṁ rati-bhara-śrama-khinna-gātrīm (43)

The heavenly damsel then said, “On the night of the
rāsa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa abandoned all the other vraja-sundarīs
to take You with Him, to sport with You, and to show You
profuse affection. How-ever, after a short while, when
You became tired from Your amorous, loving sports, He

                              29
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

suddenly left You all alone in the forest.

tarhi plutaṁ vilapitaṁ gahanā ca mūrcchā

ceṣṭāpy atibhrama-mayī tava yad yad āsīt

vyāpyaiva hā bahu-janūṁṣi hṛdi sthitaṁ me

tat kaṣṭam aṣṭa-vidhayaiva tanoḥ prakṛtyā (44)

“At that time You displayed various conditions of Your
body and heart – You lamented loudly and fainted over
and over again. Your movements showed that You were
confused; they were not natural. Alas, seeing You in
that condition was so painful I will never forget it.
Even in future births, as I pass through the eight
stages of life, such as birth, old age and death, Your
anguish will ceaselessly pierce My heart like a sharp
iron spear.

devī-jano ’smi hṛdi me kva nu kaṣṭam āsīd

daivād yaśasvini! babhūva bhavad-didṛkṣā

mām āgamayya bata sākṛta kīla-viddhāṁ

yasyāsti naiva sakhi! nirgamane ’py upāyaḥ (45)

“O glorious one, is it possible for pain to remain in My
heart? After all, I am a damsel from the heavenly
planets. But alas, at an inauspicious moment, a yearning
to see You suddenly manifested. It was that desire alone
that brought Me here, and now, O sakhī, it is piercing
My heart like a sharp iron spear. Indeed, I cannot see
how to remove it at all.”

*****

Śrī Kṛṣṇa condemned Himself in order to gauge the depth
of Śrī Rādhikā’s love for Him. He knew that the super-
excellence of Rādhikā’s love would be established in
this world if Her love neither faltered nor decreased
slightly after She heard this criticism of Him. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa spoke in this way in order to relish the nectar-
like words scented with prema that flowed from the
earnest and solemn heart of Śrī Rādhikā, the crown jewel
of His beloveds.

sandānitaṁ tvayi mano na divaṁ prayātuṁ

sthātuñ ca nātra tila-mātram apīttham īṣṭe

udghūrṇate pratipadaṁ na padaṁ labheta

adyābhavaṁ tvayi cirāt-prakaṭī kṛtātmā (46)

“Sakhī,” continued the heavenly damsel, “My heart has
become so bound to Yours that when I see You suffer, I
become powerless to return to the heavenly planets. At
the same time, I cannot remain here bearing such heavy
grief in My heart. Since I cannot find peace, I have
come to see You to express the feelings aroused by what
is revolving in My mind.


                           30
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

kṛṣṇāt punar bahu vibhemi na dharma-loka-

lajje dayā-dhvani kadāpi na pāntha tāsya

bālye striyās taruṇimany acirād vṛṣasya

vatsasya madyam anu yo vyadhitaiva hiṁsām (47)

“What is more, I am very afraid of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, because He
has no sense of religion, or moral principles, nor does
He fear public opinion. He is so hard-hearted that He
has never stepped foot on the path of mercy. When He was
just a little baby, He killed a woman, the rākṣasī
Pūtanā. In His youth He killed the bull Vṛṣāsura, and in
His boyhood He killed the calf Vatsāsura. So, as You can
see, from His very childhood He has engaged in violent,
irreligious acts.”

gāndharvikāha subhage! tvayi kāpi śakti-

rākarṣiṇī kila harāv iva santatāsti

yan nindasi priyatamaṁ tad api prakāmaṁ

mac-cittam ātmani karoṣy anuraktam eva (48)

When Śrī Rādhikā heard the heavenly damsel speak such
words of criticism about Kṛṣṇa, She said, “O most
fortunate one, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the beloved of My life. His
potency to attract My heart is unparalleled. Although He
has hurt Me time and again, I am unable to sever My
heart’s attachment to Him.

“Often I decide to stop talking to Him because of His
improper behaviour, but the moment I see Him again, I
forget everything. I see a power in You similar to the
power I see in Him, because even though You are
criticizing Śrī Vrajarāja-kumāra (the son of the king of
Vraja), who is more dear to Me than millions of My own
lives, You still attract My heart, making Me attached to
You. Surely it is unnatural to feel affection for
someone who criticizes a loved one, unless one comes
under the control of some supernatural power; then,
maybe it could happen. The nature of unconditional love
is such that once it manifests it is not easily
destroyed. This love is so firm and so vast that it
never wavers, nor can it ever be annihilated even after
hearing criticism of the loved one.”

*****

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta this is explained with the
verse akaitava kṛṣṇa-prema, yena jāmbunada-hema, sei
premā nṛloke nā haya / yadi haya tāra yoga, nā haya tabe
viyoga, viyoga haile keha nā jīyaya. The translation of
this verse was given earlier, in Verse 42.

tvaṁ me sakhī bhavasi cen na divaṁ prayāsi

nitya-sthitiṁ vraja-bhuvīha mayā karoṣi

tat-prema-ratna-vara-sampuṭam udghaṭaya

tvāṁ darśayāmi tad-ṛte na samādadhāmi (49)

                           31
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017


Śrīmatī Rādhikā continued, “O Sundarī, if You really
consider Yourself My sakhī, do not return to the
heavenly planets. Stay with Me in this land of Vraja for
all time, and then I will be able to open My treasure
chest to show You the amazing jewel of prema. It is not
possible to understand the prema that Śrī Kṛṣṇa and I
have for each other just by talking about it. It is only
possible to understand by observing it. If You and I do
not live together, how will I ever make You understand
this prema, and how will I be able to remove Your doubt?
Stay with Me, and I will be able to make You understand
clearly why I cannot become indifferent toward Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, even though I suffer so greatly because of Him.”

hantādhunāpi na hi viśvasiṣi prasīda

dāsī bhavāmi kim u māṁ nu sakhīṁ karoṣi

tvaṁ śādhi sādhu dhin u vā tuda vā gatir me

rādhe! tvam eva śapathaṁ karavāṇi viṣṇoḥ (50)

When the disguised Śrī Kṛṣṇa heard the words of Śrī
Rādhikā, He said, “Alas, alas, You still lack faith in
Me, even though We now know each other. Rādhā, You want
Me to be Your sakhī, but that is something for the
distant future. At the moment, I am just Your
maidservant. Please be happy with Me, and control Me in
every way. O Rādhā, I swear by Śrī Viṣṇu that You are My
one and only shelter, whether You punish Me or show Me
mercy.”

*****

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s words here are completely true. This is
because without mādanākhya-mahābhāva it is impossible to
fulfil the boundless desire to enjoy of śṛṅgāra-rasa-
rāja[3] Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

vaktuṁ tadā pravavṛte vṛṣabhānu-nandi-

nyākarṇya tāṁ vividiṣām iha ced dadhāsi

premeya-devam idam eva na cedam etat

yo veda veda-vidasāv api naiva veda (51)

When Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrī Rādhikā heard this, She said,
“O My friend, if You desire to hear about My prema, then
listen: Anyone who says, ‘This is the extent of prema’,
‘this is prema’, ‘this is the nature of prema’ or ‘this
is not the nature of prema’ knows nothing about prema,
even if they have studied the Vedas and all other
scriptures.

*****

The nature of prema cannot be explained in words.
Indeed, prema will not manifest in one’s heart as long
as one has a mind with which to deliberate upon it. One
who deliberates upon the nature of prema remains
unqualified for it, even if that is his sole subject of
deliberation. Prema is completely beyond all else. It is

                           32
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017

sva-saṁvedya, meaning it can only be experienced by
itself. Prema will not manifest if one’s heart has any
inclination other than to make the beloved completely
happy. Prema is nothing other than being fully absorbed
in meditating on what makes the beloved happy – “Will my
beloved become happy by my doing this?” In such a
condition, no other consideration can be present. One
who merely deliberates upon prema cannot realize it, and
upon attaining prema, nothing else is perceived. All
scriptures may be realized through deliberation, but not
prema.

yo vedayed vividiṣuṁ sakhi! vedanaṁ yat

yo vedanā tad akhilaṁ khalu vedanaiva

premā hi ko ’pi para eva vivecane sa-

tyantardadhāty alam asāv avivecane ’pi (52)

“O sakhī, suppose someone wants to grasp the nature of
prema and tries to explain it to another, even though he
has no realization of it himself. In that case, he who
tries to explain it is cheating, and any realization
resulting from those words is simply a fraud. Prema is
the most excellent of topics, and it cannot be described
in words. It disappears upon being analysed and becomes
even more concealed when it is not.

*****

Prema is incomparable, and it can only be experienced by
itself. Language cannot illuminate it, and it cannot be
understood by hearing about it from one in whose heart
it has not manifest. It is simply fruitless labour to
try to understand or explain prema, because
understanding it is purely dependent upon experiencing
it.

Prema disappears when it is analysed – this was
discussed in the explanation of the previous verse. It
cannot manifest in a heart that is intent on analysing
it. And if the intelligence to analyse it appears after
it has awakened in the heart, prema cannot remain there.

One may not have the slightest tendency to analyse
prema, but still, unless one meditates on whether or not
one’s actions are pleasing to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it will not
manifest in one’s heart. Now, even though the slightest
tendency to analyse prema may be absent, it still will
not manifest in one’s heart unless one meditates on
whether or not one’s actions are pleasing to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
This is because prema is found only in a person whose
natural tendency deep in his heart is to act entirely
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure. Unless one meditates on
whether or not one’s actions are pleasing to Kṛṣṇa, the
tendency to act solely for His happiness will not arise
in the heart. In that case, only the tendency to perform
activities to fulfil the desire for one’s own happiness
will appear, and then prema cannot arise.

dvābhyāṁ yadā rahitam eva manaḥ svabhāva-

siṁhāsanopari virājati rāgi-śuddham

                           33
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017


tac-ceṣṭitaiḥ priya-sukhe sati yat-sukhaṁ syāt

tac ca svabhāvam adhirūḍham avekṣayet tam (53)

“When the heart is filled with rāga – attachment to
Kṛṣṇa with affection – a mood naturally reigns in which
there is no other desire than to give happiness to one’s
beloved. And when one makes the beloved happy, even
though one’s tendency of heart is neither to deliberate
on how to do so nor to neglect it, happiness naturally
arises. At this time, prema becomes visible in one’s
innate activities.

*****

When prema arises, specific conditions of the heart
manifest, such as it becoming filled with rāga. The
symptom of rāga is described in Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi
(14.126) as follows:

duḥkham apy adhikaṁ citte sukhatvenaiva vyajyate

yatas tu praṇayotkarṣāt sa rāga iti kīrttyate

Due to the excellence of praṇaya (strong loving
attachment), the heart’s condition becomes such that it
experiences supreme bliss even in extremely distressful
situations, all because of the possibility that one will
attain one’s beloved. Without that possibility, even the
condition of complete happiness is distressful. This
state of heart is called rāga.

When prema arises, other conditions of the heart also
arise. At that time the heart becomes purified, and no
desires appear there other than to give pleasure to the
beloved. Furthermore, one neither neglects the beloved
nor meditates on serving him. This is because service to
him will manifest naturally. At that time there is no
tendency in the heart to gain knowledge about prema.

These conditions of heart must occur naturally. Prema
cannot be created artificially. Its presence can be
perceived when anubhāvas or sāttvika-bhāvas manifest
naturally. There is no other way to perceive prema. The
following symptom reveals that prema has appeared in a
person’s heart: upon seeing the happiness of one’s
beloved, a happiness naturally arises in one’s own
heart. That happiness causes anubhāvas and other
transcendental sentiments to manifest.

loka-dvayāt sva-janataḥ parataḥ svato vā

prāṇa-priyād api sumeru-samā yadi syuḥ

kleśās tad apy atibalī sahasā vijitya

premaiva tān harir ibhān iva puṣṭim eti (54)

“Just as a lion defeats elephants and nourishes itself
by eating them, similarly this extremely powerful prema
nourishes itself by conquering the unlimited and
difficult miseries caused by conditions in this world,
by other planets, by family members, by enemies, by

                           34
Prema-samputa.txt                                  5/5/2017

one’s own body or by matters related to the body, and
even by troubles caused by one’s beloved that are as
insurmountable as Mount Sumeru.

*****

Śrī Rādhikā is explaining that prema is inherently free
from obstacles. Once it has manifested, not even
hundreds of thousands of obstacles can obstruct it. In
such prema there is no place for concern about worldly
comforts, religious duties, the attainment of residence
in heaven, and so forth. Reproaches by family members
and abuse by enemies cannot enter the ears, and one even
forgets to protect one’s own body. Prema has absolutely
no obstacle. Even the lover’s own attempts to break it
by neglecting his beloved’s love do not act as an
obstacle to prema. The symptom of prema is given in Śrī
Ujjvala-nilamaṇi (Sthāyī-bhāva-prakaraṇam, 14.63) as
follows:

sarvathā dhvaṁsa-rahitaṁ saty api dhvaṁsa-kāraṇe

yad-bhāva-bandhanaṁ yūnoḥ sa premā parikīrttitaḥ

When the deep emotion that binds a young couple does not
break, despite many reasons for it to do so, it is
called prema.

In fact, multitudes of difficulties nourish prema rather
than obstruct it. If the current of a quickly flowing
river is obstructed, the water will overcome the
obstruction and flow with redoubled force. Similarly,
attraction for the beloved increases in proportion to
the obstacles encountered. As a result, the force of
that prema increases a hundredfold.

The great sage Bharata Muni, who is the original guru of
the scriptures on rasa, has explained this phenomenon as
follows (as quoted in Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, 1.20):

bahu vāryate yataḥ khalu yatra pracchanna-kāmukatvaṁ ca

yā ca mitho durlabhatā sā manmathasya paramā ratiḥ

The prema that is strongly objected to by society and
religion, in which the lover (nāyaka) and beloved
(nāyikā) must hide their amorous desires, and in which
loving union is difficult to attain, is called manmatha-
sambandhita paramā prīti, the supreme passionate
affection.

Therefore, it is seen that a multitude of obstacles
nourishes prema rather than inhibits it.

snigdhāṅga-kāntir atha garva-dharo ’tyabhīto

viśrambhavān svapiti kiṁ gaṇayed asau tān

kaṇṭhī-ravaḥ śuna ivābhibhavan sarāga-

steṣv eva rājatitamāṁ tamasīva dīpaḥ (55)

“The proud, confident and graceful lion sleeps
fearlessly without disturbance. Similarly, that prema

                           35
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

which brims with affection, exhibits pride due to the
rise of māna and reaches the stage of praṇaya, can never
be destroyed. In that prema, the pride of possessiveness
– ‘he is mine; he is exclusively my beloved’ – is firmly
situated within the heart of the lover.

“Just as a lion considers a dog to be insignificant, so
prema does not recognize insignificant, dog-like
obstacles. Just as a lamp’s glow becomes brighter in the
darkness, so the glory of prema becomes more lustrous in
the face of obstacles. With those obstacles conquered,
prema becomes more radiant than before. Thus situated,
it never diminishes.

lāmpaṭy ato nava-navaṁ viṣayaṁ prakurva-

nāsvādayann atimadoddhuratāṁ dadhānaḥ

āhlādayann amṛta-raśmir iva tri-lokīṁ

santāpayan pralaya-sūrya ivāvabhāti (56)

“Sakhī, through lascivious desire, this prema makes one
continually relish the beloved in new and fresh ways.
Like the moon, it pleases the three worlds with
excessive intoxication, and it also burns like the sun
at the time of universal devastation.

*****

The meaning here is that the lover (nāyaka) has such
deep love and affectionate attachment to many beloveds
(nāyikās) that he develops a longing for more and more
nāyikās. Tasting such new moods greatly delights the
nāyaka. This love and affection causes the beloved to
experience separation from the lover when he goes to
another nāyikā. The beloved dreams about the happiness
of past and future meetings with the lover, and thus she
becomes submerged in an ocean of unprecedented
enjoyment. As the moon’s rays cool the three worlds, the
prema that exists when the nāyaka and nāyikā meet
creates an enjoyment that cannot be described in words.
At that time, the lover and beloved perceive the three
worlds to be filled with happiness. Yet, in a state of
separation from each other such prema gives more pain
than millions of forest fires, and it seems that
everything is burning.

enaṁ vibhartti sakhi! kaḥ khalu gopa-rāja-

sūnuṁ vinā tri-bhuvane tad-upary-adho ’pi

premāṇam enam alam eṇa-dṛśo ’nvavinda-

nnatraiva goṣṭha-bhuvi kāścana tāratamyāt (57)

“My dear sakhī, in the entire universe, in the upper
planetary systems such as Maharloka, and in the lower
planetary systems such as Rasātala, is anyone worthy of
receiving this prema other than Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa? It is only in this land of Vraja that some doe-
eyed girls taste this prema, according to their various
individual bhāvas.


                           36
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

*****

Prema can only be attained when one is completely
independent and free from care, and when one can
completely relinquish the pride born of one’s
occupational duty. No ordinary human being can possess
prema, for such a person is always controlled by time,
fruitive activities, illusion, the senses and so forth.
Consequently, he cannot peacefully feel affection for
anyone.

All forms of Bhagavān, starting with the guṇa-avatāras
and puruṣa-avatāras up to Śrī Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of the
spiritual sky, are supremely independent, but they
engage in activities such as creating material
universes, delivering devotees and establishing
religion, and they all carry the identity of being the
Supreme Lord. They are not able to simply love someone
because they cannot be free from the anxiety of these
responsibilities, even for a moment, nor can they give
up their opulence. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s manifestations, such as
Śrī Mathurānātha and Śrī Dvārakānātha, are also unable
to show genuine love and affection. However, Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not a king, but the son of a king,
a prince, and thus He is completely carefree. When He
falls in love with someone He forgets everything, even
that He is Bhagavān. Only He has the capacity to truly
love someone.

Furthermore, no one can be a true premikā if her heart
harbours a trace of desire or slight consideration for
her own personal happiness. This kind of mood can be
found only in the gopīs of Vraja, because they have
given up everything, including their social duties and
obligations, the religious principles prescribed in the
Vedas, their shame, patience and bodily comforts, and
their spiritual happiness, solely to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa for
His pleasure. They have also given up their
relationships with friends, relatives and family
members, despite being scolded and reproached by them.
Therefore, only the vraja-sundarīs can love Śrī Kṛṣṇa
purely.

premā hi kāma iva bhāti bahiḥ kadācit

tenāmitaṁ priyatamaḥ sukham eva vindet

premeva kutracid avekṣyata eva kāmaḥ

kṛṣṇastu taṁ paricinoti balāt kalāvān (58)

“Sometimes prema manifests externally as kāma, or
transcendental lust, from which the beloved, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
obtains unlimited happiness. And sometimes mere lust is
portrayed as prema. Only the crown jewel of clever
personalities and the abode of all arts, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is
able to understand its true nature.”

*****

The desire to gratify one’s own senses is called lust,
or kāma. In prema there is no trace of desire for one’s
own sense enjoyment, and one only endeavours to arrange
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s satisfaction. In the world of prema, the

                           37
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

love of the vraja-sundarīs is situated on the topmost
stage and is called adhirūḍha-mahābhāva. Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.171–2) states:

ataeva kāma-preme bahuta antara

kāma—andha-tamaḥ, prema—nirmala bhāskara

ataeva gopī-gaṇera nāhi kāma-gandha

kṛṣṇa-sukha lāgi mātra, kṛṣṇa se sambandha

There is a great difference between kāma and prema. Kāma
is dense darkness, and prema is like the pure sun. There
is not the slightest trace of kāma in the gopīs. Their
relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa is solely based on giving
Him pleasure.

Some acts, such as embracing and kissing, are common to
both kāma and prema, so externally they appear to be
similar, yet their true natures are in fact opposite. In
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.283–4) it is also said:

premaiva gopa-rāmāṇāṁ kāma ity agamam prathām

ity uddhavādayo ’py etaṁ vañchanti bhagavat-priyāḥ

The prema of the vraja-sundarīs manifests in such a way
that it appears to be kāma. Śrī Uddhava and other dear
devotees of the Lord pray to attain this kāmarūpā-
bhakti.

The vraja-sundarīs’ prema, which seems to be kāma, is
supremely pleasurable to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is topmost of
those who relish transcendental mellows. This is because
the nature of love is that one who loves always longs to
see the beloved happy. If this mood is not manifest,
then love cannot remain. Because the vraja-sundarīs have
no desire for their own happiness, waves of bliss
manifest in their limbs when they give joy to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
They clean their bodies and decorate them with beautiful
clothes and ornaments with the sole purpose of giving
satisfaction to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In Ādi Purāṇa it is stated:

nijāṅgam api yā gopyo mameti samupāsate

tābhyaḥ paraṁ na me pārtha nigūḍha-prema-bhājanam

O son of Pṛthā, the gopīs decorate their bodies because
they consider them to be Mine. No one is a greater
repository of deep prema than they.

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādī-līlā 4.191–2, 195) it is
also said:

āmāra darśane kṛṣṇa pāila eta sukha

ei sukhe gopīra praphulla aṅga-mukha

gopī-śobhā dekhi’ kṛṣṇera śobhā bāḍe yata

kṛṣṇa-śobhā dekhi’ gopīra śobhā bāḍe tata

ataeva sei sukha kṛṣṇa-sukha poṣe

                           38
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017


ei hetu gopī-preme nāhi kāma-doṣe

[The gopīs think,] “Śrī Kṛṣṇa has obtained so much
pleasure from seeing us,” and thus their faces and
bodies blossom. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty increases when He
sees the beauty of the gopīs, and the gopīs’ beauty
increases, the more they see Kṛṣṇa’s beauty. ... The
happiness of the gopīs nourishes Kṛṣṇa’s happiness
because their prema is completely free from the fault of
kāma.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not satisfied by one who flaunts their kāma
as prema, and He is not controlled by it. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also
does not find happiness in prema contained with kāma.
The prema of the queens of Dvārakā could not control Śrī
Kṛṣṇa when mixed with the desire to satisfy their own
senses. This is also explained in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.61.4):

smāyāvaloka-lava-darśita-bhāva-hāri

bhrū-maṇḍala-prahita-saurata-mantra-śauṇḍaiḥ

patnyas tu ṣoḍaśa-sahasram anaṅga-bāṇair

yasyendriyaṁ vimathitum karaṇair na śekuḥ

The sixteen thousand queens of Śrī Kṛṣṇa were unable to
allure His senses even by their smiling sidelong glances
and the dancing of their captivating eyebrows, which,
like Cupid’s arrows, are expert in amorous messages.

kṛṣṇāntikaṁ sakhi! nayāśu nikāma-taptāṁ

mām ity udāharati kintu tad-ātmajena

kāmena tat-sukhaparaṁ dadhatī sva-bhāvā-

deva sva-cittamayam atra na kāminī syāt (59)

Śrī Rādhikā continued, “Sakhī, when a young woman says,
‘I am burning in the fire of lust; please take me
quickly to the lord of my life,’ she cannot be called
lusty, because at that time, the nature of her heart is
firmly fixed in giving pleasure to her beloved. The
passionate mood that manifests to give happiness to her
beloved cannot be called mere lust (kāma); rather, it is
true love, or prema.

premāmbudhir guṇa-maṇī-khanir asya śāṭhya-

cāpalya-jaihmyam akhilaṁ ramaṇīyam eva

premāṇam eva kila kāmam ivāṅganāsu

sandarśayan svam udakarśayad eva yas tāḥ (60)

“Sakhī, Śrī Vrajendra-nandana is both an ocean of prema
and a mine of jewel-like qualities. His deceitfulness,
fickleness, crookedness and other such qualities are
extremely charming. He devises how to increase women’s
love for Him by presenting His prema – in the semblance
of lust – before them all.”

                           39
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017


*****

Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form consists of pure
sweetness. His mood of heart-stealing sweetness appears
even when opulence (aiśvarya) is manifest in His
pastimes of killing the demons. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa’s moods
of fickleness, crookedness and so forth are sweet. Śrī
Govinda’s form is filled with rasa, and the movements of
all His limbs cause waves of bliss to arise. He
increases the love of His beloved gopīs through His
crookedness, fickleness and other qualities. If Śrī
Kṛṣṇa did not display qualities, such as crookedness,
the gopīs’ love would not manifest the waves of
vyabhicārī-bhāvas and other transcendental moods of
ecstasy, as well as the stages of khaṇḍita and so forth.
And thus the greatness of their love would not be
revealed to the world. Śrī Kṛṣṇa shows His yearning to
meet with His gopī beloveds and thus gives unlimited
bliss to their hearts. When they desire to make Him
happy by offering all that they have to Him, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
shows His eagerness to enjoy that offering in every way.
Śrī Govinda is the personification of unalloyed
goodness, and desires are spontaneously born within Him
to reciprocate with the love of His devotees. Without
this, love cannot increase.

kā vāṅganāḥ śata-sahasram amuṣya kāma-

paryāptaye mada-kalāḥ prabhavantu yat tāḥ

premā tad atra ramaṇīṣv anupādhir eva

premaika-vaśyatamatā ca mayānvabhāvi (61)

Are hundreds and thousands of beautiful girls,
intoxicated by youthful lust, able to satisfy, by their
various kinds of endeavours, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s desire for an
amorous meeting? Śrī Kṛṣṇa is self-satisfied (ātmārāma)
and free from material desires (āptakāma), so no one can
enchant Him by their lust. He is only controlled by pure
prema. Therefore, Śrīmatī Rādhikā says, “Sakhī, stay in
Śrī Vṛndāvana. Experience for Yourself how the vraja-
ramaṇīs’ prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is free from any desire for
personal happiness, and how Śrī Kṛṣṇa is controlled only
by such prema.

tatrāpi mayy atitarām anurajyatīti

loka-pratītir api na hy anṛtā kadāpi

yat prema merum iva me manute parāsāṁ

no sarṣapais tri-caturair api tulyam eṣaḥ (62)

“Although the prema of all the beautiful young girls of
Vraja is unconditional, everyone knows that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
much more attracted to Me than to all others. Indeed,
this is true, because Śrī Kṛṣṇa feels My prema to be as
boundless as Mount Sumeru, and the prema of the other
girls like a few mustard seeds.

*****


                           40
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

Pure and genuine prema is only seen in Vraja; nowhere
else. Some-times the prema of the queens of Dvārakā is
mixed with kāma, but the vraja-sundarīs’ prema is always
free from duplicity and any personal desire. For this
reason, only the vraja-sundarīs’ prema reaches the level
of mahābhāva. This is described in Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi
(Sthāyī-bhāva-prakaraṇam, 14.156):

mukunda-mahiṣī-vṛndair apy asāv atidurlabhaḥ

vraja-devy eka-saṁvedyo mahābhāvākhyayocyate

Modanākhya-mahābhāva is only possible for the gopīs of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s group, such as Śrī Lalitā. It is not
possible in other gopīs. This is explained in Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (Sthāyī-bhāva-prakaraṇam, 14.176):
rādhikā-yūtha evāsau modano na tu sarvataḥ.

Mādanākhya-mahābhāva is only present in Śrī Rādhikā. It
does not arise in anyone else. This is stated in Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (Sthāyī-bhāva-prakaraṇam, 14.219):

sarva-bhāvodgamollāsī mādano ’yaṁ parāt paraḥ

rājate hlādinī-sāro rādhāyām eva yaḥ sadā

Hence, by deliberation upon the true nature of prema,
one can conclude that Śrī Rādhikā’s prema is topmost.

premānurūpamayi rajyati yat parāsu

rāgānurūpam iha dīvyati nāparādhyet

daivād vyatikramam upaiti kadācid asmāt

nāsau sukhī bhavati tena ca māṁ dunoti (63)

“O friend, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is attracted toward other nāyikās
and can sport with them according to the extent of their
prema for Him. This is not a fault of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. If this
principle were ever to be transgressed by a gopī, then
Śrī Kṛṣṇa would not become satisfied, and I also would
feel distress.

*****

Śrī Kṛṣṇa would not be happy if He were to show more
affection to a gopī, or sport with her more than her
affection for Him warranted, because such a beloved
(nāyikā) would not be able to satisfy His expectation.
He would thus become unhappy. And when He feels sad,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā also feels sad.

saṅketa-gām api vidhāya mad-eka-tāno

māṁ nājagāma yad ihābhavad antarāyaḥ

ruddhaḥ kayācid anurodha-vaśāt sa reme

mad-duḥkha-cintana-davārddita eva rātrim (64)

“When Śrī Kṛṣṇa indicates that I should meet with Him, I
go to Our assigned meeting place. But if He does not
arrive there, it is only due to some obstacle. Although

                           41
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

He is completely enchanted by Me, He still may sport
with another beautiful girl, being bound by her request.
But in doing so He feels no pleasure, because all night
long the forest fire of remembering My suffering causes
Him distress.

*****

The suffering that Śrīmatī Rādhikā feels in separation
from Śrī Kṛṣṇa drowns the entire universe in an ocean of
distress. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa is directly embraced by any
other nāyikā, He remembers Śrī Rādhikā’s distress in
separation from Him and faints. This is described in Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (Sthāyī-bhāva-prakaraṇam, 14.181):
atrānubhāvā govinde kāntāśliṣṭe ’pi mūrcchanā. That is
why Śrī Rādhikā says, “When Śrī Kṛṣṇa goes to other
nāyikās, He cannot be peaceful because He thinks of My
unhappiness.”

tenaiva me hṛdi mahā-davathur babhūva

mad-veśa-bhūṣaṇa-vilāsa-paricchadādi

tan-moda-kṛd viphalatām agamat kim adye-

tyākranditaṁ yad api tarhi tad anvabhūs tvam (65)

“Sakhī, while He sports with other young girls of Vraja,
He thinks about My suffering, and because of this My
mind becomes afflicted by His unhappiness. When that
happens, I lament, ‘Everything – My dress, My ornaments,
My coquetry and My beautiful appearance are all useless.
Alas, alas, they cannot give pleasure to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.’

“You have heard Me weeping at such a time.

prātas tam atyanunayan tam atarjayaṁ bho-

statraiva gaccha sukham āpnuhi tat punaś ca

roṣaḥ sa tat-sukha-paraḥ priyatottha eve-

tyālocaya vraja-bhuvo ’py anurāga-caryām (66)

“When Śrī Kṛṣṇa came the next morning and beseeched Me
to forgive Him, I chastised Him angrily, saying, ‘Go
back to that beloved mistress of Yours and enjoy with
her some more!’ This anger was actually for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
happiness. Internally, I was asking Myself why He would
go to a place where He finds no pleasure. My anger was
only due to prema, which consists wholly and solely of
the endeavour to give Śrī Kṛṣṇa pleasure. Reflect upon
the loving affairs in Śrī Vṛndāvana in the light of this
consideration. These affairs are transcendental and most
astonishing.

adyotayaṁ muhur ahaṁ nija-kāmam eva

kiṁ māṁ vihāya ramayasy aparāṁ śaṭheti

vācā sa cāpi rati-cihna-juṣā sva-mūrttyā

vyajyaiva kāmam atha mantum urī cakāra (67)


                           42
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

“ ‘You rogue, why did You leave Me so You could go and
sport with other women?’ With such language I repeatedly
expressed My own desire for enjoying. His lusty
activities were evident by the love-marks on His
transcendental body, so He had to admit His fault.

premā dvayo rasikayor ayi dīpa eva

hṛd-veśma bhāsayati niścala eva bhāti

dvārād ayaṁ vadanatas tu bahiṣkṛtaś cet

nirvāti śīghram athavā laghutām upaiti (68)

“O my friend, prema is like a lamp. The hearts of both
the rasika nāyaka and nāyikā are like a chamber, and the
mouth is like a door. As long as the lamp of prema
illuminates only the chamber, it will remain steady, but
if its light is allowed to shine out through the door,
the lamp will quickly become fainter or even go out.

*****

Prema cannot remain strong if it is expressed with words
such as, “I love you dearly”; on the contrary, it will
decrease.

antaḥ-sthitasya khalu tasya ruci-cchaṭākṣi-

vātāyanād adhara-gaṇḍa-lalāṭa-vakṣaḥ

cāru pradīpya tad-abhijña-janaṁ sva-bhāso

vjñāpayed api vilakṣaṇatām upetāḥ (69)

“The splendour of the lamp of prema in the pavilions of
the lover’s and beloved’s hearts shines through the
lattice of their window-like eyes. It illuminates their
lips, cheeks, foreheads and breasts in a most wondrous
way, and reveals its unique and inexpressible beauty to
one who is experienced in regard to the nature of prema.

*****

It is inappropriate to express prema in words, for they
cause its intensity to diminish. But even if one does
not express one’s prema in words, it cannot be concealed
when facing the object of one’s prema. When prema
appears in the heart, then the eyes, cheeks, lips and
forehead blossom, and an unprecedented, radiant mood
appears.

kāntena kintu bahu-vallabhatā juṣā syāt

niṣkrāmito ’pi sa muhur na hi yāti śāntim

mithyaika-bhāṣaṇa-paṭutvam ayī prathāsya

kāmaṁ diśed yavanikeva pidhāya taṁ drāk (70)

“The following words, however, would issue from the
mouth of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the lover of so many young damsels:
‘My beloved, I love You so much; You alone are My very
life.’ In this way, He would continuously express His

                           43
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

love, yet still, His love would not diminish. This is
because it is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s habit to only speak very
clever words of falsity. This habit immediately veils
His prema like a curtain and makes it appear as lust. In
other words, all of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s declarations, which are
to be taken as false, actually cover His prema to make
it appear merely as lust.

tvayy eva me priyatame ’nupamo ’nurāgaḥ

svapne ’pi vastum aparā kim u hṛdya-pīṣṭe

itthaṁ harir vadati mānavatīḥ sadānyā

māṁ khaṇḍitān tu rati-cihna-bhṛd eva vakti (71)

“When one of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds starts to sulk, He
tells her, ‘O My beloved, I love you alone. Could any
other young girl attain a place in My heart?’ And when I
become jealous (khaṇḍitā) on seeing the marks made by
another nāyikā on His body, He pacifies Me with words of
a similar nature.

mad-vaktra-netra-suṣamā sama-mādhurīka-

saundaryya-varṇana-balad-vijihīrṣa eva

prāṇās tvam eva hi mameti vadan vyanakti

na prema tat sad api kintv iha kāmam eva (72)

“In this situation, Śrī Kṛṣṇa glorifies the beauty,
matchless grace and sweetness of My face and eyes, and
in His intense eagerness to sport with Me, He speaks
words such as, ‘You alone are My life.’ With such talk
He covers His prema for Me, and instead shows lust.

santapyate yadi punar virahāgni-puñjai-

rutkaṇṭhayā culukitaḥ sva-gabhīrimābdhiḥ

prema vyanakti dayitāpi girā yathaiva

yat te sujāta-caraṇāmburuheti padye (73)

“O sakhī, despite all this, if a beloved gopī is burning
in the fire of separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and if her
eagerness has evaporated the ocean of her gravity to a
palmful of water, she will reveal her prema through
words.

*****

Evidence of this is found in verses such as the
following:

yat te sujāta-caraṇāmbaruhaṁ staneṣu

bhītāḥ śanaiḥ priya dadhīmahi karkaśeṣu

tenāṭavīm aṭasi tad vyathate na kiṁ svit

kūrpādibhir bhramati dhīr bhavad āyuṣāṁ naḥ


                           44
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.19)

Dearly beloved, we are afraid of causing pain to Your
very soft lotus feet, and we therefore place them gently
on our hard breasts. Do Your soft feet not suffer when
You step on sharp stones and pebbles as You roam through
the forests? Our minds are reeling with anxiety for You,
who are our very soul.

tasmin mahā-virasatātitam asya pāre

na prāṇa-vāyur api sañcarituṁ śaśāka

prema-pradīpa-vara ety ati-dīptim eva

sneho nu yat pracuratāṁ ciram ācikāya (74)

“Although the movement of the life-air is checked when
one is in the darkness of the suffering of separation,
the lamp of profound prema shines long and bright with
the oil of abundant affection.

*****

The vraja-sundarīs’ life-air cannot remain in their
bodies when they are suffering in separation from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; yet at the same time it does not leave, because
their immense affection causes their prema to increase.

rāse mayaiva vijahāra vihāya sarvā-

statrāpi māṁ yad amūcat śṛṇu tasya tattvam

premāmbudher vraja-purandara-nandanasya

mām eva mantur adhikāṁ na kadāpi mantuḥ (75)

“During the rāsa dance, Śrī Kṛṣṇa gave up the company of
all the other gopīs and sported with Me alone, but after
that He left Me as well, and I will tell You why. There
is no fault in Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the
ocean of prema. He accepts Me alone as His most beloved.

adhyāsya mām atula-saubhaga-divya-ratna-

siṁhāsanaṁ bahu-vilāsa-bharair vibhūṣya

gacchan vanād vanam arīramad eva kāntā-

manyāṁ punaḥ smṛti-pathe ’pi nināya nāyam (76)

“The basis of this statement is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa seated Me
on a divine jewelled throne of matchless fortune,
decorated Me with the ornaments of various playful
pastimes, and enjoyed with Me as We roamed from forest
to forest. At that time, He did not remember His other
beloveds.

kiñcin mayaiva manasaiva vicāritaṁ ta-

rhyetaṁ mahotsava-sudhāmbudhim aty-apāram

naivānvabhūn mama sakhī-tatir āvayoḥ sā


                           45
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

viśleṣa-saṅgara-dhutā kva nu kiṁ karoti (77)

“Then, I began to think, ‘Alas, My sakhīs are not able
to experience this vast and fathomless ocean of ecstatic
nectar. They are burning in the fever of separation from
Me, and I do not know where they are wandering in their
search for Me.

atrāsvahe yadi punaḥ katicit kṣaṇās tā

ālyo milanti rabhasād abhito bhramantyaḥ

ity abhyadhāṁ priyatamātha na pāraye ’haṁ

gantuṁ muhūrttam iha viśramaṇaṁ bhajeva (78)

“ ‘My sakhīs are roaming about here and there, and if We
sit here for just a moment, they will soon reach this
spot and find Us.’ Thinking in this way, I said, ‘O My
beloved, I cannot walk any more. Let Us rest here for a
while.’

tan me manogatam idaṁ sahasaiva sādhu

sarvaṁ viveda sa vidagdha-śiromaṇitvāt

cāturya-sampad-atulo rasikāgra-gaṇyaḥ

kiñcit sapady atha hṛdaiva parām amarśa (79)

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa fully understood My inner mood at that time,
because He is vidagdha-śiromaṇi, the crest jewel of
clever personalities. Being extremely cunning, and
matchless in His ability to relish divine mellows, He
thought to Himself,

etāṁ nayann upavane yadi baṁbhramīmi

sambhāvitāly atirujā puru-viddha-cittām

kiṁ syāt sukhaṁ yadi dadhe sthitim atra gopyaḥ

sarvā mileyur api tāḥ kuṭila-bhruvo mām (80)

enāṁ punaś ciram anekam upālabheran

bhaṅgaś ca sāmpratika-keli-rasasya bhāvī

sampatsyate ’dya na hi rāsa-vinoda-nṛtyaṁ

tāsu krudhā nija-nijaṁ sadanaṁ gatāsu (81)

“ ‘If Śrī Rādhikā and I roam in the groves alone, She
will not feel the slightest happiness. Rather, Her heart
will be full of pain because She will be aware of the
possible distress of the sakhīs. As long as She bears
such pain in Her heart, there can be no pleasure in Our
union. However, if I do stop here for a short while, the
sakhīs will be jealous of the fact that We are together.
They will look at Me with crooked eyebrows and reproach
Śrī Rādhikā, thus interrupting the loving exchange
between Us. Then they will all go home angrily, and we
will not be able to delight in the rāsa dance tonight.’


                           46
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017

yat prārthitaṁ sva-kutukena purānayaiva

śaknoṣi kiṁ nu kulajārbuda-lakṣa-koṭīḥ

āliṅgituṁ priyatama! kṣaṇam ekaṁ anvi-

tyāste didṛkṣitam idaṁ mama pūrayeti (82)

tasmād imām api jahat-pala-mātram eva

nirdūṣaṇāṁ vinayinīṁ prathamaṁ vidhāya

mantuṁ sva-mūrddhny akhilam eva dadhāmy ṛṇī syāṁ

tāḥ snehayāni nikhilā api sarvathā syām (83)

“O sakhī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa then thought further: ‘Previously
Śrī Rādhikā made this request: “O beloved, I desire to
see how You embrace innumerable virtuous gopīs at the
same time. Kindly satisfy My curiosity.” If the rāsa
dance with the gopīs does not take place, Śrī Rādhikā’s
desire will not be fulfilled. Now, if I leave Rādhikā
for a moment, that will remove Her pride born of good
fortune. It will make Her humble and free from blame in
the eyes of the other gopīs. I will accept all the
blame. I will show the other young ladies of Vraja that
the fault is all Mine, and not Śrī Rādhikā’s. But if I
leave Rādhikā, I will not be able to serve Her and
thereby reciprocate with Her affection for Me. As a
result I will become indebted to Her, and all the gopīs
will become affectionate toward Her.

vaiśleṣika-jvaram apāram atulyam asyāḥ

sandarśya vismaya-mahābdhiṣu majjitānām

sva-prema-garvam api nirdhunavāny athainā-

ntābhir mahādhikatamām anubhāvayāmi (84)

“ ‘I will plunge the other vraja-sundarīs into an ocean
of astonishment by revealing the boundless and
incomparable agony that Rādhikā feels when She is
separated from Me. They will then come to understand the
depth of Her prema for Me, and that will dissolve the
pride that appeared in their hearts when they thought
that I loved them more than anyone else. After that, all
the gopīs will firmly trust and believe that Śrī Rādhikā
is supreme and beyond compare.

sambhoga eṣa sakalādhika eva vipra-

lambho ’pi sarva-śata-koṭi-guṇādhiko ’stu

tābhyāṁ śuciḥ parama-puṣṭim upaiti cāsyā-

ntā hrepayatv alam imāṁ tu gurū-karotu (85)

“ ‘All the other beautiful young women will understand
that just as the mellow of union (sambhoga-rasa) finds
its absolute summit in Śrī Rādhikā, so Her feeling of
separation from Me is incomparably greater than that of
all the other gopīs. Only in Rādhikā is the
transcendental mellow of amorous love (śṛṅgāra-rasa)

                           47
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017

nourished to the utmost point by union with Me and
separation from Me. Thus the other vraja-sundarīs will
become ashamed, and they will clearly see Rādhikā as
their guru.’

kāmī harir bhavati no yad asau vihāya

premādhikā api raho ramate tu tasyām

itthaṁ vadantya iha samprati yā ruṣāsyāḥ

ālīs tudanti bahu nāv api dūṣayanti (86)

tā eva koṭi-guṇitā virahe tv amuṣyāḥ

premāgni-bāḍava-śikhāḥ paricāyayāmi

yābhir balād upagatād avalihyamānāḥ

sva-prema-dīpa-dahanāyitam eva vidyuḥ (87)

“O friend, Śrī Kṛṣṇa also had another thought in His
heart: ‘The angry gopīs call Me lusty because I left
them to play secretly with Rādhikā. They think that they
are more loving toward Me than Śrī Rādhikā is, and this
saddens Lalitā and the other gopīs in Rādhikā’s own
group. The angry gopīs accuse both Rādhikā and Me of
having many faults. I will show them how the flames of
Rādhikā’s prema increase a millionfold when She is
separated from Me. If those gopīs come close to Rādhikā
while She is feeling such separation, they will be burnt
by these flames. Thus they will be able to recognize
that their own prema glows like an insignificant lamp in
comparison.

evañca setsyati mad-īpsitam aikyam āsāṁ

rāsākhya-nāṭyam anumaṇḍalatāṁ gatānām

madhye mayā saha rucā tu virājamānā-

menāṁ vilokya na bhaved api kācid īrṣā (88)

“ ‘When the other vraja-ramaṇīs see Rādhā crying in
separation from Me, they will become sympathetic toward
Her. Then, all of them will come together to search for
Me, and that is just what I desire. Finally, at the time
of the rāsa dance, they will all dance in a circle, and
they will not feel any jealousy when they see Rādhikā
shining brilliantly by My side, in the centre of the
circle.

kaṣṭaṁ kadāpi sukha-sampad udarkam eva

mitrāya mitram api yacchati tad-dhitaiṣi

tīvrāñjanair yad api mūrcchayati sva-dṛṣṭi-

māyaty ati-dyuti-matīṁ kurute janas tām (89)

“ ‘People make their eyes appear bright and beautiful by
applying collyrium to them, even though that collyrium
may cause them some discomfort. Similarly, well-wishers
may create temporary difficulties for their friends that

                           48
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

ultimately result in their friends’ wealth or happiness.
Even though I will cause pain to Rādhā by abandoning Her
for some time, She will experience the highest bliss
when We meet again.’

ity ātta-yuktir urasā sarasaṁ vahan māṁ

gatvā padāni katicin mṛdula-pradeśe

atrāsyatāṁ kṣaṇam apīti nidhāya tatrai-

vāste sma me nayana-gocaratāṁ jahat saḥ (90)

“O devī, as My beloved was deliberating in this way, He
tenderly lifted Me up and carried Me for a few steps.
Then He put Me down in a soft place, saying, ‘My dear
one, please sit here for a moment.’ At that point He
disappeared.

dṛṣtvā mamātivikalatvam apāsta-dhairyyo

dātuṁ sva-darśanam iyeṣa yadā tadaiva

gopyaḥ sakhī-vitatayaś ca sametya tā mat-

sandhukṣaṇe samayatanta nitānta-taptāḥ (91)

“Sakhī, My beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa became perturbed when He
saw My grief in separation from Him, and He wanted to
come before Me again. But, just at that moment My sakhīs
and the other gopīs arrived. They were extremely
distressed to see My suffering, and they tried to
console Me.

yac cāvadhīt punar ariṣṭa-bakāgha-vatsān

viśva-druhaḥ kapaṭinīm api pūtanāṁ tām

doṣo na cāyam api tūccataraiva viṣṇu-

śaktir harāv ajani sādhu-janāvanīyam (92)

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa was not at fault in killing the bull-demon
Ariṣṭāsura, the crane-demon Bakāsura, the snake-demon
Aghāsura, the calf-demon Vatsāsura, or the deceptive
rākṣasī Pūtanā. It is the divine potency of Lord Viṣṇu,
the protector of all virtuous men, that kills demons,
and that potency is within Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

*****

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.8, 13) states:

svayaṁ bhagavānera karma nahe bhāra-haraṇa

sthiti-kartā viṣṇu karena jagat-pālana

ataeva viṣṇu takhana kṛṣṇera śarīre

viṣṇu-dvāre kṛṣṇa kare asura-saṁhāre

It is not the work of Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa to
remove the burden of the universe; rather, it is the
work of the maintainer, Śrī Viṣṇu. ... During Śrī

                           49
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes on Earth, it was Śrī Viṣṇu, present
within Kṛṣṇa’s body, who actually killed the demons.

nārāyaṇena sadṛśas tanayas tavāya-

mity āha yad vraja-purandaram eva gargaḥ

tat-sākṣi-bhūtam iha daitya-vadhādi-karma

lokottaraṁ samudagād giridhāraṇādi (93)

“On the occasion of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name-giving ceremony,
the sage Gargācārya told Vraja-rāja Śrī Nanda, ‘O King
of Vraja, your son is just like Nārāyaṇa.’

*****

Kṛṣṇa’s killing of demons, His lifting of Govardhana
Hill and the many other divine feats that He performed
are proof of the great sage’s words.

kiñca sphuraty ayi yathā mama cetasīdaṁ

tenāpi nāpi kathitaṁ muni-puṅgavena

nārāyaṇo ’py agha-bhido na hi sāmyam asya

rūpair guṇair madhurimādibhir etum īṣṭe (94)

“O devī, at Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name-giving ceremony, Gargamuni,
the best of sages, did not say that Śrī Nārāyaṇa’s form,
qualities, sweetness and other attributes will never be
able to equal those of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Agha. But
naturally it seems like that in My mind.”

*****

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.59) mentions:

siddhāntatas tv abhede ’pi śrīśa-kṛṣṇa-svarūpayoḥ

rasenotkṛṣyate kṛṣṇa-rūpam eṣā rasa-sthitiḥ

From the perspective of siddhānta, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, the
Lord of Śrī Lakṣmī, is non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
However, from the perspective of rasa, the form of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is sākṣāt manmatha-manmatha, He who even bewilders
the mind of Cupid, who himself bewilders ordinary
people’s minds. This is achieved by Kṛṣṇa’s four unique
qualities: līlā-mādhurī, prema-mādhurī, veṇu-mādhurī and
rūpa-mādhurī.[4]

ākarṇya karṇa-ramaṇīyatamāḥ priyāyā

vāco hariḥ sa-rabhasaṁ punar abhyadhatta

premokta eva khalu lakṣita-lakṣaṇo yaḥ

so ’yaṁ tvad-āśrayaka eva mayādhyavodhi (95)

The words of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved Śrī Rādhikā were
blissful nectar to His ears, and caused Him great joy.
Still disguised as a heavenly damsel, He said with great
curiosity, “Rādhā, now I can fully understand that You

                           50
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

alone are the shelter of the symptoms of the prema that
You have been explaining.

doṣā api priyatamasya guṇā yataḥ syu-

stad-datta-kaṣṭa-śatam apy amṛtāyate yat

tad-duḥkha-leśa-kaṇikāpi yato na sahyā

tyaktvātma-deham api yaṁ na vihātum īṣṭe (96)

yo ’santam apy anupamaṁ mahimānam uccaiḥ

pratyāyayaty anupadaṁ sahasā priyasya

premā sa eva tam imaṁ dadhatī tvam eva

rādhe śrutā khalu mayaiva tathaiva dṛṣṭā (97)

“My dear sakhī, You have explained to Me the following
characteristics of prema: even the faults of the beloved
may be perceived as good qualities; the many troubles
given by the beloved may appear to be nectar; one with
prema is unable to bear even the slightest difficulty
felt by the beloved; one with prema is unable to give up
the body even if he wishes to; and at every step one
perceives unprecedented glories in the beloved, even
where there are none. Rādhā, this prema is in You alone.
I have heard this earlier in the assembly at Haimavatī,
and today I am witnessing it directly.

premī harir na hi bhaved iti satyam eva

tac-ceṣṭitair anumime tam ime vadanti

prāṇā mama tvad-anutāpa-davāgni-dagdhāḥ

sakhyas tavātra nikhilā api yat pramāṇam (98)

“But sakhī, I am telling You without any doubt that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa has no prema. Please understand this to be true. I
have concluded this after seeing His behaviour. The
proof of this is found in Your sakhīs and in the flames
of Your intense lamentation, which have scorched My
life-air.

yac ca tvayoktam idam eva manogataṁ mat-

preṣṭhasya tat tu vayam atra kathaṁ pratīmaḥ

no tan-mukhāt tvam aśṛṇor na ca tasya sakhyu-

stau vā januṣya bhavatāṁ kva nu satya-vācau (99)

“You have told Me the reasons why He left You at the
time of rāsa, but how can I believe what You say? You
have not heard this from His mouth, nor from any of His
friends. And even if You did hear it from them, so what?
Have any of them ever spoken a true word in their life?”

yarhy eva yad yad ayi mat-priya-cetasi syāt

tarhy eva tat tad akhilaṁ sahasaiva vedmi


                           51
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

rādhe viduṣyasi kim acyuta-yoga-śāstraṁ

śaknoṣi yena para-kāya-manaḥ praveṣṭum (100)

Śrī Rādhikā then said, “Sakhī, I am aware of all the
moods in the heart of My beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa as soon as
they arise.”

To this the heavenly damsel replied, “Rādhā, have You
studied the scriptures that delineate the means by which
one can meet with Acyuta – the scriptures on acyuta-yoga
which describe how You are able to enter Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
body and mind?”

devījano ’sya viratācyuta-yoga-siddhi-

vyagras tathā katham aho vata mānuṣī syām

yat pṛcchasīdam ayi vaktum aśeṣam īśe

ced viśvasiṣy aparathā tu kathā vṛthaiva (101)

Śrī Rādhā replied, “You are a celestial damsel, so You
are always eager to cultivate the perfection of acyuta-
yoga. I am just a human being; how can I be like You?
Are You asking Me how I can possibly know the mind of My
beloved? I shall tell You everything if You have faith
that what I say is true; if not, why should I waste My
words?”

pratyāyane ’sti yadi yuktir atiprabhāvaḥ

kiṁ v āli te katham idaṁ na vayaṁ pratīmaḥ

no cet priyas tava guṇārṇava eva kintu

premī bhaved ayam idaṁ tu mataṁ tavaiva (102)

Hearing this, that heavenly damsel answered, “O Rādhā,
if You can convince Me with logic, and if You can awaken
My faith, then why would I not believe You? It is true
that Your beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa is an ocean of good
qualities, but it is only Your own personal opinion that
He has prema.”

preṣṭhaḥ paro bhavati tasya mano na budhya

ity eva bhāty anubhavādhvani hanta yasyāḥ

saivocyatāṁ nu para-kāya-manaḥ praveśa-

vidyāvatīti parihāsa-vidā tvayādya (103)

Śrī Rādhikā said, “My dear sakhī, You joke most
cleverly. You say that You have acquired expertise in
the art of entering the body and mind of the lover or
anyone else, but now You are realizing that actually You
are unable to understand the mind of Your lover.”

rādhe! tadā vilapitaṁ kim iti tvayoccai-

rjñātvā hṛdasya sukhinī katham eva nābhūḥ

satyaṁ bravīṣy api tu devy avadhehi kāpi

                           52
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017


śaktir viveka-bhid abhūt tad-adarśanasya (104)

The celestial damsel said, “O Rādhā, if You know the
mind and heart of Your beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa, why were You
lamenting so loudly when He left You? If You knew His
heart, why did You not become happy?”

Śrī Rādhikā replied, “Devī, Your point is valid, but
please listen carefully. I truly know Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart,
but still, when I was in separation from Him, an
indescribable potency arose and overwhelmed Me. It stole
all My discrimination and caused Me to lose
consciousness and all awareness of My mind and body.”

tvaṁ vetsi tan-mana ihāstu na me vivādo

gāndharvike! tava manaḥ sa hi veda no vā

vedeti kiṁ bhaṇasi bhoḥ śṛṇu yad-rahasyaṁ

tattvaṁ tvayā yad abhavaṁ taralī-kṛtaiva (105)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa disguised as a heavenly damsel said,
“Gāndharvikā, I am not questioning whether or not You
know Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mind; rather, I want to know whether He
knows Your mind.”

Śrī Rādhikā replied, “Sakhī, have You as yet inquired
whether or not Śrī Kṛṣṇa knows My mind? Listen and I
will tell You the secret of this. It is generally
impossible to speak of this, but today I will reveal
everything to You because Your prema has made Me
restless.”

rādhe! jano ’yam ayi yat taralī-kṛto ’bhūt

premnā tvayaiva tad apṛccham idaṁ sva-dhārṣṭyam

śuśrūṣate śravaṇam asya yathā rahasyaṁ

vaktuṁ tathārhasi na gopaya kiñcanāpi (106)

“Rādhā,” the heavenly damsel said, “I have expressed My
desire to hear the secret behind this matter, and in so
doing, I have revealed My arrogance. I am only asking
You this because Your love has made Me eager to hear it.
I know that this is most confidential, but still, it is
most appropriate to carefully tell everything to Your
eager sakhī; it is not appropriate to withhold this
information.”

anyonya-citta-viduṣau nu parasparātma-

nitya-sthiter iti nṛṣu prathitau yad āvām

tac-caupacārikam aho dvitayatvam eva

naikasya sambhavati karhicid ātmano nau (107)

Śrī Rādhikā then spoke: “Common people say, ‘Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa are eternally present in each others’ hearts, and
that is why They know each others’ minds.’ Factually,
the real truth is this: We are one soul. It is not

                           53
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017

possible for one soul to become two.

ekātmanīha rasa-pūrṇatame ’tyagādhe

ekā susaṅgrathitam eva tanu-dvayaṁ nau

kasyiṁścid eka-sarasīva cakāsad eka-

nālottham abja-yugalaṁ khalu nīla-pītam (108)

“In a lake, two lotuses – one blue and one yellow – may
bloom from a single stem. In the same way, Our two
bodies, one blue and one yellow, are connected as one
life. They are one supremely profound soul composed of
topmost rasa. As bodies We are separate, but by nature
We are one. Kṛṣṇa is by nature blissful (ānanda) and I
by nature am joyful (hlādinī). Just as fire and its
burning potency are one, there is no difference between
the potency (śakti) and the possessor of the potency
(śaktimān).

“We cannot be distinguished from each other when seen as
a person and the person’s potency, but for the sake of
rasa, We manifest in separate forms as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Without pastimes, We cannot relish each other; and
without form, We cannot perform pastimes.

*****

With this truth in mind, Śrī Gopāla-campūḥ (Pūrva-campū
15.9) states:

imau gaurī-śyāmau manasi viparīrtau bahir api

sphurat tad tad vastrāv iti budha-janair niścitam idam

sa ko ’py accha-premā vilasad ubhayoḥ sphūrtikatayā

dadhan mūrttī-bhāva-pṛthag-apṛthag apy āvirudabhūt

The meaning of this verse (from Śrī Gopāla-campūḥ) is
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is fully present in Śrī Rādhā’s heart,
and Śrī Rādhā is fully present in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart. Śrī
Rādhikā wears śyāma-coloured cloth, the colour of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s complexion, and Kṛṣṇa wears yellow garments (
pītāmbara), the colour of Rādhikā’s. Seeing this,
scholars learned in philosophical conclusions have
ascertained that pure prema, which is impossible to
describe in words, has manifested in two different
forms. Furthermore, to perform enchanting pastimes,
these forms are both different and non-different.

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.55–56) it is
said:

rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir-hlādinī-śaktir-asmād

ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa eka ātmā, duī deha dhari’

anyonye vilāse rasa āsvādana kari’

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the very form of the transformation

                           54
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017

of kṛṣṇa-prema, and She is kṛṣṇa-prema in its most
condensed state. She is the bliss-giving potency
(hlādinī-śakti) of Kṛṣṇa’s loving, sportive pastimes.
Even though Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are one soul, They
have assumed two separate bodies to perform Their
eternal loving pastimes in Goloka Vṛndāvana.

yat sneha-pūra-bhṛta-bhājana-rājitaika-

vartty agravartty amala-dīpa-yugaṁ cakāsti

tac cet are taratamo ’panudat parokṣa-

mānandayed akhila-pārśva-gatāḥ sadālīḥ (109)

“When a container filled with oil has a wick that is lit
at both ends, the two flames dispel the darkness in both
directions. Similarly, Our two bodies are joined
together as one soul, destroying the darkness of each
others’ distress, and also giving pleasure to the sakhīs
present with Us.

yady āpated viraha-māruta etad ātta-

kampaṁ bhaved yugapad eva bhajec ca mūrcchām

vyagrā sadāly atha tad-āvaraṇe yateta

tat susthayec ca sukha-sadma-gataṁ vidhāya (110)

“Sakhī, due to the blowing wind of separation from each
other, the flames of Our two bodies tremble and We both
faint at the same time. The sakhīs, all of whom are
expert, anxiously try to stop this wind from blowing.
They remove all Our distress and restore Our peaceful
condition by arranging for Us to enter the house of
happiness in each others’ company.

sandarśitaṁ tad idam adya rahasya-ratnaṁ

svasvānta-sampuṭa-varaṁ sphuṭam udghaṭaya

sandeha-santam asahāri tavāstu bhavye

hṛdy eva dhāryam aniśaṁ na bahiḥ prakāśyam (111)

“O Kalyāṇi (auspicious one), today I have completely
opened up the most precious treasure chest of My heart
and shown You the supremely secret jewel of prema. May
this remove the darkness of Your doubts completely.
Always keep it in Your heart and never reveal it to
anyone.”

kṛṣṇo jagāda sakhi! yad yad idaṁ tvayoktaṁ

tat tat sa-yuktikam adhārayam eva sarvam

cetas tu me śaṭham aho haṭhavartty avaśyaṁ

tat te parīkṣitum ihecchati kiṁ karomi (112)

The celestial damsel (Śrī Kṛṣṇa) said, “My friend, I
have clearly understood all that You have told Me, and I
will keep it within My heart. But this crooked mind of

                           55
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

Mine yearns to test the truth of Your words. How can I
help this?

tvaṁ varttase ’tra sa tu sāmpratam ātma-tāta

gehe kadācid avanāya gavāṁ vane ’pi

ātmaikyam āli yuvayor yad iha pratīma-

stat kiṁ parīkṣaṇam ṛte samupaiti siddhim (113)

“Sakhī, as You sit here, Your beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa may be
in His father’s house or in the forest tending the cows.
I do believe that You are one soul in two bodies, but
only by testing it can it be actually proven.

yaiva smṛtiḥ sumukhi! yasya yathā yadā te

saivāsya ced bhavati tarhi tathā tadaiva

pratyakṣam eva yadi tāṁ kalayāmi sampra-

tyatraiva vā sakhi tadaiva dadhe pratītim (114)

“O Sumukhī (beautiful-faced one), if right now, at this
very place, I directly perceive that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
instantaneously and precisely knows what You are
thinking, then O friend, My belief will become resolute.

dūre ’thavā nikaṭa eva sa te priyaḥ syā-

dehīha satvaram iti smṛta-mātra eva

āyāti cet tava samakṣam ayaṁ tadā vā-

mātmaikyam ity avagamo dhinuyāt sadā mām (115)

“Whether Your beloved is near here or far away, just
think of Him and meditate on this: ‘Please, come here
quickly.’ When I see Him present here before You, I will
happily accept once and for all that You two are united
as one soul.

vighnaḥ kvacit tu guru-nighnatayāpi daivād

daityāgamād api kutaścana vāpi hetoḥ

anyonyam apy atanu vāṁ smarato yadi syā-

nno saṅgatis tad iha nāstitamāṁ vivādaḥ (116)

“However, I will not say anything if the two of You are
fully absorbed in thinking of each other but cannot meet
because obstacles have arisen, such as the sudden
arrival of a demon or Your having to obey the orders of
elders.

yady apy amuṁ guru-pure sakhi saṅkucantī

naivāhvayasy abhisarasyata eva dūram

kiñcaikadāpi na tad āgamam īhase tvaṁ

svārthaṁ tv idaṁ tu nitarāṁ madirākṣi vidmaḥ (117)

                           56
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017


kṛṣṇa-priye sakhi! tad apy adhunā mamānu-

rodhād amuṁ smara sa etu sukhaṁ tanotu

nātrāsti te guru-janāgamanāvakāśo

mat-saṁśayottham api khedam apākarotu (118)

“O sakhī, O You with intoxicated eyes (Madirākṣi), I
know very well that when You are confined to the home of
Your elders out of fear of them, You cannot call Śrī
Kṛṣṇa to come to You. Your meeting with Him takes place
far from Your home; You never desire that He come to You
for Your own pleasure.

“But, now, My dear friend, O beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in
accordance with My request, please remember Him just
once. I would be overjoyed to see Him if He appeared
here, especially since there is no reason to suspect the
arrival of Your superiors. Please remove this painful
doubt of Mine without hesitation.”

ity arthitā sa-rabhasaṁ vṛṣabhānu-kanyā-

sanyāyam āha naya mā hasanīyatāṁ mām

brūṣe yathaiva karavāṇi tathaiva no cet

premaiva dhāsyati rujaṁ ciram ātta-lajjaḥ (119)

Śrī Rādhikā, the dear darling daughter of Śrī Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja, duly deliberated upon the heavenly damsel’s
request and said, “O sakhī, do not make Me the object of
ridicule. If I cannot satisfy Your request, I shall feel
ashamed of My prema and thus I will be miserable
forever.

vṛndārakeḍya! bhagavan! mad-abhīṣṭa-deva!

śrī-bhāskara! tri-jagad-īkṣaṇa-saukhya-dāyin

mat-sarva-kāma-da! kṛpāmaya! padminīśa!

satyānṛtādy-akhila-sākṣitayā pratīta (120)

gāndharvikā-giridharau bhavataḥ sadaikā-

tmānāv itīyam anṛtā na yadi prathāsti

sampraty asau giridharo ’tra tad ādadāno

man-netrayoḥ paricayaṁ svam ude ’bhyudetu (121)

“O Lord, who are worshipped by the demigods, O You who
give pleasure to the living entities in all three
worlds, O You who fulfil all My desires, O merciful one,
O Padminīśa, O witness to all that is true and false, O
My worshipful Lord, O Bhagavān Sūryadeva, if people
speak the truth when they say ‘Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are
eternally one soul’, may Śrī Kṛṣṇa appear directly
before My eyes so as to give pleasure to My intimate
associates.”


                           57
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017

uktvedam eva vṛṣabhānu-sutātma-kāntaṁ

dhyātuṁ samārabhata mīlita-netra-yugmā

sā yoginīva viniruddha-hṛṣīka-vṛtti-

rāste sma yāvad avikhaṇḍita-mauna-mudrā (122)

tāvad vihāya sahasaiva hariḥ sa yoṣi-

dveśaṁ sakhīḥ svam akhilāḥ paricinvatīs tāḥ

bhru-saṁjñayaiva vidadhan nija-pakṣa-pāte

cumban priyāṁ muhur avāritam āliliṅga (123)

Saying this, Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrī Rādhikā closed Her
eyes and meditated upon Her lover, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She sat
down like a yoginī, subduing the functions of Her senses
and observing full silence.

In a moment Śrī Kṛṣṇa removed His disguise, thus
revealing His identity to the other sakhīs. With the
movement of His eyebrows He conveyed His desire that
they play along with Him, and then He embraced His
beloved Śrī Rādhikā and began to kiss Her freely again
and again.

romāñcitākhila-tanur galad-aśru-siktā

dhyānāgataṁ tam avabudhya bahir vilokya

ānanda-līna-hṛdayā khalu satyam eva

yoginy arājata nirañjana-dṛṣṭir eṣā (124)

Śrī Rādhikā’s whole body began to horripilate, and tears
of joy flowed from Her eyes. As soon as She understood
in Her meditation that Her beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa had come,
She opened Her eyes. Seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa before Her, She
became immersed in an ocean of rapturous bliss. Śrī
Rādhikā appeared like a yoginī directly meeting brahma.
The tears from Her eyes washed away Her collyrium.

saṁjñāṁ kṣaṇād alabhatātha paṭāñcalena

vaktraṁ pidhāya sudṛg ātanute sma lajjām

taṁ prāha saiva lalitā kim aho vilāsi-

nnāgā alakṣitam iha tvam atīva citram (125)

After a few moments, beautiful-eyed Śrī Rādhikā returned
to Her senses and shamefully covered Her face with the
end of Her garment. Śrī Lalitā addressed Śrī Kṛṣṇa, that
crest jewel of all gallant lovers, “O sportive one, it
is most astonishing that You have come here undetected.

antaḥ-pure kula-vadhū-kula-mātra-gamye

śakto na yatra pavano ’pi haṭhāt praveṣṭum

tatreti yas tu gatabhīḥ puruṣaḥ sa eṣa


                           58
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017

gaṇyo ’tisāhasika-śekhara eka eva (126)

“Only the women of the family are allowed entrance into
this private, inner chamber of the house. Even the wind
cannot enter here. That male who comes here without fear
must be the crest jewel of courageous men.

tatrāpi mad-vidha-sakhī-jana-pālitāyāḥ

sādhvī-kulāplavana-kīrtti-surāpagāyāḥ

snātvaiva mitra-yajanāya kṛtāsanāyā-

staṁ dhyātum eva vinimīlita-locanāyāḥ (127)

aṅgaṁ balāt spṛśasi yad-vṛṣabhānu-putryā

devāt tato dina-pater api no vibheṣi

na tvaṁ kim atra gaṇayiṣyasi loka-dharmau

lajjā tu keyam iti na hi paryyacaiṣīḥ (128)

“You are forcibly touching the body of Śrī Rādhikā, the
daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, even though She is
constantly guarded by fierce sakhīs like me. Her fame is
like the sacred river Mandākinī, in which chaste women
ritually bathe by engaging in the purification of
hearing and chanting. In other words, She is the best of
chaste women. Even Arundhatī desires to attain Her
chastity.

“After Śrī Rādhikā took Her bath, She sat with closed
eyes to worship Mitradeva, the Sungod. [ That is, on the
pretext of worshipping the Sungod She meditated upon
satisfying Her most beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa.] You do not know
the meaning of shame. Have You no fear of the Sungod?
Have You no regard for social etiquette and moral
virtues?

tan mādhavādya tava diṣṭam ahaṁ stuve ya-

dāryā gṛhe na hi nāpi patiḥ sa kopī

sakhyo ’balā vayam aho karavāma kiṁ te

bhadreṇa lampaṭa-vara tvam ito ’vito ’bhūḥ (129)

“O Mādhava, I praise Your good fortune that Śrī
Rādhikā’s mother-in-law Jaṭilā and Her angry husband are
not at home. We sakhīs are but frail and weak women. How
can we oppose You? O topmost amongst all debauchees,
today by Your good fortune You have skilfully protected
Yourself from this danger.”

*****

Śrī Lalitā’s words were full of irony. She actually
meant: “O Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā’s mother-in-law Jaṭilā and
Her angry husband are not at home. I am Her friend, and
since I always desire Her happiness, please sport with
my friend Rādhikā without any fear.”

kṛṣṇo ’bravīt kam api naiva dadhāmi mantuṁ

                           59
Prema-samputa.txt                              5/5/2017


gośāla-catvaram anuśrita-khelano ’ham

daivāt samasmaram imam atha sadya eva

daivena kenacid ivāgamito ’py abhūvam (130)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa replied, “Lalitā, I am not to blame for what
has happened. I was playing in the courtyard of the
cowshed, when I suddenly remembered Śrī Rādhikā, and
then some demigod instantly brought Me here.”

rādhābhyadhatta lalite! kva nu varttate ’sau

devī pratītim upayāti vilokya no vā

devī tu dīvyati dṛśaiva gatādhir eta-

ddhāmāntar atra mudam ātanute tato naḥ (131)

Śrī Rādhikā said, “My dear friend Lalitā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa came
here simply as a result of My remembering Him. But where
has that celestial damsel gone? Does She believe Me now
that She has witnessed this?”

Lalitā replied, “When that heavenly damsel saw the two
of You meet, all doubt left Her and the pain in Her
heart was dispelled. She is inside, arranging for our
happiness.”

devīti kāṁ bhaṇasi tāṁ paricāyayātre-

tyuktvā sakhīṁ harir athābruvad abruvāṇām

āṁ jñātam adya lalite khalu dhūrttatā vo

vyakteyataiva samayena babhūva diṣṭyā (132)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “Please introduce Me to this heavenly
damsel.” When Śrī Lalitā did not reply, He said, “Aah,
now I understand. Now, by good fortune, I have come to
understand your cunningness.

kāpy atra siddha-vanitā kim u khecarī vā

devī sameti tata eva gṛhīta-vidyā

mām atyavaśyam iyam ātmavaśe vidhāya

dāsīyati pratidinaṁ prasabhaṁ prakṛṣya (133)

“Some adept young lady endowed with supernatural power,
or some aerial demigoddess, must have come to your home,
and your friend Rādhikā must have learned some
supernatural mantra from her. Now Rādhikā has rendered
Me weak and helpless, even though I am not controlled by
anyone. Every day She forcefully allures Me and wants to
make Me Her servant.

saivādya mahyam api kañcana mantram ekaṁ

rādhe dadātu bhava bhāvini me sahāyā

śiṣyaṁ tvam eva kuru mām athavā prapanna-

                           60
Prema-samputa.txt                                5/5/2017


mutkaṇṭhitaṁ rahasi kutracanāpi nītvā (134)

“O Bhāvinī, O Śrī Rādhā, please arrange for this
heavenly damsel to give Me a mantra too. I eagerly
surrender unto You. Please take Me to a solitary place
and make Me Your disciple.”

vaṁśy eva rājatitamām atisiddha-vidyā

sāṅkaṁ tavānayati sādhu-satīḥ pura-strīḥ

tāñ cāpi corayasi yarhi tadā gatir me

kā syād ato nahi tayāpi sadārtha-siddhiḥ (135)

Śrī Rādhikā said, “In Your hand You hold Your shining
flute, which is endowed with supernatural power and
which can attract supremely chaste young married women
to fulfil Your desires. Why do You need any other
mantra?”

“The flute cannot always fulfil My task,” Śrī Kṛṣṇa
answered. “How can it help Me when you people steal it?”

devī hriyā tava gṛhāntar ihāsti līnā

tvām eva mantram upadekṣyati sā kathaṁ vā

utkaṇṭhase tad api cet praviśa svayaṁ bhoḥ

sā cet dayeta bhavitā eva kārya-siddhiḥ (136)

Lalitā replied, “O Kṛṣṇa, the celestial damsel became
shy when She saw You so She hid in the house. Why would
She teach You a mantra? If You are so eager, go into the
house. If the heavenly damsel is merciful, She will
certainly fulfil Your desires.”

ity acyute viśati veśma jagāda rādhā

kiṁ tattvam atra sakhi! māṁ vada saṁśayānām

rādhe! na saṅkuca cala praviśāmi tasyāḥ

sakhyās tavātra hariṇā kalayāmi saṅgam (137)

Hearing this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa entered the house. Śrī Rādhikā
asked, “Lalitā, what are you doing? Tell Me clearly. I
do not understand what is going on, but I have a
suspicion.”

Lalitā replied, “My friend Rādhā, do not hesitate. Let
us go into the house and observe Your friend meeting Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.”

ālīṣu manda-hasitāmṛta-varṣiṇīṣu

kṛṣṇokti-pāṭavam athodabhinat tad uptam

hṛd-vapram anvadhita tarka-tarus tato ’syā

ṛddhaḥ phalaṁ bahu-rasaṁ nikhilāvabodham (138)


                           61
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

Thereafter, the seed of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s skilful words was
sown in the field of Śrī Rādhikā’s heart. It sprouted
and, showered with sweet laughter from the clouds of Śrī
Lalitā and the other sakhīs, it grew into a tree of
knowledge that gave fruits that were filled with rasa.

*****

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s clever talk, as potent as a mantra given by
a demigoddess, put doubts in Śrī Rādhikā’s heart. These
doubts thickened with the laughter of the sakhīs.
However, after carefully contemplating what had
happened, She came to understand everything, and became
overjoyed to learn that She had met with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is more dear to Her than millions of Her own lives.

antardadhe bahir agād athavātra devī

tan-mārgaṇāya tad itas tvarayā prayāmaḥ

vidyāṁ tvam eva sakhi! tām upadiśya kṛṣṇa-

mānandayeti sahasā niragus tadālyaḥ (139)

Śrī Lalitā said, “It seems that the heavenly damsel has
disappeared from this place or gone outside. Let us
immediately go and search for Her. O friend Rādhā,
please impart knowledge of the mantra to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
make Him happy.” Thereupon, the sakhīs hastily left.

tat prema-sampuṭa-gatair bahu-keli-ratnai-

stau maṇḍitāvajayatāṁ rati-kānta-koṭīḥ

santo ’pi yat śravaṇa-kīrtana-cintanādyai-

stau prāptum unnata-mudaḥ satataṁ jayanti (140)

Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa decorated Themselves with the
jewels of amorous pastimes from the treasure chest of
prema, and by so doing defeated millions of Cupids. This
is not astonishing. Saintly devotees hear and chant
about these gems of transcendental, amorous pastimes and
meditate on them to attain service to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. Thus, they attain supreme bliss and
eternally overcome lust.

*****

After one has tasted the rasa of transcendental
pastimes, the desire for mundane enjoyment cannot remain
in the heart. The heart and mind will then remain
eternally immersed in relishing such rasa, leaving no
place for thoughts related to the body or the senses.

ṣaṭ-śūnya-ṛtv-avanibhir gaṇite tapasye

śrī-rūpa-vāṅ-madhurimāmṛta-pāna-puṣṭaḥ

rādhā-girīndra-dharayoḥ sarasas taṭānte

tat-prema-sampuṭam avindata ko ’pi kāvyam (141)

iti śrī-prema-sampuṭaḥ sampūrṇaḥ

                           62
Prema-samputa.txt                               5/5/2017


This poem about Śrī Śrī Rādha-Kṛṣṇa, entitled Śrī Prema-
sampuṭa, was manifested in the month of Phālguna in year
1606 of the Śakābda Era (AD 1684) on the bank of Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa by one who is fully
nourished by drinking the sweet, nectarean words of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

*****

Here, out of humility, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura does not reveal his name.

iti śrīla-bhaktivedānta nārāyaṇa gosvāmī sampāditaṁ

śrī-prema-sampuṭa-bhāvānuvādaṁ sampūrṇaḥ

Thus ends the bhāvānuvāda of Śrī Prema-sampuṭa of Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja.




* * *




[1] A member of one of the eleven unauthorised sahajiyā
communities who concoct their own methods of devotional
service.




[2] The husband of another woman.




[3] “The king of the transcendental mellow of amorous
love”




[4] (1) līlā-mādhurī – Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the performer of
astonishing varieties of pastimes, of which rāsa-līlā is
the most captivating; (2) prema-mādhurī – He is
surrounded by devotees who possess incomparable
mādhurya-prema, which develops to the stage of
mahābhāva; (3) veṇu-mādhurī – the sweet and mellow sound
of His flute attracts the minds of everyone within the
three worlds; and (4) rūpa-mādhurī – His extraordinary
beauty astonishes all moving and non-moving entities.




                           63
Prema-samputa.txt                                 5/5/2017

Table of Contents

śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ

Foreword (translated from the Hindi edition)

The Life History of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

Refuting the opinions of the atibāḍī   Rūpa Kavirāja

Protecting the honour of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya
through Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa

Attainment of the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī by the
mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā

Re-establishing the doctrine of parakīyā

The glories and legacy of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura

Śrī Prema-sampuṭa – The Treasure Chest of Pure,
Transcendental Love

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]




                           64
