Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt             5/5/2017

Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā

by Rūpa Gosvāmī



translated by

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja




Contents

Foreword



Bṛhad-bhāga

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Family

1. Herdsmen

2. The priestly class

3. Craftsmen

Personalities honoured by Śrī Kṛṣṇa

Brāhmaṇas

Yūtha

Group of Contemporary Sakhīs

The most exalted sakhīs

1. Lalitā-devī

2. Viśākhā

3. Campakalatā

4. Citrā (Sucitrā)

5. Tuṅgavidyā

6. Indulekhā

7. Raṅgadevī

8. Sudevī

The exalted sakhīs

1. Kalāvatī

2. Śubhāṅgadā

3. Hiraṇyāṅgī


                           1
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

4. Ratnalekhā

5. Śikhāvatī

6. Kandarpa Mañjarī

7. Phullakalikā

8. Anaṅga Mañjarī

General activities of the contemporary sakhīs

A Description of the Eight Prominent Sakhīs

1. Lalitā-devī

Flower decorations

Crown

Hair band

Ear ornaments

Decoration for the forehead

Necklace

Armlet

Waist belt

Anklets

Bracelets

Ornaments for the feet

Blouse

Umbrella

Bed

Awning

Candrātapaḥ

Hut

2. Viśākhā

3. Campakalatā

4. Citrā

5. Tuṅgavidyā

6. Indulekhā

7. Raṅgadevī

8. Sudevī


                              2
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017

Various Characters of [different] Sakhīs

Piṇḍakeli

Vitaṇḍikā

Puṇḍarīkā

Sitākhaṇḍī

Cārucaṇḍī

Sudantikā

Akuṇṭhitā

Kalākaṇṭhī

Rāmacī

Mecikā

Messengers (dūtyaḥ)

Messengers who arrange loving quarrels

Messengers who arrange meetings

The Sakhīs Belonging to the Second Division

Lalitā’s sakhīs

Viśākhā’s sakhīs

Campakalatā’s sakhīs

Citrā’s sakhīs

Tuṅgavidyā’s sakhīs

Indulekhā’s sakhīs

Raṅgadevī’s sakhīs

Sudevī’s sakhīs

Names of Śrī Rādhā’s Eight Sakhīs (Sammohana Tantra)

Names of the eight sakhīs (Sammohana Tantra)

Ratnabhavāḥ



Laghu-bhāga

Description of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Beautiful Form, Qualities,
Sweetness, etc

The suhṛt-sakhās

Subhadra

The sakhās

                           3
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017


The priya-sakhās

Śrīdāmā

Sudāmā

The priya-narma-sakhās

Subala

Arjuna

Gandharva

Vasanta

Ujjvala

Kokila

Sanandana

Vidagdha

Madhumaṅgala

Śrī Balarāma

Servants called viṭa

Servants called ceṭa

Servants who prepare betel nuts

Servants who supply water

Servants who decorate Śrī Kṛṣṇa

Servants who prepare fragrant substances

Servants who act as hairdressers

Servants who are engaged inother task

Maidservants

Maidservants appointed in many different services

Spies

Messengers

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Female Messengers

Paurṇamāsī

Vīrā

Vṛndā

Nāndīmukhī

Ordinary Servants

                            4
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017


Description of pastime places

The items Śrī Kṛṣṇa uses

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Beloveds

Śrīmatī Rādhārānī’s charming beauty

The marks on Śrī Rādhā’s palms

The marks on Śrī Rādhā’s feet

Śrī Rādhā’s priya-sakhīs

Prāṇa-sakhīs, or jīvita-sakhīs

Nitya-sakhīs

Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mañjarīs

Śrī Rādhā’s objects of worship

Special description services of some sakhīs

Groups of Śrī Rādhā’s sakhīs

Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants

Śrī Rādhā’s ornaments




Foreword


(to the first Hindi edition)



Today I am feeling unprecedented happiness to be able to
present a Hindi edition of Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-
dīpikā to the faithful readers. The author, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, is an eternal associate of Śrī Śacī-nandana
Gaurahari, and he is the crest jewel in the community of
those who relish pure bhakti-rasa. This unparalleled
scripture is a prominent guide that illuminates worship
in the wake of the spontaneous devotional moods of
Vraja. Although its language is profound, it is easy to
understand.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s inherent nature is superlatively
sweet. He established in this world the innermost desire
of Śrī Caitanya, and he has written a brief yet vital
description of the names, forms, qualities and different
services of Śrī Rādhā’s and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s cherished
companions. In the Bṛhad-bhāga, or first part, of this
composition, he describes those in vātsalya-rasa and
madhura-rasa, and in the Laghu-bhāga, or second part, he
describes those in sakhya-rasa and dāsya-rasa.

                             5
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017

Sometimes, especially in the second part, he depicts in
detail the beautiful forms of Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Govinda,
as well as Their bodily limbs, Their ornaments and the
astonishing paraphernalia used by Them. Such a
comprehensive description of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
companions will not be found in any other single
scripture. This book is entitled Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-
gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā because it briefly introduces the dear
associates (gaṇa) of Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Fortunate living beings who give attention to hearing
from pure rasika devotees of Vraja the transcendent
narrations of the Supreme Lord’s pastimes, and in whose
hearts an excessive eagerness thus awakens to devotedly
serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the mood of the residents of Vraja,
are qualified to practise rāgānugā-bhakti.

“What are the sweet emotions that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternally
perfected associates have for Him? Is it possible that I
may also attain a mood such as theirs? How can it be
attained?” When the moods of the heart are characterised
by this type of ardent yearning, it is symptomatic of
the aforementioned excessive eagerness, or greed.

When, in the sādhaka’s life, he comes to such a stage,
he follows the path revealed by the spiritual
authorities. In his external body he renders service –
such as hearing the glories of the Lord and daily
chanting the holy name a fixed number of times –
following in the footsteps of the residents of Vraja
like Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana. And internally, in his
siddha-deha, or perfected spiritual body, he performs
mānasī-sevā under the guidance of Śrī Lalitā, Śrī
Viśākhā, Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and others.

To constantly cultivate that mānasī-sevā, or
transcendental service within the purified mind, it is
essential to become acquainted with the eternal
associates of Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa and their way of
performing loving service to Them. This is the
information given in this literature. Thus it is not an
exaggeration to pronounce this scripture as the very
beacon that guides the devotee who has already attained
perfection (svarūpa-siddhi), to attain complete maturity
in his internal service.




A Brief Life History of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



In the pastimes of Śrī Gaurāṅga, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is
the leader of the six Gosvāmīs, and in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes in Vraja, he is Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī. His ancestors
resided in the province of Karṇāṭaka. For some reason,
one of his ancestors left that place and came to live in
Bengal. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī appeared in this dynasty of
Bhāradvāja-gotra’s yajurvediya-brāhmaṇas in about 1411
Śakābda Era (1489 AD) in a village named Moragrāma
Mādhāīpura in Bengal. His father’s name was Kumāra-deva.
He had two brothers – Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī was elder

                           6
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

and Anupama, or Vallabha, was younger. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
was the son of Anupama. Even in their childhood, these
three brothers felt immense attachment to Śrī Bhagavān’s
lotus feet.

When they had completed their education and had grown to
youths, the ruler of Bengal (Gauḍadeśa) Husain Shah
became impressed by their sharp intelligence, noble
character and various other good qualities. He appointed
Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī as his prime minister and Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī as his private secretary. In 1514 AD, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu started out for Vraja for the first
time. On the way, He came to the village of Rāmakeli,
where He met these three brothers. Then, instead of
continuing to Vṛndāvana, He returned to Jagannātha Purī.
Now, having had Mahāprabhu’s divine association, Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī was tormented by such an eagerness to
attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa that he abandoned his governmental
duties and everything else.

Then, for the second time, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu set
out for darśana of Śrī Vṛndāvana. Upon His return from
Vṛndāvana, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī met Him at Prayāga
(Allahabad). It was there that Mahāprabhu inspired His
dear Rūpa with a unique presentation on the eternal
fundamental principles of bhakti-rasa and then empowered
him to expound them. A description of this is found in
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 19.136–7):



prabhu kahe,—śuna, rūpa, bhaktirasera-lakṣaṇa

sūtrarūpe kahi, vistāra nā jāya varṇana

pārāpāra-śūnya gambhīra bhaktirasa-sindhu

tomāya cākhāite tāra kahi eka ‘bindu’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “My dear Rūpa, I will tell you,
in condensed aphorisms, the symptoms of bhakti-rasa,
because it is not possible to describe them in their
entirety. This nectarean ocean of the mellows of bhakti
(bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu) is so deep and so vast that its
length or breadth cannot be calculated. I am imparting
to you just one drop from that ocean.”



Thus, for ten consecutive days during their stay in
Prayāga, Śrīman Mahāprabhu presented bhakti-rasa-tattva
in a way that had no precedent. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
expounded this subject in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu,
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Lalita-mādhava, Vidagdha-mādhava and
other books.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s attachment for Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is extraordinarily deep. Consequently, he is
naturally renounced from family life, humble, detached
from sense objects and full of other such exalted
qualities for which he is famous. Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Bhakta-māla and other books portray his

                           7
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

personal qualities as well as his life’s achievements.
Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura Mahāśaya has rightfully
proclaimed him to be ‘śrī-caitanya mano ’bhīṣṭa-
saṁsthāpaka – he who establishes the innermost desire of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s heart’. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu gave him two specific orders: to re-establish
the lost places of Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala, and to write
scriptures delineating bhakti.

While still living in Bengal, he began to compose verses
for the dramas Lalita-mādhava [Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in
Dvārakāpurī] and Vidagdha-mādhava [His pastimes in
Vraja]. He planned to combine these dramas, in the hope
that they would pacify the Vrajavāsīs’ feelings of
separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. However, at Satyabhāmāpura in
Orissa, he received an order by Śrī Satyabhāmā-devī to
write two separate dramas. Then, in Nīlācala (Jagannātha
Purī), Mahāprabhu directly instructed him to do the
same. Only those who are rasika, or able to relish the
astonishing devotional moods of transcendence, can
fathom the joy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu when He heard
these writings of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in the assembly of
devotees. The Lord fully empowered Śrī Rūpa, gave him
the position of ācārya (one who teaches by his own
example) and sent him to Vṛndāvana. Thereafter, Śrī Rūpa
fulfilled the Lord’s innermost desire. Śrīla Narottama
Ṭhākura Mahāśaya has written:

śrī-caitanya mano ’bhīṣṭam sthāpitaṁ yena bhūtale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti svapadāntikam



When will Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī give me the shelter of his
lotus feet? Because he understood the innermost desire
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he was able to establish His
mission in this world and is very dear to the Lord.

The following are some of the books composed by Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī: Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi,
Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛtam, Vidagdha-mādhava, Lalita-mādhava,
Nikuñja-rahasya-stava, Stavamālā, Mathurā-māhātmya,
Padyāvalī, Uddava-sandeśa, Haṁsadūta, Dānakeli-kaumudī,
Kṛṣṇajanma-tithi-vidhi, Prayuktākhyāt-mañjarī and
Nāṭaka-candrikā.



The Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī-ṭīkā’s Mention of Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-
gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā



At the end of Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī
commentary on the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
there is a description of the books composed by Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī:



tayoranujasṛṣṭeṣu kāvyaṁ śrī-haṁsadūtakaṁ

bṛhad laghutayā khyātā śrī-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā

                           8
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017




The meaning is that Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī’s younger
brother, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, has written a poetic work
named Śrī Haṁsadūta, as well as Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-
gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā, which is famous for its divisions
named Bṛhad and Laghu.



The Fifth Wave of Bhakti-ratnākara also mentions Śrī
Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā.



Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s original composition of this book
is in the Sanskrit language. Although many editions with
Bengali translations have been published, in almost all
of them, textual variations, changes of sequence,
additional texts or omitted texts can be detected. We
have revised the book and as far as possible,
systematically arranged it and ornamented some of the
verses with commentaries. I sincerely hope that Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī and the rūpānugā guruvarga (spiritual
teachers guided by him) will be pleased by this
endeavour and bestow upon us their merciful blessings.
Then the readers’ study of this work will be simplified.

I am fully convinced that devotees thirsty for bhakti –
both those who are rasika and bhāvuka, as well as those
practitioners of rāgānugā-bhakti who are eager for
vraja-rasa – will deeply cherish this book. Faithful
readers will gain entrance into Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s prema-dharma (eternal religion of pure,
transcendental love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa) by studying this
book.

In conclusion, may my most worshipful Śrīla Gurupāda-
padma, the very embodiment of the Supreme Lord’s com-
passion, shower abundant mercy upon me. By his doing so,
my qualification to fulfil his innermost desire through
my service may eternally increase. This is my humble
entreaty at his divine feet, which can bestow prema.

This first edition was completed in haste, so it may
contain minor typographical errors. We request the
faithful reader to inform us of these errors so we can
correct them in future editions of this work.



Praying for the particle of mercy from Śrī Hari, Guru
and the Vaiṣṇavas,



Humble and insignificant,

Tridaṇḍibhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa

Śrī Kāmikā Ekādaśī

9 August 2007

                            9
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




Bṛhad-bhāga




Auspicious Invocation



vande guru-pada-dvandvaṁ bhakta-vṛnda-samanvitam

śrī-caitanya-prabhuṁ vande nityānanda-sahoditam (1)



First of all, I offer homage to the lotus feet of my
Holy Master, accompanied by all the devotees, as well as
to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who descended into this
world together with Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu. (1)



śrī-nanda-nandanaṁ vande rādhikā-caraṇa-dvayam

gopī-jana-samāyuktaṁ vṛndāvana-manoharam (2)



I offer homage to the divine lotus feet of Śrī Nanda-
nandana and Śrīmatī Rādhikā. They are surrounded by the
gopīs and steal the hearts of all the residents of
Vṛndāvana. (2)




Introduction to the Book




ye sūtritāḥ satā ratyā prasiddhāḥ śāstra-lokayoḥ

vyākriyante parīvārās te vṛndāvana-nāthayoḥ (3)



mathurā-maṇḍale loke grantheṣu vividheṣu ca

purāṇe cāgamādau ca tad-bhakteṣu ca sādhuṣu (4)



te samāsād vilikhyante sva-suhṛt-parituṣṭaye

ānupūrvīvidhānena rati-prathita-vartmanaḥ (5)


                           10
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017



I (Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī) have gathered all the well-known
information about the associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the King and Queen of Vṛndāvana, that
is available in the area of Mathurā, in histories told
by general people from generation to generation, in
various scriptures such as the Purāṇas and āgama-
śāstras, and in the knowledge gathered by the devotees
currently in the assemblies of the sādhus. Based on this
information, I will systematically and concisely
describe the different groups of the eternally perfected
residents of Vraja, as is favourable for the path of
rāga. I am doing this for the pleasure of my well-wisher
(Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī). May an attachment for Śrī Rādhā,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Their associates awaken in everyone by
this description. (3–5)




Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Family (śrī-kṛṣṇasya parivārāḥ)




te kṛṣṇasya parīvārā ye janā vraja-vāsinaḥ

paśu-pālās tathā viprā bahiṣṭhāś ceti te tridhā (6)



The residents of Vraja are actually Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s family
members. This family of His consists of three groups:
the herdsmen (paśu-pālas), the priestly class (viprās)
and the artisans (bahiṣṭhas). (6)




1. Herdsmen (paśu-pālāḥ)




paśu-pālās tridhā vaiśyā ābhīrā gurjarās tathā

gopa-ballava-paryāyā yadu-vaṁśa-samudbhavāḥ (7)



The herdsmen are further divided into three groups:
vaiśyas, ābhīras and gurjaras. They are descendants of
the Yadu dynasty and are known by such appropriate names
as Gopa and Ballava. (7)



a. vaiśyas (vaiśyāḥ)




                           11
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

prāyo go-vṛttayo mukhyā vaiśyā iti samīritāḥ

anye ’nulomajāḥ kecid ābhīrā iti viśrutāḥ (8)



The vaiśyas generally maintain themselves by taking care
of cows. They are considered to be superior to the
ābhīras and gurjaras. The vaiśyas whose father belongs
to a higher social class and mother to a lower are also
known as ābhīras. (8)



b. ābhīras (ābhīrāḥ)



ācārādyena tat-sāmyād ābhīrāś ca smṛtā ime

ābhīrāḥ śūdra-jātīyā go-mahiṣādi-vṛttayaḥ

ghoṣādi-śabda-paryāyāḥ pūrvato nyūnatāṁ gatāḥ (9)



The ābhīras are similar to the vaiśyas in customs and
behaviour. They belong to the śūdras and maintain their
life by taking care of cows, buffaloes and other
animals, and are also known by the name Ghoṣa. The
ābhīras are considered slightly inferior to the
aforementioned vaiśyas. (9)



c. gurjaras (gurjarāḥ)



kiñcid ābhīrato nyūnāś chāgādi-paśu-vṛttayaḥ

goṣṭha-prānta-kṛtāvāsāḥ puṣṭāṅgā gurjarāḥ smṛtāḥ (10)



The gurjaras are herdsmen who live at the outskirts of
the pasturing grounds2 and who take care of goats and
other animals. They are somewhat inferior to the ābhīras
and are often strong and robust. (10)




2. The priestly class (brāhmaṇas) (viprāḥ)




sarva-veda-vido viprā yājanādy-adhikāriṇaḥ (11)



The brāhmaṇas know all the Vedas and are engaged in the

                           12
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

following six duties: performing sacrifices, engaging
others in performing sacrifices, studying, teaching,
giving charity and accepting charity. (11)




3. Craftsmen (bahiṣṭhāḥ)




bahiṣṭhāḥ kāravaḥ proktā nānā-śilpopajīvinaḥ (12)



Craftsmen, who maintain their lives by various kinds of
trades and crafts, are known as bahiṣṭhas. (12)



[The aforementioned groups are further divided into
eight:]



ebhiḥ pañca-vidhair eva parīvārā harer iha

pūjyā bhrātṛ-bhaginy-ādyā dūtyo dāsāś ca śilpinaḥ

dāsikāś ca vayasyāś ca preyasyaś ceti te ’ṣṭadhā (13)



These five groups within Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s family (vaiśyas,
ābhīras, gurjaras, vipras and bahiṣṭhas) are further
divided into eight. They are: honourable elders,
brothers-and-sisters and so forth, messengers, servants,
craftsmen, maidservants, friends of the same age and
beloveds. (13)




Personalities honoured by Śrī Kṛṣṇa (pūjyāḥ)




mānyā bhrātrādayas tasya vayasyāḥ sevakādayaḥ

śrī-goṣṭha-yuva-rājasya preyasyaś ca puraḥ kramāt (14)



The brothers of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Crown Prince of Vraja;
His contemporary friends; servants and so forth; and His
beloved gopīs are all respected by Him. (14)



pūjyāḥ pitā-mahādyāś ca tathā jñeyā mahīsurāḥ

                           13
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


pitāmaho harer gauraḥ sita-keśaḥ sitāmbaraḥ (15)



maṅgalāmṛta-parjanyaḥ parjanyo nāma ballavaḥ

variṣṭho vraja-goṣṭhīnāṁ sa kṛṣṇasya pitāmahaḥ (16)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s paternal and maternal grandfathers, the
brāhmaṇas and other such elders are worshipful to Him.
The name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s paternal grandfather is Parjanya
(cloud) because he showers torrents of auspicious
nectar. His bodily complexion resembles molten gold and
both his hair and clothing are of white colour.
Grandfather Śrī Parjanya is the object of veneration to
all in Vraja. (15–16)



yaḥ surarṣer nideśena lakṣmī-bharttur ūpāsanām

purā nandīśvare cakre śreṣṭha-santati-kāṅkṣayā

vāg-amūrttā tate vyomni prādurāsīt priyaṅkarī (17)



In bygone times, Śrī Parjanya lived in the area of
Nandīśvara. He wished to beget illustrious offspring, so
following the instructions of Devarṣi Nārada he
worshipped Śrī Nārāyaṇa, the husband of Lakṣmī-devī.
After performing austerities for a long time, Parjanya
Mahārāja heard a most pleasant divine voice from the
heights of the sky. The voice said, (17)



“tapasānena dhanyena bhāvinaḥ pañca te sutāḥ

varīyān madhyamas teṣāṁ nanda nāmnā bhaviṣyati (18)



nandanas tasya vijayī bhavitā vraja-nandanaḥ

surāsura-śikhā-ratna-nīrājita-padāmbujaḥ” (19)



“O Parjanya, five sons will be born to you as a result
of your most excellent austerities. The best of them
will be the middle one. He will be famous by the name
Nanda. The son of this Nanda will be victorious in the
entire world and bestow joy in the land of Vraja. Both
the demigods and the demons will worship His lotus feet
with the jewels decorating their heads.” (18–19)



tuṣṭas tatra vasann atra prekṣya keśinam āgatam


                           14
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

parīvāraiḥ samaṁ sarvair yayau bhīto bṛhad-vanam (20)



With a happy heart Śrī Parjanya resided in the area of
Śrī Nandīśvara for some time, but when he heard about
the Keśī demon’s arrival there, he became fearful and
moved to Mahāvana (Gokula) with his entire family. (20)



pitāmahī mahī-mānyā kusumbhābhā harit-paṭā

varīyasīti vikhyātā kharvā kṣīrābha-kuntalā (21)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s paternal grandmother is Varīyasī. She is
most revered throughout Vraja-maṇḍala. Her bodily
complexion resembles the colour of the orange-red
kusumbha flower (safflower) and her garments are green.
She is short and her hair is completely white as milk.
(21)



pitṛvyau pitur ūrjanya-rājanyau ballavau ca yau

naṭī-suverjanākhyāpi pitāmaha-sahodarā (22)



guṇavīraḥ patir yasyāḥ sūryasyāhvaya-pattanam (23a)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s father, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja, has two paternal
uncles named Ūrjanya and Rājanya. They are both cowherd
men by occupation. Suverjanā, who is expert in the art
of dance and therefore is famous by the name Naṭī
(dancer), is the sister of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s paternal
grandfather. She is, in other words, Śrī Nanda
Mahārāja’s paternal aunt. Suverjanā’s husband is named
Guṇavīra, and they reside at Sūrya-kuṇḍa. (22–23a)



pitā vraja-janānando nando bhuvana-vanditaḥ (23b)



tundilaś candana-rucir bandhujīva-nibhāmbaraḥ

tila-taṇḍulitaṁ kūrcaṁ dadhāno lamba-vigrahaḥ (24)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s father is Śrī Nanda Mahārāja. He is
worshipped throughout the world and is the source of
happiness to the residents of Vraja. He has a big belly,
his bodily complexion is like sandalwood paste
(candana), and his dress resembles the colour of the
yellowish red bandhujīva flower. He is tall and his
beard resembles the colour of sesame seeds mixed with

                           15
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

rice, or in other words, a mixture of white and black.
(23b–24)



upanandānujo nando vasudeva-suhṛttamaḥ

goparāja-yaśode ca kṛṣṇa-tātau vrajeśvarau (25)



Śrī Nanda is the younger brother of Upananda and a close
friend of Vasudeva. Goparāja Nanda and Yaśodā are Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s father and mother, and they are also widely
known as the King and Queen of Vraja. (25)



vasudevo ’pi vasubhir dīvyatīty eṣa bhaṇyate

tathā droṇa-svarūpāṁśaḥ khyātaścānakadundubhiḥ (26)



nāmedaṁ gāruḍe proktaṁ mathurā-mahima-krame

vṛṣabhānur vraje khyāto yasya priya-suhṛd-varaḥ (27)



Śrī Nanda Mahārāja’s friend is called Vasudeva because
he is radiant with piety, jewels and wealth, which are
all denoted by the word vasu. Viśuddha sattva-guṇa, or
the transcendental platform of pure existence, is also
called vasudeva, and according to this meaning his name
is Vasudeva because he is endowed with this viśuddha
sattva-guṇa. He is a partial manifestation of a Vasu
called Droṇa and is also well known by the name Ānaka
Dundubhi. A description of these names is found in the
Mathurā-māhātmya of the Garuḍa Purāṇa. The renowned Śrī
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja of Vraja is Śrī Vasudeva Mahārāja’s
most dear friend. (26–27)



mātā gopa-yaśo-dātrī yaśodā śyāmala-dyutiḥ

mūrttā vatsalatevāsau śakra-cāpa-nibhāmbarā (28)



Because she gives (dā) fame (yaśa) to the society of the
cowherds, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mother is called Yaśodā. Her
bodily complexion is blackish blue (śyāmala). She is the
very personification of parental love and her attire is
colourful like the rainbow. (28)



nātisthūla-tanuḥ kiñcid dīrgha-mecaka-kuntalā

aindavī kīrttidā yasyāḥ priyā prāṇa-sakhī varā (29)



                           16
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017


Śrī Yaśodā’s body is of medium size – neither plump nor
thin. Her hair is quite long and black. Her best
friends, who are as dear to her as her own life, are
Aindavī and Kīrttidā. (29)



gokulādhīśa-gṛhiṇī yaśodā devakī-sakhī

gopeśvarī goṣṭha-rājñī kṛṣṇa-māteti bhaṇyate (30)



She is well known as the wife of the ruler of Gokula,
Vraja-rāja Śrī Nanda Mahārāja; as Yaśodā; as a friend of
Śrī Vasudeva’s wife Śrī Devakī; as Gopeśvarī (the Queen
of the cowherds); as Goṣṭharānī (the Queen of Vraja) and
as the mother of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (30)



According to the Ādi Purāṇa



“dve nāmni nanda-bhāryāyā yaśodā devakīti ca

ataḥ sakhyam abhūt tasyā devakyā śauri-jāyayā” (31)



“Śrī Nanda Mahārāja’s wife has two names: Yaśodā and
Devakī. Devakī, the wife of Śauri Śrī Vasudeva, has the
same name as Yaśodā, and therefore they naturally have a
special friendship.” (31)

rohiṇī bṛhad-ambāsya praharṣārohiṇī sadā

snehaṁ yā kurute rāma-snehāt koṭi-guṇaṁ harau (32)



Śrī Rohiṇī-devī is known as the elder mother of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. She is an embodiment of ever-increasing joy. She
even feels millions of times greater affection for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa than for Śrī Balarāma. (32)



upanando ’bhinandaś ca pitṛvyau pūrvajau pituḥ

pitṛvyau tu kanīyāṁsau syātāṁ sananda-nandanau (33)



Śrī Nanda Mahārāja has two elder brothers – Upananda and
Abhinanda – and two younger – Sananda and Nandana. The
four of them are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s paternal uncles. (33)



ādyaḥ sitāruṇa-rucir dīrgha-kūrco harit-paṭaḥ


                              17
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017

tuṅgī priyāsya sāraṅga-varṇā sāraṅga-śāṭikā (34)



The eldest of the brothers, Śrī Upananda, has a pinkish
bodily complexion like that of the mixture of white and
the reddish colour of dawn. His beard is long and he
wears green clothes. His wife’s name is Tuṅgī. Both her
complexion and the colour of her sari are similar to
that of the cātaka bird. (34)



dvitīyaḥ kumbu-ramya-śrī-lamba-kūrco ’sitāmbaraḥ

bhāryāsya pīvarī nīla-paṭā pāṭala-vigrahā (35)



The second eldest brother, Śrī Abhinanda, has a fair
complexion resembling the colour of a conch shell and
his beard is long. He wears black clothes. His wife,
Pīvarī, has blue clothing and a pinkish complexion. (35)



sunandāpara-paryāyaḥ sanandasya ca pāṇḍaraḥ

śyāma-celaḥ sita-dvi-tri-keśo ’yaṁ keśava-priyaḥ (36)



bhāryā kuvalayā-rakta-celā kuvalayacchaviḥ (37a)



Sananda is also called Sunanda. His bodily complexion is
pale whitish yellow and his garments are black. Only a
few of his hairs have turned white. He is extremely dear
to Keśava. His wife, whose name is Kuvalayā, wears
clothes of a mixed colour of blue and light red
(kuvalaya), and her body also bears the same complexion.
(36–37a)



nandanaḥ śitikaṇṭhābhaś caṇḍāta-kusumāmbaraḥ (37b)



apṛthag vasatiḥ pitrā taruṇa-praṇayī harau

atulyāsya priyā vidyut-kāntir-abhra-nibhāmbarā (38)



The bodily complexion of Nandana is like the colour of
the throat of the peacock and his clothes resemble the
colour of an oleander flower (caṇḍāta). Śrī Nandana
lives together with his father, Śrī Parjanya Mahārāja,
and has gentle love for Śrī Hari. His wife’s name is
Atulyā. Her complexion resembles light-ning and her
clothes are like the blackish blue colour of rain
clouds. (37b–38)

                           18
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




sānandā nandinī ceti pitur ete sahodare

kalmāṣa-vasane rikta-dante ca phena-rociṣī (39)



mahānīlaḥ sunīlaś ca ramaṇāvetayoḥ kramāt (40a)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s father, Vrajarāja Nanda, has two sisters
named Sānandā and Nandinī. They wear many different
types of colourful clothes. They do not have many teeth
and their bodily complexions are whitish like foam.
Sānandā’s husband is Mahānīla and Nandinī’s is Sunīla.
Mahānīla and Sunīla are thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s uncles. (39–
40a)



pitur ādya-pitṛvyasya putrau kaṇḍava-daṇḍavau (40b)



subale mudam āptau yau yayoś cāru mukhāmbujam (41a)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eldest paternal uncle, Śrī Upananda, has two
sons named Kaṇḍava and Daṇḍava. They both gladly stay in
Subala’s company and their attractive faces are as
beautiful as lotus flowers. (40b–41a)



rājanyau yau tu dāyādau nāmnā tau cāṭu-vāṭukau

dadhisārā-haviḥsāre sadharmiṇyau kramāt tayoḥ (41b)



Śrī Nanda Mahārāja has two cousins, who are sons to his
uncle Rājanya [mentioned in Verse 22, Bṛhad-bhāga].
Their names are Cāṭu and Vāṭuka. Cāṭu’s wife is
Dadhisārā and Vāṭuka’s is Haviḥsārā. (41b)



mātāmaho mahotsāhaḥ syād asya sumukhābhidhaḥ

lamba-kambu samaśmaśruḥ pakva-jambū-phalacchaviḥ (42)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s maternal grandfather is called Sumukha. He
is energetic and enthusiastic by nature. His long beard
is white like a conch shell and his bodily complexion
resembles [the purple colour of] a ripe jāmun fruit.
(42)



                           19
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017


mātāmahī tu mahiṣī dadhi-pāṇḍara-kuntalā

pāṭalā pāṭalī-puṣpa-paṭalābhā harit-paṭā (43)



The name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s maternal grandmother is Pāṭalā.
She is well-known as the Queen of Vraja. Her hair looks
yellowish just like yoghurt made from cow milk, her
complexion is pale pinkish like a pāṭala flower (rose),
and her clothes are green. (43)



priyā sahacarī tasyā mukharā nāma ballavī

vrajeśvaryai dadau stanyaṁ sakhī-sneha-bhareṇa yā (44)



Mukharā, who by caste belongs to the cow herders, is a
dear friend of Grandmother Pāṭalā. Mukharā has so much
affection for her friend that sometimes, when Pāṭalā was
busy (no need to even mention all her various duties),
she even used to breast-feed Pāṭalā’s daughter,
Vrajeśvarī Śrī Yaśodā. (44)



sumukhasyānujaś cārumukho ’ñjana-nibhacchaviḥ

bhāryāsya kulaṭī-varṇā balākā nāma ballavī (45a)



Grandfather Sumukha’s younger brother is Cārumukha. His
bodily complexion is [blackish] like kājala. His wife is
a gopī named Balākā. Her complexion can be compared to
one kind of deep blue gram or to kājala. (45a)



golo mātāmahī-bhrātā dhūmalo vasana-cchavīḥ (45b)



hasito yaḥ svasur-bhartrā sumukhena krudhoddhuraḥ

durvāsasam upāsyasau kulaṁ lebhe vrajojjvalam (46)



yasya sā jaṭilā bhāryā dhvāṅkha-varṇā mahodarī (47a)



Grandmother Pāṭalā’s brother is called Gola3. His
clothes and complexion are of a greyish purple colour.
When his brother-in-law Sumukha makes fun of him and
laughs, he becomes mad with anger.

He received the good fortune of taking birth in an
illustrious family of Vraja by worshipping Śrī Durvāsā.

                           20
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017


Gola’s wife is called Jaṭilā. She has a big belly and
her complexion resembles that of a crow. (45b–47a)



yaśodhara-yaśodeva sudevādyās tu mātulāḥ (47b)



atasī-puṣpa-rucayaḥ pāṇḍarāmbara-saṁvṛtāḥ

yeṣāṁ dhūmra-paṭā bhāryāḥ karkaṭī-kusuma-tviṣaḥ (48)



remā romā suremākhyāḥ pāvanasya pitṛ-vyajāḥ (49a)



Yaśodhara, Yaśodeva, Sudeva and others are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
maternal uncles. They all have a complexion that
resembles a [blue] linseed flower (atasī) and wear
clothes that are white mixed with a tinge of pale
yellow. Their wives – Remā, Romā and Suremā – are
Pāvana’s [Śrī Viśākhā’s father’s] cousins from his
father’s side. Remā, Romā and Suremā wear clothes of
greyish purple colour and their complexion is like the
[reddish] colour of the flower of the silk-cotton tree.
(47b–49a)



yaśodevī-yaśasvinyāvubhe mātuḥ sahodare (49b)



dadhisārā-haviḥsāre ity anye nāmanī tayoḥ

jyeṣṭhā śyāmānujā gaurī hiṅgulopama-vāsasau (50)



Yaśodevī and Yaśasvinī are the sisters of Yaśodā, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s mother.

They are also known by the names Dadhisārā and
Haviḥsārā. The elder sister Yaśodevī has a blackish blue
(śyāma) complexion and the younger sister Yaśasvinī’s
complexion is like molten gold. They both wear clothes
of the colour resembling a mixture of white, yellow and
red (hiṅgula). (49b–50)



cāṭu-vāṭukayor bhārye te rājanya-tanūjayoḥ

putraś cārumukhasyaikaḥ sucāru-nāma śobhanaḥ (51)



gola-bhrātuḥ sutā yasya bhāryā nāmnā tulāvatī (52a)



                           21
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017


Dadhisārā and Haviḥsārā are the wives of the previously
mentioned Cāṭu and Vāṭuka [in Verse 41b, Bṛhad-bhāga],
who are the sons of Rājanya [mentioned in Verse 22,
Bṛhad-bhāga]. Cārumukha (Sumukha’s brother) has a
handsome son called Sucāru.

Gola’s niece Tulāvatī is Sucāru’s wife. (51–52a)



pitāmaha-samās tuṇḍu-kuṭera-puraṭādayaḥ (52b)



Tuṇḍu, Kuṭera, Puraṭa and others are like Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
paternal grandfathers (because they are contemporaries
of Śrī Parjanya Mahārāja and live in close proximity to
him). (52b)



kilā ’ntakela-tīlāṭa-kṛpīṭa-puraṭādayaḥ

goṇḍa-kalloṭṭa-kāraṇḍa-tarīṣaṇa-varīṣaṇāḥ

vīrāroha-varāroha-mukhyā mātāmahopamāḥ (53)



Kila, Antakela, Tilāṭa, Kṛpīṭa, Puraṭa, Goṇḍa, Kalloṭṭa,
Kāraṇḍa, Tarīṣaṇa, Varīṣaṇa, Vīrāroha, Varāroha and
others are just like maternal grandfathers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
(because they are of the same age as Śrī Sumukha and
live close to him). (53)



vṛddhāḥ pitāmahī-tulyāḥ śilābherī śikhāmbarāḥ

bhāruṇī bhaṅgurā bhaṅgī bhāraśākhā śikhādayaḥ (54)



Śilābherī, Śikhāmbarā, Bhāruṇī, Bhaṅgurā, Bhaṅgī,
Bhāraśākhā, Śikhā and other elder ladies are just like
paternal grandmothers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (54)



bhāruṇḍā jaṭilā bhelā karālā karavālikā

ghargharā mukharā ghorā ghaṇṭā ghoṇī sughaṇṭikā (55)



cakkiṇī coṇḍikā cuṇḍī ḍiṇḍimā puṇḍavāṇikāḥ

ḍāmaṇī ḍāmarī ḍumbī ḍaṅkā mātāmahī-samāḥ (56)



Bhāruṇḍā, Jaṭilā, Bhelā, Karālā, Karavālikā, Ghargharā,
Mukharā, Ghorā, Ghaṇṭā, Ghoṇī, Sughaṇṭikā, Cakkiṇī,

                           22
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

Coṇḍikā, Cuṇḍī, Ḍiṇḍimā, Puṇḍavāṇikā, Ḍāmaṇī, Ḍāmarī,
Ḍumbī, Ḍaṅkā and other elder ladies are like Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
maternal grandmothers. (55–56)



maṅgalaḥ piṅgalaḥ piṅgo māṭharaḥ pīṭha-paṭṭiśau

śaṅkaraḥ saṅgaro bhṛṅgo ghṛṇi-ghāṭika-sāraghāḥ (57)



paṭīra-daṇḍi-kedārāḥ saurabheya-kalāṅkurau

dhurīṇa-dhurva-cakrāṅgā maskarotpala-kamvalāḥ (58)



supakṣa-saudha-hārīta-harikeśa-harādayaḥ

upanandādayaś cānye sarve ’mī janakopamāḥ (59)



Maṅgala, Piṅgala, Piṅga, Māṭhara, Pīṭha, Paṭṭīśa,
Śaṅkara, Saṅgara, Bhṛṅga, Ghṛṇi, Ghāṭika, Sāragha,
Paṭīra, Daṇḍi, Kedāra, Saurabheya, Kalāṅkura, Dhurīṇa,
Dhurva, Cakrāṅga, Maskara, Utpala, Kamvala, Supakṣa,
Saudha, Hārīta, Harikeśa, Hara, Upananda and other gopas
are just like fathers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (57–59)



parjanyaḥ sumukhaś cemau mithaḥ sakhyaṁ paraṁ gatau

vāg-bandhaṁ cakratuḥ prītyā kaiśore tau suhṛd-varau

tena nandādi-nāmānas tiṣṭhanty anye ’pi ballavāḥ (60)



Parjanya (Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s paternal grandfather) and Sumukha
(Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s maternal grandfather) are best friends. In
their youth, these two companions promised each other
that other cowherd men could give their children the
same names as they both would give their sons, like
Nanda. For this reason, in Śrī Vṛndāvana there are also
other gopas who are called by names such as Nanda. (60)



taraṅgākṣī taralikā śubhadā mālikāṅgadāḥ

vatsalā kuśalā tālī medurā masṛṇā kṛpā (61)



śaṅkinī bimbinī mitrā subhagā bhoginī prabhāḥ

śārikā hiṅgulā nītiḥ kapilā dhamanī-dharā (62)



pakṣatīḥ pāṭakā puṇḍī sutuṇḍā tuṣṭirañjanā

                           23
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


viśālā śallakī veṇā varttikādyāḥ prasūpamāḥ (63)



Taraṅgākṣī, Taralikā, Śubhadā, Mālikā, Aṅgadā, Vatsalā,
Kuśalā, Tālī, Medurā, Masṛṇā, Kṛpā, Śaṅkinī, Bimbinī,
Mitrā, Subhagā, Bhoginī, Prabhā, Śārikā, Hiṅgulā, Nīti,
Kapilā, Dhamanī-dharā, Pakṣati, Pāṭakā, Puṇḍī, Sutuṇḍā,
Tuṣṭi, Añjanā, Viśālā, Śallakī, Veṇā, Varttikā and other
cowherd ladies are like mothers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (61–63)



ambikā ca kilimbā ca dhātṛke stanya-dāyike

amibikeyaṁ tayor mukhyā vrajeśvaryāḥ priyā sakhī (64)



Ambikā and Kilimbā are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s wet nurses, and they
breast-feed Him. Ambikā, who is a dear friend to
Vrajeśvarī (Śrī Yaśodā), is senior to Kilimbā. (64)




Brāhmaṇas (mahīsurāḥ)




mahīsurās tu dvi-vidhā gokulāntar-vasanti ye

kulam āśritya varttante kecid anye purohitāḥ (65)



The brāhmaṇas living in Gokula are divided into two
classes. One is under the shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
paternal family and the others belong to the priestly
class. (65)



vaṣaṭkāra-svadhākāra-prāghārādyāḥ kula dvijāḥ

sāmadhenī mahākavyā vedikādyās-tad-aṅganāḥ (66)



Vaṣaṭkāra, Svadhākāra, Prāghāra and others belong to
those brāhmaṇas sheltered in the family. Their wives are
Sāmadhenī, Mahākavyā, Vedikā and others. (66)



vedagarbho mahāyajvā bhāguryādyāḥ purodhasaḥ

eteṣāṁ gautamī śārvī gārgītyādyā varāḥ striyaḥ (67)




                           24
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

Vedagarbha, Mahāyajvā, Bhāguri and others are priests
(purohitas). Gautamī, Śārvī, Gārgī and others are the
wives of these priests. (67)



kubjikā vāmanī svāhā sulatā śāṇḍilī svadhā

bhārgavītyādayo vṛddhā brāhmaṇyo vraja-pūjitāḥ (68)



Kubjikā, Vāmanī, Svāhā, Sulatā, Śāṇḍilī, Svadhā,
Bhārgavī and other elder brāhmaṇa ladies are venerable
in the entire Vraja-maṇḍala. (68)



paurṇamāsī bhagavatī sarva-siddhi-vidhāyinī

kāṣāya-vasanā gaurī kāśakeśī darāyatā (69)



Bhagavatī Paurṇamāsī is Yogamāyā, who arranges all Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes very skilfully. Her clothes are the
colour of red ochre [the colour of ascetics]. Her
complexion is golden, and her hair is white like the
flower of kāśa grass. She is quite tall. (69)



mānyā vrajeśvarādīnāṁ sarveṣāṁ vraja-vāsinām

devarṣeḥ priya-śiṣyeyam upadeśena tasya yā (70)



sāndīpaniṁ sutaṁ preṣṭhaṁ hitvāvantīpurīm api

svābhīṣṭa-daivata-premnā vyākulā gokulaṁ gatā (71)



Nanda and all the residents of Vraja worship Paurṇamāsī.
She is Devarṣi Śrī Nārada’s dear disciple. Following the
instruction of her guru she left her beloved son Śrī
Sāndīpani (Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Baladeva’s teacher) in
Avantikāpurī (Ujjain) and came to reside in Gokula,
being overwhelmed in love for her treasured Lord, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. (70–71)




Yūtha




yūthaḥ parijanānāṁ syād dvividhānāṁ mahoccayaḥ

vayasyā dāsikā dūtya ity asau tri-kulo mataḥ (72)

                           25
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




A large group consisting of two kinds of close
associates is called a yūtha. A yūtha is divided into
three groups: contemporary sakhīs (vayasyas),
maidservants (dāsīs) and gopī messengers (dūtīs). (72)



yūthasyāvāntarā bhedāḥ kulaṁ tasya tu maṇḍalam

maṇḍalasya tathā vargo vargasya gaṇa ucyate (73)



gaṇasya samavāyaḥ syāt samavāyasya sañcayaḥ

sañcayasya samājaḥ syāt samājasya samanvayaḥ

iti bhedā nava jñeyā laghavaḥ kramaśo budhaiḥ (74)



Those who know the eternal fundamental principles of
transcendental mellows (rasa-tattva) have further
divided the yūtha into nine sections: kulas, which are
further divided into maṇḍalas; maṇḍalas, which are
divided into vargas; vargas into gaṇas; gaṇas into
samavāyas; samavāyas into sañcayas; sañcayas into
samājas, and samājas, which are further divided into
samanvayas. (73–74)




Group of Contemporary Sakhīs


(vyasyānāṁ [sakhīnāṁ] kulam)



tatrādau kulamālīnāṁ likhyate tat tri-maṇḍalam

tāratamyāt tayoḥ premnāṁ kulasyāsya tri-rūpatā

samājo maṇḍalaś ceti gaṇaś ceti tad ucyate (75)



First of all, there is a description of the sakhīs’
group, which is, according to the gradation of divine
love (prema), divided into samāja, maṇḍala and gaṇa.
(75)




Description of samāja



                           26
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


samājaḥ parama-preṣṭha-sakhīnāṁ prathamo mataḥ

variṣṭhaś ca varaś ceti sa samanvaya-yugma-bhāk (76)



The group of the most beloved sakhīs is called a samāja.
This samāja consists of two parts – the most exalted
(variṣṭha) and the exalted (vara). (76)




a. The most exalted (variṣṭhaḥ)



variṣṭhaḥ sarvataḥ khyātaḥ sadā sacivatāṁ gataḥ

tayor evāsamordhvo vā nāsau premnaḥ samāśrayaḥ (77)



The variṣṭha sakhīs are most renowned among the gopīs
and are always skilfully assisting Śrī Rādhā and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in Their intimate pastimes. No one can equal them
or exceed them in their love for the Divine Couple. (77)



prapannaḥ sarva-suhṛdāṁ paramādaraṇīyatām

apāra-guṇa-rūpādi-mādhurībhiś ca bhūṣitaḥ (78)



These most exalted gopīs are highly venerated by all the
affectionate sakhīs under their guidance. They are
embellished by such charms as boundless good qualities
and beauty. (78)




The eight sakhīs (aṣṭa-sakhyaḥ)




lalitā ca viśākhā ca citrā campakavallikā

tuṅgavidyendulekhā ca raṅgadevī sudevikā (79)



The eight most exalted sakhīs are Lalitā, Viśākhā,
Citrā, Campakalatā, Tuṅgavidyā, Indulekhā, Raṅgadevī and
Sudevī. (79)




                           27
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017



1. Lalitā-devī




tatrādyā lalitā-devī syād aṣṭāsu varīyasī

priya-sakhyā bhavej jyeṣṭhā saptaviṁśati-vāsaraiḥ (80)



Śrī Lalitā-devī is the foremost amongst these eight
variṣṭha sakhīs. She is twenty-seven days older than her
dear friend Śrī Rādhā. (80)



anurādhātayā khyātā vāma-prakharatāṁ gatā

gorocanā-nibhāṅgī sā śikhi-piccha-nibhāmbarā (81)



Śrī Lalitā is renowned by the name Anurādhā. She is
decorated by the qualities of both a vāmā4 nāyikā and
prakharā5 nāyikā (heroine). Lalitā’s bodily complexion
resembles bright yellow gorocanā and her attire has the
colour of a peacock’s tail. (81)



jātā mātari sāradyāṁ pitur eṣā viśokataḥ

patir bhairavanāmāsyāḥ sakhā govarddhanasya yaḥ (82)



Śrī Lalitā’s mother’s name is Sāradī and her father’s is
Viśoka. Her husband, whose name is Bhairava, is a friend
of Govardhana Gopa. (82)




2. Viśākhā




viśākhātra dvitīyā syād ekācāra-guṇa-vratā

priya-sakhyā janir yatra tatraiṣābhyuditā kṣaṇe (83)



The second of the variṣṭha sakhīs is Viśākhā. She is
like Śrī Rādhā in her conduct, good qualities and
determination [in serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa]. Viśākhā was born
at exactly the same moment as Śrī Rādhikā. (83)



                           28
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017


tārāvali-dukūleyaṁ vidyun-nibha-tanu-dyutiḥ

pituḥ pāvanato jātā mukharāyāḥ svasuḥ sutāt (84)



jaṭilāyāḥ svasuḥ putryāṁ dakṣiṇāyāntu mātari

bhaved vivāha-karttāsyā vāhiko nāma ballavaḥ (85)



Viśākhā’s attire resembles the sky embedded by stars –
it is blue with white embroideries of flowers and
leaves. Her complexion resembles lightning.

Her father, whose name is Pāvana, is Mukharā’s sister’s
son. Viśākhā’s mother is Dakṣiṇā, a daughter of Jaṭilā’s
sister. Viśākhā’s husband is Vāhika Gopa. (84–85)




3. Campakalatā




tṛtīyā campakalatā phulla-campaka-dīdhitiḥ

ekenāhnā kaniṣṭheyaṁ cāṣa-pakṣanibhāmbarā (86)



The third of the variṣṭha sakhīs is Campakalatā. Her
bodily lustre resembles that of a blooming campaka
flower. She is one day younger than Śrī Rādhikā. Her
clothes are like the colour of the blue jay bird (cāṣa).
(86)



pitur ārāmato jātā vāṭikāyāntu mātari

voḍhā caṇḍākṣa-nāmāsyā viśākhā sadṛśī guṇaiḥ (87)



Campakalatā’s father is Ārāma and her mother is Vāṭikā.
Her husband’s name is Caṇḍākṣa. She is almost like
Viśākhā by her qualities. (87)




4. Citrā (Sucitrā)




citrā caturthī kāśmīra-gaurī kāca-nibhāmbarā

                           29
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017


ṣaḍviṁśatyā kaniṣṭhāhnāṁ mādhavāmoda-medurā (88)



Of the variṣṭha sakhīs Citrā is the fourth one. Her
complexion is golden like saffron and her attire
resembles the colour of crystal. She is twenty-six days
younger than Śrī Rādhikā. She always rejoices in the
happiness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (88)



caturākhyā pitur jātā sūrya-mitra-pitṛvyajā

jananyāṁ carcikākhyāyāṁ patir asyās tu pīṭharaḥ (89)



The name of Citrā’s father is Catura, who is the
paternal uncle of Sūryamitra (Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja).
Citrā’s mother is named Carcikā and her husband is
Pīṭhara. (89)




5. Tuṅgavidyā




pañcamī tuṅgavidyā syāj jyāyasī pañcabhir dinaiḥ

candra-candana-bhūyiṣṭhā kuṅkuma-dyuti-śālinī (90)



Tuṅgavidyā is the fifth of the variṣṭha sakhīs. She is
five days older than Śrī Rādhikā. Her body emanates a
fragrance of sandalwood mixed with camphor (candra-
candana), and her complexion resembles kuṅkuma. (90)



pāṇḍu-maṇḍana-vastreyaṁ dakṣiṇa-prakharoditā

meghāyāṁ puṣkarāj jātā patir asyās tu bāliśaḥ (91)



Tuṅgavidyā’s clothes are light yellow. She is decorated
by the qualities of dakṣiṇā6 nāyikā and prakharā nāyikā.
Her mother’s name is Medhā, her father’s is Puṣkara and
her husband’s is Bāliśa. (91)




6. Indulekhā



                           30
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017



indulekhā bhavet ṣaṣṭhī haritālojjvala-dyutiḥ

dāḍimba-puṣpa-vasanā kaniṣṭhā vāsarais tribhiḥ (92)



Indulekhā is the sixth of the variṣṭha sakhīs. Her
complexion is bright yellow. Her attire is like the
colour of the [bright red] flowers of the pomegranate
tree. She is three days younger than Śrī Rādhikā. (92)



belā-sāgara-saṁjñābhyāṁ pitṛbhyāṁ janimīyuṣī

vāma-prakharatāṁ yātā patir asyās tu durvalaḥ (93)



Indulekhā’s mother is Belā and her father is Sāgara. The
qualities of a vāmā nāyikā and prakharā nāyikā decorate
Indulekhā. Her husband’s name is Durvala. (93)




7. Raṅgadevī




saptamī raṅgadevīyaṁ padma-kiñjalka-kānti-bhāk

javārāgi-dukūleyaṁ kaniṣṭhā saptabhir dinaiḥ (94)



prāyeṇa campakalatā-sadṛśī guṇato matā (95a)



The seventh of the variṣṭha sakhīs is Raṅgadevī. Her
complexion resembles the colour of lotus-pollen, and her
clothes have the colour of the somewhat reddish javā
flower. She is seven days younger than Śrī Rādhā and her
qualities resemble those of Campakalatā’s. (94–95a)



karuṇā-raṅgasārābhyāṁ pitṛbhyāṁ janimīyuṣī

asyā vakrekṣaṇo bharttā kanīyān bhairavasya yaḥ (95b)



Śrī Raṅgadevī’s father is Raṅgasāra and her mother is
Karuṇā. Her husband, whose name is Vakrekṣaṇa, is the
younger brother of Bhairava. (95b)




                           31
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017



8. Sudevī




sudevī raṅgadevyās tu yamajā mṛdur aṣṭamī

rūpādibhiḥ svasuḥ sāmyāt tad-bhrānti-bhara-kāriṇī

bhrātrā vakrekṣaṇasyeyaṁ pariṇītā kanīyasā (96)



Sudevī is the eight of the variṣṭha sakhīs. She is the
twin sister of Raṅgadevī and is of a gentle (mṛdu7)
nature. She resembles her sister by beauty, good
qualities, nature and so forth, and is therefore
sometimes mistaken to be Raṅgadevī. Sudevī is married to
the younger brother of Vakrekṣaṇa, the husband of
Raṅgadevī. (96)




b. The exalted sakhīs (varaḥ)




etad aṣṭaka-kalpābhir aṣṭābhiḥ kathito varaḥ

etā dvādaśa-varṣīyāś calad-bālyāḥ kalāvatī (97)



śubhāṅgadā hiraṇyāṅgī ratnalekhā śikhāvatī

kandarpa-mañjarī phullakalikānaṅga-mañjarī (98)



In addition to the aforementioned eight variṣṭha sakhīs
there are eight other exalted sakhīs, the vara sakhīs.
They are all twelve years old and have almost grown out
of their childhood. They are: Kalāvatī, Śubhāṅgadā,
Hiraṇyāṅgī, Ratnalekhā, Śikhāvatī, Kandarpa Mañjarī,
Phullakalikā and Anaṅga Mañjarī. (97–98)




1. Kalāvatī




mātulo yo ’rkā mitrasya gopo nāmnā kalāṅkuraḥ

kalāvatī sutā tasya sindhumatyām ajāyata (99)


                           32
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017



hari-candana-varṇeyaṁ kīra-dyuti-paṭāvṛtā

kapotaḥ patir etasya vāhikasyānujas tu yaḥ (100)



Out of these eight, Kalāvatī is the daughter of the gopa
Kalāṅkura, who is the maternal uncle of Arkamitra
(Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja). Her mother’s name is Sindhumatī.
Her complexion resembles that of white sandalwood (hari-
candana) and her attire is the colour of a parrot’s
(śuka) lustre. Her husband Kapota is Vāhika’s younger
brother [Vāhika is Viśākhā’s husband]. (99–100)




2. Śubhāṅgadā




śubhāṅgadā taḍid-varṇā viśākhāyāḥ kanīyasī

pīṭharasyānujeneyaṁ pariṇītā patatriṇā (101)



Śubhāṅgadā’s complexion is effulgent like lightning. She
is Viśākhā’s younger sister and is married to Patatri,
who is the younger brother of Pīṭhara [Citrā’s husband].
(101)




3. Hiraṇyāṅgī




hiraṇyāṅgī hiraṇyābhā hariṇī-garbha-sambhavā

sarva-saundarya-sandoha-mandirī-bhūta-vigrahā (102)



Hiraṇyāṅgī’s complexion is golden. She was born from the
womb of a doe. [This is described in the following
verses.] Her bodily charm is like an abode of all
beauty. (102)



yajvā yaśasvī dharmātmā gopo nāmnā mahāvasuḥ

sa mitraṁ ravimitrasya vicitra-guṇa-bhūṣitaḥ (103)




                           33
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017

Mahāvasu Gopa (Hiraṇyāṅgī’s father) is always absorbed
in performing sacrifices. He is celebrated, religiously
minded and decorated with various good qualities. He is
a friend of Ravimitra (Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja). (103)



abhilaṣyan sutaṁ vīraṁ kanyāñcātimanoramām

iṣṭaṁ bhāguriṇārebhe niyatātmā purodhasā (104)



Mahāvasu Gopa desired to have a brave son and a
beautiful daughter and therefore began a sacrifice with
the help of the self-controlled priest Bhāguri. (104)



tataḥ sudhāmayaḥ ko ’pi sucāruḥ caruraḥ utthitaḥ

nanditas taṁ sucandrāyai sadharmiṇyai sa dattavān (105)



A sacred nectarean eatable manifested from the
sacrifice. Mahāvasu became blissful and gave it to his
wife Sucandrā. (105)



tam aśnantyāṁ caruṁ tasyām alinde sambhramojjhitaḥ

suraṅgyākhyā vraja-carī kuraṅgī raṅgiṇī-prasūḥ (106)



āgatya tarasā tasyālokāt kiñcid abhakṣayat

paśupālī-hariṇy ubhe tato garbham avāpatuḥ (107)



When Sucandrā ate the sacrificial eatable, some of it
fell on the courtyard because of her haste. A doe named
Suraṅgī, the mother of Raṅgiṇī, was wandering around in
Vraja. She saw the eatable, and quickly took it and ate
it. Both the gopī Sucandrā and the doe Suraṅgī became
pregnant by eating the sacrificial eatable. (106–107)



sucandrā suṣuve putraṁ stoka-kṛṣṇaṁ bruvanti yam

asoṣṭa goṣṭha-madhye sā hiraṇyāṅgīṁ kuraṅgikā (108)



At the appropriate time Sucandrā gave birth to a son,
who became known by the name Stoka-kṛṣṇa, and the doe
Suraṅgī gave birth to a daughter, Hiraṇyāṅgī, in the
meadow. (108)



                           34
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017


yā sakhī priya-gāndharvā gāndharvāyāḥ priyā sadā

phullāparājitā-śreṇī-virāji-paṭa-maṇḍitā (109)



Gāndharvā Śrī Rādhā and Hiraṇyāṅgī are most dear
friends. Hiraṇyāṅgī wears clothes resembling blossoming
aparājita flowers. (109)



etāṁ dāratayodārāṁ dadau vṛddhāya go-duhe

jaradgavāya gargasya girāṁ gauravataḥ pitā (110)



The liberal father of Hiraṇyāṅgī gave her in marriage to
an old cowherd man, Jaradgava, out of respect for the
words of Garga Muni. (110)




4. Ratnalekhā




suto mātṛ-ṣvasuḥ sūryasāhvayasya payonidhiḥ

tasya putravataḥ patnī mitrā kanyābhilāṣiṇī (111)



śraddhayārādhayāñcakre bhāskaraṁ sutavaskarā

prasādena dyu-ratnasya ratnalekhām asūta sā (112)



The son of the maternal aunt of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja
(Sūryasāhvaya) is called Payonidhi. Even though his wife
Mitrā already had a son, she worshipped the Sun-god with
great faith with the desire to get a daughter. As the
result of the Sun-god’s mercy she got a daughter,
Ratnalekhā. (111–112)



manaḥśilā-rucir asau rolamba-rucirāmbarā

vṛṣabhānu-sutā-preṣṭhā bhānu-śuśrūṣaṇe ratā (113)



vyūḍhā bālye kaḍāreṇa mātā yasya kuṭhārikā

ghūrṇayantī dṛśau ghore mādhavaṁ prekṣya tarjjati (114)



                           35
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017


Ratnalekhā’s bodily lustre resembles a red mineral
called manaḥśilā, and the colour of her attire is that
of a bumblebee. She is very dear to Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Śrī Rādhā and worships the Sun-god with an intent mind.
She was married to the son of Kuṭhārikā, Kaḍāra, already
in her childhood. Whenever she sees Mādhava, she rolls
her eyes in a fearsome manner to scold Him. (113–114)




5. Śikhāvatī




dhanyadhanyād abhūt kanyā suśikhāyāṁ śikhāvatī

karṇikāra-dyutiḥ kundalatikāyāḥ kanīyasī (115)



jarat-tittira-kirmīra-paṭā mūrtteva mādhurī

udūḍhā garuḍeneyaṁ garjarākhyena go-duhā (116)



Śikhāvatī is the daughter of Dhanyadhanya and Suśikhā.
Her bodily complexion is like that of the [yellowish]
karṇikāra (svarṇa-campā) flower. She is Kundalatikā’s
younger sister and wears multi coloured clothes
resembling an old tītara (partridge) bird. She appears
to be just like the personification of sweetness. She is
married to a gopa named Garjara, who is also known by
the name Garuḍa. (115–116)




6. Kandarpa Mañjarī




kandarpa-mañjarī nāma jātā puṣpākarāt pituḥ

jananyāṁ kuruvindāyāṁ yasyāḥ pitrā hariṁ varam (117)



hṛdi kṛtya na kutrāpi vivāho ’nyatra kāryate

kiṅkirātojjvala-rucir vicitra-sicayāvṛtā (118)



Kandarpa Mañjarī’s father is Puṣpākara and her mother is
Kuruvindā. In his heart, Kandarpa Mañjarī’s father
considered Śrī Hari to be his actual son-in-law, so he
did not arrange her marriage with anyone else. Kandarpa

                           36
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

Mañjarī’s effulgent bodily complexion is like that of a
parrot (kiṅkirāta), and she wears colourful clothes
decorated with flower embroidery. (117–118)




7. Phullakalikā




śrīmallāt phullakalikā kamalinyām abhūt pituḥ

seyam indīvara-śyāmā śakra-cāpa-nibhāmbarā (119)



sahajenānvitā pīta-tilakenālika-sthale

viduro ’syāḥ patir dūrān mahiṣīr āhvayaty asau (120)



Phullakalikā’s father is called Śrī Malla and her mother
is Kamalinī. Her darkish (śyāmā) complexion is like that
of a blue lotus and she wears enchanting clothes
resembling the rainbow. Her shining forehead is
beautified by a natural yellow tilaka. Her husband’s
name is Vidura, who calls his buffaloes from afar. (119–
120)




8. Anaṅga Mañjarī




vasanta-ketakī-kāntir mañjulānaṅga-mañjarī

yathārthākṣara-nāmeyam-indīvara-nibhāmbarā (121)



durmado madavān asyāḥ patir yo devaraḥ svasuḥ

priyāsau lalitā-devyā viśākhāyā viśeṣataḥ (122)



Anaṅga Mañjarī, Śrī Rādhā’s younger sister, has an
enchanting complexion resembling a spring ketakī flower
and she wears clothes resembling a blue lotus. Even
Cupid (Anaṅga) is attracted by her beauty and sweetness;
thus her name Anaṅga Mañjarī is quite appropriate. Her
husband is the proud and arrogant Durmada, the younger
brother of Śrī Rādhā’s husband. Anaṅga Mañjarī is
extremely dear to Lalitā-devī and especially to Viśākhā.
(121–122)


                           37
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017




General activities of the contemporary sakhīs


(vayasyānāṁ sāmānya-karmāṇi likhyante)



veśaḥ priya-vayasyāyā guru-paty-ādi-vañcanam

hariṇā prema-kalahe tasyā evānuyāyitā (123)



These dear sakhīs are experts in preparing Śrī Rādhikā’s
dress, ornaments and so forth, and in cheating
honourable persons such as the husband, mother-in-law
and father-in-law. When Śrī Hari and Śrī Rādhā sometimes
have a loving quarrel, they take Śrī Rādhikā’s side.
(123)



abhisāre sahāyatvam annādi-pariveśanam

āsvādanaṁ saha-krīḍā rahasya-parigopanam (124)



They assist in taking Śrī Rādhā to meet Śrī Kṛṣṇa at the
appointed meeting place and serve Them many kinds of
eatables. They relish the pastimes of the Divine Couple
and keep secrets concealed. (124)



pavitra-citta-cāturyaṁ paricaryā yathocitam

utkarṣa-mlānikāritvaṁ svapakṣa-pratipakṣayoḥ (125)



With pure-hearted cleverness they serve the Youthful
Couple according to the needs of a particular time. In
all matters they promote the superiority of their own
party and the inferiority of the opposing party. (125)



tauryatrika-kalollāsairubhayoḥ paritoṣaṇam

avakāśovitācāra-sevā-prārthana-bhāṣaṇam (126)



They please the Divine Couple by their dance, songs and
playing of musical instruments. They know well how to
behave, beg for service as well as converse properly
according to circumstance. (126)



                           38
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


ityādi suṣṭhu bhūyiṣṭhaṁ jñeyam āsāṁ vicakṣaṇaiḥ

sarvā evākhilaṁ karma jānanti kurvate ’pi ca (127)



A discerning person will himself clearly understand the
charming and fascinating activities of these sakhīs, and
thus there is no need to say anything more. Still, it
will not be inappropriate to state that they basically
know everything and do whatever is required at a
particular moment. (127)



tatra kāścin niyuktāḥ syur aniyuktāś ca kāścana

niyuktāḥ suṣṭhu yā yatra likhyante tāḥ kramād imāḥ (128)



Those sakhīs who directly serve in the aforementioned
intimate ways are niyuktās and others, who from a
distance nourish these intimate services, are aniyuktās.
Now the niyuktās and their respective intimate services
will be thoroughly described, one by one. (128)




A Description of the Eight Prominent Sakhīs


(aṣṭa-sakhī-caritam)



(The eight prominent sakhīs are already portrayed in
this book. It is, nevertheless, essential to note here
that earlier the descriptions dealt with their looks,
family and so forth, but now the services performed by
them and by the sakhīs under their guidance will be
described.)




1. Lalitā-devī




tathāpi parama-preṣṭha-sakhyaḥ śreṣṭhatayoditāḥ

sarvatra lalitā-devī paramādhyakṣatāṁ gatā (129)



The parama-preṣṭha sakhīs are considered to be the most
prominent of all the niyuktā sakhīs. Śrī Lalitā-devī is
even the leader of all the parama-preṣṭha sakhīs. (129)

                           39
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




svīkṛtākhilabhāveyaṁ sandhi-vigrahiṇī matā

aparādhyati rādhāyai mādhave kvāpi daivataḥ (130)



Śrī Lalitā knows perfectly well all of Śrī Rādhā’s and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental emotions. She arranges both
Their meetings and loving quarrels. Because she is in
Śrī Rādhā’s party, she sometimes suddenly even offends
Mādhava. (130)



caṇḍimnā kuñcita-mukhī sakhī-dyutibhir-āvṛtā

vigrahe prauḍhi-vāde ca prativākyopapattiṣu (131)



When loving quarrels as well as arrogant words, retorts
and arguments take place, Śrī Lalitā sometimes becomes
filled with great anger, and sometimes, when her
sentiments become one with Śrī Rādhā’s, she lowers her
face [accepting Rādhā’s mood]. At that time, she becomes
covered by her friend Śrī Rādhā’s effulgent complexion,
which is like molten gold, although her own complexion
resembles gorocanā. (131)



pratibhām upalabdhābhir dhatte vigraham āgrahāt

āyāti sandhi-samaye taṭastheva sthitā svayam (132)



bhagavaty ādibhir dvārair yuktā sandhiṁ karoty asau
(133a)



Sometimes at the time of loving quarrels, nava-
navonmeṣa-śālinī8 Śrī Lalitā zealously incites Śrī
Rādhā’s jealous anger (māna) by giving Her the right
intelligence for that occasion. Sometimes, together with
Bhagavatī Paurṇamāsī and others, she herself arranges
[Śrī Rādhā’s] meetings with Kṛṣṇa, but when the time of
meeting comes, she becomes indifferent. (132–133a)



pauṣpāṇāṁ maṇḍanaṁ chatraṁ śayanothāna-veśmanām (133b)



nirmitāv indrajālādeḥ prahelyāñcātikovidā (134a)



Śrī Lalitā is expert in making ornaments, parasols and

                           40
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

beds out of flowers as well as constructing secluded
places suitable for intimate conversations. She is also
skilful in magic and making riddles. (133b–134a)



tāmbūle ’dhikṛtā yāḥ syur asyās tu dāsikāś ca yāḥ (134b)



madanonmādinī vāṭyāṁ yāḥ kinnara-kiśorikāḥ

prasūna-vallī-tāmbūla-vallī-pūga-drumeṣu ca (135)



sakhyaś ca vana-devyaś ca varā mānyopajīvinām

yāḥ kanyakāḥ syuḥ sarvāsu tāsv evādhyakṣatāṁ gatā (136)



Śrī Lalitā is the supervisor of the maidservants who
perform tāmbula-sevā; of the kinnara-kiśorīs9 engaged in
the Madanonmādinī Garden; of the maidservants who
protect flower vines, betel vines as well as betel nut
trees; of the vana-devīs (forest goddesses); and even of
those maidens who are esteemed in venerable groups.
(134b–136)



ratnalekhādayo ’ṣṭau yāḥ priya-sakhyo ’nukīrttitāḥ

sarvatra lalitā-devyāstā jñeyāḥ pratyantarāḥ (137)



The previously described eight dear sakhīs of the vara
group, like Ratnalekhā, are always completely submissive
to Śrī Lalitā-devī. (137)



ratnaprabhā-ratikale tatrāpy aṣṭāsu viśrute

guṇa-saundarya-vaidagdhī-mādhurībhir upāgate (138)



Of the eight sakhīs that serve under the guidance of Śrī
Lalitā, Ratnaprabhā and Ratikalā are well-known and are
endowed with good qualities, beauty, dexterity, charm
and so forth. (138)




Flower decorations made by Śrī Lalitā in her service


(puṣpeṣu maṇḍanam)


                           41
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017



kirīṭaṁ bālapāśyā ca karṇapūro lalāṭikā

graiveyakāṅgade kāñcī-kaṭake maṇi-bandhanī (139)

haṁsakaḥ kañculītyādi vividhaṁ puṣpa-maṇḍanam

maṇi-svarṇādi-klṛptasya maṇḍanasyātra yādṛśaḥ

ākāraś ca prakāraś ca kausumasya ca tādṛśaḥ (140)



There are numerous varieties of ornaments made of
flowers: crowns (kirīṭas), hair bands (bāla-pāśyās), ear
ornaments (karṇapūras), forehead decorations
(lalāṭikās), necklaces (graiveyakas), upper arm
bracelets (aṅgadas), waistbelts (kāñcīs), ankle bells
(kaṭakas), bangles (maṇi-bandhanīs), feet decorations
(haṁsakas), bodices (kañculīs) and many others. In their
forms, varieties and so forth, the ornaments made of
flowers are no less than the ornaments made of jewels,
gold and other precious metals. (139–140)




Crown (kirīṭam)




raṅgiṇī-hema-yūthībhir navamālī-sumālibhiḥ

dhṛti-māṇikya-gomeda-muktendu-maṇi-kāntibhiḥ

vinyastābhir yathā śobhamābhiḥ suṣṭhu vinirmitam (141)



Crowns are made by very expertly joining flowers such as
raṅginī [blue colour], svarṇa-yūthī [golden], navamālikā
[white] and sumālikā whose colours resemble rubies;
gomeda10; pearls; and moon-stones. The crowns are made
so beautifully that they appear to shine as the
aforementioned jewels. (141)



kṛta-sapta-śikhaṁ hema-ketakī-korakacchadaiḥ

citrakair dhātubhiś citraiś citta-hāri harer idam (142)



kirīṭaṁ puṣpapārākhyaṁ ratnapārād api priyam

gāndharvātaḥ kṛtiṁ yasya lalitā samaśikṣata (143)



tat tu pañca-śikhaṁ puṣpaiḥ pañca-varṇair vinirmitam

                           42
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017


korakair api gāndharvābhūṣaṇaṁ mukuṭaṁ bhavet (144)



These specific crowns have seven crests made of buds of
the golden ketakī flowers as well as of colourful
substances such as red ochre (gairika). The kirīṭa is a
decoration for the head and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is extremely fond
of them. What more is there to say? Since this
decoration is the best of all flower decorations, it is
also known as Puṣpapāra11. It is even more valued than
the best of jewels. Śrī Lalitā Sakhī learned to expertly
make them from Gāndharvā Śrīmatī Rādhā. Śrī Lalitā-devī
also makes five-crested crowns for Śrīmatī Rādhā out of
flowers and flower buds of five colours. (142–144)




Hair band (bāla-pāśyā)




keśa-bandhana-ḍorī ca vicitraiḥ korakādibhiḥ

āvali gumphitā gāḍhaṁ bāla-pāśyeti kīrttitā (145)



Hair-tying bands (bāla-pāśyā) increase the beauty of the
hair and tie the hair. They are made by stringing
together like a garland various colourful flower buds.
(145)




Ear ornaments (karṇapūraḥ)




tāṭaṅkaṁ kuṇḍalaṁ puṣpī karṇikā karṇa-veṣṭanam

iti pañca-vidhaḥ proktaḥ karṇapūro ’tra śilpibhiḥ (146)



Artisans divide ear ornaments (karṇapūra) into five
types: tāṭaṅka, kuṇḍala, puṣpī, karṇikā and karṇa-
veṣṭana. (146)



a. tāṭaṅkaṁ



tāla-patrākṛtir bhūṣā taṭaṅkaḥ sa dvidhoditaḥ


                             43
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017

citra-puṣpa-kṛtaḥ svarṇa-ketakī-dala-jas tathā (147)



Tāṭaṅkas, which look like palm leaves, are of two kinds.
They are either made of many-coloured flowers or of the
petals of golden ketakī flowers. (147)



b. kuṇḍalam



mayūra-makarāmbhoja-śaśāṅkārddhādi-sannibham

svānurūpaiḥ kṛtaṁ puṣpaiḥ kuṇḍalaṁ bahudhoditam (148)



Kuṇḍalas are flower ornaments which resemble peacocks,
sea creatures (makaras12), lotuses, half-moons and so
forth. They are of many kinds. (148)



c. puṣpī



catur-varṇaiḥ kramāt puṣpaiś cakravālatayā kṛtaḥ

madhye paryāpta-guñjo ’yaṁ stavakaiḥ puṣpikocyate (149)



Puṣpī ornaments are made by stringing together four
types of differently-coloured flowers in sequence to
form a round shape. In the middle of these ear ornaments
also hangs, in fitting size, a cluster of guñja berries.
(149)



d. karṇikā



rājīva-karṇikākārā pīta-puṣpair vinirmitā

bhṛṅgikā-dāḍimī-puṣpa-prota-madhyātra karṇikā (150)



Karṇikā is made by stringing yellow flowers all around a
lotus pericarp. Bhṛṅgī flowers and pomegranate flowers
are stitched in the middle. (150)



e. karṇa-veṣṭanam




                           44
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

yat tu karṇaṁ veṣṭayati vṛttaṁ tat karṇa-veṣṭanaṁ (151)



The round ear-rings which overspread the whole ear are
called karṇa-veṣṭana. (151)




Decoration for the forehead (lalāṭikā)




dvi-varṇa-puṣpa-racitā dvi-pārśvā śoṇa-madhyamā

alakāvali-mūla-sthā puṣpapāṭī lalāṭikā (152)



Lalāṭikā is made of flowers of two different colours. It
has two parts. One is of red colour. It is fastened at
the top of the head and follows the parting of the hair
to the forehead. Its flowers are arranged in an artistic
way. (152).




Necklace (graiveyakam)




varttulāś ca catur-grīvā kausumyo yatra koṣṭhikāḥ

tad-varṇa-puṣpakair madhyaṁ jñeyaṁ graiveyakas tu tat
(153)



An ornament made of only one kind of flower and
beautified in the middle by vines and leaves is called
graiveyaka. The ornament hangs from the neck in a round
fashion like four garlands. (153)




Armlet worn on the upper arm above the elbow (aṅgadam)




klṛptaṁ puṣpa-latātantu protair maṇḍalatāṁ gataiḥ

tri-varṇopary-upary-upta-tri-puṣpānanam aṅgadam (154)




                           45
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

An ornament made by stringing three different coloured
flowers together, one by one, into the form of a round
creeper is called aṅgada. (154)




Waist belt (kāñcī)




kṣudra-jhallari-saṁvītā citra-gumpha-karambitā

pañca-varnair-viracitā kusumaiḥ kāñcir ucyate (155)



An astonishing decoration made of five different kinds
of colourful flowers and adorned with small wavy
garlands, is called kāñcī (waist belt). (155)




Anklets (kaṭakāḥ)




kṛtta-vṛntair latātantau protair ekaikaśas tu yaḥ

kalpita vividhaiḥ puṣpaiḥ kaṭakā bahudhoditāḥ (156)



These anklets are made by stringing together many kinds
of flower buds and stems of fruits or leaves, using a
fine stalk as the thread. Many different kinds of
anklets can be made. (156)




Bracelets (maṇi-bandhanī)




catur-varṇa-prasūnāṅka-guccha-lambi-tridhārikā

kara-ḍorī kusumajā kīrttitā maṇi-bandhanī (157)



Maṇi-bandhanī is made with flowers of four different
colours. Three flower-strings hang down from it. Maṇi-
bandhanī is tied around the wrist. (157)




                            46
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017



Ornaments for the feet (haṁsakaḥ)




pṛthulā ca catuḥ-śṛṅgī puṣpa-śṛṅgāṭa-lambikā

pārśve saumanasī gumphā sphuranti haṁsako bhavet (158)



The haṁsaka covers the entire top part and side part of
the foot. It is beautifully constructed, and small
strings made of the buds of the main flowers [of the
ornament] swing from it. (158)




Blouse (kañculī)




ṣaḍ-varṇa-puṣpa-vinyāsa-sauṣṭhavenāticitritā

kastūrī-vāsitā kaṇṭha-lambi-gucchātra kañculī (159)



A highly enticing flower decoration skilfully made of
six different coloured flowers is called a kañculī. It
is scented with fragrance of musk, and it is fastened
around the neck with flower strings. (159)




Umbrella (chatram)




śuklaiḥ ṣūkṣma-śalākāli-paryuptaiḥ kusumaiḥ kṛtam

svarṇa-yūthī-cita-cchatra-daṇḍaṁ chatram udīryate (160)



Umbrellas are made by attaching strings of white flowers
to thin wooden rods and decorating a wooden handle with
golden jūhī flowers. (160)




Bed (śayanam)



                           47
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017



campakāśoka-paryāpta mallī-gumphita-geṇḍukā

navamālī-kṛtā tūlī vistīrṇā śayanaṁ bhavet (161)



A pillow is made by joining campaka and aśoka flowers
and a huge quantity of mallikā [camelī] flowers. A wide
mat-tress is made of strings of navamallikā flowers
[tender camelī flowers]. (161)




Awning (ullocaḥ)




sūcī-vāpa-sadṛk citra-puṣpa-vinyāsa-nirmitaḥ

khaṇḍitaiḥ ketakī-patraiḥ parṇavān malli-lambibhiḥ (162)



The ulloca [a type of candrātapa] is prepared by making
a lattice-like design with strings of variegated fresh
mallikā flowers and attaching them to petals of ketakī
flowers. The ulloca is further beautified by decoration
with additional varieties of colourful flowers. (162)




Candrātapaḥ




pārśve ca suphalan muktā-sindhuvāra-kalāpakam

madhya-lambi-navāmbhojaś candrātapa itīryate (163)



When the walls of an awning are made of radiant strings
of pearl-like sindhuvāra flowers and garlands made of
freshly blooming lotus flowers hang down from its
middle, it is called a candrātapa. (163)




Hut (veśma)




śarakāṇḍaiḥ kṛta-stambhā citra-puṣpādi-saṁvṛtaiḥ

                           48
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


puṣpaiḥ kṛta-catuḥ-khaṇḍi vividhair veśma bhaṇyate (164)



Many kinds of huts can be constructed by using various
flowers to decorate four pillars made of reeds, placing
the pillars in the four corners, and decorating all the
sides with strings of various kinds of flowers. (164)




2. Viśākhā




viśākhā navatā bhadrā priya-narma-sakhī matā

akhaṇḍā ’kṣīṇa-mantreyaṁ govinde narma-karmaṭhā (165)



parijñātārtha-hṛdayā buddhi-dūtyaika-kovidā

sāmni kāndarpikopāye dāne bhede ca peśalā (166)



Śrī Viśākhā is in her fresh blooming youth and is the
personification of the highest auspiciousness. She is a
priya-narma-sakhī13 and is proficient in all areas. She
gives faultless and useful advice and is highly expert
in speaking joking words in Śrī Govinda’s presence. She
is especially competent in understanding the sentiments
of Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa and skilfully and
intelligently carrying out the duties of a messenger.
She knows well all the schemes regarding the art of
love, i.e., how to bring the hero to the heroine. She
also knows all the means to nourish this meeting: sāma
(negotiations to get to mutual agreement), dāna
(alluring the hero), bheda (sowing discord) and so
forth. (165–166)



patra-bhaṅgādi-racane mālyāpīḍādi-gumphane

vicitra-sarvato-bhadra-maṇḍalādi-vinirmitau (167)



nana-vicitra-sūtreṇa sucira-prakriyāsu ca

sūryārādhana-sāmagrī-sādhane ca vicakṣaṇā (168)



vicitra-deśīya-gīte sudakṣā dhrupadādiṣu (169a)




                           49
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

Śrī Viśākhā shows great expertise in using substances
like red ochre to paint beautiful and enchanting
pictures of creepers, flowers and so forth on various
parts of the body. She is expert in stringing garlands
and flower wreaths for head decorations. She is skilful
in sarvato-bhadra-maṇḍala, which means painting
auspicious diagrams (maṇḍalas) in multi-colours on doors
and other places. Sarvato-bhadra-maṇḍala also refers to
a style of writing poems mentioned in the acrostics
(citra-kāvya) section of the kāvya-śāstra (scriptures
delineating poetry). Employing this style, Viśākhā
intelligently composes poetry containing double meanings
by using variegated aphorisms (sūtras); thus, she
continually displays her extraordinary deftness. She is
talented in using words to bewilder people and in other
similar activities. She is expert in preparing the
various ingredients for the worship of the Sun-god, in
singing songs in different languages, in singing with
styles like dhrupada and in writing poetry. (167–169a)



raṅgāvali-prabhṛtayo yāḥ sakhyaś citra-kovidāḥ (169b)



mādhavī-mālatī-candrarekhādyā ālayas tathā

yāś ca vastrādhikāriṇyaḥ sakhyo dāsyaś ca sammatāḥ (170)



yā vanya-devy-adhikṛtāḥ sarvānanda-camatkṛtau

yāś ca prasūna-vṛkṣeṣu sakhyo ’dhikṛtim āśritāḥ

mālikādyāś ca yās tāsu sarvāsv adhyakṣatāṁ gatā (171)



Śrī Viśākhā-devī is the supervisor of the eight sakhīs
(be-ginning with Raṅgāvali) who can expertly converse
about any subject matter; of Mādhavī, Mālatī,
Candrarekhā and other sakhīs; and of the sakhīs and
maidservants entrusted to take care of [Śrī Rādhā’s]
clothes. She is also the supervisor of the forest
goddesses (vana-devīs), who bestow joy and amuse
everyone with their activities, and of the sakhīs,
beginning with Mālikā, entrusted to take care of trees
that have flowers. (169b–171)




3. Campakalatā




abhijñā campakalatā dūtya-tantra-praghaṭṭake

nigūḍhārambha-sambhārā vāco-yukti-viśāradā (172)


                           50
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017



upāyena paṭimnā ca pratipakṣāpakarṣakṛt (173a)



Campakalatā is expert in supervising the messengers. She
always conceals the intentions behind her actions and is
most clever in logical speech. She reveals the
inferiority of the opposing party and demonstrates the
superiority of her own party by accomplishing tasks and
by deftness. (172–173a)



phala-prasūna-kandānāṁ sandhāna-prakriyā-vidhau (173b)



hasta-cāturya-mātreṇa nana-mṛṇmaya-nirmitau

ṣaḍ-rasānāṁ parīkṣāyāṁ sūda-śāstre ca kovidā (174)



sitotpala-kṛti-paṭur miṣṭa-hasteti viśrutā (175a)



Campakalatā is especially skilled in collecting fruits,
flowers and edible roots as well as in how to use them.
She is highly skilled in making objects out of clay just
by cleverly using her hands. She is learned in testing
the six kinds of tastes – sweet, sour, bitter, pungent,
salty and astringent – as well as in the scriptures that
completely delineate the methods of cooking (sūda-
śāstra). She is known as Miṣṭa-hastā (‘sweet hands’)
because she is skilled in using sugar candy to make
sweets of different shapes. (173b–175a)



paura-gavyasca pacane yāḥ sakhyo dāsikāś ca yāḥ (175b)



kuraṅgākṣi-prabhṛtayaḥ sakhyo yā aṣṭa-saṅkhyakāḥ

sakaleṣu druma-latā-gulmeṣv-adhikṛtāś ca yāḥ

sakhī-prabhṛtayaḥ sarvāḥ samprāptādhyakṣatām asau (176)



Campakalatā is the supervisor of the sakhīs and maid-
servants who make different preparations from milk; of
the eight sakhīs beginning from Kuraṅgākṣī; and of the
gopīs who take care of the trees, creepers, bushes and
other vegetation of Vraja. (175b–176)




                           51
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

4. Citrā



citrā vicitra-cāturyā sarvatrāsau praveśinī

yāne ’bhisaraṇābhikhye ṣaḍ-guṇasya tṛtīyake (177)



lekhe ’pīṅgita-vijñāne nānā-deśīya-bhāṣite

dṛṣṭi-mātrāt paricaye madhu-kṣīrādi-vastunaḥ (178)



kāca-bhājana-nirmāṇe tan-madhyormi-vinirmitau

jyotiḥ-śāstre paśu-vrāta-vidyāyāṁ kārmaṇe ’pi ca (179)



vṛkṣopacāra-śāstre ca viśeṣāt pāṭavaṁ gatā

rasānāṁ pānakādīnāṁ suṣṭhu-nirmāṇa-karmaṭhā (180)



Citrā is skilled in all activities due to her remarkable
dexterity. There are six expedients to arrange and
nourish a rendezvous (abhisaraṇa). Out of these six, she
is extremely skilled in the third one, yāna. She is also
most talented in writing; expressing her heart’s
feelings with hints and signs; speaking in languages of
many different countries; as well as recognizing the
qualities of dishes made of honey, milk and so forth by
glancing just once upon them. She can skilfully make
crystal vessels. She can masterfully play the different
notes – sā, re, gā, mā and so forth – on these crystal
vessels filled with water to varying levels with the
vibrations she arouses in the vessels. She knows the
scripture delineating astrology and is knowledgeable in
how to protect and take care of animals and trees. She
is especially skilled in preparing sherbets and other
drinks. (177–180)



aṣṭau rasālikādyāḥ syuḥ yāḥ sakhyaḥ parikīrttitāḥ

yāś ca peyādhikāriṇyaḥ sakhyo dāsyaś ca sammatāḥ (181)



divyauṣadhīnāṁ prāyeṇa hīnānāṁ kusumādibhiḥ

tathā vana-sthalīnāñ ca virudhāñcādhikāritām

labdhāḥ sakhyādayo yāś ca tatraiṣādhyakṣatāṁ gatā (182)



Śrī Citra Sakhī is the supervisor of the eight famous
sakhīs beginning with Rasālikā; of the sakhīs and

                           52
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017

maidservants who prepare drinkables; and of the sakhīs
who always gather divine medicinal herbs and such, of
those who protect trees without flowers, and of those
who take care of the forest area and various creepers
and vines. (181–182)




5. Tuṅgavidyā



tuṅgavidyā tu vidyānām aṣṭādaśatayaṁśitā

sandhāvatīva kuśalā kṛṣṇa-viśrambha-śālinī (183)



Tuṅgavidyā is well versed in the eighteen types of
knowledge15. She is exceptionally skilled in arranging
the meeting of the youthful Divine Couple. Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
full faith in her. (183)



rasa-śāstre naye nāṭye nāṭakākhyayikādiṣu

sarva-gāndharva-vidyāyām ācāryakam upāgatā (184)



viśeṣān mārga-gītādau vīṇā-yantrādi-paṇḍitā (185a)



Tuṅgavidyā, who holds the post of ācārya in the art of
music (gāndharva-vidyā), is most learned in the
scriptures delineating rasa (rasa-śāstra), moral conduct
(nīti-śāstra) and the art of dancing (nāṭya-śāstra). She
is expert in dramaturgy as well as in telling
appropriate stories or instructive fabricated stories.
She is especially skilled in singing according to rāgas
and rāginīs and in playing on the vīṇā and other musical
instruments. (184–185a)



mañjumedhādayaḥ sakhyo yā aṣṭau parikīrttitāḥ (185b)



yā dūtyaḥ kuśalāḥ sandhau ṣaḍ-guṇasyādime guṇe

saṅgīta-raṅga-śālāyāṁ yāḥ sakhyo ’dhikṛtiṁ gatāḥ (186)



mārdaṅgikyaḥ kalāvatyo narttakī-pramukhāś ca yāḥ

vṛndāvanāntara-stheṣu jaleṣv adhikṛtāś ca yāḥ

sakhyaś ca jala-devyaś ca tatraiṣādhyakṣatāṁ gatāḥ (187)

                           53
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017




Tuṅgavidyā-devī is in charge of the eight famous sakhīs
headed by Mañjumedhā; of the expert messengers
accomplished in sandhi, the first of the six expedients
[mentioned in connection with Verse 177, Bṛhad-bhāga];
and of the gopīs who know how to sing, play musical
instruments, dance and perform plays. She is also the
leader of the skilful gopīs who know how to play
mṛdaṅga, who know the sixty-four arts, and who know how
to dance, as well as of the sakhīs who collect water
from the various rivers and springs of Vṛndāvana. (185b–
187)




6. Indulekhā



indulekhā bhaven mallā nāga-tantrokta-mantrake

vijñānasya ca mantre ’pi sāmudraka-viśeṣavit (188)



Indulekhā knows well all of the incantations for
controlling snakes mentioned in nāga-tantra. Moreover,
she is also most skilled in using those incantations.
She is especially conversant with sāmudrika-śāstra [the
science of reading the auspicious and inauspicious
features on a person’s body]. (188)



hārādi-gumphane citre danta-rañjana-karmaṇi

sarva-ratna-parīkṣāyāṁ paṭṭa-ḍorādi-gumphane (189)



lekhe saubhāgya-mantrasya kauśalaṁ yad-bhuje dhṛtam

anyonya-rāgam utpādya saubhāgyaṁ janayed varam (190)



Indulekhā makes many different kinds of necklaces and so
forth, and she decorates teeth. She has in her
fingertips the skills to test all kinds of jewels, to
string silk ribbons, and to make magical amulets or
diagrams containing mantras that bring good fortune. She
evokes Śrī Rādhā’s and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s loving attachment for
each other and thus expands supremely good fortune.
(189–190)



tuṅgabhadrādayas tv asyāḥ sakhyaḥ syuḥ pratyanantarāḥ

yās tu sādhāraṇā dūtyo dvayoḥ pālindhikādayaḥ (191)

                           54
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




tāsāṁ rahasya-vārttānām iyaṁ bhājanatāṁ gatā

alaṅkāreṣu veśeṣu koṣa-rakṣā-vidhau ca yāḥ (192)



sakhyo dāsye ’py adhikṛtā yāś ca vṛndāvanāntare

sthaleṣv adhikṛtā yāś ca tāsv adhyakṣatayā sthitā (193)



Indulekhā is the leader of the sakhīs headed by
Tuṅgabhadrā and of some of Śrī Rādhā’s and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
general messengers like Pālindhikā, who carry messages
back and forth. She is the leader of the gopīs who know
about secret conversations; of the sakhīs appointed in
making ornaments, making dresses and protecting the
treasury; and of the sakhīs entrusted to take care of
all the enchanting places of Vṛndāvana. (191–193)




7. Raṅgadevī



raṅgadevī sadottuṅgā hāveṅgita-taraṅgiṇī

kṛṣṇāgre ’pi priya-sakhī-narma-kautūhalotsukā (194)



Raṅgadevī, who is always maddened by pride, is the
personification of the waves of bodily gestures (hāva,
bhāva and iṅgita). She cleverly speaks in an indirect
way. What is more, she is eager to joke and act
playfully with Śrī Rādhā in the very presence of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. (194)



ṣāḍ-guṇyasya guṇe turye yukti-vaiśiṣṭyam āśritā

kṛṣṇasyākarṣaṇaṁ mantraṁ tapasā pūrvamīyūṣī (195)



Raṅgadevī is expert in āsana, the fourth of the six
expedients [mentioned in Verse 177, Bṛhad-bhāga], and
her logic is excellent. As a result of her austerities,
she received a mantra to attract Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (195)



vicitreṣ vaṅgarāgeṣu gandha-yukta-vidhau ca yāḥ

kalakaṇṭhī-prabhṛtayaḥ sakhyo ’ṣṭau yāḥ prakīrttitāḥ
(196)

                           55
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




sakhyo dāsye ’py adhikṛtā yāś ca dhūpana-karmaṇi

śiśire ’ṅgāra-dhāri-ṇyasta-parttāv api vījane (197)



āraṇyakeṣu paśuṣu keśariṣu mṛgādiṣu

sakhī-prabhṛtayo yāś ca tatraiṣādhyakṣatāṁ gatā (198)



Raṅgadevī is the supervisor of the eight sakhīs, headed
by Kalakaṇṭhī, who are responsible for such services as
painting flower decorations with fragrant substances
[such as candana] on the body. She is also the leader of
the sakhīs and maidservants who offer incense, of those
who burn the fire in the cold season and fan with cāmara
during the warm season, and of those sakhīs and
maidservants who watch over the animals in the jungle,
such as lions and deer. (196–198)




8. Sudevī



sudevī keśa-saṁskāraṁ priya-sakhyās tathāñjanam

aṅga-samvāhanaṁ cāsyāḥ kurvatī pārśva-gā sadā (199)



Sudevī Sakhī always remains close to her dear sakhī Śrī
Rādhā. She adorns Śrī Rādhā’s hair, applies black
ointment (añjana) around Her eyes, massages Her body and
serves Śrī Rādhā in other such ways. (199)



śārikā-śuka-śikṣāyāṁ naukā-kukkuṭa-khelane

bhūri-śākuna-śāstre ca pakṣyādi-ruta-bodhane (200)



candrodayārdra-puṣpādi vanhividyāvidhāv api

udvarttana-viśeṣe ca suṣṭhu kauśalam āgatā (201)



Sudevī Sakhī is very expert in teaching the śuka and
sārī (male and female parrot) to sing the Divine
Couple’s glories. She is also extemely skillful in boat
pastimes, such as competiting with persons who are
experts in taking boats to deep water or with persons
who can ride their boats with great speed. She expertly

                           56
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017

arranges competitions between cocks, she knows well the
method of reading auspicious and inauspicious omens
described in scriptures delineating astrology (śakuna-
śāstra), and she understands very well the languages of
animals and birds. She is expert in identifying the
flowers blooming in moonlight and knows well how to keep
fire ablaze under all circumstances (agni-vidyā). She is
also skilled in making fireworks, lights and other such
things, as well as in massaging with oil. (200–201)



gaṇḍūṣa-kṣepa-pātreṣu geṇḍuke śayane ’pi ca

yāḥ kāverīmukhāḥ sakhyas tā asyāḥ pratyanantarāḥ (202)



Sudevī teaches Kāverīmukhā and the other sakhīs under
her guidance how to use leaves to prepare spittoons used
for spitting water after cleansing the mouth. She also
instructs them in making pillows and cushions out of
flowers. (202)



āsanasyādhikāre yāḥ sakhyo dāsyaś ca sammatāḥ

pratipakṣādibhāvānāṁ yā jñānāya caranti ca (203)



dhūrtāḥ pranidhi-rupeṇa nānā-veśa-dharāḥ striyaḥ

yāś ca pakṣiṣu vanyeṣu chekeṣv adhikṛtās tathā

sakhyaś ca vana-devyaś ca tatraiṣādhyakṣatāṁ gatā (204)



Sudevī is the supervisor of the sakhīs, maidservants and
forest goddesses who are engaged in preparing thrones
for Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa to sit on; who roam here and
there to find out the thoughts of the gopīs in the
opposing party; and who, according to need, behave
cunningly and disguise themselves in various ways. The
gopīs protecting the forest birds such as parrots and
cuckoo birds, and those who know the style of poetry
called chekānuprāsa [a type of alliteration involving
single repetitions of several consonants], also act
under Sudevī’s supervision. (203–204)




Various Characters of [different] Sakhīs

(sakhīnāṁ vibhinna-bhāvāḥ)



atha śilpa-niyogāder vivṛtiḥ kriyate ’dhunā (205a)


                             57
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017



Now an account of the sakhīs’ manifold qualifications in
various arts is given. (205a)



vigrahe grahilāḥ sakhyaḥ piṇḍakelir vitaṇḍikā (205b)



puṇḍarīkā sitākhaṇḍī cārucaṇḍī sudantikā

akuṇṭhitā kalākaṇṭhī rāmacī mecikādayaḥ (206)



Piṇḍakeli, Vitaṇḍikā, Puṇḍarīkā, Sitākhaṇḍī, Cārucaṇḍī,
Sudantikā, Akuṇṭhitā, Kalākaṇṭhī, Rāmacī, Mecikā and
other sakhīs are insistent upon arranging loving
quarrels (vigraha). (205b–206)




Piṇḍakeli



tāmrāṁśukāpi kāntabhā piṇḍake niścitāgamam

śliṣṭair vacana śauṭir yair vilajjayati mādhavam (207)



Of these sakhīs, Piṇḍakā, whose bodily complexion is
enchanting, wears clothes of coppery red colour. With a
carefree heart she embarrasses Mādhava by speaking
ambiguously. (207)




Vitaṇḍikā



haridrābhā hari-ccelā hari-mitrāṇi yā girā

vitaṇḍikā vitaṇḍābhir nigrahaiḥ sthānam ānayet (208)



Vitaṇḍikā’s bodily complexion is yellowish like the
colour of turmeric, and she also wears clothes of that
same colour. In Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s presence she talks like His
friend. She uses words that are vitaṇḍā, words that
support her own party, which stop the sakhīs of the
opposing party and instead bring Śrī Rādhā and Her
sakhīs to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (208)



                           58
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




Puṇḍarīkā



puṇḍarīkā paṭaṁ dhṛtvā puṇḍarīkājinacchaviḥ

puṇḍarīkāṅgabhā tarjjet puṇḍarīkākṣam āgasi (209)



Puṇḍarīkā Sakhī’s clothes and complexion are bright like
a white lotus (puṇḍarīka). When the lotus-eyed
(puṇḍarīkākṣa) Śrī Hari has committed some offence, she
grabs hold of the border of His garment and heavily
scolds Him. (209)




Sitākhaṇḍī



sitākhaṇḍī-tviṣā gaurī-nāmnā sitāmbarā sadā

vakti kāṭhinya-mādhuryāt sitākhaṇḍīti yā hareḥ (210)



Gaurī Sakhī’s complexion is like the colour of a peahen.
She wears white clothes all the time. She uses words
that appear harsh but are actually sweet, and that is
why Śrī Kṛṣṇa calls her Sitākhaṇḍī.

The word sitā means ‘sugar candy’, which by nature is
hard and sharp. The meaning is that even though sugar
candy feels hard within the mouth, when it goes down in
the throat and in the stomach, it cools the body and
reveals its sweetness. In the same way, Gaurī Sakhī
externally seems to speak harsh words, but within her
heart she is sweet and gentle. This is why she is known
as Sitākhaṇḍī. (210)




Cārucaṇḍī



cārucaṇḍī bhaginy asyāḥ bhṛṅga-śyāmā taḍit-paṭā

cāru-caṇḍatayā vācāṁ cārucaṇḍīti bhaṇyate (211)



Sitākhaṇḍī’s sister is Cārucaṇḍī. Her complexion
resembles a blackish (śyāma) bee and her attire is
golden like lightning. Externally she seems very

                           59
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017

pleasing to one’s mind, but because she actually uses
unbearable words, she is known as Cārucaṇḍī [cāru =
lovely, caṇḍī = an enraged woman]. (211)




Sudantikā



sudantikā śirīṣābhā kuruṇṭaka-nibhāmbarā

karoty ujjvalam apy eṣā pāṭa-vairasamujjavalam (212)



Sudantikā Sakhī’s complexion resembles the colour of the
[yellowish white] śirīṣa flower, and her dress is
yellowish like the kuraṇṭaka flower. By her sharp words
she magnifies the sweetness of ujjvala-rasa – the
radiant amorous mellow. (212)




Akuṇṭhitā



akuṇṭhitābja-kāṇḍābhā viṣa-kāṇḍa-sitāmbarā

āgaḥ kṛṣṇasya yā vaṣṭi sva-samāja-samṛddhaye (213)



Akuṇṭhitā Sakhī’s bodily lustre resembles the colour of
the stalk of a lotus flower, and her dress is white like
the lotus flower’s cobweb-like roots. She reveals Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s offences to increase the pleasure of the gopīs
in her own group. (213)




Kalākaṇṭhī



kalākaṇṭhī kulī-puṣpa-varṇa-kṣīrodakāmbarā

vaṣṭi gāndharvikā-mānaṁ yā hareś cāṭu-kāṅkṣayā (214)



Kalākaṇṭhī Sakhī’s bodily complexion resembles that of
the kulī flower. Her dress is white like the colour of
the mixture of milk and water. She reveals Śrī Rādhā’s
jealous anger to Śrī Hari and advices Him to beg for Her
forgiveness. (214)


                           60
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017




Rāmacī



rāmacī lalitā-dhātryāḥ putrī gaura-śukāṁśukā

yayā harir durvacobhir uddhave parihasyate (215)



Rāmacī is the daughter of Śrī Lalitā’s wet nurse. Her
bodily lustre is golden and she wears clothes resembling
the colour of a male parrot. She feels unsurpassed joy
by insulting Śrī Kṛṣṇa with joking harsh words. (215)




Mecikā



piṇḍa-puṣpa-ruciḥ pāṇḍu-dukūlā mecikā sadā

kṛṣṇasya kurute vyaktam āgas tasyeva yā girā (216)



Mecikā’s complexion resembles the [reddish] piṇḍa flower
and she wears yellow garments all the time. She unfolds
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s faults from His spoken words. (216)




Messengers (dūtyaḥ)



vṛndā vṛndārikā melā muralyādyās tu dūtikāḥ

kuñjādisaṁskṛtābhijñā vṛkṣāyurveda-kovidāḥ (217)



vaśī-kṛta-sthāna-varā dvayoḥ snehena nirbharāḥ

gaurāṅgyaś citra-vasanā vṛndā tāsu varīyasī (218)



Vṛndā, Vṛndārikā, Melā, Muralī and other gopīs are
called messengers (dūtīs). They are all remarkably
skilled in decorating beautiful forest bowers and other
such places to arrange Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
meetings. They are also extremely deft in identifying
medicinal roots and herbs and in Ayurveda.


                           61
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

The messengers have authority over all the topmost
places. They are filled with affection for Śrī Rādhā and
Śrī Govinda. Their bodily complexions are golden and
they wear multi-coloured garments. Vṛndā is the foremost
amongst them. (217–218)




Messengers who arrange loving quarrels between Śrī Rādhā
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa

(atha vigraha-dūtyaḥ)



sāgrahā vigrahādau syur dūtyaḥ skhalita-yauvanāḥ

peṭarī vāruḍī cārī koṭarā kāliṭippanī (219)



maruṇḍā moraṭā cūḍā cūṇḍarī goṇḍikādayaḥ

piṇḍakeli-purogānā etāḥ syur vanagāḥ sadā (220)



Peṭarī, Vāruḍī, Cārī, Koṭarā, Kāliṭippanī, Maruṇḍā,
Moraṭā, Cūḍā, Cūṇḍarī, Goṇḍikā, Piṇḍakeli and other
messengers zealously arrange loving quarrels (vigraha)
and the like. They all have crossed their youth and are
always roaming in the forest under the guidance of their
prominent sakhīs. (219–220)



Peṭarī



viṣa-kāṇḍopamajaṭā peṭarī vṛddha-gurjarī (221a)



Vāruḍī



vāruḍī gāruḍī veṇī-sadṛk cikura-veṇikā (221b)



Peṭarī is an old woman of the gurjara16 community. Her
matted hair is white like the stringy roots of a lotus
flower. Vāruḍī’s bodily lustre resembles the marakata
jewel (emerald). Her braided hair looks like the current
of a river. (221)



Cārī


                           62
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017



kucārī-bhaginī cārī tapaḥ-kātyāyanī smṛtā (222a)



Koṭarā



ābhīrī koṭarā jātyā tila-taṇḍula-keśabhāk (222b)



Cārī is Kucārī’s sister. She is also called by the name
Tapaḥ-kātyāyanī. Koṭarā is an ābhīra17 by caste, and the
colour of her hair resembles that of sesame seeds mixed
with rice, i.e., some of her hair is white and some
black. (222)



Kāliṭippanī



palitā pāṇḍu-cikurā rajakī kāliṭippanī (223a)



Maruṇḍā



maruṇḍā muṇḍita-śirāḥ pāṇḍura-bhrū-kulālikā (223b)



By her social status Kāliṭippanī is a washerwoman. Her
hair is white and yellow because of old age. Maruṇḍā
does not have any hair and both of her eyebrows are
yellowish. (223)



Moraṭā



javanā moraṭā kāśa-kusumopama-mūrddhajā (224a)



Cūḍā



cūḍāvali-digdhamukhā lalāṭe palitojjvalā (224b)



Moraṭā is capable of running around here and there with
great speed. Her hair is as lustrous as the kāśa grass
flower. Cūḍāvali’s [the dūtī named Cūḍā] face is covered

                           63
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

by wrinkles caused by old age. Her forehead is effulgent
due to her white hair. (224)



Cūṇḍarī



cūṇḍarī puṇḍarīkākṣa-tatārddha-jaratī dvijā (225a)



Goṇḍikā



goṇḍikeyaṁ jarad-goṇḍī muṇḍa-pāṇḍu-śikhojjvalā (225b)



Cūṇḍarī is a middle-aged woman belonging to the brāhmaṇa
class. The lotus-eyed Śrī Kṛṣṇa sings of her glories.
Goṇḍikā belongs to a lower class and is somewhat older.
Her head is luminous with yellowish hair. (225)




Messengers who arrange meetings (sandhi-dūtyaḥ)



cāturya-sandhi-kuśalāḥ śivadā saumya-darśanā

suprasādā sadā-śāntā śāntidā kāntidādayaḥ (226)



sarvathā lalitā-devī jīvitād-vastunaḥ tu imāḥ

mādhavasya parīvāre tasyāptā iti manyate (227)



Śivadā, Saumya-darśanā, Suprasādā, Sadā-śāntā, Śāntidā,
Kāntidā and others are messengers (dūtīs) who arrange
meetings. They are very skilful in cleverly arranging
meetings, and because they are Śrī Lalitā-devī’s life
and soul, they are counted as particularly trustworthy
members in the family of Śrī Mādhava. (226–227)



gāndharvāyāṁ prapannāyāṁ kalahāntaritāṁ daśāṁ

laliteṅgitam āsādya harer gaṇatayā sthitā (228)



When Śrī Rādhā is in the state of kalahāntaritā, the
messengers arranging meetings approach Śrī Kṛṣṇa
following the indication of Śrī Lalitā. (228)

                           64
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




svīyeti dhiyā tena nisṛṣṭāḥ pṛthu-yatnataḥ

kṛti-tuṣṭā nijābhīṣṭaṁ sandhim eva sumantritāḥ (229)



They intelligently and diligently accomplish their
respon-sibilities as messengers. They make Śrī Kṛṣṇa
happy by their pleasing advice and thus arrange the
youthful Divine Couple’s meeting – the fulfilment of
their own desire. (229)



vidhāya suṣṭhu govindād vindantyaḥ pāritoṣikam

yānti-vṛndāvaneśvaryāḥ prasāda-bhara-pātratām (230)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa rewards them for arranging these beautiful
meet-ings, and they also become worthy recipients of
Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrī Rādhā’s complete mercy. (230)



rāghavī śivadā saumya-darśanā soma-vaṁśajā

pauravī suprasādeyaṁ sadā-śāntā tapasvinī (231)



śāntidā-kāntide ceti bhūmi-deva-kulodbhave

prasādād eva devarṣeretā vāsaṁ vraje yayuḥ (232)



Of the aforementioned messengers, Śivadā was born in the
Raghu dynasty and Saumya-darśanā in the Candra dynasty.
Suprasādā belongs to the Puru dynasty and Sadā-śāntā is
a daughter of an ascetic. Śāntidā and Kāntidā are born
in brāhmaṇa families. By the mercy of Devaṛṣi Śrī
Nārada, they all received residence in Śrī Vṛndāvana.
(231–232)




The Sakhīs Belonging to the Second Division, the Maṇḍala

(dvitīya-maṇḍalam)



dvitīyo ’smān manāṅ nyūna-premā syān maṇḍalāt puraḥ

samāsama-prematayā dvivargo ’yaṁ nigadyate (233)



                           65
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017


The prema of the sakhīs belonging to the second
division, the maṇḍala [mentioned in Verse 75, Bṛhad-
bhāga], is somewhat inferior to the love of the sakhīs
of the first division (samāja). The sakhīs in the
maṇḍala are divided into two groups according to their
prema: sama (equal) and asama (unequal). (233)



vargaḥ priya-sakhīnāṁ yaḥ samapremety asau mataḥ

sa dvidhā syān nitya-siddho bhakti-siddhas tathā bhavet
(234)



The priya-sakhīs are in the category of sama-prema
(equal love). They are further divided into two groups:
the eternally perfected (nitya-siddha) and those who
have attained perfection by the practise of devotion
(bhakti-siddha). (234)



nitya-priyāṇāṁ tatrāpi daśa-koṭim ito gaṇaḥ

samavāyo niyutānāṁ lakṣair aṣṭābhir eva ca (235)



The eternally perfected priya-sakhīs are divided into a
hundred million gaṇas and eighteen hundred thousand
samavāyas. (235)



yad aṣṭakaṁ para-preṣṭha-sakhīr aṣṭānugacchati

bahavaḥ sañcayās tatra sahasraiḥ ko ’pi pañcaṣaiḥ (236)



The previously described eight parama-preṣṭha sakhīs
each have eight sakhīs serving under their guidance.
They also are divided into many kinds of groups
(sañcaya). In some of these groups there are five
thousand gopīs and in some of them there are six
thousand gopīs. (236)



bhavet kaścic catuḥ-pañcaḥ kaścit tri-caturair api

kutaścid iha sādharmyāt prāyaḥ syāt sañcayaikatā (237)



Some of the groups include four or five thousand gopīs,
and some include three or four thousand gopīs. In some
cases these sañcayas share an almost equal nature. (237)




                           66
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017

samājaḥ sañcayo ’nekair eṣāpy eka-samājatā

bhavet sneha-viśeṣeṇa kaścit ṣoḍaśa-bhāgiha (238)



Although there are many samājas in the category of a
sañcaya, these samājas are of one nature. The samājas
are in some cases divided into sixteen divisions
according to the affec-tion (sneha) their members
experience. (238)



viṁśatyāpi tathā pañcaviṁśatā triṁśatā tathā

catvāriṁśad yūthaḥ kaścid evaṁ pañcaśatā bhavet (239)



Some samājas are divided into twenty, some into twenty-
five, some into thirty, some into forty and some into
fifty divisions. (239)



ṣaṣṭyā kaścit samājaḥ syāc catuḥṣaṣṭyādibhis tathā

catuḥṣaṣtyādibhis tatra samājo ’yaṁ prapañcyate (240)



Some samājas are divided into sixty divisions and some
into sixty-four divisions. Now the samāja which is
divided into sixty-four divisions is described in
detail. (240)



dvābhyāṁ dvi-trais tri-catur-ādibhiś cālī-janair bhavet

sarva-bhāveṇa sādharmye samājo ’pi samanvayaḥ (241)



In some of these sixty-four divisions there are two
sakhīs, in some of them there are two or three, and in
some of them there are four sakhīs. These samājas are
also called samanvayas, because they are so similar.
(241)




Lalitā’s sakhīs

(lalitāyāḥ sakhyaḥ)



ratnaprabhā ratikalā subhadrā ratikā tathā

sumukhī ca dhaniṣṭhā ca kalahaṁsī kalāpinī (242)

                           67
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




Ratnaprabhā, Ratikalā, Subhadrā, Ratikā, Sumukhī,
Dhaniṣṭhā, Kalahaṁsī and Kalāpinī are the eight
prominent sakhīs serving under the guidance of Śrī
Lalitā Sakhī. (242)




Viśākhā’s sakhīs

(viśākhāyāḥ sakhyaḥ)



mādhavī mālatī candrarekhikā kuñjarī tathā

hariṇī capalā-nāmnī surabhiś ca śubhānanā (243)



Mādhavī, Mālatī, Candrarekhikā, Kuñjarī, Hariṇī, Capalā,
Surabhi and Śubhānanā are the eight prominent sakhīs
serving under the guidance of Śrī Viśākhā Sakhī. (243)




Campakalatā’s sakhīs

(campakalatāyāḥ sakhyaḥ)



kuraṅgākṣī sucaritā maṇḍalī maṇikuṇḍalā

candrikā candralatikā paṅkajākṣī sumandirā (244)



Kuraṅgākṣī, Sucaritā, Maṇḍalī, Maṇikuṇḍalā, Candrikā,
Candralatikā, Paṅkajākṣī and Sumandirā are the eight
prominent sakhīs serving under Śrī Campakalatā Sakhī’s
guidance. (244)




Citrā’s sakhīs

(citrāyāḥ sakhyaḥ)



rasālikā tilakinī śaurasenī sugandhikā

rāmiṇī kāmanagarī nāgarī nāgaveṇikā (245)



                           68
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


Rasālikā, Tilakinī, Śaurasenī, Sugandhikā, Rāmiṇī,
Kāmanagarī, Nāgarī and Nāgaveṇikā are the eight
prominent sakhīs serving under Śrī Citrā Sakhī’s
guidance. (245)




Tuṅgavidyā’s sakhīs

(tuṅgavidyāyāḥ sakhyaḥ)



mañjumedhā sumadhurā sumadhyā madhurekṣaṇā

tanumadhyā madhuspandā guṇacūḍā varāṅgadā (246)



Mañjumedhā, Sumadhurā, Sumadhyā, Madhurekṣaṇā,
Tanumadhyā, Madhuspandā, Guṇacūḍā and Varāṅgadā are the
eight prominent sakhīs serving under the guidance of Śrī
Tuṅgavidyā Sakhī. (246)




Indulekhā’s sakhīs

(indulekhāyāḥ sakhyaḥ)



tuṅgabhadrā rasottuṅgā raṅgavāṭī susaṅgatā

citrarekhā vicitrāṅgī modanī madanālasā (247)



Tuṅgabhadrā, Rasottuṅgā, Raṅgavāṭī, Susaṅgatā,
Citrarekhā, Vicitrāṅgī, Modanī and Madanālasā are the
eight prominent sakhīs serving under Śrī Indulekhā
Sakhī’s guidance. (247)




Raṅgadevī’s sakhīs

(raṅgadevyāḥ sakhyaḥ)



kalakaṇṭhī śaśikalā kamalā madhurendirā

kandarpa-sundarī kāmalatikā prema-mañjarī (248)




                           69
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

Kalakaṇṭhī, Śaśikalā, Kamalā, Madhurā, Indirā, Kandarpa-
sundarī, Kāmalatikā and Prema Mañjarī are the eight
prominent sakhīs serving under Śrī Raṅgadevī Sakhī’s
guidance. (248)




Sudevī’s sakhīs

(sudevyāḥ sakhyaḥ)



kāverī carukavarā sukeśī mañjukeśikā

hārahīrā mahāhīrā hārakaṇṭhī manoharā (249)



Kāverī, Cārukavarā, Sukeśī, Mañjukeśikā, Hārahīrā,
Mahāhīrā, Hārakaṇṭhī and Manoharā are the eight
prominent sakhīs serving under Śrī Sudevī Sakhī’s
guidance. (249)




Names of Śrī Rādhā’s Eight Sakhīs According to the
Sammohana Tantra

(śrī-rādhāyāḥ aṣṭa-sakhyaḥ [sammohanatantre])



līlāvatī sādhikā ca candrikā mādhavī tathā

lalitā vijayā gaurī tathā nandā prakīrtitā (250)



Līlāvatī, Sādhikā, Candrikā, Mādhavī, Lalitā, Vijayā,
Gaurī and Nandā. (250)




Names of the eight sakhīs mentioned in another part of
the same Sammohana Tantra


(anyāś cāṣṭau)



kalāvatī rasavatī śrīmatī ca sudhāmukhī

viśākhā kaumudī mādhavī śāradā cāṣṭamī smṛtā (251)




                           70
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017

Kalāvatī, Rasavatī, Śrīmatī, Sudhāmukhī, Viśākhā,
Kaumudī, Mādhavī and Śāradā. (251)




Ratnabhavāḥ



etā nopekṣitā uktā nityānāmavadhāraṇe

ity etat parivārāṇāṁ śrī-vṛndāvana-nāthayoḥ

asaṅkhyānāṁ gaṇayituṁ diṅ-mātram iha darśitam (252)



The group of sakhīs (named Ratnabhavā) mentioned in the
Sammohana Tantra has not been neglected in this literary
work; they are all counted among the eternal sakhīs.

The family of the King and Queen of Vṛndāvana, Śrī Rādhā
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is unlimited, so counting can only give
the reader an idea of their actual number. (252)



talpānna-pāna-tāmbūla-hindolā-sthāsakādayaḥ

anye ’pi ye viśeṣāḥ syuḥ svayam ūhyās tu te budhaiḥ
(253)



There are innumerable gopīs who prepare beds, cooked
food preparations, rasālā (curd mixed with sugar and
spices) and tāmbula (betel nut) and who swing the swing,
apply tilakas and perform many other similar services,
but whose names have not been mentioned in this literary
work. Pure devotees expert in relishing rasa will
themselves find the names of various other associates
[of Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa] from many other scriptures.
For them these associates are worthy of meditating upon.
(253)



luptatam āsīt kṛpayā jyotir ghaṭayeva bhānumaty āsau

rūpa-viṣayāpi dṛṣṭiḥ sarasān śabdān avaikṣiṣṭa (254)



When darkness pervades, the faculty of seeing forms and
other objects gets ineffective, but when the moon or the
sun arises, one’s ability to see things is resumed. From
one point of view, the darkness-like influence of time
has similarly caused the names, forms and other aspects
of Śrī Rādhā’s and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s associates to become
unmanifest, but these features, which are like a grand
festival for the eyes, have now manifested again in the
form of words, caused by the effulgent light of the

                           71
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

Supreme Lord’s mercy. (254)



śāke dṛgaśva-śakre, nabhasi nabhomaṇi-dine ṣaṣṭyām

vrajapati-sadmani rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā-dīpi
(255)



The word śāke refers to the Śakābda Era. According to
the rule ‘aṅkasya vāmā gatiḥ – the course of the numbers
are to the left’, the phrase dṛgaśva-śakre makes 1472.19
The word nabhasa (rainy season) indicates the month of
Śravaṇa, the word nabhomaṇi indicates ‘sun’, the word
dina indicates ‘day’ and the word ṣaṣṭyām indicates
‘sixth’. In this way, one can conclude that Śrī Rādhā-
kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā was completed in year 1472 of the
Śakābda Era, in the sixth day of the month of Śravaṇa,
on Sunday, in Śrī Nanda Mahārāja’s beautiful home
Nandagrāma (vrajapati-sadmani). (255)



śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikāyāṁ

bṛhad-bhāgaḥ sampūrṇaḥ



Thus ends the bhāvānuvada of

Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-ganoddeśa-dīpikā’s Bṛhad-bhāga.




Laghu-bhāga




Description of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Beautiful Form, Qualities,
Sweetness and so forth

(śrī kṛṣṇasya rūpādikam)



sudhā-lāvaṇya-mādhurya-dalitāñjana-cikkaṇaḥ

indra-nīla-maṇiḥ kiṁvā nīlotpala-ruci-prabhā (1)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is as attractive as nectar and full of
sweetness. He is as soft as añjana applied around one’s
eyes. His bodily complexion is lustrous like the
indranīla jewel (sapphire) or blackish blue (śyāmala)
like the blue lotus. (1)


                              72
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017



kiṁvā navya-tamālo ’pi megha-puñja-manoharaḥ

prabhā mārakatī kāntiḥ sudhā-lāvaṇya-vāridhiḥ (2)



Or Śrī Kṛṣṇa is beautiful like a newly-grown tamāla tree
[whose bark is dark blue] and as entrancing as a group
of monsoon clouds. His bodily complexion is even more
radiant than the lustre of a marakata jewel (emerald).
His beauty is like an ocean of nectarean sweetness. (2)



pīta-vastra-paridhāno vana-mālā-vibhūṣitaḥ

nānā-ratna-bhūṣitāṅgo nānā-keli-rasākaraḥ (3)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa dresses in yellow garments and is decorated
with a garland of forest flowers and with various
jewels. He is an ocean of many kinds of ecstatic
pastimes. (3)



dīrgha-kuñcita-keśo ’pi bahu-gandha-sugandhitaḥ

nānā-puṣpa-mālayā ca cūḍā-dīptir manoharā (4)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s hair is long, curly and scented with various
fragrances. The beauty of His topknot, decorated with
many kinds of flower garlands, captivates one’s mind.
(4)



śrīmal-lalāṭa-pāṭīras-tilakālaka-śobhitaḥ

nīlonnata-bhrū-vilāsa-kāminī citta-mohanaḥ (5)



A sandalwood tilaka and locks of hair beautify Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s forehead. The playful dance of His raised,
bluish eyebrows captivates the hearts of attractive
women. (5)



ghūrṇamānaṁ sunayanaṁ rakta-nīlotpala-prabham

khagendra-cañcu-lāvaṇya-sunāsāgraja-sundaraḥ (6)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful eyes are restless and radiant like
a red and blue lotus. The tip of His charming nose is
greatly handsome, like the beak of Garuḍa, the lord of

                           73
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

birds. (6)



manohāri karṇa-yugmaṁ maṇi-kuṇḍala-śobhitam

nānā-maṇi-kuṇḍalāḍhya-gaṇḍa-sthala-virājitaḥ (7)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s attractive ears are decorated with jewel-
studded earrings. The radiance of His cheeks are
enhanced with the lustre of these various kinds of
jewels. (7)



mukha-padmaṁ sulāvaṇyaṁ koṭi-candra-prabhākaram

nānā-hāsya-sumadhuraś-cibuko dīptimān bhavet (8)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face is highly enchanting and
effulgent like millions upon millions of moons. His
attractive chin is brightly illuminated by many kinds of
laughter and merriment. (8)



kaṇṭha-deśaḥ sulāvaṇyo muktā-mālā-vibhūṣitaḥ

tri-bhaṅgo lalita-snigdha-grīvas trailokya-mohanaḥ (9)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful and charming neck is decorated
with pearl necklaces, and its graceful bending posture
enchants everyone in the three worlds. (9)



vakṣaḥ-sthalañca lāvaṇyair amaṇī-ramaṇotsukam

maṇi-kaustubha-vidyud-bhā-muktā-hāra-vibhūṣitam (10)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s charming chest, decorated with the Kaustubha
jewel and a splendorous pearl necklace resembling
lightning, displays His desire to sport with young
ladies. (10)



ājānulambita-bhujau keyūra-valayānvitau

raktotpala-hasta-padmau nānā-cihna-suśobhitau (11)



gadā-śaṅkha-yava-cchatra-candrārdhāṅkuśa-śobhitau

dhvaja-padma-yūpa-hala-ghaṭa-mīna virājitau (12)

                           74
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s arms, which extend to His knees
(ājānulambita), are decorated by armlets and bracelets.
His lotus hands, which look like red lotuses, are
beautified with various marks such as club, conch shell,
barley corn, umbrella, half-moon, goad, flag, lotus
flower, victory column, plough, pitcher and fish. (11–
12)



udarañca sumadhuraṁ lāvaṇya-keli-sundaram

pṛṣṭha-pārśva-sudhā-ramyaṁ ramaṇī-keli-lālasam (13)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful and attractive belly is the
playground of all loveliness. His graceful back and His
sides are endowed with the desire to have dalliances
with beautiful young women. (13)



kaṭi-bimba-sudhāmbhojaṁ kandarpa-mohanotsukam

rāma-rambhe ivorū dvau nārī-mohana-kārakau (14)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s round hips resemble a divine lotus flower
and are eager to enchant Cupid. His ample thighs, which
look like the trunks of banana trees, steal the minds of
women. (14)



jānū dvau ca sulāvaṇyau madhurau paramojjvalau

pāda-padmau sumadhurau ratna-nūpura-bhūṣitau (15)



javā-puṣpa-sama-rucī nānā-cihna-suśobhitau

cakrārddha-candrāṣṭa-koṇa-trikoṇa-yava-śobhitau (16)



ambara-cchatra-kalasa-śaṅkha-goṣpada-svastikau

aṅkuśāmbhoja-dhanuṣā jāmbavena ca śobhitau (17)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s knees are full of loveliness, sweetness and
radiance. His remarkably charming lotus feet are
decorated by jewelled ankle bells. His lotus feet are as
effulgent as a [pinkish] javā flower (China Rose) and
marked by various signs such as disc, half-moon,
octagon, triangle, barley corn, sky, umbrella, pitcher,
conch shell, cow’s hoof, swastika, goad, lotus flower,

                           75
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017

bow and jāmuna fruit. (15–17)



āṅgulyo ’ruṇa-bhāḥ samyaṅ nakha-candra-samanvitāḥ

śrī-yutau caraṇāmbhojau nānā-prema-sukhārṇavau (18)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s toes are as reddish as dawn and His toenails
look like full moons. His beautiful lotus feet are like
an ocean of the various joys of prema. (18)



eteṣāṁ kṛṣṇa-rūpāṇāṁ tulanā na hi vidyate

kiñcid uddīpanārthāya diṅ-mātram iha darśitam (19)



Although the above-mentioned features of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
sweet beauty cannot be compared to anything within this
material world, an idea has been given here to help
stimulate the devotees’ bhakti. (19)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Male Friends (vayasyāḥ)

atha śrī-kṛṣṇa-candrasya sakhi-vṛndañca kathyate

agragāmī vayasyānāṁ pralambārātir agrajaḥ (20)



Now Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s friends are described. Śrī Baladeva is
the foremost of all the sakhās. He is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s elder
brother and the killer of the well-known demon Pralamba.
(20)

Groups of Sakhās (vayasya-bhedāḥ)

suhṛt-sakhi-priya-sakhāḥ priya-narma-sakhas tathā

vayasyāḥ krṣṇa-candrasya sphuṭam atra catur-vidhāḥ (21)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s friends are divided into four groups: (1)
suhṛt, (2) sakhā, (3) priya-sakhā and (4) priya-narma-
sakhā. (21)




The suhṛt-sakhās



subhadraḥ kuṇḍalo daṇḍī maṇḍalo ’mī pitṛvyajāḥ

śunando nandirānandī ity ādyā yātaraḥ smṛtāḥ (22)


                           76
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s paternal cousins Subhadra, Kuṇḍala, Daṇḍī
and Maṇḍala as well as Sunanda, Nandī, Ānandī and other
suhṛt-sakhās accompany Him when He goes to the forest.
(22)



śubhado maṇḍalībhadra-bhadravarddhana-gobhaṭāḥ

yakṣendra-bhaṭa-bhadrāṅga-vīrabhadra-mahāguṇāḥ (23)



kulavīro mahābhīmo divyaśaktiḥ suraprabhaḥ

raṇasthirādayo jyeṣṭha-kalpāḥ saṁrakṣaṇāya ye (24)



pitṛbhyām abhito bhīta-cittābhyāṁ duṣṭa-kaṁsataḥ

prāṇa-koṭy-adhika-preṣṭha-putrābhyāṁ viniyojitāḥ (25)



Śubhada, Maṇḍalībhadra, Bhadravarddhana, Gobhaṭa,
Yakṣendra, Bhaṭa, Bhadrāṅga, Vīrabhadra, Mahāguṇa,
Kulavīra, Mahābhīma, Divyaśakti, Suraprabha, Raṇasthira
and other suhṛt-sakhās are older than Śrī Kṛṣṇa and are
engaged in protecting Him.

Because Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā were terrified of the
wicked Kaṁsa, they appointed the aforementioned suhṛt-
sakhās, beginning with Śubhada, to protect their sons
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Balarāma, who are more dear to them
than millions of their own lives. (23–25)



atrādhyakṣo ’mbikā-sūnur vijayākṣas tapasyayā

yaḥ kilāmbikayā lebhe dhātryopāsya sadāmbikām (26)



Vijayākṣa, the son of Ambikā, is the leader of all the
suhṛt-sakhās. Ambikā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s wet nurse, received
her jewel-like son as a result of her constant worship
of Ambikā-devī (Pārvatī). (26)




Subhadra



sucikkaṇo nīla-varṇaḥ subhadro dīptimān bhavet

pīta-vastra-paridhāno nānābharaṇa-śobhitaḥ (27)


                           77
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017



Subhadra is effulgent due to his highly beautiful bodily
lustre and bluish complexion. He wears yellow garments
and is ornamented with many kinds of decorations. (27)



upanandaḥ pitā tasya tulā mātā pativratā

paramojjvalakaiśoraḥ patnī kundalatā bhavet (28)



Subhadra’s father is Upananda and his highly chaste
mother is Tulā. Subhadra is in his illustrious prime
youth. His wife’s name is Kundalatā. (28)




The sakhās



viśāla-vṛṣabhaujasvi-devaprastha-varūthapāḥ

mandāra-kusumāpīḍa-maṇibandha-karandhamāḥ (29)



mandaraś candanaḥ kundaḥ kalinda-kulikādayaḥ

kaniṣṭha-kalpāḥ sevāyāṁ sakhāyo vipulāgrahāḥ (30)



Viśāla, Vṛṣabha, Ojasvī, Devaprastha, Varūthapa,
Mandāra, Kusumāpīḍa, Maṇibandha, Karandhama, Mandara,
Candana, Kunda, Kalinda, Kulika and other sakhās are
younger than Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They are very enthusiastic in
serving Him. (29–30)




The priya-sakhās



śrīdāmā dāmā sudāmā vasudāmā tathaiva ca

kiṅkiṇi-bhadrasenāṁśu-stoka-kṛṣṇa vilāsinaḥ (31)



puṇḍarīka-viṭaṅkākṣa-kalaviṅka-priyaṅkarāḥ

śrīdāmādyāḥ samās tatra śrīdāmā pīṭha-mardakaḥ (32)




                           78
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

Śrīdāmā, Dāmā, Sudāmā, Vasudāmā, Kiṅkiṇī, Bhadrasena,
Aṁśumāna, Stoka-kṛṣṇa, Vilāsi, Puṇḍarīka, Viṭaṅkakṣa,
Kalaviṅka and Priyaṅkara are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s priya-sakhās.
These sakhās are of the same age as Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Out of
them, Śrīdāma is a pīṭha-marda20. (31–32)



samasta-mitrasenānāṁ bhadrasenaś camūpatiḥ

stoka-kṛṣṇo yathārthākyaḥ kṛṣṇasya pratyanantaraḥ (33)



Among all of these priya-sakhās, Bhadrasena is the
commander of the army consisting of [Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s]
friends. Stoka-kṛṣṇa has a suitable name, for he is like
a small (stoka) Kṛṣṇa, always following under the
guidance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (33)



ramayanti priya-sakhāḥ kelibhir vividhair amī

niyuddha-daṇḍa-yuddhādi-kautukair api keśavam (34)



The priya-sakhās greatly please Śrī Kṛṣṇa through
various types of playful pastimes and by different kinds
of sports, scuffles, brawls, wrestling and stick fights.
(34)



ete priya-sakhāḥ śāntāḥ kṛṣṇa-prāṇa-samā matāḥ (35)



All the priya-sakhās are peaceful by nature, and they
are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s life and soul. (35)




Śrīdāmā



śrīdāmā śyāmala-rucir aṅga-kāntir manoharā

pīta-vastra-paridhāno ratnamālā-vibhūṣitaḥ (36)



vayaḥ ṣoḍaśa-varṣañca kiśoraḥ paramojjvalaḥ

śrī-kṛṣṇasya priyatamo bahu-keli-rasākaraḥ (37)



Śrīdāmā has an attractive blackish blue (śyāma) bodily
complexion. He wears yellow clothes and is decorated

                           79
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

with jewelled necklaces. He is in his illustrious youth
of sixteen years. He is very dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is an
embodiment of innumerable varieties of blissful
pastimes. (36–37)



vṛṣabhānuḥ pitā tasya mātā ca kīrttidā satī

rādhānaṅga-mañjarī ca kaniṣṭhā bhaginī bhavet (38)



Śrīdāmā’s father is Śrī Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja and his
mother, who is extremely chaste, is Kīrttidā-devī. Śrī
Rādhā and Anaṅga Mañjarī are his two younger sisters.
(38)




Sudāmā



īṣad-gauraḥ sudāmā ca deha-kāntir manoharā

nīla-vastra-paridhāno ratnābharaṇa-bhūṣitaḥ (39)



Sudāmā has a supremely attractive bodily lustre, which
is slightly fair. He wears blue garments and is
decorated with jewelled ornaments. (39)



pitā ca maṭuko nāma rocanā jananī bhavet

sukiśora-vayo-veśaḥ nānā-keli-rasotkaraḥ (40)



Sudāmā’s father is Maṭuka and his mother is Rocanā. He
is beautified by his handsome youth and attire, and he
is a mine of various blissful sports. (40)




The priya-narma-sakhās



subalārjuna-gandharva-vasantojjvala-kokilāḥ

sanandana-vidagdhādyāḥ priya-narma-sakhā matāḥ (41)



Subala, Arjuna, Gandharva, Vasanta, Ujjvala, Kokila,
Sanandana, Vidagdha and other sakhās are famous as

                           80
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

priya-narma-sakhās. (41)



tad-rahasyantu nāsty eva yad-amīṣāṁ na gocaraḥ

madhumaṅgala-puṣpāṅka-hāsaṅkādyā vidūṣakāḥ (42)



śrīmān sanandanas tatra sauhṛdānanda-sundaraḥ

mūrttimān eva rasarāḍ ujjvalaś ca mahojjvalaḥ

vilāsi-śekharo yasya vilāsena vaśī-kṛtaḥ (43)



There are no confidential topics whatsoever about which
these priya-narma-sakhās do not know.

Of the priya-narma-sakhās, Madhumaṅgala, Puṣpāṅka,
Hāsaṅka and others are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s vidūṣakas21. Śrīmān
Sanandana is drowned in the happiness of his
affectionate friendship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The priya-narma-
sakhā called Ujjvala is as greatly effulgent (ujjvala)
as Rasarāja (the king of transcendental mellows)
personified. Even Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the crown jewel of
all revellers of pastimes (vilāsa), becomes enchanted by
his pastimes. (42–43)




Subala



subalasya gaura-kāntir nīla-vastra-manoharaḥ

nānā-ratna-bhūṣitāṅgo nānā-puṣpa-vibhūṣitaḥ (44)



sārddha-dvādaśa-varṣīyaḥ kaiśora-vayasojjvalaḥ

sakhi-bhāvaṁ samāśritya nānā-sevā-pariplutaḥ (45)



dvayor milana-naipuṇyo madhuro bhāva-bhāvitaḥ

nānā-guṇa-sukhopetaḥ kṛṣṇa-priyatamo bhavet (46)



Subala is fair-complexioned. He is supremely enchanting
with his blue attire and his body decorated with various
jewels and flowers. He is in the blooming youth of
twelve-and-a-half years. He is immersed in serving Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in various ways as His friend. He is most expert
in arranging meetings between Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
He is absorbed in madhura-bhāva (amorous love)22 and is

                           81
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

endowed by various good qualities, which bring joy to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Subala is extremely dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa due to all these
reasons. (44–46)




Arjuna



raktotpala-nibhā kāntir arjuno dīptimān bhavet

vasane candra-kāntiś ca nānā-ratna-suśobhitaḥ (47)



Arjuna’s bodily complexion is exceedingly effulgent like
that of a red lotus and his clothes resemble moonlight.
He is beautified by various jewels. (47)



pitā sudakṣiṇas tasya bhadrā ca jananī bhavet

jyeṣṭho bhrātā vasudāmā dvayoḥ prema-pariplutaḥ (48)



Arjuna’s father is Sudakṣiṇa and his mother is Bhadrā.
His elder brother’s name is Vasudāmā. Both of them are
immersed in love for the Divine Couple. (48)



sārddhaś caturdaśa samā vayaḥ kaiśorakojjvalaḥ

nānā-puṣpa-bhūṣitāṅgo vana-mālā-vibhūṣitaḥ (49)



Arjuna is supremely radiant in his youth of fourteen-
and-a-half years. He is decorated by various types of
flower ornaments and garlands made of forest flowers.
(49)




Gandharva



niśākara-prabhā-kāntir gandharvo rūpavān bhavet

rakta-vastra-paridhāno nānābharaṇa-saṁyutaḥ (50)



The highly attractive Gandharva has a bodily lustre

                           82
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

which resembles that of a moon. He wears red clothes and
is decorated by innumerable types of ornaments. (50)



vayo dvādaśa-varṣañca kiśora-vayasojjvalaḥ

nānā-puṣpa-bhūṣitāṅgo gandharvaś ca suśobhitaḥ (51)



Gandharva is twelve years old and in his blooming youth.
He is extremely radiant, being decorated with many kinds
of flower garlands. (51)



mātā mitrā susādhvī ca vināko janako mahān

śrī-kṛṣṇasya priyatamo nānā-keli-kutūhalaḥ (52)



Gandharva’s mother Mitrā is extremely chaste and his
father is the great soul Vināka. Gandharva is most dear
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is famous for his various amazing
pastimes. (52)




Vasanta



īṣad-gaurāṅga-kāntiś ca vastraṁ candra-samojjvalam

nānā-maṇi-bhūṣitāṅgo vasanta ujjvalo bhavet (53)



ekādaśa-varṣa-vayā nānā-mālya-vibhūṣitaḥ

mātā ca śāradī sādhvī piṅgalo janako mahān (54)



Vasanta is slightly fair-complexioned and his attire is
as radiant as the moon. All his limbs are exceedingly
bright because he is decorated with many types of jewels
and flower garlands. He is eleven years old. His mother
Śāradī is very chaste and his father is the great soul
Piṅgala. (53–54)




Ujjvala



rakta-varṇa-prabhā kāntir ujjvalaḥ paramojjvalaḥ

                           83
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


tārāvalī-samaṁ vastraṁ muktā-puṣpa-virājitaḥ (55)



Ujjvala’s complexion is greatly bright like radiant red
colour and his clothes resemble rows of stars. He is
beautified by muktā flowers. (55)



sāgarākhyaḥ pitā tasya mātā veṇī pati-vratā

trayodaśa-varṣa-vayāḥ kiśoraḥ paramojjvalaḥ (56)



Ujjvala’s father’s name is Sāgara and his mother, who is
very chaste, is called Veṇī. Ujjvala is in his radiant
youth of thirteen years. (56)




Kokila



śubhra-kāntiḥ sulāvaṇyaḥ kokilaḥ paramojjvalaḥ

nīla-vastra-paridhāno nānā-ratna-vibhūṣitaḥ (57)



The extremely radiant and charming Kokila has a bright
whitish bodily complexion. He wears blue clothes and is
ornamented by various types of jewels. (57)



varṣaikādaśakaṁ māsāś catvāro yad-vayaḥ-kramaḥ

janakaḥ puṣkaro nāma medhā mātā yaśasvinī (58)



Kokila is eleven years and four months old. His father
is Puṣkara and his celebrated mother is Medhā. (58)




Sanandana



īṣad gauraṅga-kāntiś ca śobhitaś ca sanandanaḥ

nīla-vastra-paridhāno nānābharaṇa-bhūṣitaḥ (59)




                           84
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

The exceedingly beautiful Sanandana has a slightly fair
bodily lustre. He wears blue clothes and is decorated by
various kinds of ornaments. (59)



sārddhāś caturdaśa samā vayo mālya-virājitaḥ

aruṇākṣaḥ pitā tasya mātā ca mallikā bhavet (60)



Sanandana is fourteen-and-a-half years old. He wears a
garland around his neck. His father’s name is Aruṇākṣa
and his mother’s is Mallikā. (60)




Vidagdha



rūpaṁ campaka-varṇāḍhyaṁ vidagdho dīptimān bhavet

śikhikaṇṭha-varṇa-vāsā muktā-mālā-vibhūṣitaḥ (61)



Vidagdha’s complexion is attractive and greatly
effulgent like that of the campaka flower, and he wears
clothes that are blackish blue like the throat of a
peacock. He is decorated by many types of pearl
necklaces. (61)



caturdaśa-varṣa-pūrṇaḥ kiśoraḥ paramojjvalaḥ

pitā ca maṭuko nāma jananī rocanā bhavet (62)



sudāmā cāgraja-bhrātā bhaginī suśīlāpi ca

śrī-kṛṣṇasya priyatamo yugma-bhāva-vibhāvitaḥ (63)



Vidagdha is fourteen years old and in the prime of his
youth. His father’s name is Maṭuka and his mother is
Rocanā. The previously mentioned Sudāmā is his elder
brother and his sister is Suśīlā. Vidagdha is
exceedingly dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is always immersed in
his love for the Divine Couple. (62–63)




Madhumaṅgala



                           85
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


īṣacchyāmala-varṇo ’pi śrī-madhumaṅgalo bhavet

vasanaṁ gaura-varṇāḍhyaṁ vana-mālā-virājitaḥ (64)



Madhumaṅgala’s complexion is somewhat blackish blue
(śyāma). His clothes are of a golden colour and he is
decorated with garlands made of forest flowers. (64)



pitā sāndīpanir devo mātā ca sumukhī satī

nāndīmukhī ca bhaginī paurṇamāsī pitāmahī

vidūṣakaḥ kṛṣṇa-sakhaḥ śrī-madhumaṅgalaḥ sadā (65)



Madhumaṅgala’s father is Śrī Sāndīpani Ṛṣi and his
chaste mother’s name is Sumukhī. Nandīmukhī is his
sister and his paternal grandmother is Paurṇamāsī.
Madhumaṅgala, who also belongs to the vidūṣakas23,
always accompanies Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (65)




Śrī Balarāma



śubhraḥ sphaṭika-varṇāḍhyo balarāmo mahābalaḥ

nīla-vastra-paridhāno vana-mālā-virājitaḥ (66)



Śrī Balarāma’s complexion is whitish like that of
crystal or camphor. His name is Balarāma because He is
extremely strong [bala means strength]. He wears blue
garments and is decorated with many kinds of garlands
made of forest flowers. (66)



dīrgha-keśaḥ sulāvaṇyaś cūḍā cārur manoharā

ratna-kuṇḍala-yugmañca karṇa-yugme virājitam (67)



Śrī Balarāma’s long and beautiful hair is extremely
charming, and He wears an enchanting topknot. Jewelled
kuṇḍalas hang from His ears. (67)



nānā-puṣpa-maṇer hāraḥ kaṇṭha-deśe suśobhitaḥ

keyūra-valayau yugmau bāhu-yugme virājitau (68)

                           86
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




Garlands made of many kinds of flowers and jewelled
necklaces hang beautifully from Śrī Balarāma’s neck.
Armlets and bracelets decorate His arms. (68)



ratna-nūpura-yugmañca pāda-yugme suśobhitam

vasudevaḥ pitā tasya mātā ca rohiṇī bhavet (69)



Jewelled anklebells beautify Śrī Balarāma’s feet. His
father is Śrī Vasudeva and His mother is Śrī Rohiṇī.
(69)



nando mitraṁ pitus tasya mātā sādhvī yaśomatī

bhrātā kanīyān śrī-kṛṣṇaḥ subhadrā bhaginī ca sā (70)



Śrī Balarāma’s father, Vasudeva, is the friend of the
King of Vraja, Nanda Mahārāja, and His highly chaste
mother Rohiṇī is Yaśodā’s friend. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is His
younger brother and Subhadrā is His sister. (70)



vayaḥ ṣoḍaśa-varṣañca kiśora-paramojjvalaḥ

śrī-kṛṣṇasya priyatamo nānā-keli-rasākaraḥ (71)



Śrī Balarāma is radiant in His youth of sixteen years.
He is very dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is a mine of various
ecstatic pastimes. (71)



Servants (sevakāḥ)




Servants called viṭa



kaḍāra-bhāratī-bandha-gandhavedādayo viṭāḥ

vividhāḥ sevakās tasya sevā-saukhya-parāyaṇāḥ (72)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa has many different groups of servants, who all
are absorbed in pleasing Him through their service. Out

                           87
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

of them, Kaḍāra, Bhāratī-bandha, Gandhaveda and other
servants are called viṭa24. (72)




Servants called ceṭa



ceṭā bhaṅgura-bhṛṅgāra-sāndhika-grahilādayaḥ

raktakaḥ patrakaḥ patrī madhukaṇṭho madhuvrataḥ

śālikas tāliko mālī māna-mālādharādayaḥ (73)



tad-veṇu-śṛṅga-muralī-yaṣṭhi-pāśādi-dhāriṇaḥ

amīṣāṁ ghaṭakāś cāmī dhātūnāṁ copahārakāḥ (74)



Bhaṅgura, Bhṛṅgāra, Sāndhika, Grahila, Raktaka, Patraka,
Patrī, Madhukaṇṭha, Madhuvrata, Śālika, Tālika, Mālī,
Māna, Mālādhara and others are ceṭas25. They carry Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s possessions such as His veṇu26, horn, muralī27,
stick and the rope used when milking cows. They present
red ochre and other minerals to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (73–74)




Servants who prepare betel nuts (tāmbūlikāḥ)



pṛthukāḥ pārśva-gāḥ keli-kalālāpa-kalāṅkurāḥ

pallavo maṅgalaḥ phullaḥ komalaḥ kapilādayaḥ (75)



suvilāsa-vilāsākhya-rasāla-rasaśālinaḥ

jambulādyāś ca tāmbūla-pariṣkāra-vicakṣaṇāḥ (76)



Pallava, Maṅgala, Phulla, Komala, Kapila, Suvilāsa,
Vilāsa, Rasāla, Rasaśālī, Jambula and other servants are
appointed in preparing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s tāmbūla (betel nut).
They are skilled in preparing tāmbula by cleaning and
wrapping it. They are all younger than Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
always stay close to Him. They are in the initial stage
of learning the art of reciting Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
(līlā-kathā) and singing and playing musical
instruments. (75–76)




                           88
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017



Servants who supply water (jala-sevakāḥ)



payoda-vāridādyaś ca nīra-saṁskāra-kāriṇaḥ (77)



Payoda, Vārida and other servants bring vessels filled
with water for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s use. (77)

Servants who wash Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s clothes (vastra-sevakāḥ)

vastropacāri-nipuṇāḥ sāraṅga-bakulādayaḥ (78)



Sāraṅga, Bakula and other servants are skilled in taking
care of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s clothes by washing and decorating
them. (78)




Servants who decorate [Śrī Kṛṣṇa] (veśa-kāriṇaḥ)



premakando mahāgandhaḥ sairindhra-madhukandalāḥ

makarandādayaś cāmī sadā śṛṅgāra-kāriṇaḥ (79)



Premakanda, Mahāgandha, Sairindhra, Madhukandala,
Makaranda and other servants decorate Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (79)




Servants who prepare fragrant substances (gāndhikāḥ)



sumanaḥ-kusumollāsa-puṣpahāsa-harādayaḥ

gandhāṅgarāga-mālyādi-puṣpālaṅkṛti-kāriṇaḥ (80)



Sumana, Kusumollāsa, Puṣpahāsa, Hara and other servants
beautify Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s body with ointments such as aguru
and kuṅkuma. They decorate Śrī Kṛṣṇa with flower
garlands and also prepare flower ornaments. (80)




Servants who act as hairdressers (nāpitāḥ)

                           89
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017




nāpitāḥ keśa-saṁskāre mardane darpaṇārpaṇe

dakṣāḥ subandha-karpūra-sugandha-kusumādayaḥ (81)



Subandha, Karpūra, Sugandha, Kusuma and other servants
are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s hairdressers. They are vastly skilful in
services such as arranging His hair, massaging His body
and offering Him a mirror for looking. (81)




Servants who are engaged in various other tasks (aparāḥ)



koṣādhikāriṇaḥ svaccha-suśīla-praguṇādayaḥ

vimala komalādyāś ca sthālī-pīṭhādi-dhārakāḥ (82)



Svaccha, Suśīla, Praguṇa and other servants are engaged
in taking care of the store-rooms and performing other
services. Vimala, Komala and other servants take care of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s plate, seat and other articles used at the
time of eating. (82)




Maidservants (paricārikāḥ)



dhaniṣṭhā-candanakalā-guṇamālā-ratiprabhāḥ

taruṇīnduprabhā-śobhā-rambhādyāḥ paricārikāḥ

gṛha-mārjana-saṁskārālepa-kṣīrādi-kovidāḥ (83)



Dhaniṣṭhā, Candanakalā, Guṇamālā, Ratiprabhā, Taruṇī,
Induprabhā, Śobhā, Rambhā and others are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
maid-servants. They are all specifically expert in
decorating the house, cleaning, smearing cow dung and
bringing milk. (83)




Maidservants appointed in many different services
(ceṭyaḥ)



                             90
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017


ceṭyaḥ kuraṅgī bhṛṅgārī sulambā lambikādayaḥ (84)



Kuraṅgī, Bhṛṅgārī, Sulambā, Lambikā and others are Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s maidservants (ceṭī). (84)




Spies (carāḥ)



caturś cāraṇo dhīmān peśalādyāś carottamāḥ

caranti gopa-gopīṣu nānā-veśena ye sadā (85)



Catura, Cāraṇa, Dhīmān, Peśala and other servants are
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s foremost spies. Always wearing many types of
disguises, they visit the gopas, gopīs and others in
order to secretly accomplish Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s tasks. (85)




Messengers (dūtāḥ)



dūtā viśārado tuṅga-vāvadūka-manoramāḥ

nītisārādayaḥ kelau kalau gopī-kuleṣu ca (86)



Tuṅga, Vāvadūka, Manorama, Nītisāra and other servants
are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s messengers. They are skilled in
everything. They are experts in arranging amorous
pastimes between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs and in
pacifying loving quarrels. Their names are appropriate:
Tuṅga (the efficient one) is proficient in accomplishing
tasks, Vāvadūka (eloquent) is most clever in speaking
both appropriate and inappropriate words, Manorama
(charming) is capable of stealing anyone’s mind, and
Nītisāra (knowing the essence of virtuousness) knows
what is essential [in regards to the Divine Couple].
(86)




Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Female Messengers

(śrī-kṛṣṇasya dūtī-prakaraṇam)




                           91
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

paurṇamāsī vīrā vṛndā vaṁśī nāndīmukhī tathā

vṛndārikā tathā melā muralādyāś ca dūtikāḥ (87)



nānā-sandhāna-kuśalā tayor milana-kāriṇī

kuñjādi-saṁskriyābhijñā vṛndā tāsu varīyasī (88)



Paurṇamāsī, Vīrā, Vṛndā, Vaṁśī, Nāndīmukhī, Vṛndārikā,
Melā, Muralī and others are the female messengers of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s party. All of them are experts in making
enquiries in many different ways and in arranging
meetings between Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They are also
talented in decorating forest bowers and other meeting
places. Among them, Vṛndā is the most accomplished in
all tasks. (87–88)




Paurṇamāsī



paurṇamāsyā aṅga-kāntis-tapta-kāñcana-sannibhā

śukla-vastra-paridhānā bahu-ratna-vibhūṣitā (89)



Paurṇamāsī’s bodily complexion is effulgent like molten
gold. She wears white clothes and is amply decorated by
jewels. (89)



pitā suratadevaś ca mātā candrakalā satī

prabalas tu patis tasyā mahāvidyā yaśaskarī (90)



bhrātāpi devaprasthaś ca vraje siddhā-śiromaṇiḥ

nānā-sandhāna-kuśalā dvayoḥ saṅgama-kāriṇī (91)



The father of Paurṇamāsī is Suratadeva and her chaste
mother’s name is Candrakalā. Paurṇamāsī’s husband is
Prabala and her brother is Devaprastha. She herself is
supremely learned, famous and the perfected crown jewel
of all yoginīs of Vraja-maṇḍala. Paurṇamāsī is skilled
in making enquiries and in arranging meetings between
Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (90–91)




                           92
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


Vīrā



vīrā nāma varā dūtī khyātānyā pūjitā vraje

vīrā pragalbha-vacanā vṛndā cāṭūkti-peśalā (92)



Vīrā is another prominent female messenger. She is
worshipful and famous in Vraja-maṇḍala. Vīrā is a
fearless speaker (pragalbha-vacanā). Conversely, Vṛndā28
is most clever in using sweet and charming words (cāṭu-
vacanā). (92)



eṣā śyāmala-kāntiś ca śuklābha-vasanojjvalā

nānā-ratna-puṣpa-mālā-bhūṣaṇair bhūṣitāpi ca (93)



Vīrā’s complexion is blackish blue (śyāmala) but seems
bright because she wears white clothes. She is decorated
with many kinds of flower garlands and jewelled
ornaments. (93)



kavalaḥ patir etasyā mātā ca mohinī satī

tasyāḥ pitā viśālo ’pi bhaginī kavalā bhavet (94)



Vīrā’s husband is Kavala. Her mother Mohinī is a
virtuous wife. Vīrā’s father is Viśāla and her sister’s
name is Kavalā. (94)



jaṭilāyāḥ priyatamā jāvaṭākhya-pura-sthitā

nānā-sandhāna-nipuṇā dvayor milana-ceṣṭitā (95)



Vīrā, who lives in Jāvaṭa, is very dear to Jaṭilā. She
is most expert in making enquiries and is specifically
devoted to arrange meetings between Śrī Rādhā and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. (95)




Vṛndā (vṛndāyā viśeṣaḥ)



tapta-kāñcana-varṇābhā vṛndā kāntir manoharā

                           93
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


nīla-vastra-paridhānā muktā-puṣpa-virājitā (96)



Vṛndā’s bodily complexion is attractive like molten
gold. She wears blue garments and is decorated with
pearls and flowers. (96)



candrabhānuḥ pita tasyāḥ phullarā jananī tathā

patir asyā mahīpālo mañjarī bhaginī ca sā (97)



Vṛndā’s father is Candrabhānu and her mother’s name is
Phullarā. Her husband’s name is Mahīpāla and her sister
is Mañjarī. (97)



vṛndāvana-sadā-vāsā nānā-kelī-rasotsukā

ubhayor milanākāṅkṣī tayoḥ prema-pariplutā (98)



Vṛndā always resides in Vṛndāvana. She is eager to
relish many kinds of ecstatic pastimes as well as to
arrange meetings between Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She is
always immersed in love for Them. (98)




Nāndīmukhī



nāndīmukhī gaura-varṇā paṭṭa-vastra-vidhāriṇī

sāndīpaniḥ pitā tasyā mātā ca sumukhī satī (99)



bhrātā madhumaṅgalo ’syāḥ paurṇamāsī pitāmahī

nānā-ratna-bhūṣitāṅgī kaiśora-vayasojjvalā (100)



Nāndīmukhī is fair-complexioned. She wears silk clothes.
Her father is Sāndīpani Muni and her chaste mother’s
name is Sumukhī. Her brother’s name is Madhumaṅgala and
her paternal grandmother is Paurṇamāsī. Nāndīmukhī is
decorated with various jewels and is in the prime of
youth. (99–100)



nānā-sandhāna-kuśalā nānā-śilpa-vidhāyinī

                           94
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017


dvayor milana-naipuṇyā sadā prema-yutā bhavet (101)



Nāndīmukhī is skilled in making enquiries about various
topics. She is talented in many kinds of fine arts and
in arranging meetings between Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
She is always carried away by her love for both of Them.
(101)




Ordinary Servants (sādhāraṇa-bhṛtyāḥ)



śobhana-dīpanādyāś ca dīpikādhāriṇo matāḥ

sudhākara-sudhānāda-sānandādyā mṛdaṅginaḥ

kalāvantas tu mahatī-vādino guṇa-śālinaḥ (102)



Śobhana, Dīpana and other servants take care of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s lanterns. Sudhākara, Sudhānāda, Sānanda and
other servants play mṛdāṅga. They are all experts in
singing, playing musical instruments and the other
sixty-four arts. Many good qualities ornament them, and
they are skilled in playing a specific kind of vīṇā
called mahatī29. (102)



vicitrarāva-madhurarāvādyās tasya vandinaḥ

narttakāś candrahāsenduhāsa-candramukhādayaḥ (103)



Vicitrarāva, Madhurarāva and other servants are Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s panegyrists (vandis), and Candrahāsa, Induhāsa,
Candramukha and others are dancers. (103)



kalakaṇṭhaḥ sukaṇṭhaś ca sudhākaṇṭhādayo ’py amī

bhārataḥ sārado vidyāvilāsa-sarasādayaḥ

sarva-prabandha-nipuṇā rasajñās tāla-dhāriṇaḥ (104)



Kalakaṇṭha, Sukaṇṭha, Sudhākaṇṭha, Bhārata, Sārada,
Vidyāvilāsa, Sarasa and other servants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are
experts in composing literary works about all kinds of
subjects. They are conversant in rasa. They play
rhythmical instruments to give the tempo to the music
[and dance]. (104)


                           95
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017



kañcukādi-vinirmātā rauciko nāma saucikaḥ

nirṇejakās tu sumukho durlabho rañjanādayaḥ

puṇyapuñjas tathā bhāgyarāśir ity asya haḍḍipau (105)



A servant named Raucika, who is an expert tailor, sews
kurtās and other garments for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Sumukha, Durlabha, Rañjana and other servants are
engaged in washing His clothes.

The two servants Puṇyapuñja and Bhāgyarāśi are sweepers
who clean Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s home and the surroundings of His
home. (105)



svarṇa-kārāvalaṅkāra-kārau raṅgana-ṭaṅkanau

kulālau manthanī-pārīkārau pavana-karmaṭhau (106)



The jewellers Raṅgana and Ṭaṅkana make ornaments for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. The potters named Pavana and Karmaṭha make
churning pots and earthen bowls, cups and other vessels.
(106)



varddhakī varddhamānākhyaḥ khaṭṭā-śakaṭa-kārakau

sucitraś ca vicitraś ca khyātau citra-karāv ubhau (107)



The two servants Varddhakī and Varddhamāna are
carpenters who make Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s bed, ox-cart and other
such things. Sucitra and Vicitra are artists who paint
colourful pictures for His pleasure. (107)



dāma-manthāna-kuṭhāra-peṭī-śikyādikāriṇaḥ

kāravaḥ kuṇḍa-kaṇṭhola-karaṇḍa-kaṭulādayaḥ (108)



Kuṇḍa, Kaṇṭhola, Karaṇḍa, Kaṭula and other servants are
craftsmen. They prepare items to be used in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
service, such as ropes, churning rods, axes, boxes and
baskets made of flat rope for carrying fruits and
vegetables. (108)



maṅgalā piṅgalā gaṅgā piśaṅgī maṇikastanī


                           96
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

haṁsī vaṁśīpriyetyādyā naicikyas tasya supriyāḥ (109)



Maṅgalā, Piṅgalā, Gaṅgā, Piśaṅgī, Maṇikastanī, Haṁsī,
Vaṁśīpriyā and other cows are most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
are known as the best of cows (naicikī). (109)



padmagandha-piśaṅgākṣau balī-vardāv atipriyau

suraṅgākyaḥ kuraṅgo ’sya dadhilobhābhidaḥ kapiḥ (110)



The two bulls Padmagandha and Piśaṅgākṣa are most dear
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. His deer is called Suraṅga and His
monkey’s name is Dadhilobha. (110)



vyāghra-bhramarakau śvānau rājahaṁsaḥ kalasvanaḥ

śikhī tāṇḍavikābhikhyaḥ śukau dakṣa-vicakṣaṇau (111)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa also has two pet dogs, Vyāghra and Bhramaraka;
a swan named Kalasvana; a peacock called Tāṇḍavika; and
two male parrots named Dakṣa and Vicakṣaṇa. (111)




Description of pastime places (sthāna-vivaraṇam)



vṛndāvanaṁ mahodyānaṁ śreyo niḥśreyasād api

krīḍā-girir yathārthākhyaḥ śrīmān govarddhano mataḥ
(112)



nīlamaṇḍapikā-ghaṭṭaḥ kandarā maṇikandalī (113a)



Śrī Vṛndāvana is in all respects the most prominent of
the forests in Vraja-maṇḍala, and is the most auspicious
of all auspicious places. Śrīman Girirāja-Govardhana, a
pastime place within Vraja’s area, supplies the cows
with water, tender grass and other items; offers the
gopas fruits, edible roots, water, resting places and so
forth; and provides the gopīs secluded forest bowers,
caves and so on for their unimpeded enjoyment. By this
Girirāja-Govardhana increases their joy, and thus lives
up to his name Govardhana (go referring to cows, gopas
and gopīs, and vardhana meaning ‘increasing’). By doing
this, he is also offering abundant assistance in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Thus it is fully appropriate to call

                           97
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

him Krīḍā-giri, ‘the pastime ground Śrī Girirāja-
Govardhana’.

There is a bathing-place (ghāṭa) called Nīlamaṇḍapikā
and a cave called Maṇikandalī at Śrī Govardhana. (112–
113a)



ghaṭṭo mānasa-gaṅgāyāḥ pāraṅgo nāma viśrutaḥ (113b)



suvilāsatarā nāma tarir yatra virājate (114a)



Mānasa-gaṅgā’s bathing-place is widely known as Pāraṅga-
ghāṭa. A boat called Suvilāsatarā is splendidly situated
there. (113b–114a)



nāmnā nandīśvaraḥ śailo mandiraṁ sphurad indiram (114b)



āsthānī-maṇḍapaḥ pāṇḍugaṇḍa-śailā-samojjvalaḥ

āmoda-varddhano nāma paramāmoda-vāsitaḥ (115)



Nandīśvara Hill is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s residence. The place is
so splendorous that it seems as if Lakṣmī-devī
personally resides there. On top of Nandīśvara Hill is a
large rock, which is whitish with a tinge of pale
yellow. The radiant, beautifully decorated palace
situated on this rock is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
maddens the hearts of everyone in Vraja – moving and
non-moving beings, insects and worms, animals and birds,
rivers, mountains, and gopas and gopīs. Because He lives
in this palace together with Śrī Nanda, Yaśodā,
Baladeva, Mother Rohiṇī and others, everyone calls it
Āmoda-varddhana30. (114b–115)



pāvanākyaṁ saraḥ krīḍā-kuñja-puñja-sphurat-taṭam

kuñjaṁ kāma-mahātīrthaṁ mandāro maṇi-kuṭṭimaḥ (116)



Pāvana-sarovara, which lies at the foot of Nandīśvara
Hill, is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own lake. Its banks are beautified
by many charming pastime groves. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s grove is
named Kāma-mahātīrtha, and inside is a small, bejewelled
room called Mandāra. (116)



nyagrodha-rājo bhāṇḍīraḥ kadambas tu kadamba-rāṭ


                           98
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017

anaṅga-raṅga-bhūr nāma līlā-pulinam ucyate (117)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s famous banyan tree, well suited for
pastimes, is called Bhāṇḍīra and His kadamba tree is
called Kadamba-rāja. The bank of the river Yamunā, which
is beautified with pastime groves, is widely known as
Anaṅgaraṅga-bhūmi. (117)



yamunāyā mahā-tīrthaṁ khelā-tīrthaṁ tad ucyate

parama-preṣṭhayā sārddhaṁ sadā yatra sa khelati (118)



The grove where Śrī Kṛṣṇa always performs sportive
pastimes (līlā-vilāsa) with His highly beloved Śrīmatī
Rādhā is called Khelā-tīrtha, which is the most sacred
abode at Śrī Yamunā. (118)




The items Śrī Kṛṣṇa uses (śrī-kṛṣṇasya vyavahārya-
dravyāṇi)



śaradindus tu mukuro vyajanaṁ madhumārutam

līlā-padmaṁ sadāsmeraṁ geṇḍukaś citrakorakaḥ (119)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mirror is called Śaradindu and His palm-leaf
fan is named Madhumāruta. His pastime lotus is called
Sadāsmera and His ball is called Citrakoraka. (119)



śiñjinī mañjulaśaraḥ maṇi-bandhāṭanī-yugam

vilāsa-kārmaṇaṁ nāma kārmukaṁ svarṇa-citritam (120)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s golden bow is called Vilāsa-kārmaṇa and the
bowstring is called Mañjulaśara. The bowstring is tied
to jewels at each end of the bow. (120)



divya-ratna-sphuran-muṣṭis tuṣṭidā nāma karttarī

mandraghoṣo viṣāṇo ’sya vaṁśī bhuvana-mohinī (121)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s small knife is called Tuṣṭidā. Its handle is
studded by wonderful jewels and therefore looks very

                           99
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

beautiful. The name of His horn [used as a bugling
instrument] is Mandraghoṣa, and His flute (vaṁśī) is
named Bhuvana-mohinī. (121)



rādhā-hṛn-mīna-baḍiśī mahānandābhidhāpi ca

ṣaḍ-randhra-bandhurā veṇuḥ khyātā madana-jhaṅkṛtiḥ (122)



This vaṁśī makes Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart excessively glad by
catching the fish of Śrī Rādhā’s mind by its hook. It is
therefore also known as Mahānandā. Kṛṣṇa’s veṇu has six
holes and is widely known by the name Madana-jhaṅkṛti.
(122)



kākalī-mūkita-pikā muralī saralābhidhā

gauḍī ca gurjarī ceti rāgāv atyanta-vallabhau (123)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s muralī is named Saralā and creates sweet
sounds like that of the kokila bird. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
favourite rāgas are gauḍī and gurjarī. (123)



japyaḥ sādhyāṅkitaḥ preṣṭhābhidhānaṁ manur adbhutaḥ
(124a)



The wonderful mantra that Śrī Kṛṣṇa chants in order to
achieve His desired goal is the name of His beloved,
Śrīmatī Rādhā. (124a)



daṇḍas tu maṇḍano nāma vīṇā nāma taraṅgiṇī

pāśau paśu-vaśīkārau dohany amṛtadohanī (124b)



The name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s staff is Maṇḍana and His vīṇā is
called Taraṅgiṇī. The two ropes He uses when milking
cows are called Paśu-vaśīkāra. His milking pot is called
Amṛtadohanī. (124b)




Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments (bhūṣaṇāni)



ambārpitā mahārakṣā nava-ratnāṅkitā bhuje (125)


                          100
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017



On Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s two arms Mother Yaśodā has tied amulets
for protection, which are inlaid with nine priceless
jewels31. (125)



aṅgade raṅgadābhikhye caṅkane nāma kaṅkaṇe

mudrā ratnamukhī pītaṁ vāso nigama-śobhanam (126)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s armlets are called Raṅgada. His bangles are
called Caṅkana; His signet ring is called Ratnamukhī and
His yellow cloth is named Nigama-śobhana, which means
‘the increaser of the Śrutis’32 beauty’. (126)



kiṅkiṇī kalajhaṅkārā mañjīrau haṁsagañjanau

kuraṅga-nayanā-citta-kuraṅga-hara-śiñjitau (127)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s waist belt is called Kalajhaṅkārā and His
ankle bells are named Haṁsagañjana. Their sweet tinkling
steals the deer-eyed gopīs’ hearts, which are as
restless as deer. (127)



hāras tārāvalī nāma maṇimālā taḍitprabhā

ruddha-rādhā-pratikṛtir niṣko hṛdaya-modanaḥ (128)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s necklace is named Tārāvalī, His jewelled
beads are called Taḍitprabhā, and the medallion on His
chest is named Hṛdaya-modana, in which there is a
picture of Śrī Rādhā. (128)



kaustubhākhyo maṇir yena praviśya hradam auragam

kāliya-preyasī-vṛnda-hastair ātmopahāritaḥ (129)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s jewel is called Kaustubha. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa
entered Kāliya-hrada, the wives of the snake offered
this jewel to Him with their own hands. (129)



kuṇḍale makarākāre ratir āgādhi-daivate

kirīṭaṁ ratna-pārākhyaṁ cūḍā cāmara-ḍāmarī (130)



                          101
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s two    makara-shaped33 earrings (kuṇḍalas) are
widely known by    the name Ratir-āgadhi-daivatā. His
crown’s name is    Ratnapāra, and the decoration on the
crown is called    Cāmara-ḍāmarī. (130)



nava-ratna-viḍambākhyaṁ śikhaṇḍaṁ mukuṭaṁ viduḥ

rāgavallī tu guñjālī tilakaṁ dṛṣṭimohanam (131)



The peacock feather crown on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s head is called
Nava-ratna-viḍamba. His guñjā-necklace is named
Rāgavallī and His tilaka’s name is Dṛṣṭimohana. (131)



patra-puṣpamayī mālā vanamālā padāvadhiḥ

vaijayantī tu kusumaiḥ pañca-varṇair vinirmitā (132)



The garland made    of many different types of leaves and
flowers, hanging    down to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, is
called Vanamālā,    and a garland made of five different
coloured flowers    is named Vaijayantī-mālā. (132)



janmanālaṅkṛtā puṇyā kṛṣṇā bhādrāṣṭamī niśā

preyasyā saha rohiṇyā śaśī yasyām udeyivān (133)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared in the night of the eight day
(aṣṭamī) of the waning moon in the month of Bhādra. This
night manifests its glory in this world being decorated
by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s birth. During this night the moon rises
along with his beloved, the constellation called
Rohiṇī34. (133)




Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Beloveds (śrī-kṛṣṇasya preyasyaḥ)



atha tasyānukīrttyante preyasyaḥ paramādbhutāḥ

ramādibhyo ’py uru-prema-saubhāgya-bhara-bhūṣitāḥ (134)



Now Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s wonderful beloveds are eulogised. They
are decorated with the fortune of excessive prema, which
is even greater than that of Lakṣmī and others. (134)


                             102
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




Śrīmatī Rādhārānī’s charming beauty (śrī-rādhā)



ābhīra-subhruvāṁ śreṣṭhā rādhā vṛndāvaneśvarī

asyāḥ sakhyaś ca lalitā-viśākhādyāḥ suviśrutāḥ (135)



Among the gopīs of Vraja, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrī Rādhā is
the foremost. Lalitā, Viśākhā and others are renowned as
Śrī Rādhā’s principal sakhīs. (135)



candrāvalī ca padmā ca śyāmā śaibyā ca bhadrikā

tārā vicitrā gopālī pālikā candraśālikā (136)



maṅgalā vimalā līlā taralākṣī manoramā

kandarpa-mañjarī mañjubhāṣiṇī khañjanekṣaṇā (137)



kumudā kairavī śārī śāradākṣī viśāradā

śaṅkarī kuṅkumā kṛṣṇā śāraṅgīndrāvalī śivā (138)



tārāvalī guṇavatī sumukhī keli-mañjarī

hārāvalī cakorākṣī bhāratī kamalādayaḥ (139)



Candrāvalī, Padmā, Śyāmā, Śaibyā, Bhadrikā, Tārā,
Vicitrā, Gopālī, Pālikā, Candraśālikā, Maṅgalā, Vimalā,
Līlā, Taralākṣī, Manoramā, Kandarpa Mañjarī,
Mañjubhāṣiṇī, Khañjanekṣaṇā, Kumudā, Kairavī, Śārī,
Śāradākṣī, Viśāradā, Śaṅkarī, Kuṅkumā, Kṛṣṇā, Śāraṅgī,
Indrāvalī, Śivā, Tārāvalī, Guṇavatī, Sumukhī, Keli
Mañjarī, Hārāvalī, Cakorākṣī, Bhāratī, Kamalā and other
gopīs are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds. (136–139)



āsāṁ yūthāni śataśaḥ khyātāny ābhīra-subhruvām

lakṣa-saṅkhyās tu kathitā yūthe yūthe varāṅganāḥ (140)



These beautiful gopīs have hundreds of groups (yūthas).
The number of the prominent gopīs divided into these
groups is also vast. (140)

                          103
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017




mukhyāḥ syus teṣu yūtheṣu kāntāḥ sarva-guṇottamāḥ

rādhā candrāvalī bhadrā śyāmalā pālikādayaḥ (141)



Out of all the gopīs in these groups, Rādhā, Candrāvalī,
Bhadrā, Śyāmalā, Pālikā and others are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pre-
eminent beloveds due to their incomparably good
qualities. (141)



tatrāpi sarvathā śreṣṭhe rādhā-candrāvalīty ubhe

yūthayos tu tayoḥ santi koṭi-saṅkhyā mṛgī-dṛśaḥ (142)



Again among these gopīs, Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Candrāvalī
are the two most prominent. Both of them have vast
numbers of deer-eyed Vraja-damsels in their respective
yūthas. (142)



tayor apy ubhayor madhye sarva-mādhuryato ’dhikā

rādhikā viśrutiṁ yātā yad-gāndharvākhyayā śrutau (143)



Of these two, Śrī Rādhā is well known as the most
prominent beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She is the pinnacle of
all sweet transcendental qualities. The Śrutis call Her
Gāndharvā. (143)



asamānorddha-mādhurya-dhuryo gopendra-nandanaḥ

yasyāḥ prāṇa-parārddhānāṁ parārddhād api vallabhaḥ (144)



Gopendra-nandana (the son of the King of the cowherds)
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whom no one can equal nor excel in sweetness
(mādhurya), is Śrī Rādhā’s beloved. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is so much
dearer to Śrīmatī Rādhā than Her own life, that it can
be compared to the amount one gets when multiplying the
number parārddha [one half of Brahmā’ṣ life span] with
itself.

The significance here is that Śrī Rādhā’s love for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is unlimited times more than even the sum
resulting from multi-plying unlimited parārddha with
unlimited parārddha. In other words, no one can imagine
how much She loves Him. (144)




                          104
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

śrī-rādhā-rūpa-lāvaṇyaṁ viśeṣāt parikīrttyate

nānā-vaidagdhī-naipuṇyā sudhārṇava-svarūpiṇī (145)



Now Śrī Rādhā’s exquisite beauty will be glorified in
detail.

She is most skilful in arts of various kinds, and She is
the personification of an ocean of nectar. (145)



nava-gorocanā-bhātir druta-hema-sama-prabhā

kimvā sthirā vidyud iva rūpāti-paramojjvalā (146)



Śrī Rādhā’s supremely radiant fair complexion resembles
fresh gorocanā, molten gold or stationary lightning.
(146)



vicitraṁ nīla-vasanaṁ tasyāś ca pariśobhitam

nānā-muktā-bhūṣitāṅgī nānā-puṣpa-virājitā (147)



Śrī Rādhā is attired in beautiful blue clothes. She is
decorated by various kinds of pearls and flowers. (147)



dīrgha-keśī sulāvaṇya-muktā-mālā-suśobhitā

puṣpa-mālā-suvinyāsā suveṇī paramojjvalā (148)



Śrī Rādhā’s body is full of loveliness (lāvaṇya36) and
decorated with pearl necklaces. Her hair is long and Her
wonderful braid is decorated by beautifully strung
flower garlands. (148)



subhālaḥ paramoddīptaḥ sindūra-paribhūṣitaḥ

nānā-citrālakā bhānti citra-patra-suśobhitāḥ (149)



Śrī Rādhā’s enchanting forehead is radiantly decorated
by a dot of vermillion. The beautiful locks of hair
swaying on Her cheeks together with Her astonishing mark
of tilaka cross the pinnacle of all beauty. (149)



bāhu-yugmaṁ sulāvaṇyaṁ nīla-kaṅkaṇa-śobhitam

                          105
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


anaṅga-daṇḍa-lāvaṇya-mohinī paramā bhavet (150)



Even Cupid, who has two very charming arms, is
bewildered by Śrī Rādhā’s lovely arms, which are
beautified by bracelets made of blue jewels. (150)



nayanotpala-yugmañca ākarṇa-pariśobhitam

kajjalojjvala-dīptiś ca trailokya-jayinī parā (151)



Śrī Rādhā’s wide lotus eyes, which extend to Her ears,
are beautified with the radiant glow of collyrium. It
appears as if the unique beauty of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus
eyes has conquered all the beauty in the three worlds.
(151)



nāsikā tila-puṣpābhā muktā-veśara-śobhitā

nānā sugandha-yuktā sā parā dīptimatī bhavet (152)



Śrī Rādhikā’s nose is attractive like a sesame flower
and is decorated with a pearl. Śrī Rādhā, who is scented
with various fragrances, is supremely beautiful. (152)



ratna-tāḍaṅka-yugmañca nānā-citra-vinirmitam

oṣṭhādharaḥ sudhāramyo raktotpala-vinirjitaḥ (153)



Śrī Rādhā’s jewelled earrings (tāḍaṅka) are made with
various artistic styles. Her lips are even more pleasing
than nectar and their reddish colour defeats the beauty
of the red lotus. (153)



muktā-mālā danta-paṅktī rasanā-pariśobhitā

mukha-padmaṁ sulāvaṇyaṁ koṭi-candra-prabhākaram

bimbavac ca sudhāramya-prema-hāsya-yutaṁ bhavet (154)



Śrī Rādhā’s rows of teeth, which are beautified by Her
graceful tongue, are radiant like lines of pearls. Her
charming lotus face is like a mine of the beauty of
millions of moons, and it is endowed with a loving smile
as sweet as nectar. (154)


                          106
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017



cibukasya sulāvaṇyaṁ kandarpa-mohanaṁ param

masi-binduḥ sulāvaṇyo hemābje bhramarī yathā (155)



Śrī Rādhā’s charming chin bewilders even Cupid. The dot
of kājala on Her chin looks just like a black bee
resting upon a golden lotus. (155)



kaṇṭha-deśe citra-rekhā muktā-mālā-vibhūṣitā

pṛṣṭha-grīvā suramyā ca pārśve ’pi mohinī bhavet (156)



Śrī Rādhā’s neck is decorated with pearl necklaces and
marked with three lines which enhance the beauty of Her
neck. Her back and the nape of Her neck are beautiful
and charming, and the sides of Her body captivate the
mind. (156)



vakṣaḥ-sthalaṁ sulāvaṇyaṁ hema-kumbha-suśobhitam

kañculyā-cchāditaṁ tasyā muktā-hāra-virājitam (157)



Śrī Rādhā’s most attractive chest is beautified by Her
golden breasts. It is covered by a blouse and decorated
with a pearl necklace. (157)



subāhu-yugalaṁ tasyā lāvaṇya-mohakāri ca

ratnāṅgade tayor madhye valayā-pariśobhite (158)



The jewelled armlets upon Śrī Rādhā’s beautiful, lovely
and enchanting arms are beautified with small, swaying
rings. (158)



ratna-kaṅkaṇa-dīpte ca ratna-guccha-virājite

raktotpalaṁ hasta-yugmaṁ nakha-candra-sudīptakam (159)



Śrī Rādhā’s wrists are beautified by jewelled bracelets
and bangles, as well as bracelets made of thirty-two
pearl strings. Her hands, which look like reddish
lotuses, shimmer in the unprecedented radiance of Her
moon-like nails. (159)


                          107
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017




The marks on Śrī Rādhā’s palms (kara-cihnāni)



bhṛṅgāmbhoja-śaśikalā-kuṇḍala-cchatra-yūpakaḥ

śaṅkha-vṛkṣa-kusumaka-cāmara-svastikādayaḥ (160)



ete cihnāḥ śubha-karā nānā-citra-virājitāḥ

karāṅgulyaḥ sudīptāś ca ratnāṅgurīya-bhūṣitāḥ (161)



Śrī Rādhā’s lotus hands are beautified by various kinds
of auspicious marks such as bumblebee, lotus flower,
crescent moon, earring, umbrella, victory column, conch
shell, tree, flower, cāmara and swastika. Her splendid
fingers are decorated with jewelled rings. (160–161)



udaraṁ madhu-lāvaṇyaṁ nimna-nābhi-suśobhitam

sudhā-rasa-prapūrṇañca trailokya-mohanaṁ param (162)



Śrī Rādhā’s abdomen is sweeter than sweetness itself and
is beautified by a deep navel. Because it is full of
nectar, it enchants everyone in the three worlds. (162)



kṣīṇa-madhyaṁ kaṭi-taṭaṁ lāvaṇya-bhara-bhaṅguram

vali-trayī-latā-baddhā kiṅkiṇī-jāla-śobhitam (163)



Śrī Rādhā’s hips get slender from the middle towards Her
attractive waist. Her waist has three auspicious,
creeper-like folds [above Her navel], and a laced belt,
studded with small bells, beautifies Her waist. (163)



ūru dvau rāma-rambheva manoja-citta-mohanau

jānū dvau ca sulāvaṇyau nānā-keli-rasākarau (164)



Śrī Rādhā’s attractive thighs, which resemble the trunks
of banana trees, attract even the mind of Cupid. Her
charming knees are a mine of various amorous sports.
(164)


                          108
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017



śrī-pāda-padma-yugmañca maṇi-nūpura-bhūṣitam

vaṅka-rāja-sulāvaṇya-padāṅgurīya-śobhitam (165)



Śrī Rādhā’s beautifully arched lotus feet are decorated
with jewel-studded ankle bells. The toes of Her divine
feet are beautified by rings. (165)




The marks on Śrī Rādhā’s feet (caraṇa-cihnāni)



śaṅkhendu-kuñjara-yavair aṅkuśoṣu-ratha-dhvajaiḥ

tomara-svasti-matsyādi-śubha-cihnau pādāv api (166)



Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet are marked by a conch shell, a
moon, an elephant, a barley corn, a goad, a chariot, a
flag, a ḍamaru drum, a swastika, a fish and other
auspicious marks. (166)



āpañcadaśa-varṣañca vayaḥ kaiśorakojjvalam (167)



Śrī Rādhā is in Her illustrious prime youth of fifteen

years. (167)



mātṛ-koṭer api snigdhā yatra gopendra-gehinī (168a)



Śrīmatī Yaśodā-devī, the wife of the King of the
cowherds, has more parental affection for Śrī Rādhā than
unlimited mothers could have. (168a)



vṛṣabhānuḥ pitā tasyā vṛṣabhānur ivojjvalaḥ (168b)



ratnagarbhā kṣitau khyātā kīrttidā jananī bhavet (169a)



Śrī Rādhā’s father, Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, is the bhānu
(sun) situated in the sign of vṛṣa (Taurus); which means
that he is as radiant as the sun in one of the summer

                          109
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

months. Śrī Rādhā’s mother is Śrī Kīrttidā-sundarī. She
is famous throughout the world as Ratnagarbhā. (168b–
169a)



pitāmaho mahībhānur indur mātāmaho mataḥ (169b)



mātāmahī-pitāmahyau mukharā-sukhade ubhe (170a)



Śrī Rādhā’s paternal grandfather is named Mahībhānu and
her maternal grandfather is Indu. Her paternal
grandmother’s name is Sukhadā and Her maternal
grandmother is Mukharā. (169b–170a)



ratnabhānuḥ subhānuś ca bhānuś ca bhrātaraḥ pituḥ (170b)



Ratnabhānu, Subhānu and Bhānu are Śrī Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja’s brothers and thus Śrī Rādhā’s paternal
uncles. (170b)



bhadrakīrttir mahākīrttiḥ kīrtticandraś ca mātulāḥ

mātulyo menakā ṣaṣṭhī gaurī dhātrī ca dhātakī (171)



Bhadrakīrtti, Mahākīrtti and Kīrtticandra are Śrī
Rādhā’s maternal uncles (mātulaḥ), and Menakā, Ṣaṣṭhī,
Gaurī, Dhātrī and Dhātakī are Her maternal aunts
(mātulā). (171)



svasā kīrttimatī mātur-bhānumudrā pitṛ-svasā

pitṛ-svasṛ-patiḥ kāśo mātṛ-svasṛ-patiḥ kuśaḥ (172)



Śrī Rādhā’s mother’s sister is Kīrttimatī and her
husband is Kuśa. Śrī Rādhā’s father’s sister is
Bhānumudrā and her husband is Kāśa. (172)



śrīdāmā pūrva-jo bhrātā kaniṣṭhānaṅga-mañjarī (173a)



Śrī Rādhā’s elder brother is Śrīdāmā and Her younger
sister is Anaṅga Mañjarī. (173a)



                          110
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017


śvaśuro vṛka-gopaś ca devaro durmadābhidhaḥ (173b)



śvaśrūs tu jaṭilā khyātā pati-manyo ’bhimanyukaḥ

nanandā kuṭilā-nāmnī sadā-cchidra-vidhāyinī (174)



Śrī Rādhā’s father-in-law is Vṛka Gopa37 and Her
husband’s younger brother is Durmada. Her mother-in-law
is Jaṭilā, and Abhimanyu has the false conception of
being Her husband. Her sister-in-law Kuṭilā is always
looking for faults. (173b–174)



parama-preṣṭha-sakhyas tu lalitā saviśākhikā

sucitrā campakalatā raṅgadevī sudevikā

tuṅgavidyendulekhe te aṣṭau sarva-gaṇāgrimāḥ (175)



The eight parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs Lalitā, Viśākhā, Sucitrā
[Citrā], Campakalatā, Raṅgadevī, Sudevī, Tuṅgavidyā and
Indu-lekhā are the most prominent among Śrī Rādhā’s
sakhīs. (175)




Śrī Rādhā’s priya-sakhīs (priya-sakhyaḥ)



priya-sakhyaḥ kuraṅgākṣī maṇḍalī maṇikuṇḍalā

mālatī candralatikā mādhavī madanālasā (176)



mañjumedhā śaśikalā sumadhyā madhurekṣaṇā

kamalā kāmalatikā guṇacūḍā varāṅgadā (177)



mādhurī candrikā prema-mañjarī tanumadhyamā

kandarpa-sundarī mañjukeśīty ādyās tu koṭiśaḥ (178)



Kuraṅgākṣī, Maṇḍalī, Maṇikuṇḍalā, Mālatī, Candralatikā,
Mādhavī, Madanālasā, Mañjumedhā, Śaśikalā, Sumadhyā,
Madhurekṣaṇā, Kamalā, Kāmalatikā, Guṇacūḍā, Varāṅgadā,
Mādhurī, Candrikā, Prema Mañjarī, Tanumadhyamā,
Kandarpa-sundarī, Mañjukeśī and others are Śrī Rādhā’s
innumerable priya-sakhīs. (176–178)

                          111
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017




Prāṇa-sakhīs, or jīvita-sakhīs (jīvita-sakhyaḥ)



uktā jīvita-sakhyas tu lāsikā kelīkandalī

kādambarī śaśimukhī candrarekhā priyamvadā (179)



madonmadā madhumatī vāsantī kalabhāṣiṇī

ratnāvalī maṇimatī karpūralatikādayaḥ (180)



Lāsikā, Kelīkandalī, Kādambarī, Śaśimukhī, Candrarekhā,
Priyamvadā, Madonmadā, Madhumatī, Vāsantī, Kalabhāṣiṇī,
Ratnāvalī, Maṇimatī, Karpūralatikā and others are Śrī
Rādhā’s jīvita-sakhīs. (179–180)




Nitya-sakhīs (nitya-sakhyaḥ)



nitya-sakhyas tu kastūrī manojñā maṇi-mañjarī

sindūrā candanavatī kaumudī madirādayaḥ (181)



Kastūrī, Manojñā, Maṇi Mañjarī, Sindūrā, Candanavatī,
Kaumudī, Madirā and others are Śrī Rādhā’s nitya-sakhīs.
(181)




Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mañjarīs (śrī-rādhāyā mañjaryaḥ)



śrī-rūpa-mañjarī rāga-mañjarī rati-mañjarī

lavaṅga-mañjarī guṇa-mañjarī rasa-mañjarī (182)



vilāsa-mañjarī prema-mañjarī maṇi-mañjarī

suvarṇa-mañjarī kāma-mañjarī ratna-mañjarī (183)




                          112
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017

kastūrī-mañjarī gandha-mañjarī netra-mañjarī

śrī-padma-mañjarī līlā-mañjarī hema-mañjarī

bhānumaty-anya-paryāyā supremā rati-mañjarī (184)



Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī, Rāga Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī, Lavaṅga
Mañjarī, Guṇa Mañjarī, Rasa Mañjarī, Vilāsa Mañjarī,
Prema Mañjarī, Maṇi Mañjarī, Suvarṇa Mañjarī, Kāma
Mañjarī, Ratna Mañjarī, Kastūrī Mañjarī, Gandha Mañjarī,
Netra Mañjarī, Śrī Padma Mañjarī, Līlā Mañjarī, Hema
Mañjarī and others are Śrī Rādhā’s mañjarīs.

Prema Mañjarī [Supremā in Verse 184] and Rati Mañjarī
are both also known by the name Bhānumatī. (182–184)




Śrī Rādhā’s objects of worship (śrī-rādhāyā upāsyaḥ)



upāsyo jagatāṁ cakṣur bhagavān padma-bāndhavaḥ

japyaḥ svābhīṣṭa-saṁsargī kṛṣṇa-nāma mahāmanuḥ

paurṇamāsī bhagavatī sarva-saubhāgya-varddhinī (185)



The Sun-god, who gives light to the eyes of the
inhabitants of the world and who is the friend of the
lotus, is Śrī Rādhā’s worshipful deity. The great mantra
chanted by Her is the name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which fulfils
Her cherished desire. Bhagavatī Paurṇamāsī increases Her
good fortune. (185)




Special description [of different services] of some
sakhīs (sakhyādi-viśeṣāḥ)



lalitādyā aṣṭa-sakhyo mañjaryas tad-gaṇaś ca yaḥ

sarvā vṛndāvaneśvaryāḥ prāyaḥ sārūpyam āgatāḥ (186)



The eight sakhīs beginning with Lalitā, the mañjarīs and
all the members of their groups (gaṇas) share almost
identical forms (sārūpya) with Śrī Rādhā; they are
endowed with a beauty that resembles Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrī
Rādhā’s beauty. (186)




                          113
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

kānanādigatāḥ sakhyo vṛndā-kundalatādayaḥ

dhaniṣṭhā guṇamālādyā ballaveśvara-gehagāḥ (187)



Vṛndā, Kundalatā and other sakhīs traverse the forests
and gardens and assist in the pastimes taking place
there. Dhaniṣṭhā, Guṇamālā and other sakhīs live in the
very palace of Goparāja Nanda Mahārāja. (187)



kāmadā nāma dhātreyī sakhī-bhāva-viśeṣa-bhāk

rāgalekhā-kalākelī-mañjulādyās tu dāsikāḥ (188)



Kāmadā, the daughter of a wet nurse, has a special
friendship with Śrī Rādhā. Rāgalekhā, Kalākelī, Mañjulā
and others are Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants. (188)



nāndīmukhī bindumatītyādyāḥ sandhi-vidhāyikāḥ

suhṛt-pakṣatayā khyātāḥ śyāmalā maṅgalādayaḥ (189)



Nāndīmukhī, Bindumatī and other sakhīs remove the
jealous anger (māna) between Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
arrange Their meeting. Śyāmalā, Maṅgalā and other sakhīs
belong to the suhṛt-pakṣa [the party of gopīs favourable
to Śrī Rādhā]. (189)



pratipakṣatayā khyātiṁ gatāś candrāvalī-mukhāḥ (190)



Candrāvalī is the famous leader of Śrī Rādhā’s rival
group. (190)



kalāvatyo rasollāsā guṇatuṅgā smaroddhurāḥ

gandharvās tu kalākaṇṭhī sukaṇṭhī pikakaṇṭhikā

yā viśākhā-kṛta-gītīr gāyantyaḥ sukha-dā hareḥ (191)



Rasollāsā, Guṇatuṅgā, Smaroddhurā, Kalākaṇṭhī, Sukaṇṭhī
and Pikakaṇṭhī are experts in singing, playing musical
instru-ments and other similar arts. They are therefore
Śrī Rādhā’s gandharva-sakhīs – Her musicians. They
especially please Śrī Kṛṣṇa by singing songs composed by
Śrī Viśākhā. (191)



                          114
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017


vādayantyaś ca śuṣiraṁ tatānaddha-ghanāny api

māṇikī narmadā premavatī kusumapeśalāḥ (192)



Māṇikī, Narmadā, Premavatī and Kusumapeśalā please Śrī
Kṛṣṇa by playing on vaṁśī and other flutes, on vīṇā and
other string instruments, on ḍhola and other drum
instruments, and on karatālas and other cymbal
instruments. (192)




Groups of Śrī Rādhā’s sakhīs



sakhyaś ca nityasakhyaś ca prāṇa-sakhyaś ca kāścana

priya-sakhyaś ca parama-preṣṭha-sakhyaḥ prakīrttitāḥ
(193)



Śrī Rādhā’s sakhīs are divided into the famous groups of
sakhī, nitya-sakhī, prāṇa-sakhī, priya-sakhī and parama-
preṣṭha-sakhī. (193)




Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants (śrī-rādhā-bhṛtyāḥ)



divākīrtti-tanūje tu sugandhā nalinīty ubhe

mañjiṣṭhā raṅgarāgākhye rajakasya kiśorike (194)



Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants Sugandhā and Nalinī are
daughters of a barber, and Mañjiṣṭhā and Raṅgarāgā are a
washerman’s daughters. (194)



pālindrī nāma sairindhrī citriṇī citra-kāriṇī

māntrikī tāntrikī nāmnā daiva-jñā daiva-tāriṇī (195)



The maidservant who dresses and decorates Śrī Rādhā is
called Pālindrī and the one who decorates Her is
Citriṇī. The two maidservants who keep Her informed
about destined future events [who are thus knowledgeable
of the scripture delineating astrology] are Māntrikī and
Tāntrikī. (195)

                          115
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017




tathā kātyāyanītyādyā dūtikā vayasādhikāḥ

ubhe bhāgyavatī-puñjapuṇye haḍḍipa-kanyake (196)



Kātyāyanī and other female messengers are older than Śrī
Rādhā. The two maidservants Bhāgyavatī and Puñjapuṇyā
are daughters of a sweeper. (196)



bhṛṅgī mallī matallī ca pulinda-kula-kanyakāḥ

kecit kṛṣṇa-gaṇāś cāsyāḥ parivāratayā matāḥ (197)



Bhṛṅgī, Mallī and Matallī are young Pulinda girls. Some
of them are considered to be in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s party
(kṛṣṇa-pakṣa) and some in Śrī Rādhā’s (rādhā-pakṣa).
(197)



gārgī mukhyā mahī-pūjyā ceṭyo bhṛṅgārikādayaḥ

subalojjvala-gandharva-madhumaṅgala-raktakāḥ

vijayādyā rasālādyā payodādyā viṭādayaḥ (198)



Gārgī and other prominent brāhmaṇīs; Bhṛṅgārikā and
other maidservants; Subala, Ujjvala, Gandharva,
Madhumaṅgala, Raktaka and other servants; Vijayā and
others; Rasālā and others; Payodā and others; and the
group of viṭas and others are Śrī Rādhā’s servants and
maidservants. (198)



āsannā sarvadā tuṅgī piśaṅgī kalakandalā

mañjulā bindulā sandhā mṛdulādyās tu vāhikāḥ (199)



The maidservants Tuṅgī, Piśaṅgī, Kalakandalā, Mañjulā,
Bindulā, Sandhā and Mṛdulā always remain by Śrī Rādhā’s
side and carry Her possessions. (199)



samāṁsamīnāḥ sunadā yamunā bahulādayaḥ

pīnā vatsatarī tuṅgī kakkhaṭī vṛddha-markaṭī

kuraṅgī raṅgīṇī khyātā cakorī cāru-candrikā (200)



                          116
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017


Śrī Rādhā’s cows are Sunadā, Yamunā, Bahulā and others.
They have offspring every year and give birth only to
male calves. Śrī Rādhā’s dear female calf Tuṅgī is quite
strong and well nourished, and Her old female monkey’s
name is Kakkhaṭī. Her doe’s name is Raṅginī and Her
female cakorī bird is called Cāru-candrikā. (200)



nija-kuṇḍa-carī tuṇḍīkerī nāma marālikā

mayūrī tuṇḍikā nāmnā śārike sūkṣmadhī-śubhe (201)



Śrī Rādhā’s female swan is called Tuṇḍīkerī. She sports
in Śrī Rādhā’s own pond, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Her peahen is
called Tuṇḍikā and Her two female parrots are named
Sūkṣmadhī (‘refined intelligence’) and Śubhā. (201)



padyānindhāni lalitā-devyā lalitāni sva-nāthayoḥ

paṭhantyau citrayā vācā ye citrī-kurutaḥ sakhīḥ (202)



These two female parrots recite the charming songs that
Śrī Lalitā-devī composes about the pastimes of her
Mistress and Master, Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The
parrots utter the wonderful poetry of the songs with
exceedingly sweet voices and thus awaken an astonishing
rasa in the minds of the sakhīs. (202)




Śrī Rādhā’s ornaments (bhūṣaṇāni)



tilakaṁ smara-yantrākhyaṁ hāro hari-manoharaḥ

rocanau ratna-tāḍaṅkau ghrāṇa-muktā prabhākarī (203)



Śrī Rādhā’s tilaka is named Smara-yantra, Her necklace
is Hari-manohara and Her jewelled earrings (tāḍaṅka) are
called Rocana. The pearl in Her nose is called
Prabhākarī. (203)



channa-kṛṣṇa-praticchāyaṁ padakaṁ madanābhidham

syamantakānya-paryāyaḥ śaṅkhacūḍa-śiromaṇiḥ (204)



The pendant on Her chest, Madana, conceals a picture of

                          117
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                  5/5/2017

Śrī Kṛṣṇa within it. Another name of Śrīmatī’s
Syamantaka jewel is Śaṅkhacūḍa-śiromaṇi. (204)



puṣpavantau kṣipan kāntyā saubhāgya-maṇir ucyate

kaṭakāś caṭakārāvāḥ keyūre maṇikarbure (205)



A jewel called Saubhāgyamaṇi dangles on Śrī Rādhā’s
chest. By its radiance, it puts to shame even the
combined lustre of the sun and the moon as they rise
together38. The golden anklets on Her feet are called
Caṭakārāva because their jingling makes the sound ca-ṭa-
ka. Her armlets are beautified by various colourful
jewels that are called Maṇikarbura. (205)



mudrā nāmāṅkitā nāmnā vipakṣa-mada-mardinī

kāñcī kāñcana-citrāṅgī nūpure ratna-gopure

madhusūdana-mārundhe yayoḥ śiñjita-mañjarī (206)



Śrī Rādhā’s signet ring is called Vipakṣa-mada-mardinī.
Her waist belt is called Kāñcana-citrāṅgī and Her ankle
bells are named Ratna-gopura. Their jingling stuns even
Śrī Madhusūdana. (206)



vāso meghāmbaraṁ nāma kuruvinda-nibhaṁ tathā

ādyaṁ sva-priyam abhrābhaṁ raktam antyaṁ hareḥ priyam
(207)



Śrī Rādhā wears two types of garments, whose names are
Meghāmbara and Kuruvinda-nibha. The former kind is of
Her favourite colour, blue like a cloud. The latter is
red – Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s favourite colour. (207)



sudhāṁśu-darpa-haraṇo darpaṇo maṇi-bāndhavaḥ (208)



Her mirror, which has studded jewels on all sides, is
called Sudhāṁśu-darpa-haraṇa because it totally defeats
[haraṇa] even the pride [darpa] of the moon [sudhāṁśu]
by its beauty. (208)



śalākā narmadā haimī svastidā ratna-kaṅkatī

kandarpa-kuhalī nāma vāṭikā puṣpa-bhūṣitā (209)

                          118
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                 5/5/2017




Śrī Rādhā’s golden hairpin is called Narmadā, Her jewel-
studded comb is named Svastidā and Her garden, which is
always beautified by flowers, is called Kandarpa-kuhalī.
(209)



svarṇa-yūthī taḍid-vallī kuṇḍaṁ khyātaṁ sva-nāmataḥ

nīpa-vedī-taṭe yasya rahasya-kathana-sthalī (210)



The vine of golden jasmines (svarṇa-yūthī) growing in
Her garden is called Taḍid-vallī because it is as
beautiful as lightning. Her pond is known by Her own
name – Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa. On the banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa,
situated underneath a kadamba tree, is a throne where
Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa sit together and engage in many
varieties of secret conversations. (210)



mallāraś ca dhanāśrīś ca rāgau hṛdaya-modanau

chālikyaṁ dayitaṁ nṛtyaṁ vallabhā rudra-vallakī (211)



The two rāgas mallāra and dhanāśrī attract Her mind. Her
favourite dance is chālikya, and Her favourite musical
instrument is the vīṇā called Rudra-vallakī. (211)



janmanā ślāghyatāṁ nītā śuklā bhādrapadāṣṭamī

kāntā ṣoḍaśabhī reme yatrāli-nilaye śaśī (212)



The occasion of Śrī Rādhā’s birth is the eight day
[aṣṭamī] of the waxing moon in the month of Bhādra. This
aṣṭamī is known throughout the world as Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī,
and during this occasion Candra-deva (the Moon-god)
sports together with his sixteen wives (the sixteen
aspects of the moon [full moon]). Although on aṣṭamī
eigth aspects of the moon naturally shine, the Moon-god,
by the Lord’s yogamāyā potency, manifested sixteen
aspects on the night of Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī. (212)



ity etat parivārāṇāṁ śrī-vṛndāvana-nāthayoḥ

asaṅkhyānāṁ gaṇayituṁ diṅ-mātram iha darśitam (213)



Although the Mistress and Master of Vṛndāvana, Śrī Rādhā
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, have innumerable dear associates, they

                          119
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt               5/5/2017

are here described only to give the reader an idea of
their vast number. (213)



śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikāyāṁ laghu-bhāgaḥ
sampūrṇaḥ



Thus ends the bhāvānuvada of Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-
dīpikā’s Laghu-bhāga.




Table of Contents

Introduction to the Book

Names of the eight sakhīs mentioned in another part of
the same Sammohana Tantra

Foreword

Bṛhad-bhāga

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Family

Herdsmen

2. The priestly class

3. Craftsmen

Personalities honoured by Śrī Kṛṣṇa

Brāhmaṇas

Yūtha

Group of Contemporary Sakhīs

The most exalted sakhīs

1. Lalitā-devī

2. Viśākhā

3. Campakalatā

4. Citrā (Sucitrā)

5. Tuṅgavidyā

6. Indulekhā

7. Raṅgadevī

8. Sudevī

The exalted sakhīs


                           120
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt                5/5/2017

1. Kalāvatī

2. Śubhāṅgadā

3. Hiraṇyāṅgī

4. Ratnalekhā

5. Śikhāvatī

6. Kandarpa Mañjarī

7. Phullakalikā

8. Anaṅga Mañjarī

General activities of the contemporary sakhīs

A Description of the Eight Prominent Sakhīs

Lalitā-devī

Flower decorations

Crown

Hair band

Ear ornaments

Decoration for the forehead

Necklace

Armlet

Waist belt

Anklets

Bracelets

Ornaments for the feet

Blouse

Umbrella

Bed

Awning

Candrātapaḥ

Hut

2. Viśākhā

3. Campakalatā




                          121
Radha-krsna-ganoddesa-dipika.txt   5/5/2017




                          122
