Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                        5/5/2017

Rāga-vartma-candrikā




Preface

Introduction



Part One

FIRST ILLUMINATION

text 1, text 2, text 3, text 4, text 5, text 6, text 7,

text 8, text 9, text 10, text 11, text 12, text 13, text
14



SECOND ILLUMINATION

text 1, text 2, text 3, text 4, text 5, text 6, text 7,
text 8



Part Two

In connection with Svakīyā-Parakīyā

The opinion of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī

The line of thought of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura

Opinions of other Vaiṣṇavas

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura on svakīyā and parakīyā



Part Three

Additional commentary on Rāga-vartma-candrikā

Qualifications for entering

Two kinds of faith

Mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas

The goal – mañjarī-bhāva

The process – real initiation

The need of the scriptures

The mood of intimacy in spontaneous devotion

Serving the spiritual master

                              1
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


How to enter into spontaneous devotion

Now Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments on them one
by one.

Five principles of practice for entering rāgānugā

Who hears the prayers of the rāgānuga devotee?

The difference between aiśvarya and mādhurya

Worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa with Their pastimes and associates

After attaining the stage of bhāva

A rāgānuga devotee’s prayer to Kṛṣṇa

Can the scriptures be neglected?




Preface



[translated from the Hindi edition]

By the unlimited mercy and inspiration of my supremely
worshipable spiritual master, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, I am infinitely pleased today
to see that this Hindi edition of Rāga-vartma-candrikā
is now being published. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, the crown prince of illustrious teachers among
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, is the author of this
book. Although in size this treatise is very small, from
the perspective of its exalted subject matter, it is
very great.

In his Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Śrīpāda
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has briefly explained the
path of spontaneous loving devotion (rāgānuga-bhakti).
He has given a more detailed description of the same
subject matter in this book, presented in two
illuminating beams of light. In the First Illumination,
he ascertains the paths of vaidhī- and rāgānuga-bhakti:
vaidhī is performed under scriptural regulations and
rāgānugā is inspired by spiritual “greed.” On the path
of spontaneous devotion (rāga-mārga), in spite of the
rise of such spiritual “greed,” scriptural reasoning is
still relied upon. In other words, when one follows the
path of regulative devotion (vidhi-mārga), being
inspired by feelings of spiritual greed, it is
categorized as rāgānugā, and when one follows vidhi-
mārga, being disciplined by rules and regulations, it is
indeed service in vidhi-mārga. Devotional service that
disregards rules and regulations creates turmoil.

There are five limbs of spontaneous devotion (rāgānuga-
bhajana): (1) svābhīṣṭa-bhāvamaya, activities that are
saturated with one’s cherished devotional mood, for

                           2
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

example servitude (dāsya), fraternity (sakhya) and so
on; (2) bhāva-sambandhī, activites that are related to
one’s cherished mood, such as hearing (śravaṇa),
chanting (kīrtana), remembrance (smaraṇa) and so forth
of the Lord’s names (nāma), form (rūpa), qualities
(guṇa) and pastimes (līlā), observing vows on holy days
such as Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī, and hearing discourses
on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; (3) bhāva-anukula, activities that
are favorable to one’s cherished mood, such as wearing
neck beads made from the holy tulasī tree, wearing the
Vaiṣṇava markings of tilaka, and decorating oneself with
stamps of the holy name and the Lord’s lotus feet; (4)
bhāva-aviruddha, activities that are not directly
opposed to one’s cherished mood, such as serving cows,
banyan and myrobalan trees, brāhmaṇas and especially the
Vaiṣṇavas; (5) bhāva-viruddha, activities that are
detrimental to one’s cherished mood, such as
ahaṅgrahopāsanā (to consider oneself to be non-different
from the object of worship), nyāsa (various elaborate
practices for chanting mantras and performing arcana),
mudrās (different procedures of intertwining the fingers
during arcana) and dvārakā- and mahiṣī-dhyāna
(meditation upon Dvārakā and the service rendered to the
Lord by the queens who reside there).

The Second Illumination presents concepts in relation to
Śrī Kḥṣṇa’s aspects of supreme opulence (aiśvarya) and
consummate sweetness (mādhurya). Whether the Lord
exhibits His great opulences or not, if He maintains the
sweet mood of His human-like pastimes (nara-līlā), it is
known as mādhurya; and if he exhibits only His divine
opulences, transgressing the unassuming mood of nara-
līlā, then it is known as aiśvarya. Some devotees are
steadfast in their awareness of Kṛṣṇa’s supreme majesty,
whereas devotees solely intent on the Lord’s sweetness,
even when confronted with His majesty, will experience
no fear and remain firmly fixed in their own mood. Also
described are the principles of Kḥṣṇa’s omniscience
(sarvajñatā) and bewilderment (mugdhatā), the concepts
of marital love (svakīyā) and paramour love (parakīyā),
the types of cherished eternal forms attained by
rāgānuga devotees upon ascending to the realm of
perfected divine love (prema), the authority of the
Yogamāyā potency, and so on.

Life history of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura appeared in a family
of brāhmaṇas from the community of Rāḍhadeśa in the
district of Nadia, West Bengal. He was celebrated by the
name Hari-vallabha. He had two older brothers,
Rāmabhadra and Raghunātha. In childhood he studied
grammar in a village named Devagrāma. After this he went
to a village named Śaiyadābād in the district of
Murṣidābād, where he studied devotional scriptures in
the home of his spiritual master. It was in Śaiyadābād
that he wrote three books while still undergoing his
studies. These three books are Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-
bindu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa and Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā. A
short time later, he renounced his household life and
went to Vḥndāvana. There he wrote many books and
commentaries.

After the disappearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and

                           3
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

His eternal associates who had taken up residence in
Vraja, the current of unalloyed devotion (śuddha-bhakti)
was flowing by the influence of three great
personalities: Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Narottama Ṭhākura and
Śyāmānanda Prabhu. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
was fourth in the line of disciplic succession coming
from Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura.

One disciple of Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura was named Śrīla
Gaṅgā-nārāyaṇa Cakravartī Mahāśaya. He lived in Bālūcara
Gambhilā within the district of Murṣidābād. He had no
sons and only one daughter, whose name was Viṣṇupriyā.
Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura had another disciple named
Rāmakḥṣṇa Bhaṭṭācārya from the brāhmaṇa community of
Vārendra, a rural community of West Bengal. The youngest
son of Rāmakḥṣṇa Bhaṭṭācārya was named Kḥṣṇa-caraṇa. Śrī
Gaṅgā-nārāyaṇa accepted Kḥṣṇa-caraṇa as an adopted son.
The disciple of Śrī Kḥṣṇa-caraṇa was Rādhā-ramaṇa
Cakravartī, who was the spiritual master of Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

In his commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam entitled
Sārārtha-darśinī, at the beginning of rāsa-pañcādhyāya,
the five chapters describing Śrī Kḥṣṇa’s rāsa dance,
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written the following
verse:

śrī-rāma-kṛṣṇa-gaṅgā-caraṇān

natvā gurūn uru-premnaḥ

śrīla-narottama-nātha-

śrī-gaurāṅga-prabhuṁ naumi

In this verse the name Śrī Rāma refers to the spiritual
master of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrī Rādhā-
ramaṇa. The word kṛṣṇa refers to his grand-spiritual
master (parama-gurudeva), Śrī Kḥṣṇa-caraṇa. The name
Gaṅgā-caraṇa refers to his great grand-spiritual master
(parātpara-gurudeva), Śrī Gaṅgā-caraṇa. The name
“Narottama” refers to his great-great grand-spiritual
master (parama-parātpara-gurudeva), Śrīla Narottama
Ṭhākura, and the word nātha refers to the spiritual
master of Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura, Śrī Lokanātha
Gosvāmī. In this way he is offering obeisances unto his
disciplic succession (guru-paramparā) up to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu.

The daughter of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Hemalatā Ṭhākurāṇī,
was extremely learned and a great Vaiṣṇavī. She expelled
an estranged disciple named Rūpa Kavirāja from the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community. Since then Rūpa Kavirāja was
known as atibāḍī in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community. He
established his own concocted doctrine opposed to the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava conclusions, that only a person in the
renounced order of life could act as ācārya. He claimed
that it was not possible for a householder to become a
spiritual master. Completely disregarding the path of
devotional rules and regulations (vidhi-mārga), he
propagated the path of spontaneous attraction (rāga-
mārga) in an unrestrained and undisciplined manner. His
opinion was that rāgānuga-bhakti could be practiced by
remembrance (smaraṇa) alone, abandoning the practices of

                             4
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

hearing (śravaṇa) and chanting (kīrtana).

Fortunately, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura was present at
that time. In his Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on the
Third Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he refuted these false
conclusions. The householder disciples in the disciplic
succession of Nityānanda Prabhu’s son, Vīrabhadra, and
those who are descendants of the rejected sons of
Advaita Ācārya award and accept the title of “Gosvāmī.”
Such action is completely improper according to the line
of ācāryas. Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura refuted this idea of
Rūpa Kavirāja. He proved that it was not incompatible
for a qualified householder descendant of an ācārya to
act as a spiritual master. But for unfit descendants of
ācārya families who are greedy for disciples and wealth
to adopt the name of Gosvāmī is unlawful and contrary to
the statements of the scriptures. This he also proved.
Therefore, although acting as an ācārya, he never used
the title Gosvāmī with his name. He did this just to
instruct the foolish and unfit descendants of ācārya
families of modern times.

When Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was very old,
he spent most of the time in a semi-conscious state,
deeply absorbed in bhajana. At that time, in the state
of Jaipur, a debate broke out between the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas and other Vaiṣṇavas who supported the doctrine
of svakīyāvāda, marital love in the Lord’s pastimes.

Jaya Singh II was the king of Jaipur. The Vaiṣṇavas of
the antagonistic camp led Jaya Singh to believe that the
worship of Śrīmatī Rādhikā along with Śrī Govindadeva
was not supported by the scriptures. Their contention
was that Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s name was not mentioned
anywhere in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or the Viṣṇu Purāṇa and
that She was never legally married to Kḥṣṇa according to
Vedic rituals. Another objection was that the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas did not belong to a recognized line of
disciplic succession (sampradāya). There are but four
lines of Vaiṣṇava disciplic succession, which have
descended from time immemorial: the Śrī sampradāya,
Brahmā sampradāya, Rudra sampradāya and Sanaka (Kumāra)
sampradāya.

In the age of Kali the principal ācāryas of these four
sampradāyas are, respectively, Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva,
Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī and Śrī Nimbāditya. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
were thought to be outside of these four sampradāyas and
were not accepted as having a pure lineage. In
particular, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas did not have their own
commentary on the Brahma-sūtra (otherwise known as the
Vedānta-sūtra). Therefore they could not be accepted as
a bona fide line of Vaiṣṇava disciplic succession.

At that time Mahārāja Jaya Singh, knowing the prominent
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas of Vḥndāvana to be followers of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, summoned them to Jaipur to take up
the challenge with the Vaiṣṇavas from the line of Śrī
Rāmānuja. Because he was very old and immersed in the
transcendental bliss of bhajana, Śrīla Cakravartī
Ṭhākura sent his student, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava vedāntācārya
mahā-mahopādhyāya (the great one among exalted teachers
of Vedānta), paṇḍita-kula-mukuṭa (the crown of the
assembly of learned scholars) Śrīla Baladeva

                           5
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                          5/5/2017

Vidyābhūṣaṇa, to Jaipur along with his disciple Śrī
Kḥṣṇadeva in order to address the assembly.

The caste gosvāmīs had completely forgotten their
connection with the Madhva sampradāya. In addition to
this they were disrespectful to the Vaiṣṇava Vedānta and
created a great disturbance for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.
Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, by his irrefutable logic
and powerful scriptural evidence, proved that the
Gauḍīya sampradāya was a pure Vaiṣṇava sampradāya coming
in the line of Madhva. The name of this sampradāya is
the Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya sampradāya. Our previous
ācāryas, like Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Kavi Karṇapūra and
others, accepted this fact. The Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
accept Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as the natural commentary on
the Vedānta-sūtra. For this reason no separate
commentary of Vedānta-sūtra was written in the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava sampradāya.

In various Purāṇas the name of Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
mentioned. She is the personification of the hlādinī
(pleasure-giving) potency and the eternal beloved of Śrī
Kḥṣṇa. In several places of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
specifically in the Tenth Canto in connection with the
description of the Lord’s Vṛndāvana pastimes (vraja-
līlā), Śrīmatī Rādhikā is mentioned in a very concealed
manner. Only rasika and bhāvuka devotees who are
conversant with the conclusions of the scriptures can
understand this confidential mystery.

In the learned assembly in Jaipur, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa
refuted all the arguments and doubts of the opposing
party. He solidly established the position of the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas as following in the line of disciplic
succession descending from Madhva, as well as the
authenticity of the worship of Rādhā-Govinda. The
opposition was silenced by his presentation.
Nonetheless, because the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya did
not have a commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra, the
contesting party did not accept them as being a pure
line of Vaiṣṇava disciplic succession.

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa then wrote the famous Gauḍīya
commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra named Śrī Govinda-
bhāṣya. Once again the worship of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda
began in the temple of Śrī Govindadeva, and the validity
of the Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya sampradāya was
accepted. It was only on the authority of Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu
was able to write the Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya and prove the
connection of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas with the Madhva
sampradāya. There should be no doubt in this regard.
This accomplishment of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura done on behalf of the sampradāya will be
recorded in golden letters in the history of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura describes a very
striking event in his own book entitled Mantrārtha-
dīpikā. Once, while reading Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, he
came upon the verse quoted below (Madhya-līlā 21.125),
which describes the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī-mantra.

kāma-gāyatrī-mantra rūpa, haya kṛṣṇera svarūpa,

                           6
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017


sārdha-cabbiśa akṣara tāra haya

se akṣara candra haya, kṛṣṇe kari’ udaya

trijagat kaila kāmamaya

The kāma-gāyatrī-mantra is identical with Śrī Kḥṣṇa. In
this king of mantras there are twenty-four-and-a-half
syllables and each syllable is a full moon. This
aggregate of moons has caused the moon of Śrī Kḥṣṇa to
rise and fill the three worlds with divine love, prema.

It is proved by the evidence of this verse that the
kāma-gāyatrī-mantra is composed of twenty-four-and-a-
half syllables. But in spite of considerable thought,
Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī could not ascertain which
syllable in the kāma-gāyatrī was considered a half-
syllable. Although he carefully scrutinized grammar
books, the Purāṇas, the Tantra, the scriptures (śāstras)
dealing with drama (nāṭya) and rhetoric (alaṅkāra), and
other scriptures, he found no mention anywhere of a
half-syllable. In all these scriptures he found mention
only of the vowels and consonants that make up the fifty
letters of the alphabet. He found no evidence anywhere
of a half-syllable.

In Śrī Harināmāmṛta-vyākaraṇa, the grammar system
composed by Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, he found mention of only
fifty letters in the section dealing with the names of
the various groups of vowels and consonants
(saṅjñāpāda). By study of the arrangement of letters
(mātṛkā) in the Mātṛkānyāsa and other books, he found no
mention anywhere of a half-syllable. In the Rādhikā-
sahasra-nāma-stotra, found in the Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa,
one of the names of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the goddess of
Vḥndāvana, is given as Pañcāśad-varṇa-rūpiṇī (one whose
form is composed of fifty syllables).

Seeing this, his doubt only increased. He began to
consider whether Kavirāja Gosvāmī might have made a
mistake while writing. But there was no possibility of
him committing any mistake. He was omniscient and thus
completely devoid of the material defects of mistakes,
illusion and so on. If the fragmented letter “t” (the
final letter of the kāma-gāyatrī-mantra) is taken as a
half-syllable, then Kḥṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī would be
guilty of the fault of disorder, for he has given the
following description in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 21.126–8):

sakhi he! kṛṣṇa-mukha-dvija-rāja-rāja

kṛṣṇa-vapu siṁhāsane, vasi’ rājya-śāsane

kare saṅge candrera samāja

dui gaṇḍa sucikkaṇa, jini’ maṇi-sudarpaṇa,

sei dui pūrna-candra jāni

lalāṭe aṣṭamī-indu, tāhāte candana-bindu,

sei eka pūrṇa-candra māni

                             7
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


kara nakha cāndera hāṭa, vaṁṣī upara kare nāṭa

tāra gīta muralīra tāna

pada nakha candra-gaṇa, tale kare sunartana

nūpurera dhvani yāra gāna

In these lines, Śrīla Kḥṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has
described the face of Śrī Kḥṣṇa as the first full moon.
His two cheeks are both considered as full moons. The
dot of sandalwood on the upper portion of His forehead
is considered as the fourth full moon, and the region of
the forehead below the dot of sandalwood is the moon of
aṣṭamī or, in other words, a half-moon. According to
this description, the fifth syllable is a half-syllable.
If the fragmented “t”, which is the final letter of the
mantra, is taken as a half-syllable, then the fifth
syllable could not be a half-syllable.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura fell into a dilemma
because he could not decipher the half-syllable. He
considered that if the syllables of the mantra would not
reveal themselves, then neither would it be possible for
the worshipable deity of the mantra to be manifest to
him. He decided that since he could not obtain audience
of the worshipable deity of the mantra, it would be
better to die. Thinking thus, he went to the bank of
Rādhā-kuṇḍa at night with the intent of giving up his
body.

After the second period (prahara) of the night had
passed, he began to doze off when suddenly the daughter
of Vḥṣabhānu Mahārāja, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, appeared to him.
She very affectionately said, “O Viśvanātha, O Hari-
vallabha, do not lament! Whatever Śrī Kḥṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
has written is the absolute truth. By My grace, he knows
all the inner sentiments of My heart. Do not maintain
any doubt about his statements. The kāma-gāyatrī is a
mantra to worship Me and My dear beloved (prāṇa-
vallabha). We are revealed to the devotee by the
syllables of this mantra. No one is capable of knowing
Us without My grace. The half-syllable is described in
the book known as Varṇāgama-bhāsvat. After consulting
this book, Śrī Kḥṣṇadāsa Kavirāja determined the actual
identity of the kāma-gāyatrī. You should examine this
book and then broadcast its meaning for the benefit of
faithful persons.”

After hearing this instruction from Vḥṣabhānu-nandinī
Śrīmatī Rādhikā herself, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
suddenly arose. Calling out, “O Rādhā! O Rādhā!” he
began to cry in great lamentation. Thereafter, upon
regaining his composure, he set himself to carrying out
Her order.

According to the indication of Śrīmatī Rādhikā regarding
the determination of the half-syllable, the letter ya,
which precedes the letter vi in the mantra, is
considered a half-syllable. Apart from this, all other
syllables are full syllables, or full moons.

By the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrīla Viśvanātha

                            8
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

Cakravartī Ṭhākura became acquainted with the meaning of
the mantra. He obtained the direct audience of his
worshipable deity, and by means of his internal
perfected spiritual body (siddha-deha), he was able to
participate in the Lord’s eternal pastimes (nitya-līlā)
as an eternal associate. After this, he established the
deity of Śrī Gokulānanda on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa.
While residing there, he experienced the sweetness of
the eternal pastimes of Śrī Vḥndāvana. It was at this
time that he wrote his Sukhavarttinī commentary on
Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū, a book written by Śrīla Kavi
Karṇapūra.

rādhā-parastīra-kuṭīra-vartinaḥ

prāptavya-vṛndāvana-cakravartinaḥ

ānanda-campū-vivṛti-pravartinaḥ

sānto-gatir me sumahā-nivartinaḥ

I, Cakravartī, completely leaving aside all else, desire
to attain Śrī Vṛndāvana. Residing in a simple hut on the
bank of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is the topmost place of
pastimes for Śrī Rādhā, I am now writing this commentary
on Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū.

In old age, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura spent most of
his time in a semi-conscious state, deeply absorbed in
bhajana. His principal student, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa,
took over the responsibility of teaching the scriptures.

Re-establishment of the doctrine of parakīyāvāda

Because of a slight decline in influence of the Six
Gosvāmīs in Śrī Vḥndāvana-dhāma, a controversy arose
regarding the doctrines of svakīyāvāda, marital love,
and parakīyāvāda, paramour love, in the Lord’s pastimes.
To dispel the misconceptions regarding svakīyāvāda,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura wrote two books,
Rāga-vartma-candrikā and Gopī-premāmṛta, which are
wonderfully filled with all the conclusions of the
scriptures. Thereafter, in his Ānanda-candrikā
commentary on the “laghutvam atra”1 verse of Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi (1.21), he soundly refuted the theory of
svakīyāvāda by scriptural evidence and irrefutable
arguments, and established the conception of parakīyā.
In his Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
he gave strong support to parakīyā-bhāva.

It is said that at the time of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura there were some scholars (paṇḍitas)
who opposed him in regard to worship in the mood of
parakīyā. But by his deep scholarship and irrefutable
logic, he defeated them. On account of this, the
paṇḍitas resolved to kill him. Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura used to go out in the early morning
before dawn to circumambulate Śrī Vḥndāvana-dhāma. They
formulated a plan to kill him at that time in some
dense, dark grove.

While performing such circumambulation, Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura came upon the grove where the
adversaries desired to kill him. But suddenly they

                           9
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

looked and saw that he was no longer there. In his
place, they saw a beautiful young Vrajavāsī girl picking
flowers along with two or three of her friends. The
paṇḍitas inquired from the girl, “Dear child, just a
moment ago a great devotee was approaching here. Where
did he go? Did you happen to see him?” The girl replied,
“I saw him, but I don’t know where he went.”

Seeing the astonishing beauty of the girl, her sidelong
glancing, her graceful feminine manner and gentle
smiling, the paṇḍitas became captivated. All the
impurity in their minds was vanquished and their hearts
became soft. On being requested by the paṇḍitas to
introduce herself, the girl said, “I am a maidservant of
my mistress Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is presently at her
mother-in-law’s home at Yāvaṭa. She sent me to pick
flowers.” Saying this, she disappeared, and in her
place, they saw Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura once
again. The paṇḍitas fell at his feet and prayed for
forgiveness. He forgave them all.

Many such astonishing events are heard in the life of
Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura. In this way he refuted the
theory of svakīyāvāda and established the truth of pure
parakīyā. This work of his is of great importance for
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura not only protected
the integrity of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava dharma, but he
also re-established its influence in Śrī Vḥndāvana.
Anyone who evaluates this accomplishment of his is sure
to be struck with wonder by his uncommon genius. The
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas have composed the following
verse in praise of his extraordinary work:

viśvasya nātha-rupo ’sau

bhakti-vartma-pradarśanāt

bhakta-cakre varttitatvāt

cakravarty ākhyayābhavat

Because he indicates the path of bhakti, he is known by
the name Viśvanātha, the Lord of the universe, and
because he always remains in the assembly (cakra) of
pure devotees, he is known by the name Cakravartī, he
around whom a circle or assembly turns.

In the year 1754, on the fifth day of the light phase of
the moon of the month of Māgha (January–February), at
approximately one hundred years of age, while absorbed
in an internal condition at Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, he entered
into aprakaṭa (unmanifest) Vḥndāvana. Even today his
samādhi tomb can be found just next to the temple of Śrī
Gokulānanda in Śrīdhāma Vḥndāvana.

Following in the footsteps of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, he
composed abundant transcendental literatures about
bhakti and thus established the inner heart’s longing of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu in this world. He also refuted various
faulty conclusions opposed to the genuine following of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī (rūpānuga). He is thus revered in
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava society as an illustrious ācārya and as

                            10
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                          5/5/2017

an authoritative mahājana. He is renowned as a great
transcendental philosopher, poet and rasika devotee. A
Vaiṣṇava composer of verse named Kḥṣṇa dāsa has written
the following lines at the conclusion of his translation
of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s book Mādhurya-kādambinī:

mādhurya-kādambinī-grantha jagata kaila dhanya

cakravartī-mukhe vaktā āpani śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya

keha kahena-cakravartī śrī-rūpera avatāra

kaṭhina ye tattva sarala karite pracāra

ohe guṇa-nidhi śrī-viśvanātha cakravartī

ki jāniba tomāra guṇa muñi mūḍha mati

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has benedicted the
whole world by writing the book Mādhurya-kādambinī. In
reality, Śrī Kḥṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the speaker of
this book. He has spoken it through the mouth of Śrī
Cakravartī. Some people say that Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura
is an incarnation of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. He is very
expert in the art of describing extremely complex truths
in an easily understandable manner. O ocean of mercy,
Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura! I am a great fool.
Kindly reveal the mystery of your transcendental
qualities in my heart. This is my prayer at your lotus
feet.

Among   Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas there are very few who
wrote   as many books as Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Even
today   the following proverb regarding his three books is
quite   famous among the Vaiṣṇavas:

kiraṇa-bindu-kaṇā ei tīna niye vaiṣṇava-paṇā

These three books, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa, Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu and Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā, are taken
by the Vaiṣṇavas as their wealth.

A list is given below of his books and commentaries,
which form a storehouse of incomparable wealth of
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava devotional literature:

(1) Vraja-rīti-cintāmaṇi

(2) Camatkāra-candrikā

(3) -Prema-sampuṭam (Khaṇḍa-kāvyam – a poetic work that
displays only partial characteristics or ornamentation
of poetry)

(4) Gītāvalī

(5) Subodhinī (commentary on Alaṅkāra-kaustubha)

(6) Ānanda-candrikā (commentary on Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi)

(7) commentary on Śrī Gopāla-tāpanī

(8) Stavāmṛta-laharī


                             11
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                        5/5/2017

(9) Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam

(10) Śrī Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā

(11) Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa

(12) Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu

(13) Rāga-vartma-candrikā

(14) Aiśvarya-kādambinī (unavailable)

(15) Śrī Mādhurya-kādambinī

(16) commentary on Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu

(17) commentary on Dāna-keli-kaumudī

(18) commentary on Śrī Lalita-mādhava-nāṭaka

(19) commentary on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (incomplete)

(20) commentary on Brahma-saṁhitā

(21) Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary on Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā

(22) Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

My most revered Śrī Gurudeva, aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, was a guardian
of the Śrī Gauḍīya sampradāya and founder-ācārya of the
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti as well as the Gauḍīya maṭhas
established under its auspices. Aside from publishing
his own books, he republished the books of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and other previous ācāryas in the
Bengali language. Today, by his heartfelt desire,
enthusiastic blessings and causeless mercy, Jaiva-
dharma, Śrī Caitanya-śikṣāmṛta, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhura Śikṣā, Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka and other books have
been printed in Hindi, the national language of India.
Gradually other books are being published.

The present-day head and ācārya of the Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti, my most revered godbrother,
parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja, is deeply immersed in transcendental knowledge
and is a very dear, intimate servant of the lotus feet
of our spiritual master. I humbly pray at his lotus feet
that he may bless me by presenting this precious book,
Rāga-vartma-candrikā, into the lotus hands of our Śrīla
Gurudeva and thus fulfill his inner heart’s longing.

I have complete faith that those who are possessed of
yearning for bhakti and especially the practitioners of
the path of spontaneous devotion who are captivated by
the mellows of Vṛndāvana (vraja-rasa) will receive this
book with great reverence. Faithful persons who study
this book will obtain qualification to enter into the
wealth of prema of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Finally, I pray at the lotus feet of my most revered
Śrīla Gurudeva, the condensed personification of the
Lord’s compassion, that he may pour down a shower of
abundant mercy upon me, by which I may obtain more and

                              12
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

more eligibility to engage in the service of his inner
heart’s longing. This is our humble prayer at his lotus
feet, which bestow pure love for the Supreme Lord Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.



An aspirant for a particle of mercy of

Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas,

humble and insignificant,



Tridaṇḍi-bhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



the holy day of Akṣaya-tṛtīyā

April 25, 1993




Introduction




It is with great happiness that we now present before
our readership this new edition of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Rāga-vartma-candrikā, one of the
most important compositions within the great treasure-
house of Vaiṣṇava literature. Written in the eighteenth
century, this book illuminates the rare path to
achieving a relationship based on spontaneous love with
the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

This edition is a direct translation of the Hindi
edition, originally published in 1993, of Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, one of the foremost
proponents of Kṛṣṇa-devotion in the modern era. This
book is divided into three parts. Part One is a direct
translation of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Rāga-vartma-
candrikā, with the addition of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s
insightful commentary known as Śrī Candrikā-cakora-
vṛtti. Part Two, composed by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
himself, is a thorough examination of the principle
regarding the Lord’s marital love (svakīyā) and
extramarital love (parakīyā). Part Three comprises
additional material spoken in English by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja to an intimate circle of disciples in the early
1990s. This section provides additional clarification on
the important and sometimes complex topics presented in
the previous two sections.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has a strong determination to
see the writings of the great Gauḍīya ācāryas published
in English and widely distributed. This he shares in
common with his dear friend and instructing spiritual
master, Śrī Śrīmad A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda,

                            13
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

who single-handedly and in a relatively short period of
time spread the teachings of Kṛṣṇa consciousness around
the entire world. Śrīla Prabhupāda’s translations and
writings set the standard for the literary presentation
of Vaiṣṇava philosophy, and we hope and pray that our
current efforts, and this volume in particular, are
pleasing to him.

Added to this new edition is a thorough glossary, which
should prove helpful to those readers unfamiliar with
the Sanskrit terminology necessarily employed to explain
the exalted subject matter found herein. I would like to
thank Atula-kṛṣṇa dāsa for checking the Sanskrit in this
edition, Kṛṣṇa-prema dāsa for designing the new cover
and Subala-sakhā dasa for providing the new photograph
of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. On behalf of the many
devotees serving in Gauḍīya Vedānta Publications, we
offer this edition into the hands of our beloved
gurudeva, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, praying that he will
always bless us with the capacity to fulfill his inner
heart’s longing.



An aspirant for the service of the

lotus feet of śrī guru and the Vaiṣṇavas,

Prema-vilāsa dāsa



Śrī-kṛṣṇa-janmāṣṭamī, the divine appearance day of the
Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa

August 20, 2003

Gopīnātha-bhavana, Śrī Vṛndāvana




Part One



FIRST ILLUMINATION




text 1


śrī-rūpa-vāk-sudhā-svādi

cakorebhyo namo namaḥ

yeṣāṁ kṛpā-lavair vakṣye

rāga-vartmani candrikām


                           14
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

With great humility and veneration, I offer obeisances
again and again to those devotees who, like cakora
birds, are always relishing the nectar of the words of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. On the strength of just a slight
merciful glance from them, I am beginning this book,
which is like a moonbeam illuminating the path of
spontaneous devotion.

Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti

First of all, this insignificant and destitute person
offers obeisances over and over again to his supremely
worshipable spiritual master, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja; to the crown-jewel of rasika
devotees in the illustrious line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura; to those who have
fulfilled the cherished innermost desire of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu by establishing in this world the path to
awaken pure love for the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; to Śrī
Kḥṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, resplendent with the mood and
luster of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and accompanied by all His
associates; and to Gāndharvā-Giridhārī Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Vinoda-bihārī. I offer obeisances to all of them again
and again to obtain their causeless mercy and blessings
before commencing this Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti1 on
Rāga-vartma-candrikā, composed by the topmost follower
of Rūpa Gosvāmī, the highly eminent preceptor Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

The world-renowned Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
is an eternal associate of Śrī Kḥṣṇa Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, who is directly Svayam Bhagavān, the Supreme
Lord himself. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī established, preached
and distributed the tasteful mellows of Vṛndāvana
(vraja-rasa) according to the innermost desire of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is one
of the prominent preceptors in the line of Rūpa Gosvāmī
of the subsequent era. He has written wonderful
commentaries, saturated with philosophical conclusions
(siddhānta) and transcendental mellows (rasa), on Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrī Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi, Śrī Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta and other literatures.
For the distinct benefit of rāgānuga devotees and
particularly for practitioners (sādhakas) who have
received little spiritual instruction, he has composed
the three very brief yet invaluable encapsulations, Śrī
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-
kiraṇa and Śrī Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā. To further
corroborate the thought of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, he has
referred to the divine, spotlessly pure paramour love
(viśuddha-parakīyā-bhāva) throughout all his
commentaries, books and prayers. Examination of his
transcendental writings confirms that he is one of the
prominent Vaiṣṇavas in the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
(rūpānuga). His life’s noble purpose was to follow,
illuminate and preach the internal mood of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī. Therefore, in the beginning of this treatise,
he specifically expresses his deep internal faith in
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī by repeatedly offering obeisances to
those cakora-bird-like devotees who relish the nectar of
the rasa-laden words of Rūpa Gosvāmī.

This book has been named Rāga-vartma-candrikā. The deep

                            15
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

purport of the title is that generally faithful people
worship the Lord by following the rules and regulations
of vaidhī-bhakti, whereas the worship of Vrajendra-
nandana Śyāmasundara that is filled with ever-fresh
sentiments of intense loving attachment (anurāga) is
extremely uncommon, even for great demigods and high-
class sādhakas. Devotees possessed of divine love
(premi-bhaktas) like the grandsire of the universe, Śrī
Brahmā, as well as Śrī Uddhava and Śrī Nārada, yearn for
this. However, this path based on anurāga is practically
impossible to discover. Only a few fortunate people even
realize that such a course exists, let alone follow it.
For those glorious persons in whom “greed” has awakened
to proceed in this way, this book is candrikā,
illuminating moonlight. By means of the soothing rays of
this moonlight, they can easily detect and advance along
this rarely achieved path.




text 2


śrīmad-bhakti-sudhāmbhoder

bindur yaḥ pūrva-darṣitaḥ

tatra rāgānugā bhaktiḥ

saṅkṣiptātra vitanyate

In the previously published Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-
bindu, rāgānuga-bhakti was described in brief. Now an
elaborate explanation of that spontaneous devotion is
given in this treatise.

Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti

Here it is necessary to know the meanings of the terms
rāga, rāgānugā and rāgātmikā. Regarding this subject
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that excessive
attachment for many forms of sense enjoyment, which the
materialist feels through natural contact with sense
objects, is called rāga. Just as the eyes become
agitated on seeing something beautiful, in the same way
all the senses are always eager to taste pleasure, and
thus the heart develops attachment (rāga) for the sense
objects.

When Kḥṣṇa is the exclusive object of this rāga, it is
called rāga-bhakti. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has defined this
rāga in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.272): “iṣṭe
svārasikī rāgaḥ paramāviṣṭatā – the strong, deep and
natural absorption in the cherished object of one’s
devotion arising from an unquenchable loving thirst is
called rāga.” When one’s devotion unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa attains
to this stage, it is called rāgātmikā-bhakti. This
bhakti is especially found in the Vrajavāsīs, the
eternal residents of Vraja. In brief, it can be said
that rāgātmikā-bhakti is the thirst to love Kḥṣṇa, and
devotion that follows in its wake is called rāgānugā. In
other words when, by the mercy of Śrī Kḥṣṇa and His

                             16
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

devotees, one cultivates devotion impelled by the
covetousness to obtain the same mood

as Kḥṣṇa’s beloved associates, it is called rāgānuga-
bhakti. This rāgānuga-bhakti is of two types:
sambandhānugā and kāmānugā.




text 3


vaidhī bhaktir bhavet śāstraṁ

bhaktau cet syāt pravartakam

rāgānugā syāc ced bhaktau

lobha eva pravartakaḥ

Devotion impelled by injunctions of the scriptures is
called vaidhī-bhakti, and when incited by spiritual
“greed,” it is called rāgānuga-bhakti.




text 4


bhaktau pravṛttir atra syāt

tac cikīrṣā suniścayā

śāstrāl lobhāt tac cikīrṣū

syātāṁ tad adhikāriṇau

To advance in devotional life means to nurture the
single-minded desire to engage exclusively in the limbs
of bhakti. One can progress in bhakti in two different
ways: through fear of injunctions of the scriptures and
through intense spiritual greed (lobha). Hence,
according to one’s qualification, there are two types of
practitioner of bhakti-sādhana.




text 5


tatra lobho lakṣitaḥ svayaṁ śrī-rūpa-gosvāmi-caraṇair
eva

tat-tad-bhāvādi-mādhurye

śrute dhīr yad apekṣate

nātra śāstraṁ na yuktiṁ ca

                              17
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017


tal lobhotpatti lakṣaṇam

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.292)

vraja-līlā-parikara-stha śṛṅgārādi-bhāva-mādhurye śrute
dhīr idaṁ mama bhūyāt iti lobhotpatti-kāle śāstra-yukty-
apekṣā na syāt, satyāṁ ca tasyāṁ lobhatvasyaivāsiddheḥ.
na hi kenacit śāstra-dṛṣṭyā lobhaḥ kriyate nāpi
lobhanīya-vastu-prāptau svasya yogyāyogyatva-vicāraḥ ko
’py udbhavati. kintu lobhanīya-vastuni śrute dṛṣṭe vā
svata eva lobha utpadyate.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, in Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, has
described the symptoms of greed as follows: “If, by
hearing about the sweetness of the intimate loving moods
exchanged between Śrī Kḥṣṇa and His cherished
companions, one experiences in his heart the natural
expectation of attaining a loving sentiment similar to
that of Kḥṣṇa’s dear ones, without being motivated by
logic or scriptural arguments, it is to be considered
symptomatic of the appearance of spiritual greed.”

Upon hearing about the delight of the sentiment of
amorous love between Kḥṣṇa and the cowherd girls (gopīs)
and the other moods of Kḥṣṇa’s associates in His
Vṛndāvana pastimes (vraja-līlā), one may yearn, “Such a
mood should arise in my heart.” At that time one need no
longer rely on logic or scriptural arguments. If such
scriptural impetus persists, then one’s sentiments
cannot be identified as greed. No one ever develops
greed on the basis of the scriptures, nor is there any
consideration of spiritual qualification or lack thereof
for obtaining the coveted goal. Rather, greed arises
spontaneously simply upon hearing about or seeing the
object of one’s greed.

Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti

In Jaiva-dharma Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura confirms
that, after one has heard about the supremely sweet
moods of the Vrajavāsīs, the consequent disposition of
hankering to enter into these moods signifies the
symptom of the appearance of spiritual greed. Upon
hearing narrations concerning Kṛṣṇa, a person with the
propensity for regulative devotion will scrutinize what
he has heard with his intelligence, with what is said in
the scriptures and with reasoning. Only when these three
are consistent with what he has heard does he go
forward, but the path of spontaneous devotion (rāga-
mārga) does not work like this. On this path there is no
place for the intelligence, for scripture or for
reasoning. The only consideration is greed for the
devotional moods of the Vrajavāsīs: “What sweet feelings
do the Vrajavāsīs have for Kḥṣṇa? Can I ever have such
sentiments? How can they be attained?” Floundering in a
state of intense agitation, one becomes desperate for
these moods. Such anxiety and intense covetousness are
the prime symptoms of this greed. In the absence of
these symptoms, one should understand that passion for
rāgānuga-bhakti has not yet arisen.




                            18
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017



text 6


sa ca bhagavat-kṛpā-hetuko ’nurāgī bhakta kṛpā hetukaś
ceti dvi vidhaḥ. tatra bhakta-kṛpā-hetukaś dvi vidhaḥ,
prāktana ādhunikaś ca. prāktanaḥ paurva-bhavika-tādṛśa-
bhakta-kṛpotthaḥ, ādhunikaḥ etaj-janmāvadhi-tādṛśa-
bhakta-kṛpottaḥ. ādye sati lobhānantaraṁ tādṛśa-guru-
caraṇāśrayaṇam. dvitīye guru-caraṇāśrayānantaraṁ lobha-
pravṛttir bhavati. yad uktam:

kṛṣṇa-tad-bhakta-kāruṇya

mātra-lobhaika-hetukā

puṣṭi-mārgatayā kaiścid

iyaṁ rāgānugocyate

There are two sources of this greed: the mercy of
Bhagavān (bhagavad-prasādaja) and the mercy bestowed by
devotees possessed of spontaneous, loving devotion
(bhakta-prasādaja). There are again two types of greed
arising from the mercy of the devotee: ancient
(prāktana, also called prācīna) and present (ādhunika).
The greed arising from mercy received in previous lives
from Kḥṣṇa’s devotees who are endowed with the sweet
sentiments of Śrī Śyāmasundara’s eternal associates in
Vraja is called prāktana. And the greed arising from the
mercy of such elevated devotees in the present life is
called ādhunika. Those whose hunger has already been
awakened in a previous life will immediately take
shelter at the lotus feet of a rāgānuga-rasika-guru upon
the manifestation of such greed in this life. However,
sādhakas whose greed is recent develop that intense
thirst only after taking shelter of the lotus feet of a
spiritual master. Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu confirms that
engagement in bhakti due to greed, which arises only
from the mercy of Śrī Kḥṣṇa and His devotees, is known
as rāgānuga-bhakti. Some also call it puṣṭi-mārga.

Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti

In the Śrī Vallabha sampradāya, rāgānuga-bhakti is known
as puṣṭi-mārga and vaidhī-bhakti as maryādā-mārga. At
the time of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Vallabhācārya
established puṣṭi-mārga. He met Mahāprabhu twice. The
first time was when Mahāprabhu, returning from
Vḥndāvana-dhāma, stayed in Prayāga for a few days to
instruct Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. At that time, the aged
Vallabhācārya took Mahāprabhu to his residence in the
village of Adhail on the other side of the Yamunā. The
second meeting was in Purī-dhāma when Mahāprabhu was
sitting and discussing the mellows of the love of the
Divine Couple (yugala-rasa) with his associates headed
by Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī
Gadādhara Paṇḍita, Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda. At that time Śrī Vallabhācārya was recognized
as a dig-vijayī Vaiṣṇava ācārya, a preceptor who was
undefeated in philosophical debate. He authored a well-
known commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam called Subodhinī.
His sampradāya is noted for service rendered to Bāla-

                            19
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

gopāla in the parental mood (vātsalya-bhāva), and now
his Nāthadvāra-dhāma, the main place of pilgrimage for
his followers that is situated in the Indian state of
Rajasthan, has become very famous.




text 7


tataś ca tādṛśa lobhavato bhaktasya lobhanīya tad-bhāva-
prāpty-upāya-jijñāsāyāṁ satyāṁ śāstra yukty-apekṣā syāt.
śāstra-vidhinaiva śāstra-pratipādita-yuktyaiva ca tat
pradarśanāt, nānyathā. yathā dugdhādiṣu lobhe sati
kathaṁ me dugdhādikaṁ bhaved iti tad upāya jijñāsāyāṁ
tad abhijñāpta-jana-kṛtopadeśa vākyāpekṣā syāt. tataś ca
gāḥ krīṇātu bhavān ity ādi tad upadeśa vākyād eva gavān
ayana-tad-ghāsa-pradāna-tad-dohana-prakaraṇādikaṁ tata
eva śikṣen na tu svataḥ. yad uktam aṣṭama-skandhe
“yathāgnim edhasya taṁ ca goṣu bhuvy annam ambūdyamane
ca vṛttim. yogair manuṣyā adhiyanti hi tvāṁ guṇeṣu
buddhyā kavayo vidanti.”

When both of the previously mentioned types of devotees,
who have either previously acquired or recently acquired
greed, become fervently curious about the means for
achieving the ecstatic sentiments of Śrī Kḥṣṇa’s eternal
associates, then they depend on the scriptures and the
conducive systems prescribed therein. It is only through
the reasoning established by the scriptures that such
sentiments can be achieved. There is no other way. For
example, if a person desires to drink milk, how can he
get it? At that point he needs to learn through the
guidance of a knowledgeable person how and where he can
easily obtain milk. Since this person is hankering for
milk, he will accept instructions on how to purchase a
cow and maintain it. Only after the cow gives birth to a
calf will he be able to milk the cow and drink this
milk. In this way the person thirsty for milk has to
accept different directives from a trusted source on
buying, milking and feeding the cow and so on.

In the same manner, a sādhaka filled with greed also has
to profit from relevant instructions. One cannot gain
knowledge on one’s own; one must accept proper
direction. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (8.6.12) Brahmājī
explains, “Just as a human being traditionally derives
fire from wood, milk from a cow, grains and water from
the earth, and money from enterprise and thereby
maintains his life, in the same way, O Viṣṇu, the
experts in bhakti say that we can attain you by
utilizing our intelligence to take proper association.
By this we will overcome the three modes of nature and
thus progress gradually in bhakti.”




text 8



                           20
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

sa ca lobho rāga-vartma-vartināṁ bhaktānāṁ guru-
pādāśraya-lakṣaṇam ārabhya svābhīṣṭa-vastu sākṣāt
prāpti-samayam abhivyāpya “yathā yathātmā parimṛjyate
’sau, mat-puṇya-gāthā- śravaṇābhidhānaiḥ. tathā tathā
paśyati vastu sūkṣmaṁ, cakṣur yathaivāñjana-
saṁprayuktam.” iti bhagavad-ukter bhakti-hetu-kāntaḥ
karaṇa-śuddhi-tāratamyāt pratidinam adhikādhiko bhavati.

Upon the rise of this greed, the sādhaka who is
following the path of spontaneous devotion must perform
śravaṇa and kīrtana of transcendental topics beginning
from the initial stage of his sādhana – that is, taking
shelter at the lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual
master – until he achieves his cherished desire of
receiving direct darśana of his worshipable deity. In
this manner the innermost recesses of his heart
gradually become purified, and he achieves the desired
goal according to his degree of purification. The Lord
said to Śrī Uddhava (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.26)),
“When a medicinal ointment is applied to a diseased eye,
the eye’s weakness is overcome and its power to discern
very subtle objects is restored. In the same way, to the
extent that the heart is purified by repeatedly hearing
about and glorifying My supremely sacred pastimes, one
can receive a glimpse of My subtle, divine form.”

Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti

In a heart significantly purified by bhakti, the Lord’s
divine form manifests of its own accord. For example,
Śrī Nārada took birth as the son of a maidservant. By
good fortune, at the age of five he received the
association of great saints and had the auspicious
opportunity to extensively hear their holy utterances
(hari-kathā) during Cāturmāsya, the four months of the
rainy season. He was also privileged to honor their
remnants, as well as to drink the pure water that had
washed their sacred lotus feet. By the end of
Cāturmāsya, the young Nārada had developed a burning
desire to attain the Lord. On observing this intense
hankering in the young boy, the devotee sages bestowed
upon him the bhagavan-mantra and instructions for
practicing bhajana.

After the sages departed from that place, by the will of
Providence, Nārada’s mother left her body. In a fearsome
and desolate forest, the five-year-old boy absorbed
himself in the worship of Bhagavān through the mantra
given to him by the sages. Gradually, as his heart was
purified, he received a glimpse of the Supreme Lord, who
is an ocean of mercy. The Lord instructed Nārada to
continue executing sādhana-bhajana and to glorify his
pastimes throughout the universe. Nārada followed these
instructions and upon attaining perfection, unseen by
others, he gave up his material body made of the five
elements and received the form of an eternal associate
of the Lord.




text 9


                            21
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017


udbhūte tādṛśe lobhe śāstra darśiteṣu tat-tad-bhāva-
prāpty upāyeṣu, “ācārya-caitya-vapuṣā svagatiṁ vyanakti”
ity uddhavokteḥ, keṣucid guru-mukhāt keṣucid abhijña-
mahodayānurāgi-bhakta-mukhāt abhijñāteṣu keṣucid bhakti-
mṛṣta-citta-vṛttiṣu svata eva sphuriteṣu, sollāsam
evātiśayena pravṛttiḥ syāt. yathā kāmārthināṁ
kāmopāyeṣu.

When the sādhaka attains greed, the Supreme Lord
inspires him by manifesting himself in two forms:
externally He gives instructions in the form of the
spiritual master, and internally, as the Supersoul, He
inspires a person from within the heart about the means
to achieve the desired object. According to this
statement of Śrī Uddhava’s from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.29.6), in order to follow the method illuminated in
the scriptures to obtain one’s cherished devotional mood
(bhāva), some sādhakas with inborn greed gain complete
knowledge by hearing instructions directly from the
spiritual master. Others acquire this knowledge by
hearing from the lotus mouths of elevated devotees who
possess deep, spontaneous love for the Lord and and who
are highly enlightened in such bhāva. In a few others,
this knowledge self-manifests in their immaculate hearts
through the nectar of bhakti. Profuse enthusiastic
endeavors to attain those moods are witnessed in all of
these sādhakas, just as a person who desires material
happiness strives with great intensity for his own sense
enjoyment.




text 10


tac ca śāstraṁ sarvopaniṣat sārabhūtaṁ yeṣām “ahaṁ priya
ātmā sutaś ca sakhā guruḥ suhṛdo daivam iṣṭam” ity ādi
vākya-nicayākara-śrī-bhāgavata-mahā-purāṇam eva. tathā
tat-pratipādita-bhakti-vivaraṇa caṁ cu śrī-bhakti-
rasāmṛtārṇa-vādikam api. tatratyaṁ vākya-trayaṁ yathā –
“kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija samīhitam /
tat-tat-kathā rataś cāsau kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā.” iti
“sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi / tad-bhāva-
lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ.” iti
“śravaṇotkīrtanādīni vaidha-bhakty-uditāni tu / yāny
aṅgāni ca tāny atra vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ.” iti trikam
atra kāmānugā pakṣe eva vyākhyāyate.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is the essence of the
scriptures (śāstras) and all of the Upaniṣads, Lord
Kapiladeva has said (3.25.38), “For my devotees I am
their beloved, their very soul, their son, friend,
divine master, well-wisher, benefactor and worshipable
Lord.” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is a treasury of statements
clarifying these relationships. Hence, here it is to be
understood that the word śāstra indicates Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. In addition, the word śāstra should also be
accepted for literatures such as Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu that explain in detail the same bhakti propounded
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.


                           22
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

The sacred text Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu explains how
rāgānuga-bhakti can be achieved. Regarding this subject
matter, three verses have been cited (1.2.294–6):

kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya

preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam

tat-tat-kathā rataś cāsau

kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa

siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ

śravaṇotkīrtanādīni

vaidha-bhakty uditāni tu

yāny aṅgāni ca tāny atra

vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ

The purport of the first verse is that, while
remembering Śrī Kḥṣṇa and His beloved associates whom
one desires to follow, and being fully absorbed in
narrations of their pastimes, one should always reside
in Vraja. If this is not physically possible, then one
should reside there mentally.

The meaning of the second verse is that on this path of
rāgānuga-bhakti, the sādhaka, being enchanted by the
specific intense, loving sentiment for Śrī Kḥṣṇa of any
of His beloved associates of Vraja, should serve Him in
two ways: (1) in the sādhaka-rūpa (the present physical
body), he should follow the sādhana executed by the
rāgānuga devotees, that is the Six Gosvāmīs and
subsequent preceptors; and (2) in the siddha-rūpa (the
internally-contemplated spiritual body suitable for
directly carrying out the longed-for loving service to
Śrī Kḥṣṇa), he should emulate the moods of Kḥṣṇa’s
dearmost rāgātmikā associates, such as Lalitā, Viśākhā,
Rūpa Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī and so on.

The meaning of the third verse is that scholars who are
conversant with the principles of bhakti advise that the
limbs of bhakti such as hearing, chanting and so on,
which are practiced in vaidhī-bhakti according to one’s
qualification, should also be observed in rāgānuga-
bhakti in keeping with one’s ability.

These three verses from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu are
written with the aim of delineating the requisites for
practicing rāgānuga-bhakti. Herein they will be
explained in terms of kāmānuga-bhakti.

Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti

The devotion naturally present in the associates of

                            23
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

Vraja is known as rāgātmikā-bhakti, and this is of two
types: sambandha-rūpā and kāma-rūpā. Śrīdāma, Subala,
Arjuna, Madhumaṅgala and other cowherd boys, as well as
Nanda, Yaśodā and other elders of the community, have
sambandha-rūpā-bhakti, since Kḥṣṇa is related to them as
a friend, son and so on. The beautiful damsels of Vraja
also have a relationship with Kḥṣṇa, but they are
endowed with a special mood, kāma-rūpā, which is not
found in the associates in dāsya-, sakhya- or vātsalya-
rasa.

Here the word kāma indicates the thirst for amorous
union, which, when transformed into rāgātmikā-bhakti,
gives rise to causeless, natural affection that is
filled with the desire to give enjoyment to Kḥṣṇa. In
other words all efforts are directed for the pleasure
and satisfaction of Kḥṣṇa, never for oneself. Even if
any gopī apparently strives for her own gratification,
ultimately that endeavor is accepted for the enhancement
of Kḥṣṇa’s delight. This unparalleled love is present
only in Kḥṣṇa’s beloved gopīs. The prema of the
milkmaids of Vraja, on reaching an exceedingly
astonishing sweetness, generates playful loving
pastimes. Scholars call this unique principle of love
kāma.

In reality, the kāma of the Vraja maidens is
transcendental and completely untainted, whereas the
kāma, or lust, of the conditioned soul is corrupt and
worthless. The kāma, or love, of the vraja-gopīs is so
pure and so highly attractive that even the Lord’s very
dear devotees, such as Uddhava, yearn for this type of
love. There is nothing that compares to the matchless
love of the vraja-gopīs. This kāma-rūpā-rāgātmikā-bhakti
is not found anywhere except in Vraja. The kāma for
Kḥṣṇa that is seen in the residents of Mathurā is, in
reality, not kāma but only rati, loving attachment that
is tinged with desire for one’s own enjoyment. The
selfless kāma described here in relation to the gopīs
has nothing to do with the kāma of Kubjā.2

Kāma-rūpa-bhakti is of two types: sambhoga-icchāmayī and
tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī. Sambhoga-icchāmayī consists of
playful amorous pastimes (keli, also known as krīḍā or
vilāsa). The transcendental amorous playfulness that Śrī
Kḥṣṇa engages in with the Vraja maidens is called
sambhoga. And that bhakti which is filled with the sole
desire to promote the amorous union of Kḥṣṇa with one’s
group leader (yutheśvarī), such as Rādhā or Candrāvalī,
and in which one feels great satisfaction in assisting
and fulfilling the exchange of a special loving
sentiment between the hero (nāyaka) and the heroine
(nāyikā), is called tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī.

The thirst to follow kāma-rūpa-bhakti is called
kāmānūga-bhakti. This kāmānūga-bhakti is of two types:
the one following sambhoga-icchāmayī kāma-rūpā is called
sambhoga-icchāmayī kāmānuga-bhakti (also known as
mukhya-kāmānuga) and the one following tat-tad-bhāva-
icchāmayī kāma-rūpā (commonly known as mañjarī-bhāva) is
called tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī kāmānuga-bhakti. The
permanent devotional sentiment (sthāyibhāva) of the
mañjarīs, called ullāsa-rati, is present in Rūpa
Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī, Lavaṅga Mañjarī and other

                           24
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

mañjarīs. They are averse to Śrī Kḥṣṇa’s proposals to
taste loving exchanges directly with Him, but rather
find their fulfillment in relishing the rasa of Kḥṣṇa’s
meeting with their mistress (svāminī), Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu descended into this world to
bestow upon sādhaka-jīvas the beauty (sva-bhakti-śriyam)
of the most radiant mellows of ecstatic divine love
(anarpita-carīṁ cirāt unnatojjvala-rasa)3 – that is,
mañjarī-bhāva – and to taste the unlimitedly deep mood
of Śrī Rādhā, the very embodiment of the most elevated
ecstatic love known as mahābhāva.




text 11


prathamataḥ kṛṣṇaṁ smaran iti smaraṇasyātra rāgānugāyāṁ
mukhyatvaṁ rāgasya mano-dharmatvāt. preṣṭhaṁ nija
bhāvocita līlā vilāsinaṁ kṛṣṇaṁ vṛndāvanādhīśvaram. asya
kṛṣṇasya janaṁ ca kīdṛśaṁ nija samīhitaṁ svābhilaṣanīyaṁ
śrī vṛndāvaneśvarī lalitā viśākhā śrī rūpa mañjary
ādikam. kṛṣṇasyāpi nija-samīhitatve ’pi taj janasya
ujjvala-bhāvaika-niṣṭhatvāt nija-samīhitatvādhikyam.
vraje vāsam iti asāmarthye manasāpi. sādhaka śarīreṇa
vāsas tu uttara-ślokārthataḥ prāpta eva. sādhaka-rūpeṇa
yathāvasthita-dehena. siddha-rūpeṇāntaś cintitābhīṣṭa-
tat-sākṣāt-sevopayogi-dehena. tad-bhāva-lipsunā – tad
bhāvaḥ sva-preṣṭha-kṛṣṇa-viṣayakaḥ sva-samīhita kṛṣṇa-
janāśrayakaś ca yo bhāva ujjvalākhyās taṁ labdhum
icchatā. sevā manasaivopasthāpitaiḥ sākṣād apy
upasthāpitaiś ca samucita-dravyādibhiḥ paricaryā kāryā.
tatra prakāram āha, vraja-lokānusārataḥ sādhaka-
rūpeṇānugamyamānā ye vrajalokāḥ śrī-rūpa-gosvāmy-ādayaḥ
ye ca siddha-rūpeṇānugamyamānāḥ vraja-lokāḥ śrī rūpa
mañjary-ādayas tad anusārataḥ. tathaiva sādhaka-
rūpeṇānugamyamānā vrajalokāḥ prāpta-kṛṣṇa-sambandhino
janāś candrakāntyādyaḥ daṇḍakāraṇya-vāsi-munayaś ca
bṛhad-vāmana prasiddhāḥ śrutayaś ca yathā-sambhavaṁ
jñeyāḥ. tad anusāratas tat-tad-ācāra-dṛṣṭyety arthaḥ.
tad evaṁ vākya-dvayena smaraṇaṁ vraja-vāsaṁ ca uktvā
śravaṇādīn apy āha-śravaṇotkīrtanādīnīti. guru-
pādāśrayaṇādīni tv ākṣepa-labdhāni. tāni vinā vraja-
lokānugatyādikaṁ kim api na sidhyed ity ato manīṣibhir
iti manīṣayā vimṛṣyaiva svīya-bhāva-samucitāny eva tāni
kāryāṇi na tu tad-viruddhāni.

In the first Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu verse quoted in Text
10, the phrase kṛṣṇaṁ smaran, meaning “remembering Śrī
Kṛṣṇa,” indicates that the limb of smaraṇam,
remembrance, is prominent in the path of rāgānuga, as
rāga, spontaneous love, is a function of the mind.
Preṣṭham, meaning “most beloved,” indicates that beloved
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Vṛndāvana, who enjoys pastimes in
a form corresponding to one’s desire (that is, appearing
as Rādhā-ramaṇa, Govinda, Gopīnātha and so on).

The words janaṁ cāsya refer to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nearest and
dearest. Who are they? To answer this question, the
adjective nija-samīhitam is used, indicating those
associates who possess the mood for which one is
aspiring, like Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Lalitā,

                           25
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

Viśākhā, Rūpa Mañjarī and so on. The practicing devotees
who eagerly hanker for the brilliantly lustrous, pure
mood of sweet paramour love (ujjvala-bhāva) possess an
extraordinarily profound determination (niṣṭhā) for the
ujjvala-bhāva of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s associates, namely Śrī
Rādhā and the other Vraja maidens, which is greater than
their niṣṭhā for the desired object, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.
Hence, such devotees deeply hanker for this mood of His
associates.

Kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā means that one should always
reside in Vraja. The implication is that if this is
physically impossible, one should dwell there mentally.
However, the next verse quoted from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu clearly explains that the sādhaka should take up
residence in Vraja physically.

Sādhaka-rūpeṇa indicates the present gross body of the
practicing devotee, and siddha-rūpeṇa refers to the
internally-contemplated cherished body suitable for the
direct service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Tad-bhāva-lipsunā means
that, being eager to attain the ujjvala-bhāva that is
enjoyed by the beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa and that is ever
present in one’s favorite Vrajavāsīs, namely Kṛṣṇa’s
darling Śrīmatī Rādhikā and other gopīs, one should
earnestly serve them with love.

How is this service to be performed? By collecting all
the paraphernalia by mind or by body, one should engage
in their loving service. Again, in what mood is this
service to be executed? The answer to this is vraja-
lokānusārataḥ: by emulating the service attitude of the
Vrajavāsīs. That is, the practicing devotee in his
physical body should follow the example of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī and other like-minded Vrajavāsīs, and in his
perfected spiritual body (siddha-deha) should perform
service adopting the method of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and the
other maidservants of Vraja.

Here another definition of vraja-lokānusārataḥ is given.
One should understand this phrase to mean those who have
established their relationship with Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa by having performed sādhana in their previous
lives, such as Candrakānti and other sakhīs, the famous
sages of Daṇḍakāraṇya as described in the Padma Purāṇa
and the Śrutis as mentioned in Bṛhad-vāmana Purāṇa. One
should follow these Vrajavāsīs; that is, by observing
their practices, one should render service as they did.

In this way, the first two verses describe the subject
matters of smaraṇa, remembrance, and vraja-vāsa,
residence in Vraja. And the third verse quoted from
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu discusses śravaṇa, hearing, and
other limbs of sādhana. Śravaṇotkīrtanādīni: one should
follow hearing (śravaṇa), chanting (kīrtana) and the
other limbs of bhakti, meaning all the sixty-four limbs,
beginning with accepting shelter at the lotus feet of a
spiritrual master. Apart from this practice of hearing,
chanting and so on, which is aimed at emulating the mood
of the Vrajavāsīs, no other sādhana is capable of
bestowing the desired fruit. To emphasize this point,
the word manīṣibhiḥ is used here. It means that
intelligent persons will use their power of
discrimination to follow the limbs of bhakti that are

                           26
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                           5/5/2017

favorable to their mood. It is essential to avoid
following anything unfavorable, which can hinder the
appearance of bhāva, the first rays of the sun of divine
love.

Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti

In Text 10 the author quoted three verses from Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu in regard to rāgānuga-sādhana-bhakti.
These three verses are often cited in general terms for
the sādhakas who have greed in dāsya-, sakhya-,
vātsalya- or mādhurya-rasa. However, one should
understand that in this book Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura has explained the meaning of these verses for
kāmānuga-sādhakas, especially for those following tat-
tad-bhāva-icchāmayī. Even though Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the object
of our desires, the underlying idea is that we recognize
Him as Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s dearmost beloved, Her
sweetheart Śrī Rādhā-kānta, not that we should
independently consider Him our nāyaka, our own lover.
The reason is that the mañjarīs are surrendered totally
to Śrīmatī Rādhikā and regard Kṛṣṇa as the prāṇanātha,
the very life air, of their mistress, Śrīmatī. Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, the topmost rūpānuga devotee,
declares in his Manaḥ-śikṣā (9): “mad-īśā-nāthatve
vraja-vipina-candram – always remember Vṛndāvana-candra
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the life and soul of my svāminī, Śrī
Rādhikā.”

Although the words janaṁ cāsya in the first verse quoted
from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu indicate Vṛndāvaneśvarī
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and others, we should understand that
they specifically refer to Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī, Rati
Mañjarī and other mañjarīs. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has
written in Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (16):

pādābjayos tava vinā vara-dāsyam eva

nānyat kadāpi samaye kila devi yāce

sakhyāya te mama namo ’stu namo ’stu nityaṁ

dāsyāya te mama raso ’stu raso ’stu satyam

O Goddess, I have no desire other than for the topmost
attainment of servitude to Your lotus feet. I forever
offer obeisances to the position of being Your sakhī,
but may I remain firmly attached to being Your
maidservant. This is my avowed declaration.

Furthermore, in Vraja-vilāsa-stava (38), he says:

tāmbūlārpaṇa-pāda-mardana-payo-dānābhisārādibhir

vṛndāraṇya-maheśvarī priyatayā yās toṣayanti priyāḥ

prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhī-kulād api kilāsaṅkocitā bhūmikāḥ

keli-bhūmiṣu rūpa-mañjarī-mukhās tā dāsikāḥ saṁśraye

By offering Her betel nuts, massaging Her feet, bringing
Her water, arranging for Her secret meetings with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and performing varieties of other loving services,
many gopī attendants constantly please Śrīmatī Rādhikā,

                            27
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

the queen of Vṛndā’s forest. In their rendering of
loving service to the Divine Couple, they are free from
any of the hesitation or shyness that is found in the
prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhīs. I take shelter of these personal
maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhikā headed by Rūpa Mañjarī.

The sum and substance of this is that it is far more
desirable to have the mood of the tat-tad-bhāva-
icchāmayī-sakhīs than to have the mood of sambhoga-
icchāmayī.

The meaning of “one should reside in Vraja” is that
rāgānuga-sādhakas should engage in devotional practices
in the places that stimulate their cherished moods. Such
places, where the secret pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala were performed, include Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Surya-
kuṇḍa, Śrī Govardhana, Vṛndavana (including Sevā-kuñja,
Nidhuvana and Vaṁśīvaṭa) and Nandagrama (especially
Pāvana-sarovara, Ṭer-kadamba, Śrī Uddhava-kyāri, Saṅketa
and Yāvaṭa). Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his purport to this
verse has written: “atha rāgānugāyāḥ paripāṭīm āha
kṛṣṇam ityādinā sāmarthye sati vraje śrīman-nanda-
vrajāvāsa-sthāne śrī-vṛndāvanādau śarīreṇa vāsaṁ kuryāt,
tad-bhāve

manasapīty arthaḥ – if possible, a practitioner of the
spontaneous path (a rāgānuga-sādhaka) should reside
physically in Vraja, that is in places near the home of
Nanda Mahārāja in Vṛndāvana and in other pastime-places.
If this is not possible, then one should dwell there
mentally.”

These pastime-places (līlā-sthalīs) are transcendental
holy places that quickly deliver perfection in one’s
devotional practices. By their causeless mercy, the flow
of pastimes pertaining to each place easily begins to
reflect in the heart of a sincere, honest sādhaka
without any effort on his part. In the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa
it is said: “parānandamayī siddhir mathurā-sparśa-
mātrataḥ – just by the mere touch of Mathurā (Vraja-
bhūmi), one attains the perfection of supreme bliss.”
One cannot expect to understand the inconceivable,
supernatural potency of these places with one’s material
intelligence.

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī in Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta has
explained that the topmost devotee Śrī Nārada prayed to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the crown-jewel of enjoyers (rasika-
śiromaṇi), in the same manner. The dhāma definitely
showers its mercy upon one who takes exclusive shelter
there, because it is Kṛṣṇa’s very form (svarūpa):

tad vai tasya priya krīḍā-

vana-bhūmau sadā rahaḥ

nivasaṁs tanuyād evaṁ

sampadyetācirād dhruvam

Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (2.5.220)

O Gopa-kumāra, if you aspire for the servitorship of the
cowherd boys and girls of Vraja, you should always live

                             28
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                          5/5/2017

in Kṛṣṇa’s beloved playground (krīḍā-bhūmi) and perform
sādhana-bhakti there to achieve divine love. In this
manner, without a doubt you will very quickly obtain the
perfection of that extraordinarily rare prema.

In the eighth verse of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī summarizes the essence of all teachings
regarding living in Vraja with niṣṭhā, resolute
determination:

tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

By withdrawing the tongue and mind from all sense
objects that have no connection with Kṛṣṇa, one should,
while living in Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala, utilize one’s full
time by sequentially engaging them in meticulously
chanting and remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names, form,
qualities and pastimes following the moods of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s eternal companions who possess inherent,
spontaneous love for Him. This is the essence of all
instruction.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī exhibits the utmost
unwavering determination and heartfelt attachment for
living in Vraja:

śrī rūpa-rati mañjaryor aṅghri-sevaika-gṛhṇunā

asaṅkhyenāpi januṣā vraje vāso ’stu me ’niśam

Śrī Prārthanāmṛtam (1)

With the sole aspiration alive in my heart to attain the
service of the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Rati
Mañjarīs, in however many births I may take, may my vow
to live in Vraja forever be fulfilled.

vasato girivara-kuñje lapataḥ śrī rādhike ’nu kṛṣṇeti

dhayato vraja-dadhitakraṁ nātha sadā me dināni gacchantu

Śrī Prārthanāśraya (14)

O my Lord, let me spend the rest of my days as a
permanent resident in the groves of Govardhana, calling
out, “Hā Rādhā! Hā Kṛṣṇa!” and drinking the yogurt and
buttermilk of Vraja.

In the following verse, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
displaying his deep faith and affection for Vṛndāvana-
dhāma, makes a steadfast vow to live in Vraja:

na cānyatra-kṣetre haritanu-sanāthe ’pi sujanād

rasāsvādaṁ premṇā dadhad api vasāmi kṣaṇam api

samaṁ tv etad grāmyā valibhir abhitanvann api kathāṁ


                           29
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

vidhāsye saṁvāsa-vraja-bhuvana eva pratibhavam

Sva-niyama-daśakam (2)

Even if in some other holy place the deity of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is present and there is the fortunate opportunity there
to relish with great love narrations related to the Lord
flowing from the mouths of elevated devotees, I have no
desire to live in such a place, even for a moment. But
even if I must live in the company of vulgar persons who
converse only about mundane topics, I will live in the
land of Vraja life after life.

For whatever reason, if it is not possible for a sādhaka
to actually take up residence in Vraja, then he should
dwell there mentally. In the first of the three verses
quoted from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
himself has given the order to make one’s abode in Vraja
and perform sādhana – kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā.

The phrase sādhaka-rūpeṇa in the second verse quoted
from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu means one should perform
sādhana in the present physical body just as Śrī Rūpa,
Śrī Sanātana, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and others
carried out their bhajana. In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 19.127–31), their process of bhajana has
been described in this way:

aniketa duṅhe vane yata vṛkṣa-gaṇa

eka eka vṛkṣera tale eka eka rātri śayana

vipra-gṛhe sthūla-bhikṣā, kāhāṅ mādhukarī

śuṣka rutī cānā civāya bhoga parihari

karoṅyā-mātra hāte, kāṅthā, chiṅḍā-bahirvāsa

kṛṣṇa-kathā, kṛṣṇa-nāma, nartana-ullāsa

aṣṭa-prahara kṛṣṇa-bhajana, cāri daṇḍa śayane

nāma-saṅkīrtana-preme, seha nahe kona dine

kabhu bhakti-rasa-śāstra karaye likhana

caitanya-kathā śune, kare caitanya-cintana

Mahāprabhu’s associates would inquire about the welfare
of Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs from any devotee
returning from a pilgrimage to Śrī Vṛndāvana, who would
reply, “They have not even bothered to construct a
simple hut and pass each night under a different tree of
Vraja. They are always engaged in bhajana, performing
severe renunciation and deeply immersed in bhāva.
Somehow or other they sustain their lives by going to
the brāhmaṇas’ houses for sthūla-bhikṣā (accepting a
full meal from one house) and sometimes doing mādhukarī
(begging small amounts door-to-door), sometimes eating
only dry bread or fried chickpeas, and sometimes
fasting. They carry clay pots for drinking water and
wear tattered cloth and torn quilts. Almost twenty-four
hours daily they are engaged in hearing and chanting,
performing harināma-saṅkīrtana and dancing in great

                           30
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

jubilation, being fully immersed in ecstatic moods. They
sleep for only an hour and a half at night, and
sometimes, being engrossed in bhajana, they do not sleep
at all. Sometimes they compose sacred texts on bhakti,
and sometimes they hear about the pastimes of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and become deeply submerged in
thought of Him.” Hearing this, all the devotees would
begin to cry.

Śrīnivāsa Ācārya in his Íaḍ-gosvāmi-aṣṭakam (6) has
described their firm resolve in executing sādhana-
bhajana:

saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ kālāvasānī-kṛtau

nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-smṛter madhurimānandena sammohitau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

I offer my prayers to the Six Gosvāmīs, who passed all
their time in chanting the holy names, performing nāma-
saṅkīrtana and offering prostrated obeisances, thereby
humbly fulfilling their vow to complete a fixed number
daily. In this way, they utilized their valuable lives
and conquered over eating, sleeping and other such
pleasures. Always seeing themselves as completely
worthless, they became enchanted in divine rapture by
remembering Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s sweet qualities.

Siddha-rūpeṇa means that one should perform service
within the mind (mānasī-sevā) in one’s cherished,
internally-contemplated spiritual form that is suitable
for directly serving Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. This is a
crucial matter. Without the mercy of the spiritual
master or pure, rasika devotees, a sādhaka cannot
conceive of his eternal spiritual identity. Through the
merciful guidance of the guru, the conception of one’s
eternal identity arises automatically. By remembering
and internally serving the Lord’s eternal eightfold
daily pastimes (aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā) in one’s siddha-deha,
one gradually attains svarūpa-siddhi, realization of
one’s eternal identity while still a sādhaka, and
finally vastu-siddhi, one’s actual spiritual body
suitable for experiencing prema in the Lord’s manifest
pastimes.

However, one must know that not everyone has the
qualification to contemplate transcendental daily
service rendered to the Divine Couple. It is imperative
to keep this path carefully veiled. One should not speak
about these pastimes to unqualified persons. It is
proper to keep the subject matter concealed from
conditioned souls who have not experienced the awakening
of genuine greed in their hearts to enter into the

path of spontaneous devotion. Bhagavān’s names (nāma),
form (rūpa), qualities (guṇa) and pastimes (līlā)
pertain to transcendence (aprākṛta-tattva); all are
supremely pure and sentient (cinmaya) in nature. Unless
and until realization of this arises in the heart, one
is not qualified to hear about the Divine Couple’s
confidential pastimes, which are saturated with rasa.

                           31
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

Reading or hearing about these pastimes, unqualified
persons will meditate on the illusory, mundane
association between men and women. Thus, they are bound
to fall down and become deeply submerged in the vileness
of immoral behavior. Therefore, like Devarṣi Nārada,
intelligent readers should be careful to first acquire
the appropriate saṁskāras, deep impressions accumulated
within the heart, for transcendental śṛṅgāra-rasa before
entering into these pastimes.

The prime concern is that a sādhaka should practice
rāgānuga-bhakti only upon obtaining the appropriate
qualification. Without the rise of genuine greed and
while the sādhaka is still plagued by impediments to
spiritual advancement (anarthas), practicing this system
of sādhana will give unfavorable results. As one’s
factual greed for vraja-bhajana develops, one must first
of all take shelter of an intimate associate of Śrī
Gaurasundara, the Lord who is Himself non-different from
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. That intimate devotee of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu will give us personal instructions on
rāgānuga-sādhana according to our ability. Otherwise, by
keeping bad company and following the misleading advice
procured therein, one will end up imitating the bhajana
of high-class devotees and only reap ill results. Some
people wrongly interpret the phrase “One should do
bhajana in the wake of the residents of Vraja (vraja-
lokānusārataḥ).” Presuming themselves to be Lalitā and
Viśākhā, they dress their male bodies in female garb and
perform bhajana as a sakhī. In this way, they bring
about not only their own destruction, but others’ as
well. “I am Lalitā, I am Viśakhā” – this becomes the
ahaṅgrahopāsanā, the attitude of considering oneself
identical with the object of worship, of the
impersonalist māyāvādīs. By committing offenses at the
lotus feet of Lalitā and Viśakhā, they descend into a
terrifying hell.

No one is qualified to enter the intimate service of the
Divine Couple without following the mood of the vraja-
gopīs. It is Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s inner desire for the
sādhaka to perform bhajana by following the mañjarīs,
who are themselves under the direction of the Vraja
maidens. This is also approved by Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
the literatures written by our gosvāmīs. To achieve the
mood of the mañjarīs, it is essential to accept the
guidance of Rūpa-Sanātana within the family of Śrī
Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura
expresses his heartfelt, burning desire for mañjarī-
bhāva as follows:

śrī rūpa-mañjarī-pada, sei mora sampada,

sei mora bhajana-pūjana

sei mora prāṇa-dhana, sei mora ābharaṇa,

sei mora jīvanera jīvana

The lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī are my dearmost
treasure. Remembering and serving them are my topmost
worship and inner devotional practice. Her lotus feet
are my most cherished wealth, more dear than my own
life. They are the beautiful ornament of my life and,

                           32
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

indeed, they are the very essence of my existence.

śuniyāchi sādhu-mukhe bole sarva-jana

śrī rūpa-kṛpāya mile yugala-caraṇa

hā! hā! prabhu sanātana gaura-parivāra

sabe mili’ vāñchā-pūrṇa karaha āmāra

śrī rūpera kṛpā jena āmā prati haya

se pada āśraya jāra, sei mahāśaya

prabhu lokanātha kabe saṅge laiyā jābe

śrī rūpera pāda-padme more samarpibe

Narottama dāsa also says that he has heard from the
mouths of Vaiṣṇava holy men that one can attain the
lotus feet of the Divine Couple only by the mercy of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. He cries out, “O Sanātana Prabhu, O
most merciful Vaiṣṇavas in Gaura’s family! All of you
together, please fulfill my earnest desire. I pray again
and again that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī may always shower his
mercy upon me. Aho! Those who have received the shelter
of Śrī Rūpa’s lotus feet are very fortunate. When will
my spiritual master, Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī, take me with
him to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and offer me at his lotus feet?”

To attain his perfected spiritual body (siddha-deha),
Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura prays at the lotus feet of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa:

siddha-deha diyā, vṛndāvana mājhe

sevāmṛta-kara’ dāna

piyāiyā prema, matta kari’ more

śuna’ nija guṇa-gāna

yugala sevāya, śrī rāsa-maṇḍale

niyukta kara’ āmāya

lalitā sakhīra, ayogyā kiṅkarī

vinoda dhariche pāya

Please bestow upon me my siddha-deha. Place me in the
midst of Śrī Vṛndāvana, and shower upon me the nectar of
Your devotional service. Allow me to drink the nectar of
Your prema and let me be fully absorbed in it, so much
so that I become totally maddened. Then You will be able
to hear me sing about Your astonishing attributes.
Bhaktivinoda, the unworthy servant of Lalitā Sakhī,
holding Your lotus feet close to his heart, begs to be
engaged in confidential service unto You in the arena of
the rāsa dance. Please hear my supplication and appoint
me as Your maidservant.

In his Kārpaṇya-pañjikā-stotra, Utkalikā-vallarī, Śrī
Gāndharvā-samprārthanāṣṭakam and other works, Śrīla Rūpa

                           33
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

Gosvāmī has to some extent shed light on the service
rendered to the Divine Couple in one’s perfected
spiritual body (siddha-deha), as has Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī in compositions such as Vilāpa-kusumāñjali,
Prema-pūrābhigha-stotram, Utkaṇṭhā-daśakam, Sva-
saṅkalpa-prakāśa-stotram, Śrī Prārthanāmṛta-stotram and
Abhīṣṭa-prārthanāṣṭakam. Our author, Śrīla Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, has also described similar moods in his
Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma. For practitioners of rāgānuga-
bhakti, all these confidential moods are the topmost
treasure, like a cintāmaṇi gem that fulfills all
desires.

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has expressed his innermost
moods as follows in Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (72):

śrī-rūpa-mañjarī-karārcita-pādapadma-

goṣṭhendra-nandana-bhujārpita-mastakāyāḥ

hā modataḥ kanaka-gauri padāravinda-

samvāhanāni śanakais tava kiṁ kariṣye

After enjoying some amorous pastime, the happily
exhausted Śrīmatī Rādhikā puts Her head in the lap of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who runs His soft, fragrant lotus fingers
slowly and gently through Her hair, thus untangling Her
disheveled curls. At that time Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī takes
her mistress’s extremely soft lotus feet in her lap and
lovingly massages them. When will the day come when Rūpa
Mañjarī will beckon me with a gesture and grant me this
service? Alas! When will I get the opportunity to
perform this service to Śrīmatī’s supremely precious and
so rarely attained lotus feet?

Someone may argue that the phrase vraja-loka in the
second verse quoted from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu refers
only to Śrī Rādhā, Lalitā and so on. This would mean
that a sādhaka should perform service with his physical
body according to the mood of these Vraja maidens. If
that is the case, since the scriptures have not
mentioned anywhere that Śrī Rādhā and Lalitā have ever
performed activities such as taking shelter of a
spiritual master, observing fasting on holy days like
Ekādaśī, worshiping a śālagrāma-śilā or rendering
service to the tulasī plant, it would follow that it
would not be important for practitioners following these
eternal associates to execute these limbs of bhakti.
However, the true meaning of the phrase vraja-loka
refutes all such misconceptions put forward by the
present-day skeptical, opposing theorists. Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmīpāda, in his commentary on this verse (1.2.295)
from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, explains that the phrase
vraja-loka refers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost associates and
their intimate followers, like Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and so
on. Thus, one should perform service mentally in the
siddha-deha by following Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and other
Vrajavāsīs, and physical service in the sādhaka-deha by
emulating Śrī Rūpa and our other gosvāmīs.

Municari-gopīs

According to the Padma Purāṇa, some sages residing in

                           34
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

the forest of Daṇḍakāraṇya worshiped Kṛṣṇa by the
gopāla-mantra, but in spite of praying to Him for a long
time, they were unable to attain their cherished
desires. Fortunately, Śrī Rāmacandra arrived in the
forest. Upon seeing his charming beauty, deep amorous
attraction for Kṛṣṇa arose in the sages’ hearts. Feeling
restless because of their intense hankering, within
their minds they prayed at the lotus feet of Śrī
Rāmacandra for fulfillment of their wishes. He
understood their hearts and granted them a boon to
satisfy their desire. Afterwards, by Śrī Rāmacandra’s
mercy, they intently engaged in the appropriate bhajana
and attained the elevated stage of bhāva. By the
arrangement of Yogamāyā, in their next lives they
entered the wombs of gopīs and took birth as cowherd
damsels. Some of them received the association of nitya-
siddha-gopīs and easily participated in the rāsa dance.
The others, who did not receive that association, were
enjoyed by their husbands and bore children. At the time
of the rāsa-līlā, their husbands held them back and
prevented them from participating in the rāsa dance. As
a result, these gopīs, being deeply agitated in
separation from Kṛṣṇa, burned up all impiety (aśubha) in
the fire of that separation. By meditating on Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and embracing Him within their hearts, they received the
bliss of union, which washed away their mundane pious
merits (śubha), allowing them to directly meet with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in the arena of the rāsa dance.

Upaniṣadcāri- and śruticāri-gopīs

Some of the prominent Śrutis (Upaniṣads), who were
thoroughly versed in subtle and profound philosophical
considerations, were completely astonished to see the
unparalleled fortune of the gopīs. To attain the same
fortune as the Vraja maidens, they began to worship the
Lord with intense desire. After a long time, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
was pleased with their worship and appeared before their
eyes. Seeing Him, they offered their internal desire at
His lotus feet, saying, “O Kṛṣṇa, after gazing at Your
full beauty, which defeats that of millions of
Kāmadevas, we are submerged in amorous emotions and,
like the gopīs, we are bewitched by feelings of kāma.
Just as the maidens of Gokula, enamoured by Your
sweetness, served You with the intent of engaging in
romantic pleasure, we fervently yearn to be related with
You in the same manner. Please fulfill our hearts’
desire.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa was pleased with their prayers and replied, “O
Śrutis, your desire is so exalted. It is extremely rare
and most difficult to attain the mood of the gopīs.
Nevertheless, by My mercy your desires will be fulfilled
in your next life, when you will take birth as young
cowherd maidens from the wombs of gopīs in Vraja.”

In this way, it has been recommended to engage in
sādhana-bhajana by following the procedure adopted by
those sādhakas who achieved a gopī form in the manifest
Vraja after executing severe austerities for many, many
births. However, just as final instructions are more
authoritative, one will reap greater benefit and quicker
results by following Śrīman Mahāprabu’s special
associates, that is, Śrī Rūpa-Raghunātha and the other

                           35
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

gosvāmīs.




text 12


tāni cārcana bhaktāv ahaṅgrahopāsanā mudrā nyāsa
dvārakā-dhyāna rukmiṇy ādi-pūjādīny āgama-śāstra-
vihitāny api naiva kāryāṇi. bhakti-mārge ’smin kiñcit
kiñcit aṅga-vaikalye ’pi doṣābhāva śravaṇāt. yad uktam –
“yān āsthāya naro rājan na pramādyeta karhicit. dhāvan
nimīlya vā netre na skhalen na pated iha.” iti “na hy
aṅgopakrame dhvaṁso mad bhakter uddhavāṇv api.” iti ca
“aṅgi vaikalye tv asty eva doṣaḥ. yān śravaṇotkīrtanādīn
bhagavad-dharmān āśritya ity ukteḥ.” “śruti-smṛti-
purāṇādi-pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā aikāntikī harer bhaktir
utpātāyaiva kalpate.” ity ukteś ca. lobhasya
pravartakatve ’pi nija bhāva pratikūlāny uktāni sarvāṇi
śāstra-vihitānāṁ tyāgānaucityam iti buddhyā yadi karoti
tadā dvārakā-pure mahiṣī-janaparijanatvaṁ prāpnoti. yad
uktam – “riraṁsāṁ suṣṭhu kurvan yo vidhi-mārgeṇa sevate.
kevalenaiva sa tadā mahiṣītvam iyāt pure.” kevalenaiva
kṛtsnenaiva na tu nija bhāva-pratikūlān mahiṣī-pūjādīn
kāṁścit kāṁśid aṁśān parityajyety arthaḥ. “nirṇīte
kevalam iti triliṅgan tv eka kṛtsnayoḥ” ity amaraḥ.
kevalena vidhi-mārgeṇa pure mahiṣītvaṁ miśreṇa
mathurāyām iti vyākhyā nopapadyate. pure yathā
mahiṣītvaṁ tathā mathurāyāṁ kiṁ rūpatvam? kubjā
parikaratvam iti cet kevala vaidhī bhakti phalād api
miśra-vaidhī bhakti phalasya apakarṣaḥ khalu anyāya eva.
“rāmāniruddha pradyumna rukmiṇyā sahito vibhuḥ.” iti
gopāla tāpanī śruti dṛṣṭyā rukmiṇī pariṇayo mathurāyām
ity ato rukmiṇī parikaratvam iti vyākhyā tu na sarva
laukikī. rādhā-kṛṣṇopāsakaḥ kathaṁ kubjāṁ vā rukmiṇīṁ vā
prāpnoti iti dvitīyaś cānyāyaḥ. vastutas tu lobha-
pravartitaṁ vidhi-mārgeṇa sevanam eva rāga-mārga ucyate
vidhi-pravartitaṁ vidhi-mārgeṇa sevanañ ca vidhi-mārga
iti. vidhi-vinābhūtaṁ sevanaṁ tu śruti-smṛtyādi-vākyād
utpāta-prāpakam eva.

Rāgānuga-sādhakas are advised not to practice
ahaṅgrahopāsanā (considering oneself identical with the
object of worship), nyāsa (various elaborate practices
for chanting mantras and performing arcana), meditation
on the moods of Dvārakā and worship of Rukmiṇī and the
other queens of Dvārakā, even though these are included
in the limb of arcana as mentioned in the Tantras. It is
understood from the scriptures that on the path of
spontaneous devotion, there is no fault if some of the
limbs of sādhana are not followed completely. In the
conversation between Mahārāja Nimi and the Nava-
yogendras recorded in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.35), it is
said:

yān āsthāya naro rājan

na pramādyeta karhicit

dhāvan nimīlya vā netre

na skhalen na pated iha

                           36
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017


O King, followers of this devotional path, having taken
shelter of spiritual virtue (bhagavad-dharma), are never
afflicted by misfortune. Even if one runs along with
eyes closed, one will never slip or fall from the path.

The word yān in the above verse refers to taking shelter
of the principal limbs of bhakti (śravaṇa, kīrtana and
so on), whereupon it is not considered a fault to
overlook any other limb.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.29.20) Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa said
to Uddhava:

na hy aṅgopakrame dhvaṁso

mad-bhakter uddhavāṇv api

Shortcomings in one’s performance of certain limbs of
bhakti do not prove detrimental in this devotional path
for one who has just begun practicing.

In addition, the Brahma-yāmala declares:

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

Even though one may be engaged in exclusive devotion
toward the Lord, if one transgresses the regulations of
scriptures like the Śruti, Smṛti, Purāṇas or the
Pañcarātra, his bhakti will simply be the cause of
disturbance.

When a sādhaka is overcome by devotional greed, he is no
longer controlled by the regulations of the scriptures.
However, if in his bhajana he continues to follow those
scriptural instructions that are unfavorable to his own
moods, such as meditation on Dvārakā and so on,
considering them to be compulsory, he will become an
associate of the queens of Dvārakā upon attaining
perfection. The scriptures provide proof for this.

riraṁsāṁ suṣṭhu-kurvan yo

vidhi-mārgena sevate

kevalenaiva sa tadā

mahiṣītvam iyāt pure

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.303)

Even if one has a strong desire to enter into the
closest amour with the Lord but performs service in
vidhi-mārga only, one will become an associate of the
queens of Dvārakā.

In this verse the word kevala indicates that if one is
exclusively dedicated to following vidhi-mārga without

                            37
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

foregoing worship of the Dvārakā queens or any other
limb that is unfavorable to one’s moods, one will attain
the position of an eternal associate of the Dvārakā
queens. The Amara-koṣa Sanskrit dictionary confirms the
definition of the word kevala as “only.”

Some propose that by engaging in sādhana in vidhi-mārga
only, one attains the servitorship of the queens of
Dvārakā. And if one performs sādhana in which vidhi-
mārga is mixed with rāga-mārga, one becomes a
maidservant of the queens of Mathurā. However, such an
explanation gives rise to many questions, as it has no
logical reasoning behind it. The first question is this:
if becoming a queen of Dvārakā means to become an
associate of Rukmiṇī, Satyabhāmā and other queens, then
what does it mean to become an associate of the Mathurā
queens? It is inconsistent to reply that it means to
become an eternal associate of Kubjā. From the viewpoint
of rasa as described in the rasa-śāstras, the position
of Kubjā is inferior to that of Rukmiṇī and the other
queens. Thus, the conclusion would be that the path of
mixed rāga and vidhi gives a result inferior to that of
vidhi alone. There is not a shadow of a doubt that this
would be highly unjustified.

One may present the statement from Gopāla-tāpanī
Upaniṣad, “The omnipotent Śrī Kṛṣṇa resides eternally in
Mathurā-dhāma with Śrī Baladeva, Śrī Aniruddha, Śrī
Pradyumna and Śrī Rukmiṇī-devī.” This would mean that
Rukmiṇī was married in Mathurā, and that Śrī Kṛṣṇa also
resides there with her and His other associates. Hence,
attaining the position of the Mathurā queens, which is
the fruit of vaidhī-bhakti mixed with rāga, means
becoming an associate of Rukmiṇī in Mathurā. This
explanation is also illogical, because not everyone
accepts that Rukmiṇī was married in Mathurā. Why should
a sādhaka become the eternal associate of Kubjā or
Rukmiṇī by worshiping Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? This is a second
inconsistency. In rāga-mārga, one is inspired by genuine
greed and serves according to vidhi, the regulated path,
whereas in vidhi-mārga one serves being prompted by the
words of the scriptures. The previously quoted śruti-
smṛti-purāṇādi verse from the Nārada-pañcarātra provides
evidence that serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa without following
regulations causes disturbance only.

Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti

The rules and regulations meant for ahaṅgrahopāsanā,
mudrā, nyāsa, meditation on the moods of Dvārakā and
worship of Rukmiṇī and the other queens of Dvārakā,
although mentioned in the Tantras, need not be followed
by rāgānuga-sādhakas. Here ahaṅgrahopāsanā means the
worship by which one thinks, “I am Brahman.” The
practitioner of spontaneous devotion should execute
sādhana-bhajana by remembering and following the
specific mood of his cherished Vrajavāsīs – such as
Subala, Śrīdāma and other sakhās, Nanda Bābā and Mother
Yaśodā, or Lalitā, Viśākhā, Rūpa Mañjarī and other Vraja
maidens – for which he has greed. He should not imagine
himself to be Śrīdāma, Subala Sakhā, Yaśodā or Lalitā.
This type of worship, called ahaṅgrahopāsanā, is
prohibited here. Some neophyte, so-called sādhakas,
considering themselves to be Lalitā, decorate their male

                            38
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

bodies with ornaments meant for a woman and call
themselves “Lalitā Sakhī.” But this improper behavior is
forbidden by established rules of conduct. Such people
bring disgrace to the name of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

In the scriptures we find descriptions of different
types of nyāsa: ṣaḍ-aṇga-nyāsa, pīṭha-nyāsa, aṅga-nyāsa,
kara-nyāsa and many others. These are various elaborate
procedures prescribed for chanting mantras and
performing arcana. As they are unfavorable to the mood
of rāgānuga-bhakti, they too have been forbidden.

Meditation on Dvārakā and worship of the queens there
are predominated by aiśvarya-bhāva, an awareness of the
Lord’s supreme majesty. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, decorated like the
emperor of emperors, sometimes resides there in His
four-handed form, holding the conch, disc, club and
lotus flower. He and His associates identify themselves
as kṣatriyas, and the royal queens, being kṣatriyāṇīs,
are also endowed with a high degree of majesty. They are
the wives of Kṛṣṇa, married according to Vedic
injunctions. Their love for the Lord is classified as
samañjasā, inhibited. However, in Vraja, Kṛṣṇa is an
eternally youthful adolescent, expert in dancing,
attired as a cowherd and forever accompanied by His
flute. His intimate associates there are the cowherd men
and women of Vraja. The gopīs possess samartha-rati, a
powerful love capable of controlling Kṛṣṇa, which is far
superior to the Dvārakā queens’ samañjasa-rati.
Therefore a practitioner of the spontaneous path
(rāgānuga-sādhaka) need not follow the rules and
regulations of the scriptures related to meditation on
Dvārakā and worship of the queens there.

In rāgānuga-bhakti, if a person takes shelter of those
essential practices, such as śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on
that are considered to be the very body of bhagavad-
dharma, there is no fault if he fails to observe a few
of the other limbs. One important point to be noted here
is that the nine kinds of bhakti (śravaṇa, kīrtana and
so on), or the five limbs (associating with devotees
(sādhu-saṅga), chanting the holy name (nāma-kīrtana),
hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (bhāgavata-śravaṇa), residing
in Vṛndāvana (vraja-vāsa) and serving the deity (śrī-
vigraha-sevā)), or three limbs (śravaṇa, kīrtana and
smaraṇa) are not only the main limbs of bhakti, but are
actually the origin of all other limbs. That is, besides
being the primary sādhana, they are also the sādhya, or
goal. However, the previously mentioned processes of
nyāsa, mudrā, meditation on Dvārakā, and so on do not
constitute that sādhana which has the nature of the
original limbs; they are merely limbs of arcana, one of
the prime limbs. Therefore, as they are unfavorable to
the cultivation of the moods of rāgānuga-bhakti,
exclusion of these activities is not harmful. However,
any neglect of the prime limbs, which are in fact the
original limbs, would prove harmful. Especially when one
is absorbed in the principal limbs of hearing, chanting,
remembrance and so on, any laxity in observing other
limbs is not considered to be a fault.

Some people have the mistaken belief that it is not
necessary to follow the rules and regulations delineated
in the Vedic scriptures or to accept Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,

                           39
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

the crown-jewel of all evidence. They think that one can
become a rasika devotee by practicing intense, single-
pointed bhakti according to one’s own whim. Due to their
firm conviction in this misconception, they fail to
follow the indispensable practices of taking shelter of
a bona fide spiritual master, understanding the elevated
devotional sentiments described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
observing vows such as those prescribed for the holy day
of Ekādaśī and and the holy month of Kārttika. They
impudently advertise themselves as being rasika and take
pride in being devotees on the path of spontaneous
devotion. To emphasize this point, the verse śruti-
smṛti-purāṇādi has been cited in Text 12.




text 13


atha rāgānugāyā aṅgāny anyāni bhajanāni kāni kīdṛśāni
kiṁ svarūpāṇi kathaṁ kartavyāny akartavyāni vety
apekṣāyām ucyate. svābhīṣṭa-bhāvamayāni, svābhīṣṭa-
bhāva-sambandhīni, svābhīṣṭa-bhāvānukūlāni, svābhīṣṭa-
bhāvāviruddhāni, svābhīṣṭa-bhāva-viruddhāni, iti pañca-
vidhāni bhajanāni śāstre dṛśyante. tatra kānicit sādhya-
sādhana-rūpāṇi, kānicit sādhyaṁ premāṇaṁ prati upādāna-
kāraṇāni, kānicit nimitta-kāraṇāni, kānicit bhajana-
cihnāni, kānicid upakārakāṇi, kānicit apakārakāṇi,
kānicit taṭasthāni, iti. etāni vibhājya darśyante.

Which limbs are to be practiced in rāgānuga-bhakti? How
many types are there? What are their characteristics?
Which are essential, and which are to be disregarded? To
answer these questions, the scriptures set down five
types of devotional practices:

(1) svābhīṣṭa-bhāvamaya – saturated with one’s cherished
mood;

(2) svābhīṣṭa-bhāva-sambandhī – related to one’s
cherished mood;

(3) svābhīṣṭa-bhāva-anukūla – favorable to one’s
cherished mood;

(4) -svābhīṣṭa-bhāva-aviruddha – neutral, or not
opposed, to one’s cherished mood; and

(5) -svābhīṣṭa-bhāva-viruddha – detrimental to one’s
cherished mood.

Here svābhīṣṭa means the mood that a sādhaka aspires to
attain. Some of these five categories are both the
practice (sādhana) and the goal (sādhya). (That is, the
nature of the practices never changes; the only
difference is that in the stage of sādhana they are in
an immature state, while in the stage of sādhya they are
mature.) To achieve the goal of prema, some are direct,
or ingredient, causes (upādāna-kāraṇa) and others are
indirect, or instrumental, causes (nimitta-kāraṇa); some
are signs of bhajana (such as wearing the Vaiṣṇava
markings of tilaka, wearing neck beads made from the

                           40
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

holy tulasī tree, dress meant for the different stages
of life (āśramas), and so on); some are helpful; some
are neutral; and some are harmful. All of these
classifications will be explained ahead.




text 14


tatra dāsya-sakhyādīni svābhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayāni, sādhya-
sādhana-rūpāṇi. guru-pādāśrayato mantra-japa-dhyānādīni
sādhya-pratyupādāna-kāraṇatvād bhāva-sambandhīni “japen
nityam ananya-dhīḥ” ity ādy-ukte nitya kṛtyāni, “japyaḥ
svābhīṣṭa-saṁsargī kṛṣṇa-nāma mahā-manuḥ” iti gaṇoddeśa-
dīpikokteḥ, siddha rūpeṇānugamyamānānām api mantra-japa-
darśanād upādāna kāraṇatvena bhāva sambandhīni “gāḥ
sarvendriyāṇi vindann eva san mama gopa-strī-jana-
vallabho bhavaty abhīṣṭa saṁsargi kṛṣṇa nāma eva mahā-
manuḥ sarva-mantra-śreṣṭha ity aṣṭādaśākṣaro daśākṣaraś
ca mantra eva arthād ukto bhavatīti gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā-
vākyārtho jñeyaḥ. svīya-bhāvocita nāma-rūpa-guṇa-līlādi
smaraṇa śravaṇādīni upādāna-kāraṇatvāt bhāva-
sambandhīni. tathā hi – “gītāni nāmāni tad arthakāni
gāyan vilajjo vicared asaṅga” iti. “śṛṇvanti gāyanti
gṛṇanty abhīkṣṇaśaḥ, smaranti nandanti tavehitaṁ janāḥ”
ity ādy ukter abhīkṣṇa-kṛtyāni. atra rāgānugāyāṁ yan
mukhyasya tasyāpi smaraṇasya kīrtanādhīnatvam avaśayaṁ
vaktavyam eva kīrtanasyaiva etad yugādhikāratvāt sarva
bhakti-mārgeṣu sarva śāstrais tasyaiva sarvotkarṣa
pratipādanāc ca. “tapāṁsi śraddhayā kṛtvā premāḍhyā
jajñire vraje” ity ujjvala-nīlamaṇy ukter
anugamyamānānāṁ śrutīnāṁ premāṇaṁ prati tapasāṁ
kāraṇatvāvagamāt kalāv asmin tapo ’ntarasya vigītatvāt
“mad arthaṁ yad vrataṁ tapaḥ” iti bhagavad-ukter
ekādaśī-janmāṣṭamy-ādi vratāni tapo rūpāṇi iti nimitta-
kāraṇāni naimittika-kṛtyāni akaraṇe pratyavāya śravaṇān
nityāni. tatraivaikādaśī vratasyānvaye “govinda-smaraṇaṁ
nṛṇāṁ yad ekādaśy-upoṣaṇam” iti smṛter upādāna-kāraṇa-
smaraṇasya lābhād aṁśena bhāva-sambandhitvam api,
vyatireke tu “mātṛ-hā pitṛ-hā caiva bhrātṛ-hā guru-hā
tathā” ity ādi skāndādi-vacanebhyo guru-hantṛtvādi
śravaṇān nāmāparādha lābhaḥ “brahma-ghnasya surāpasya
steyino guru-talpinaḥ” iti viṣṇu-dharmottarokter anapāyi
pāpa-viśeṣa-lābhaś ca, iti nindāśravaṇād atyāvaśyaka-
kṛtyatvam. kiṁ bahunā, “paramāpadam āpanne harṣe vā
samupasthite. naikādaśīṁ tyajed yas tu tasya dīkṣāsti
vaiṣṇavaḥ. viṣṇavārpitākhilācāraḥ sa hi vaiṣṇava
ucyate.” iti skānda-vākyābhyām ekādaśī-vratasya
vaiṣṇava-lakṣaṇatvam eva nirdiṣṭam. kiṁ ca vaiṣṇavānāṁ
bhagavad-anivedita-bhojana-niṣedhāḥ, “vaiṣṇavo yadi
bhuñjīta ekādaśyāṁ pramādataḥ” ity atra bhagavan-
niveditānnasyaiva bhojana-niṣedho ’vagamyate. kārttika
vratasya ca tapo ’ṁśena nimitta tvaṁ śravaṇa-kīrtanādy-
aṁśena upādānatvam api. śrī-rūpa-gosvāmi-caraṇānām
asakṛd uktau kārttika-devateti kārttika-devīty ūrjja-
devīti ūrjjeśvarīti śravaṇād viśeṣataḥ śrī-
vṛndāvaneśvarī prāpakatvam avagamyate. “ambarīṣa śuka-
proktaṁ nityaṁ bhāgavataṁ śrṇu” iti smṛteḥ krameṇa śrī
bhāgavata-śravaṇāder nitya-kṛtyatvam uktam. “kathā imās
te kathitā mahīyasām” ity anantaraṁ “yas tūttama-śloka-
guṇānuvādaḥ prastūyate nityam amaṅgala-ghnaḥ tam eva

                           41
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

nityaṁ śṛṇuyād abhīkṣṇaṁ kṛṣṇe ’malāṁ bhaktim
abhīpsamānaḥ.” iti dvādaśokter daśama-skandha-sambandhi
sva-preṣṭha śrī-kṛṣṇa-carita-śravaṇāder yathāyogyaṁ
nitya-kṛtyatvam abhīkṣṇa-kṛtyatvaṁ bhāva-sambandhitvaṁ
ca. nirmālya-tulasī-gandha-candana-mālā-vasanādi-
dhāraṇāni bhāva-sambandhīni. tulasī kāṣṭha-mālā
gopīcandanādi-tilaka-nāma-mudrā-caraṇa-cihnādi-dhāraṇāni
vaiṣṇava-cihṇāny anukūlāni. tulasī-sevana-parikramaṇa-
praṇāmādīny apyanu-kūlāni. gavāśvattha-dhātrī-
brāhmaṇādi-sammānāni tad bhāvāviruddhāni upakārakāṇi.
vaiṣṇava-sevā tūkta samasta lakṣaṇavatī jñeyā. uktāny
etāni sarvāṇi kartavyāni. yathaiva poṣyāt kṛṣṇād api
sakāśāt tat poṣakeṣv āvartita dugdha-dadhi-navanītādiṣu
vrajeśvaryā adhi-kaivāpekṣā, śrī-kṛṣṇaṁ sva-stanya-payaḥ
pibantaṁ bubhukṣum apy apahāya tadīya dugdhottāraṇārthaṁ
gatatvāt. tathaiva rāga-vartmānugamana-rasābhijña-
bhaktānāṁ poṣyebhyaḥ śravaṇa kīrtanādibhyo ’pi tat
poṣakeṣv eteṣu sarveṣu paramaivāpekṣaṇaṁ naivānucitam.
ahaṅgrahopāsana nyāsa mudrā dvārakā-dhyāna mahiṣy-
arcanādīny apakārakāṇi na kartavyāni. purāṇāntara-kathā-
śravaṇādīni taṭa-sthāni. atra bhakteḥ saccidānanda-
rūpatvān nirvikāratve ’pi yad upādānatvādikaṁ tat khalu
durvitarkyatvād eva bhakti-śāstreṣu “tatra prema-vilāsāḥ
syur bhāvāḥ snehādayas tu ṣaṭ” ity ādiṣu vilāsa-śabdena
vyañjitaṁ, yathā rasa-śāstre vibhāvādi śabdena, atra
khalu sukha-bodhārtham eva upādānādi-śabda eva prayukta
iti kṣantavyaṁ sadbhiḥ.

The devotional sentiments of servitude (dāsya),
fraternity (sakhya), parenthood (vātsalya) and amorous
love (mādhurya) are called bhāvamaya, those that are
saturated with one’s cherished mood. Hearing (śravaṇa),
chanting (kīrtana) and performing other limbs of bhajana
in these moods nourish the sādhaka’s creeper of divine
love (prema). Thus, these activities are called
bhāvamaya-sādhana. Upon the manifestation of prema, the
performance of such śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on is called
bhāvamaya-sādhya. Hence, these practices of bhajana are
both the means and the goal.

The practices of bhajana, beginning with taking shelter
of a genuine spiritual master and including mantra-japa,
meditation and so on, are upādāna-kāraṇa, the
ingredient, or material, cause for attaining the goal of
prema. They are therefore called bhāva-sambandhī, those
activities related to one’s desired feeling or mood. The
scriptures enjoin a perpetual duty in phrases such as:
“japen nityam ananya-dhīḥ – one must perform japa every
day with one-pointed attention.” The Gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā
states that it is one’s duty to chant the great mantra
comprised of Kṛṣṇa’s names that is associated with one’s
desired relationship with Kṛṣṇa (japyaḥ svābhīṣṭa-
saṁsargī kṛṣṇa-nāma-mahāmanuḥ). The japa or kīrtana of
those names of Kṛṣṇa that specifically allude to the
eternal relationship with the Lord that one aspires for
in one’s perfected form should be understood to be
bhāva-sambandhī, because it is upādāna-kāraṇa, the
ingredient cause of ecstatic devotion (bhāva).

What is the great mantra comprised of Kṛṣṇa’s names that
is associated with one’s desired relationship? In reply
to this question, Gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā presents the
following explanation: in the word govinda, the syllable
go means “having pervaded all my senses.” Thus, govinda

                           42
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

means “the beloved of the cowherd girls, Gopījana-
vallabha, having pervaded all my senses, splendidly
resides there.” Therefore the term mahā-mantra here
refers only to that name of Kṛṣṇa which is associated
with one’s own desired relationship with Him. Because of
this explanation, the eighteen-syllable gopāla-mantra
has been referred to as the best of all mantras. In
conclusion, the sādhana comprised of the hearing and
chanting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, qualities and
pastimes as appropriately related to one’s own cherished
mood is known as bhāva-sambandhī (due to its being the
upādāna-kāraṇa, or ingredient cause of bhāva).

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.39, 1.8.36) advises:

gītāni nāmāni tad arthakāni

gāyan vilajjo vicared asaṅgaḥ

Completely giving up material attachments, one should
wander freely, unembarrassed while singing about the
sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name and beauty.

śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanty abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

smaranti nandanti tavehitaṁ janāḥ

The devotees achieve supreme bliss by incessantly
hearing about, glorifying and remembering Your pastimes.

These proofs from scripture confirm that continuous
engagement in bhāva-sambandhī-sādhana is obligatory.

It has been mentioned earlier that smaraṇa, remembrance,
is the primary limb of rāgānuga-bhakti. But one should
understand that smaraṇa is dependent on kīrtana. In the
present age of Kali, it is the practice of kīrtana that
grants the eligibility to enter into bhajana, because as
all the scriptures proclaim, kīrtana is superior to all
the other limbs of bhakti and bestows the highest
result.

In Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi it is said that the personified
Śrutis, following the mood of the gopīs, performed
austerities (tapasya) with deep faith and, upon
attaining full prema, took birth in Vraja. This proves
that performance of penances is one cause for attaining
gopī-prema. Here tapasya means fasting on holy days such
as Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī, because in the present age of
Kali other types of austerities are condemned. The Lord
has personally said, “Vows performed for My sake are
called tapasya.” Thus, fasting on holy days such as
Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī and other such austerities are
nimitta-kāraṇa, instrumental causes for enhancing one’s
specific devotional sentiment. Failure to perform these
occasional duties is harmful, and thus they are to be
accepted as perpetual obligations. In this vein, the
scriptures known as Smṛti further explain that to fast
on Ekādaśī is accepted as govinda-smaraṇa, remembrance
of Govinda. On the basis of this evidence, we can see
that observing vows such as those pertaining to holy
days like Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī leads to attaining
smaraṇa, remembrance, which is upādāna-kāraṇa, the
ingredient cause of attaining one’s cherished mood.

                              43
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

Therefore such vows are partially considered to be
bhāva-sambandhī.

From the perspective of prohibitions, the Skanda Purāṇa
declares that people who fail to observe Ekādaśī take on
sin equal to killing one’s mother, father, brother and
spiritual master. Disregarding Ekādaśī and other fasts
is regarded as an offense to the holy name. It is also
written in the Viṣṇu-dharmottara that, while the
scriptures offer various means of atonement for crimes
such as killing a brāhmaṇa, drinking liquor, kidnapping,
and harboring lusty desires for the wife of one’s
spiritual master, there are no penances that can
eradicate the sin incurred by taking grains on Ekādaśī.
Therefore regular observance of the Ekādaśī vow is
accepted as obligatory and should be followed without
question. In the Skanda Purāṇa it is said, “People who
do not abandon their Ekādaśī fast, even in the presence
of dreadful calamities or untold happiness, have
attained Vaiṣṇava initiation (dīkṣā) in the true sense,”
and “Those who dedicate all their activities at the
lotus feet of Viṣṇu are genuine Vaiṣṇavas.” These two
statements from the Skanda Purāṇa confirm that it is
incumbent upon Vaiṣṇavas to observe Ekādaśī. Vaiṣṇavas
are always forbidden to accept anything not offered to
the Lord, but on Ekādaśī, Vaiṣṇavas are prohibited from
accepting grains, even if it is mahā-prasāda and taken
out of inattentiveness.

The vow observed during the holy month of Kārttika, as
an aspect of the performance of austerities, is nimitta-
kāraṇa, the instrumental cause of attaining one’s
cherished devotional sentiment. As an aspect of the
performance of primary devotional limbs such as hearing
(śravaṇa) and chanting (kīrtana), it is upādāna-kāraṇa,
the ingredient cause. In many places Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
has mentioned that Śrīmatī Rādhikā, as the presiding
deity of the Kārttika month, is called Kārttika-devī,
Urjā-devī, Urjeśvarī and so on. Observing the Kārttika
vow presents a special opportunity for the sādhaka to
achieve the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the goddess of
Vṛndāvana. Hence, it is compulsory.

“O Ambarīṣa, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, spoken by Śukadeva
Gosvāmī, should be heard every day.” This statement from
the Smṛti declares that hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is a
perpetual duty.

“I have glorified the lives of great personalities to
you. Those who are aspiring for pure devotion at the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa should regularly hear the
attributes of the Lord, the destroyer of all
inauspiciousness who is glorified with immaculate
poetry.” This statement from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.3.15)
establishes that hearing about the character of one’s
beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa as related in the Tenth Canto is a
continual duty in the category of bhāva-sambandhī,
activity related to one’s cherished mood.

Accepting tulasī leaves, sandalwood paste, perfume,
garlands and garments that have been offered to the Lord
is bhāva-sambandhī. Activities such as wearing neck
beads made from the holy tulasī tree and adorning the
body with Vaiṣṇava markings such as tilaka, stamps of

                           44
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

the holy name and of the Lord’s footprints marked in
gopī-candana, are bhāva-anukūla, favorable to the
development of one’s desired mood. Serving tulasī and
circumambulating and offering obeisances to her are also
bhāva-anukūla. Since it is helpful to honor the cow, the
banyan tree, the myrobalan tree, the brāhmaṇas and so
on, such limbs of devotion are called bhāva-aviruddha,
neutral to the development of the desired sentiments.

Serving the Vaiṣṇavas includes all the special qualities
of the four practices of bhajana already described (that
is, bhāvamaya, bhāva-sambandhī, bhāva-anukūla and bhāva-
aviruddha) and must be performed along with them. All of
the practices mentioned above are to be accepted as
regular duties. For example, it is seen that Mother
Yaśodā gives more importance to diligently looking after
the boiled milk, curd and butter with which she will
nourish Śrī Kṛṣṇa than to Kṛṣṇa Himself. As told in the
Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the middle of
feeding her son breast-milk, she put Him down in order
to rescue the boiling milk, although He was not yet
satisfied. Similarly, it is also not improper for
rāgānuga-bhaktas conversant with rasa to pay more
attention to the aforementioned devotional activities,
which directly nourish śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on.

Since ahaṅgrahopāsanā, nyāsa, mudrās, meditation on
Dvārakā and worship of the Dvārakā queens are a
hindrance to rāga-mārga-sādhana, they are prohibited.
Hearing discourses on Purāṇas other than Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is neutral – that is, neither favorable nor
unfavorable.

Although bhakti is by nature eternally existent, fully
sentient and spiritually blissful (sac-cid-ānanda-
svarūpa) and is not subject to transformation, still we
have employed terms such as upādāna-rūpa – meaning “that
which takes the form of the ingredient cause” – just to
help us understand this difficult subject matter more
easily. In the scriptures that delineate the science of
devotional mellows, terms such as vibhāva and anubhāva
have been used to describe rasa; similarly, upādāna and
other words have been used here to make this subject
easy to comprehend. May the saintly devotees forgive me
for this.

Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti

In Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 273) Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
says: “ataeva yady anyāpi bhaktiḥ kalau kartavyā tadā
tat saṁyoge naivety uktam – in Kali-yuga, if one is
practicing other limbs of bhakti, it is obligatory to
perform them along with harināma-saṅkīrtana.” Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī has also said that harināma-saṅkīrtana
is the topmost out of all the limbs of bhakti, including
smaraṇa, remembrance:

manyāmahe kīrtanam eva sattamaṁ

lolātmakaika sva-hṛdi sphurat smṛteḥ

vāci sva-yukte manasi śrutau tathā

dīvyat parān apy upakurvad ātmavat

                            45
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017


Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (2.3.148)

We consider that kīrtana is superior to smaraṇa because
remembrance appears in the heart only, and the heart is
flickering and unsteady by nature. Kīrtana, however,
directly manifests on the organ of speech and
automatically paints the mind with its own hue. In the
end the sound of kīrtana not only satisfies one’s own
ears, but pleases all those who hear it, just as it
pleases one’s self.

Smaraṇa does not have this power. Therefore only kīrtana
is capable of subduing the mind, which is more restless
than the wind. Moreover, without kīrtana the mind is
incapable of performing smaraṇa. The mind cannot be made
steady by any means other than kīrtana. This is the deep
meaning of the above verse by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī.

kṛṣṇasya nānā-vidha-kīrtaneṣu

tan-nāma-saṅkīrtanam eva mukhyam

tat-prema-sampajanane svayaṁ drāk

śaktaṁ tataḥ śreṣṭhatamaṁ mataṁ tat

Brhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (2.3.158)

Among the many types of śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, the kīrtana
of the Lord’s name is topmost and supremely worshipable.
Through śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana, the supreme wealth of
kṛṣṇa-prema manifests in the sādhaka’s heart very
quickly. This śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana is independently
capable of bestowing pure love for Kṛṣṇa, and therefore,
compared to smaraṇa and other limbs of bhakti, it is
considered the foremost.

Furthermore, śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana is both the practice
(sādhana) and the goal (sādhya). This is the conclusion
of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī and other Vaiṣṇava ācāryas who
are deeply immersed in love for the Lord.



Thus ends the first illumination




SECOND ILLUMINATION




text 1

nanu “na hāniṁ na glāniṁ na nija-gṛha-kṛtyaṁ vyasanitāṁ
na ghoraṁ nodaghūrṇāṁ na kila kadanaṁ vetti kim api.
varāṅgībhiḥ svāṅgīkṛta-suhṛd anaṅgābhir abhito, harir
vṛndāraṇye parama-niśam uccair viharati.” ity ādibhya
eva śrī vṛndāvaneśvaryādi-prema-vilāsa-mugdhasya śrī

                           46
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

vrajendra-sūnor na kvāpi anyatrāvadhāna-sambhava ity
avasīyate. tathā sati nānā dig-deśa-vartibhir ananta-
rāgānugīya-bhaktaiḥ kriyamāṇaṁ paricaryādika kena
svīkartavyam? vijñaptis tava pāṭhādikaṁ ca kena
śrotavyam? tad aṁśena paramātmanaivāṁśāṁśinor aikyād iti
cet samādhir ayaṁ samyag ādhir eva tādṛśa-kṛṣṇānurāgi-
bhaktānām. tarhi kā gatiḥ? sākṣāt śrīmad-uddhavoktir
eva. sā ca yathā – “mantreṣu māṁ vā upahūya yat tvam
akuṇṭhitākhaṇḍa sad-ātma-bodhaḥ. pṛccheḥ prabho mugdha
ivāpramattas tan me mano mohayatīva deva.” asyārthaḥ –
“mantreṣu jarāsandha-vadha rājasūyādy-artha-gamana-
vicārādiṣu prastuteṣu māṁ vai niścitam upahūya yat
pṛccheḥ uddhava tvam atra kiṁ kartavyaṁ tad brūhi iti
pṛccheḥ apṛcchaḥ akuṇṭhitaḥ kālādinā akhaṇḍaḥ paripūrṇaḥ
sadā sarvadika eva ātmano bodhaḥ samvic-chaktir yasya sa
mugdha iva yathā anyo mugdho janaḥ pṛcchati tathety
arthaḥ tat tava yugapad eva maugdhyaṁ sārvajñyaṁ ca
mohayatīva mohayaty eva. atra mugdha iva tvaṁ na tu
mugdha iti. mohayatīva na tu mohayati iti vyākhyāyāṁ
saṅgaty abhāvāt. asaṅgateṣu karmāṇy anīhasya bhavo
’bhavasyety ādi-vākyeṣu madhye etad vākyasyopanyāso
vyarthaḥ syād ity atas tathā na vyākhyeyam. tataś ca
dvārakā-līlāyāṁ saty api sārvajñye yathā maugdhyaṁ
tathaiva vṛndāvana-līlāyām api saty api maugdhye
sārvajñyaṁ tasyācintya-śakti-siddham eva mantavyam.
ataeva varṇitaṁ śrī-līlāśuka-caraṇaiḥ “sarvajñatve ca
maugdhe ca sārvabhaumam idaṁ maha iti.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the embodiment of rasa and is always
immersed in amorous pastimes (rasa-vilāsa).

na hāniṁ na glāniṁ na nija-gṛha-kṛtyaṁ vyasanitāṁ

na ghoraṁ nodaghūrṇāṁ na kila kadanaṁ vetti kim api

varāṅgībhiḥ svāṅgīkṛta-suhṛd anaṅgābhir abhito

harir vṛndāraṇye parama-niśam uccair viharati

Surrounded by the beautiful Vraja maidens, Śrī
Śyāmasundara, having accepted transcendental lust
(kandarpa) as His heart’s nearest and dearest friend, is
always so absorbed in romantic intrigues in Śrī
Vṛndāvana that He remains completely unaware of anything
else – any kind of loss, lamentation, household duties,
calamity, fear, anxiety or defeat at the hands of his
enemies.

This scriptural evidence reveals that Vrajendra-nandana
Śyāmasundara is so captivated in His loving affairs with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the other young wives of Vraja that
He has no chance even to think about anything else. This
being the case, who, then, accepts the service rendered
by countless rāgānuga devotees situated in so many
countries in all the directions? Who listens to the
various kinds of prayers and praises that they offer to
Him? One may resolve this uncertainty by saying that Śrī
Vrajendra-nandana’s portion (aṁśa), Paramātmā, resides
in the heart of every living entity. Since there is no
difference between the portion and the origin, it is
Paramātmā who accepts the service and hears the prayers
and hymns of the rāgānuga devotees – this itself is Śrī
Vrajendra-nandana’s accepting and listening. However,
for a rāgānuga devotee of Kṛṣṇa, such a proposition is

                           47
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

as painful as a crippling disease. What, then, is the
solution? Śrī Uddhava provides the answer with these
words:

mantreṣu māṁ vā upahūya yat tvam

akuṇṭhitākhaṇḍa-sadātma-bodhaḥ

pṛccheḥ prabho mugdha ivāpramattas

tan no mano mohayatīva deva

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.4.17)

O my Lord, while pondering, “Is it proper or not for Me
to go there to kill Jarāsandha, attend the rājasūya-
yajña and perform other duties?” You called me over and,
just like an ordinary, simple-minded person, asked me,
“O Uddhava, what is My duty in this situation?” Although
You are full of unlimited, eternal knowledge that is
undivided and unimpeded by time and space, still You
questioned me, just as an innocent person approaches
someone wise for advice about some weighty matter. By
simultaneously displaying child-like unawareness
(mugdhatā) and omniscience (sarvajñatā), You are
bewildering me.

Uddhava is saying, “Some people explain that in reality
You are not perplexed but are only acting so, and that
You appear to be bewildering me but I am not really
bewildered.” However, such an explanation is
inconsistent. One may try to justify such an
interpretation by inappropriately citing seemingly
relevant scriptural statements such as “karmāṇy anīhasya
– the Lord is without endeavor, yet performs karma” and
“bhavo ’bhavasya – He is unborn, yet takes birth.”
However, since this context is different, such an
explanation is wrong. Just as we must accept child-like
unawareness (mugdhatā) in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Dvārakā pastimes
despite the presence of His omniscience (sarvajñatā),
similarly in His Vṛndāvana pastimes we are obliged to
acknowledge sarvajñatā, brought about by His
inconceivable potency, despite the presence of mugdhatā.
Līlāśuka Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura has given an identical
explanation in Kṛṣṇa-karnāmṛta (83): “We see that the
apparently contradictory qualities of omniscience and
child-like unawareness co-exist in each and every one of
the Lord’s pastimes. Therefore we must accept this as
being accomplished by His inconceivable potency.”




text 2

atra sarvajñatvaṁ mahaiśvaryam eva na tu mādhuryaṁ,
mādhuryaṁ khalu tad eva yad aiśvarya vinābhūta kevala-
nara-līlatvena maugdhyam iti sthūla dhiyo bruvate.

Someone may propose: “One should understand that
omniscience (sarvajñatā) here indicates an abundance of
divine opulence (mahā-aiśvarya) devoid of sweetness
(mādhurya), while the bewilderment (mugdhatā) that

                              48
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

results from completely setting aside aiśvarya and
imitating human-like behavior is simply mādhurya.” But
only dull-headed people will speak like this.




text 3

mādhuryādikaṁ nirūpyate. mahaiśvaryasya dyotane
vādyotane ca nara-līlatvānatikramo mādhuryam. yathā
pūtanā prāṇahāritve ’pi stana-cūṣaṇa-lakṣaṇa-nara-bāla-
līlatvam eva. mahā kaṭhora śakaṭa-sphoṭane ’py ati
sukumāra caraṇa traimāsikyottāna-śāyi bāla-līlatvam.
mahā-dīrgha-dāmāśakya-bandhatve ’pi mātṛ- bhīti-
vaiklavyam. brahma-baladevādi-mohane ’pi sarvajñatve ’pi
vatsa-cāraṇa-līlatvam. tathā aiśvarya sattva eva
tasyādyotane dadhi-payaś-cauryaṁ gopa-strī-
lāmpaṭyādikam. aiśvarya-rahita-kevala-naralīlatvena
maugdhyam eva mādhuryam ity ukteḥ krīḍā capala-prākṛta-
nara-bālakeṣv api maugdhyaṁ, mādhuryam iti tathā na
nirvācyam.

Therefore the conclusion regarding the Lord’s aspect of
unassuming sweetness (mādhurya) and related topics is
that whether divine opulence is exhibited or not, if the
mood of human-like pastimes is not transgressed even
slightly, then it is called mādhurya. For example, when
Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed the demoness Pūtanā, He enacted the
pastime of sucking her breast, behaving just like an
ordinary human child. While smashing the terrifying and
hard-hearted cart demon (Śakaṭāsura) with His extremely
tender lotus feet, Kṛṣṇa maintained His human-like
behavior as a small baby of only three months, lying
flat on His back. Even when Mother Yaśodā could not bind
Him with the longest rope, Kṛṣṇa appeared completely
perturbed out of fear of her. In brahma-vimohana-līlā,4
having baffled Brahmā, Baladeva and everyone else, Kṛṣṇa
was seen tending the cows and calves just like an
ordinary human boy, even while personally remaining
omniscient. Moreover, even though Kṛṣṇa’s great opulence
(aiśvarya) is present when He is seen performing the
pastimes of stealing milk and yogurt and acting lustily
toward the enchanting young cowherd maidens, that
aiśvarya is not apparent.

If the Lord’s child-like unawareness (mugdhatā) were to
be called mādhurya simply because without displaying any
divine opulence, it corresponds to human activities,
then the mugdhatā shown by any ordinary restless and
playful child would also have to be called mādhurya.
Therefore it is completely wrong to explain mādhurya in
this way.




text 4


aiśvaryaṁ tu nara-līlatvasyānapekṣitatve sati
īśvaratvāviṣkāraḥ. yathā mātṛ-pitarau prati aiśvaryaṁ

                           49
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

darśayitvā – etad vāṁ darśitaṁ rūpaṁ prāg janma
smaraṇāya me. nānyathā mad bhavaṁ jñānaṁ martya-liṅgena
jāyate. ity uktam. yathā arjunaṁ prati “paśya me rūpam
aiśvaram” ity uktvā aiśvaryaṁ darśitam. vraje ’pi
brahmāṇaṁ prati mañju-mahima-darśane paraḥ sahasra-
catur-bhujatvādikam apīti.

To exclusively manifest the sentiment of being the
supreme controller of existence (īśvara-bhāva), while
disregarding the human-like mood of nara-līlā, is called
aiśvarya. When revealing His magnificence, Kṛṣṇa said to
his parents Śrī Vasudeva and Devakī (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.3.44)), “O Father, O Mother, I have shown you My
four-armed form just to remind you of your previous
birth; otherwise, you would not have understood Me
properly through My human-like characteristics.” In the
same way, he told Arjuna (Bhagavad-gītā (9.5)), “Behold
My magnificent form!” and revealed His aiśvarya. In Śrī
Vṛndāvana, too, even while displaying the glories of His
charming beauty, He showed Brahmā thousands and
thousands of His four-armed forms.




text 5

atha bhakta niṣṭham aiśvarya-jñānam. ataeva “yuvāṁ na
naḥ sutau sākṣāt pradhāna-puruṣeśvarau” ity ādi
vasudevokteḥ “sakheti matvā prasabhaṁ yad uktam” ity
arjunokteś ca īśvaro ’yam ity anusandhāne ’pi hṛt-kampa-
janaka-sambhrama-gandhasya anudgamāt svīya bhāvasyāti-
sthairyam eva yad utpādayati tan mādhurya-jñānam. yathā
– “vandinas tam upadeva gaṇā ye, gīta-vādya-valibhiḥ
paribabruḥ.” iti “vandyamāna-caraṇaḥ pathi vṛddhaiḥ.”
iti ca yugala-gītokteḥ goṣṭhaṁ prati gavānayana-samaye
brahmendra-nāradādibhiḥ kṛtasya kṛṣṇa-stuti-gīta-vādyaṁ
pūjopahāra-pradāna-pūrvaka-caraṇa-vandanasya dṛṣṭatve
’pi śrīdāma-subalādīnāṁ sakhya-bhāvasyāśaithilyam. tasya
tasya śrutatve ’pi vrajābalānāṁ madhura-
bhāvasyāśaithilyam. tathaiva vraja-rāja-kṛta-tad-
āśvāsana-vākyair vrajeśvaryā api nāsti vātsalya-
śaithilya gandho ’pi praty uta dhanyaivāhaṁ yasyāyaṁ
mama putraḥ parameśvara iti manasy abhinandane putra-
bhāvasya dārḍhyam eva. yathā prākṛtyā api mātuḥ putrasya
pṛthvīśvaratve sati tat-putra-prabhāvaḥ sphīta
evāvabhāti. evaṁ dhanyā eva vayaṁ yeṣāṁ sakhā ca
parameśvara iti yāsāṁ preyān parameśvara iti sakhānāṁ
preyasīnāṁ ca sva sva-bhāva dārḍhyam eva jñeyam. kiṁ ca
saṁyoge sati aiśvarya-jñānaṁ na samyag avabhāsate,
saṁyogasya śaityāt candrātapa-tulyatvāt virahe tv
aiśvarya-jñānaṁ saṁyag avabhāsate virahasyauṣṇayā
sūryātapa-tulyatvāt. tad api hṛt-kampa-sambhramādarāya
bhāvān naiśvarya-jñānam. yad uktam–“mṛgayur iva
kapīndraṁ vivyadhe lubdha-dharmā striyam akṛta-virūpāṁ
strī-jitaḥ kāmayānām. balim api bali-matvāveṣṭayad
dhvāṅkṣavad yas tad alam asita-sakhyair dustyajas tat
kathārtha” iti. atra vrajaukasāṁ govardhana-dhāraṇāt
pūrvaṁ kṛṣṇa īśvara iti jñānaṁ nāsīt. govardhana-dhāraṇa
varuṇa-loka gamanānantaraṁ tu kṛṣṇo ’yam īśvara eveti
jñāne ’py ukta prakāreṇa śuddhaṁ mādhurya-jñānam eva
pūrṇam. varuṇa-vakyenoddhava-vākyena ca sākṣād īśvara-
jñāne ’pi “yuvāṁ na naḥ sutāv iti” vasudeva vākyavat

                           50
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

vrajeśvarasya “na me putraḥ kṛṣṇa” iti manasy api manāg
api noktiḥ śruyate iti tasmād vraja-sthānāṁ sarvathaiva
śuddham eva mādhurya-jñānaṁ pūrṇaṁ pura-sthānāṁ tu
aiśvarya-jñāna-miśraṁ mādhurya-jñānaṁ pūrṇam.

Now a description of devotees who are steadfast in the
awareness of the Lord’s great opulence (aiśvarya) will
be presented. Śrī Vasudeva told Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī
Baladeva, “You are not my sons. You are directly the
Supreme Personalities of Godhead.” Arjuna also, after
seeing Kṛṣṇa’s universal form, said (Bhagavad-gītā
(11.41)), “O Kṛṣṇa, please forgive me for whatever I may
have said earlier out of carelessness or affection, not
realizing Your glories.” The statements of these
devotees reveal that their respective vātsalya- and
sakhya-bhāva diminished upon seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s divine
opulence. This is called aiśvarya-jñāna. But in
mādhurya-jñāna, even when confronted with evidence that
Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, one will not register even
the slightest scent of that awe which causes the heart
to shudder because feelings of natural intimacy are
already firmly established there.

According to the Yugala-gīta [Chapter 35 of the Tenth
Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam], “Gandharvas and other
demigods devoted to the Śrutis surrounded Śrī Kṛṣṇa on
all four sides and worshiped Him with hymns, flowers and
other paraphernalia,” and “Lord Brahmā and others
offered obeisances at His lotus feet as He herded the
cows along the path.” These statements from Yugala-gīta
explain that the cowherd boys headed by Śrīdāma and
Subala saw Brahmā, Indra, Nārada and other demigods
offer prayers with songs and musical instruments,
worship with all paraphernalia, and obeisances at
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet as He returned from the forest.
Nevertheless, their mood of natural friendship with
Kṛṣṇa was not even slightly inhibited. After hearing of
this instance from Pauṇamāsī, the Vraja maidens were
also seen to exhibit an unshakable fixation in their
amorous feelings (mādhurya-bhāva) for the Lord. And in
the same way, there was not the slightest weakening of
Vrajeśvarī Śrīmatī Yaśodā’s maternal mood when she heard
the words Vrajarāja Nanda Bābā spoke to pacify the
Vrajavāsīs. Rather, her love for Kṛṣṇa was strengthened,
and she said, “I am blessed that my son is directly
Parameśvara, the Supreme Controller.”

This statement indicates that the surge of maternal
pride in the heart of Yaśodā strengthens her vātsalya-
bhāva. In the same way, an ordinary mother whose son
becomes the ruler of the world at once demonstrates even
more motherly love for him. The sakhās say, “We, too,
are blessed that our friend is Parameśvara,” and the
vraja-gopīs also say, “We are blessed that the Supreme
Lord is our beloved.” From these statements we can
understand that the moods of the Vrajavāsīs are
strengthened by being confronted with evidence that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord.

When the Vrajavāsīs meet with the Lord, any awareness on
their part of His supreme majesty (aiśvarya-jñāna) is
not apparent. Meeting is like the cool rays of the moon,
but separation burns like the scorching rays of the sun.
Therefore, in separation, aiśvarya-jñāna manifests

                           51
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

openly. Still, when reverential sentiments momentarily
appear, if the heart does not palpitate and if feelings
of awe are not aroused, this cannot really be accepted
as aiśvarya-jñāna. For example, in Bhramara-gīta
[Chapter 35 of the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam] the
gopīs say, “In His incarnation as Rāma, from a hidden
place like a hunter, He pierced the monkey king Bāli
with arrows. Generally, a hunter kills animals out of
excessive greed for flesh, but Rāma killed Bāli without
reason. Thus, He is even more cruel than a hunter.
Furthermore, being subjugated by a woman (his wife
Sītā), He cut off the lusty Śūrpaṇakhā’s nose and ears.
In His incarnation as Vāmana, like a crow He accepted
the worship of Mahārāja Bali and bound him with the
noose of Varuṇadeva. Therefore we do not want any kind
of friendship with that black-complexioned person.
Still, we continue to talk about Him, as it is extremely
difficult for us to give this up.”

This verse from Bhramara-gīta reflects the distinct
moods of the Vraja maidens, who did not nurture any
special reverence for Śrī Kṛṣṇa even after learning of
His majestic aspect. Before Kṛṣṇa lifted Govardhana
Hill, the Vrajavāsīs had no aiśvarya-bhāva for Him. Even
after Kṛṣṇa lifted Govardhana and even when He returned
from Varuṇaloka, even though they were confronted with
evidence that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, the Vrajavāsīs’
hearts were filled with feelings of mādhurya-jñāna just
as before. Śrī Vasudeva, referring to Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva, said, “Neither of you are my sons.” On the
other hand, after hearing from Varuṇadeva and Uddhava
that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Person, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja
experienced some knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s divine opulence
arise in his heart, but he never felt that “Kṛṣṇa is not
my son.” Nor is it mentioned anywhere that he ever spoke
in this way to anyone. Thus, the Vrajavāsīs were always
full of spotlessly pure mādhurya-jñāna. The mādhurya-
jñāna of the associates of Dvārakā, however, was mixed
with awareness of the Lord’s great opulence (aiśvarya).




text 6

nanu pure vasudeva-nandanaḥ kṛṣṇo ’yam aham īśvara eva
iti nara-līlatve ’pi jānāty eva yathā tathaiva nanda-
nandanaḥ kṛṣṇaṁ svam īśvaratvena vraje jānāti na vā?
yadi jānāti tadā dāma-bandhanādi-līlāyāṁ mātṛ-bhīti-
hetukāśru-pātādikaṁ na ghaṭate. tadādikam anukaraṇam
eveti vyākhyā tu manda-matīnām eva na tv abhijña-
bhaktānām. tathāvyākhyān asyābhijña-sammatatve “gopy
ādade tvayi kṛtāgasi dāma yāvad yā te daśāśru-
kalilāñjana-sambhramākṣam. vaktraṁ nilīya bhaya-
bhāvanayā sthitasya sa māṁ vimohayati bhīr api yad
bibheti.” ity uktavatyāṁ kuntyāṁ moho naiva varṇyeta.
tathā hi bhīr api yad bibheti ity uktyaiva kuntyā
atraiśvarya-jñānaṁ vyaktī-bhūtaṁ bhaya-bhāvanayā
sthitasya ity antarbhayasya ca tayā satyatvam
evābhimatam. anukaraṇa-mātratve jñāte tasyā moho na
sambhaved iti jñeyam. yadi ca svam īśvaratvena na jānāti
tadā tasya nitya jñānānanda ghanasya nitya jñānāvaraṇaṁ
kena kṛtam iti? – atrocyate. yathā saṁsāra-bandhe

                           52
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

nipātya duḥkham evānubhāvayituṁ māyāvṛttir avidyā
jīvānāṁ jñānam āvṛṇoti, yathā ca mahā-madhura-śrī-kṛṣṇa-
līlā-sukham anubhāvayituṁ guṇātītānāṁ śrī-kṛṣṇa-
parivārāṇāṁ vrajeśvaryādīnāṁ jñānaṁ cic-chakti-vṛttir
yogamāyaivāvṛṇoti, tathaiva śrī kṛṣṇam ānanda-svarūpam
apy ānandātiśayam anubhāvayituṁ cic-chakti-sāra-vṛttiḥ
premaiva tasya jñānam āvṛṇoti. premṇas tu tat svarūpa-
śaktitvāt tena tasya vyāpter na doṣaḥ. yathā hy avidyā
sva-vṛttyā mamatayā jīvaṁ duḥkhayitum eva badhnāti,
yathā daṇḍanīya janasya gātra-bandhanaṁ rajju-nigaḍādinā
mānanīya-janasyāpi gātra-bandhanam anargha-sugandha-
sūkṣma-kañcukoṣṇīṣādinā, ity avidyādhīno jīvo duḥkhī,
premādhīnaḥ kṛṣṇo ’ti sukhī. kṛṣṇasya premāvaraṇa-
svarūpaḥ sukha-viśeṣa-bhoga eva mantavyaḥ, yathā
bhṛṅgasya kamala-koṣāvaraṇa-rūpaḥ. ataevoktaṁ “nāpaiṣi
nātha hṛdayāmburuhāt svapuṁsām” iti praṇaya-rasanayā
dhṛtāṅghri-padme iti ca. kiṁ ca yathaivāvidyayā
svatāratamye jñānāvaraṇa-tāratamyāt jīvasya pañca-vidha-
kleśa-tāratamyaṁ vidhīyate, tathaiva premṇāpi sva-
tāratamyena jñānaiśvaryādy-āvaraṇa-tāratamyāt sva-
viṣayāśrayayor ananta-prakāraṁ sukha-tāratamyaṁ
vidhīyate iti. tatra kevala premā śrī yaśodādi niṣṭhaḥ
sva viṣayāśrayau mamatā rasanayā nibadhya paraspara-
vaśībhūtau vidhāya jñānaiśvary-ādikam āvṛtya yathādhikaṁ
sukhayati na tathā devakyādi-niṣṭho jñānaiśvarya miśra
iti. tasmāt tāsāṁ vrajeśvaryādīnāṁ sannidhau tad
vātsalyādi-prema-mugdhaḥ śrī kṛṣṇaḥ svam īśvaratvena
naiva jānāti. yat tu nānā-dānava-dāvānalādy-utpātāgama-
kāle tasya sārvajñāṁ dṛṣtaṁ tat khalu tat tat premī
parijana-pālana-prayojanikayā līlā-śaktyaiva sphūritaṁ
jñeyam. kiṁ ca maugdhya samaye ’pi tasya sādhaka-bhakta-
paricaryādi-grahaṇe sārvajñyam acintya-śakti-siddham iti
prāk pratipāditam. tad evaṁ vidhi-mārga-rāga-mārgayor
viveka aiśvaryya mādhuryayor viveka aiśvarya-jñāna
mādhurya-jñānayor vivekaś ca darśitaḥ. svakīyā-
parakīyātvayor vivekas tu ujjvala-nīlamaṇi vyākhyāyāṁ
vistārita eva. tatra vidhi-mārgeṇa rādhā-kṛṣṇayor
bhajane mahā-vaikuṇṭha-stha-goloke khalv avivikta-
svakīyā-parakīyā-bhāvam aiśvarya-jñānaṁ prāpnoti.
madhura-bhāva-lobhitve sati vidhi-mārgeṇa bhajane
dvārakāyāṁ śrī-rādhā-satyabhāmayor aikyāt satyabhāmā-
parikaratvena svakīyā-bhāvam aiśvarya-jñāna-miśra-
mādhurya-jñānaṁ prāpnoti. rāga-mārgeṇa bhajane vraja-
bhūmau śrī-rādhā-parikaratvena parakīyā-bhāvaṁ śuddha-
mādhurya-jñānaṁ prāpnoti. yadyapi śrī rādhikā śrī
kṛṣṇasya svarūpa-bhūtā hlādinī śaktiḥ, tasyā api śrī
kṛṣṇaḥ eva tad api tayor līlā sahitayor evopāsyatvaṁ na
tu līlā rahitayoḥ, līlāyāṁ tu tayor vraja-bhūmau kvāpy
ārṣa-śāstre dāmpatyaṁ na pratipāditam iti śrī rādhā hi
prakaṭāprakaṭa-prakāśayoḥ parakīyaiva iti sarvārtha
niṣkarṣa-saṅkṣepaḥ.

Here a question may be raised: just as Vasudeva-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed human-like pastimes in Dvārakā with
the awareness that “I am the Supreme Lord,” did Nanda-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa have this same perception in His
Vṛndāvana pastimes or not? If one says, “Yes, He knew
it,” then at the time of being bound by Mother Yaśodā in
dāma-bandhana-līlā, tears would not have flowed from His
eyes out of fear of her. It is not fitting for learned
devotees to suggest that His fear and tears of fright
were simply a show. Only less intelligent people will
say this. If the learned devotees would accede to this
explanation, then Kuntī-devī would not have said

                           53
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.8.31)), “O Kṛṣṇa, Mother Yaśodā
decided to punish You when You broke the yogurt pot so
that You would not create such mischief again in the
future. When, out of anger, she started to bind You with
a rope, Your eyes became agitated out of fear; tears
mixed with kajjala flowed down Your cheeks and drenched
Your chest. At that time, frightened of Your mother,
although fear personified is himself afraid of You, You
lowered Your head and hid Your face behind her. The
remembrance of You in such a condition leaves me feeling
bewildered.”

There is no indication from this statement that Kuntī-
devī is actually confused. However, her speech reveals
that bewilderment and an awareness of the Lord’s divine
opulences (aiśvarya-jñāna) are both present in her. The
phrase “fear personified is himself afraid of You”
indicates Kuntī-devī’s aiśvarya-jñāna. Her words
“frightened of Your mother” signify that the fear in the
heart of Kṛṣṇa was not artificial; it was genuinely felt
by Him. This is the conclusive opinion of Kuntī-devī. If
she had thought that Kṛṣṇa was pretending to be afraid,
she would not have been puzzled. But if we say that He
did not know He is the Supreme Lord, then the question
arises as to what it is that covers the eternal
knowledge of Kṛṣṇa, who is the personification of
unending bliss and knowledge.

We see that ignorance (avidyā), as the function of the
illusory energy (māyā), throws all living entities into
the bondage of the material world and veils the
knowledge of their constitutional position to make them
experience only suffering. In the same way, the
embodiment of the function of cit-sakti – that is, the
pastime-potency (līlā-śakti) Yogamāyā – covers the
knowledge of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s associates such as Mother
Yaśodā, who are beyond the three modes of nature. This
enables them to taste the mellows of the happiness of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s supremely sweet pastimes. Similarly, the
essence of cit-śakti, namely prema, also covers Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s knowledge of His own nature – that He is the
very personification of divine pleasure itself (ānanda-
svarūpa) – to enable Him to relish a greater abundance
of ecstasy. Prema is also Kṛṣṇa’s internal, intrinsic
potency (svarūpa-śakti). Therefore there is no fault in
its covering His svarūpa, identity.

Ignorance binds the living entities by its tendency to
create attachment, and thereby inflicts agony upon them,
just as criminals are bound by ropes and chains, causing
them to experience suffering. Conversely, respectable
people find great satisfaction in adorning themselves
with pleasing, costly, fragrant, fine and soft clothes,
like kurtās and turbans, although this also constitutes
bondage. Similarly, the conditioned souls, bound by
ignorance, experience only misery in the state of
bondage, whereas Kṛṣṇa becomes happy under the control
of prema. Kṛṣṇa savors great joy in being bound by love,
just as the bumblebee feels happy in being enclosed in
the whorl of a lotus flower. Therefore it is said, “O
Lord, You do not leave the lotus-like hearts of Your
devotees,” and “Devotees have bound Your lotus feet with
ropes of love.”


                           54
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

The extent to which one’s knowledge is covered depends
on the degree of his ignorance, and accordingly, he will
experience five kinds of misery (kleśa).5 Similarly,
various degrees of prema suppress the knowledge and
opulence of both the object (viṣaya) and receptacle
(āśraya) of prema, enabling them to taste the happiness
of unlimited varieties of rasa according to the level of
their love. Thus, the love of Mother Yaśodā and other
Vrajavāsīs (āśraya of prema) binds their viṣaya Kṛṣṇa
with the ropes of possessiveness (mamatā), and vice
versa. By their mutual love, viṣaya and āśraya bring one
another under control, thus showering an excess of joy
upon both. On the other hand, the prema mixed with
awareness of the Lord’s great opulence (aiśvarya-jñāna)
found in Vasudeva, Devakī and other residents of Mathurā
and Dvārakā is not capable of bestowing such happiness
upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His devotees.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is so captivated by the parental love
(vātsalya-prema) of Vrajeśvarī Yaśodā and the other
older gopīs that He is not even aware that He is the
Supreme Lord. When disturbances from demons and forest
fires occur, whatever omniscience (sarvajñatā) seen in
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is only to protect His dearmost devotees. One
should understand that His pastime-potency causes him to
momentarily display His omniscience. Furthermore,
whatever omniscience is present at the time of Kṛṣṇa’s
childlike-unawareness (mugdhatā) is simply to allow Him
to accept the service rendered by sādhakas. This
omniscience also is instilled in Him by His
inconceivable potency, as previously established.

In this way I have expounded a philosophical
deliberation on the paths of regulated devotion (vidhi-
mārga) and spontaneous devotion (rāga-mārga), the Lord’s
aspects of divine opulence (aiśvarya) and consummate
sweetness (mādhurya) and His devotees’ awareness of
these aspects (aiśvarya-jñāna and mādhurya-jñāna). I
have also presented an elaborate analysis of the
distinctions between the Lord’s marital love (svakīyā)
and paramour love (parakīyā) in Ānanda-candrikā, my
commentary on Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda’s Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi [a
summary of which is given in Part Two].

By performing bhajana of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in vidhi-mārga,
one attains aiśvarya-jñāna, which does not differentiate
between the moods of marital (svakīyā) and paramour
(parakīyā) love in Goloka, within the realm of Mahā-
Vaikuṇṭha. By being covetous of the amorous mellow
(mādhurya-rasa) and performing bhajana in vidhi-mārga
with the knowledge that Śrī Rādhā and Satyabhāmā are
one, the sādhaka becomes an associate of Satyabhāmā in
Dvārakā in the mood of marital love, attaining mādhurya-
jñāna mixed with aiśvarya-jñāna. By being covetous of
the amorous mellow and performing bhajana by spontaneous
love (rāga-mārga), one becomes an associate of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā in Vraja in the mood of paramour love and
attains pure mādhurya-jñāna.

Although Śrīmatī Rādhikā is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own pleasure
potency, and Kṛṣṇa is therefore Rādhikā’s very own
consort, it is nonetheless one’s perpetual duty to serve
the Divine Couple, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala, along with Their
pastimes, and not Kṛṣṇa alone without His pastimes. None

                           55
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

of the scriptures written by the sages has determined
that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa of Vraja are actually married.
Therefore Śrīmatī Rādhikā, in Her manifestations both in
the manifest pastimes (prakaṭa) and in the spiritual
world (aprakaṭa), is attributed with the mood of a
paramour (parakīyā-bhāva), not that of a wife (svakīyā).
In this way the essence of all topics has been briefly
presented here in this Text.




text 7

atha rāgānugā bhakti-majjanasyānartha nivṛtti niṣṭhā-
rucy-āsakty-antaraṁ prema-bhūmikārūḍhasya sākṣāt
svābhīṣṭa-prāpti-prakāraḥ pradarśyate. yathojjvala
nīlamaṇau “tad-bhāva-baddha-rāgā ye janās te sādhane
ratāḥ. tad yogyam anurāgaughaṁ prāpyot-kaṇṭhānusārataḥ.
ta ekaśo ’thavā dvi-trāḥ kāle kāle vraje ’bhavan” iti.
anurāgaughaṁ rāgānugā bhajanautkaṇṭhyaṁ na tv anurāga-
sthāyinaṁ sādhaka-dehe ’nurāgotpatty-asambhavāt. vraje
’bhavann iti avatāra-samaye nitya-priyādyā yathā
āvirbhavanti tathaiva gopikā-garbhe sādhana-siddhā apy
āvirbhavanti. tataś ca nitya-siddhādi-gopīnāṁ mahā-
bhāva-vatīnāṁ saṅga-mahimnā darśana-śravaṇa-
kīrtanādibhiḥ sneha-māna-praṇaya-rāgānurāga-mahābhāvā
api tatra gopikā-dehe utpadyante. pūrva-janmani sādhaka-
dehe teṣām utpattyasambhavāt. ataeva vraje kṛṣṇa
preyasīnām asādhāraṇāni lakṣaṇāni. yad uktam – “gopīnāṁ
paramānanda āsīd govinda-darśane. kṣaṇaṁ yuga-śatam iva
yāsāṁ yena vinā bhaved” iti. “truṭir yugāyate tvām
apaśyatām” ityādi ca. kṣanasya yuga-śatāyamānatvaṁ
mahābhāva-lakṣaṇam. nanu prema-bhūmikārūḍhasya
sādhakasya deha-bhaṅge saty evāprakaṭa-prakāśe gopī-
garbhāj janmanā vinā eva gopikā-deha-prāptau satyāṁ
tatraiva nitya-siddha-gopikā-saṅgodbhūtānāṁ snehādīnāṁ
bhāvānāṁ prāptiḥ syād ity evaṁ kiṁ na brūṣe? maivam.
gopī-garbhāj janmanā vinā iyaṁ sakhī kasyāḥ putrī kasya
vadhūḥ kasya strī ity ādi nara-līlatā vyavahāro na
sidhyet. tarhy aprakaṭa-prakāśa eva janmāstīti cen
naivaṁ, prapañcāgocarasya vṛndāvanīya-prakāśasya
sādhakānāṁ prāpañcika-lokānāṁ ca praveśādarśanena
siddhānām eva praveśa-darśanena jñāpitāt kevala-siddha-
bhūmitvāt snehādayo bhāvās tatra sva-sva-sādhanair api
tūrṇaṁ na phalanti, ato yogamāyayā jāta-premāṇo bhaktās
te prapañca-gocare vṛndāvana-prakāśe eva śrī-
kṛṣṇāvatāra-samaye nīyante tatrotpatty-anantaraṁ śrī
kṛṣṇāṅga-saṅgāt pūrvam eva tat tad bhāva siddhy-artham.
tatra sādhaka-bhaktānāṁ karmī prabhṛtināṁ siddha-
bhaktānāṁ ca praveśa-darśanenaivānu-bhūyate sādhaka-
bhūmitvaṁ siddha-bhūmitvaṁ ca. nanu tarhy etāv antaṁ
kālaṁ taiḥ paramotkaṇṭhair bhaktaiḥ kva sthātavyam?
tatrocyate. sādhaka-deha-bhaṅga-samaye eva tasmai
premavate bhaktāya cira-samaya-vidhṛta-sākṣāt-
sevābhilāṣa-mahotkaṇṭhāya bhagavatā kṛpayaiva sa-
parikarasya svasya darśanaṁ tad-abhilaṣaṇīya sevādikaṁ
cālabdha-snehādi prema-bhedāyāpi sakṛd dīyate eva yathā
nāradāyaiva. cid-ānandamayī gopikā tanuś ca dīyate.
saiva tanur yogamāyayā vṛndāvanīya-prakaṭa-prakāśe
kṛṣṇa-parivāra-prādurbhāva-samaye gopī-garbhād
udbhāvyate. nātra kāla-vilamba-gandho ’pi. prakaṭa-
līlāyā api vicchedābhāvāt. yasminn eva brahmāṇḍe tadānīṁ

                           56
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

vṛndāvanīya-līlānāṁ prākaṭya tatraivāsyām eva vraja-
bhūmau, ataḥ sādhaka-premi-bhakta-deha-bhaṅga-sama-kāle
’pi sa-parikara śrī-kṛṣṇa-prādurbhāvaḥ sadaivāsti, iti
bho bho mahānurāgi sotkaṇṭha-bhaktā mā bhaiṣṭa susthiras
tiṣṭhata svasty evāsti bhavadbhya iti.

How a rāgānuga devotee directly attains the desired goal
by gradually advancing through the devotional stages of
the elimination of impediments (anartha-nivṛtti),
resolute determination (niṣṭhā), strong taste (ruci),
deep attachment (āsakti) and finally ascending to the
realm of divine love (prema) will now be described.
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi states:

tad-bhāva-baddha-rāgā ye

janās te sādhane ratāḥ

tad-yogyam anurāgaughaṁ

prāpyotkaṇṭhānusārataḥ

tā ekaśo ’thavā dvi-trāḥ

kāle kāle vraje ’bhavan

Those who were especially attracted to the moods of the
Vrajavāsīs performed sādhana-bhajana by way of
spontaneous devotion (rāga-mārga). Eventually, they
attained a wealth of suitable fervor required for
worship by spontaneous love and in due time, according
to their eagerness, took birth in Vraja-bhūmi, either
alone or in groups of two or three.

The word anurāgaugha in the verse above indicates
appropriate eagerness for performing rāgānuga-bhajana.
It does not refer to the intense attachment (anurāga)
comprising one’s permanent devotional sentiment
(sthāyibhāva), because there is no likelihood of this
manifesting in the physical body of the sādhaka.

The phrase “took birth in Vraja” means that the
perfected sādhakas took birth from the wombs of gopīs,
just as the eternally perfected (nitya-siddha) gopīs
appeared at the time of Kṛṣṇa’s descent. After that, the
sādhana-siddha-gopīs gradually developed sneha, māna,
praṇaya, rāga, anurāga, bhāva and mahābhāva by the
influence of associating with – that is, by seeing
directly, hearing about and glorifying – the nitya-
siddha-gopīs, who are endowed with mahābhāva. These
moods could not possibly have arisen in the sādhaka’s
previous material body. Therefore Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.31.15) describes the extraordinary characteristics
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved damsels of Vraja in this way: the
gopīs attained supreme pleasure by seeing directly Śrī
Govinda, and experienced just a moment’s separation from
Him to be like the passing of hundreds of milleniums.
The Vraja maidens have stated, “We consider even the
blink of an eye to pass like a millennium.” The gopīs’
experience of a moment lasting for aeons is a symptom of
mahābhāva.

Here one may ask, “Why is it not said that, upon leaving
his present body, a sādhaka who has attained prema

                           57
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

directly receives the form of a gopī in the unmanifest
(aprakaṭa) Vraja without taking birth from the womb of a
gopī, and then, through the association of the eternally
perfected gopīs, she would attain the different moods of
sneha and so on?” The answer is, “No, we cannot say this
because it cannot be reconciled with the human-like
relationships that exist there. Without taking birth
from the womb of a gopī, one cannot answer questions
like, ‘Whose daughter is this sakhī?’ ‘Whose daughter-
in-law and whose wife is she?’”

A further question arises, “What is the harm if one says
that they directly take birth in the Vraja located in
the spiritual world?” The answer is, “No, it cannot
happen like this.” The sādhakas or conditioned souls
cannot enter into the special transcendental
manifestation of Vṛndāvana, which is wholly beyond the
material realm. Only perfected souls can enter there.
Since it is a land for the perfected only, the fruit of
attaining the elevated moods of sneha and so on through
the performance of sādhana there will not come easily.
Therefore, before directly associating with Kṛṣṇa,
Yogamāyā takes the devotee who has attained prema to the
manifest Vṛndāvana, which is perceived in the material
universe. One takes birth there at the time of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s appearance so that these moods (sneha and so on)
can be perfected. It is seen that practicing devotees,
fruitive workers (karmīs) and perfected devotees all
enter into the materially perceived manifestation of
Vṛndāvana. Therefore this Vṛndāvana-dhāma is experienced
both as a land of sādhana and a land of siddha,
perfection.

Having attained prema, where do these most fervent
devotees stay after leaving the sādhaka body and before
attaining the gopī form? The answer is that after
quitting the sādhaka body, the devotees endowed with
prema, who for a long time have enthusiastically aspired
for the direct service of the Lord, mercifully receive
darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa along with His associates. This
occurs even before they attain sneha and all the other
moods savored in the Lord’s sportive amorous play
(prema-vilāsa). Kṛṣṇa grants them their desired service
one time (just as He directly appeared before Nārada in
his previous birth), and bestows upon them their
transcendentally blissful gopī form. That very gopī
form, by the sway of Yogamāyā, emerges from the womb of
a gopī in the manifest (prakaṭa) Vṛndāvana, where Kṛṣṇa
descends with his eternal associates. There will not be
the slightest delay in this because the manifest
pastimes (prakaṭa-līlā) continue to take place without
any interruption in one or other of the innumerable
universes (brahmāṇḍas). Thus, the devotees endowed with
prema take birth from the womb of a gopī in that
universe in which the Vṛndāvana pastimes are being
enacted. Kṛṣṇa always appears accompanied by His
associates when the sādhaka devotee who has attained
prema leaves his body. Therefore, O greatly eager
anurāgī devotees, do not fear. Rest assured – all is
auspicious for you.

Śrī Candrikā-cakora-vṛtti

After receiving prema in the stage of perfection wherein

                            58
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

one’s eternal identity is perceived (svarūpa-siddhi),
one cannot attain the perfection of this identity
without taking birth from the womb of a gopī in the
manifest (prakaṭa) Vraja. The Purāṇas relate that once
Mahādeva, lord of the demigods, nurtured an intense
yearning to witness the rāsa dance. When he reached
Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana, the gopīs stopped him on the border
of Vraja, telling him that no one can enter without the
permission of Yogamāyā Paurṇamāsī. After hearing this
from the gopīs, Mahādeva worshiped Śrī Paurṇamāsī with
severe austerities in order to please her.

Being satisfied with his worship, Yogamāyā appeared and
asked him what boon he wanted. He expressed his wish to
witness the rāsa-līlā. Holding his hand, Yogamāyā dipped
him in Brahma-kuṇḍa. Śaṅkara immediately assumed the
form of an extremely beautiful cowherd girl. Paurṇamāsī
instructed the new adolescent gopī to watch the rāsa-
līlā from one of the groves situated in the northeast
corner of the rāsa dance arena. When the rāsa dance
began that night, this new gopī watched the festivity
from the appointed place. However, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the
gopīs did not experience their special joy in that
night’s pastime and wondered why they were not feeling
elated. They then suspected that an unqualified person
must have somehow entered the arena. After searching in
all directions, they came to suspect the new gopī whom
they found hiding inside the kuñja.

The other gopīs asked her, “Today we are seeing you for
the first time. Whose daughter are you? What is your
husband’s name? From which village do you come?” But the
new gopī, unable to answer these questions, simply
stared at them. The Vraja maidens were certain that she
was an unqualified outsider, although afterward, upon
the request of Paurṇamāsī, on another occasion Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and the gopīs allowed her to witness the rāsa dance from
a distance.

As Mahādeva did not take birth from the womb of a gopī,
he was unable to perfect his mood as an adolescent
cowherd girl. Therefore it is imperative to take birth
as a cowherd maiden from the womb of one of the gopīs of
Vraja and marry a cowherd boy to perfect one’s identity.
This activity takes place through the assistance of
Yogamāyā. After this, upon attaining complete perfection
through the association of the eternally perfected
devotees, one can render service directly to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
in the unmanifest (aprakaṭa) Vraja.




text 8

līlā-vilāsine bhakti-mañjarī-lolupāline. maugdhya-
sarvajñya-nidhaye gokulānanda te namaḥ. dadāmi buddhi-
yogaṁ taṁ yena mām upayānti te. ity avocaḥ prabho tasmād
evāham arthaye. gopī-kucālaṅkṛtasya tava gopendra-
nandana. dāsyaṁ yathā bhaved evaṁ buddhi-yogaṁ prayaccha
me. ye tu rāgānugā bhaktiḥ sarvāthaiva sarvadaiva
śāstra-vidhim atikrāntā eva iti bruvate “ye śāstra-
vidhim utsṛjya yajante śraddhayānvitaḥ” iti “vidhihīnam

                           59
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

asṛṣtānnam” ity ādi gītokter garhām arhanto muhur
utpātam anubhūtavanto ’nubhavanto ’nubhaviṣyanti cety
alam ativistārena. hanta rāgānugā vartma durdarśaṁ
vibudhair api. paricinvas tu sudhiyo bhaktāś
candrikayānayā.

O Gokulānanda, O enjoyer of amorous pastimes (līlā-
vilāsī), You are like a honeybee attracted by and always
relishing the beautiful, fragrant budding flowers of
devotion, wherever they are found (in any devotee, but
especially in Śrīmatī Rādhikā). You are the deep mine of
bewilderment (mugdhatā) and omniscience (sarvajñatā)
personified. I offer obeisances unto You.

O Lord, You have personally confirmed, “I give My
devotees the intelligence by which they can attain me.”
Thus, I pray to You, O son of Nanda Mahārāja, please
bestow upon me that intelligence by which I can render
service unto You when You are decorated by the breasts
of the gopīs.

Three groups of persons are reprehensible: (1) those who
say that rāgānuga-bhakti is always beyond all the
different rules and regulations of the scriptures; (2)
those who perform arcana with faith but abandon all
rules (as stated in Bhagavad-gītā (17.1), ye śāstra-
vidhim utsṛjya); and (3) those who perform sacrifices
disregarding the injunctions of the scriptures (as
stated in Bhagavad-gītā (17.13), vidhi-hīnam
asṛṣṭānnam). Because they disregard the scriptures, such
persons have repeatedly experienced, are experiencing
and in the future will experience many disturbances. It
is pointless to discuss this any further.

Aho! This path based on spontaneous love (rāgānuga-
mārga) is very difficult to detect, even for the
demigods. May deeply intelligent devotees come to know
of it through this moonbeam, this candrikā.



Thus ends the second illumination




Part Two




In connection with Svakīyā-Parakīyā


We are presenting herein the essence of Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī’s and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s
views on the Lord’s marital love (svakīyā) and
extramarital love (parakīyā) imparted in both their
commentaries on verse 2.21 of Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. Both
of these great devotees have very skillfully given their
respective visions of the same ultimate absolute truth
from the viewpoint of established truth and the Lord’s

                           60
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

pastimes, based on logic and proof from the scriptures.




The opinion of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī


(1) According to the standards of mundane society, the
characteristics that are attributed to an ordinary
paramour (upapati) are in no way applicable to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. There is no paramour mood (parakīyā-bhāva) in the
Lord’s eternal pastimes. However, through the illusory
potency, for the nourishment of some special rasa, there
is only a belief in paramour love (aupapatya) in the
Lord’s manifest pastimes. A similar illusion is also
demonstrated in the brahma-mohana-līlā, the pastime
described in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in
which Brahmā was bewildered.

(2) In the devotional mellow of amorous love (śṛṅgāra-
rasa), the love of a paramour (aupapatya) gives rise to
conflicting mellows (rasābhāsa). Śṛṅgāra-rasa has been
described as very pure:

śṛṅgo hi manmathodbhedas

tad-āgamana-hetukaḥ

uttama-prakṛti-prāyo

rāsaḥ śṛṅgāra iṣyate

Sāhitya-darpaṇa (3.188)

In his explanation of the phrase uttama-prakṛti-prāyaḥ,
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has quoted the words śṛṅgāraḥ śucir
ujjvalaḥ from the prominent Sanskrit dictionary, Amara-
kośa, which states that the three words śṛṅgāra, śuci
and ujjvala are all synonyms. Therefore the use of the
word śuci (pure) signifies that there is never any
possibility of the immorality of paramour love in the
sacred and pure love (ujjvala-rasa) shared between Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. In contrast, in another Sanskrit
dictionary, Trikāṇḍaśeṣa, the word jāra is defined as an
illicit lover whose activities are considered abominable
in the mundane realm.

(3) The scripture known as the Nāṭya-alaṅkāra also
describes a paramour as despicable. The Sāhitya-darpaṇa
states:

upanāyaka-saṁsthāyāṁ

muni-guru-patnī-gatāyāṁ ca

bahu-nāyaka-viṣayāyāṁ ratau ca

tathā ’nubhava-niṣṭhāyām

That amorous desire which a woman has for her paramour
or for many lovers, a man has for the wife of a sage or
spiritual master, or which exists between a man and

                             61
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

woman who are not faithful to each other, is considered
improper in śṛṅgāra-rasa.

(4) Śrī Kṛṣṇa personally pointed out the fault of
extramarital love:

asvargyam ayaśasyaṁ ca

phalgu kṛcchraṁ bhayāvaham

jugupsitaṁ ca sarvatra

hy aupapatyaṁ kula-striyāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.26)

For a woman from a respectable family, adulterous
service to a paramour is always condemned. Such behavior
spoils her passage to the other world, bars her from
entering the heavenly planets and brings her disgrace in
this world as well. Such sinful conduct is not only
extremely low class and fleeting in nature but, even in
the present, is also only a source of suffering, leading
directly to a hellish existence.

(5) Parīkṣit Mahārāja also said (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.33.28)): “āpta-kāmo yadu-patiḥ kṛtavān vai
jugupsitam – with what motive did the self-satisfied
leader of the Yadus, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose every desire is
fulfilled, perform this reprehensible activity?”

(6) These statements that describe the fault of an
adulterer must be understood for lovers other than
Kṛṣṇa. It is not possible for Kṛṣṇa to possess these
flaws, as He has descended for the purpose of tasting
the amorous mellow (mādhurya-rasa).

(7) Kṛṣṇa has a special, eternal marital relationship
with the gopīs. In verse 37 of Brahma-saṁhitā, ānanda-
cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis tābhir ya eva nija-
rūpatayā kalābhiḥ, the word nija-rūpatayā means: “sva-
dāratvenaiva na tu prakaṭa-līlāvat para-dāratva-
vyavahāreṇety arthaḥ – in the eternal, unmanifest
pastimes, the gopīs, who are permeated by transcendental
blissful rasa, do not nourish the pastimes in the
paramour mood in the same way that they do in the
manifest pastimes.” In the unmanifest pastimes the
gopīs, as the foremost goddesses of fortune, have no
sentiment other than that of being Kṛṣṇa’s eternally
wedded wives. Therefore, in the Lord’s pastimes that are
manifest in the material world, the gopīs’ mood of being
the wives of men other than Kṛṣṇa (para-dāratva) is only
manifested by the illusory potency, māyā.

(8) The scriptures state that Kṛṣṇa is the husband of
the gopīs. The Gautamīya-tantra (2.23) describes that
Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the husband of the gopīs who
achieved perfection after many births:

aneka janma siddhānāṁ

gopīnāṁ patir eva vā

nanda-nandana ity uktas

                             62
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


trailokyānanda-vardhanaḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, increases the
bliss of the three worlds. He is the husband and
protector of those gopīs who attained perfection after
many births.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.35) also affirms that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is the husband of the gopīs, of the gopīs’ husbands and
of all embodied beings:

gopīnāṁ tat-patīnāṁ ca

sarveṣāṁ eva dehinām

yo ’ntaś carati so ’dhyakṣaḥ

krīḍaneneha deha-bhāk

He who lives as the overseeing witness within the gopīs
and their husbands, and indeed within all embodied
beings, assumes forms in this world for the purpose of
enjoying transcendental pastimes.

(9) The Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (23) confirms that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is svāmī, the husband of the gopīs – sa vo hi
svāmī bhavati.

(10) The paramour mood (parakīya-bhāva) is not possible
for the goddesses of fortune. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s intimate
beloveds (vallabhās) are actually goddesses of fortune.
They are regarded as such in Brahma-saṁhitā (29):
“lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānam – in Goloka
Vṛndāvana, Govinda is served by millions of goddesses of
fortune in the form of gopīs.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa has also
addressed Śrīmatī Rādhikā as akhila-loka-lakṣmī, the
fountainhead of all goddesses of fortune situated
throughout all the worlds. Kṛṣṇa is described as upapati
only because He appears to be like a paramour in the
manifest pastimes.

(11) The scriptures that delineate rasa (the rasa-
śāstras) consider the following aspects of loving
affairs to be superexcellent: (i) bahu-vāraṇatā –
repeatedly forbidding the advances of your lover
(thereby intensifying his desire); (ii) pracchanna-
kāmukatā – keeping your amorous desires hidden; and
(iii) durlabhatā – facing impediments in meeting with
your beloved. This is applicable only in relation to
mundane rasa-śāstra.

(12) Although the above-mentioned three aspects are not
present in samartha-rati (the love of the gopīs, which
is capable of controlling Kṛṣṇa), still śṛṅgāra-rasa is
sufficiently nourished, so much so that even mādanākhya-
mahābhāva is observed in its highest degree. Therefore
there is no necessity whatsoever of the paramour mood.
Even though it seems that the paramour mood exists in
the Lord’s manifest pastimes, it is simply an invention
of the illusory energy.

In conclusion, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has written:


                           63
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

svecchayā likhitaṁ kiñcit

kiñcid atra parecchayā

yat pūrvāpara-sambandhaṁ

tat-pūrvam aparaṁ param

On this subject I have composed some parts according to
my own desire and some parts according to the desire of
others. Those parts [referring to parakīyā] that are
related to the previous and following sections have been
written out of my wish, and whatever is not consistent
with these portions has been written out of the desire
of others. It should be understood in this way.




The line of thought of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura


Śrīla Cakravartīpāda maintains that Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
is one of the prominent rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas. It is not
possible for him to give an explanation in favor of
svakīyā, marital love. Whatever he has explained
supporting svakīyā, he has done simply to satisfy
others. Therefore, concluding his explanation, Jīva
Gosvāmī himself has agreed: “likhitaṁ kiñcid atra
parecchayā – I have written this to satisfy the desires
of others.” To allow unqualified persons of different
inclinations to understand that the Lord’s inconceivable
pastimes with the vraja-gopīs are completely immaculate,
he has presented his commentary in support of svakīyā so
that they too can come forward to meditate on these
pastimes with unwavering faith. For the surrendered,
intimate devotees of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, however, this
explanation can never be acceptable, because it is not
fully consistent with some of the topics found elsewhere
throughout Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s commentary.

(1) The paramour mood (aupapatya) is opposed to the
principles of religious life (dharma) and leads to
hellish life. This statement refers only to worldly
lovers. But how can there be even the slightest doubt
regarding Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the crown-jewel ruler of
religiosity (dharma) and irreligiosity (adharma)? The
meeting of mundane romantic partners entails a touch of
immorality, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the topmost performer of
pastimes (līlā-puruṣottama), who creates and destroys
all the innumerable universes simply by a movement of
His eyebrow, and the gopīs, who as the embodiments of
the pleasure-giving potency (hlādinī-śakti) are the most
prominent among all His immeasurable potencies, can
never be touched by this fault. Thus, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
has written in Nāṭaka-candrikā: “It should be understood
that whatever scholars have described as inferior about
extramarital affairs between a married woman and her
paramour applies only to mundane lovers, not to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs.” This is also the opinion of Śrī
Kavi Karṇapūra in his Alaṅkāra-kaustubha. This upapati-
bhāva for the transcendentally perfect Śrī Kṛṣṇa and

                            64
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

parakīya-bhāva for the gopīs are not defects (dūṣaṇa);
rather, they are their ornaments (bhūṣaṇa).

(2) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s manifest pastimes are not illusory. In
reality, there is no distinction between the manifest
and unmanifest pastimes. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s thought in
regard to verse 43 of Brahma-saṁhitā is worth
considering and following. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa, to show mercy
to the living entities, manifests His incomparably sweet
pastimes (līlā-mādhurya) in the material world, it is
called prakaṭa-līlā, the manifest pastimes. When these
pastimes disappear from the eyes of the living entities
in the material realm, it is called aprakaṭa-līlā, the
unmanifest pastimes. In Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta (1.244)
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states:

anādim eva janmādi

līlām eva tathādbhutām

hetunā kenacit kṛṣṇaḥ

prāduṣkuryāt kadācana

Even though Kṛṣṇa is unborn, His birth and other
pastimes are supremely wonderful. For various reasons,
He manifests such greatly astonishing, transcendental
pastimes in the material world.

(3) It is illogical to think that there is an eternal
husband–wife relationship in the manifest pastimes and
an illusory paramour love in the unmanifest pastimes,
because paramour love is splendidly manifest throughout
the rāsa dance, the crown-jewel of all Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes,
from beginning to end. It is totally inappropriate to
consider this pastime illusory. In each and every
chapter of rāsa-pañcādhyāyī, the five chapters of the
Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgāvatam that describe the rāsa-
līlā, there are many proofs supporting extramarital love
and paramourship. Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī has clearly
established the male and female paramour moods (paroḍha-
and upapati-bhāva, respectively) by quoting the
following verses spoken directly by Śrī Kṛṣṇa and by the
gopīs: tā vāryamāṇāḥ patibhiḥ (10.29.8), bhrātaraḥ
patayaś ca vaḥ (10.29.20), evaṁ yat-paty-apatya-suhṛdām
anuvṛttir aṅga (10.29.32), tad-guṇān eva gāyantyo
nātmāgārāṇi sasmaruḥ (10.30.44), pati-sutānvaya-bhātṛ-
bāndhavān (10.31.13), evaṁ mad-arthojjhita-loka-veda-
svānāṁ (10.32.21), kṛtvā tāvantam ātmānaṁ yāvatīr gopa-
yoṣitaḥ (10.33.19), manyamānāḥ sva-pārśva-sthān svān
svān dārān vrajaukasaḥ (10.33.37), and so on.

(4) If the rāsa dance were illusory, a product of the
illusory energy māyā, then how would we be able to prove
the superiority of the gopīs over the goddesses of
fortune? On the basis of the rāsa-līlā, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.47.60) affirms that the gopīs are greater
than the goddesses of fortune: “nāyaṁ śriyo ’ṅga u
nitānta-rateḥ prasādaḥ – the gopīs received that
supremely rare mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa which even the goddess
of fortune Lakṣmī could never attain.” If the rāsa dance
were illusory, then the greatness of the gopīs would be
unfounded and false.


                           65
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

(5) The rāsa-līlā has not been described by anyone
anywhere as an affair between married couples.

(6) If we reject those sections of the Tenth Canto that
validate paramour love, considering them erroneous, then
we cannot derive any benefit from the rāsa-līlā. In this
context, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has personally said (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.32.22)): “na pāraye ’haṁ niravadya-
saṁyujām – your meeting with Me is most pure and
faultless in all respects. I am unable to repay you for
your saintly behavior.” If the rāsa dance is illusory,
then the proof provided by this portion of the verse
that substantiates the superexcellence of the gopis’
prema is rendered baseless and insubstantial.

(7) In this same verse, the phrase yā mābhajan durjara-
geha-śṛṅkhalāḥ also offers evidence supporting paramour
love. Cutting the indestructible shackles of household
life, the Vraja damsels served Śrī Kṛṣṇa with single-
pointed attention. Expressing His inability to repay
them for their loving service and sacrifice, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
was rendered eternally indebted to them. He was thus
controlled by the gopīs’ love. This is the eternal and
highest truth. If this rāsa-līlā is illusory, then this
actual fact would also be false.

(8) It is illogical to say that Kṛṣṇa is deceitful and
that, as a shrewd trick, He expressed His indebtedness
to the gopīs only to flatter them. Why, then, did
Uddhava, the exalted scholar and crown-jewel of
exclusive devotees, point out the gopīs’ selfless
dedication to Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the pinnacle of devotion if
it is only illusory and transient? Why did he yearn to
take birth as a creeper or blade of grass in Vṛndāvana
in order to be bathed in the gopīs’ footdust? Āsām aho
caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ, vṛndāvane kim api gulma-
latauṣadhīnām (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.61)) – is it not
proved by this verse that the gopīs’ prema is superior
to that of the queens of Dvārakā? This prema is
unequalled and superexcellent because the gopīs
demonstrate intense, undivided spontaneous love
(anurāga) for Kṛṣṇa, having forsaken their family
relations and even their virtuous conduct. If one thinks
this sacrifice of the gopīs to be an illusory act of
māyā, then the cause of the excellence of their prema
would also have to be unreal. Thus, in turn, the
statement of the one-pointed devotee Śrī Uddhava would
be proved false as well. Would the proponent of such an
opinion not be guilty of the fault of refusing to accept
the words of trustworthy authorities?

(9) The meaning of the ten- and eighteen-syllable
gopāla-mantras is also full of the paramour mood. This
secret is not hidden from those who know the
extraordinary power of transcendental sound (śabda).

(10) A glimpse of the paramour mood is seen in the
different meditations and mantras for worshiping Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

(11) Sādhakas in the fully mature stage of meditation
directly perceive the moods of the manifest pastimes.
Therefore these pastimes are not transitory or illusory.
Bhagavad-gītā (4.9) mentions that the birth and

                           66
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

activities of the Supreme Lord are transcendental: janma
karma ca me divyam evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ. The
respected Śrī Rāmānujācārya, in his commentary on this
verse, establishes the eternality of the birth and
activities of the Lord and his associates. Śrī
Madhusūdana Sarasvatī also explains that the word divya
means aprākṛta, beyond the material realm. The Puruṣa-
bodhanī Śruti (the Upaniṣad that is explained in the
disciplic succession of Pippalāda Ṝṣi) also states that
the Lord’s pastimes are eternal: eko devo nitya-
līlānurakto bhakta-vyāpī bhakta-hṛdayādyāntarātmā. In
his sacred text entitled Vidvan-maṇḍalana, Śrī
Viṭṭhalanātha affirms the timelessness of the Lord’s
birth and activities. The Bṛhad-vāmana Purāṇa also
testifies to the perpetual nature of the manifest
pastimes. The Lord says, “By accepting Me as your
paramour, all of you will develop boundlessly deep
feelings of love and affection for Me. Thus, every
aspect of your lives will be filled with success.”

(12) The names of Śrī Bhagavān are eternal. For each of
His pastimes, a specific name is designated. If His
pastimes are transitory, then His names, like Rāsa-
bihārī and so on, would also have to be impermanent. If
this were so, the essence of bhajana would also become
false. To consider the Lord’s holy name to be temporary
is actually an offense, nāma-aparādha.

(13) In Bhagavat-sandarbha Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has
personally established that the Lord’s name, birth,
activities and so on are eternal. He also proves that
the pastimes pertaining to the Lord’s form, incarnation,
birth, activities and associates are unlimited, timeless
manifestations of His internal potency (svarūpa-śakti).
If all of these are eternal according to Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī’s views, then how can the Lord’s pastimes that
are full of paramour love be considered illusory?

(14) It is not mentioned anywhere in the scriptures that
the Vraja maidens were married to Kṛṣṇa with the
brāhmaṇas and the sacrificial fire present as witnesses.
Would Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī agree with anyone saying
this? When Parīkṣit Mahārāja raised a question, being
doubtful about the paramour mood of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
the establisher of religious principles and whose every
desire is fulfilled (āptakāma), Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī
could have clearly stated that these gopīs were the
married wives of Kṛṣṇa, not of anyone else. Why, then,
did he try to make Parīkṣit Mahārāja understand the
subject through the presentation of arduous
philosophical conclusions? There is another point to be
considered here. If Śrī Kṛṣṇa had married in Vraja, the
wedding would have taken place before His sacred thread
ceremony was performed in Mathurā. Would this not be
against ārya-śāstra, the scripture governing the conduct
of civilized society?

(15) We see that the word pati, meaning “husband,” is
mentioned in a few places. This does not refer to a
married man. Rather, it should be understood as gati,
meaning, “You are my everything, you are my ultimate
shelter.” It is not always correct to say that pati
refers only to a married man, the husband of a female
lover (nāyikā). For example, in the chapter in Ujjvala-

                           67
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

nīlamaṇi describing various types of nāyikās, the term
svādhīna-bhartṛkā, meaning “a woman who controls her
husband,” is used in relation to paramour love.
Furthermore, it may be said that Kṛṣṇa has been
described as the pati of some of the nāyikās, but He has
no marital relationship with other nāyikās. If Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is the married husband of them all, then the topic
“para-dārābhimarṣaṇa – to enjoy with another’s wife”
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.27)) would not arise. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam also mentions the Vraja maidens’ husbands.
Moreover, it is also stated that the gopīs never had
union with their husbands at any time (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi
(3.32)): na jātu vraja-devīnāṁ patibhiḥ saha saṅgamaḥ.

(16) In the statement sa vo hi svāmī bhavati from
Gopāla-tāpanī, the word svāmī indicates aiśvarya
(meaning “divine opulence”), not marriage. This is
authenticated in Pāṇini’s grammar (5.2.126), which says
svāminn aiśvarya. However, some texts cite the following
application: “loke hi yasya hi yaḥ svāmī bhavati, sa
tasya bhoktā bhavatībhiḥ – in this world, svāmī is he
who maintains and supports others (like a king or any
magnanimous benefactor) and who is the enjoyer of all.”
Therefore the word svāmī does not always refer to a
husband.

(17) All relationships in Vraja are transcendental.
Wherever the word māyā is used, it should be understood
as Yogamāyā. Therefore Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s acceptance of
Abhimanyu as Her husband should be seen as a
transcendental arrangement. As one inseparable link in
the chain of the Lord’s pastimes, this relationship is
also not illusory. Yogamāyā is behind it.

(18) Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the embodiment of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
hladinī-śakti, His pleasure potency – of this, there is
no doubt. The object of our adoration is the Divine
Couple Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa along with Their special pastimes. To
worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa devoid of Their pastimes is outside
our line of thought and our concept of bhajana.

(19) One may question why the Vraja maidens are seen to
endure bad reputation, mental agony and torment
inflicted by their mothers-in-law and sisters-in-law,
who prohibit them from meeting with Kṛṣṇa, whereas this
is not so for Satyabhāmā, Rukmiṇī and the other queens
of Dvārakā. One might thus conclude that, compared to
Rukmiṇī, the gopīs’ position is inferior. However, just
as apparently mundane distress is witnessed in the
gopīs, who are filled with the most elevated form of
divine love known as mahābhāva, they are also seen to
experience happiness to a much higher degree than
others.

(20) The gopīs’ relationship with Kṛṣṇa is the result of
their inconceivable spontaneous love (anurāga) for him.
To establish this bond with him, the cowherd maidens had
to give up their family members, thus cutting themselves
off from the path of respectability. However, they
experienced all resultant anguish and unhappiness as the
highest pleasure. Can we find any other example of such
an elevated expression of love? The cherished desire of
the worshipable Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī would also be the
unique and supra-mundane love of the gopīs; there is no

                           68
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

doubt about this. Therefore the supremely merciful Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī has written the verse svecchayā likhitaṁ
kiñcit [see p. 77], indicating that the paramour
relationship is also his coveted goal. If the marriages
of the young girls of Vraja had occurred and been
witnessed by a spiritual master, the sacrificial flame
and the brāhmaṇas, then all the discussions in Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi from beginning to end would be overturned.
Therefore Jīva Gosvāmī’s statement denoting a husband–
wife relationship has been written to satisfy the
desires of others – parecchā.

Verses in the Ṝg Veda (1.12.66, 1.17.117, 1.20.134,
6.55.4-5, 9.38.4, 10.162.5) and other mantras from the
Śruti mention the word jāra, a paramour, the lover of an
unmarried girl. The Chāndogya Upaniṣad (1.66.4,
1.17.117, 118) and Ānandagiri’s commentary on Śaṅkara-
bhāṣya (2.13.2) also approve of the paramour mood as
Vāmadevya’s method of worship by sāmopāsanā (as
presented in the Sāma Veda). In the commentary of Pāṇini
(3.3.20 Sūtra, 743 Vārttika), we see the origin of the
word jāra in the phrase jarayantīti jārāḥ.




Opinions of other Vaiṣṇavas


The paramour mood (parakīya-bhāva) is the prime
speciality in both the objective (sādhya) and practice
(sādhana) of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. Prior to them no
Vaiṣṇava preceptor had presented this principle. A hint
of parakīya-bhāva is seen in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (verses
9, 51, 53, 76–7, 87 and 90), in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(verses 10.29.22, 25–6 and 10.33.27, 35), in the
commentary on Bhopadeva Ṝṣi’s Muktāphala (5.14), and in
the collections of poems of Śrī Caṇḍīdāsa and Vidyāpati.
In Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s writings, we definitely find
an indication of parakīya-bhāva, although it is not
explicitly mentioned. Gīta-govinda (12.13) mentions the
word “husband” – patyur manaḥ kīlitam. However, from
other references in Gīta-govinda, it does not appear
that Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the married wife of Śrī Kṛṣṇa:
“dehi pada-pallavam udāram – please give Your
magnanimous feet, which are soft like the buds of lotus
flowers” (10.8); in Part One, in the discussion of the
rāsa dance that takes place in springtime (vāsantī-
rāsa), Śrīmatī Rādhikā is seen from a distance and her
jealous anger (māna) is difficult to pacify; and sukham
utkaṇṭhitam gopa-vadhu-kathitaṁ vitanotu salīlam (2.18),
the word “gopa-vadhu” meaning “wife of a cowherd.”

No other Vaiṣṇava ācārya gave instructions for
performing bhajana in the mood of a paramour (parakīya-
bhāva) prior to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. Many persons are
under the impression that Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī favored the
concept of marital love (svakīyā) in the Lord’s
pastimes, but this suspicion is unfounded. Śrī Rūpa, Śrī
Sanātana, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa, Śrī Kavi Karṇapūra and
other gosvāmīs have described Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
in terms of parakīya-bhāva. However, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
saw that those qualified to appreciate parakīya-rasa or

                              69
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

to perform bhajana in the paramour mood are very rare.
He has, therefore, discussed worship by the means of
mantra (mantramayī-upāsanā, meditation upon a single
pastime described in a single verse) in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
sandarbha (153). Śrī Rūpa-Raghunātha and other gosvāmīs
have mentioned in their books svārasikī-upāsanā, service
performed within a continuous flow of pastimes that
appears spontaneously within one’s bhajana.

This svārasikī-upāsanā is, indeed, Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
innermost cherished desire (mano ’bhīṣṭa). Nowhere in
their writings have the gosvāmīs emphasized mantramayī-
upāsanā. Bhajana of the svārasikī variety and bhajana
performed in the paramour mood are both discussed in
Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (1.7.82, 154–
5 and 2.5.84–5) and its commentary. The example of
bhajana given in the second part of Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta
is simply presenting the process of svārasikī-bhajana
step by step. Moreover, the method of bhajana performed
in the mood of a sakhā or a priya-narma-sakhā is of the
svārasikī variety, not the mantramayī method. Even the
mantras themselves have been explained as being
svārasikī. The following description is written in
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (2.1.77):

gopārbha-vargaiḥ sakhibhir vane sa gā

vaṁśī-mukho rakṣati vanya-bhūṣaṇaḥ

gopāṇganā-varga vilāsa-lampaṭo

dharmaṁ satāṁ laṅghayatītaro yathā

Decorated with forest flowers, my worshipable Lord holds
a flute to His mouth and, along with His sakhās, takes
the cows out to graze. Because He is a great debauchee,
He always enjoys pastimes with the gopīs that violate
the religious principles of the pious.

In mantramayī-upāsanā, the meeting of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in
one place is described, but paramour love requires the
presence of impediments and so forth. It is a more
complex drama that cannot be captured in a single scene.
Thus mantramayī-upāsanā is not sufficient to capture the
mood of parakīya-bhāva.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, in their commentaries on Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, have
presented detailed deliberations on svakīyā and
parakīyā. Both conclusions are appropriate in their
respective places. The only difference is their angle of
vision. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has favored svakīyā from the
perspective of established philosophical truth, whereas
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has supported
parakīya-bhāva from the viewpoint of the Lord’s
pastimes. Just as in the material world there are
innumerable universes, and in the divine realm there are
countless Vaikuṇṭhas, similarly in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode of
Goloka Vraja there are infinite chambers (prakoṣṭhas).
Even though this is not overtly described anywhere,
there are certainly hints in the writings of the
gosvāmīs. Kṛṣṇa’s mood differs depending on his diverse
manifestations (that is, Vrajendra-nandana, Mathurādhīśa
or Dvārakādhīśa). While there is meeting in one

                           70
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

manifestation (prakāśa), there is separation in another.
In meeting, there is the bliss of union, and in
separation the pangs of viraha – such experiences cannot
be denied. In Gopāla-campū (1.1.22) Jīva Gosvāmīpāda
describes the pastimes of the Gokula manifest within
this world (prakaṭa-prakāśa) and the eternal Goloka
situated within the divine realm (aprakaṭa-prakāśa) from
among Goloka’s many different types of manifestations.
Just as innumerable types of pastime occur in the
playful amorous sporting of mādanākhya-mahābhāva,
similarly there is no objection to pastimes of marital
love (svakīyā) occurring eternally, pastimes of
extramarital love (parakīyā) occurring eternally and
also pastimes of simultaneous svakīyā and parakīyā
occurring eternally within the different chambers
(prakoṣṭhas). However, after considering them all from a
neutral standpoint, one must surely accept the
superiority of parakīyā.




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura on svakīyā and parakīyā


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has given a beautiful,
detailed elucidation of this subject matter in his
commentary on the verse ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-
pratibhāvitābhiḥ (Brahma-saṁhitā (37)). We are
presenting it here for the benefit of the sādhakas.

Our honorable preceptor Jīva Gosvāmipāda has explained
in his commentary on this verse of Brahma-saṁhitā, in
his commentary on Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, in Kṛṣṇa-
sandarbha and in other places as well, that Kṛṣṇa’s
manifest pastimes are arranged by Yogamāyā. Because of
their connection with the illusory realm, they appear to
have assimilated some mundane features that cannot exist
in the intrinsic fundamental reality (svarūpa-tattva).
Examples of such pastimes include the killing of demons,
associating with the wives of others, taking birth and
so on. It is an established truth that the gopīs are
extensions of Kṛṣṇa’s personal intrinsic potency. Hence,
since they are unquestionably His own consorts, how can
there be any possibility of their being anyone else’s
wives? Still, we see that in the manifest pastimes the
gopīs do appear to be the wives of others, but this is
only an implicit conviction created by the illusory
potency, māyā.

There is a secret meaning in Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s
explanation, which, if brought to light, will
automatically dispel all types of doubt. The revered
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, the foremost follower of Śrīla Rūpa
and Sanātana Gosvāmīs, is the ācārya of essential truth
and reality (tattva-ācārya) of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.
Furthermore, he is Śrī Rādhā’s confidential assistant in
kṛṣṇa-līlā. Therefore there is no secret truth that is
unknown to him. Those who do not understand his profound
intentions raise arguments for and against his ideas by
presenting their own concocted interpretations.

According to Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana’s vision, there is no

                           71
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

difference between the manifest and the unmanifest
pastimes. The only distinction is that one manifestation
is beyond the material domain and the other is seen
within it. In the region beyond the mundane sphere,
everything – the seer and the seen – is transcendentally
pure. Fortunate people, on receiving the extraordinary
mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, relinquish all material connections
and enter the spiritual domain. If during the
performance of sādhana they attained perfection in
savoring the extraordinary varieties of rasa, they can
then see and take delight in all the supremely pure
pastimes of Goloka. Such recipients of mercy are very
rare.

On the other hand,6 those who attain perfection in
bhakti and experience the nectar of spiritual rasa by
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, witness the pastimes of Goloka in the
pastimes of Gokula that are manifest in this world, even
while remaining in the material universe. There are some
gradations of qualification in both categories of
sādhaka. As long as one has not attained vastu-siddhi
(birth from the womb of a gopī in Kṛṣṇa’s manifest
pastimes), the influence of māyā maintains some
restriction in one’s vision of the Goloka pastimes. On
the other hand, realization of one’s svarūpa varies
according to the level of one’s attainment of svarūpa-
siddhi. It must be accepted that a devotee’s darśana of
Goloka will vary according to the degree that he has
realized his intrinsic form and nature. People who are
tightly bound by māyā have no spiritual vision. Some of
them are trapped by the variegated charm of māyā, and
some, having taken shelter of impersonal knowledge of
the formless aspect of the absolute, which is opposed to
the reality of Bhagavān’s personality, proceed toward
the path of total destruction. Even after seeing the
Lord’s manifest pastimes, both types of bound people
view such pastimes as mundane activities, having no
connection with the unmanifest pastimes. Thus, there is
gradation in one’s darśana of Goloka depending upon
one’s qualification.

There is a subtle point to note here. Just as Goloka is
the completely pure, divine truth beyond the illusory
realm, the Gokula that is manifest on this Earth is
similarly always pure and uncontaminated, even though it
appears in the material world by the Lord’s knowledge
potency, Yogamāyā. There is not even the slightest touch
of material defect, degradation or imperfection in
either the manifest or the unmanifest pastimes.
Different people perceive the pastimes differently,
depending on their qualification. Defect
(contamination), foulness, designation, illusion,
ignorance, impurity, falsity, loathsomeness and
grossness are all perceived through the conditioned
living entities’ intelligence, false ego and eyes that
have been dulled by the material nature. They do not
belong to the object of their perception, Gokula. The
more one is free from defects, the more one is granted
vision of the transcendental truth. The truth is
revealed in the scriptures, but the purity of
realization for those who deliberate on these principles
of established truth will depend upon their
qualifications.


                           72
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

According to the views of Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana,
whatever pastimes are manifest in Bhauma-Gokula are also
present in Goloka, also in their pure form without a
tinge of māyā. That is why the mood of transcendental
paramourship is also certainly present in some form or
another in Goloka in its inconceivably pure state. All
the manifestations created by Yogamāyā are immaculate.
The transcendental mood that Yogamāyā creates of being
the wife of someone other than Kṛṣṇa, or of being His
paramour, is therefore based on the pure absolute
reality. But what is this pure absolute reality? This
should be discussed.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.9–10,
1.13–14, 5.2):

pūrvokta-dhīrodattādi

caturbhedasya tasya tu

patiś copapatiś ceti

prabhedāv iha viśrutau

patiś ca kanyāyā yaḥ

pāṇi-grāhako bhavet

rāgeṇollaṅghayan dharmaṁ

parakīyā-balārthinā

tadīya-prema-sarvasyaṁ

budhair upapatiḥ smṛtaḥ

laghutvam atra yat proktaṁ

tat tu prākṛta-nāyake

na kṛṣṇe rasa-niryāsa-

svādārtham avatāriṇi

tatra nāyikābheda-vicāraḥ,

“nāsau nāḍhye rase mukhye

yat paroḍhā nigadyate

tat tu syāt prākṛta-kṣudra-

nāyikādy-anusārataḥ.”

After deep deliberation on these verses of Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī establishes that the
transcendental paramour mood, like the pastime of
Kṛṣṇa’s birth, is a divine delusion created by Yogamāyā.
“Tathāpi patiḥ pura-vanitānāṁ dvitīyo vraja-vanitānām –
it is understood that the mood of being married exists
in Dvārakā, while the Vraja maidens have the
transcendental paramour mood.” According to the
conclusions of Śrīla Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs, the
delightfully deceptive pastimes are also accepted as the

                              73
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

contrivance of Yogamāyā. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has
established that there is no difference between the
pastimes of Goloka and Gokula, and it must be accepted
that the original principle of all pastimes is manifest
in Gokula.7

One who accepts the hand of a virgin girl according to
the sacred rites of marriage is called a husband. And he
who, being overcome by passion, violates conventional
morality in order to win another’s wife is called a
paramour. Now, the religious obligation binding one
within matrimonial regulation does not exist in Goloka.
Even the concept of husbandhood within the bounds of
matrimony does not exist there. Therefore the gopīs, who
are Kṛṣṇa’s own potency, cannot be married to any other
person and can never be the wives of other men. In that
realm of Goloka it is not possible for the paramour
(parakīyā) and married (svakīyā) conditions to exist
separately from each other. In the manifest pastimes
within the illusory realm, the strictures of marriage do
exist, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa is beyond their jurisdiction.
Therefore the form of righteous prescription (dharma)
found in the sweet realm of Vraja is a creation of
Yogamāyā. Kṛṣṇa transgresses this dharma and enjoys the
transcendental paramour mellow. Only a person with
mundane vision in the material world will see this as a
violation of the dharma created by Yogamāyā. In reality,
there is no such degradation in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

The paramour mellow is the very essence of all rasas, so
a denial of its presence in Goloka would minimize that
realm. It is not possible that the highest delight in
rasa could be absent from the topmost abode of Goloka.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of all incarnations,
relishes this rasa in one way in Goloka and in another
way in Gokula. Thus, even though there appears to be a
transgression of dharma according to material vision,
this truth must also exist in some form in Goloka.

“Ātmārāmo ’py arīramat (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.42)) –
Kṛṣṇa performed amorous pastimes, although He is self-
satisfied (ātmārāma).” “Ātmany avaruddha-saurataḥ
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.25)) – Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose every
desire comes to fruition, keeps in His heart the hāva,
bhāva and other anubhāvas arising from His amorous
diversions.” “Reme rameśo vraja-sundarībhir yathārbhakaḥ
sva-pratibimba-vibhramaḥ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.16))
– Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who gives pleasure to the supreme
goddess of fortune Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, enjoyed with the
beautiful Vraja maidens just as an innocent child plays
with his reflection without undergoing any
transformation.”

It is understood from these scriptural statements that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s constitutional nature is to be self-
satisfied. In those spiritual planets predominated by
opulence, He manifests his own potency as Lakṣmī, and
consorts with her in the mellow of wedded conjugal love.
There, with the sense of wedlock prevailing, rasa only
goes up to the stage of servitorship (dāsya). But in
Goloka, Kṛṣṇa manifests millions and millions of gopīs
and enjoys with them continuously, oblivious to any
sentiments of wedded love. In the svakīyā conception,
rasa does not remain extremely inaccessible as in the

                           74
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

parakīyā mood, where the obstacles to meeting make union
all the more precious. Hence, from beginningless time,
the gopīs are naturally imbued with an innate conception
of being other men’s wives. Śrī Kṛṣṇa therefore
reciprocates with their mood, and naturally assumes the
identity of their paramour, taking the help of His
flute, which is His dearly beloved intimate companion,
to accomplish the rāsa dance and other pastimes.

Goloka, which is eternally perfect and free from
illusion, is the abode of divine rapture. Thus, the flow
of rasa in the conception of paramourship finds its
perfection there. Even the parental mellow is not found
in Vaikuṇṭha because of the sense of awe and reverence
there. However, in the fountainhead of ultimate
sweetness, which is the Vraja situated in Goloka, there
exists nothing but the original conception of this rasa.
Nanda and Yaśodā are present there, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
birth does not actually take place. In reality,
parenthood does not exist in the absence of birth, so
Nanda and Yaśodā only have the self-conception
(abhimāna) of being parents. This is substantiated in
the verse jayati jana-nivāso devakī-janma-vādaḥ (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.90.48)). This abhimāna is eternal for the
sake of perfect rasa.

By the same logic, there is no fault or transgression of
scriptural prohibitions in the amorous mellow, since the
bhāvas of being the wife of another and of being a
paramour are simply eternal self-conceptions. When the
essential reality of Goloka appears in manifest Vraja,
both of these conceptions (being another’s wife and
paramourship) are seen in a tangible form by worldly
vision. This is the only difference. In the mellow of
parenthood, Nanda and Yaśodā’s mood of being parents
becomes apparent in a concrete way through birth and
other pastimes; and in the amorous mellow, the idea of
the Vraja maidens being the wives of others takes on a
perceptible shape in the form of their marriages with
Abhimanyu, Govardhana Malla and others. In reality there
is no such thing as the gopīs having husbands, either in
Gokula or in Goloka.

The scriptures therefore proclaim: “na jātu vraja-
devīnāṁ patibhiḥ saha saṅgamaḥ – the vraja-devīs never
had union with their husbands.” Thus, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, the master of the truths of rasa, has written:
“patiś copapatiś ceti prabhedāv iha viśrutau – in the
resplendent mellow of amorous love, there are two types
of heroes: husband and paramour.” Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has
written in his commentary on this verse: “patiḥ pura-

vanitānāṁ dvitīyo vraja-vanitānām – the hero of Dvārakā-
purī’s young women is called a husband, and in Vraja,
the hero Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the paramour of the young women of
Vraja.”

This passage shows that Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has accepted
Kṛṣṇa as the husband in Vaikuṇṭha and Dvārakā, and as
the eternal paramour in Goloka-Gokula. The
characteristics of a paramour are exhibited to their
full extent in the Lord of Goloka-Gokula. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is completely self-satisfied, transgresses His natural
state of self-satisfaction. The cause for this

                           75
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

transgression is His intense passion to meet with the
Vraja damsels, who are others’ wives. The state of being
another’s wife is nothing but the eternal self-
conception (abhimāna) of the gopīs. Even though the
gopīs do not factually have real husbands, their
transcendental paramour mood is fulfilled just by having
the sentiment of being the wives of others. Therefore
transgressing the rules of dharma out of their intense
attachment and all other such symptoms are eternally
present in the arena of the super-excellent amorous
mellow. In Bhauma-Vraja, this bhāva is partially visible
in a tangible form to people with mundane vision.

Therefore the simultaneous divergence and non-
distinction between the transcendental mellows of
wedlock and paramourship in Goloka is inconceivable by
material intelligence. It can be said that there is no
difference between them, and it can also be said that
there is difference. Why? The essence of paramourship is
loving enjoyment outside of the sanction of wedlock, and
the essence of wedlock is abstention from unlawful
connections. Therefore Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s loving enjoyment with
His own personal potency (svarūpa-śakti) can also be
understood as svakīyā by this definition.8 Although
these two, paramourship and wedlock, are one rasa, they
exist eternally as its dual variations. Furthermore,
although the form of rasa in Gokula is the same, mundane
observers view it otherwise.

Śrī Govinda, the hero of Goloka, exhibits His qualities
of being the pati (meaning “husband” or “shelter”) of
the gopīs as well as being their upapati (meaning
“paramour”). Both qualities shine forth brilliantly in
their pristine splendor, beyond all piety and impiety.
These same characteristics also exist in the hero of
Gokula, but with some diversity created by the agency of
Yogamāyā. One may raise the following point: whatever
Yogamāyā manifests is the absolute truth, so the
sentiment of paramour love would similarly have to be
accepted as absolutely true. To dispel this doubt, it is
said that conviction in the paramour conception can
exist in the relishing of rasa, and there is no fault in
that, because it is not unfounded. However, whatever
base convictions exist in mundane consciousness are
faulty. They are not present in the pure, transcendental
world.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has indeed given the correct, perfect
philosophical conclusion, while the opposing conclusions
are also inconceivably true. Simply arguing in vain
about the conclusions of paramourship and wedlock is a
fruitless exhibition of word jugglery. There is no
possibility of any type of skepticism rising in the
hearts of those who make a thorough and impartial study
of the commentaries by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and the
“opposing party.” Whatever is spoken by pure Vaiṣṇavas
is true and utterly free from any bias or party spirit,
but there is a mystery surrounding their apparent verbal
disagreements. Those whose intelligence is materialistic
and lacks the spirit of devotion cannot fathom the deep
secrets of the loving controversies between pure
Vaiṣṇavas, and thus they wrongly conceive of such great
personalities as philosophical adversaries. The great
devotee Śrīla Cakravartipāda has wholeheartedly and with

                           76
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

the utmost reverence supported the opinion that Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī has given in his Vaiṣṇava-toṣanī
commentary on verse 10.33.35 of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:
“gopīnāṁ tat-patīnāṁ ca – the gopīs and their husbands.”

When contemplating any opinion connected with the divine
pastimes of Goloka and other transcendental realms, we
should keep in mind the invaluable advice given by
Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His followers, the Six Gosvāmīs.
The Supreme Personality and Absolute Truth is never
without form and attributes. Rather, He is full with
variegated qualities and pleasurable engagements, which
lie completely beyond the material plane.

The supremely relishable and splendid form of the
mellows of transcendental service to Bhagavān, tasted
through the four types of transcendentally variegated
ingredients – vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika and
vyabhicārī9 – is eternally present in Goloka and
Vaikuṇṭha. By the agency of Yogamāyā, this very rasa of
Goloka manifests in the material realm as vraja-rasa for
the benefit of the devotees. One should know that all
the rasas seen in this Gokula must surely be found also
in Goloka in their radiantly pure state. That is why the
wonderful varieties of hero and heroines (Kṛṣṇa and the
gopīs), the diversity of rasa in them and all the
surroundings and paraphernalia of Gokula, including the
land, rivers, mountain, residences, gateways, bowers,
cows and so on, collectively exist in the same form in
Goloka.

Only the worldly beliefs of those who are imbued with
mundane intelligence are missing in Goloka. In the
variegated pastimes of Vraja, different visions of
Goloka are realized according to one’s level of
qualification. It is difficult to establish a fixed
standard to determine which aspects of those varieties
of visions are illusory and which are pure. A clear
vision gradually arises within the heart as the eyes of
devotion become cleansed through being anointed with the
salve of prema. Therefore there is no need to argue and
counter-argue over this matter, because it will not
elevate one’s qualification. The truth of Goloka is
filled with inconceivable bhāva, and any attempt to
investigate this inconceivable reality by the mind would
prove as unproductive as threshing empty husks. Hence,
one should disregard the method of empirical knowledge,
and strive for realization through the practice of
unalloyed devotion.

On the path of bhakti, it is crucial to renounce any
subject matter whose acceptance would ultimately give
rise to an impersonal impression. The pure paramour
mellow described in the Goloka pastimes is free from all
mundane conceptions and is very rarely attained.
Devotees on the path of bhakti following Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
associates in Goloka (rāgānuga-bhakti) should adopt this
concept and perform sādhana. By doing so, they will
realize this highly auspicious fundamental truth upon
attaining perfection. When persons of gross worldly
intellect endeavor for bhakti in the paramour mood, they
generally end up engaging in immoral activity in the
material sphere. Our tattva-ācārya Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
took this into consideration and presented his line of

                           77
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                        5/5/2017

thought out of great concern. The spirit of pure
Vaiṣṇavism is to accept the essence of his statements.
It is an offense to disregard the ācārya by attempting
to establish another theory.




Part Three




Additional commentary on Rāga-vartma-candrikā


Before beginning our study of Rāga-vartma-candrikā, we
should pray first to our spiritual masters, oṁ viṣṇupāda
aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja and oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Swami Mahārāja, then to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and finally to the author,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. We earnestly beg
that his mercy especially should come to us. In this
Rāga-vartma-candrikā, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura tells us what he has realized about Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s anurāga, spontaneous love, by the grace of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Anurāga
refers to that stage of prema which comes just before
mahābhāva – sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga and anurāga. The
author states, “I am writing something for those
fortunate persons who covet this rāga but cannot find
the way to enter and achieve it. This book will serve as
their guide, like a candrikā, or moonbeam, to shed light
on rāga-vartma, the path of spontaneous loving devotion.
In this world this path is very rare. Just as the moon
diffuses rays of light that illuminate a very narrow
trail hidden in the shadows on a dark, moonless night,
similarly this book is the moonbeam (candrikā) that
casts light on the path of spontaneous devotion (rāga-
vartma).” Therefore it is called Rāga-vartma-candrikā.




Qualifications for entering


We should know that this pathway is a very, very narrow
one, meant only for a few rare, highly qualified
persons. It is not for everyone. Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura advises that others should not read
this book. However, no worldly qualification is required
to enter this path, only lobha, or spiritual “greed.”
Api cet sudurācāraḥ (Bhagavad-gītā (9.30): even if a
person is engaged in most abominable actions, he can
enter this path if he has such greed. A man may be beset
with impediments to spiritual advancement (anarthas),
but if he associates with a devotee firmly established
on the path of spontenous love (a rāgānuga-bhakta) and
under his guidance reads the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-

                              78
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam – especially Gopī-gīta, Yugala-gīta,
Bhramara-gīta and Veṇu-gīta – he may become attracted
and acquire a very deep greed to have the same
devotional sentiment (bhāva) as the Vrajavāsīs, either
in sakhya-, vātsalya- or mādhurya-rasa. Just by
faithfully hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam’s descriptions of
the amorous moods of the cowherd girls, the parental
sentiments of Kṛṣṇa’s father and mother or the mood of
Kṛṣṇa’s friends, one may begin to yearn to have in his
heart moods like theirs. In Rāga-vartma-candrikā,
however, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is not
describing sakhya- and vātsalya-bhāva; he is presenting
gopī-bhāva only. One who has sufficient impressions
(saṁskāras) within his heart from having taken proper
association in his previous birth will be able to
cultivate greed and achieve gopī-bhāva simply from
reading about it; he will not have to rely on thorough
study of the scriptures or on logical arguments. For
such a person, this treatise will be the illuminating
moonbeam for discovering the path of spontaneous loving
devotion.




Two kinds of faith


First the author explains that there are two different
kinds of faith (śraddhā) – vaidhī and rāgānugā – which
result in two kinds of devotion – vaidhī-bhakti and
rāgānuga-bhakti. Both types of śraddhā are achieved
through the association of qualified Vaiṣṇavas. Where
entrance into bhakti is impelled by the order of the
scriptures, which instruct everyone to be devoted to
Kṛṣṇa or else they will go to hell, it is called vaidhī-
bhakti. For example, the scriptures have ordered:

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.6)

The highest pursuit for all humanity is to please the
transcendental Lord Kṛṣṇa by all one’s efforts of body,
mind and soul. Such devotion must be unmotivated and
continuously performed in order to fully satisfy the
self.

These are orders. By hearing such instructions, many
people will practice devotion out of fear. This is
vaidhī-bhakti, and that devotion which is based solely
on greed is called rāgānuga-bhakti. Such greed is
generated by hearing the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs
described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, by reading the books of
the gosvāmīs and especially by being in the association
of a rāgānuga-bhakta, without whose association the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs will not be properly

                            79
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

understood.

How can we tell if our greed is genuine or not? When a
sādhaka hears narrations of Kṛṣṇa’s sweet, human-like
pastimes (mādhurya-līlā), especially those performed
with the gopīs – whether it be from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
Kṛṣṇa-karnāmṛta, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-
nidhi or any other book composed by a rāgānuga, rasika
Vaiṣṇava – and he becomes very eager to be like Kṛṣṇa’s
eternal associates and have their devotional sentiments,
his heart will become filled with Kṛṣṇa’s names (nāma),
form (rūpa), qualities (guṇa) and pastimes (līlā). This
condition of the heart, called citta-vṛtti, is its real
or natural state, as opposed to the imposed worldly
citta-vṛtti. At this time the devotee will not be
interested to examine scriptural injunctions; he will
only want to achieve that mood which he sees in the gopī
of whom he desires to take shelter, his āśraya-gopī, for
whose mood he has developed genuine greed. But how can
this be achieved?

In the face of such greed, scriptural orders and
bindings are left aside. Scriptural rules and
regulations are simply not needed. We become determined
to have something we desire, no matter what – whether we
have the money to purchase it or not. For example, I saw
some sweets, and at once, overwhelmed by desire for
them, I thought, “These are very tasteful.” Greed came.
So in whatever stage one may be, he will not heed any
scriptural restrictions, rules or regulations at all if
he thinks something is very tasteful and he has greed
for it. But if we judge that we are not qualified and
that what we want is a very elevated thing, then we do
not possess greed. Do you understand? If I want a
sweetmeat but I wonder what to do, because I see that I
have no money in my pocket to purchase it, then that
means that I have no real greed. When a person resolves
that he must have it somehow, by hook or by crook, by
begging, borrowing, stealing or anything, he does not
consider whether he is qualified to have it or not. He
only thinks, “I must have it.” This is actual greed. Our
heart must be completely overpowered by Kṛṣṇa’s nāma,
rūpa, guṇa and līlā. Then we know that greed has come.

A sādhaka may ponder, “I heard from a rasika Vaiṣṇava
how Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citrā, Rūpa Mañjarī and others
serve Kṛṣṇa, and I want to serve like them.” I may have
no qualification or anything, nor do I know how to
achieve this elevated devotional sentiment, but greed
for it comes. If I will not wait for any logical
argument at all to convince me, then it is called greed.
It should come without relying on any reasoning, and if
logic is required, it is not lobha, spiritual greed.
“How can I receive this?” In the association of that
rāgānuga, rasika Vaiṣṇava, you should read Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, this Rāga-vartma-
candrikā, Vraja-rīti-cintāmaṇi, Kṛṣṇa-karnāmṛta, Rādhā-
rasa-sudhā-nidhi, Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s Gīta-govinda, the
books of all our gosvāmīs and of Kavi Karṇapūra. You
will have to read all of these books and learn how to
achieve the cherished objective most easily, be it by
stealing, begging, borrowing or whatever it takes. You
should do whatever method is simplest. So without
studying these scriptures we cannot achieve it.

                           80
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017


All our preceptors, including Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura and Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, have recorded for us
in a practical way how they themselves achieved it and
how the sādhana-siddha-gopīs achieved it. Their writings
are authentic. So we must ascertain their methods and
follow the scriptures, because without abiding by the
scriptures or by Rūpa Gosvāmī and the other ācāryas’
instructions, we will become imitationists (sahajiyās)
or atheists (pāṣaṇḍīs). Yet we should know at the same
time that a person with greed will never consider his
qualification. This is the main point. But he will take
assistance from these books. Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura is not personally present, but through his books
he is here. It is important to understand that this
greed will not come by any effort. Lobha comes only by
the grace of Kṛṣṇa Himself or a rāgānuga-bhakta, not by
one’s personal endeavor. Without their mercy one cannot
have it.




Mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas


The mercy obtained from Vaiṣṇavas (bhakta-kṛpa) is of
two kinds: ancient (prāktana, or prācīna), and recent
(ādhunika). Prāktana means mercy that comes from past
births as well as the present birth. If a man has a
sufficiently developed inner nature (saṁskāra) from his
previous birth’s devotional activities and receives the
mercy of a Vaiṣṇava, then in this birth he will very
easily and quickly advance. Perhaps he will not even
have to accept initiation (dīkṣā), like some of our
gosvāmīs. Or, if he does take initiation, he will be
seen to advance very rapidly. Haridāsa Ṭhākura, Svarūpa
Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda did not reveal their
disciplic succession. Yet they received the association
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and thus achieved all these
things. This is an example of prāktana-kṛpā, due to
impressions accrued in previous births. Of course,
eternal associates of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, not being
conditioned souls, do not depend upon previous
impressions and so forth. Yet, when they appear in this
world, they set an example for us by their behavior.

The other one, ādhunika-kṛpā, refers to one who has no
past birth saṁskāra, but somehow, by the causeless mercy
of a spiritual master or qualified Vaiṣṇava, has
developed greed. Such a person should accept a Vaiṣṇava
spiritual master who is firmly established in spontanous
devotion. Or if he has received his initiation before
developing greed, then he should accept a rāgānuga
Vaiṣṇava as his instructing spiritual master (śikṣā-
guru). Then he may serve both instructing and initiating
spiritual masters with equal devotion, or in some cases,
he may prefer to serve the śikṣā-guru more closely than
the dīkṣā-guru, as Śyāmānanda Prabhu, Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī and Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī did. Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī’s initiating spiritual master was
Yadunandana Ācārya. Afterward, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
placed him into the hands of Svarūpa Dāmodara. Later,

                           81
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

when Raghunātha dāsa went to Vṛndāvana, he had the
association of Sanātana Gosvāmī and especially Rūpa
Gosvāmī, whom he joined on the order of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prayed to Rūpa
Gosvāmī only for all the activities of divine service
described in Vilāpa-kusumāñjali. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī also did not disclose who his initiating
spiritual master was. He only acknowledged Rūpa and
Raghunātha, because he received all his thoughts from
them.




The goal – mañjarī-bhāva


Why does Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī pray only to Rūpa
Gosvāmī? Svarūpa Dāmodara is Lalitā-devī in Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes and is more qualified than Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is
Rūpa Mañjarī. Yet Raghunātha dāsa prays only to Rūpa
Gosvāmī, because he does not want to be a nāyikā of
Kṛṣṇa, like Lalitā and Viśākhā. He wants to become a
mañjarī only. What is a mañjarī? Any creeper or any good
flower has mañjarīs, buds. First the bud comes and then
the flower, but the bud is always located above the
flower. When the bee comes to take the honey from the
flower, it sits on the petals, and then the mañjarīs,
being overjoyed, tremble. When the Kṛṣṇa bee comes to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and They engage in sporting pastimes of
love (prema-vilāsa), the bee does not sit on the
mañjarī. Yet the mañjarī trembles, feeling as if the bee
is sitting on her. The ecstatic feelings of the Divine
Couple’s love sports comes to the mañjarī. So there is
no need for the bee to go to her. She automatically
feels everything the flower experiences. If the bee
kisses the flower, then by seeing this, the mañjarī
tastes even more than the flower because the flower does
not tremble as the mañjarī does.

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī wanted to be a mañjarī, not a
flower. He did not want sakhī-bhāva. Herein lies the
importance of the mañjarīs. In our sampradāya, nobody
wants to be Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sakhī. They only want to
be Rādhikā’s kiṅkarī, maidservant. In reality there is
no equivalent word in English for kiṅkarī. It is such a
beautiful Sanskrit word – so soft, fragrant and very
sweet. You will not find these descriptions in any book.
They have not been written down anywhere; they come only
through realization. I myself have no realization, but
by God’s mercy I am able to explain this a little.

The first verse of Vilāpa-kusumāñjali tells that Rūpa
Mañjarī’s husband is absent, but we see some marks on
her lips. How? It is not that Kṛṣṇa has kissed Rūpa
Mañjarī. He has kissed Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and Rādhikā has
that mark, but at once it appeared on Rūpa Mañjarī.
Everything, whatever marks appear on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī
will not come to the sakhīs (Lalitā, Viśākhā), but they
will appear on the mañjarīs. That is why we are
followers of Rūpa Gosvāmī. This is a very special
benediction that his followers receive, and I think that
you will never forget this in your whole life.

                           82
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017




The process – real initiation


A person may have taken initiation only as a formality,
thinking, “So many others have taken initiation, so I
should also take it,” and by fire sacrifice he has
received sacred thread, neck beads and so on. But he has
not been given instructions on the internal mood of
dīkṣā, which constitutes real initiation. This will come
gradually, not in a moment. Actually, dīkṣā takes place
over a long period of time, but formal initiation can be
taken by anyone. When one has past birth saṁskāra, one
will easily accept initiation, and the process will be
accomplished quickly. Without previous saṁskāra, dīkṣā
will be slow unless one gets the association of a
rāgānuga-bhakta. In this case, the rāgānuga-bhakta as
well as the disciple should both be very qualified. If
the disciple does not have that saṁskāra and does not
yet possess any greed, he will not be able to receive
these things from his initiating spiritual master, who
may be very qualified but may have no time to give him
all these things. Later on, when that greed comes, he
should not change his spiritual master. He only needs to
accept a śikṣā-guru, who will instruct him according to
his qualification. He will hear all these things from
him. If the initiating spiritual master is present, he
will receive all these things from his gurudeva, or his
gurudeva will gladly order him to hear from another
person, as in the case of Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita, Narottama
dāsa Ṭhākura and Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. The dīkṣā-guru will
gladly give this order.

If one has some association with his spiritual master or
any Vaiṣṇava in the line of Rūpa Gosvāmī, then his
bhakti may gradually come to the platform of spontaneous
devotion (rāgānugā). And if we see that a person has
greed without the help of any Vaiṣṇava or without taking
initiation or anything, like Bilvamaṅgala, then, by his
actions and thoughts, we can know that his greed is real
and that he is rāgānuga. But at first we should know
that our devotion will be in accordance with scriptural
injunction (vaidhī), and after that, by hearing, greed
can come.

So, if from previous or present saṁskāra one has
developed greed, one will have to read, hear and study
the scriptures, especially the writings of Rūpa Gosvāmī
and his followers, the rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas. Actually,
what is rūpānuga? In his books Rūpa Gosvāmī has written
from a neutral position about the rasas of śānta, dāsya,
sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya. By following these moods
with greed, one will be a rāgānuga-bhakta, but not
necessarily a rūpānuga, even if one follows Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi. One will be a rūpānuga when one especially
follows how Rūpa Gosvāmī serves Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, deeply
meditating on the qualities and the specific sentiment
(bhāva) he possesses for serving them.

So the sādhaka will have to learn from the scriptures

                           83
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

how to receive these things and hear from a rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇava, who will tell him to read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta, Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-
nidhi, Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s Gīta-govinda and the books of
Caṇḍīdāsa, Vidyāpati and others. He will also instruct
him to search only for that bhāva for which he has
greed. That rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava will be conversant with
all the rasas, but he will serve only by one, which is
his permanent mood (sthāyibhāva). This will come only
when the elevated stage of divine love (prema) is
reached, but greed for that sthāyibhāva can be achieved
before that. One’s sthāyibhāva will not change in this
or any future life – this is called saṁskāra, that which
is innate in the soul. If I have greed, as Rūpa Gosvāmī
has, and if it is real, that permanent mood will never
change in any life. It will always remain the same.

Bharata Mahārāja had achieved the elevated stage of
bhāva, but we do not know in which rasa; perhaps it was
dāsya-bhāva, servitude. The Kumāras have sthāyibhāva in
śānta-rasa, neutrality, but even so, they can narrate
the entire Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Being neutral, they know
everything, but they do not possess greed for vraja-
bhakti. Śukadeva Gosvāmī is a special case, because he
is the parrot of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Yet he cannot serve
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa like the gopīs. He enjoys knowledge of
everything, but still he is a parrot. For the benefit of
devotees in śānta-rasa, sometimes it is said that he is
in śānta-rasa. This is an important point. If Śukadeva
is the parrot of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, he will sit on the
branches of any tamāla or kadamba tree and with very
great bliss, watch all the pastimes; yet he cannot serve
like Rūpa Mañjarī. In the scriptures it has been told
that he has śānta-bhāva, because he is neutral, but he
is in Vraja, where there is no śānta-bhāva. We will have
to ponder what rasa he actually possesses. When Rādhikā
and Kṛṣṇa are sleeping in the morning, Śuka speaks so
many charming, clever words to awaken Them. This is
certainly not śānta-bhāva. For the sake of devotees in
śānta-rasa, it is said that he is in śānta-bhāva, and
externally it appears that way, but actually he is not.
Similarly, the cows in Vraja also appear to have śānta-
bhāva, but really they have vātsalya-bhāva, the parental
mood.




The need of the scriptures


To illustrate how to ascertain the process, Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives the example of a man who has
greed to drink milk – seeing some milk, he wants to
taste it. So he must go through a process to get it. He
can ask someone who drinks milk how he acquired it.
After questioning him, he will purchase a cow, making
sure that there is a calf, because without a calf there
can be no milk. He will take them to his home. There he
will apply water or ghee to the udder of the cow and
bring the calf to drink. When the calf has taken milk,
the udder must be washed and then he can milk the cow.
Next the milk has to be put on the fire to boil. If he

                             84
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

wants it sweet, he can add sugar, and for extra flavor
he can add rose water, camphor and so on, making it even
more fragrant. Similarly, for developing desire, we do
not require the scriptures, but they are necessary to
help us ascertain the means to achieve our goal.




The mood of intimacy in spontaneous devotion


Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura tells us that when a man
has actual greed, he will also follow the procedures of
vaidhī-bhakti, but the mood will not be the same. He
will engage in devotional activities such as hearing
(śravaṇa), chanting (kīrtana) and remembering (smaraṇa),
and especially he will carefully take shelter of the
lotus feet of a spiritual master. Faithfully, in a mood
of great intimacy (viśrambha-bhāva), giving up all fear,
he will serve the spiritual master as a dear friend. He
will not consider that, “I am very low and he is very
high.” No, he will think, “I am his and he is mine,”
just as a child, seeing his father sitting up high, does
not care to sit on the ground and will at once jump up
and sit on his father’s lap. Then he will pat his
father’s shoulder, stroke his father’s face, touch him
on his arm or hold his hand, interacting with his father
with great love. Similarly, a qualified person having
greed will serve his spiritual master from whom he has
heard all these things with even more love. This type of
intimate service is essential. If you know your
spiritual master in his eternal form as a gopī and you
have greed to serve him in that form, then this will be
rāgānugā, spontaneous devotion. And if your greed is to
serve him as guru, this is not rāgānugā but rather
vaidhī-sādhana, devotion inspired by scriptural
regulations. You should pray to your spiritual master
that he should please manifest his internal form in your
heart. He will grant his darśana, giving you an inner
idea. You should pray to him as it says in our guru-
gāyatrī-mantra: “tan no guruḥ pracodayāt – please
manifest your eternal form, who you are in Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes.”

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu lists the sixty-four practices of
devotional service. The first ten deal with the
relationship with the spiritual master. For rāgānuga-
bhakti you will have to follow these same procedures,
but the bhāva will change from what is found in vaidhī-
bhakti. The vaidhī-bhakti disciple will sit lower and
pray to his spiritual master with folded hands,
“Gurudeva, please give me an order. What service shall I
do?” And if he receives an order, then as servant he
will perform the service. But a greedy person will serve
in a mood as I have already described, with no fear and
no sense of difference between them. He will see that “I
am his and he is mine.” All the limbs of vaidhī-bhakti
should also be followed in rāgānuga-bhakti, but with a
different mood. If one rejects vaidhī, he will not be
able to enter rāgānugā and his greed will be checked, so
he must follow.


                           85
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017




Serving the spiritual master


For a man who has greed and wants to follow the process
of spontaneous devotion, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam tells us that
Bhagavān comes to him in the form of guru, as both
caitya-guru, the Supersoul situated within the heart,
and as dīkṣā-guru, the initiating spiritual master. Here
we should know that in principle guru is complete and
undivided (akhaṇḍa-tattva), because the spiritual master
gives everything that Nityānanda Prabhu and Baladeva
Prabhu have come to give. All his instructions are from
them, so we should regard him as non-different from
Nityānanda Prabhu or Baladeva Prabhu.

In Bhagavad-gītā (10.10) Lord Kṛṣṇa states:

teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

Upon those who worship Me with love, yearning for My
eternal association, I bestow the transcendental
knowledge by which they can come to Me.

If a soul surrenders, Kṛṣṇa gives everything to him
within the heart – dadāmi buddhi-yogam. He says, “I give
him the intelligence to achieve bhakti.” Kṛṣṇa gives
that, but not openly; He dictates within the heart. So
when pure greed comes to a devotee, Kṛṣṇa, as caitya-
guru, benedicts him within the heart with a revelation
(sphūrti), inspiring him internally with the
understanding of how He Himself can be achieved. Then He
gives instructions as the initiating spiritual master or
the instructing spiritual master. If one has a pure
heart and sufficient saṁskāra, Kṛṣṇa Himself will
manifest all philosophical conclusions and the way to
achieve Him. People may see someone with no spiritual
master and wonder, “How does he know these things?” Here
is the answer. Kṛṣṇa dictates everything or manifests
Himself from within, whether anyone sees or not.
Sometimes I have experienced this myself. I feel
something within myself – I have not read it, nor have I
seen or heard it. Yet sometimes something very beautiful
comes in my heart. Perhaps you have also had this
experience? Certainly you will have this, because one
who serves his spiritual master will surely receive
these things. Even if the guru is not visible to us,
still he will manifest everything.




How to enter into spontaneous devotion


                           86
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017


Now Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura presents the three key
verses from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.294–6) that
explain how to enter into rāgānuga-bhakti:

(1) kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya

preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam

tat-tat-kathā rataś cāsau

kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

While remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa and his beloved associates
whom we desire to follow, being fully absorbed in
discussions of their pastimes, one should always reside
in Vraja. If this is not possible, then reside there
mentally.

(2) sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa

siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ

On this rāgānuga path, being charmed by the intense love
of Kṛṣṇa’s beloved Vrajavāsīs, the sādhaka should live
in Vraja under the guidance of those devotees who have
taken shelter of the Vrajavāsīs (like Śrī Rūpa, Sanātana
and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmīs), always eager to serve
them in his present physical body. And in the perfected
stage in his siddha-rūpa, the internally contemplated
spiritual body suitable for performing eternal loving
service, he should engage in the cherished service of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa according to his chosen mood, following in the
footsteps of the eternal residents of Vraja, such as Śrī
Rādhikā, Lalitā, Viśakhā and Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī.

(3) śravaṇotkīrtanādīni

vaidha-bhakty uditāni tu

yāny aṅgāni ca tāny atra

vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ

In vaidhī-bhakti one should practice the limbs of
devotion headed by hearing and chanting according to
one’s qualification. Similarly, scholars well versed in
the principles of devotion have advised that the same
practices be followed for rāgānuga-bhakti.




Now Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments on them one
by one.




                            87
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                          5/5/2017


Verse One – remembering Kṛṣṇa and His dear ones

Here the word smaraṇa means remembering Kṛṣṇa and His
dear ones with rati, with bhāva, or in other words, with
emotion and love. They may be in dāsya-, sakhya- or
vātsalya-rasa, but here he is especially explaining
mādhurya-rasa. How should we remember Kṛṣṇa? How do we
practice remembrance? One who has greed like the gopīs
will remember Kiśora-Kṛṣṇa in śṛṅgāra-rasa when He is in
Sevā-kuñja or Vaṁśīvaṭa. He has a lovely, smiling face
and He has placed a very beautiful flute on His lips.
Like a deer, His eyes are restlessly searching here and
there. The gopīs are coming. Seeing them, Kṛṣṇa becomes
overjoyed. At that moment, Kṛṣṇa has no control over His
body or mind. He is God himself, yet He forgets
everything – He does not know what He is doing or even
what He looks like. Standing in His charming threefold-
bending pose, He is so beautiful. Thousands and
thousands of gopīs are there, but from the corner of His
eyes, He is searching for one particular gopī – and She
is delaying. Who is that? Then, from far away he sees
that She is coming. At this time, how will Kṛṣṇa appear?

So this is smaraṇam – remembering Kṛṣṇa with all these
details, appreciating his many virtues. In Jaiva-dharma,
we can read about all the qualities of Kiśora-Kṛṣṇa in
śṛṅgāra-rasa. The Kṛṣṇa of sakhya-rasa is not the Kṛṣṇa
of the gopīs, and the Kṛṣṇa with Nanda and Yaśodā is
also another. He is different in every rasa. So we
should remember Kṛṣṇa in the bhāva in which we desire to
enter. Thus, cultivating mādhurya-bhāva, one should
remember Kṛṣṇa with the gopīs, playing, gambling and
cheating them, and how they in turn cheat Kṛṣṇa and try
to steal His flute.

Remember Kṛṣṇa and His dearmost associates. What are the
gopīs, and especially Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, like? And that
very gopī for whose mood we have greed – what is she
doing? Not Rādhikā, Lalitā or Viśākhā, but Rūpa Mañjarī.
We have a very keen interest only to see what she is
doing – that mood I want to have. When Śrīmatī Rādhikā
is pleased, then Rūpa Mañjarī becomes very happy. She
performs many services, like bringing water in a golden
pot and fanning with a cāmara, very slowly and gently.
When she sees that the Divine Couple are very tired, she
serves Them accordingly. We will watch that mañjarī and
see how she won the love of Kṛṣṇa, Rādhikā, Lalitā,
Viśākhā and all the others. We should always remember
how she performs all her services to the Divine Couple
and follow her.

This is rāgānuga-bhakti – how to enter into all these
pastimes and services. It is based on remembrance that
should not be broken. Then we can achieve that service.
Kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya – remembering all the gopīs
and especially that one in whom I have a special
interest. This is the method of rāgānuga-sādhana-
bhajana. Tat-tat-kathā rataś cāsau – we must cultivate
our relationship with the spiritual master, especially
the premi-guru, that rāgānuga-guru from whom we are
hearing. He will tell us how all the sakhīs are serving
Kṛṣṇa, and especially what Rūpa Mañjarī and our
spiritual master in his eternal form are doing. We must

                           88
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

talk about their activities and their pastimes with
Kṛṣṇa. And the devotee should always reside in
Vṛndāvana. If he has no chance to stay in Vṛndāvana by
body, he should surely live there by mind. Without
living in Vṛndāvana, he cannot have that kind of love;
therefore, it is essential.

Three practices are prominent: kṛṣṇa-smaraṇa,
remembering that special Kṛṣṇa with His dearmost
associates; tat-tat-kathā rataś cāsau, continuously
discussing their pastimes; and kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā,
physically or at least mentally always residing in
Vṛndāvana, in Sevā-kuñja, in Saṅketa, in Yāvaṭa and all
other such places. And if you have the qualification, at
midday you should go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa with Rādhikā and
with that gopī for whom you have special attraction.

Someone not so qualified cannot live in Vṛndāvana all
the time. He will be convinced that he has some other
more pressing duties. But even if he is tied to house,
family, factory and so many other facilities far away
from there, still by mind he can begin to enter the mood
of Vraja to some degree. But those who are like
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī will think, “My house should be
burned if I am not there. Let anyone burn down my house.
And what will happen to my parents, children and wife if
I go to Vṛndāvana? I don’t care – let them die or let
anything else happen to them.” On the other hand, a
neophyte disciple may say, “Oh, my gurudeva told me to
preach, so I must do that. This is my duty.” But when
greed will come in full bloom, we will forget
everything. At that stage no other obligation can come
in our way, and then the whole world will see us as a
guru, actually following in the mood of Rūpa Gosvāmī and
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. As guru we should adhere to our
line very closely and preach only our ācāryas’ words.
Then, if others will see that our words are correctly in
line, they will be bound to accept all our instructions.
At that time there will be no harm in preaching or doing
any other service. That will be the real preaching, but
I don’t know how many births it will take to come to
that stage. You may be attached to preaching now, but
one day you will have to leave preaching and go to
Goloka Vṛndāvana, where there is no preaching, only
service. And then, if you want, from there, as Rūpa
Gosvāmī descended with Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you can
also return and preach with your spiritual master.

This surrender and complete dedication of the heart to
the spiritual master is called tādātmya in Sanskrit – as
fire enters into iron. The iron then knows that “I am
fire” and does the work of fire. Here also, Rūpa Gosvāmī
and all the mañjarīs are tadātmika with Rādhā. So the
action of Rādhā becomes the action of all the mañjarīs.
Whatever She realizes is also realized by every mañjarī.
Nothing is hidden from them. Some things are withheld
from Her sakhīs, but not from Her mañjarīs.




Verse Two – how will we serve?


                           89
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

The word sevā in this verse means “service.” Sādhaka-
rūpeṇa means to function as a practitioner of rāgānuga-
bhakti, and siddha-rūpeṇa means to serve in one’s
perfected spiritual body that can be achieved when
intense greed arises. By the grace of one’s spiritual
master and by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, the devotee’s eternal
form is revealed in his inner heart. Then, as written in
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.157): “mane
nija-siddha-deha koriyā bhāvana, rātri-dine kore vraje
kṛṣṇera sevana – with one’s perfected eternal form,
revealed by the mercy of the spiritual master, one
should serve the Divine Couple Śri Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa day and
night in Vraja.” Each and every jīva has his own
individual eternal identity (siddha-svarūpa). We also
have our own, but it has not yet manifested. Now it is
in the seed stage. Just as the whole tree is contained
in the seed, our full perfected form, with all its
characteristics, is existing in seed form. But now, as
we are turned away from Kṛṣṇa, it is not visible. When,
by the grace of guru and Gaurāṅga, our greed sprouts and
subsequently fully blossoms, then the instructing
spiritual master or the initiating spiritual master can
reveal our eternal identity. First he will tell us what
is our svarūpa, just as in Jaiva-dharma we see with
Vrajanātha and Vijaya-kumāra. Our siddha-svarūpa is in a
dormant condition. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura tells that
in one life it can be revealed, but I see that for us it
is many births away. He has simply indicated the path.
When Vrajanātha and Vijaya-kumāra took initiation, they
saw Caitanya Mahāprabhu with all His eternal associates
standing there. At the time of our initiation, we were
unable to see them, but they are fully visible to a
realized soul.

This is real dīkṣā, initiation. We have entered in the
class of taking dīkṣā, but our initiation is not
complete. So we are in class now. God and guru should
shower their grace that we can take full dīkṣā –
actually receive transcendental knowledge (divya-jñāna)
and spiritual vision (divya-darśana), just as Vrajanātha
and Vijaya-kumāra had darśana. They at once fainted.
Subsequently, they took all necessary instruction in
Navadvīpa from Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī, and upon his
order for further training, they went to Purī, where
they met Vakreśvara Paṇḍita’s disciple Śrī Gopāla-guru
Gosvāmī. He was a rāgānuga Vaiṣṇava and is one of the
eight principal sakhīs in Kṛṣṇa’s eternal pastimes. So
they went there and inquired from him. He was so
merciful that afterward he called them one at a time and
revealed to them their eternal identities, having
realized that Vrajanātha was in sakhya-bhāva and that
Vijaya Kumāra was in gopī- or mañjarī-bhāva. He gave
both of them the gopāla-mantra, either with eighteen
syllables (aṣṭadaśākṣara) or with ten syllables
(daśākṣara). Dāsya-, sakhya-, vātsalya- and mādhurya-
bhāvas are all found in the ten-syllable mantra, which
nourishes and supports every rasa.

Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains the construction
of the ten-syllable mantra, which Caitanya Mahāprabhu
received from His spiritual master, and the eighteen-
syllable mantra. Gopījana-vallabhāya svāhā without the
word klīṁ is the ten-syllable mantra. And when Kṛṣṇa and
Govinda, kṛṣṇāya govindāya, are added, it becomes an

                           90
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

eighteen-syllable mantra. Klīṁ alone is itself a
complete mantra, the bīja, or seed, added to the ten
syllables.

This gopāla-mantra will support the rasa of every kind
of living entity – klīṁ kṛṣṇāya govindāya gopījana-
vallabhāya svāhā. Everything is included there. But one
thing should be understood: kṛṣṇāya is the deity for one
in dāsya- or sakhya-rasa. For him govindāya and
gopījana-vallabhāya will be adjectives describing
Kṛṣṇa’s qualities; that is, the attributes of the first
name, kṛṣṇāya. Who is Kṛṣṇa? He is my master, I am His
servant, and Kṛṣṇa is gopī-vallabha, dear to the cowherd
girls, in a general way. Kṛṣṇa is the name that is
prominent also for those in sakhya-rasa. They will focus
on Kṛṣṇa or Govinda. But those who have gopī-bhāva, or
mañjarī-bhāva, will focus on the name Gopījana-vallabha,
and the two words kṛṣṇāya and govindāya will be
adjectives of that.

Devotees in the mood of vātsalya follow the same
principle, accepting the name Kṛṣṇa as the deity with
whom they are related. Everyone with vātsalya-bhāva
knows that the gopīs love Kṛṣṇa, but they have no
experience of how they love Him. They don’t know that
all the girls engage in intimate, loving affairs with
Him. And sakhās also do not know the nature of these
exchanges. So when someone has greed like the mañjarīs
or gopīs, then the word go will mean gopīs. He gives so
much transcendental pleasure (ānanda) to the gopīs –
this is Govinda. They will not contemplate other
meanings. And Kṛṣṇa, by His appearance with five arrows,
is immensely attractive. So all the names will support
the name gopījana-vallabhāya. They will see the other
names as adjectives of that name with whom they are
related.

Thus, everyone receives Gopījana-vallabha in our
sampradāya. By the grace of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
those who come to this sampradāya are mainly of gopī-
bhāva. Some may be of other rasas, like Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura,
Murāri Gupta, Anupama and so on. Therefore Vrajanātha
and Vijaya-kumāra received the same mantra, although
their eternal perfected forms are in separate rasas.
Vijaya-kumāra saw his spiritual master as Lalitā and
Vrajanātha saw him as Baladeva or Subala. It can happen
like this.

The spiritual master gives training for serving under
Lalitā and Viśākhā in mādhurya-rasa. Rūpa Mañjarī, who
is a prāṇa-sakhī, also gives training in everything, not
as a guru but as a very intimate friend. In mādhurya-
rasa everyone has to go to Rūpa Mañjarī for training to
serve as a mañjarī. We can see our instructing spiritual
master as Rūpa Mañjarī, and he can also be seen as
Lalitā, but our vision of guru in this way should not be
māyāvāda, impersonal. We should see our spiritual master
as a manifestation, or delegated representative, of Rūpa
Mañjarī. There is no harm in this. That is why Gopāla-
guru was seen as Lalitā and also as Subala. We should
know that this means he was their manifestation, just as
in Kṛṣṇa one can see Nārāyaṇa, Vāmana and all other
incarnations. Anyone can see his spiritual master in
this way according to one’s inner devotional sentiment,

                           91
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                          5/5/2017

as a manifestation. But seeing our spiritual master
directly as Rūpa Mañjarī will be māyāvāda, and we should
always keep māyāvāda very far away.

The words sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa in this second verse from
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu mean that I should do service
outwardly as Rūpa Gosvāmī did. What did he do?

saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ kālāvasānī-kṛtau

nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-smṛter madhurimānandena sammohitau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

saḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam (6)

I worship the Six Gosvāmīs, who passed all their time in
chanting the holy names, singing songs and offering
prostrated obeisances, thereby humbly fulfilling their
vow to complete a fixed number daily. In this way they
utilized their valuable lives and conquered over eating,
sleeping and other such pleasures. Always very meek and
humble, they became enchanted in divine rapture from
remembering Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s sweet qualities.

Sometimes he would go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, sometimes to
Govardhana and sometimes to Nandagrāma. In Nandagrāma
sometimes he would go to Ṭer-kadamba, and sometimes he
would spend one day at Uddhava-kyāri, Nanda-baiṭhak,
Kokilavana or Yāvaṭa. He, as well as our other Six
Gosvāmīs, would visit all our most cherished places. He
always liked to go to Yāvaṭa because Śrīmatī Rādhikā, as
well as Her friends headed by Rūpa Mañjarī, used to live
there. In the night they would go from there to meet
Kṛṣṇa in Saṅketa, Sevā-kuñja and many other places, and
at midday they would meet at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. This sacred
pond has some greater importance than all other places
because pastimes there take place in the daytime, and
only Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s direct followers, Her svapakṣa-
sakhīs, can go there. Vipakṣa-, suhṛt- and taṭastha-
gopīs are not allowed, nor can Nanda and Yaśodā ever go
there.

So the words sādhaka-rūpeṇa mean to follow the Six
Gosvāmīs, especially Rūpa Gosvāmī. And siddha-rūpeṇa
refers to Rūpa Gosvāmī in the eternal form as Rūpa
Mañjarī. As a sādhaka, he comes in a male form as Rūpa
Gosvāmī, and in his siddha-svarūpa, he is the
maidservant Rūpa Mañjarī. What services does she
perform?

tāmbūlārpaṇa-pāda-mardana-payodānābhisāradibhir

vṛndāranya-maheśvarīṁ priyatayā yas toṣayanti priyah

prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhī-kulād api kilāsaṅkocitā bhūmikāh

keli-bhūmiṣu rūpa-mañjarī-mukhās tā dāsikā saṁśraye

Vraja-vilāsa-stava (38)

She brings Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa tambūla (pāna) and payodāna,

                           92
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

very sweetly flavored water in a golden pitcher. She
brings a golden pot when Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa want to spit
their pāna. Then, arodhana-visarade abhisāra – do you
know what abhisāra is? It is when Śrīmatī Rādhikā meets
Kṛṣṇa in Saṅketa. When She goes to meet Him on the full
moon, and during Śuklavara, the fifteen days of the
waxing moon, She dresses completely in white. Even
though Śrīmatī Rādhikā is very golden and fair, still
She has the mañjarīs rub camphor mixed with so many
ingredients on Her body to make Her appear white, so
that if anyone sees Her, they will think it is the
moonrays only. This is Her disguise. The mañjarīs will
bind Her ankle bells so that they will not make any
“kling kling” sound. No noise should be heard. And Her
sārī and veil will also be white.

One sakhī tells Śrīmatī Rādhikā, “The new moon night is
very dark, so You should practice how You will go
there.” Thus, Śrīmatī Rādhikā takes training at midnight
when it is quite dark. She has Her sakhīs take pots full
of water and pour them in the courtyard to make it muddy
and very slippery. Then they put down thorns here and
there. They have created a setting as if it is a cloudy
day with rain falling very heavily, making the earth
extremely slippery, with many serpents here and there
and thorns too. So in this situation, how can She go to
Kṛṣṇa? She practices in the night by moving very quietly
and cautiously on tiptoes. Lalitā is instructing Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, while Rūpa Mañjarī watches, and our spiritual
master in this world, in the form of a mañjarī, also
watches. The mañjarīs know everything – at what time and
how they should go – and they very cleverly make all
arrangements.

This is abhisāra, rendezvous. Kṛṣṇa is waiting at
Saṅketa. The night is dark and it is raining. The
mañjarīs come there first to find Kṛṣṇa and tell Him
that Śrīmatī Rādhikā will not come today. Actually, She
has already come and is hiding, watching to see Kṛṣṇa’s
reaction. And to increase Kṛṣṇa’s desire for Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, the mañjarīs lie to Him, saying that She will
not come. And immediately Kṛṣṇa practically faints and
suggests a way they can meet. If they see that Kṛṣṇa is
sincerely hankering to meet, they at once go and tell
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who then comes. Otherwise, She will not
come. So her sakhīs know all these clever tricks.
Sometimes, too, when it is time for abhisāra, it may be
that their fathers-in-law or mothers-in-law or all of
their sisters-in-law are present. The sakhī should be so
cunning that she can find a way to cheat them, telling
them lies and cleverly devising a way for Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa to meet. This is called abhisāra. The mañjarīs
perform all these activities.

There are eight kinds of gopīs: (1) abhisārikā – one who
arranges the abhisāra; then (2) vāsaksajjā – one who
comes before the meeting and prepares a bed of flowers
for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to sleep on. They are always
thinking that Kṛṣṇa is coming just now, just now. As
they are making the beds, they are always listening for
any noise. Or if they hear any rustling sound of the
leaves, they think that Kṛṣṇa is coming. These are
called vāsaksajjā.


                           93
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

(3) Utkaṇṭhitā – she is most eager for Kṛṣṇa to come.
Kṛṣṇa is just coming, just coming. When will He come?
When will He come? But when Kṛṣṇa does not reach there,
she is called (4) khaṇḍitā. When the time for meeting
Kṛṣṇa is over, and He has not yet come, she wonders why
not. There must be some reason. Perhaps He has gone to
another gopī, or He may have fallen into danger. There
are so many demons in Vṛndāvana. Perhaps He had to fight
with them or anything may have happened. Kṛṣṇa finally
comes well after the appointed time when it is about to
be morning. Seeing some signs on Kṛṣṇa’s body indicating
that He has just come from another beloved, she becomes
furious. This is khaṇḍitā. (5) Kalahantarikā – she has a
lover’s quarrel with Kṛṣṇa, and does not speak to Him.

So in each situation that mañjarī has some duty – to
rebuke Kṛṣṇa, to make Him understand or to give
consolation to Rādhikā. And when Kṛṣṇa apologizes, falls
at the feet of Rādhikā and at last convinces Her to give
up Her anger, then Śrīmatī Rādhikā commands Him, “Give
Me My ankle bell. Take My braids and decorate them,” and
Kṛṣṇa follows Her order. At this time, She is called (6)
svādhīna-bhartṛkā – a lady who has her lover under her
control. [The other two kinds of nāyikās are (7)
vipralabdhā, who is feeling great separation because her
lover has never come, and (8) proṣita-bhartṛkā, whose
lover is far away in a distant place.]

So all qualities should be in that mañjarī. She
prepares, gives sympathy, decorates and makes so many
arrangements:

nikuñja-yūno rati-keli-siddhyai

yā yālībhir yuktir apekṣanīyā

tatrāti-dākṣyād ati-vallabhasya

vande guroḥ śrī caraṇāravindam

Śrī Gurvaṣṭakam (6)

The spiritual master is always present with the sakhīs,
planning the arrangements for the perfection of the
Divine Couple’s amorous pastimes within the groves of
Vṛndāvana. Because he is so expert in making these
tasteful arrangements for Their pleasure, he is very
dear to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I offer prayers unto his
lotus feet.

So many arrangements are required to prepare the groves
(kuñjas) where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meet and engage in Their
vilāsa, Their pleasurable amorous affairs. The sakhīs
must cheat others, meet with Kṛṣṇa, rebuke Him and
perform many other duties for arranging the Divine
Couple’s meetings. Rūpa Mañjarī is well trained in
kuñja-sevā and, being highly experienced, is quite fit
to do all these services. We should always remember what
she does in her eternal body as Rūpa Mañjarī and hope to
be able to adopt her mood. But until we receive our
permanent devotional mood (sthāyibhāva), which comes
from the Lord’s pleasure potency (hlādinī-śakti), we can
only pray to have all these things, as Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī does in Vilāpa-kusumāñjali. We cannot do all

                           94
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

these things in our present stage, and the spiritual
master warns disciples not to try. We can only pray,
“When will my good fortune come and actually I will be
engaged in serving the Divine Couple, just like Rūpa
Mañjarī, Anaṅga Mañjarī and our gurus?”

So, as sādhakas we should adopt the practices in this
body that Rūpa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and our
spiritual master have done. And siddha-rūpeṇa, in our
internally contemplated spiritual forms we should try to
serve the Divine Couple Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa as Rūpa Mañjarī,
Rati Mañjarī and Lavaṅga Mañjarī do. Tad-bhāva-lipsunā
kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ. Those who have greed should
do all these things just as the Vrajavāsīs do. Here
“Vrajavāsīs” means Rūpa Mañjarī and other mañjarīs.

What is the meaning of vraja-lokānusārataḥ? There are
two kinds of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. One is aiśvarya-līlā,
pastimes displaying divine opulence, and the other is
mādhurya-līlā, pastimes displaying consummate sweetness
in human-like form. Kṛṣṇa is always complete in six
opulences: knowledge (jñāna), renunciation (vairāgya),
wealth (śrī) and so on. He always exhibits these,
whether He is Nārāyaṇa or whether He is Kṛṣṇa. Even in
Vṛndāvana, we see that Kṛṣṇa is full of these six
virtues. He is never without them. When He killed
Pūtanā, He was a baby of only a few days. She tried to
fly away when He took her breast, but still Kṛṣṇa would
not let her go. “Oh, I will take your milk and at the
same time your life also. I will keep you with Me
eternally and never leave you.” Pūtanā had the power of
ten thousand elephants, yet she could not break away
from Kṛṣṇa. Baby Kṛṣṇa was doing nothing, only holding
her breast in His mouth, yet He took her life. This is
actually aiśvarya-līlā, a pastime wherein the Lord
utilizes his divine opulence, but still, Kṛṣṇa never
changed His shape or anything. He remained as a boy and
just kept hold of Pūtanā’s breast. This is
lokānusārataḥ, a pastime performed in human-like form,
even though Pūtanā was killed by the Lord’s divine
opulence, aiśvarya. There is also aiśvarya in Vraja, but
it co-exists with mādhurya.

The gopīs see only Kṛṣṇa’s aspect of unassuming human-
like sweetness (mādhurya), not His divine power
(aiśvarya). But aiśvarya is there, covered by mādhurya.
So it is not that in Vṛndāvana there is no aiśvarya-
līlā. The aiśvarya in Vraja is greater than that in
Dvārakā or even Vaikuṇṭha, but it is always covered by
mādhurya. Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written that
if there were only human-like pastimes (nara-līlā) and
no divine opulence (aiśvarya) in Kṛṣṇa, then He would be
simply an ordinary human child. Without the quality of
aiśvarya, He cannot be God, and there is no rasa in
worshiping Him. So there must be aiśvarya, because
without it He is not the Supreme Lord, nor is He the
gopīs’ object of worship.

There is an interesting point to be noted here. We see
that at first all the cowherd men and women accept Kṛṣṇa
as Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā’s son or as their friend only
and behave accordingly. But when everyone saw Kṛṣṇa
lifting Govardhana Hill on His finger at the age of
seven, the elder Vrajavāsīs told Nanda Bābā, “This child

                           95
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

is not an ordinary boy. He is just like Nārāyaṇa, and in
fact, He is Nārāyaṇa.”

Nanda Bābā replied, “He may be Nārāyaṇa, but yet He is
my son. At the time of Kṛṣṇa’s name-giving ceremony, I
understood this by hearing the words of Garga Ṝṣi, who
told that He is not less than Nārāyaṇa; first He was
Nārāyaṇa, Vāsudeva, Vasudeva’s son.” This is why all the
elder cowherd men were saying, “So don’t treat Him as
your son, and you should not rebuke Him or tie Him up.
Don’t abuse Him; don’t call Him a little thief, cheater
and rascal.”

Nanda Bābā immediately laughed and said, “You are saying
that He is God, and He held Govardhana up on His finger.
Garga Ṝṣi has also said this. But I see that you are
over sixty. Your mind is not working correctly. Kṛṣṇa
comes and begs from His mother, ‘Give Me bread and
butter.’ And He always weeps. If it is late, He becomes
enraged, and sometimes He steals. These are not symptoms
of God. So whether He held up Govardhana or not, He is
my son. But in my opinion, He did not do it; it was
actually our deity of Nārāyaṇa, the worshipable deity of
our home, who lifted Govardhana upon hearing our prayer.
Why? Because we prayed to Nārāyaṇa, so he answered our
prayers. But it appears that Kṛṣṇa has done this. He is
my son. If for argument’s sake we say that Kṛṣṇa is God,
still He is my son, and I will beat Him, I will
discipline Him, and do whatever else needed to make Him
behave.” Here, Nanda Mahārāja is seeing actually that
all of Kṛṣṇa’s virtues make Him appear God-like, and
even though He had performed an act of God, Nanda Bābā
still cannot give up his belief that Kṛṣṇa is his son.

On the other hand, there are Vasudeva and Devakī. After
killing Kaṁsa, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma went to them in prison
and untied their shackles. The two boys wanted to offer
obeisances to their mother and father, who were standing
with folded hands and praying, “Oh, you are God. We saw
you in the wrestling arena. Originally, you appeared to
us in a four-handed form and now you have come here
before us.” Kṛṣṇa saw that the pastimes would be spoiled
by their awareness of His divinity. So, calling Yogamāyā
to come, Kṛṣṇa climbed into Devakī’s lap and began to
weep. By the effect of Yogamāyā, Devakī also began to
weep. And Baladeva went to the feet of Vasudeva, who
began to weep as well. But they rarely saw Kṛṣṇa as
their son; they almost always saw Him as the Supreme
Lord. So here we see aiśvarya accompanied with some
mādhurya, but so little that it cannot cover the
aiśvarya. In Vraja, however, even if there is an
abundance of aiśvarya, Yaśodā and Nanda still do not
forget that Kṛṣṇa is their son. They always remember
this. And they become so proud observing that, “Oh,
Kṛṣṇa has lifted Govardhana Hill. My son has done this?
Now all Vraja can see how strong and powerful my son
is.”

And for mādhurya-rasa, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has
given many good examples with the gopīs. For instance,
when Uddhava went to Vraja to console the gopīs, he
heard them speaking to the bumblebee, “O bee, go away at
once! Get out of here. We will have no connection with
Kṛṣṇa. We will have no reconciliation with Him. We

                           96
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

cannot do that. We know who He is from so many previous
births, not just from this birth.” This is aiśvarya. We
can give another example of the gopīs realizing Kṛṣṇa’s
divinity when they say, “Paurṇamāsī has told us about
Kṛṣṇa, and we have faith in her words. She told us that
in his first birth he was Rāma, having the same blackish
color as Kṛṣṇa. He loved Sītā so much that he acted like
her servant, and when he went to the forest, he took her
with him because he could not live alone. Kṛṣṇa also
cannot live alone. He cannot. He always has to keep some
lady with him. Rāma loved Sītā so much that he took her
with him into the jungle, becoming her order-supplier.
Sītā said to him, ‘Oh, look at that golden deer! Go and
bring it to me – dead or alive. If it is alive, I will
take it to Ayodhyā when we return and give it to Mother
Kaikeyī or to Bharata, and if it is dead, then I will
make a very smooth and beautiful seat cover out of it.
So, in either case I want it.’

“Lakṣmaṇa warned Rāma, ‘I think this is the illusory
energy of demons. You should not go.’ But we know that
Rāma cannot change this lady’s mind once she has spoken,
even if he were Brahmā or any other great personality,
because he is the servant of that lady. So Rāma went to
capture the deer.

“Śūrpaṇakhā came to Rāma, saying, ‘I am so beautiful and
you are so handsome. I want to marry you. Your wife is
not so beautiful; she is not as beautiful as me. I am
making myself available for you.’ Rāma replied, ‘Go to
Lakṣmaṇa. He is unmarried. My wife is here so I cannot
accept you. But he is single, so you can go to him.’ She
went and told this to Lakṣmaṇa, who asked her, ‘Do you
want to be a maidservant or do you want to be the
queen?’ She answered, ‘I want to be the queen.’ Lakṣmaṇa
replied, ‘But I am the servant of Rāma. If you wed me,
you will be a maidservant. Rāma can have many wives and
every wife will be a queen. So return to Rāma.’

“Again Śūrpaṇakhā went to Rāmacandra, who directed her
back to Lakṣmaṇa. Then she became furious and was ready
to eat Sītā alive. Rāma told Lakṣmaṇa, ‘Don’t make any
jokes. It will create a harmful reaction. Don’t ever
joke with ladies. Don’t laugh or make them laugh.’ But
Lakṣmaṇa had done this.”

The gopīs continued, “He is so cruel and lusty. Why did
he cut Śūrpaṇakhā’s nose and ears? He purposely cut her
to make her ugly so that no one would marry her. Even
her husband would not keep her. So how cruel this person
is. And in her next birth, Śūrpaṇakhā came as Kubjā,
being so ugly that no one would marry her. So see what
kind of person He is!

“In Satya-yuga, He came as Vāmana, and for no good
reason he cheated Bali Mahārāja, telling him, ‘I will
take only three steps of land.’ Bali Mahārāja agreed,
‘Yes, I will give them to you.’ But when he began to
measure his steps, he became so tall that with one leg
he covered the whole universe. And with the second foot
he covered from Pātāla to Satyaloka. And for his third
step, he needed somewhere to place his foot, so Bali
Mahārāja offered himself. But he was not satisfied. He
tied Bali up and threw him down to hell. This is what we

                           97
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

know   about this person, and there are even more things
that   we don’t know, so we will have no reconciliation
with   that person. Go away from here at once.” This is
what   the gopīs were saying to the bumblebee.

Here Viśvanātha Cakravartī says that the gopīs have
heard that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, that He is Rāma,
Vāmana and all other incarnations, but nonetheless they
simply feel that “Kṛṣṇa is our lover.” So this is
aiśvarya, an awareness of His divinity, but it is always
covered with mādhurya, the conviction that He is simply
their dear lover. This aiśvarya-bhāva in the gopīs comes
only in viraha-bhāva, separation, not in meeting. Their
aiśvarya-bhāva is like a blade of grass in a large
quantity of milk being boiled over a very big fire. When
the milk is very hot and starts to boil, after much time
that blade of grass will come to the surface, but only
briefly. Then at once it will sink to the bottom. So
only in the heat of separation that blade of grass –
that is, aiśvarya-bhāva – will be seen in the gopīs. It
is not visible all the time. But even when in aiśvarya
they are aware of His divinity, they will see Kṛṣṇa
simply as their lover.

When aiśvarya is favorable to Kṛṣṇa’s human-like
pastimes (nara-līlā) and He continues to behave like an
ordinary child, then it is mādhurya. Sometimes Devakī
and Arjuna also have mādhurya-bhāva. For instance, when
Kṛṣṇa was sitting on the chariot, Arjuna told him, “O
Kṛṣṇa, take my chariot to the middle of the
battlefield.” And Kṛṣṇa did that. But when Arjuna saw
Kṛṣṇa’s Universal Form, he became very nervous and said,
“I will never call You ‘Friend’ again. You are the
Supreme Lord Himself.” Arjuna became covered by
awareness of Kṛṣṇa’s divinity (aiśvarya) and forgot that
Kṛṣṇa was his dear friend.

The Lord’s pastimes in Dvārakā are full of aiśvarya.
Sometimes there is mādhurya, but it is always defeated
by aiśvarya. The words vraja-lokānusārataḥ in this
second verse from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu refer to
Kṛṣṇa’s always retaining the mood of being an ordinary
human. Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā and the gopīs have a
relationship with Kṛṣṇa as human beings even though they
are not mere humans – this is nara-līlā. He is the lover
of the gopīs and of Śrīmatī Rādhikā (Rādhā-kānta). So,
as the gopīs serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with the unassuming
sweetness of simple human relations, we should also
serve Them like a mañjarī. This the meaning of vraja-
lokānusārataḥ.




Verse Three – one’s mood determines the difference
between vaidhī and rāgānugā

In the third verse quoted from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu,
the word śravaṇotkīrtanādīni means that all the sixty-
four limbs (aṅgas) of sādhana-bhakti should be
performed, or else the five main limbs, namely,
associating with advanced devotees (sādhu-saṅga),
chanting the holy name (nāma-kīrtana), hearing Śrīmad-

                             98
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam (bhāgavata-śravaṇa), residing in a holy place
(mathurā-vāsa) and faithfully worshiping the deity (śrī-
mūrtira śraddhāya sevana). These five limbs that are
executed in regulative devotion (vaidhī-bhakti) should
be adopted in spontaneous devotion (rāgānuga-bhakti)
also, but the mood will be changed. If a man develops
faith by reading or hearing the injunctions of the
scriptures and consequently is inspired to cultivate a
life a devotion, it is called vaidhī-bhakti. But a
devotee who has greed to have service like the gopīs,
even though he is performing vaidhī-bhakti, actually has
rāgānuga-bhāva. The mood of this vaidhī-bhakti will
change; it will not be the same as it is in vaidhī-
bhakti.

A rāgānuga-bhakta should execute all the limbs of
bhakti, or nine, five, three (hearing, chanting,
remembering) or only one – harināma-kīrtana. But the
important point is that the proper mood must come. Here
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is explaining that a
follower of the path of spontaneous devotion should
adopt only those practices that are favorable for the
attainment of one’s cherished goal. He should not follow
all of the sixty-four or nine limbs of bhakti. He will
not incur any offense if he neglects any one of them for
his root purpose, which is to personally serve Śrīmatī
Rādhikā as the gopīs or mañjarīs do.

To obtain this, one should do what is anukūla,
favorable. And what is unfavorable one should reject,
like ahaṅgrahopāsanā, which means to think that “I am
Lalitā, I am Viśākhā or I am Rūpa Mañjarī.” Sahajiyā-
bābājīs meditate in this way, rather than thinking that,
“I am the servant of Lalitā.” This ahaṅgrahopāsanā,
considering oneself to be non-different from the object
of worship, is very dangerous, so you should be careful
to avoid this.

Other unfavorable practices to avoid are mudras,
different procedures of intertwining the fingers during
arcana, and go-sevā, cow protection. All these things
are not important. We don’t hold kuśa grass in the hand
for taking a vow, nor do we adopt nyāsa, various
elaborate practices for chanting mantras and performing
arcana. We should not meditate on Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in
Dvārakā, nor should we worship Rukmiṇī and the other
queens of Dvārakā, although these activities are
included within the sixty-four limbs of bhakti. Worship
of other incarnations such as Rāmacandra is for others,
not for us. Kṛṣṇa is Rāma; yet we should be very careful
with this. We can offer respect, saying, “O Kṛṣṇa, You
have assumed such a beautiful form as Rāma in which You
are performing many wonderful pastimes,” but we will not
worship that form. We should focus solely on Kṛṣṇa.
Worship of Dvārakādhīśa-Kṛṣṇa is better than the worship
of Rāma, but that also has been warned against. In some
cases, perhaps Nṛsiṁhadeva as the protector of bhakti
can be worshiped without ill effect. The scriptures
present these various forms of worship, instructing that
they should be done. But these are for ordinary persons,
for the general public, not for those sādhakas who are
specifically aspiring to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Rāgānuga
means to serve Rādhikā together with Kṛṣṇa, so we should
be aikāntikī, single-pointed. Our line of preceptors has

                           99
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

established so many deities for the general public that
are not meant for those engaged in specialized worship.
So you should perform your worship very carefully in
such a way that no one will think that you are against
Rāma or Dvārakādhīśa. And you should execute all your
devotional activities with spiritual greed. So, even
though it is written in the devotional scriptures that
one should perform all these practices that we have
mentioned and should not neglect any aspect of bhakti,
we have to understand that those practices that are not
favorable to the cultivation of rāgānuga are not to be
done.

There may be a time when a person following this
principle of spontaneous devotion comes to a temple of
Satyabhāmā, Rukmiṇī, Rāmacandra or some other such
deity. By chance he may have to worship them, but even
if he does not, he incurs no offense. For a general
person, it would be an offense, but in our case we do
not avoid this worship in a mood that would be
considered offensive. Take the example of Hanumān.
Garuḍa told Hanumān, “Your worshipable Lord is calling
you – Śrī Kṛṣṇa wants you to come.” He replied, “My
health is so bad; I am sick. I cannot go. I am seriously
ill.” Garuḍa repeated, “Kṛṣṇa is calling you.” Hanumān
replied, “I know, but I am so weak that I cannot do
anything.” Then Garuḍa tried to take him by force, but
Hanumān flicked Garuḍa with his tail, throwing him with
such tremendous force that he at once landed in Dvārakā.
Then Kṛṣṇa told Garuḍa, “Go again and tell him that Rāma
is calling him.”

Garuḍa returned to Hanumān and told him, “Your
worshipable Lord Rāma is calling you.” Then immediately
Hanumān became very joyful and said, “I am just taking
my bath, and as soon as I put on tilaka, I am coming.
You should go ahead and tell Rāma that I am coming just
now.” Garuḍa said, “I will go very quickly, as quickly
as the mind. So please come with me and ride on my
back.” Hanumān said, “No, there is no need. I am coming
just now. You should go ahead.” In the meantime, as
Garuḍa had gone halfway to see Rāma, flying so fast, he
saw Hanumān coming back, jumping back from seeing Rāma.
He had already seen Kṛṣṇa in the form of Rāma, having
spoken with him and paid his respects. He was now
returning while Garuḍa was only halfway there.

If a practitioner of the spontaneous path has that root
devotional sentiment and is not following the limbs of
serving the Lord’s lotus feet (pāda-sevana), worshiping
the deity (arcana), offering the Lord prayers (vandana),
becoming His servant (dāsya), becoming His friend
(sakhya) or any other limb, it will not be an offense
for him. That essential bhāva will compensate for all
the practices that are missing.

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate


                           100
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                          5/5/2017

Devotional service to the Lord that ignores the
authorized Vedic literatures like the Upaniṣads, Purāṇas
and Nārada-pañcarātra is simply an unnecessary
disturbance in society.

This is a very important verse from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.2.101). The purport is that if one is
exclusively devoted to Kṛṣṇa but is not following the
instructions of the scriptures, then some disturbance
will come. Disturbance means doing something that is not
sanctioned by the scriptures. So here the words śruti-
smṛti-purāṇādi-pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā mean that for a
person having greed to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, this root
bhakti should be observed. That alone will be
sufficient. And if you do not follow any of the other
limbs that are unfavorable to our cherished goal, even
though the scriptures instruct that they should be
observed, still there is no chance of committing an
offense.




Five principles of practice for entering rāgānugā


To develop greed, a person has to follow five
principles:

(1) Abhīṣṭa-bhāvamayī – this means always thinking of
one’s cherished devotional mood (bhāva). To have the
devotional sentiment of a mañjarī – this is bhāvamayī.
It will never be changed.

(2) Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-sambandhī – these practices are
related to one’s cherished mood. Abhi means “surely” and
iṣṭa means “what we want.” These practices will surely
deliver the desired goal.

(3) Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-anukūla – those practices favorable to
one’s desired mood.

(4) Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-aviruddha – that which is not
unfavorable to our desired mood, we may adopt.

(5) Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-viruddha – that which is unfavorable
to our desired mood, we should not accept.

Now Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains more about
these five aspects. Abhīṣṭa-bhāvamayī is our spiritual
practice (sādhana) itself – that which we are doing, and
in the stage of perfection it will be the same.
Remembering Govinda now, and in one’s perfected
spiritual body remembering Him. Both will be the same,
but one is immature and the other will be mature. The
practices will never change. Kīrtana will never be
changed, whether in the practicing stage or in
perfection.

Now we are thinking we are adolescent cowherd girls
engaged in Rādhikā’s service. In our remembering, we are
seeing ourselves as gopīs making very beautiful garlands
and giving them to Rūpa Mañjarī. In turn, Rūpa Mañjarī

                           101
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

gives them to Lalitā and Viśākhā, who place them on the
necks of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. This type of remembrance is
called aṣṭa-kālīya-sevā, service rendered to the Divine
Couple’s eternal eightfold daily pastimes. Or, with such
thoughts in mind, we may pray like Raghunātha dāsa in
Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, and in the stage of perfection we
will actually engage in internal service. So there is no
change. It is only a question of the immature and mature
stages. This is called abhīṣṭa-bhāvamayī.

Now let us consider the second principle, abhīṣṭa-bhāva-
sambandhī. There are two reasons behind everything: the
ingredient cause (upādāna-kāraṇa) and the instrumental
cause (nimitta-kāraṇa). Like an earthen pot – the
ingredient cause is the earth, and the instrumental
cause is the potter himself. Another example is
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who is the instrumental cause of
material creation, and Advaita Ācārya, who is its
ingredient cause.

Here Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is saying that the
ingredient cause of bhakti is greed arising out of what
we have heard from our initiating or instructing
spiritual master about Kṛṣṇa. That Kṛṣṇa, who is of
adolescent age and very sweet, holding a flute to His
lips, is very favorable for gopī-prema. The spiritual
master will also tell us about āśraya, those
personalities who are the reserviors of our own
cherished mood, that is, Rūpa Mañjarī and all her
companions. We should remember and discuss all the
activities of Rūpa Mañjarī. This is upādāna-kāraṇa, the
ingredient cause. We should go to the places where they
perform pastimes, like Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa,
Girirāja-Govardhana, Vṛndāvana and Vaṁśīvaṭa. These are
all classified as the upādāna or ingredient cause,
crucial or essential practices that will quickly bring
us to our goal.

And some practices are classified as the instrumental
cause, nimitta-kāraṇa. This refers to putting on tilaka,
wearing neck beads, taking sannyāsa, wearing saffron
cloth, and so on. Some aspects are favorable. If you do
them, you will gain something by it. For example,
reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures is
essential. If you do not do this, you will be the loser.
So these practices are necessary. But in all activities,
we must always keep our mind focused on the desired root
devotional sentiment for which we have greed and which
we are striving to attain – dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya or
mādhurya. In the practicing stage it is immature, and in
perfection it is mature.

Key practices such as taking shelter of a bona fide
spiritual master, chanting japa, practicing meditation,
hearing and remembering are bhāva-sambandhī and
classified as the ingredient cause. First is bhāvamayī,
developing actual greed for that particular mood we
cherish; that is, gopī-bhāva, mañjarī-bhāva. Second is
bhāva-sambandhī; that is, the ingredient cause –
engaging in those essential practices that will bestow
that mood. Without taking shelter of a spiritual master,
one cannot attain this greed. To follow the guru is
crucial. To hear from him and serve him are essential
and are called bhāva-sambandhī and the ingredient cause,

                           102
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

upādāna-kāraṇa. So the word upādāna should be understood
to mean “ingredient” or “material.”

To chant the gopāla-mantra, kāma-gāyatrī and gaura-
gāyatrī are all bhāva-sambandhī. When remembering klīṁ
gaurāya svāhā, we should not be just uttering words –
something should come in our hearts. What? That Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself, and He is so kind that
without any cause He is always in a mood to give kṛṣṇa-
prema through that mantra, klīṁ gaurāya svāhā. To that
Gaurāṅga we are offering ourselves (svāhā) to attain His
service. We are advised to chant all these mantras that
the spiritual master has given us three times every day
– this is classified as the ingredient cause (upādāna-
kāraṇa), and we must do this.

Nijābhīṣṭa kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha pacheta’ lāgiyā (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.159)) – following one of
Kṛṣṇa’s beloved associates according to your inner
desire, the mahā-mantra should always be chanted. This
is the ingredient cause. This means not only chanting
but remembering the qualities corresponding to the names
of Kṛṣṇa. For instance, from the name “Hare” in the
mahā-mantra comes harā, which means “attractive to all,”
but here Śrīmatī Rādhikā enchants Kṛṣṇa and attracts Him
in the kuñja. Kṛṣṇa fascinates all, but here Śrīmatī
Rādhikā attracts Kṛṣṇa. Therefore She is known as
Madana-mohana-mohinī. With these thoughts in mind, we
should chant the holy name. These mantras deliver
perfection; therefore no ceremony of preliminary
purificatory procedures should be done with these
mantras. These are bhāva-sambandhī; that is, the
ingredient cause, upādāna-kāraṇa. Hearing about and
glorifying Kṛṣṇa and His dear ones are also bhāva-
sambandhī. The instrumental cause, nimitta-kāraṇa, is
not considered bhāva-sambandhī.

Here Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is saying that in
spontaneous devotion there are two primary activities:
glorification, kīrtana, and remembrance, smaraṇa. In
this instance, which is superior, kīrtana or smaraṇa?
Here he is saying that for ordinary people, smaraṇa
seems to be superior, but in this Kali-yuga it is
declared: “harer nāma eva kevalam – chanting the holy
name is the only way.” Śrī Caitanya Mahaprabhu has come
only for kīrtana. Those who perform the sacrifice of
chanting the holy name are called very intelligent
(sumedhā). Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is saying that
whatever Caitanya Mahāprabhu has stated is a decided
fact. So here smaraṇa is not superior, but it follows
kīrtana, and in Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta Sanātana Gosvāmī has
told why. The sahajiyā-bābājīs do not accept Sanātana
Gosvāmī’s or Mahāprabhu’s idea. But Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura is emphasizing here that smaraṇa
should be done under the supervision of saṅkīrtana. Why?
Because a man remembering the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa will be
disturbed if any noise comes. His meditation will be
disrupted. If a man whose mind is restless and
flickering performs kīrtana very, very loudly, all his
senses become subdued. All the senses are bound to be
silent. If we engage in kīrtana, our minds will feel no
disturbance when we practice silent remembrance in the
morning.


                           103
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

This kīrtana may be either japa or congregational
chanting. The important things are having greed, to be
following a rasika Vaiṣṇava, remembering the pastimes of
Kṛṣṇa, chanting and being in Vṛndāvana by either body or
mind. Kīrtana is required, and it should be individual
(vyaktigata), not collective (samaṣṭigata). If our
spiritual master is doing kīrtana and we have
participated in that, our kīrtana will not be the same
as his because we are not equal to him. He is
remembering the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and weeping, but we
are not. We are only singing along with him, so our
chanting is not the same. His is individual, performed
for his personal bhajana, and ours is congregational.
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī performs kīrtana individually by
his own mouth, and when he performs kīrtana with
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and his associates, it is not
individual. But what Caitanya Mahāprabhu discusses with
Rāya Rāmānanda is individual.

Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura relates from Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi the account of the sages who performed
austerities. We should not think that this means
surrounding oneself by fire in the summer, taking bath
in very, very cold water in the winter, not eating,
taking a vow of silence or any other such bodily
hardships. Here it refers to worship. By the grace of
Rāmacandra, sixty thousand sages performed mental
worship, and all of them later became gopīs. So these
practices are all bhāva-sambandhī.

The instumental cause, nimitta-kāraṇa, includes
observing vows like those for Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī, as
well as performing austerities solely to please Kṛṣṇa.
The ingredient cause, upādāna, means you must certainly
do it. And if you fail to perform activities that are
considered nimitta, it is harmful but not as harmful as
not performing activities that are considered upādāna.

I gave the example that the ingredient cause, upādāna,
is the clay and the instrumental cause, nimitta, is the
potter. Without the potter or without earth, nothing can
be done, but the earth is especially crucial, so upādāna
is superior. Hearing the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and serving
the spiritual master are the ingredient cause, and other
practices are secondary. Nimitta means the support, the
immediate cause, and upādāna means the base, the
ingredient. Without the ingredient, nothing can be done,
so upādāna is more important.

But if anyone says that we should not observe Ekādaśī,
it is incorrect. We should follow the vows precribed for
Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī, even though they are classified
as the instrumental cause (nimitta-kāraṇa) and not as
important as the other practices. Observing vows for
holy days such as Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī, as well as
applying tilaka and so on, are beneficial for bhāva-
sambandhī. Bhāva-sambandhī is mūla-kāraṇa, the main
cause, and is superior to nimitta-kāraṇa, which is the
secondary cause. The superiority of bhāva-sambandhī over
nimitta-kāraṇa is stressed for the benefit of those who
place emphasis on observing Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī and
Rāma-navamī but do not give importance to hearing the
Lord’s pastimes. This has been written for these people.
If anyone does not observe Ekādaśī, what will be the

                           104
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

harm? When one has greed and is engaged in performing
activities that are bhāvamayī or bhāva-sambandhī, one
may overlook the Ekādaśī vow, as Vaṁśīdāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja did, for example. On other days he would fast
for three or four days, and when Ekādaśī came, he would
be completely unaware of the day. Ragunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
would be internally absorbed in remembrance for many
days and Ekādaśī would go by at that time. Since they
were performing rāgānugā, there was no harm in missing
it. But if they were not to follow such vows when they
regained their external senses, then it would be
harmful.

First I have explained bhāvamayī – this can be immature
and mature; that is, in sādhana we can think we are
gopīs, and when we will actually be a gopī, then it will
be siddha-bhāva, our perfected devotional sentiment. In
both cases, it is called bhāvamayī. Next is bhāva-
sambandhī upādāna-kāraṇa – these are activities we must
do, like hearing and remembering. These things cannot be
neglected for any reason. But if we cannot follow
nimitta-kāraṇa in certain circumstances, it is not
harmful. Therefore it is considered secondary.

The Kārttika vow is of two kinds. When it is followed
with the emphasis on renunciation, it is considered the
instrumental cause, nimitta-kāraṇa. But Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura is writing here in relation to bhāva-
sambandhī. When hearing and chanting of the glories of
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are being performed, it is considered
part of the ingredient cause, upādāna-kāraṇa. So if the
renunciation is not observed, there is no harm, but this
hearing and chanting should not be neglected. Every vow
is of two kinds. When it is considered upādāna-kāraṇa,
it should not be missed, but if we fail to follow the
limbs of devotion that are considered to be nimitta-
kāraṇa, there is no harm.

Once I went to the Govindajī Mandira in Jaipur during
the month of Kārttika. The priests there requested me to
take the deities’ remnants, and I told them, “I am so
fortunate that you are giving me this mahā-prasāda of
Rādhā-Govinda.” They brought me rice, laukī (bottle-
gourd) and eggplant. We are not supposed to take laukī
or eggplant during Kārttika, but I accepted them as
mahā-prasāda, taking them with great faith. I thought to
myself, “This is considered the ingredient cause,
upādāna-kāraṇa, to respect mahā-prasāda. Śrī Govindajī
is Rūpa Gosvāmī’s deity,” so I respected it; but here in
our temple we tell them not to prepare laukī and
eggplant during Kārttika, and we do not take them.

The third item is bhāva-anukūla, that which is favorable
to our desired goal. This includes applying tilaka,
serving the tulasī plant, circumambulating holy places
and offering obeisances. These are favorable and should
be done. Serving cows, worshiping the banyan tree and
respecting brāhmaṇas – these are among sixty-four limbs
of bhakti listed in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu and are
somewhat favorable or beneficial. If a sādhaka does not
follow them, there is no harm, but we should do as
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has instructed in Manaḥ-śikṣā
(1) – sujane bhūsura-gaṇe. Bhūsura refers to the
brāhmaṇas. But if a rāgānuga Vaiṣṇava has no time for

                           105
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

these practices, there is no harm because this is
considered part of the instrumental cause, nimitta,
only. These are bhāva-anukūla – they are favorable,
supportive, but not essential.

The fourth is bhāva-aviruddha, that which is not
unfavorable but yet not favorable. Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura gives an example. Kṛṣṇa wants to have milk from
the breast of Yaśodā, and at the same time she is
heating milk on the fire. As the milk boiled over,
Yaśodā forcibly put Kṛṣṇa down. He was weeping and very
angry, but she went to protect the milk on the stove. We
should protect the things that Kṛṣṇa likes more than we
should protect Kṛṣṇa Himself. And we should favor these
things more than Kṛṣṇa because they will be used in His
service.

For a rāgānuga devotee, although the devotional limbs of
hearing, chanting and remembering are considered
superior, the management of the kīrtana is no less
important. Making arrangements and managing everything
is considered preaching. At first, engaging in hearing
and chanting is superior to management, but ultimately
management will be transferred into these activities. If
one has spontaneous love for the Lord in his heart, he
can manage and make arrangements if they are supportive
of kīrtana, smaraṇa and so forth. We must perform these
managerial duties, but internally we should keep a
certain mood while we engage in all these activites
solely to promote saṅkīrtana. In this case there is no
harm; saṅkīrtana should be supported.

Another example is the washing of the deity’s cloth. It
is not less than kīrtana or smaraṇa, because later it
will be transferred into kīrtana. In the future, the
person who washes the deity’s cloth will be able to
perform kīrtana and smaraṇa.

One should have respect for the limbs of devotion and
remember Kṛṣṇa; this is the topmost form of remembrance,
smaraṇa. Deep attachment, āsakti, is of two kinds: that
for the activities that comprise one’s spiritual
practice (sādhana) and that which is for Kṛṣṇa and His
eternal associates. Both are good, but later on āsakti
for devotional practices such as hearing and chanting
will transfer into āsakti for Kṛṣṇa Himself and then
become smaraṇa. So it begins as bhāva-anukūla and after
that it will become bhāvamayī.

The fifth item is bhāva-viruddha, those things that
should be rejected. Here ahaṅgrahopāsanā (to consider
oneself non-different from the object of worship), nyāsa
(various elaborate practices for chanting mantras and
performing arcana), mudrās (different procedures of
intertwining the fingers during worship), meditation on
the Lord’s pastimes in Dvārakā and the queens there –
all should be rejected. Other practices are helpful, but
these are directly harmful.

I have related Viśvanātha Cakravartī’s explainations
here. When you attain spiritual perfection, you will
actually realize these things. In the preliminary stage,
you cannot have an exact idea of what they are. He
concludes this section by saying, “I am explaining these

                           106
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

topics to you, and if you have not understood them
properly, it is my fault that I could not make you
comprehend, so the Lord and his pure devotees should
forgive me.”




Who hears the prayers of the rāgānuga devotee?


Here Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartīpāda raises a question.
If Kṛṣṇa is solely engaged in amorous sports with the
gopīs, performing the rāsa dance and playing with them,
and He has forgotten everything else that is going on,
then who will hear the prayers of all the rāgānuga
devotees who are praying to Him? Kṛṣṇa is always tasting
amorous love in the association of the gopīs,
continuously trying to please them, and the gopīs are
also in a mood of making Kṛṣṇa happy. Kṛṣṇa has
forgotten His house and His duties. He is not aware if
any danger or any enemy may come or not. He does not
know what fear is, and He has no anxiety.

So Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is asking, “Who will
fulfill the desires of the rāgānuga devotees when Kṛṣṇa
has forgotten everything? Who will give them blessings
or consolation?” He says that some propose that the
Supersoul, Paramātmā, the plenary portion of Kṛṣṇa, will
hear all these things, because he resides in the heart
of every living entity as the witness. So as Paramātmā,
Kṛṣṇa will hear. But Viśvanātha Cakravartī is of the
opinion that no rāgānuga-bhakta will be satisfied
dealing with Parāmātmā, because he is not rasika and is
unaware of the rāgānuga devotee’s mood. Thus, Paramātmā
is not sufficient; he is merely the witness, who bestows
the results of one’s activities and who is bound in his
duty in this way. The devotees on the path of
spontaneous love will not be satisfied even by Nārāyaṇa,
Rāmacandra or Dvārakādhiśa, what to speak of their
plenary portions.

Viśvanātha Cakravartī is explaining that Kṛṣṇa will hear
their prayers; Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara Gopī-kānta
will hear. But how will He hear? He is immersed and has
forgotten everything. The answer is that there are two
special qualities in Kṛṣṇa: sarvajñatā (omniscience) and
mugdhatā (joyous bewilderment). Mugdhatā means that, by
the power of His love, He does not know anything. Prema
is so powerful that it covers Kṛṣṇa over so that He acts
like an ordinary person of limited intelligence. This is
observed when Kṛṣṇa was in Dvārakā. Uddhava was there
and Kṛṣṇa called him, telling him that there were two
very important tasks to be done: one, to kill
Jarāsandha, and the other, to accept the Pāṇḍavas’
invitation to join the rājasūya-yajña. “Both are equally
important. What should I do?” Here Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura is asking that if Kṛṣṇa is omniscient, knowing
past, present and future, then why did He seek Uddhava’s
advice?

So, it may be that Kṛṣṇa was only acting as if ignorant,
but from the context here, it is evident that He was not

                           107
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

merely acting. Uddhava answered Him, “O Lord, I am
surprised and don’t understand why You have asked me
this question. You know everything, but You are speaking
as if You know nothing.” Uddhava advised him, “First You
should go to the rājasūya-yajña. Take Arjuna and Bhīma
with You, and from there, with the horse from the yajña,
You should go to Jarāsandha and kill him, thereby
completing the rājasūya-yajña. Both tasks will be
accomplished with one stroke.” Kṛṣṇa appreciated
Uddhava’s solution, “O Uddhava, certainly you are very
intelligent. I will do as you advise.”

Here Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is saying that Kṛṣṇa
simultaneously exhibits both qualities, mugdhatā, as if
knowing nothing, and sarvajñatā, knowing everything.
Kuntī prays to Kṛṣṇa, “I remember how You were crying
bitterly when Yaśodā was going to bind Your hands and
waist. That crying was real, it was not imitation. When
I recall this, I am astonished – fear personified fears
You, yet You were afraid of the stick in Your mother’s
hand.” This is called mugdhatā, bewilderment like that
of a child. This bewilderment happens by Yogamāyā’s
influence.

A man overpowered by Kṛṣṇa’s illusory potency, māyā,
feels suffering and happiness, and undergoes many births
under the influence of the illusory energy. His
happiness and suffering are all the work of māyā, which
causes him to forget Kṛṣṇa. Therefore are Kṛṣṇa’s
sarvajñatā and mugdhatā caused by this illusory potency?
No, nor are they caused by the illusory potency of Lord
Brahmā or even Balarāma. Rather, they are the result of
Kṛṣṇa’s prema, His special affection for His devotees
(bhakta-vātsalya). He loves those who have taken shelter
of Him so much that He knows nothing besides them; that
is, He forgets everything else. That prema is Yogamāyā
itself. There are many functions of prema, like Yogamāyā
and the pleasure potency, hlādinī-śakti. All are
functions of Yogamāyā, that is, of prema. So Kṛṣṇa is
omniscient and bewildered by love at the same time.
Thus, if any rāgānuga devotee in this world is
worshiping Kṛṣṇa and is praying for something when He is
performing the rāsa dance, Kṛṣṇa will fulfill the desire
of that devotee. He hears everything because, although
He is thoroughly distracted during the rāsa-līlā, at the
same time He is omniscient.




The difference between aiśvarya and mādhurya


Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is explaining
aiśvarya and mādhurya. Aiśvarya is opulence, majesty and
reverence, knowing that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord
Bhagavān. Defining mādhurya simply as “sweetness” is not
sufficient because in our lives we taste some sweet
things, but this is not mādhurya. In our ordinary
interactions with our family we taste something that we
might call mādhurya, but this is not really mādhurya.
Behind it there must be aiśvarya, opulence; without
aiśvarya there can be no mādhurya. Mahā-aiśvarya, the

                           108
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

mood of great opulence, may or may not be present – that
is not the question. Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are going on in
human-like form, and even though there is mahā-aiśvarya
underneath, it is mādhurya. And when Kṛṣṇa and His
devotees are both aware that He is the Supreme Lord, and
bhakti itself also knows this, it is mahā-aiśvarya and
the pastimes are not like human actions. For instance,
we see that Arjuna has great reverence for Kṛṣṇa. When
Kṛṣṇa revealed his Universal Form to Arjuna on the
battlefield, Arjuna told Him, “I have committed many
offenses at Your lotus feet. I have called You ‘Friend’,
but You are the Supreme Lord Himself. You are
worshipable to me, yet I have called You ‘Friend’ and
ordered You to drive my chariot.” This is aiśvarya-līlā,
because Kṛṣṇa was in a mood that “I am the Lord.” He
showed his Universal Form to Arjuna, who immediately
gave up his sakhya-bhāva.

When Vasudeva and Devakī saw Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva after
they had killed Kaṁsa, they actually began to worship
Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva and offered many prayers. When Kṛṣṇa
came to kill Kaṁsa, He was in īśvara-bhāva, knowing that
“I am the Supreme Lord.” Vasudeva and Devakī also knew
that He was the Supreme, so this is aiśvarya-bhāva.

Kṛṣṇa went to Govardhana and He lifted Govardhana on one
finger for seven days. Indra came and performed the
royal bathing ceremony for Kṛṣṇa, and Yaśodā heard about
this. All were assembled and, calling Yaśodā and Nanda
Mahārāja to come, they said, “You should not think that
Kṛṣṇa is your son. He is the Supreme Lord himself. You
should not beat Him, slap Him or call Him bad names.
Don’t call Him thief, liar and all other things, because
it will be an offense.” Yaśodā was greatly pleased and
delighted that her son had lifted up Govardhana for
seven days and that all were praising Him. So her
breasts became very swollen with pride. If a woman hears
her children praised, she becomes greatly pleased. But
Yaśodā never said that Kṛṣṇa was God. So this is the
mood of mādhurya. She knew that His action was not that
of an ordinary person, but still she thought, “He is
merely my son.”

The gopīs had heard about Kṛṣṇa’s bhagavattā, his nature
as the Supreme. When Uddhava went to Vraja and met them,
the gopīs were saying that Kṛṣṇa was the Supreme Lord,
not only in this birth but also in past births. As
Rāmacandra, he had also done many questionable things
and was fully controlled by Sītā-devī. So the gopīs have
īśvara-bhāva, an awareness that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Lord. They learned this from Paurṇamāsī, who had been
told by Gargācārya. They had heard that Kṛṣṇa was the
Lord Himself, yet they never saw Him as such. They
always said to Him, “Come here; the red lac has come off
my feet. Please paint my feet.” They would give Kṛṣṇa
orders and become angry with Him, because they never
accepted Him as God. They behaved with Kṛṣṇa as if He
were their own. So here, even though they had īśvara-
bhāva, they knew Kṛṣṇa only as their lover. This is
mādhurya-bhāva.

Now Viśvanātha Cakravartī is saying that when Kṛṣṇa
knows that He is the Supreme Lord, and His devotee knows
that He is the Lord, then it is aiśvarya-bhāva. And when

                           109
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

it is mādhurya, Kṛṣṇa forgets that he is the Lord, and
the devotee also forgets. So Kṛṣṇa is always in vraja-
bhāva, overpowered by prema. Under the influence of
Yogamāyā, He performs all his actions by this prema. And
it is not against siddhānta that Kṛṣṇa is overpowered by
prema, because prema and Kṛṣṇa are the same thing. Kṛṣṇa
is eternally existing, fully knowledgeable and
transcendentally blissful (sac-cid-ānanda), and prema is
his very nature.

Śrīla Cakravartīpāda explains that at the time of the
rāsa dance Kṛṣṇa was sarvajña, omniscient, because He
knew that all the gopīs wanted to love Him and dance
with Him. Then He expanded into so many forms and did
what the gopīs wanted. That is mugdhatā, child-like
bewilderment. When He knew that “everyone wants to dance
with Me,” this is sarvajña, one of His divine opulences.
So both come at the same time. How is this possible?
Because of Kṛṣṇa’s inconceivable potency (acintya-
śakti). These are His qualities.




Worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa with Their pastimes and associates


One thing Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura stresses
is that we should not worship Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa without
Their pastimes. If you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa while meditating
on Their pastimes, a very simple thing can be achieved.
Rūpa Gosvāmī has said, “By chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name and by
remembering His pastimes, both should amalgamate, and
then rasa will come.” If sugar is there and water is
there but they are not mixed together, there will be no
rasa. So they need to be mixed together; then there can
be rasa. What kind of pastimes should we meditate on?
Only those with the gopīs. If a man has greed for vraja-
bhakti, even though Kṛṣṇa is always with his hlādinī-
śakti, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, it is not sufficient to remember
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa without Their pastimes. Without meditating
on Their pastimes, hlādinī-śakti will not work. Just by
worshiping deities of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the temple, there
is no certainty that we will attain vraja-bhāva. We may
receive darśana of Lakṣmī or Satyabhāmā and Rukmiṇī
instead.

So, thinking of Rūpa Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī and our
spiritual master in mañjarī form, we should remember
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes that our gosvāmīs and Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam have described. When we perform ārati of
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, we should think about Their pastimes.
In the morning, we should meditate on Their morning
pastimes; and at midday, the pastimes of midday. And we
should see ourselves and our spiritual master also as
mañjarīs. Then our bhajana will be rāgānuga. Otherwise,
it is simply vaidhī-bhakti. When the gopīs offer ārati,
they use a ghee lamp. The lamp is our heart, the ghee is
our heart’s prema and the cotton wick is our bhāva.
Every devotee has a special bhāva, and that bhāva will
be transmitted through the eyes. The gopīs worship by
the corners of their eyes, and Kṛṣṇa, in turn, accepts
their worship with His eyes, taking it in His heart. The

                           110
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

gopīs perform arcana in this way, not by simply waving a
lamp with great ceremony! When Kṛṣṇa comes, Mother
Yaśodā takes items such as a ghee lamp and flower and
greets Him with great affection. The gopīs, standing at
the door where no one can see them, are performing
arcana of Kṛṣṇa with their very lusty eyes. Kṛṣṇa does
not see what His mother is doing. Where are His eyes
focused? So this is the best arcana and best ārati, and
we should see that ārati in Vraja through the ārati that
we perform in our temple.

There is one thing that Viśvanātha Cakravartī has warned
to be very careful about. One of our ācāryas has said
that Rādhikā’s love for Kṛṣṇa is in the mood of marital
love (svakīyā), not in the mood of a a paramour
(parakīyā), and that the paramour mood is found only in
the pastimes manifest in this world (prakaṭa-līlā), not
in the pastimes that take place in the spiritual world
(aprakaṭa-līlā). Viśvanātha Cakravartī has not mentioned
the name of the person who said this, but we can reveal
that it was Jīva Gosvāmī. He has written that the
devotee who exclusively aspires to serve the Lord in the
paramour mood should always think that Śrīmatī Rādhikā
is Kṛṣṇa’s paramour, but he cautioned that if a man has
any doubt, he is advised strictly to follow the
conception of marital love (svakīya-bhāva).

Our author is saying that in the Purāṇas or in any books
written by rasika Vaiṣṇava preceptors like Nārada,
Vyāsa, Śuka, Śaṅkara and Parāśara, the father of
Vyāsadeva, it has never been stated that Rādhikā is the
wedded wife of Kṛṣṇa. So we should know that, whether in
the manifest pastimes or the unmanifest pastimes, it is
mentioned everywhere that Rādhikā has the mood of a
paramour (parakīya-bhāva). Sva means “own” and kīyā
means “wealth or possession,” so the word svakīyā means
the hlādinī-śakti of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, whether Rādhikā
is svakīyā or not, She always has the mood of a
paramour, in both the manifest and the unmanifest
pastimes. Therefore we should think of and worship
Rādhikā in parakīya-bhāva. We should aspire to serve Her
by cheating family members such as husband, father-in-
law, mother-in-law, brothers and everyone else. And we
will also have to know a sakhī’s sixteen kinds of duty10
to be able to assist Śrīmatī Rādhikā in parakīya-bhāva.
If we have greed, we will have to become expert in all
these things. If not, then we will not be able to serve
Her in this way.

There is one pastime when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were married
as children, but that marriage is in the paramour mood
(parakīyā), not in the mood of marital love (svakīyā).
The gopīs were sitting with Kṛṣṇa and wanted to joke
with Him. Lalitā, going behind Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, took the ends of Her sārī and His dhoti and
tied them together. Viśākhā uttered mantras while the
gopīs sang marriage songs. Then they told Kṛṣṇa, “You
should hold Your hand out and take Rādhikā’s hand in
yours,” and all were very pleased when He did this. This
is a joke in the mood of parakīyā, similar to the way
Brahmā jested by performing the “marriage” of Radhā-
Kṛṣṇa in Bhāṇḍīravana. So it has two meanings. The inner
meaning is to nourish and increase the pleasure of
parakīya-rasa, just as in this world little children

                           111
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

play getting married. And the outer meaning is to close
the mouths of the unqualified, “See, there is a marriage
here. It is legitimate.” Both purposes are served.




After attaining the stage of bhāva


Now Śrīla Cakravartīpāda is saying one last thing. A
rāgānuga-sādhaka, having crossed the stages of śraddhā
(faith), niṣṭhā (resolute steadiness), ruci (strong
taste) and āsakti (firm attachment), has completed his
sādhana upon achieving bhāva (ecstatic emotion), which
is the first ray of prema (divine love). After bhāva,
there is nothing further to do in this world. This
physical body cannot tolerate the weight of prema. So
after one leaves this body, what happens? Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura is questioning – will the sādhaka
directly go to Goloka Vṛndāvana? From that time onward,
what does he do, where does he live?

He is relating that some say that he goes direct to
Goloka Vraja, but it is not the fact. There is something
more. Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi says that after this stage one
goes to Vṛndāvana, but the fact is not clear whether it
is the manifest (prakaṭa) Vraja in this world or the
unmanifest (aprakaṭa) Vraja in the spiritual world. If
they go directly to Goloka Vṛndāvana, then some
questions arise. After prema comes, then the higher
stages of sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga, bhāva and
finally mahābhāva must be achieved. Then one can
directly meet Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. Without mahābhāva no one
can meet Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; there must be mahābhāva. This
is the qualification of the gopīs who meet and serve
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. If one can directly go to the spiritual
world, Goloka Vṛndāvana, then where has he received the
stages from sneha to mahābhāva? He has not received
them, so he cannot go directly there. In the physical
body of a sādhaka, one’s permanent devotional sentiment
(sthāyibhāva) cannot come. What to speak of mahābhāva,
even sneha, māna and praṇāya will not come. Sthāyibhāva
cannot come in this body. It will come when
āśrayālambana, uddīpana, vyabhicārī and all bhāvas will
gather there. Then it becomes prema. This physical body
can tolerate only up to the stage of bhāva, not beyond.

Viśvanātha Cakravartī is saying that it is not clearly
stated whether the destination is the manifest or
unmanifest Vraja, but only that one goes to Vraja. So we
should deliberate on this. Our ācāryas have investigated
this matter. Viśvanātha Cakravartī says that we will
have to take birth from the womb of a gopī. So we will
go directly to the unmanifest Vraja, where we will take
birth as a gopī. This is one argument, but he concludes
that it is not correct, because the spiritual world is
not a land of spiritual practice, sādhana. Thus, the
sādhaka cannot go there directly and receive birth from
the womb of a gopī. Our author rejects this proposal.

Now the author gives his own opinion. When a sādhaka
reaches the stage of bhāva, Yogamāyā, by the wishes of

                           112
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa and Rādhikā, takes him to some universe where
Their pastimes are being enacted. Their pastimes are
always manifest somewhere at every moment. So Yogamāyā,
complying with the wishes of the Divine Couple, takes
that fortunate living entity to that universe and
arranges for her birth from the womb of a gopī. From
childhood, she receives the association of eternally
perfected gopīs. Sometimes she sees Kṛṣṇa and feels
greed to meet with Him – this is pūrva-rāga. She
experiences so many levels of emotion from prema to
mahābhāva, and even if she is married and has associated
with her husband, still she can have prema for Kṛṣṇa.
But if she has borne a child, Yogamāyā will not approve
of her association with Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. So, such a
living entity, still having some kaṣaya, must be
married, and by the anguish she experiences by not being
allowed to meet with Kṛṣṇa, all her remaining desires
will be washed away. Then she will know that “this is
not my child, this is not my husband,” at which point
she will meet with Kṛṣṇa. Those who associate with
eternally perfected gopīs will develop their prema up to
mahābhāva and be allowed to meet Kṛṣṇa. When these
manifest pastimes are wound up and Kṛṣṇa returns to the
spiritual world, these new gopīs go there together with
all of Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates to serve Him forever.




A rāgānuga devotee’s prayer to Kṛṣṇa


Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura assures us, “O Vaiṣṇava
endowed with intense spontaneous love, don’t be worried
and don’t be afraid. You should go on practicing your
rāgānuga-bhajana. After this life, you will go to a
planet where Kṛṣṇa is present, and He will attract you.
Be assured that Kṛṣṇa is always waiting for you there,
so go on practicing this rāgānuga-bhajana.”

Our author prays to Kṛṣṇa, “O Gokulānanda, You are the
topmost enjoyer of pastimes, always submerged in an
ocean of the gopīs’ love. You are a swan swimming in the
ocean of that love, and You are the enjoyer of that
love. You have no time, yet You are omniscient
(sarvajña). You are prone to bewilderment (mugdha), and
at the same time by Your inconceivable potency (acintya-
śakti), You are omniscient also. So listen to my prayer.
Don’t be in a state of joyous bewilderment, mugdha,
because if You are, You will not hear my prayer. I pray
to You that You should be both, so that You can know my
heart and hear my prayer.

“You are the bee of the bhakti-mañjarī. Bhakti is like a
bud, a mañjarī, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is like a flower, and
you are a honey bee. I pray to You to give me the
intelligence by which I can receive vraja-prema for both
You and Rādhikā. If You do not answer my prayer, then I
will declare that You are not fulfilling the promise You
gave in Bhagavad-gītā (10.10): ‘dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ tam
– I provide My devotees with the intelligence by which
they can come to Me.’ So You must keep Your word. O
Vrajendra-nandana, Your feet always take great pleasure

                           113
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

in playing with the breasts of the gopīs. How will I
obtain this stage of service to You? You should give me
the kind of intelligence by which I can receive this.”




Can the scriptures be neglected?


Now Viśvanātha Cakravartī concludes this book by saying
that it is a mistake to think that rāgānuga-bhakti is
beyond sciptural injunctions and that only those who
have disregarded them can enter into rāgānuga-bhakti.
This view is not correct, because without following
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the scriptures written by Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī, Nārada Ṝṣi and others, one will create troubles
for oneself. So we should not follow those who reject
sciptural injunctions.

It is most difficult for the demigods to achieve this
rāgānuga-bhakti, what to speak of general persons. This
Rāga-vartma-candrikā, the moonrays that illuminate the
path of spontaneous love, has been written for those
qualified devotees who have received the mercy of guru
and Gaurāṅga in order that they may ascertain the way
and then proceed along that path. Śrīla Cakravartī
Ṭhākura says, “If I have shed some light and someone has
received it, then I will feel that my endeavors in
writing this book have been successful.”

Our spiritual body will not manifest until we have
grasped the essence of this process. We should know that
we are not yet qualified. When we can no longer wait
patiently wait to attain this, whether the proper
qualification has come or not, at that time all
impediments will be washed away. Pure greed must arise.
Then Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master will arrange that
our spiritual identity, the eleven aspects of our
spiritual body, will be revealed to us, and we will not
be able to remain alive until we know all these things.
So pure greed must come. Then there will be no question
of qualification, whether we are in this stage or not.
Kṛṣṇa will arrange everything, but in the meantime we
should never simply imagine these things. This is our
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava speciality.

We should continue practicing and go on trying to learn
everything that is needed. Then, by performing rāgānuga-
bhakti, the goal will come. We are sure that Śrīmatī
Rādhikā is making preparations for us. If She arranged
everything for Gopa-kumāra and the Govardhana brāhmaṇa
as described in Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, why won’t She
arrange for us also? Surely She will do this. She has
sent one of Her associates to bring us up to this stage,
so why won’t She arrange further? Whatever mercy has
come to you already will surely continue. If you have
greed and a very strong desire, She must arrange for you
to progress. If someone is not available to come in
person, She will inspire us through caitya-guru in our
hearts – She will do it! At this time we can only
desire, following the way Raghunātha dāsa prays in

                           114
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                       5/5/2017

Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, but in our present stage we are not
qualified to do any more than this. So keeping a strong
desire, we must pray – this is within our power, and
after that Śrīmatī Rādhikā will arrange whatever else is
needed.



Table of Contents

Part One

Part Two

Part Three

Preface

Introduction

FIRST ILLUMINATION

text 1

text 2

text 3

text 4

text 5

text 6

text 7

text 8

text 9

text 10

text 11

text 12

text 13

text 14

SECOND ILLUMINATION

text 4

In connection with Svakīyā-Parakīyā

The opinion of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī

The line of thought of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura

Opinions of other Vaiṣṇavas

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura on svakīyā and parakīyā

                           115
Raga-Vartma-Candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


Additional commentary on Rāga-vartma-candrikā

Qualifications for entering

Two kinds of faith

Mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas

The goal – mañjarī-bhāva

The process – real initiation

The need of the scriptures

The mood of intimacy in spontaneous devotion

Serving the spiritual master

How to enter into spontaneous devotion

Now Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments on them one
by one.

Five principles of practice for entering rāgānugā

Who hears the prayers of the rāgānuga devotee?

The difference between aiśvarya and mādhurya

Worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa with Their pastimes and associates

After attaining the stage of bhāva

A rāgānuga devotee’s prayer to Kṛṣṇa

Can the scriptures be neglected?




                             116
