Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Tags: Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda commentaries Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta

Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda commentaries Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛtattt



* * *




* * *




Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda

The Conversation between

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu & Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya



Chapter Eight of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā

By Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī



Commentary by Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja



Contents

Introduction

Maṅgalācaraṇa

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Meets Rāmānanda Rāya

Varṇāśrama-dharma

Offering the results of one’s activities to Kṛṣṇa

Renouncing Occupational Duties

                             1
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017


Bhakti Mixed with Empiric Knowledge

Bhakti Devoid of Empiric Knowledge

Prema-bhakti

Dāsya-prema — the love of a servant for Kṛṣṇa

Sakhya-prema — the love of a friend for Kṛṣṇa

Vātsalya-prema — the love of a parent for Kṛṣṇa

Kāntā-prema — the love of a beloved for Kṛṣṇa

Rādhā-prema — Śrī Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa

Kṛṣṇa-tattva

Rādhā-tattva

Prema-tattva

Vilāsa-tattva

Under the Guidance of the Sakhīs

Questions and Answers

The Final Evening




Introduction


[to the first Hindi edition]



It is a matter of great joy that today, by the causeless
mercy and inspiration of my most revered spiritual
master, oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, this commentary known
as Sajjana-toṣaṇī on Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda is being
presented as a separate book for the faithful readers.

Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda (the conversation between Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda) is one of
the most shining treasures within the Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, written by Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja. Indeed,
it is like the Kaustubha-maṇi, the most brilliant jewel
adorning the neck of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta is a most unprecedented, gem-like literature
containing the siddhānta (transcendental conclusions) of
pure devotion. With regards to this, the most respected
Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has written the following:



kṛṣṇadāsa kavirāja, rasika bhakata-mājha,


                             2
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

jeṅho kailā caitanya-carita

gaura-govinda-līlā, śunite galaye śilā,

tāhāte nā haila mora cita

Prārthanā (2)



“Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja is an exceptionally high-class
devotional poet. He is also bhāvuka, one who is immersed
in experiencing the more elevated expressions of divine
love. He has composed the unprecedented sacred texts,
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, which describes the pastimes of
Śrī Gaurāṅga, and Śrī Govinda-līlāmṛta, which depicts
the pastimes of Śrī Govinda. Both of these books, being
crown jewels of transcendental literature, are the best
of all contributions.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the king of devotional literature and
the essence of all Vedānta, is considered to be the
birthplace of śuddha-bhakti (pure devotion) and it was
revealed to Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana

Vedavyāsa during his devotional trance. Similarly, the
two above-mentioned books by Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī are also acknowledged as the very essence of
Veda, Vedānta, the Purāṇas, and all historical records.

Full of humility, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja writes in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta:



ei grantha lekhāya more ëmadana-mohana’

āmāra likhana yena śukera paṭhana



sei likhi, madana-gopāla ye likhāya

kāṣṭhera puttalī yena kuhake nācāya

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (8.78—79)



“Śrī Madana-mohana is directly writing this book through
me. My writing is just like a parrot who repeats what it
has learned from another. I am writing what Śrī Madana-
gopāla is Himself dictating to me. I am simply a wooden
puppet, dancing or writing according to His desire.”

Regarding the creation of that scripture, Śrīla Kavirāja
Gosvāmī states therein:



caitanya-līlā-ratna-sāra, svarūpera bhāṇḍāra,

teṅho thuilā raghunāthera kaṇṭhe


                              3
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017

tāṅhā kichu ye śuniluṅ, tāhā ihāṅ vistāriluṅ,

bhakta-gaṇe diluṅ ei bheṭe

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā (2.84)



“For sixteen years Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, one of
the six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana, stayed directly at the
lotus feet of Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu in
Śrīdhāma Jagannātha Purī. That which he witnessed and
heard directly by his transcendental eyes and ears, and
that which he heard from his close association with Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī (who is an internal associate
of the Lord), is the foundation for this Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta.”

Commenting on this section of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes in his Amṛta-pravāha-
bhāṣya: “Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī is one of the
most intimate associates of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He
has described the final pastimes of Śrīman Mahāprabhu in
his notebook, or kaḍacā, in the form of condensed
anecdotes, or sūtras. Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
memorized all those notes. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī, heard those notes directly from him, and
expanded upon them in composing his Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta. In this regard the author wrote elsewhere:



svarūpa gosāñi kaḍacāya ye līlā likhila

raghunātha-dāsa-mukhe ye saba śunila



sei saba līlā kahi saṅkṣepa kariyā

caitanya-kṛpāte likhi kṣudra-jīva hañā

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā (3.269—270)



“I have heard from the mouth of Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī all about the pastimes of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu that Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī recorded in his
notebook. I have briefly described those pastimes.
Whatever I have written is by the mercy of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, since I am an insignificant living being.”



Śrī Kavirāja Gosvāmī took birth in the West Bengal
village of Jhāmaṭapūra, which is near the well-known
Naihāṭī railway station. He did not mention anywhere the
name of his mother or father, his previous childhood
name, or his status in terms of his caste (varṇa) and
social position (āśrama). Based upon indications in his
own writings and the literatures of others, we surmise
that he was present in the world from 1452 until 1538.


                             4
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

In regard to the identity of his caste, there is
difference of opinion among various learned persons. The
Vaiṣṇava society awarded Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī the
title “Kavirāja,” or “king of poets,” for his
significant contribution of poetic Sanskrit —
ŚrīGovinda-līlāmṛta. In Bengal, ayurvedic doctors are
also called Kavirāja. For this reason, some people
assume that he was also a doctor by caste.

Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī perfectly exemplified the verse
tṛṇād api sunīcena (Śikṣāṣṭaka 3). In other words, He
possessed all the qualities of a humble Vaiṣṇava. He
himself writes in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta:



jagāi mādhāi haite muñi se pāpiṣṭha

purīṣera kīṭa haite muñi se laghiṣṭha



mora nāma śune yei, tāra puṇya kṣaya

mora nāma laya yei, tāra pāpa haya

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (5.205—206)



“I am more wicked than Jagāi and Mādhāi and even lower
than a worm in stool. Anyone who hears my name loses the
results of his pious activities, and anyone who takes my
name incurs sin.”

The respected author identifies Śrī Ragunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, the eternal associate of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, as his spiritual master.



śrī-govinda, śrī-caitanya, śrī-nityānanda

śrī-advaita, śrī-bhakta, āra śrī-śrotṛ-vṛnda



śrī-svarūpa, śrī-rūpa, śrī-sanātana

śrī-raghunātha-dāsa śrī-guru, śrī-jīva-caraṇa



iṅhā-sabāra caraṇa-kṛpā ya lekhāya āmāre

āra eka hayaóteṅho ati-kṛpā kare

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā (20.96—98)



“I have written this book by the mercy of the lotus feet
of Śrī Govinda-deva, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Lord
Nityānanda, Advaita Ācārya, other devotees, and the

                             5
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

readers of this book, as well as Svarūpa Dāmodara
Gosvāmī, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who is my spiritual master, and
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. A Supreme Personality has also favored
me.”

Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī ends nearly every chapter of Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta by writing:



śrī-rūpa-raghunātha-pade yāra āśa

caitanya-caritāmṛta kahe kṛṣṇadāsa

“Always praying at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī
Raghunātha for their mercy, I, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja,
recite this Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.”



Therein the author describes many jewels such as Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka, spoken by Śrīman Mahāprabhu, Śrī Rūpa-śikṣā
(Mahāprabhu’s instructions to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī), Śrī
Sanātana-śikṣā (Mahāprabhu’s instructions to Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī), Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda
(Mahāprabhu’s discussions with Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda), and
the questions and answers between Śrī Gopīnātha Ācārya
and Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya. Each of these discussions
gives the essence of all the scriptures. Each of them
contains a perfect description of the conclusive truths
concerning sambandha (one’s relationship with Bhagavān),
abhidheya (one’s activities in that relationship), and
prayojana (the ultimate goal of life).

In the conversation between Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda and
Śrīman Mahāprabhu, the prema of Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
established as the crest-jewel of all attainments. Later
in the conversation, Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda describes the
very elevated state of devotional love called prema-
vilasa-vivarta. Prema-vilāsa-vivarta is a high level of
prema experienced by Śrīmatī Rādhikā when, even at the
time of separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, due the influence of
adhirūḍha-mahābhāva, Śrīmatī Rādhikā feels that She is
meeting with Him.

Upon hearing of this supremely exalted state, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu accepted it as the soul’s ultimate goal.
Śrīman Mahāprabhu also accepted that following in the
footsteps of the sakhīs of Vraja is the only method by
which to attain this ultimate goal. By hearing with
complete faith this conversation between Śrī Rāmānanda
Rāya and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, one will achieve
prema-bhakti to the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and
automatically, as a secondary result, one will also
achieve complete knowledge of kṛṣṇa-tattva, rādhā-
tattva, prema-tattva, and rasa-tattva — the fundamental
truths regarding the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, His
eternal consort Śrī Rādhā, the love They share, and the
varieties of exchanges between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
intimate associates.

Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya was the governor of the southern
regions of the kingdom ruled by the heroic Orissan King

                             6
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Mahārāja Pratāparudra. Residing in Vidyānagara on the
banks of the holy river Godāvarī, (present day Kobūra,
Rājamundarī, in Andhra Pradesh) he performed his
administrative duties.

On His journey to South India, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
took darśana of Jiyaḍa-nṛsiṁha, after which He went to
the bank of the Godāvarī for His early morning bath. Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya was also there taking bath, appearing
like royalty and surrounded by many brāhmaṇas chanting
Vedic mantras.

There they met, and were thoroughly struck by each
other. Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya invited Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu to spend a few days in that place. On his
insistence, Śrīman Mahāprabhu accepted the invitation
and stayed on for several days at the house of a Vedic
Vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇa.

On the day of their meeting, at dusk, Śrī Rāmānanda
Rāya, wearing the dress of an ordinary person, returned
to the bank of the river to meet Śrīman Mahāprabhu, who
instructed him to present statements from various Vedic
literatures on both the living entity’s sādhya (ultimate
goal) and sādhana (process by which the goal is
attained).

Initially Rāmānanda Rāya suggested varṇāśrama as
practiced by ordinary persons. Śrīman Mahāprabhu finally
accepted jñāna-śūnya śuddha-bhakti as the goal.

Asked by Mahāprabhu to say more about bhakti, Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya first explained pure devotional
attraction to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He then successively described
love for Kṛṣṇa in the mood of a servant (dāsya-prema),
in the mood of a friend (sakhya-prema), and in the mood
of a parent (vātsalya-prema), and finally he explained
kāntā-prema, the love of a female beloved for Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
as the essence of all ultimate attainments. On the
platform of varieties of scriptural evidence, Rāmānanda
Rāya also showed how kāntā-prema is the essence of all
perfection.

Upon Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s acceptance of kāntā-prema as
the soul’s ultimate goal, Śrīman Rāmānanda Rāya went on
to describe the prema of Śrīmatī Rādhikā as the topmost.
Hearing this, Śrīman Mahāprabhu became extremely
pleased. He asked him to then describe the nature of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and also the nature of rasa-
tattva and prema-tattva. Using examples from scripture
as a basis, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya gave a most detailed,
sequential account of these topics.

When Śrīman Mahāprabhu instructed him to explain these
subjects more extensively, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya sang a
self-composed song extolling the state of prema-vilāsa-
vivarta, which is comprised of the feelings of
separation from Kṛṣṇa experienced in adhirūḍha-
bhāva[i]1.

Finally, upon the request of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya established the exclusive cultivation of
devotional service under the guidance of the sakhīs of
Vraja to be the one and only method of attaining the

                             7
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

ultimate perfection of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s direct, loving
service.

After many nights of continuously hearing and discussing
topics about Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, upon receiving the
direct darśana of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s mūla-tattva (His
own true identity as Śrī Kṛṣṇa covered by the sentiments
and complexion of Śrī Rādhā) and His sva-svarūpa (His
form as a sannyāsī), Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya fell
unconscious.

With the supremely cooling touch of His lotus hands,
Śrīman Mahāprabhu roused him, and after releasing him
from His embrace, forbade him from revealing His form
and identity to anyone.

Mahāprabhu ordered Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya to abandon his
royal responsibilities and go to live in Śrī Jagannātha
Purī. He told him that after visiting various holy
places in South India, He would return there to Śrī
Jagannātha Purī, and together they would dwell in
complete happiness, hearing and chanting topics of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes for the rest of their lives.

Some years ago, I spent the month of Puruṣottama in Śrī
Jagannātha Purī, discussing this conversation between
Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya and Śrīman Mahāprabhu in depth. At
the time, my dear daughter Savitā expertly took
extensive notes. Later she gave those notes to my dear
daughter Madhu Khandelval M.A., Ph.D. for editing. By
adding Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Amṛta-pravāha
commentary on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda’s Anubhāṣya
commentary on the same, as well as a range of evidence
from various books such as Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Vidagdha-mādhava, and Lalita-mādhava,
she produced a highly attractive and comprehensive
manuscript. In completion, I made some further
corrections and enhancements to the work. My hope is
that the faithful readers will be benefited tremendously
by reading and following this book.

I pray that Their Lordships Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga-
Gāndharvikā-Giridhārī may shower Their mercy upon
everyone who contributed in various ways to the book’s
production.

Owing to the book’s swift production, it will naturally
contain some grammatical and typographical errors. If
the kind readers would indicate these to me for
correction, then the next edition will be improved.
There is no need to say anything further about this.




Śrī Nandotsava




Kṛṣṇa Navamī

                             8
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




31 Śrāvaṇa, 520 Caitanyābda




17th August, 2006




Begging a particle of the mercy of Śrī Hari, Guru, and
Vaiṣṇavas,




Tridaṇḍi-bhikṣu




Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa




Maṅgalācaraṇa




8.1

sañcārya rāmābhidha-bhakta-meghe

sva-bhakti-siddhānta-cayāmṛtāni

gaurābdhir etair amunā vitīrṇais

taj-jñatva-ratnālayatāṁ prayāti



Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu is a boundless, nectarean ocean
of the established conclusions of devotion (bhakti-
siddhāntas), and His devotee Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya is the
cloud whom He filled with these conclusions about
devotion to Him. When Mahāprabhu experienced the rain of
bhakti-tattvas that the Rāmānanda-cloud showered upon
Him, He was transformed into an ocean of jewels.




                              9
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017



Vivṛtti



śrī śrī guru-gauraṇgau jayataḥ



namaḥ oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya gaura-preṣṭhāya bhutale

śrī-śrīmad-bhakti-prajñāna-keśava iti nāmine

atimartya-caritrāya svāśritānāñ ca pāline

jīva-duḥke sadārttāya śrī-nāma-prema-dāyine



gaurāśraya-vigrahāya kṛṣṇa-kāmaika-cāriṇe

rūpānuga-pravarāya vinodeti svarūpiṇī

prabhupādāntaraṅgāya sarvasadguṇaśāline

māyāvāda-tamoghnāya vedāntārthavide namaḥ



namaḥ oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhutale

śrīmate bhaktisiddhānta sarasvatīti nāmine



namo bhaktivinodāya saccidānanda-nāmine

gauraśakti-svarūpāya rūpānugavarāya te

yena vistārito gaura kṛpayā rasasāgaraḥ

viśākhikāsvarūpaṁ taṁ rāmānandamahaṁ bhaje



namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne gaura-tviṣe namaḥ



Millions and millions of times I reverently place my
head at the lotus feet of my most venerable holy master
oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Only by his causeless mercy and
inspiration has a person as fallen as I am been able to
to write this vivṛtti, or commentary, on the discussion
between Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
I also repeatedly offer my obeisances to the spotlessly
pure, transcendental lotus feet of the universal
preceptor, Śrīla Prabhupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and to the lotus feet of Śrīla
Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who is the Bhagīratha

                             10
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

of Bhakti-Bhāgīrathī, the Ganges River of pure
devotional service. [He is addressed thus because, just
as Bhagīratha Mahārāja ushered the descent of the River
Ganges to this world, Bhaktivinoda restored the flow of
the Ganges River of pure devotional service, as
inaugurated by Śrīman Mahāprabhu; thus Bhaktivinoda’s
feet bestow pure devotion.] Both these great
personalities have manifested the very deep,
confidential essence of the Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya Saṁvāda,
through their respective commentaries on the
ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta, namely Anubhāṣya and Amṛta-
pravāha.

I surrender myself in turn at the lotus feet of Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya, who is Viśākhā Sakhī in the pastimes of
Vraja and who expanded the ocean of rasa (transcendental
mellows) by the mercy of Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu.
Finally, while holding in my heart Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari, who is Śrī Kṛṣṇa covered by the complexion
and sentiments of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, I begin to write this
vivṛtti (commentary) on ŚrīRāmānandaSaṁvāda.




Sañcārya — infusing. It is common knowledge that water
evaporates from the ocean by the heat of the sun. The
resultant vapor, having been purified of the ocean’s
salty nature, transforms into a cloud. When this cloud
passes over a forest or collides into a mountain, the
same water falls as rain and again returns to the ocean.
Should that rain fall at the time of the Svāti
constellation (nakṣatra), the oysters in the ocean,
accepting this rain-water, produce pearls. The ocean,
now filled with precious stones, becomes known as the
abode of jewels (ratnākara).

With this metaphor, the author conveys that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is the ocean of the jewels of bhakti-
siddhānta, and Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda is the rain-cloud
filled with ambrosia. This Mahāprabhu, who is the
unlimited ocean of the truths about bhakti, has covertly
infused the heart of Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya with the vapor
of the nectarean flow of mellows in servitorship —
dāsya, friendship — sakhya, parenthood — vātsalya, and
conjugal relationship — mādhurya rasa. This incomparable
flow of nectar rained into the ëoysters’ of Mahāprabhu’s
ears, where they transformed into the precious jewels of
siddhāntas which the Lord drank. Thus He became the
ocean laden with the jewels of bhakti-siddhānta.

This meaning emanates directly from Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
himself. Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya spoke the following
essential statement:



eta tattva mora citte kaile prakāśana

brahmāke veda yena paḍāila nārāyaṇa




                             11
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

antaryāmī īśvarera ei rīti haye

bāhire nā kahe, vastu prakāśe hṛdaye

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā (8.263—264)



“You have manifested all these transcendental truths in
my heart, just as Nārāyaṇa educated Lord Brahmā. The
Supreme Lord dwelling within everyone’s heart speaks not
externally but from within, and in this way He gives
instruction.”



Rāmābhidha-bhakta-meghe. The crown jewel of rasikas, Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya, is the eternal associate of Śrī Gaurāṅga
Mahāprabhu, who is the unfathomable ambrosial ocean of
bhakti-siddhānta. This cloud-like devotee known as
“Rāma” is supremely enchanting, desirable, alluring, and
delectable. The choice of the adjective bhakta in this
verse signifies that it is only in the hearts of
devotees that the truths about devotion (bhakti-tattva)
can manifest. No one else has the ability to bear the
power that comes from these truths. Śrīman Rāmānanda
Rāya is that devotee-cloud who can carry the weight of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s own bhakti-siddhānta and then
distribute it to others as rainfall. After this shower
of devotion was collected by the ocean of devotional
sentiments in that devotee’s heart, this rain of
devotion bestowed an even more astonishing,
indescribable taste for Mahāprabhu to experience.

Sva-bhakti-siddhānta-cayāmṛtāni — the nectarean
collection of truths about the devotional service
relating to Himself.



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (1.4)



“May the son of Śrīmatī Śacī-devī, Śrī Gaurahari,
forever manifest spontaneously within the innermost core
of your heart. Adorned with the radiant splendor of
molten gold, He has descended (avatīrṇaḥ) in the Age of
Kali by His causeless mercy to bestow upon the world
that which has not been given for a long time — the
beauty of His own brilliantly radiant ujjvala-prema-rasa
bhakti, service in the highest mellow of amorous love.”

In this verse, the word sva-bhakti refers to the
supremely nectarean service performed in svārasikī-
upāsanā[ii]1 under the guidance of the mañjarīs. Only
this is the jīvas’ topmost goal. Before the advent of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu no one had manifested this for the
sādhakas.


                             12
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



In regard to the execution of this mañjarī sevā, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā becomes the object of Her maidservant’s
permanent ecstatic emotion (sthāyi-bhāva) and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
becomes the object of the maidservant’s transitory
emotion that nourishes the sthāyi-bhāva. This is then
called the sañcārī-bhāva. In this service, the mañjarīs
lovingly tend to Śrī Kṛṣṇa because He is the love of
Rādhā’s life and gives Her happiness. Thus, this sva-
bhakti-siddhānta, sweet as nectar, is the philosophical
understanding embodied in the followers of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī, who established the rāgānuga-rūpānuga-
siddhānta-[iii]2. This is the essence and the foundation
of the ultimate expression of love.

Pure devotion, or bhakti, is always supremely relishable
because it is joyful by nature. The possessor of this
bhakti, which culminates in mahābhāva, is Śrīman
Mahāprabhu Himself. The ocean of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
contains no trace of saltiness. Rather, it is full of
ambrosial devotional mellows (rasa). An ocean such as He
has no deficiency, is complete in every respect, and is
free from dangerous creatures such as sharks and
crocodiles — meaning “fruitive action (karma),
ritualistic worship (upāsanā), and empirical speculative
knowledge (jñāna).” This ocean, filled with unending
varieties of nectar, is most attractive to the heart.
There are no huge, treacherous and deafening waves;
instead there are gently billowing waves of meeting and
separation (saṁyoga and viyoga), in which both Bhagavān
and the devotee remain blissfully submerged.

Gaurābdhir etair amunā vitīrṇaiḥ. Gaurābdhi means the
“Gaura-ocean.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is akhila-rasāmṛta-sindhu,
the complete ocean of nectarean flavors, is gaurābdhi,
the golden ocean. The word amunā means “by him,” as in
the sense of “distributed to, or rained upon by the
cloud named Rāmānanda.” Thus, the import is that Śrīman
Mahāprabhu impelled the Rāmānanda-cloud to rain the
ambrosial conclusions of His own bhakti upon the ocean
of His own self. These siddhāntas imperceptibly appeared
in Rāmānanda Rāya’s heart, and he in turn revealed them
to Mahāprabhu. Then, Mahāprabhu again relished the mercy
which He had imperceptibly bestowed upon Śrī Rāmānanda
Rāya, and He accepted these jewels of devotion, or
bhakti-ratnas.

In Śrī Bhagavad-gītā (18.55), Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa says,
“bhaktyā mām abhijānāti — I am only understood by pure
devotion.” Therefore, for the welfare of the entire
world, Mahāprabhu posed questions, and Rāmānanda Rāya
answered Him.

Taj-jñatva-ratnālayatāṁ prayāti. The knowledge of this
bhakti-siddhānta has been referred to here as a ratna,
or precious jewel. When these devotional conclusions are
soaked in bhakti-rasa and enter the ears of a single-
pointed devotee, he becomes like an ocean of jewels.

Mahāprabhu inspired the heart of Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya.
Śrīman Mahāprabhu then personally listened in order to
establish the topmost example, and thus encourage in
others, also, an eagerness to hear. Those jewels have

                             13
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

now appeared in the form of this book, which presents
the crest jewel of all spiritual perfections.

Śrīman Mahāprabhu already knew every aspect of bhakti-
siddhānta in full. If this were not so, how could He
have empowered the heart of Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya with all
devotional conclusions? Then, the question naturally
arises: how was it that the Lord gained knowledge of
siddhānta by hearing from the lotus mouth of Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya? What is the meaning of this?

The answer is that previously Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
knowledge had simply been jñāna, theory; but after
hearing from Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, that knowledge became
vijñāna, realized knowledge. Jñāna and vijñāna are not
the same thing. Here, jñāna refers to ordinary
knowledge, whereas vijñāna entails special knowledge,
which is full of realization. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa said to
Lord Brahmā:



jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me

yad vijñāna-samanvitam

sarahasyaṁ tad-aṅgañ ca

gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.9.30)



“O Brahmā, knowledge concerning Me is absolute, non-dual
(advaya), and supremely confidential. Even though it is
without differentiation, it is eternally divided into
four categories: jñāna (theoretical knowledge), vijñāna
(realized knowledge), rahasya (confidential knowledge),
and tad-aṅga (concomitant parts of that knowledge, or
the limbs of devotion). By your intelligence, as a jīva,
you cannot understand this; by My mercy, now realize it.
Jñāna is My svarūpa (original form or essential
identity). Vijñāna is the knowledge pertaining to bhakti
to Me. My rahasya (secret knowledge) is the minute jīva.
Pradhāna (the unmanifested modes of material nature in
its original and undifferentiated state) is My jñānāṅga
(limb of jñāna, or knowledge). The eternal non-duality
and confidential differences of these four tattvas are
all transformations of My potency, which is
simultaneously one with and different from Me (acintya-
bheda-abheda-śakti).”



Here, jñāna indicates kṛṣṇa-tattva; vijñāna denotes
rādhā-tattva; rahasya signifies the tattva of prema; and
tad-aṅga means tattva of Śrīmatī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
loving pastimes (vilāsa).

One can obtain Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is acintya-bheda-
abheda-tattva (simultaneously one with and different
from His own multifarious energies), only by the process
of sādhana-bhakti. Knowledge that we grasp by hearing

                             14
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

from another is called jñāna, which when realized in the
heart, is then called vijñāna. It was vijñāna that
Śrīman Mahāprabhu obtained from Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya.

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the viṣaya, the enjoyer or object
of bhakti. He is not the āśraya, the abode of bhakti. He
is completely unaware of the feelings aroused in the
heart of the sādhaka by his devotional service to Him.
The devotee serves Him in one of four relationships:
dāsya (servitorship), sakhya (fraternity), vātsalya
(parental affection), or madhura-bhāva (amorous love).

Thus, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the viṣaya, or object of devotion of
all the various āśraya-jātīya devotees, those who are
the shelters, or receptacles, of divine love. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
does not have the loving sentiments of the devotees who
the receptacles of divine love (āśraya-jātīya). He
cannot taste the supreme, indescribable happiness that
Śrīmatī Rādhikā feels when She sees His enchanting form.
How is it possible for Śrī Kṛṣṇa to experience the state
of happiness that Śrīmatī Rādhikā reaches in the stage
of rāga and anurāga[iv]3, and especially in the stage of
mādanākhya-mahābhāva[v]4?

Kṛṣṇa wanted to know: “What are the glories of Śrī
Rādhā’s praṇaya[vi]5 (intense love)? What type of
happiness does She experience in loving service to Me?
How does She taste the nectar of My sweetness?”

To fulfill these desires, Śrī Kṛṣṇa accepted Her mood
and complexion, and coming as the āśraya (the shelter or
receptacle of the divine love), He appeared in this
world as Śrī Gaurasundara. He infused the heart of Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya with the conclusions of His own bhakti-
rasa (the ambrosia of devotion).



śrī-rādhāyāḥ praṇaya-mahimā kīdṛśo vānayaivā-

svādyo yenādbhuta-madhurimā kīdṛśo vā madīyaḥ

saukhyañ cāsyā mad-anubhavataḥ kīdṛśaṁ veti lobhāt

tad-bhāvāḍhyaḥ samajani śacī-garbha-sindhau harīnduḥ

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (4.230)



It is only by the influence of His mercy potency (kṛpā-
śakti) that the Lord’s desire could be fulfilled. In Śrī
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta it is told how Śrī Gopa-kumāra
bestowed realization of ecstatic love upon his disciple
in the same manner. He simply placed his lotus hand on
the head of his disciple, who then realized everything.
This example illuminates a secret: should the jīva wish
to receive the ecstasy of the fundamental truths
regarding Bhagavān, he should hear only from the devotee
who possesses such realization. The pastimes of Śrī Hari
are naturally stored only in the heart of such a
devotee. Such narrations, full of transcendental
knowledge and bliss, cause the listeners to also relish
them.

                             15
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Meets Rāmānanda Rāya




8.2

jaya jaya śrī-caitanya jaya nityānanda

jayādvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vṛnda



All glories to Śrī Caitanya-deva! All glories to Śrī
Nityānanda! All glories to Śrī Advaita! All glories to
the devotees of Śrī Gaurāṅga!



8.3

pūrva-rīte prabhu āge gamana karilā

ëjiyaḍa-nṛsiṁha’-kṣetre katadine gelā



Śrīman Mahāprabhu continued His tour, and everywhere, as
previously, He converted the people into Vaiṣṇavas, and
submerged them in the ocean of prema-bhakti-rasa. After
a few days, He came to the holy place named Jiyaḍa-
Nṛsiṁha.




Jiyaḍa-Nṛsiṁha kṣetra. Five miles from Viśākhāpaṭṭanam
is a place named Siṁhācala, where there is now a railway
station. There, upon a mountain, is a temple of Lord Śrī
Nṛsiṁha-deva. This temple in Viśākhāpaṭṭanam is the most
famous and affluent above all others. The excellence of
its architecture captivates the minds of all. There is
one engraved stone plaque commemorating that the
devotionally minded wife of King Tṛtīya Goṁkāra
decorated the deity with gold leaf.

The servants of Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva reside there, along
with the local people. On top of the mountain, adjoining
the temple are many houses for the visiting pilgrims.
The outer section of the main temple houses the śrī
vijaya-vigraha, the smaller deity who is taken out on
street processions during festivals, while the inner
sanctum of the temple accommodates the original deity of
Bhagavān Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva. Devotees of the Śrī Rāmānuja
Vaiṣṇava sampradāya perform the worship of Śrī Nṛsiṁha-
deva, under the patronage of the king of Vijaya-nagara.


                             16
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

Some people also say that the deity of Bhagavān Śrī
Nṛsiṁha-deva once gave His special mercy to a devotee
named Jīyaḍa; and for this reason, the deity took the
name Jiyaḍa-Nṛsiṁha. Thus the place came to be known as
Jiyaḍa-Nṛsiṁha-kṣetra.



8.4

nṛsiṁha dekhiyā kaila daṇḍavat-praṇati

premāveśe kaila bahu nṛtya-gīta-stuti



Taking darśana of Bhagavān Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu fully prostrated Himself before the deity.
Then, absorbed in prema He sang and danced, and
afterwards offered many types of prayers and
glorifications of the Lord.




Here, some people may consider that because Śrī
Gaurasundara is Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, endowed
with the mood and complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhikā (rādhā-
bhāva-dyuti-suvalita śrī-kṛṣṇa-svarūpa), surely He will
hold only the ecstatic mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, tasting
exclusive prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa of Vraja. Why, then, does
He become absorbed in prema by having the darśana of Śrī
Nṛsiṁha-deva, who is in the mood of awe and majesty?

Our Gosvāmīs provide the answer. They state that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the quintessence of all the incarnations of
Bhagavān, the Supreme Person. He is the personification
of all transcendental mellows (akhila-rasāmṛta-murti),
the shelter of unlimited varieties of rasa, and the
personification of wonderful, extraordinary
transcendental sentiments. Only by tasting each of the
unique varieties of rasa does the taste of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
sweetness reach its fullness. Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva is also a
form of Bhagavān. Thus, there is a particular variety of
rasa, or flavor, in Him. Therefore, on the day when
Śrīman Mahāprabhu had darśana of Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva, His
heart developed a desire to taste that special flavor.
Upon that desire being completely satisfied, He became
absorbed in prema and began to dance and perform
kīrtana.



8.5

“śrī-nṛsiṁha, jaya nṛsiṁha, jaya jaya nṛsiṁha

prahlādeśa jaya padmā-mukha-padma-bhṛṅga”



“All glories to Bhagavān Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva! All glories
to the Lord of Śrī Prahlāda! All glories to You who are

                             17
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

like a bumblebee always hovering about the lotus-like
face of Śrī Lakṣmī-devī. All glories to You.




Śrīdhara Svāmī has composed the following two verses in
his commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.1.1 and 10.87.1),
as a means of offering his obeisances to Lord Nṛsiṁha-
deva:



prahlāda-hṛdayāhlādaṁ bhaktā-vidyā-vidāraṇam

śarad-indu-ruciṁ vande pārīndra-vadanaṁ harim

vāg-īśā yasya vadane lakṣmīr yasya ca vakṣasi

yasyāste hṛdaye saṁvit taṁ nṛsiṁha ahaṁ bhaje



“I offer my prayers to Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva, who always
gives happiness to the heart of His devotee Śrī
Prahlāda, who always dispels the ignorance of the
devotees, and who is endowed with a complexion as
effulgent as the autumnal full moon. I offer my prayers
to that Bhagavān Śrī Nṛsiṁha, upon whose tongue
Sarasvatī, the goddess of speech, eternally stays, upon
whose chest Lakṣmī always resides, and in whose heart
dwells the transcendental potency of spiritual
consciousness.”

While describing the speciality of the mercy of Śrī
Bhagavān, Śrīman Mahāprabhu glorifies Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva
through the following verse, personally composed by Śrī
Śrīdhara Svāmī (in his commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
7.9.1).



8.6

ugro ‘py anugra evāyaṁ sva-bhaktānāṁ nṛ-keśarī

keśarīva sva-potānām anyeṣām ugra-vikramaḥ



“Just as a lion is exceedingly cruel, powerful, and a
cause of great fear for others, yet is very affectionate
and merciful to his own cubs, Bhagavān Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva
is exceedingly ferocious towards demons such as
Hiraṇyakaśipu, yet He is always full of affection for
Prahlāda and His other devotees.”



8.7

ei-mata nānā śloka paḍi’ stuti kaila


                             18
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

nṛsiṁha-sevaka mālā-prasāda āni’ dila



In this way, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu recited many
different verses in glorification of Bhagavān Śrī
Nṛsiṁha. Seeing Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s devotional
sentiments, Lord Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva’s servant then brought
garlands and the remnants of the Lord’s food and offered
them to Him.



8.8

pūrvavat kona vipre kaila nimantraṇa

sei rātri tāṅhā rahi’ karilā gamana



As happened before, a brāhmaṇa came with an invitation
for Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. The Lord passed the night
there, and early the next morning, He again commenced
His tour.



8.9

prabhāte uṭhiyā prabhu calilā premāveśe

dig-vidik nāhi jñāna rātri-divase



The next morning, Śrīman Mahāprabhu rose and being
absorbed in prema started out again on His tour. Owing
to His great ecstasy, He had no knowledge of the proper
direction, or whether it was day or night.



8.10

pūrvavat ëvaiṣṇava’ kari’ sarva loka-gaṇe

godāvarī-tīre prabhu āilā katadine



As before, Śrīman Caitanya-deva converted all the jīvas
there to Vaiṣṇavism, and after some days the Lord
reached the banks of the river Godāvarī.



8.11

godāvarī dekhi’ ha-ila ëyamunā’-smaraṇa

tīre vana dekhi’ smṛti haila vṛndāvana



                             19
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


As soon as Śrīman Mahāprabhu caught sight of the river
Godāvarī, He remembered the river Śrī Yamunā, a vision
of which manifested in His heart. Thus absorbed, when He
saw the forest on the banks of the Godāvarī, Śrī
Vṛndāvana appeared upon the screen of His heart. He
understood the Godāvarī to be the Yamunā, and the forest
there to be Vṛndāvana.




The symptom of the mahā-bhāgavata (the devotee on the
highest platform of devotional service) is that wherever
he goes and whatever he sees become uddīpana (stimulants
or causes of remembrance) of his worshipable Lord and
all that is related to Him. Seeing the purifying holy
water of the Godāvarī caused within Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
mind an awakening of the water-associated pastimes of
Vraja. He remembered especially the emperor of all Vraja
pastimes, the rāsa-līlā, because it occurred in Śrīdhāma
Vṛndāvana on the banks of the river Yamunā. Therefore,
He became immersed in the fathomless ocean of Vraja’s
sweetness.




8.12

sei vane katakṣaṇa kari’ nṛtya-gāna

godāvarī pāra hañā tāṅhā kaila snāna



Mahāprabhu remained for some time in that sanctified
forest, singing and dancing. Afterwards, the Lord
crossed the river and took His bath on the other bank.



8.13

ghāṭa chāḍi’ kata-dūre jala-sannidhāne

vasi’ prabhu kare kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtane



After bathing in the river, Śrī Caitanya-deva left the
bathing place and walked a little distance from there.
Sitting near the water, He engaged in chanting the holy
name of Kṛṣṇa.




Here some may enquire as to why Mahāprabhu did not
remain seated at that holy bathing place to perform
nāma-saṅkīrtana. Why did He move a little distance away

                             20
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

on the same shore? Our Gosvāmīs have explained that the
continuous traffic of persons bathing at the ghāṭa, or
bathing place, could have presented an obstacle to His
tasting the nectar of chanting the holy name. Therefore,
Mahāprabhu chose a place that was more suitable for
kīrtana.



8.14

hena-kāle dolāya caḍi’ rāmānanda rāya

snāna karibāre āilā, bājanā bājāya



At that time, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, sitting in a special
palanquin fit for a king, arrived there to take his
bath. Accompanying him were musicians playing on their
instruments.




Why were they playing music? Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura explains that it was customary at the time to
have musicians preceding any famous royal officer on his
journeys. Thus, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, seated in a
palanquin and accompanied by instrumental music, was
offered the appropriate royal respect as he traveled
towards the bathing place where Mahāprabhu sat.



8.15

tāṅra saṅge bahu āilā vaidika brāhmaṇa

vidhi-mate kaila teṅho snānādi-tarpaṇa



Many Vedic brāhmaṇas were accompanying Śrī Rāmānanda
Rāya, who took his bath according to the Vedic rituals
and offered oblations.




In this Bengali verse, the word vidhi-mata, meaning
“according to the Vedic system” does not indicate the
smārta method of ritualistic worship, which is based
simply on an external understanding of the system of
varṇāśrama-dharma. Rather, it is understood that Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya performed his bathing and offering of
oblations to his ancestors according to the Vaiṣṇava
methods prescribed in literatures such as Śrī Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa.

Some so-called intelligent and learned persons say that
Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya was personally well-versed in the

                             21
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Vedas, and that although he was a pure devotee, he still
followed varṇāśrama-dharma with complete faith; indeed,
he himself was the foundation of the varṇāśrama system.
Therefore, he performed the activities of taking bath
and offering oblations to his forefathers according to
the injunctions of the scriptures.

Yet the great and learned spiritual master Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has refuted this by
stating that Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya was a śuddha-bhakta, and
that there is no need at all for such a pure devotee to
follow the rules of varṇāśrama-dharma. The term śuddha-
bhakta actually means that such a person has abandoned
varṇāśrama-dharma and follows only devotional service to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa (śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhakti). It is for this reason that
Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya is said to be the topmost of all
devotees. From this it is clearly evident that Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya was not at all a follower of varṇāśrama-
dharma.



8.16

prabhu tāṅre dekhi’ jānilaóei rāma-rāya

tāṅhāre milite prabhura mana uṭhi’ dhāya



When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu saw Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, He
knew immediately who he was, and a great eagerness to
meet him awoke within the Lord’s mind.



8.17

tathāpi dhairya dhari’ prabhu rahilā vasiyā

rāmānanda āilā apūrva sannyāsī dekhiyā



Although Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was very eager to meet
him, He remained sitting patiently. Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya,
a little distance away from the bathing place, saw the
astonishing and wonderfully beautiful sannyāsī and came
near.



8.18

sūrya-śata-sama kānti, aruṇa vasana

suvalita prakāṇḍa deha, kamala-locana



The bodily effulgence of that sannyāsī was as brilliant
as unlimited suns. A saffron garment was covering the
Lord, who was large in body and very strongly built, and
whose eyes were like lotuses.

                             22
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017




It should be known that even though His bodily
effulgence was more brilliant than millions of suns, it
did not give any pain to the eyes; rather it bestowed a
great ecstasy.

8.19

dekhiyā tāṅhāra mane haila camatkāra

āsiyā karila daṇḍavat namaskāra



The sight of the astonishing sannyāsī struck the heart
of Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya with wonder. He approached Him and
respectfully prostrated himself, falling flat like a
stick before Him.




Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda was astonished to see the
extraordinary beauty of the Lord and His great
otherworldly effulgence. Because he was a pure devotee,
he fell flat like a stick at the divine feet of the
Lord.



8.20

uṭhi’ prabhu kahe,óuṭha, kaha ëkṛṣṇa’ ëkṛṣṇa’

tāre āliṅgite prabhura hṛdaya satṛṣṇa



Śrīman Mahāprabhu, seeing him offering obeisances, stood
up and said, “Please get up, please get up! Chant Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa!” Indeed, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was very eager
to embrace him.



8.21

tathāpi puchila,ó”tumi rāya rāmānanda?”

teṅho kahe,ó”haṅa muñi dāsa śūdra manda”



Although Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu understood who he was,
still He inquired, “Are you Rāya Rāmānanda?” To this, he
replied with great humility, “Yes, this unfortunate
śūdra is Your servant.”



                             23
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017


8.22

tabe tāre kaila prabhu dṛḍha āliṅgana

premāveśe prabhu-bhṛtya, doṅhe acetana



Hearing this, Śrīman Mahāprabhu then embraced Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya very firmly. Indeed, both the master and
the servant, absorbed in ecstatic love, lost
consciousness.

8.23

svābhāvika prema doṅhāra udaya karilā

duṅhāke āliṅgiyā duṅhe bhūmite paḍilā



Natural love for each other awakened in both their
hearts, and in their embrace, they both fell down to the
ground unconscious.




In Śrī Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Amṛta-
pravāha-bhāṣya it is stated that the prema between them
was natural. Actually, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya is Viśākhā
Sakhī in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Therefore, as Śrīman
Mahāprabhu is the combined form of Śrī Rādhā and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the natural love of the Divine Couple for Viśākhā
Sakhī, and the love of Viśākhā Sakhī for Them manifested
immediately upon their seeing each other.

Perfect, naturally occurring prema is not achievable by
spiritual practice (sādhana). The relationship between
the devotee and Bhagavān is something like this: when
the devotee sees his worshipful Lord, unlimited towering
waves of prema arise within his heart. And when Bhagavān
sees His devotee, then His bhakta-vātsalya, or
fathomless ocean of affection for the devotee, churns
within His heart. Thus both of them become bewildered.



8.24

stambha, sveda, aśru, kampa, pulaka, vaivarṇya

duṅhāra mukhete śuni’ gadgada ëkṛṣṇa’ varṇa



When they embraced each other, the eight ecstatic trans-
formations such as becoming stunned, perspiration,
tears, shivering, paleness, and horripilation, appeared
on their bodies. Their voices became choked, and both
began to chant “Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.”


                             24
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




They both tried to conceal their natural eternally
perfect love for each other, but they could not. Both
became helpless due to the towering waves of prema, and
their throats became choked.



8.25

dekhiyā brāhmaṇa-gaṇera haila camatkāra

vaidika brāhmaṇa saba karena vicāra



When the ritualistic Vedic brāhmaṇas who accompanied Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya saw this astonishing meeting, they were
wonderstruck. They reflected within their minds:



8.26

ëei ta’ sannyāsīra teja dekhi’ brahma-sama

śūdre āliṅgiyā kene karena krandana



8.27

ei mahārājaómahā-paṇḍita, gambhīra

sannyāsīra sparśe matta ha-ilā asthira’



“The effulgence of this sannyāsī is like Brahman itself,
but despite this, He is crying upon embracing this
śūdra, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya. Why is this?”

The Vedic brāhmaṇas considered Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya to be
a supremely learned personality, naturally very grave;
so why did he become so excited, like a mad person, upon
touching this sannyāsī?




The Vedic brāhmaṇas were considering Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
to be a śūdra, a member of the lowest social class. The
scriptures forbid sannyāsīs to touch members of the
śūdra community. “This sannyāsī, who is certainly very
effulgent,” the brāhmaṇas reflected, “is not only
touching Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, but He is binding him up in
His tight embrace. How can this be?”

Śrī Rāmānanda had indeed described himself as a śūdra
when he offered obeisances. In the district of

                             25
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Vidyānagara, he was the royal representative of King
Pratāparudra and had experienced all the enjoyment
befitting a ruler. Due to performing service to a king,
his nature and activities should have been inclined
towards irreligion. His dress and ornaments were that of
a servant of the king. Therefore, it was not proper for
a sannyāsī to touch him at all.

In fact, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya’s familial connection was
with the kṣatriya, or administrative class of persons.
Furthermore, he was a great śuddhabhakta, or pure
devotee. By declaring himself a śūdra, he manifested the
mood of tṛṇād-api sunīca, regarding himself lower in
status than the straw on the street. Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
was a parama-bhāgavata, or a devotee of the topmost
caliber, and a complete knower of bhakti-tattva. Because
the Vedic brāhmaṇas did not know the factual identity of
Mahāprabhu, they took Him for a mere sannyāsī. They also
considered Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya to be a supremely learned
personality, naturally very grave. Why, then, did he
become so restless, like a mad person, upon touching
this sannyāsī? This was the cause of the Vedic
brāhmaṇas’ astonishment.



8.28

ei-mata vipra-gaṇa bhāve mane mana

vijātīya loka dekhi’ prabhu kaila samvaraṇa



Śrīman Mahāprabhu is antaryāmī, or the indwelling
Supersoul and supreme witness in the heart of all.
Knowing that the brāhmaṇas’ sentiments were opposed to
pure devotion, He concealed His emotions.




Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda says that
these brāhmaṇas were opposed to Śrīman Mahāprabhu,
whereas Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya was indeed most favorably
disposed to Him, and was in fact a most surrendered and
intimate devotee. Despite being in close proximity to a
pure devotee, those brāhmaṇas maintained their faith in
the materialistic process of performing action with a
desire for the fruits (karma-kāṇḍa). For precisely this
reason, those brāhmaṇas are said to be non-devotees and
opposing elements. It is proper for devotees to conceal
loving exchanges in front of those who are not inclined
to serving Bhagavān and who are fixed in following the
materialistic path of karma.

8.29

sustha hañā duṅhe sei sthānete vasilā

tabe hāsi’ mahāprabhu kahite lāgilā



                             26
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


Concealing their emotions and regaining their external
consciousness, they again became sober and sat down
together. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu then smiled — it is
never possible to obstruct the joyful bliss of the
devotees — and began to speak.



8.30

“sārvabhauma bhaṭṭācārya kahila tomāra guṇe

tomāre milite more karila yatane



“O Rāya, before I came here, Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya
greatly extolled your good qualities, and insisted on My
meeting you.



8.31

tomā milibāre mora ethā āgamana

bhāla haila, anāyāse pāiluṅ daraśana”



“Indeed, I have come here only to meet you. It is very
good that with great ease I have gotten your audience.”



8.32

rāya kahe,ó”sārvabhauma kare bhṛtya-jñāna

parokṣeha mora hite haya sāvadhāna



Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda replied, “Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya
directly accepts me as his servant, and indirectly
always acts for my welfare.



8.33

tāṅra kṛpāya pāinu tomāra daraśana

āji saphala haila mora manuṣya-janama



“Only by his mercy, I have received darśana of Your
lotus feet today. By virtue of this, I now consider that
my human birth has become successful.”




                             27
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



Human birth is extremely rare. Only by the special mercy
of Bhagavān can one attain the human form of life. It is
impossible to perform bhajana (devotional service) of
Bhagavān in any other species; it is not even possible
as a demigod. The human body is itself the very root of
bhajana. Only by this human body is it possible to hear
topics of Lord Hari in the association of saintly
persons (sādhu-saṅga), take shelter at the feet of a
bona fide spiritual master, perform the limbs of
devotional service, become free from unwanted habits,
and develop through the stages of niṣṭhā (constant
engagement), ruci (taste), āsakti (attachment), etc.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.17) states:

nṛ-deham ādyaṁ sulabhaṁ sudurlabhaṁ

plavaṁ sukalpaṁ guru-karṇadhāram

mayānukūlena nabhasvateritaṁ

pumān bhavābdhiṁ na taret sa ātma-hā



“It is said that the human form of life is the basis of
all auspiciousness. It is a good boat by which one can
cross the ocean of birth and death. In the human form of
life, one may obtain the guidance of a good navigator,
the spiritual master. One also gets the assistance of a
favorable wind — the instructions and the mercy of Kṛṣṇa
as given in the scriptures. If, however, one does not
take advantage of this opportunity and wastes the human
form of life, then he is a killer of his own self.”

It is according to this reasoning that Śrī Rāmānanda
Rāya now considered his human form of life successful,
having obtained the darśana of the lotus feet of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu.



8.34

sārvabhaume tomāra kṛpā,ótāra ei cihna

aspṛśya sparśile hañā tāṅra premādhīna



Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya continued, “I can see that You have
bestowed great mercy upon Śrī Sārvabhauma. The proof of
this is that, being controlled by his love, You have
touched me, although I am an untouchable.



8.35

kāṅhā tumiósākṣāt īśvara nārāyaṇa

kāṅhā muñiórāja-sevaka viṣayī śūdrādhama


                             28
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



“Who are You? You are the Supreme Controller Nārāyaṇa
Himself. And who am I? I am a materialist enjoying royal
opulences, a most fallen śūdra engaged in enjoying the
objects of the senses.



8.36

mora sparśe nā karile ghṛṇā, veda-bhaya

mora darśana tomā vede niṣedhaya



“The Vedic injunctions have forbidden You to even look
at me, however You have not considered these
prohibitions and You did not feel contemptuous of my
touch. Indeed, it is forbidden for sannyāsīs like You to
even see persons such as myself.




Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura says that in this
verse, Śrīla Rāmānanda Rāya sees himself as a most
fallen materialistic śūdra. It is true that he did not
take birth in a family of brāhmaṇas; rather, he was a
transcendental brāhmaṇa initiated according to the
ekāyana[vii]6 branch of the Vedic tree.



Thus, he was a pure mahā-bhāgavata, a liberated devotee
of the highest order, devoid of any material desires.
The high-born Vedic brāhmaṇas had been initiated into
the performance of all varieties of yajñas after
studying thousands of branches of the Vedas. Considering
Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya to be a śūdra, they thus guaranteed
themselves entry to the hellish regions, as is confirmed
in the Padma Purāṇa: “vīkṣate jāti-sāmānyāt sa yāti
narakaṁ-dhruvam — a person rushes to hell when he
considers a devotee of the Lord to belong to a
particular caste in terms of birth.”

Whosoever is desirous of factual spiritual attainment
and genuine auspiciousness should become the servant of
the servant of Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya.



8.37

tomāra kṛpāya tomāya karāya nindya-karma

sākṣāt īśvara tumi, ke jāne tomāra marma



“Your mercy alone makes You perform this condemnable
act. You are directly the Supreme Controller Himself,

                             29
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

however You are controlled by bhakti. Who can understand
Your true purpose?




Śrīla Prabhupāda says that it is improper for sannyāsīs
to see materialistic persons or to associate with
śūdras, but being controlled by His own mercy,
Mahāprabhu did not consider Śrī Rāmānanda’s position as
a śūdra. Thus He performed the ëdespicable’ act of
touching him. Being controlled by prema, Bhagavān has
indeed performed dishonorable acts in repeatedly, such
as becoming the chariot driver of Arjuna, eating the
remnant fruits of the lowborn woman Śabarī, and
associating with the hunchback woman Kubjā.



8.38

āmā nistārite tomāra iṅhā āgamana

parama-dayālu tumi patita-pāvana

“You have come here only to deliver me. You are the
ultimate storehouse of mercy and You purify the fallen
souls.



8.39

mahānta-svabhāva ei tārite pāmara

nija kārya nāhi tabu yāna tāra ghara



“By Your own magnanimous nature, You always deliver the
fallen and sinful souls. You have no personal business
of Your own, nor do You seek self-profit. Still for the
benefit of the living entities, You travel from house to
house. The purpose of Your life is only to deliver the
fallen souls.



8.40

mahad-vicalanaṁ nṛṇāṁ

gṛhiṇāṁ dīna-cetasām

niḥśreyasāya bhagavan

nānyathā kalpate kvacit



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.8.4)



                             30
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


“?ëMy dear Lord, sometimes great souls go to the homes
of householders, who are generally fallen and deprived
of the association of saintly persons. They do this
simply for the eternal good fortune of such family
persons, because often those family persons are so
immersed in material affairs that they are unable even
to visit the āśramas, or retreats of the sādhus.
Therefore, can there be any reason that You have visited
me other than for my auspiciousness?’?”




Śrī Nanda Mahārāja spoke this verse on the occasion of
Śrī Gargācārya’s visit to his house in Nandagāoṅ, at the
behest of Śrī Vasudeva. In this verse, the two words
gṛhiṇām (attached householders) and dīna-cetasām (who
are very lowly, being engaged in family maintenance and
nothing more) indicate Śrī Nanda Mahārāja’s humility. By
the influence of bhakti, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja considered
himself to be less significant than a straw in the
street. “Such saints do not even bestow their mercy upon
the demigods, but upon householders like us they rain a
profusion of mercy. Offering us protection, they are our
factual maintainers.”

Commenting on the word mahat in this verse, Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī says “mahatāṁ śrī bhagavat-sevaikaniṣṭhānāṁ —
this term is used to refer only to one who is absorbed
in the service of Bhagavān.” Does this indicate that
Śrīman Mahāprabhu is also a great devotee engaged in the
service of Bhagavān? No, He is directly the source of
all incarnations (avatārī). He is directly Nārāyaṇa
Himself.



8.41

āmāra saṅge brāhmaṇādi sahasreka jana

tomāra darśane sabāra dravī-bhūta mana



Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya continued, “There are uncountable
brāhmaṇas and other persons here with me. Behold how all
of their hearts have melted simply by seeing You.



8.42

ëkṛṣṇa’ ëhari’ nāma śuni sabāra vadane

sabāra aṅgaópulakita, aśruónayane



“Just see! I am hearing the holy name ëKṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa’
coming very sweetly from everybody’s mouth. Everyone’s
bodily hairs are standing erect with ecstasy, and tears

                             31
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

are flowing from their eyes.



8.43

ākṛtye-prakṛtye tomāra īśvara-lakṣaṇa

jīve nā sambhave ei aprākṛta guṇa”



“One can see the symptoms of the Supreme Lord in Your
bodily appearance and nature. How is it possible for the
ordinary living beings (jīvas) to possess such
transcendental qualities that are found in Śrī Kṛṣṇa
alone?”

8.44

prabhu kahe,ó”tumi mahā-bhāgavatottama

tomāra darśane sabāra drava haila mana



Hearing this Śrīman Mahāprabhu replied, “O Rāmānanda,
you are the best even amongst the topmost devotees;
therefore only by your audience, not by Mine, has
everyone’s heart melted.




Quoting from the Padma Purāṇa Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura reveals for us the qualities of a mahā-bhāgavata
devotee:



tāpādi pañca-saṁskārī

navejyā-karma-kārakaḥ

artha-pañcaka-vid vipraḥ

mahā-bhāgavataḥ smṛtaḥ

“According to the path of ritualistic worship the uttama
or mahā-bhāgavata is characterized as being a brāhmaṇa
who has undergone the five kinds of saṁskāras, or
purificatory processes, such as austerities; who has
executed the Vaiṣṇava rituals of worship such as deity
worship through recital of mantra, and through yoga,
yajña sacrifice, offering prayers, chanting the Lord’s
holy names, and marking the body with auspicious signs;
who has worshiped the Vaiṣṇavas; and who has understood
the artha-pañcaka (five subjects of knowledge[viii]7).”



In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.45) Svayam Bhagavān Himself
describes the symptoms of the mahā-bhāgavata:

                             32
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed

bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ

bhūtāni bhagavaty ātmany

eṣa bhāgavatottamaḥ



“My devotees see Me as the soul of all souls within all
living entities, and they see all living entities within
Me. Since they see Me in all life forms, they give mercy
to all beings.”



8.45

anyera ki kathā, āmióëmāyāvādī sannyāsī’

āmiha tomāra sparśe kṛṣṇa-preme bhāsi



“What to speak of others, although I am a
Māyāvādīsannyāsī, I also am drowning in the ocean of
kṛṣṇa-prema simply by touching you.




Śrīman Mahāprabhu is calling Himself a Māyāvādīsannyāsī
in order to reveal Himself as insignificant and worthy
of rejection. It is well known that He received
initiation into the ten-syllable gopāla-mantra from Śrī
Īśvara Purīpāda. Before taking sannyāsa, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu very cleverly chanted a Vaiṣṇava mantra into
the ear of Śrīla Keśava Bhāratī, thus giving him
initiation. In this way, He transformed him into a great
devotee. Upon, receiving those mantras back again from
Śrīla Keśava Bhāratī, Śrīman Mahāprabhu maintained the
proper etiquette in regard to accepting a spiritual
master, during His manifest pastimes. A Māyāvādīsannyāsī
is a follower of advaita-vāda (monism), the school of
thought that is opposed to bhakti. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu however, was never a Māyāvādīsannyāsī in His
manifest pastimes.



8.46

ei jāni’ kaṭhina mora hṛdaya śodhite

sārvabhauma kahilena tomāre milite”



“Indeed, in order to purify My very hard heart (which is

                             33
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

dry and devoid of rasa), Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya had
asked Me to come and meet you.”

8.47

ei-mata duṅhe stuti kare duṅhāra guṇe

duṅhe duṅhāra daraśane ānandita mane



In this way Bhagavān and the devotee praised each
other’s qualities and both fell into tremendous bliss to
see each other.



8.48

hena-kāle vaidika eka vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇa

daṇḍavat kari’ kaila prabhure nimantraṇa



At this time, a brāhmaṇa Vaiṣṇava following the Vedic
principles came there. He offered daṇḍavatpraṇāma[ix]8
before Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and invited Him for
prasāda.



8.49

nimantraṇa mānila tāṅre vaiṣṇava jāniyā

rāmānande kahe prabhu īṣat hāsiyā



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu knew that brāhmaṇa to be a
Vaiṣṇava and accepted his invitation. Smiling, He spoke
to Śrī Rāmānanda.



8.50

“tomāra mukhe kṛṣṇa-kathā śunite haya mana

punarapi pāi yena tomāra daraśana”



“Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, I am exceedingly eager to hear from
your mouth topics about Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore I wish to
have your darśana again.”




8.51


                             34
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

rāya kahe,ó”āilā yadi pāmara śodhite

darśana-mātre śuddha nahe mora duṣṭa citte



Upon hearing these words from Śrīman Mahāprabhu, Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “Although You have come to
cleanse the heart of this fallen soul, simply seeing You
is not enough to purify my distorted and polluted heart.



8.52

dina pāṅca-sāta rahi’ karaha mārjana

tabe śuddha haya mora ei duṣṭa mana”



“O Lord, please stay for at least five-seven days and
kindly cleanse my contaminated heart. Only if You stay
here will the consciousness of this fool become pure.”



8.53

yadyapi viccheda doṅhāra sahana nā yāya

tathāpi daṇḍavat kari’ calilā rāma-rāya



Although separation from one another was unbearable for
both, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya offered his obeisances to Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and, on His order, departed for his
royal palace.



8.54

prabhu yāi’ sei vipra-ghare bhikṣā kaila

dui janāra utkaṇṭḥāya āsi’ sandhyā haila



Śrīman Mahāprabhu then went to the house of the brāhmaṇa
and accepted alms, meaning took prasāda there. Both the
devotee and Bhagavān were eager within their hearts to
meet each other again. Then evening came.



8.55

prabhu snāna-kṛtya kari’ āchena vasiyā

eka-bhṛtya-saṅge rāya mililā āsiyā



                             35
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017


After finishing His bath and performing His sandhyā
(evening gāyatrīmantra meditation), Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu sat and chanted hari-nāma, waiting for Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya. Then Rāmānanda Rāya, dressed as a common
person and accompanied by one servant, came to meet Him.




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that a sannyāsī bathes
and chants the appropriate mantras three times per day —
morning, midday and evening. Hence at dusk, according to
the injunctions of Śruti, Śrī Śacīnandana sat down and
chanted hari-nāma after taking bath and chanting the
sandhyāmantras, otherwise known as āhnika.



8.56

namaskāra kaila rāya, prabhu kaila āliṅgane

dui jane kṛṣṇa-kathā kaya sei-sthāne



Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya approached and respectfully
prostrated before Mahāprabhu. The Lord arose and
embraced him with great prema. They then began to
discuss topics of Kṛṣṇa in a secluded place.




Varṇāśrama-dharma




8.57

prabhu kahe,ó”paḍa śloka sādhyera nirṇaya”

rāya kahe,ó”sva-dharmācaraṇe viṣṇu-bhakti haya”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu began by saying, “O Rāya, what is the
sādhya (ultimate goal) and sādhana (spiritual practice,
or method to attain that goal) for the living entities?
Please recite verses from the revealed scriptures as
evidence.” Receiving the order of the Lord, Rāmānanda
replied that the verdict regarding the ultimate goal of
life is to perform viṣṇu-bhakti, devotional service to
Lord Viṣṇu, by executing one’s prescribed duties
according to his social position.



8.58

                             36
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017


varṇāśramācāra-vatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

visṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam



Viṣṇu Purāṇa (3.8.8)



“Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Controller, is worshiped by
those who properly execute the system of prescribed
duties according to one’s varṇa and āśrama (spiritual
and social classification). Apart from this there is no
other way to satisfy Him.”




Viṣṇu-bhakti — devotion to Lord Viṣṇu. Śrīla Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda says that bhakti is indeed most pleasing and
valuable for the human race. Apart from this, all else
is undesirable and unsatisfying. Only the soul endowed
with bhakti can accept Śrī Bhagavān. By the continuous
performance of jñāna-miśra-bhakti and karma-miśra-
bhakti, then gradually, a special kind of realized
knowledge which pertains to the topmost form of bhakti
(svarūpa-siddha-bhakti) awakens. In Śrī Bhagavad-gītā
(18.46), Śrī Kṛṣṇa says:



sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ

“Mankind can, by the constant performance of his own
duty, attain all perfection.”



All forms of life arise from Bhagavān, and this world
itself expands from Him alone. Even knowledge of this
makes a man favorably inclined towards Bhagavān. The
supremely pure disciplic succession, or paramparā, of
the path of devotional service is sanctioned by Bhagavān
Bodhāyana, Ṭaṅka, Dramiḍa, Guhyadeva, Kapardi, and down
to Bhāruci, in the disciplic order.

It is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.3.22):



bhakti-yogo bhagavati tan-nāma-grahaṇādibhiḥ

“Devotional service, beginning with the chanting of the
holy name of the Lord, is the ultimate religious
principle for human beings.”



                             37
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


In this verse, the term bhakti-yoga alone is capable of
conveying the desired meaning, but the word bhagavati
has also been used. The special meaning is that an
endeavor may be called bhakti-yoga only when the limbs
of devotion such as chanting and remembering the holy
name are performed to please Bhagavān. That type of
bhakti-yoga is capable of bestowing prema-bhakti.

One is unable to apply the name bhakti-yoga even to such
activities as śravaṇa and kīrtana when they are
performed with intentions other than the desire to
please Bhagavān. It is never possible to achieve the
fruit of prema-bhakti by this. Only after the attainment
of prema may it become possible to reach the stages of
sneha, māna, praṇaya, etc. In devotional literatures
such as the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the Nārada-pañcarātra,
use of the word bhakti exclusively indicates pure
bhagavat-bhakti, or devotional service to Bhagavān.
Therefore, it is extremely clear that the word bhakti
only applies to viṣṇu-tattva[x]9 not to anyone or
anything else.

It is only possible to know what to do and what not to
do by consulting the scriptures. This is why Śrīman
Mahāprabhu asked Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya to quote evidence
from the scriptures. The definition of sādhya (goal) is
“desired object” (abhīṣṭa-vastu). Sādhana (duties
pertaining to the soul) is defined as service that is
pleasing to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is sevya (He who is to be
served). Only divine love for Kṛṣṇa, which is utterly
devoid of any desire for one’s own happiness, is the
true goal of the soul, as per the soul’s constitutional
nature.

Sva-dharma-ācaraṇa — following one’s prescribed duties.
Brāhmaṇas (the priestly class), kṣatriyas (the warrior
or managerial class), vaiśyas

(the mercantile class), and śūdras (the servitor class),
comprise the four varṇas, or divisions of society
according to one’s occupation; and brahmacarya (celibate
student life), gṛhastha (household life), vānaprastha
(retired, or partial renunciation from household life),
and sannyāsa (complete renunciation) constitute the four
spiritual orders, or āśramas.

When we adhere to the responsibilities ordained by the
scriptures for these social and spiritual divisions, we
are engaged in the performance of one’s prescribed
duties. By executing the prescribed directives that are
suitable for one’s social and spiritual status, it is
possible to attain qualification to perform devotional
service to Lord Viṣṇu. Sva-dharma-ācaraṇa cannot be
called the sādhana to achieve perfect devotion to Viṣṇu,
which is the goal of human life. Therefore, the words of
scripture determine that devotion to Viṣṇu alone is the
true goal.

Bhagavān Viṣṇu is pleased with the worship that is
performed by executing the duties prescribed for one’s
social and spiritual status, which are determined by
one’s conditioned nature. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam lists the
respective constituent qualities of each of the four

                             38
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

social divisions:



śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ

santoṣaḥ kṣāntir ārjavam

jñānaṁ dayācyutātmatvaṁ

satyaṁ ca brahma-lakṣaṇam



śauryaṁ vīryaṁ dhṛtis tejas

tyāgaś cātmajayaḥ kṣamā

brahmaṇyatā prasādaś ca

rakṣā ca kṣatra-lakṣaṇam

deva-gurv-acyute bhaktis

tri-varga-paripoṣaṇam

āstikyam udyamo nityaṁ

naipuṇyaṁ vaiśya-lakṣaṇam



śūdrasya sannatiḥ śaucaṁ

sevā svāminy amāyayā

amantra-yajño hy asteyaṁ

satyaṁ go-vipra-rakṣaṇam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.11.21—24)



“The symptoms of a brāhmaṇa are control of the mind,
control of the senses, performance of austerities,
cleanliness, satisfaction, forgiveness, simplicity,
knowledge, compassion, truthfulness, and devotion to
Bhagavān.

“To be powerful in battle, heroic, patient, influential,
and charitable, in control of the senses, renounced,
forgiving, devoted to the brāhmaṇas, merciful, and
always protective of the citizens — these are the
symptoms of the kṣatriya.

“To be ever devoted to the demigods, the spiritual
master and Bhagavān; to always protect the three
religious principles — religiosity (dharma), economic
development (artha), and sense gratification (kāma); to
be theistic; to always endeavor for wealth, and to be
expert in trade — these are the symptoms of the vaiśya.

“To remain submissive to the higher sections of society

                              39
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

[the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas,   and vaiśyas], to always be
very clean, to serve one’s   master without duplicity, to
perform sacrifices without   uttering Vedic mantras, to
not steal, to always speak   the truth, and to protect the
cows and brāhmaṇas — these   are the symptoms of the
śūdra.”



In much the same way, there are four spiritual
positions, or āśramas, namely brahmacarya, gṛhastha,
vānaprastha, and sannyāsa. Every human being should
please Bhagavān by executing one’s prescribed duties
(dharma) according to one’s spiritual position. In the
Jāvāla Upaniṣada (8.5) it states:

sa hovāca yājñavalkyaḥ, brahmacaryaṁ samāpya gṛhī
bhavet, gṛhī bhūtvā vanī bhavet, vanī bhūtvā pravrajet,
yadi vetarathā brahmacaryādeva pravrajed gṛhād vā
vanādvā, atha punaravratī vā vratī vā snātako vā
‘snātako vā utsannāgniko vā yadahareva virajet
tadahareva pravrajet



“The saintly Janaka Mahārāja asked the great sage
Maharṣi Yājñavalkaya: ëMy lord, please be merciful and
explain the qualification for the position of sannyāsa
and the rules and regulations to be followed by one in
that order.’ Maharṣi Yājñavalkya replied, ëAfter
completing one’s time in the brahmacarya-āśrama, as a
celibate student, one should accept the gṛhastha-āśrama,
or household life. Following that, one should accept the
vānaprastha-āśrama, in which one retires from household
affairs. And after some time, one should accept the
sannyāsa-āśrama, the renounced order of life. If
feelings of renunciation arise in someone before
entering the gṛhastha-āśrama, then one may directly
enter the sannyāsa-āśrama.’”

One should endeavor to please Bhagavān in the prescribed
manner. If one deviates from this and instead turns to
illicit behavior, then the result will be greatly
detrimental, and one will attain a hellish destination.
To follow the path of transcendental enlightenment is
the foremost responsibility of the living beings. One’s
acquired nature, close association, and received
teachings each have a discernable effect upon one’s
life.

In the present verse beginning with varṇāśramācāra-vatā,
Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya states that the sādhya (goal) for
every living entity is the attainment of loving
sentiments for Viṣṇu, and that the sādhana to achieve
that is following the varṇāśrama system.




Offering the results of one’s activities to Kṛṣṇa




                             40
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017



8.59

l prabhu kahe,ó”eho bāhya, āge kaha āra”

rāya kahe,ó”kṛṣṇe karmārpaṇaósarva-sādhya-sāra”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “What you have just said is
external. Please tell Me something more than this.” Śrī
Rāya Rāmānanda replied, “To completely offer the results
of one’s activities to Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the essence of all
perfection.




By declaring this as external, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
intended to convey that yes, by following the system of
varṇāśrama-dharma, Śrī Viṣṇu is pleased, but only
partially so. Varṇāśrama is not directly related to the
constitutional nature of the jīva as a servant of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, nor is it devotional practice composed entirely
of the nine limbs of bhakti performed for the pleasure
of the Lord (svarūpa-siddhā-bhakti).

Uttamā-bhakti, or topmost devotional service, is that
bhakti which sets the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the goal,
and in which the nine processes of devotional service,
especially hearing and chanting, are executed. By the
mercy of Bhagavān, that uttamā-bhakti thus attains
oneness, or qualitative equality (tādātmya), with the
special function of Bhagavān’s internal potency. Even
when the sādhaka finally attains perfection and achieves
service to Bhagavān in His eternal pastimes in the
spiritual realm, the activities of hearing and chanting
do not subside; rather they become even more supremely
relishable and keenly desirable. This taste and desire
are in both the devotee and Bhagavān; indeed, they both
realize ecstasy. To the liberated souls, this ecstasy is
highly desirable, as it is their most treasured object
and their ultimate goal.

Here the term karma refers to the activities mentioned
in Smṛti and other scriptures that are performed on the
basis of the natural inclination of the present body.
The pursuance of varṇāśrama-dharma is sakāma-karma
(performing acts in accordance with scriptural
injunctions to fulfill one’s own material desires).
Offering the fruits of one’s activities to Bhagavān is
therefore superior to this. It is stated in the Śrīmad
Bhagavad-gītā (3.9):



yajñārthāt karmaṇo ‘nyatra

loko ‘yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ

tad-arthaṁ karma kaunteya


                             41
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

mukta-saṅgaḥ samācara

“O son of Kuntī, apart from offering the fruits of one’s
selfless activities (niṣkāma-karma) to Śrī Viṣṇu, other
forms of karma are simply a cause of bondage. Therefore,
remaining free from the desire to enjoy the fruits of
your labor, you should perform all activities with Śrī
Viṣṇu as the goal.”



Whatever karma is performed for the pleasure of Śrī Hari
is called yajña (sacrifice). Any other activity is the
cause of bondage in this world. Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā
(2.51) further states:

karma-jaṁ buddhi-yuktā hi

phalaṁ tyaktvā manīṣiṇaḥ

janma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ

padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam



“Sages who perform buddhi-yoga (devotional service
endowed with knowledge of Śrī Kṛṣṇa) renounce the fruits
of action in the material world. They become liberated
from the cycle of birth and death and attain that state
beyond all miseries.”

Performing karma while free from attachment, completely
eradicates the fear of all bondage. Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā
discusses this topic in the section on karma-yoga. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Himself says:



śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ

mokṣyase karma-bandhanaiḥ

sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā

vimukto mām upaiṣyasi



Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (9.28)



“O Arjuna! In this way you will be freed from all
bondage caused by the fruit of good and evil deeds, and,
by the yoga of renouncing the fruits of action, you will
be a unique soul even amongst liberated persons, and you
will come to Me.”

Our Gauḍīya Gosvāmīs have stated unequivocally that we
should never offer any sinful activity or low-class
activity to Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One should perform
bhakti by offering one’s very self, and abandon the
mentality of being the enjoyer and the doer. As the next

                              42
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

verse says:



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ dhyānaṁ

pāda-sevanam arcanam

vandanaṁ svārpaṇaṁ sakhyaṁ

sarvaṁ dāsye pratiṣṭhitam

Śrī Hari-bhakti-kalpa-latikā (10.3)



“The devotional processes of hearing about the Lord,
glorifying Him, remembering Him, serving His lotus feet,
worshiping Him, offering obeisances to Him, surrendering
everything to Him, and befriending Him, all rest on
service to Him.”

This verse describes dāsya-bhāva, in which the devotee
feels, “I am a servant of the Lord.” When one becomes a
servant, nothing remains his own — not his body, his
intelligence, his senses, his speech, his heart, his
religion, his desires, his wealth, or his actions. One
cannot even say, “I am performing austerities,” or “I am
performing bhakti,” because the consciousness that “I am
the doer” also disappears. The first stage of bhakti is
ātma-samarpaṇa, or self-surrender.

When we feel that all of our desires have been fulfilled
by worshiping Śrī Viṣṇu, we may conclude that Bhagavān
Viṣṇu is pleased with us, but really, this is not the
case at all. Therefore, Mahāprabhu considered offering
the fruits of one’s action to be an external conception,
because this method of worship is not inherently
pleasing to Bhagavān. He is only superficially pleased
with the devotee, for the sake of that devotee’s
happiness.

Such a worshiper considers the earth, the heavenly
planets and other such places to be related to him. This
conception has no connection whatsoever with svarūpa-
siddhā-bhakti, or the nine limbs of devotional service
performed to achieve one’s perfect spiritual body. Some
who follow varṇāśrama-dharma consider their austerities
to be their own, some consider their mother to be their
own, some their father, and some consider everything
they have to be their personal property.

For example, once there was a brāhmaṇa who sat beneath a
tree performing austerities. A pigeon perching on the
upper branches passed stool upon him, which broke the
brāhmaṇa’s meditation. He became so angry that by his
glance he burnt the pigeon to ashes. By this, he
believed that his austerity had achieved perfection. So
impressed was he that he became quite haughty and was
not slightly concerned about pleasing Bhagavān.

Bhagavān fulfills the desires of such a devotee yet
remains unattached to him. A sādhaka who, by the special
grace of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, performs uttamā-bhakti, or

                             43
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

activities exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
desires nothing, nor is there anything more that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa possesses that is worthy to be given to him. Thus,
He sells Himself to such a sādhaka. The sādhana of
following varṇāśrama-dharma pleases Śrī Viṣṇu only
fractionally. For this reason it is called external.

Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda says that the bodily
achievements of those who follow varṇāśrama-dharma are
based on the false egoism arising from the bodily
conceptions of “I” and “mine” and are thus confined to
this universe. Bhakti, on the other hand, is beyond the
material universe. Bhagavān Śrī Gaurahari regards the
external realization of those persons residing outside
Vaikuṇṭha or Goloka-dhāma as fit to be rejected, and He
does not accord any special independent recognition to
the worship of Viṣṇu by the varṇāśrama method. Jñānīs
direct their worship toward the formless aspect of
Bhagavān (nirviśeṣa), and karmīs (reward-seeking
workers) revere His variegated forms (saviśeṣa). Both
worship Śrī Viṣṇu with some material intent.

According to Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, to offer the
results of one’s action to Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
very essence of perfection when compared to the ordinary
varṇāśrama system. Nirviśeṣa tattva-vadīs actually
remain absorbed in karma, which is full of variety, or
saviśeṣa. Even though it appears that they are engaging
in bhakti, factually it is not so at all. Everything
they offer is related to the body. Such offerings bear
no relation to the soul, and so Mahāprabhu calls the
offering itself, external. Undertakings such as
constructing hospitals and dharmaśālās (guest-houses for
pilgrims) and digging wells may be offered to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
but they are external and are thus an obstruction to the
soul’s relationship with Bhagavān. Consequently, one’s
devotional service is blemished with undesirable habits.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has said:



na dharmaṁ nādharmaṁ śruti-gaṇa-niruktaṁ kila kuru

vraja rādhā-krsna pracura-paricaryām iha tanu

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā (2)



“O my dear mind! Please do not perform either the    dharma
or adharma (religion or irreligion) prescribed in    the
Śrutis. Rather, you should perform profuse loving
service to the Divine Couple Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. The    Śrutis
have ascertained Them to be the highest principle    of
worship and the Supreme Absolute Truth.”



8.60

yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat

                             44
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


yat tapasyasi kaunteya

tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam



Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (9.27)



“Śrī Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna: ëO son of Kuntī, whatever
activities you perform, whatever you eat, whatever you
sacrifice and give in charity, and whatever austerities
you perform, should be done as an offering to Me. All
endeavors should be to please Me alone.’?”




The term mad-arpaṇam speaks here of the independent
saviśeṣa-tattva (the Absolute Truth possessed of all
transcendental attributes, without a touch of the
material). Its use refutes the notion that the Supreme
is nirviśeṣa (devoid of form and other characteristics).
This niṣkāma-karma process, in which one performs one’s
prescribed duties and offers the results to Bhagavān,
with no desire to enjoy the fruits, is also known as
jñāna-miśrā-bhakti (devotion mixed with the desire for
liberation).

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments that in
this verse Bhagavān suggests the practice of offering
everything to the Lord (bhagavad-arpita-bhakti) for
those who denounce devotion performed with personal
interest (sakāma-bhakti) yet who are unable to abandon
karma and jñāna completely, and who do not have the
qualification to perform one-pointed devotion (ananyā-
bhakti). This practice can hardly be called śuddha-
niṣkāma-karma-yoga, as this name is awarded only to
action that is performed according to the injunctions of
the scriptures, as an offering to Bhagavān. A person’s
ordinary eating and drinking habits may not be included
in this.

Those unable to understand the process of exclusive
ananya-bhajana are instructed to offer all of their
activities (like eating and drinking) to Bhagavān. In
much the same way, the worship of the universal form of
Bhagavān is recommended for those unable to properly
conceive of the established truths regarding the actual
object of worship, namely Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thus, the performer
of the activity is still the recipient of the fruit of
action, which is indicated by the ātmanepada form of the
verb kuruṣva, meaning “to perform.” Furthermore, the
verse makes no mention that this practice relates
directly to Bhagavān.

The practice of the nine-fold process of devotional
service known as navadhā-bhakti begins when the sādhaka
completely surrenders himself to Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu. But
here, by contrast, the activity is performed first and
then offered to Bhagavān. For this reason, the type of

                              45
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

devotion being discussed is not to be equated with
bhakti-yoga. Indeed, it is not even considered one of
the limbs of bhakti-yoga.




Renouncing Occupational Duties




8.61

prabhu kahe,ó”eho bāhya, āge kaha āra”

rāya kahe,ó”svadharma-tyāga, ei sādhya-sāra”



Mahāprabhu said, “This is also external. Speak further
on this matter.” Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda replied, “To give up
one’s sva-dharma, or occupational duties in the
varṇāśrama system, is the essence of perfection.




Sva-dharma tyāga — abandoning varṇāśrama-dharma. There
are two types of sva-dharma: to practice varṇāśrama-
dharma with the desire to enjoy the fruits of one’s
activities and to offer one’s work and its results to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa without desiring to taste the fruits. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu declared both of these to be external,
whereupon Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya explained the topic of sva-
dharma tyāga, or the complete abandonment of one’s
occupational duty.

The sequence so far has been as follows: it was first
suggested that varṇāśrama-dharma was the perfect goal,
yet Śrīman Mahāprabhu designated it as external because
by this process, one cannot attain prema-bhakti, what to
speak of mounting the staircase of prema. Next, offering
the fruits of one’s activities, or karma-arpaṇa, was
presented as the ultimate goal, but Śrīman Mahāprabhu
also determined that as external, based on the prior
statement, “bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyā —

bhakti only comes from bhakti” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
11.3.31). The commentator on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Śrī
Śrīdhara Svāmī writes of this verse, “bhaktyā sādhana-
bhaktyā saṁjātayā prema-lakṣaṇayā — prema-bhakti only
arises from sādhana-bhakti.”

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that for those
who are incapable of entering into bhajana, verses such
as yat karoṣi have been spoken. By properly performing
one’s role in the varṇāśrama system, the mind is
gradually purified. By not following one’s prescribed
duties, one incurs a fault, therefore it is best to
execute one’s prescribed duties. However, he who

                             46
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

abandons this process in order to perform bhakti is the
topmost sādhu. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa says:



tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta

na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā

śraddhā yāvan na jāyate

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.9)



“As long as a feeling of detachment from this world of
work and its concomitant fruits, culminating in the
happiness of the heavenly planets, has not arisen, or in
other words, as long as faith in hearing and chanting
narrations of My pastimes has not awoken, the many rules
and regulations in regard to the performance of karma
must be followed.”

If one who is indifferent to hearing narrations about
Śrī Kṛṣṇa abandons his sva-dharma before a taste in
hearing has arisen, he will fall into a degraded
condition. Such a person surrenders to Bhagavān because
he fears the results of his good and bad karma, not
because he has prema for the Lord. Śrīman Mahāprabhu
thus labeled abandoning the varṇāśrama-dharma external.
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has clearly said:



yadṛcchayā mat-kathādau

jāta-śraddhas tu yaḥ pumān

na nirviṇṇo nāti-sakto

bhakti-yogo ‘sya siddhi-daḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.8)

“By virtue of spiritual merit attained in their previous
births, those who are neither repelled nor overly
attached materially, and in whom faith in discussions of
My pastimes has awakened, are eligible to take to
bhakti. Bhakti-devī then confers perfection upon them.”



The execution of sva-dharma has been termed external
because by following varṇāśrama-dharma one will act
according to his material nature. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has
said in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.60):



śāstrataḥ śrūyate bhaktau nṛ-mātrasyādhikāritā

“It is every person’s birthright to accept devotional

                              47
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

service. This is substantiated in many scriptures.”



Even that person who does not follow varṇāśrama-dharma
has the qualification to worship Viṣṇu. The partial
quote from this verse is an unequivocal statement to
that effect.



8.62

ājñāyaivaṁ guṇān doṣān

mayādiṣṭān api svakān

dharmān saṁtyajya yaḥ sarvān

māṁ bhajet sa ca sattamaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.11.32)



“?ëO Uddhava, My instructions concerning occupational
duties are described in the scriptures. One who
deliberates on their merits and limitations, and then
gives up varṇāśrama to perform bhajana of Me is the best
of perfected persons.’




The word śāstra in this connection refers to the Vedas
and other scriptures which propound mundane moral
virtues and give instruction how to progress in life.
The word ājñāya (knowing completely or properly) is
split into two parts: ā means “completely, or properly,”
and jñāya means “knowing, or understanding.” After fully
comprehending the inherent limitations and assets of
one’s prescribed religious duties, one should reject
them.

There are three obstacles encountered in the performance
of śuddha-bhakti:

(1) dehātma-buddhi — to consider the material body to be
the self.

(2) jīva-brahma-aikya-jñāna — to cultivate knowledge
that promotes the idea of oneness between the jīva and
Brahman.

(3) bhagavat-tattva-jñāna, or aiśvarya-jñāna — to
cultivate knowl-edge concerning the opulence of
Bhagavān.

In addition, there are three kinds of people who abandon
the path of karma:


                             48
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

(1) ajña — the ignorant who depart from the
prescriptions of nitya (daily obligatory) and naimittika
(occasional) duties mentioned in the Vedas.

(2) nāstika — the atheists who know about karma as
presented in the Vedas but have no faith in it.

(3) sarva-parityāgī — those whose renunciation is
complete, or who are aware that karma is not a limb of
śuddha-bhakti. They have unflinching faith that through
the performance of bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, all karma
(prescribed duties) automatically becomes complete,
meaning they have no other duties to perform.

Persons in this third category are therefore considered
to be superior, and Bhagavān refers to them in this
verse. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, when Bhagavān speaks of the
glories of the association of sādhus, He is referring to
sādhus such as these only. For example:



satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25)



“In the assembly of pure devotees, powerful discussions
illuminating My heroic deeds become a rejuvenating tonic
for both the ears and the heart. By hearing these
narrations, one quickly advances on the path of
emancipation from ignorance. First he develops śraddhā
in Me, then rati, and finally he experiences the
awakening of prema-bhakti.”

He automatically attains eligibility to receive all good
qualities, such as mercifulness, as stated in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.75), “kṛṣṇa-bhakte
kṛṣṇera guṇa sakali sañcārī — All the good qualities of
Kṛṣṇa gradually develop in Kṛṣṇa’s devotee.”



8.63

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ



Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (18.66)


                              49
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017



“?ëO Arjuna, abandon all varieties of dharma such as
varṇāśrama and just surrender completely unto Me. I
shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not
lament.’?”




In Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā (2) Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
states:

na dharmaṁ nādharmaṁ śruti-gaṇa-niruktaṁ kila kuru

vraja rādhā-kṛṣṇa pracura-paricaryām iha tanu



“Do not perform either the dharma (pious deeds) or
adharma (irreligious, or impious deeds) mentioned in the
Vedas. Rather you should perform profuse loving service
to the Divine Couple Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.”



In his commentary to this verse, Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
presents, as an example, the following verse from the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.46):

yadā yam anugṛhṇāti

bhagavān ātma-bhāvitaḥ

sa jahāti matiṁ loke

vede ca pariniṣṭhitām

“Bhagavān bestows His mercy upon a jīva who meditates on
Him constantly. The jīva then becomes free from the root
cause of bondage, i.e., the attachment to all social
customs and religious rituals prescribed by the Vedas.”



The word dharma here is taken to mean all bodily and
mental occupations (dharmas) such as adherence to the
spiritual orders and social positions. The use of the
prefix pari in the word pariniṣṭhitām (attached) carries
a special meaning, indicating that these devotees
constitutionally reject all forms of fruitive
activities. The soul itself has no attraction to all of
these dharmas. The sādhaka quits his brahma-niṣṭhā (firm
faith in impersonal Brahman) and īśvara-niṣṭhā (firm
faith in the Supreme Controller of the material world,
Lord Viṣṇu) and attains bhagavan-niṣṭhā, or firm faith
in Bhagavān.




Bhakti Mixed with Empiric Knowledge

                             50
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




8.64

prabhu kahe,ó”eho bāhya, āge kaha āra”

rāya kahe,ó”jñāna-miśrā bhaktiósādhya-sāra”



Upon Śrīman Mahāprabhu saying that renouncing one’s sva-
dharma, or occupational duties, is external, Rāmānanda
Rāya proposed that jñāna-miśrā-bhakti, or devotion mixed
with empiric speculation, is the essence of perfection.




Jñāna-miśrā-bhakti — bhakti mixed with empiric
knowledge. Jñāna (knowledge) has three divisions: tat-
padārtha-jñāna — knowledge of the Absolute Reality
(para-tattva), or the Lord (bhagavat-tattva); tvaṁ-
padārtha-jñāna — knowledge of the constitutional
position of the jīva, which includes knowledge of the
relationship between the jīva and Brahman; and jīva-
brahma-aikya-jñāna — knowledge of the oneness between
the jīva and Brahman.

This last limb, namely, jīva-brahma-aikya, is completely
opposed to devotion because therein, knowledge of the
constitutional relationship between Brahman as master
and the jīva as servant cannot manifest, or rather,
awaken. The first two limbs of jñāna, namely knowledge
of jīva-tattva and knowledge of brahma-tattva, or
bhagavat-tattva, are not in opposition to bhakti,
because they do not hinder nourishment of a master-
servant relationship.

The meaning of the word jñāna in the current verse might
be stretched, and thus interpreted in such a way as to
suggest that bhakti mixed with these three limbs of
jñāna is called jñāna-miśrā-bhakti (devotional service
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa with a desire to enjoy the fruits of
transcendental knowledge), but that would not be
correct.

It is worth considering here that without the help of
bhakti, nirviśeṣa-jñāna (knowledge of the impersonal
Brahman effulgence) on its own is completely incapable
of bestowing sāyujya-mukti, or impersonal liberation.
Thus, in the verse under consideration the jñāna-miśrā-
bhakti referred to specifically indicates the third type
of jñāna, or jīva-brahma-aikya-jñāna, which promulgates
knowledge of the non-difference between the individual
soul and the Supreme Soul.

In addition, there are even some sādhakas on the path of
bhakti-yoga whose predominant goal is to attain
knowledge that does not obstruct bhakti, such as
bhagavat-tattva-jñāna (knowledge of the reality about

                             51
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

the Supreme Personality of Godhead), jīva-tattva-jñāna
(knowledge about the reality of the minute spiritual
living entity), and sambandha-jñāna (the accompanying
knowledge of the relationship between both), as well as
māyā-tattva-jñāna (knowledge about the reality of the
illusory energy). For this reason, their practice of the
limbs of bhakti also remains mixed with jñāna.
Therefore, one might include their practice in the
definition of jñāna-miśrā-bhakti.

Regardless, the jñāna-miśra-bhakti referred to in this
verse by Śrī Rāmānanda only equates with that bhakti
which is mixed with jīva-brahma-aikya-jñāna. We shall
see that this is indicated directly in the next verse,
brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā. In their commentaries on this
verse, Śrī Śaṅkarācārya, Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Svāmī, and Śrī
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura have all accepted that the
jñāna mentioned here is jīva-brahma-aikya-jñāna.

Although on the path of śuddha-bhakti there is a statute
allowing one to abandon his sva-dharma, a certain level
of qualification to do this is required. An edict to
that effect appears in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:



tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta

na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā

śraddhā yāvan na jāyate

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.9)



“As long as disinterest in karma has not arisen, or
until, by the mercy of some mahā-puruṣa, one experiences
the awakening of faith in the process of hearing and
chanting bhagavat-kathā, one should continue to perform
karma.”



It is only upon the awakening of extremely thick śraddhā
by the grace of a pure devotee that one receives the
qualification to enter kevalā-bhakti, or exclusive
devotion, and it is then that one becomes qualified to
abandon prescribed duties (sva-dharma).

When an unqualified person renounces prescribed duties,
there is fear of an inauspiciousness occurrence. For
this reason, Śrīman Mahāprabhu is saying that it is
external. If hearing and chanting are not coming from
love within the heart, but rather from some mentally
conceived sense of duty, then this practice, too, is
external or superficial. Śrīman Mahāprabhu is looking
for an explanation of something superior; therefore, Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya describes jñāna-miśrā-bhakti as the
sādhya, or state of perfection.

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda explains that

                              52
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

while in this universe, one who is advancing in his
activities along the path of self-realization will still
be subject to some asmitā[xi]10, or material
identification, but when that false conception of the
self is dispelled, he crosses over the Virajā River,
which is beyond the influence of the three modes of
material nature, and reaches the neutral (sāmya) or
unmanifest (avyakta) state of the three modes.

The material universe manifests from the external
energy, whereas Vaikuṇṭha dhāma, the abode of the Lord,
is manifest from the internal potency. In between the
two are Brahma-loka and the Virajā River. This river is
the place of shelter for those jīvas who are detached
from dull matter and who deny the material varieties
within the material creation. Those who have acquired
this unmanifest state may not enter Vaikuṇṭha but must
remain outside; therefore it is termed as bāhya, or
external. Just as the realization of the sādhakas who
have abandoned their prescribed duties within this world
does not equate to realization of Vaikuṇṭha or Goloka-
dhāma, similarly those who make their goal detachment
from material enjoyment only receive realization of a
non-conscious impersonal reality. For this reason, it is
also external. In fact, only prema-bhakti qualifies as
parā-bhakti (transcendental devotional service to the
Supreme Lord). Unless one reaches the state of sāmya or
avyakta (the neutral state of the three modes), it is
actually impossible to attain prema-bhakti.

In jñāna-miśrā-bhakti, jñāna remains prominent, and thus
it is not bhakti at all. Rather, it is merely an offense
at the lotus feet of Bhagavān. It becomes possible to
obtain bhakti from the sāmya or avyakta platform if one
somehow gets the association of a pure guru and
Vaiṣṇavas. If a piece of gold, the size and shape of a
mustard seed, is mixed into a huge heap of golden
mustard seeds, it is extremely difficult to distinguish
it, but once the pile of seeds is set on fire and
reduced to ashes it is easy to find that piece of gold.

In the same manner, in the saintly association of the
pure spiritual master and Vaiṣṇava devotees, that
mountain-like heap of jñāna is burned to ashes by the
fire of hearing and chanting, whereupon pure bhakti
(that piece of gold) may easily be obtained.
Accordingly, where jñāna-miśrā-bhakti ends, śuddha-
bhakti, or pure devotion, begins. Jñānīs desire to
obtain sāyujya, which is the liberation of merging with
the effulgence of the Lord, yet they cannot attain their
goal by the process of jñāna alone. They may obtain it
only by virtue of mixing this jñāna with bhakti.

The practice of this jñāna-miśrā bhakti is never capable
of awakening prema; therefore, this type of jñāna
presents an obstruction to śuddha-bhakti. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.20.31) states:



tasmān mad-bhakti-yuktasya

yogino vai mad-ātmanaḥ


                             53
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

na jñānaṁ na ca vairāgyaṁ

prāyaḥ śreyo bhaved iha

“Thus the yogī who is connected with My bhakti and
absorbed in thinking of Me, need not cultivate jñāna or
renunciation. His auspiciousness is achieved only
through devotion to Me.”



8.65

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām



Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (18.54)



“?ëA person happily absorbed in Brahman neither laments
for nor desires anything. Being equipoised in his vision
of all living beings, he obtains parā-bhakti
(transcendental devotional service to Me) which is
endowed with the symptoms of prema.’?”




There is a multitude of mantras in the Vedas
establishing the dif-ference between the jīva and
Brahman. Some examples are given here:

(1) “Pradhāna-kṣetra-jña-patir guṇeśaḥ — that Paramātmā
is the controller of the guṇas and master of the living
entities” (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.6.16).

(2) “Tam āhur agryaṁ puruṣaṁ mahāntam — sages declare
Him to be the foremost and greatest of persons”
(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.3.19).

(3) “Yāthātathyato ‘rthān vyadadhāt — it is He who
awards the many jīvas’ necessities” (Īśopaniṣad 3.8).

(4) “Tenedaṁ pūrṇaṁ puruṣeṇa sarvam — by that Person’s
arrangement, this universe is complete in every respect”
(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.3.9).

(5) “Nityo nityānāṁ — He is supreme among all eternal
beings” (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13, Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
3.6.13).

This compilation of sutras directly demonstrates that
the jīva can never dissolve and become one with Brahman
in any situation. Persons who attain the brahma-bhūta
platform are in one of two categories. One type, despite

                             54
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

reaching this platform, disrespects the names, forms,
qualities, and pastimes of Bhagavān, as well as His
devotees. Such persons continue to endeavor exclusively
for sāyujya-mukti. The brahma-bhūta (self-realized)
persons of this category are offenders. Instead of
achieving liberation, this kind of person continues to
rotate in the cycle of birth and death, taking birth in
demonic species. The other kind of brahma-bhūta souls,
being non-offenders, easily achieve the shelter of the
devotees and attain parā-bhakti.




Bhakti Devoid of Empiric Knowledge




8.66

prabhu kahe,ó”eho bāhya, āge kaha āra”

rāya kahe,ó”jñāna-śūnyā bhaktiósādhya-sāra”



After hearing this, Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “This is
also external. If there is anything more than this,
please speak further.” Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “Pure
devotional service without any touch of speculative
knowledge (jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti) is the top-most
perfection.




Jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti — devotion free from jñāna. As
mentioned earlier, there are three limbs of jñāna:
knowledge of bhagavat-tattva, knowledge of jīva-tattva,
and knowledge of the oneness between the jīva and
Brahman. Now in this verse, there is mention of a
variety of bhakti untouched by these three types of
jñāna. Jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti is superior to jñāna-miśrā-
bhakti, primarily in that there is no trace of knowledge
of the oneness between the jīva and Brahman (jīva-
brahmaika-jñāna), which is directly opposed to the
cultivation of a master-servant relationship. Moreover,
this jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti is not mixed with the excessive
insistence to collect knowledge about the nature of
Bhagavān (bhagavat-tattva-jñāna) or knowledge about the
nature of the living entity (jīva-tattva-jñāna), which
generate obstacles in the path of śuddha-bhakti.

In jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti, there is a complete manifestation
of sambandha-jñāna, or knowledge of one’s relationship
with Bhagavān. However in the path of jñāna-miśrā-
bhakti, the jīva simply becomes a dry speculator (śuṣka-
jñānī). Upon the awakening of good fortune, by the
influence of the association of pure devotees, one very
quickly achieves prema-bhakti. In such a position all

                             55
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

obstacles are gradually destroyed. The sādhaka goes far
beyond having material desires, and gradually obtains a
proper level of realization of prema-bhakti.

In relation to jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
quotes evidence from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:



8.67

jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva

jīvanti san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām

sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo ‘jita jito ‘py asi tais tri-lokyām



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.3)



“Śrī Brahmā is saying to Śrī Kṛṣṇa: ëThe sādhana to
obtain an object that is beyond the senses, with the
help of knowledge obtained by the senses, is called
āroha-vāda (the futile and laborious ascending process)
or aśrauta-panthā (the path devoid of aural reception of
the Vedic principles). However, those who do not make
any endeavor for jñāna, and who instead maintain their
lives by exclusively rendering service to the
descriptions of Your pastimes flowing from the mouths of
the sādhus, by body, mind, and words, are able to
conquer You. Despite their not making any other
endeavor, and despite Your being unconquerable, such
persons control You by their prema.’?”




“Bhakti-vaśaḥ puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Person is controlled
by devotion” (Māṭhara-śruti). One may attain ānanda, or
bliss, through jñāna-śūnya-bhakti, even though
relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or a sense of ownership and
intimacy with Him, is lacking, just as one feels ecstasy
witnessing the moon even though one has no relation with
it.

There are two types of jñāna: tat-padārtha-jñāna (that
which is related to the Lord) and tvaṁ-padārtha-jñāna
(that which is related to the jīva). Śrī Bhagavān is
worshipful by all, and the jīva is His eternal servitor.
Yet nirviśeṣa-jñāna completely opposes this conception.
Thus it stands contrary to bhakti and should be rejected
entirely. This alone is the reason that jñāna-śūnyā-
bhakti is accepted as superior to jñāna-miśrā-bhakti. By
presenting this verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya has made it totally clear that the
sādhaka is able to achieve everything by only hearing
hari-kathā from the mouths of the unalloyed devotees. To
obtain sambandha, abhidheya, and prayojana (knowledge of

                              56
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

the relationship, process, and ultimate goal) rests on
the basis of this hari-kathā, which is both the sādhya
(goal) and the sādhana (process).

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā, He sent His friend
Uddhava to Vraja with the tattered garment of jñāna. The
gopīs took that garment and after tearing it to shreds
threw it straight into the Yamunā River. The Yamunā then
carried it to Prayāga and from there it continued until
it reached the ocean. Submerged in the salty water of
the ocean, those shreds of jñāna dissolved and lost
their very existence. Even opulence (aiśvarya) cannot
find any right to render service in Vraja, what to speak
of nirviśeṣa-jñāna, which the gopīs did not permit to
exist inside Vraja even by name. If opulence desires to
perform any service there, it is subsumed within Vraja’s
bottomless, fathomless, and limitless oceanic sweetness.

Take the example of a piece of straw placed in a large
pot of boiling milk. That straw remains visible on the
surface only for a second before totally disappearing
into the milk. One will not be able find it. Aiśvarya,
likened to the straw in that milk, is concealed by the
fathomless ocean of mādhurya in Vraja. One has no way of
knowing that it is there. To support this Śrī Śukadeva
Gosvāmī has said:



tasmin mahan-mukharitā madhubhic-caritra-

pīyūṣa-śeṣa-saritaḥ paritaḥ sravanti

tā ye pibanty avitṛṣo nṛpa gāḍha-karṇais

tān na spṛśanty aśana-tṛḍ-bhaya-śoka-mohāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.40)




“In the society of sādhus, many rivers of pure nectar in
the form of discussions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa flow in all
directions, from the mouths of the pure devotees present
there. Persons who, with their well-like ears, drink
this nectar without getting full, are not disturbed by
hunger, thirst, fear, lamentation, illusion, etc.”



The Śruti confirms:

tam eva, viditvāti mṛtyum eti nānyaḥ panthā vidyate
‘yanāya



“By knowing that Supreme Person, who is the embodiment
of knowledge, bliss, and eternity (sat-cit-ānanda-
svarūpa), the jīva can cross this ocean of birth and
death. Apart from knowing Him, there is no other method
of liberating oneself from the blazing fire of material

                              57
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

existence.”

Just by thirstily endeavoring to hear the topics of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa (hari-kathā), a person is not merely liberated,
but he subjugates Śrī Bhagavān. If someone tries to
obtain jñāna alone, then, just like a person threshing
empty husks of rice, he achieves nothing.



śreyaḥ-sṛtiṁ bhaktim udāsya te vibho

kliśyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye

teṣām asau kleśala eva śiṣyate

nānyad yathā sthūla-tuṣāvaghātinām

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.4)

“O Lord, devotional service unto You is the main source
of all kinds of auspiciousness. Those who give up this
path only to cultivate jñāna will simply undergo hard
labor, pain, and difficulty, just as the only gain of a
person who beats empty husks is hard work, not rice.”



Narrations about Bhagavān become supremely attractive
and full of rasa when infused with the nectar of
Bhagavān’s form, pastimes, and qualities. Śrī Bhagavān
Himself has said to Śrī Durvāsā Ṛṣi: “ahaṁ bhakta-
parādhīno hy asvatantra iva dvija — O brāhmaṇa, the
sādhus, My topmost devotees, hold complete possession of
My heart. Their love for Me is so great that I accept
their control. And because their heart is so infused
with prema-rasa, I have no desire to leave it” (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 9.4.63).

After jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti, the propensity to bring
Bhagavān under one’s loving control begins to develop.
This ability is also a measure of one’s bhakti. We can
therefore say that this jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti is the first
milestone on the path to attain prema-bhakti; one
controls the Lord in proportion to its progressive
development.

The primary cause of this wonderful phenomenon of being
able to control Bhagavān is the variegatedness of the
sādhakas’ tastes, natures, and tendencies. Each person’s
bhakti and their practices of the limbs of bhakti are
unique. From here begins the description of the
performance of devotion that pertains to one’s eternal
constitutional relationship with Bhagavān. The bhakti
that was described before this verse is performed in
connection with the body.




Prema-bhakti



                              58
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




8.68

prabhu kahe,ó”eho haya, āge kaha āra”

rāya kahe,ó”prema-bhaktiósarva-sādhya-sāra”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “O Rāmānanda, this may be called
the sādhya, but please speak something more.” Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya said, “Prema-bhakti is the essence of all
perfection.




Up until now, Śrīman Mahāprabhu had only responded to
all proposals with “eho bāhya — this is external,” but
now He says, “Eho haya —

this may be.” When jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti was proposed, He
said, “This is good,” because whatever Śrī Rāmānanda
Rāya had explained before had not been conducive for the
progressive understanding of the master-servant
relationship. However, this jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti is
favorable for its development.

Mahāprabhu’s request for him to speak further on this
point reveals that Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya has now reached
the correct path but should proceed further. From the
verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.3) which Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya spoke to illuminate jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti,
one may comprehend that practicing jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti
and hearing hari-kathā is so powerful that Bhagavān
becomes controlled by the sādhaka who does so. The Śruti
also confirms that Bhagavān is controlled by bhakti
(bhakti-vaśaḥ purusaḥ), yet the degree to which He is
controlled is also gradated. He is not controlled
equally by all the bhaktas.

Sādhakas engage in devotional services according to
their individual tastes and desires, and thus they
control Bhagavān to the degree of their devotion. They
may even be performing the same limb of bhakti as each
other, but due to the sādhakas’ individual natures,
there will be differences in their practice, so they
will not control Bhagavān to the same degree.
Essentially, this means that to the degree of intensity
with which a devotee desires to perform service,
Bhagavān is then accordingly inclined to manifest His
quality of being controlled by him. It is for this
reason that the devotees of śānta, dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya, and kānta-bhāva[xii]11 do not each control
Bhagavān to the same extent.

There is another point to consider: Is Bhagavān
controlled simply by hearing the hari-kathā that comes
from the mouth of His devotees? Or is Bhagavān
controlled by a listener who attains some special state
on hearing hari-kathā? It is with the intention of

                             59
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

clarifying this that Mahāprabhu asked Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
to speak a little further on the subject. The listener
controls Bhagavān just by listening to the narrations of
Bhagavān’s pastimes — this is fine, but this takes place
only when the hearer of hari-kathā is situated in the
stage of prema.

Prema-bhakti — devotion endowed with the characteristics
of divine love. That proclivity to render such service
that it gives excessive happiness to Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called
prema. Through the performance of hearing and chanting
performed in the stage of jñāna-śūnyā-bhakti, by the
mercy of Bhagavān, the contamination of the heart is
gradually dispelled. Thereafter, knowledge of the
servant’s relationship with the Lord as well as the
tendency to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa, manifest in the heart.
Then, by the mercy of the svarūpa-śakti, the essence of
the hlādinī and saṁvit-śaktis (Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental
bliss and knowledge potencies) enters the heart of the
sādhaka. The fully ripened, or mature, stage of śuddha-
sattva is called prema. This devotional service to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, which is filled with pure love, is known as
prema-bhakti.

Bhagavat-kathā is both our sādhya and our sādhana;
similarly, so is prema-bhakti. If there is prema within
the heart of the sādhaka then he will perform all the
limbs of bhakti with deep love, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is pleased
with him. Without prema, the sādhaka may perform bhakti
but that bhakti will never satisfy Śrī Kṛṣṇa. For a
person who is hungry, even dry bread seems most
appealing, but if someone is neither hungry nor thirsty
then he can easily ignore a delicious feast replete with
the six types of tastes (salty, sweet, pungent, bitter,
sour, and astringent).

Controlled by the prema of Vidura, Śrī Kṛṣṇa ate even
banana skins, yet because Duryodhana had no prema, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa abstained from a huge feast, composed of all six
tastes, served by him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa ate the rice and
yoghurt offered with prema by the wives of the
brāhmaṇas, Śrī Rāmacandra ate the remnant fruits of
Śabarī (a low-caste lady dwelling in the forest), and
Śrīman Mahāprabhu consumed vegetables snatched from the
devotee Śrīdhara. Bhagavān, hungry to eat whatever a
premī-bhakta offers Him, very lovingly and
enthusiastically accepts foodstuffs presented with
prema.

Although Śrī Lakṣmī resides eternally on the chest of
Śrīman Nārāyaṇa, she identifies as being the wife of a
brāhmaṇa. Proud of this designation, her serving
attitude was slackened and she was thus precluded from
entering the pastimes of Vraja. When one has knowledge
of the relationship between the master (sevya) and
servant (sevaka), the tendency or desire to render
service transforms into prema and the premī-bhakta
chants the holy name, maintaining a vow to chant a fixed
number of names daily. The devotee engages in sādhana-
bhajana, absorbed in the moods expressed in these songs:



rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭa-kuñja-kuṭīra, govardhana-parvata,

                             60
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

yāmuna-tīra

“A bower on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇda, as well as
Govardhana Hill, and the banks of the Yamunā River — all
these places are my life and soul.”



he rādhe vraja-devīke ca lalite he nanda-sūno kutaḥ

śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vane kutaḥ

“O Rādhā, mistress of Vṛndāvana! O Lalitā! O son of
Nanda Mahārāja! Where are all of you now? Are you seated
beneath the kalpa-vṛkṣa (desire trees) of Śrī Govardhana
Hill? Or are you roaming in the forests along the soft
sandy banks of the Yamunā?”



A devotee who performs sādhana-bhajana in this way very
much pleases Bhagavān, who becomes restless to taste
even his ordinary offerings. In order to taste prema, He
will dance for just a cup of buttermilk.



8.69

nānopacāra-kṛta-pūjanam ārta-bandhoḥ

premṇaiva bhakta-hṛdayaṁ sukha-vidrutaṁ syāt

yāvat kṣud asti jaṭhare jaraṭhā pipāsā

tāvat sukhāya bhavato nanu bhakṣya-peye



Padyāvalī (13)



“?ëAs long as one feels acute hunger and thirst, one
enjoys eating and drinking. In the same way, even if one
worships ārtta-bandhu Bhagavān (the Lord who is the
friend of the distressed) with many different types of
paraphernalia, only when that pūjā is performed with
prema will that devotee’s heart melt with happiness.’




The essential meaning is that if very strong hunger and
thirst are not present, then even if one is offered very
tasty, fragrant, and appetizing dishes, one will still
not have a desire to eat. Likewise, if there is no
prema, then even if one worships Śrī Kṛṣṇa with many,
many different articles, still He is not pleased. And,
on the other hand, if one has a raging hunger and
thirst, then one will appreciate and be greatly
satisfied by taking common rice and water. Similarly, if
prema is present in a devotee’s heart, Śrī Kṛṣṇa

                             61
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

receives great happiness by accepting even ordinary
items the devotee gives Him.

Some people may doubt that the example and the idea
being clarified actually correspond because, in the
example it says that only if a person is hungry and
thirsty can taking simple rice and water give him
happiness. Yet in the idea being clarified, it says that
Bhagavān indeed feels hungry upon being given anything
with prema. Thus the doubt may come in the mind that, if
the devotee is hungry to serve, then how does this makes
Bhagavān hungry? Yet such a doubt is unfounded.[xiii]12

We can thus see that since Bhagavān lovingly accepts a
devotee’s service, according to the degree of strong
love that he has for Bhagavān, that such a doubt has no
basis. If prema is not present in the heart of the
devotee, then the desire to accept service cannot
possibly awaken in the heart of Bhagavān. Once prema
awakens in the heart of the devotee and reaches the
stage of extreme eagerness and longing to serve, then
the desire to accept service awakens in the heart of
bhakta-vatsala Bhagavān (the Lord who is always
affectionate to the devotee). That is why here, Bhagavān
is called ārtta-bandhu (friend of the distressed). With
regard to the object of sādhana, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has
said:



kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya-

bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya

prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.2)



“Sādhana-bhakti is the engagement of the mind and senses
in the limbs of bhakti for the purpose of attaining
bhāva-bhakti. This bhāva is a potentiality which
eternally exists in the heart of the jīva and is
manifested in the heart purified by sādhana (through the
mercy of a nitya-siddha, a living sad-guru).”

Pure devotion is the ever-present, eternal
constitutional position of the jīva. The living being is
a tiny particle of blissful consciousness, likened to a
spark of sunshine (cit-kaṇa) of the all-blissful
spiritual sun (cit-sūrya) Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This naturally
occuring happiness is known as nitya-siddha-bhāva
(eternally present love for Kṛṣṇa) and it is awakened in
the heart of the jīva by the practice of sādhana-bhakti.
In this stage, the eternally perfect object, namely, the
potency of pure love for Godhead, reaches its
perfection. When the bound jīvas, endeavoring by their
senses, strive to attain bhāva, their practice is called
sādhana-bhakti. The goal of sādhana-bhakti is to awaken
bhāva-bhakti.


                             62
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

At the time of initiation, or dīkṣā, the holy master
instructs the sādhaka on his relationship with Śrī
Bhagavān. Fixed in this relationship, the devotee
performs sādhana with firm determination, and thus he
achieves bhāva-bhakti. When this bhāva-bhakti reaches a
completely ripened condition it is known as prema-
bhakti. The sādhaka-bhakta becomes extremely blessed
when śrī guru bestows realization of his position as a
maidservant of Śrī Rādhā. Only by the devotion of His
devotees does Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s love swell. The term sādhana-
bhakti includes all of the progressive stages of bhakti
— śraddhā (faith), sādhu-saṅga (association with pure
devotees), bhajana-anuṣṭhāna (performance of devotional
service to Kṛṣṇa), anartha-nivṛtti (the diminishing of
all unwanted habits), niṣṭhā (firm faith), ruci (taste),
and āsakti (attachment).



8.70

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ

krīyatāṁ yadi kuto ‘pi labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate



Padyāvalī (14)



“?ëO men of virtue, if consciousness that is saturated
and perfumed with the nectar of kṛṣṇa-bhakti is
available anywhere, then purchase it at once without
delay. The only price to get it is greed to obtain
vraja-rasa (the moods of Vraja). Without this divine
greed, then even heaps of spiritual credits (sukṛti)
accumulated over millions of lives will not be enough to
procure that bhakti for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.’?”




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that this type of
devotion, where the heart is soaked in kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa
(the nectar of loving service to Kṛṣṇa), has only one
price and that price is greed. Bhakti is of two types:
the first is śāstra-avadhāraṇā-mayī vaidhī-bhakti, the
path of bhakti inspired by the governing principles of
the scriptures, and the second is lobha-mūlaka rāgānuga-
bhakti, devotion impelled by greed to follow the loving
sentiments of the eternally perfected residents of
Vraja. Here Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya is alluding solely to
this second type of devotion, namely lobha-mūlaka
rāgānuga-bhakti. Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura tells us that
the only method to give happiness to Śrī Kṛṣṇa is kṛṣṇa-
bhakti-bhavitā mati, to have a consciousness infused
with the flavors of loving service to Him. A fortunate
person may enter this rāgānuga-bhakti, spontaneous

                             63
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

devotion.

In this case “Śrī Kṛṣṇa” means “Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of Vraja,” and bhakti
signifies bhāva-bhakti, the initial stage of perfection
in devotion, which matures into prema-bhakti. The phrase
prema-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā mati refers to that person
whose every pore is utterly saturated with śrī-kṛṣṇa-
bhakti-rasa, and whose intelligence has become one with
that bhakti-rasa[xiv]13. This mood may only be attained
by the mercy of Bhagavān. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it has
been said:



satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25)



“In the assembly of pure devotees, powerful discussions
illuminating My heroic deeds become a rejuvenating tonic
for both the ears and the heart. By hearing these
narrations, one quickly advances on the path of
emancipation from ignorance. First he develops śraddhā,
then rati, and finally prema-bhakti.”

This bhakti-bhāva is received by two methods — by the
mercy of the devotee (bhakta-prasādaja) and by the mercy
of Bhagavān (bhagavat-prasādaja). The mercy of Bhagavān
strictly follows the mercy of the devotee. This is the
very reason why Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa descended in
the form of the topmost devotee, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and poured His mercy everywhere.




Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura has prayed to Śrī Lokanātha
Gosvāmī:



kabe lokanātha more saṅge laiyā jābe

śrī rūpera pāda-padme more samarpibe

“O Gurudeva! When will you bestow upon me your mercy and
offer me to the feet of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī?”

In the same manner we see Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja praying
at the end of almost every chapter of Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta:




                              64
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

śrī-rūpa-raghunātha-pade yāra āśa

caitanya-caritāmṛta kahe kṛṣṇa dāsa

“Always praying at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī
Raghunātha for their mercy, I, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja,
recite this Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.”



Bhagavān can give bhakti but not a mood of service to
Him. Along with bhakti, the devotee can also give his
own bhāva and his own personal realizations. By
accepting these bhāvas, or moods, it no longer remains
difficult for one to attain bhakti. In the same way that
sugar syrup permeates every atom of a rasagullā,
similarly every pore of the body of a vraja-rasa-rasika
guru or Vaiṣṇava is completely saturated with prema-
bhakti-rasa. At every moment, the rasika Vaiṣṇava
continuously distributes the most purifying sweet
discussions of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. His mind,
intelligence, affection, and character are all
completely filled with Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rasamayī-bhakti
(ambrosial devotion).

By associating with these rasika devotees, greed is
awakened to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa with prema. If due to that
greed, one has to give up his very life, Bhagavān will
indeed become dearer to him than his own existence. We
all possess this prema-rasa in our hearts, but now it is
dormant. It is by hearing discussions saturated with
bhakti-rasa that this prema will be awakened. The
devotee hears bhakti-śāstras (devotional scriptures) and
cultivates his Kṛṣṇa consciousness by following the
instructions given in them; thus he becomes immersed in
this bhakti-bhāva.




Dāsya-prema — the love of a servant for Kṛṣṇa




8.71

prabhu kahe,ó”eho haya, āge kaha āra”

rāya kahe,ó”dāsya-premaósarva-sādhya-sāra”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “This is fine, but please speak
something more.” Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “Loving
service in servitude (dāsya-prema) — as exchanged by
master and servant — is the essence of all perfection.




                             65
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

The bhakti of all devotees is not equal. There is a
gradation. “Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya kṛṣṇa-dāsa — It is
the living entity’s constitutional position to be an
eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa.” This dāsya-bhāva also has
gradations within it. If rain falls at the time of the
svāti-nakṣatra and falls upon an oyster, then that rain
produces a pearl. If it falls on a banana plant it
produces camphor, and if it falls on the head of an
elephant it gives rise to gaja-muktā, a pearl found in
the projections of an elephant’s forehead, and thus
known as an elephant pearl. If that same rain falls upon
the feet of a cow it makes a yellow pigment called
gorocanā, and if it falls on bamboo, then vaṁśa-locana,
which is a milky colored substance is formed in the
hollow of the bamboo.

Different transformations take place, depending on the
objects the rain falls upon. Similarly, if a variety of
seeds, such as mango, neem, and tamarind, are planted in
the same garden and watered with the same Ganges water,
three different kinds of fruit-bearing trees will
appear. In the same way, despite the fact that everyone
is a servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, each person’s eternal
constitutional service mood is different, and because
these service moods are variegated, the happiness
derived from the service, is also variegated. By
performing service, worship, and sādhana under the
guidance of śrī gurudeva and Vaiṣṇavas, the eternal
constitutional position of the sādhaka, the nitya-
svarūpa, manifests itself. Beforehand, śuddha-sattva
must necessarily manifest in the heart.

The essential meaning of dāsya-bhāva is as follows: “Śrī
Bhagavān is the object of service. He is my master
(prabhu) and I am His servant (dāsa).” The service
propensity (sevā-vāsanā) that accompanies this mood of
servitorship is called dāsya-prema. Service rendered to
Bhagavān that is devoid of this dāsya-bhāva and its
accompanying feelings of possessiveness (mamatā), is
called ordinary prema-bhakti, or śānta-prema; it cannot
establish a relationship with Bhagavān.

When one’s feeling of possessiveness of the Lord
gradually increases, this ordinary prema (śānta-prema)
transforms into the mood of a servant (dāsya-bhāva).
More complete feelings of servitorship are found within
all the Lord’s associates who participate in His
pastimes. This mood of servitude is present completely
in the devotees in dāsya-rasa, more completely in the
devotees in the mellow of friendship (sakhya-rasa), most
completely in the devotees in the parental mood
(vātsalya-rasa), and is totally complete in the devotees
in the amorous mellow (madhura-rasa).

In the dāsya-bhakti of the devotees of Vraja, mamatā
(excessive feelings of intimacy, or possessiveness) are
mixed with feelings of fraternity and parental affection
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The various types of wonderment of prema,
all of which consist of the desire to please Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
present themselves through devotional service rendered
in the mood of servitude (dāsya-sevā). For the
glorification of dāsya-prema, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya quotes
the following verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:


                             66
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017



8.72

yan-nāma-śruti-mātreṇa pumān bhavati nirmalaḥ

tasya tīrtha-padaḥ kiṁ vā dāsānām avaśiṣyate



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (9.5.16)

“Śrī Durvāsā, the best of ṛṣis, said to Ambarīṣa
Mahārāja, ëSimply by hearing the all auspicious names of
Bhagavān, the jīva becomes pure, so for those who are
the servants of the lotus feet of tīrtha-pada Bhagavān,
what desirable object remains to be still attained?’



8.73

bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ

praśānta-niḥśeṣa-mano-rathāntaraḥ

kadāham aikāntika-nitya-kiṅkaraḥ

praharṣayiṣyāmi sa-nātha-jīvitam



Stotra-ratna (43)

by Śrī Yāmuna Muni (Śrī Yāmunācārya)



“?ëO Lord, when will I become Your eternal, one-pointed
servant, renouncing all desires apart from serving You,
and always feeling joyful because of having such a
glorious master?’?”




Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that it is clear from
both of these verses that there is nothing the servant
of Bhagavān cannot attain. In both cases, the devotee’s
only prayer is for the feeling of eternal exclusive
servitorship. Service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only success
of life.

In dāsya-prema, the specialty of prema-bhakti is
concealed. This dāsya-rasa flows continuously in
Vaikuṇṭha, Ayodhyā, Dvārakā, Mathurā, and Vraja; yet
throughout these holy abodes, dāsya-rasa exists in
special types of gradation. The feelings of awe and
reverence (aiśvarya) diminish as one progresses from
Vaikuṇṭha to Ayodhyā, to Dvārakā, and finally to Vraja.
As one advances towards Vraja, the feelings of reverence
that are present in the devotees in the mood of
servitorship of Vaikuṇṭha are gradually concealed. Also,

                             67
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

as one approaches Vraja, the sweetness of prema as well
as feelings of possessiveness for the Lord increase.

In his Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī says
that the minds of the dāsya-bhaktas of Vṛndāvana are
attracted only to the

service of Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and nothing
else. On the other hand, when the dāsya-bhaktas of
Vaikuṇṭha, Ayodhyā, Dvārakā, and Mathurā see the service
of the dāsya-bhaktas of Vraja, their greed awakens for
that. It is not that there is no opulence in Vraja;
indeed it exists in great profusion. Kṛṣṇa’s lifting Śrī
Govardhana for seven days with one hand, killing demons
such as Pūtanā and Aghāsura, showing Mother Yaśodā
unlimited universes within His mouth — all these
pastimes are full of opulence, but the Vrajavāsīs
considered such displays of majesty to be the power of
Nārāyaṇa, the influence of the illusory energy, or the
spell of some witch.

For this reason, when Kanhaiyā (a pet name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa)
displayed unlimited universes within His mouth, Mother
Yaśodā thought, “Some witch has attacked my son.” In
order to protect Him, the controller of all, she bathed
Him in cow dung and cow urine, engaged the brāhmaṇas in
chanting protective mantras and incantations for Him,
and gave away charity on His behalf.

In fact, in dāsya-bhāva, one constantly ponders, “What
service can I do?” Hence in this present verse, the word
kiṅkara[xv]14 has been used for the devotees of dāsya-
bhāva. It has already been mentioned that there is no
śuddha-dāsya (feelings of pure, unmixed servitorship) in
the dāsya devotees of Vraja; rather their mood of dāsya
is mixed with feelings of friendship (sakhya) and
parental affection (vātsalya-bhāva).

Another speciality of the dāsya-bhaktas of Vraja is that
again, unlike the dāsya devotees of other places, there
are no feelings of pure respect and reverence. Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura reveals that devotees of
dāsya-bhāva in the mood of awe and reverence have a
concept that offenses can be committed in their service;
therefore for them, there is no deluge of prema. In
dāsya-prema, service is not fully developed.

The service of the dāsya-bhaktas Jaya and Vijaya in
Vaikuṇṭha, composed of feelings of pure awe and
reverence, is extraordinarily beautiful, but in those
bhaktas, we cannot see the mood of viśrambha-sevā, pure
service performed with intimacy and devoid of feelings
of awe and reverence. In order to fulfill the desire of
their Lord, during the pastimes accomplished by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s creative internal potency (yogamāyā), they
accepted three births in demonic species. By doing so
they gave their Lord an opportunity to taste vīra-rasa,
or happiness obtained in fighting, in its completeness.
In one form they were providing Him with a taste of this
chivalrous mellow (vīra-rasa), and simultaneously, in
another form, or svarūpa, they were engaged in their
service in Vaikuṇṭha.

Almost all the devotees in Ayodhyā are in dāsya-bhāva.

                             68
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017

Amongst all of the servants    there, Śrī Hanumān is the
topmost. Hanumān serves his    Lord, Śrī Rāma, with his
full life force. Because of    his great thirst for
service, he warmly welcomes    any type of service to Śrī
Rāma.

Rāma is present in every pore of his entire being, and
his every breath contains Rāma. Rāma is his life and
soul. When by trickery, Ahi-Rāvaṇa, the adopted younger
brother of Rāvaṇa, took Śrī Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa to Pātāla-
loka as a human sacrifice, then and there Hanumān killed
him, and seating Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa upon his shoulders,
he took them away from there. But he cannot serve the
Lord like the dāsya-bhaktas of Vraja; he cannot take his
Lord on his lap, nor can he kiss Him.

It can be accepted that the dāsya-bhaktas of Dvārakā are
superior to the dāsya-bhaktas of Ayodhyā, but even
within them, there is not so much as a scent of sakhya
(friendship).

Śrīman Mahāprabhu, thinking that now Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
was approaching the desired sādhya, said:




Sakhya-prema — the love of a friend for Kṛṣṇa




8.74

“prabhu kahe,ó”eho haya, kichu āge āra”

rāya kahe,ó”sakhya-premaósarva-sādhya-sāra”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “This dāsya-prema is perfection.
What you have said is correct, but please speak
something beyond this.” Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya replied,
“Sakhya-prema, or prema-bhakti infused with the feelings
of fraternity, is the essence of all perfection.




The devotee who in the profusion of prema considers
himself to be as good as Śrī Kṛṣṇa, does not accept that
Kṛṣṇa is superior to him in any way. There is a saying,
khelata meṁ ko kāko gusaiyāṅ, which means, “In play, who
is the master of anyone?” Such devotees are called the
sakhās of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The name of their favorable service
mood to Śrī Kṛṣṇa is sakhya-prema. The fixed devotion
(niṣṭhā) of śānta-bhāva, the service mood imbued with
possessiveness (mamatā) of dāsya-bhāva, and the mood of
service with intimacy (viśrambha-sevā) of sakhya-bhāva
are all present in this sakhya-prema.


                              69
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

When one compares these bhāvas, it can be seen that even
though there is so much sense of possessiveness in
dāsya-prema, it still retains sambhrama-bhāva, or
feelings of respect. “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is my master and I am
His servant.” All the friends in Vaikuṇṭha, Ayodhyā,
Dvārakā, and Mathurā accept Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rāma as
Bhagavān. However, in the sakhya-prema of Vraja, the
devotee maintains the feelings of great intimacy
(viśrambha-bhāva), so he feels, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is a cowherd
boy, just like me; He is not superior to me in any way.
We are equal as cowherd boys and friends.” In addition,
whatever is done by the devotee in sakhya-prema will
certainly please Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

While eating, should the sakhās think that any foodstuff
is especially tasty, they place their remnants into Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s mouth, saying, “Kanhaiyā, just eat this pakorā
and see how tasty it is!” They do not feel shy in
feeding their remnants to Him. The fear, hesitation, and
respect of dāsya-bhāva are not present in sakhya-prema.
Only the feeling of equality (sama-bhāva) remains.

Sakhya-prema is characterized by viśrambha, one-pointed
affection full of loving trust, and includes feelings of
possessiveness between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His devotees. Even
though Arjuna and the other sons of Pāṇḍu are eternal
associates of the Lord, their affection for Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
sakhya-bhāva is full of awe and reverence for Him. But
in Vraja, such friends as Subala and Madhumaṅgala
possess sakhya-rati, which is composed of sweetness
(mādhurya).

Śrīman Rāya Rāmānanda here presents evidence from
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:



8.75

itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā

dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena

māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa

sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.12.11)



“Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said to Mahārāja Parīkṣit, ëHe who
manifests Himself to the jñānīs as the happiness of the
Brahman effugence, who manifests Himself to the devotees
of dāsya-rasa as the supremely worshipful Lord, and who
appears to those under the spell of illusory māyā as an
ordinary boy — that same Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa plays in
sakhya-rasa with the most fortunate cowherd boys of
Vraja, who are receiving the fruit of their profuse
pious activities.’?”



                             70
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




There are three different types of sādhakas: jñānīs,
karmīs, and bhaktas. According to their own particular
devotional practices, they each realize Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
different ways. The verse currently under consideration,
which depicts the realization of these different
sādhakas, glorifies above all the good fortune of the
cowherd boys of Vraja, in whom sakhya-bhāva has arisen.

Satām. The jñānīs, taking the help of bhakti, worship
Bhagavān by the process of jñāna, or speculative
knowledge. Without bhakti it is impossible for the
jñānī-sādhakas to gain knowledge. Thus, in order to
achieve perfection in jñāna, they take the shelter of
bhakti. We should understand the word satām here to
indicate the followers of the path of jñāna mixed with
bhakti.

Brahma-sukhānubhūtyā. Jñānīs worship nirviśeṣa-brahma,
the impersonal Brahman effulgence, as the Absolute
Truth, desiring sāyujya-mukti, or to merge into the
impersonal Brahman effulgence of the Lord. Once they
have achieved the perfection of this practice, they
derive happiness from the perception, or realization, of
this nirviśeṣa-brahma, which is, in fact, the effulgence
emanating from the bodily limbs of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. How is it
possible for the jñānīs to sport with this nirviśeṣa-
brahma?

Dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ refers to devotees who worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa
in dāsya-bhāva, nurturing feelings of respect and seeing
Him as their most worshipful Lord. They worship Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in the form of paradevatā, iṣṭadevatā, or
paramārādhya devatā. Due to feelings of reverence for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it is not possible for them to joke or play
with Him.

Māyāśritānāṁ — jīvas who are attached to fruitive
activities and bound by māyā, only recognize Bhagavān
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as an ordinary human child. Such souls under
the shelter of the illusory potency neither undertake
the bhajana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, nor do they love Him. What to
speak of playing with Him, such people are unable to
have realization of Him in any form.

Kṛta-puṇya-puñjā — those who have collected huge amounts
of pious activities — the cowherd boys of Vraja who have
achieved sakhya-rasa, the mood of friendship. In his
commentary on this verse, Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda
says that it describes the vast fortune of the sakhās of
Vraja, who go to the forest to picnic with Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
binding Him with the rope of prema that is full of
intimacy and devoid of reverence. These cowherd boys of
Vraja are said to have accumulated unlimited pious
activities, or kṛta-puṇya-puñjā. The fruitive workers
(karmīs), the impersonalist philosophers (jñānīs), and
the mystics (yogīs) can never eat and drink or play with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa under any circumstances. Here the verse tells
us that these sakhās are so fortunate that they sit on
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s shoulders and also have Him sit on their
shoulders.


                             71
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmīpāda says: kṛtānāṁ caritānāṁ
bhagavataḥ parama-prasāda-hetutvena, puṇyāścāravaḥ puñjā
yeṣāṁ te ityrthaḥ. Kṛta means the “behavior or character
of the cowherd boys.” Puṇya means “mind-enchanting.” The
behavior of the sakhās is indeed the cause of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s topmost mercy upon them; thus they are called
puṇya-puñja, which means “very beautiful” or
“enchanting.” Puñjā here means “group.” The sakhās of
Vraja possess matured mamatā (sense of possessiveness)
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which is generated from prema.

Itthaṁ — sinking or immersed in prema. There are
examples of this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.12.4—10)
describing how Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās decorate each
other with leaves and flowers, and how they steal each
others’ flutes and sticks. When for some reason Śrī
Kṛṣṇa goes some distance away, the sakhās then run to
catch Him. They imitate the calls of bees and peacocks
with their forest bugles and flutes, dance with the
peacocks, and sit like cranes on the bank of the Yamunā.
They contort their faces to resemble the cranes’ mouths,
jump like frogs, challenge their own shadows, and
perform other mind-enchanting activities. The sakhās,
completely devoid of reverence and full of intimacy
(viśrambha-bhāva), exclaim as they climb on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
shoulders, “tumi kon baḍa loka,ótumi āmi sama — What
kind of big man are You? You and I are equal!” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 4.25).

They shout, “Oh, come on, Kanhaiyā! What? Do You
consider Yourself a great person? You don’t know
anything! Your father only has nine hundred thousand
cows, while my father has one million one hundred
thousand cows.”

If Kṛṣṇa is sleeping and the cowherd boys arrive, they
ask, “O Mother, where is Kanhaiyā? What is He doing?”
Mother Yaśodā replies, “Now He is sleeping. Do not wake
Him up.” But before her reply is heard, all the boys
jump onto His bed and wake Him, saying “Kanhaiyā! Are
You still sleeping? The time for taking the cows out to
graze is passing.”

Here is a sign of sama-bhāva (the mood of equality) in
the intimate friendship between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
friends. There are sakhās in Dvārakā like Arjuna and
also others, but they can never act like this. As soon
as Śrī Kṛṣṇa shows His virāṭa-svarūpa (universal form)
to Arjuna, he begins shaking in fear and joins his hands
together in prayerful supplication. Likewise in Ayodhyā,
sakhās such as Sugrīva, Vibhīṣaṇa, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata,
and Śatrughna are the friends and brothers of Śrī Rāma.
Even though they are His brothers and sakhās, they can
never act so intimately with Him. Bharata, Lakṣmaṇa, and
Śatrughna cannot sit on the same seat as Śrī Rāma
because of their feelings of reverence and respect for
Him. These emotions make it impossible for them to have
the same feelings of complete equality and intimacy
(viśrambha-bhāva) as the sakhās of Vraja. In Vraja there
is friendship, love, possessiveness, and sweetness.



kāndhe caḍe, kāndhe caḍāya, kare krīḍā-raṇa

                             72
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017


kṛṣṇe seve, kṛṣṇe karāya āpana-sevana!



viśrambha-pradhāna sakhyaógaurava-sambhrama-hīna

ataeva sakhya-rasera ëtina’ guṇaócihna



ëmamatā’ adhika, kṛṣṇe ātma-sama jñāna

ataeva sakhya-rasera vaśa bhagavān

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā (19.223—225)



“The devotee in sakhya-rasa sometimes offers Kṛṣṇa
service and sometimes he makes Kṛṣṇa serve him. As they
playfully fight, the gopas sometimes climb on Kṛṣṇa’s
shoulders, and sometimes they have Him climb on their
shoulders. This sakhya-rasa possesses three qualities:
viśrambha-pradhāna (a prominence of intimacy), sakhya
(friendship), and gaurava-sambhrama-hīna (a lack of
feelings of deference and reverential respect).”

Kṛṣṇa’s sakhās, the cowherd boys of Vraja, have not
attained their position by the fruit of any puṇya, or
pious material activities, or by observing any sādhana.
They are all eternally perfect associates of the Lord
(nitya-siddha-parikara), and they have been engaged
eternally in the loving service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. For
tasting sakhya-rasa, Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, has manifested Himself
as all the cowherd boys from time eternal. All the
cowherd boys are personified forms of the sandhinī
portion of the svarūpa-śakti. To the ultimate degree
that the tendency to serve is developed, then to that
degree Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is to be served as the object of
service (sevya-vastu) will also reveal Himself. The
service tendency of the eternal associates is fully
developed in their svātantrya-mayī-sevā (independent
service). And by following ānugatya-mayi-sevā (service
performed under their guidance) then our own service
tendency unfolds correspondingly.




Vātsalya-prema — the love of a parent for Kṛṣṇa




8.76

prabhu kahe,ó”eho uttama, āge kaha āra”

rāya kahe,ó”vātsalya-premaósarva-sādhya-sāra”


                             73
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “O Rāmānanda, that is the
topmost, but please speak something beyond this.” Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya then said that vātsalya-prema (parental
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa) is indeed the essence of all
perfection.




In his commentary on this statement, Śrī Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura says that sakhya-rasa is superior to dāsya-rasa,
but one can find a goal that is superior even to this.
Śrī Rāya replied, “Vātsalya-prema is the essence of all
perfection.” Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda expressed this
inner intention thus: “Śrīman Mahāprabhu heard Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya’s conclusion that the ultimate goal is
sakhya-rasa. Thereupon, Śrīman Mahāprabhu said that
sakhya-prema is superior to dāsya-prema. When Śrīman
Mahāprabhu requested that he expand further upon the
subject, he described vātsalya-prema, love in the mood
of parental affection.

Up until this point, Śrīman Mahāprabhu has said, “Eho
haya — this is good,” but now to this He replies, “Eho
uttama — this is the topmost.” Prior to sakhya-rasa
being mentioned, whatever scriptural evidence that had
been presented had mainly referred to the practitioner
who comes in the category of an ordinary living entity;
but here the discussion embarks upon the subject of the
nitya-siddha-parikaras, or the eternally perfected
associates of the Lord. The devotees of śānta and dāsya-
rasa are controlled by Bhagavān, but from the stage of
sakhya-rasa onward, Bhagavān is controlled by His
devotee.

Some of those eternally perfect associates, in the form
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mother and father, consider themselves to
be superior to Him. They regard themselves as His
maintainers, and they see Him as the object of their
mercy. Their mood to maintain Kṛṣṇa is called vātsalya-
prema, or parental love, which demonstrates even more
mamatā than sakhya-rasa. Within vātsalya, we find the
firm faith and determination (niṣṭhā) of śānta-rasa, the
service mood of dāsya-rasa, and especially the fraternal
love devoid of shyness or reserve that is peculiar to
sakhya-rasa. In addition, we find in vātsalya a mood
that Kṛṣṇa must be sustained. Such devotees are His
complete protectors, and will even punish, scold, and
bind Him.



vātsalye śāntera guṇa, dāsyera sevana

sei sei sevanera iṅhā nāmaóëpālana’



sakhyera guṇaóëasaṅkoca’, ëagaurava’ sāra

mamatādhikye tāḍana-bhartsana-vyavahāra

                             74
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




āpanāre ëpālaka’ jñāna, kṛṣṇe ëpālya’-jñāna

ëcāri’ guṇe vātsalya rasaóamṛta-samāna



se amṛtānande bhakta saha ḍubena āpane

ëkṛṣṇaóbhakta-vaśa’ guṇa kahe aiśvarya-jñāni-gaṇe

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā (19.226—229)



“In parental love, all of the qualities found in śānta-
rasa, dāsya-rasa, and sakhya-rasa become transformed
into a particular service called maintainanence.

“The essence of sakhya-rasa is intimacy devoid of the
formality and reverence of dāsya-rasa. It is because of
this increased sense of intimacy that one chastises and
admonishes Kṛṣṇa.

“One with vātsalya-prema considers oneself to be Kṛṣṇa’s
nourisher and maintainer, and cares for Him as one does
a son. The four qualities found in the other four rasas
are all within this vātsalya-rasa, which is just like
nectar.

“The reciprocation of nectarean bliss between Kṛṣṇa and
the devotee is such that Kṛṣṇa is completely subjugated
by the devotee. This happiness is compared with an ocean
of nectar into which the devotee and Kṛṣṇa plunge. This
is the conclusion of the aiśvarya-jñānīs, those with
knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s opulence.”

8.77

nandaḥ kim akarod brahman

śreya evaṁ mahodayam

yaśodā vā mahā-bhāgā

papau yasyāḥ stanaṁ hariḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.8.46)



“Śrī Parīkṣit Mahārāja enquired from Śrī Śukadeva
Gosvāmī, ëWhat auspicious pious activities did Śrī Nanda
Bābā perform so that Śrī Kṛṣṇa agreed to become his son?
And what did Śrī Yaśodā do that led to the Absolute
Truth Śrī Kṛṣṇa sucking that most fortunate woman’s
breast milk?’




                              75
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda then presented one more verse from
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:



8.78

nemaṁ viriñco na bhavo

na śrīr apy aṅga-saṁśrayā

prasādaṁ lebhire gopī

yat tat prāpa vimukti-dāt



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.10)



“Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said to Śrī Parīkṣit Mahārāja, ëO
saintly King, the mercy that the gopī Yaśodā received
from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the giver of liberation, was not given
to Brahmā, or Śiva, or even to Lakṣmī, who always
resides on the chest of Śrī Viṣṇu.’?”




Here, we see Śrī Kṛṣṇa being controlled by vātsalya-
bhāva, parental affection. Despite being the supreme
Lord Himself and full of unlimited opulence, He was
completely controlled by Mother Yaśodā’s prema, and thus
He allowed her to bind Him. Who can bind Him, who is
unlimited, having no inside, outside, top, or bottom?

However, due to excessive feelings of possessiveness she
thinks Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be the object of protection and
maintenance and herself to be His guardian and
maintainer, and for His welfare, she bound Him. But no,
this is not so. He was bound by vātsalya-prema; this was
His mercy upon Mother Yaśodā. Such mercy was never
achieved by anyone else. Even Brahmā, who is the son of
the Lord, or Śrī Śiva, who has emanated from the Lord’s
own body, or even Lakṣmī herself, who resides eternally
on the Lord’s chest, cannot obtain such mercy as Śrī
Yaśodā received.

Bhagavān has said that He is always subservient to the
devotee — ahaṁ bhakta-parādhīnaḥ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
9.4.63). In the pastime of His mother binding Him to the
grinding mortar, known as dāma-bandhana-līlā, His
affection for His devotee is displayed to its highest
degree.

With reference to the sukṛti (devotional merits) of
Nandarāya and Yaśodā, our ācāryas (recognized
preceptors) have said that both are eternally perfect
associates. It was Śrī Droṇa and Dharā, who are actually
partial expansions (aṁśas) of Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā

                              76
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

respectively, who had performed austerities. They had
begged from Lord Brahmā the benediction of receiving a
relationship with Bhagavān in vātsalya-prema. Lord
Brahmā knew them to be partial expansions of Śrī Nanda
and Yaśodā. Thus Brahmā, desiring to be the object of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s affection, said to both of them, “Tathāstu —
So be it.” If one does not have vraja-prema himself, how
can he grant it to someone else?

The query may arise here that since Nanda Bābā and
Yaśodā-māiyā are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal parents, what is
the need for them to perform austerities? All of this is
arranged by Yogamāyā to carry out the Lord’s human-like
pastimes. Lord Brahmā knew that this incident marked the
start of the manifestation of Bhagavān’s human-like
pastimes in the material world. It is also worth noting
that when Droṇa and Dharā requested this benediction,
some great sages were assembled there who had faith in
bhakti that is mixed with knowledge of the Lord’s
opulence. Therefore, Droṇa and Dharā directly requested
the benediction of para-bhakti, which automatically
transformed into their innate vātsalya-prema. Actually,
no one can become the mother and father of Śrī Kṛṣṇa by
the blessings of Lord Brahmā.

The fact is that when the aṁśīs (full, original forms of
Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā) appear in this world, their
respective aṁśas (partial expansions) again enter into
their bodies. This principle is indicated by Lord Brahmā
using the word tathāstu. Lord Brahmā is very far from
the position of Śrī Nanda-Yaśodā, so how can he give
this type of benediction to another? He himself hankers
to take birth in any lower species in Vraja — a deer,
animal, bird, tree, or creeper — and considers his life
successful if he will be able to obtain the footdust of
any resident of Vraja:



tad bhūri-bhāgyam iha janma kim apy aṭavyāṁ

yad gokule ‘pi katamāṅghri-rajo-’bhiṣekam

yaj-jīvitaṁ tu nikhilaṁ bhagavān mukundas

tv adyāpi yat-pada-rajaḥ śruti-mṛgyam eva

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.34)



Just as Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā are eternally perfected
personal associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, so too is their
vātsalya-prema eternally existent. Thus, the question
may arise that if vātsalya-prema cannot be achieved by
the performance of austerities, then are the spiritual
practices and the worship performed by those sādhakas
who desire vātsalya-bhāva also worthless? No, it is not
like this. One will definitely achieve vātsalya-bhāva in
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa if one worships under the guidance
of Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā, but no one can become either
Śrī Nanda or Yaśodā.

While discussing this subject it is also worth

                             77
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

mentioning that Śrī Nanda had five brothers, Upānanda
being the eldest. His father Parjanya wanted to make
Upānanda king, but Upānanda told his father, “I am
neither qualified nor able to become king. You will only
find such qualification in my younger brother Nanda.”
Hearing this Parjanya became very happy and announced
that Nanda would be the king of Vraja. All the people
welcomed Parjanya’s declaration.

On the other hand, Nanda was completely renounced, and
furthermore, he had no son, but as soon as Śrī Kṛṣṇa
took birth in his home, all of his detachment was
transformed into attachment. His house, kingdom, and
every object contained in them were all for the
enjoyment of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Both husband and wife performed
their endeavors so that there would be no shortcomings
in the rearing of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Both became absorbed in
feeding their son fresh butter, placing Him on their
laps and caressing Him. They chastised Him lovingly and
Yaśodā bound Him to a grinding mortar.

Nanda and Yaśodā learned that the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja, Rādhā, had obtained from Durvāsā Muni a
benediction, that whoever would eat the prasāda cooked
by Her lotus hands would always enjoy good health and
long life. Upon hearing this, with great respect they
invited Rādhā to their palace so that Kṛṣṇa would eat
the prasāda prepared by Her hand. Even when Rādhā was
married, Mother Yaśodā would patiently tolerate the
curses and complaints of Śrī Rādhā’s mother-in-law,
Jaṭilā, to whom she would continue to humbly send gifts
and requests to send Rādhā to cook for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Nanda
and Yaśodā loved Rādhā as much as they loved Kṛṣṇa.
Herein lies the great specialty of Nanda Bābā and Mother
Yaśodā’s parental affection. We find testimony to this
in Padyāvalī (126):



śrutim apare smṛtim itare

bhāratam anye bhajantu bhava-bhītāḥ

aham iha nandaṁ vande

yasyālinde param brahma

“In a world frightened by birth and death, some people
take shelter of the Śrutis, some of the Smṛtis, and some
of the Mahābhārata. But I pay my homage to Śrī
Nandarāya, in whose courtyard Parabrahma is playing as a
child.”



By this and other prayers, all ṛṣis, munis, and Śrī
Nārada himself have glorified Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa performed so many pastimes, but nowhere else was
He ever bound. When He became an envoy of peace and went
to Hastināpura, Duryodhana attempted to bind Him with
ropes, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa showed His universal form and
everyone in the whole assembly, including Duryodhana,
became fearful. We cannot find it described anywhere
that Bhagavān was bound by Mother Devakī or Kauśalyā;

                             78
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

but He was bound by the hand of Mother Yaśodā. Nanda-
Yaśodā’s human-like dealings (laukika sad-bandhuvat)
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa are not found anywhere else.

The source of all expansions, the unlimitedly opulent
Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, being controlled by the fully
ripened vātsalya-prema of Śrī Yaśoda, allowed Himself to
be bound, and by accepting this He experienced supreme
happiness. Indeed, He was extremely anxious to taste
this vātsalya-rasa. In this way, Yaśodā, who is so proud
of feeling that she is Kṛṣṇa’s mother, became even more
fortunate in this līlā, which combines both aiśvarya and
mādhurya.

It is not possible to describe Nanda and Yaśodā’s pain
of separation from Kṛṣṇa when He was going to Mathurā.
At that time Yaśodā became just like a piece of dry
wood. Śrī Nanda Bābā quit speaking with others and
stopped coming outside of the palace. Remembering his
son he simply would continuously call for Him and weep.
Immersed in the bottomless ocean of vātsalya-prema, he
remained searching for his son. Every second he would
turn his face towards Mathurā, waiting expectantly: “Now
He will come, now He will come.”

When Uddhava came and tried to pacify Nanda Bābā, it
only increased his feelings of separation one hundred
times over. Uddhava said, “O Nanda Mahārāja, come and
wander outside for a bit. Your mind may find some
distraction.” Nanda Baba replied, “Please tell me,
Uddhava, where should I go? Wherever I go, I remember
Kanhaiyā and become even more distressed. Every object I
see reminds me of Kṛṣṇa and pierces me like a spike. My
misery and suffering simply increase, but my life does
not leave me.”

Uddhava said, “O Nanda! Your son is directly Bhagavān,
the Supreme Lord.” Hearing this Nanda Baba exclaimed,
“Uddhava, I was thinking that you were extremely
intelligent, but this is not so. Uddhava, you do not
know the symptoms of Bhagavān. Does Bhagavān ever become
hungry? Come on, if Kṛṣṇa’s mother is just a little bit
late in bringing a ball of butter, He breaks all the
pots in the house. Does Bhagavān ever go house to house
stealing? Our boy wanders everywhere in Vraja, stealing.

“O my son Uddhava, if ever there were a real father,
then that was Mahārāja Daśaratha. After Śrī Rāma went to
the forest, he could not wait even one second —
immediately his life left him. But see, Uddhava, I do
not wish to die like Daśaratha Mahārāja. Before leaving,
Kanhaiyā said, ëI will definitely return,’ so surely He
will come back to Vraja. If I were to die before His
return, then, not seeing me, He will ask His mother
after me, and when His mother answers, ëMy son, Your
father has died,’ He will be so unhappy. Wherever I may
go, if He is unhappy, my unhappiness will only increase.
I will tolerate my own unhappiness, but Uddhava, I never
want to see any unhappiness in my son.”

The greatly learned sage Uddhava became dumbstruck; the
parental affection of Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā was beyond
his understanding. From the day that Kṛṣṇa went to
Mathurā, food had not been prepared, even once. For whom

                             79
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

would they cook? All the pots were kept upside-down and
the stove was covered with cobwebs.

What sweet and charming pastimes are found in vātsalya-
rasa! Just seeing Yaśodā’s upraised stick, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
opulence and position as Bhagavān ran away. When Mother
Yaśodā looked into Kṛṣṇa’s mouth after He ate dirt, she
saw all of the moving and non-moving entities in the
universe. Thinking this to be the work of some witch,
she continued to caress her son, as her affection for
Him simply swelled higher. Even today the personified
Vedas are searching for the foot dust of these
Vrajavāsīs.




Kāntā-prema — the love of a beloved for Kṛṣṇa




8.79

prabhu kahe,ó”eho uttama, āge kaha āra”

rāya kahe,ó”kāntā-bhāvaóprema-sādhya-sāra”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “This vātsalya-prema is the
topmost, but please speak something more.” Śrī Rāmānanda
Rāya replied, “Kāntā-prema is the essence of all
perfection.




Kāntā-prema — one thinks of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as one’s beloved.
In other words, considering herself to be His sweetheart
to be enjoyed by Him, she abandons her own happiness.
Even the desire to meet and be with Śrī Kṛṣṇa is only
for His happiness. Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that
vātsalya-prema can be accepted as topmost, but superior
still is one more rasa, which is said to be the essence
of all perfection. This kāntā-bhāva (the mood of a
ladylove) is indeed the supermost level of prema. In
ordinary prema (śānta-prema) there is an absence of a
sense of possessiveness (mamatā), in dāsya-rasa there is
an absence of intimacy and confidence (viśrambha and
viśvāsa), in sakhya-rasa there is an absence of
overflowing affection, and in vātsalya-rasa there is an
absence of freedom from shyness or hesitancy. Because
there is an assortment of shortcomings in all these
rasas, the prema in these respective rasas cannot be
said to have reached completeness. When kāntā-bhāva for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa awakens in the heart, then these shortcomings
disappear totally. In other words all that is lacking
becomes fulfilled, and the wellspring of the entire
prema-tattva begins to flow continuously; thus it is the
essence of the topmost goal.

                             80
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda says that vātsalya-prema is
superior to sakhya-prema, yet Mahāprabhu desires to hear
still more. Therefore, Rāmānanda Rāya explains
Mahāprabhu’s desired intention by explaining that the
essence of all perfection is kāntā-bhāva. Actually, the
real meaning of kāntā-bhāva is the extramarital mood
(parakīyā-bhāva) of the vraja-gopīs, which extends from
bhāva right up to mahābhāva, whereas vātsalya-prema can
only develop up to the stage of anurāga. In kāntā-bhāva,
the gopīs have the good fortune to engage all their
limbs in the most complete mood of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
The desire to perform service is developed to its
ultimate extremity:



madhura-raseókṛṣṇa-niṣṭhā, sevā atiśaya

sakhyera asaṅkoca, lālana-mamatādhikya haya



kānta-bhāve nijāṅga diyā karena sevana

ataeva madhura-rasera haya ëpañca’ guṇa



ākāśādi guṇa yena para para bhūte

eka-dui-tina-cāri krame pañca pṛthivīte



ei-mata madhure saba bhāva-samāhāra

ataeva āsvādādhikye kare camatkāra

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā (19.231—234)



“In madhura-rasa, the qualities available in the
previously mentioned relationships, such as attachment
for Kṛṣṇa, rendering service unto Him, uninhibited
feelings of fraternity, and the feelings of being His
maintainer, all increase. The heroine serves her beloved
with her entire body. Hence, all five transcendental
qualities are present, just as all material qualities
manifest one after another in the material elements,
starting from ether. First one quality develops, then
two, three and four, culminating with all five qualities
being present in the earth element. This union of the
moods of the other rasas in amorous love produces an
intensified taste that is quite astonishing.”



8.80

nāyaṁ śriyo ‘ṅga u nitānta-rateḥ prasādaḥ

svar-yoṣitāṁ nalina-gandha-rucāṁ kuto ‘nyāḥ

                             81
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


rāsotsave ‘sya bhuja-daṇḍa-gṛhīta-kaṇṭha-

labdhāśiṣāṁ ya udagād vraja-sundarīṇām



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.60)



“?ëIn the rāsa festival, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa embraced the
Vraja gopīs with His vine-like arms, and fulfilled all
of their desires. The mercy that was given to them by
Bhagavān was not even received by the most loving
Lakṣmī, who is eternally present on the chest of
Bhagavān. That mercy cannot be achieved by the ladies of
the heavenly planets, whose complexion and bodily aroma
are like that of a lotus, what to speak of other women.’




There are many different ways to explain this verse.

Rāsotsave — in the rāsa-līlā festival. The word utsava
(festival) has a very special intonation here. That
festival is the pastime wherein the gopīs fully blossom
after giving Śrī Kṛṣṇa complete happiness. Within rāsa-
līlā, all other types of līlās are also included. From
rasa, rāsa (rāsa-līlā) arises; rāsa is performed on the
platform made of rasa, or bliss.

Bhuja-daṇḍa-gṛhīta-kaṇṭha-labdhāśiṣāṁ — arms like
sticks, which are nicely rounded and gradually
increasing in beauty from the shoulders to the hands.
With these arms, He embraced the beautiful necks of the
gopīs and thus fulfilled their hearts’ desires.

Here our worshipable predecessor Gosvāmīs have given the
under-standing that rasika-śekhara Śrī Kṛṣṇa is placing
His beautiful, playful, attractively decorated,
delightful, extremely soft, gentle, and cooling arms
around the gopīs’ conch-shaped necks, which are marked
with three graceful lines. He is hanging there as if
swinging with intense love and begging them to fulfill
His innermost desires: “O gopīs, do not leave Me and go
elsewhere, and do not let Me go anywhere else; otherwise
I shall be swept far away in this nectarean ocean of
prema. You are My only saviors.”

Prasāda — mercy. Here, this means the qualification the
gopīs received from Śrī Kṛṣṇa by serving Him with their
entire bodies. Qualification means the supreme happiness
of intimate, personal association with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Not
even Lakṣmī could receive this happiness, what to speak
of the Apsarās, the society girls of heaven, or the
wives of the demigods.

Aṅge — this refers to the golden line on Kṛṣṇa’s chest.
This line is in fact none other than His most beloved
Lakṣmī, who is eternally seated upon the chest of Śrī
Nārāyaṇa, who is the vaibhava-svarūpa (opulent

                             82
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

manifestation) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Nitānta-rateḥ — She who is passionately in love with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. When Lakṣmī observed the great fortune of the
gopīs with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, she too hankered to join in the
rāsa-līlā festival. To attain the same good fortune, she
began to perform austerities, yet still to this day, her
desire remains unfulfilled.

Śriyaḥ. Even Lakṣmī could not attain the good fortune of
the beautiful Vraja gopīs.

Nāyaṁ. The word ayaṁ again indicates Lakṣmī, and it can
also apply to the queens of Dvārakā. Despite greatly
coveting rati for Śrī Vrajendra-nandana’s lotus feet,
still they could not achieve it. They could not realize
the uniqueness of rasa in Śrī Kṛṣṇa which is not found
in Śrī Nārāyaṇa.



8.81

tāsām āvirabhūc chauriḥ

smayamāna-mukhāmbujaḥ

pītāmbara-dharaḥ sragvī

sākṣān manmatha-manmathaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.2)



“Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said to Parīkṣit Mahārāja, ëAfter
the gopīs sang their lament of separation, Bhagavān
Madana-mohana, who churns and bewilders the mind of
Kāmadeva (Cupid) himself, suddenly appeared in the midst
of the gopīs wearing a golden yellow cloth, a garland of
forest flowers, and a smile on His lotus face.’




The particular image of Bhagavān portrayed here only
manifests in kāntā-rasa. This attractively sweet form
constitutes the center of focus and attraction for the
assembly of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds, the beautiful vraja-
gopīs. In separation from that astonishingly attractive
form, the gopīs experienced a mere second like millions
of years. In the pain of their separation, the form that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa assumed pierced the core of the gopīs’ heart
and seemed to only increase their suffering more and
more. This type of sweetness can be experienced only in
kāntā-bhāva, not in any other rasa.



8.82—83


                              83
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-prāptira upāya bahu-vidha haya

kṛṣṇa-prāpti-tāratamya bahuta āchaya



kintu yāṅra yei rasa, sei sarvottama

taṭastha hañā vicārile, āche tara-tama



“There are various means to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and they
afford many levels in the degree of that attainment.
Whatever relationship a particular devotee has with the
Lord is the best for him. Still, when we consider all
the differences from a neutral position, we can
understand that there are gradations of prema.




There are many spiritual practices available to attain
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, many varieties of tastes, and many devotional
moods also. In accordance with the undertaking of a
specific sādhana, one will achieve a particular form of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. By performing devotion mixed with speculative
knowledge (jñāna-miśrā-bhakti), one attains the
brahmajyoti, which is the bodily effulgence of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. By performing devotion in the mood of reverence
(aiśvarya-miśrā-bhakti), one achieves Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
opulent pastime expansion (vilāsa-mūrti) named Śrī
Nārāyaṇa. And by the practice of pure devotion (śuddhā-
bhakti) a person may attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.

There is a gradation in the specialty of the form of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa that manifests, depending on whether He is
attained by the devotional moods of dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya, or mādhurya. For those in dāsya-bhāva He is
the Lord, in sakhya-bhāva He is a friend, in vātsalya-
bhāva He is a son, and He is one’s most beloved to those
in kāntā-bhāva. Whatever mood each person has, that
particular bhāva is indeed the topmost. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrti, or the complete personification
of the nectar of all rasas, in whom there are five
primary rasas and seven secondary rasas. Śrī Śukadeva
Gosvāmī says:



mallānām aśanir nṛṇāṁ nara-varaḥ strīṇāṁ smaro mūrtimān

gopānāṁ sva-jano ‘satāṁ kṣiti-bhujāṁ śāstā sva-pitroḥ
śiśuḥ

mṛtyur bhoja-pater virāḍ aviduṣāṁ tattvaṁ paraṁ yogināṁ

vṛṣṇīnāṁ para-devateti vidito raṅgaṁ gataḥ sāgrajaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.43.17)




                             84
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

“O Parīkṣit, when Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the embodiment of all
rasas, entered the wrestling arena with His brother Śrī
Balarāma, the various groups of people present regarded
Kṛṣṇa in different ways according to the mood in which
they were situated, and they also realized that
particular rasa itself. The huge wrestlers witnessed
Kṛṣṇa to be as hard as a lightning bolt; the young
women, possessing a high degree of mādhurya-rasa, saw
Him as Cupid personified, and within their heart of
hearts they became absorbed in thinking of Him with
amorous intentions. The ordinary men regarded Him as
jewel-like among men, and the gopas recognized Him as
their relative. The impious rulers considered Him to be
a severe chastiser of the wicked; and the older men and
ladies, who were like His father and mother, viewed Him
as their most beautiful child. Kaṁsa, the king of the
Bhojas, knew Him as time personified or death; the
unintelligent materialists saw Him as the universal
form; the yogīs as the Absolute Truth, and the Vṛṣṇis,
who are devotees and lovingly disposed to the Lord,
honored Him as their supreme worshipable deity.”

Thus the yogīs developed śānta-rasa (neutrality); the
Vṛṣṇis developed dāsya-rasa (servitorship); the cowherd
boys, who are fond of joking, developed sakhya-rasa
(friendship); and hāsya-rasa (laughter); Nanda Bābā and
the other cowherd men developed vātsalya-rasa (parental
feelings); and karuṇa-rasa (compassion). The ladies
experienced madhura-rasa (amorous feelings), the
wrestlers developed vīra-rasa (chivalry), the ordinary
persons felt adbhuta-rasa (astonishment), the fearful
kings raudra-rasa (anger), Kaṁsa developed bhayānaka-
rasa (fear), and the materialists experienced vībhatsa-
rasa (disgust).

Śrī gurudeva, by means of mantra, establishes this type
of relationship with Bhagavān, according to the specific
taste in each individual jīva. The jīva also should then
remain attentive and absorbed in executing the process
of worship as given by the spiritual master until he
reaches his desired goal. Of all the devotional moods,
kāntā-bhāva is undoubtedly the most excellent.



8.84

yathottaram asau svāda-

viśeṣollāsa-mayy api

ratir vāsanayā svādvī

bhāsate kāpi kasyacit



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.5.38)



“?ëThere is an increase in degree of taste, pleasure,
and intensity enjoyed in each subsequent kind of rati.
The sequence culminates with the highest taste

                             85
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

manifesting in madhura-rasa, amorous love.’




In his Amṛta-pravāha-bhāṣya on this verse Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written: Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda
said, “I had previously mentioned many different types
of goals and methods to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but now I will
describe the gradation that exists between them.
According to a person’s qualification, he will follow
one of these methods to achieve his ultimate goal, the
kṛṣṇa-prema that is suitable for his particular level of
eligibility. In every case, such prema, or rasa, will
bring about his ultimate happiness.

The attainment of Kṛṣṇa is indeed the only worthwhile
and auspicious achievement. Of the four highest types of
rasa, namely, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, and madhura, the
rasa a person is qualified will be the best for him.
When someone qualifies for entering one particular rasa,
he cannot understand the gradation when compared with
another rasa. However, when the five types of rasas —
śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, and madhura — are viewed
from a neutral position, a gradation is seen; and among
them madhura-rasa is considered the most excellent.



8.85—88

pūrva-pūrva-rasera guṇaópare-pare haya

eka-dui gaṇane pañca paryanta bāḍaya



guṇādhikye svādādhikya bāḍe prati-rase

śānta-dāsya-sakhya-vātsalyera guṇa madhurete vaise



ākāśādira guṇa yena para-para bhūte

dui-tina gaṇane bāḍe pañca pṛthivīte



paripūrṇa-kṛṣṇa-prāpti ei ëpremā’ haite

ei premāra vaśa kṛṣṇaókahe bhāgavate



“There is a gradual increase in transcendental mellows
from the first rasa onward. Each subsequent mellow
possesses the qualities of the previous ones, thus two
qualities are found in the second rasa, three in the
third, and finally five in the fifth. As the number of
qualities increases, also the taste increases in each
subsequent mellow. Therefore, the qualities found in
śānta, dāsya, sakhya, and vātsalya-rasa all manifest in

                             86
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

madhura-rasa. There is a nice example that illustrates
this. The number of qualities in each of the five
material elements (sky, air, fire, water, and earth)
gradually increases one by one until finally, in the
fifth element, earth, all five qualities are fully
present. Thus, because all the qualities of the previous
four rasas are present in kāntā-prema, it is considered
to be the most excellent of all. Actually, this kāntā-
prema completely controls Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam testifies.




The five material elements are sky, air, fire, water,
and earth. From these come the five corresponding
sensory qualities: sound, touch, form, taste, and
fragrance. Sky (ether) possesses the single quality of
sound. Two qualities — sound and touch — are present in
the element air. Fire contains sound, touch, and form.
Water possesses four qualities: sound, touch, form, and
taste. All five qualities — sound, touch, form, taste,
and fragrance — exist in the element earth. Just as sky,
air, etc., are present in the element earth,
simultaneous with its own natural quality of fragrance,
similarly, kāntā-bhāva possesses the qualities of the
other four rasas starting with śānta-rasa, but it has
the additional quality of utilizing all the bodily limbs
in the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, kṛṣṇa-prema has
arisen most completely in madhura-rasa, because this
prema, which is blossoming with rasa, accords the use of
the entire body in service. Only this rasa provides the
possibility of bringing Kṛṣṇa completely under one’s
control.

Kāntā-bhāva includes all of the services performed by
the associates of Kṛṣṇa who act as His servants,
friends, and parents. The kṛṣṇa-niṣṭhā (resolute
steadfastness in Kṛṣṇa) of śānta, the service mentality
of dāsya, the intimate service of sakhya, and the
pervasive desire in vātsalya for Kṛṣṇa’s auspiciousness
and for His maintenance and the well-being of He who is
subordinated by prema — all of these qualities are
included in madhura-rasa. Furthermore, there is one more
quality: offering one’s entire body in the service of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which is exclusively available in madhura-
rasa. The love-struck Vraja gopīs, who are the heroines
of this kāntā-bhāva, have distanced themselves from
material desires and even their own family members,
having completely renounced body, home, and dear friends
as if insignificant dry grass.



8.89

mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām

amṛtatvāya kalpate

diṣṭyā yad āsīn mat-sneho

bhavatīnāṁ mad-āpanaḥ

                             87
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.82.44)



“?ëO gopīs of Vraja,    devotional service to Me bestows
immortality upon all    living entities, but it is a matter
of great fortune and    joy that you nurture intense
affection for Me, as    this is the means to attain Me.’




A discussion of the gopīs’ pain of separation is found
in the account of the meeting at Kurukṣetra. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
glorifies them, declaring them to be supremely
fortunate, since this kāntā-prema is the only means by
which He can be completely controlled. The prema of the
other rasas is not able to do this.



8.90

kṛṣṇera pratijñā dṛḍha sarva-kāle āche

ye yaiche bhaje, kṛṣṇa tāre bhaje taiche



“Śrī Kṛṣṇa has taken a solemn oath that for all eternity
He will reciprocate accordingly with the manner in which
one serves Him.




In Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (4.11)[xvi]15, He has also
mentioned:



ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

“O Pārtha, in whichever way a person renders service to
Me, I serve him in that very same way. Everyone follows
My path in all respects.”



The worshipful Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has said in
his commentary on this verse that whatever a person
desires as the fruit of their worship of the Lord,
Bhagavān in return awards the result accordingly. The

                              88
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

sādhaka of śuddha-bhakti worships Bhagavān only to
achieve eternal service to the transcendental form of
the Lord; and the Lord rewards His loving devotee
according to his desire by making him His eternal
associate, and giving him eternal love-filled service to
Bhagavān. Bhagavān fulfills the desires of the
impersonalists by bestowing upon them liberation, or
nirviśeṣa-nirvāṇa, whereupon they enter into the
impersonal effulgence of the Lord. As the Supreme
Controller, the Lord bestows the material fruits desired
by the reward-seeking workers, and in the same manner He
bestows opulences or liberation upon the yogīs. Of all
these various attainments, service to Śrī Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Goloka Vṛndāvana is the best.

Thus, we should understand from the commentary to this
Bhagavad-gītā verse that the fruit of each individual’s
worship is not identical. Depending on the type of
bhajana one performs, the fruit received is indeed in
accordance with one’s desires.

Some learned persons have interpreted the phrase
manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ in this verse to mean that, no
matter what form one’s worship takes, since all are on
the path of worshiping Bhagavān, the Lord will give the
same result to all. This conception is completely
erroneous. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures have
thoroughly refuted the foolish theory that the deluded
materialists (karmīs), the speculators (jñānīs), and the
pure devotees (premi-bhaktas) will ultimately all arrive
at the same destination. Further on, Śrīmad Bhagavad-
gītā (9.25) states:



yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino ‘pi mām

“Those who worship the demigods will go to the demigods;
those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth
among such beings; those who worship ancestors go to the
ancestors; and those who worship Me will come to Me.”



In this above-mentioned verse Bhagavān says, “With
whatever mood one surrenders to Me, I reciprocate in a
like manner. Factually, it is Me alone whom everyone is
worshiping. Truly, I am the topmost and only valid goal
of all conceptions. The pure devotees receive the
ultimate bliss of eternal service to My transcendental
person in the supreme abode. The impersonalists destroy
their very selves through the attainment of nirvāṇa-
mukti (liberation characterized by the cessation of
material existence) in impersonal Brahman effulgence.
For the śūnya-vādīs (voidists), I manifest myself as
emptiness and nullify their very existence as well. For
the gross materialists attached to matter, I cover their
soul and make their consciousness like dull matter; and

                             89
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

they attain Me in the form of matter. In the yogis’
case, I manifest Myself as the Supreme Lord and offer
them all types of opulences [in the form of various
yogic perfections] and liberation. According to the
various types of faith, I sometimes give them birth in a
perishable body. In this way, I manifest Myself as
everything and it is only I who am attained by all these
different practitioners. However, one should understand
that out of all of these attainments, service to Me is
supreme. Certainly, the many paths followed by humanity
all lead exclusively to Me.”



8.91

ei ëpreme’ra anurūpa nā pāre bhajite

ataeva ëṛṇī’ hayaókahe bhāgavate



“?ëIf according to My vow I cannot fully reciprocate
with someone who does bhajana of Me, then I become
indebted to him.’ This is stated by Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.




Reciprocating with someone’s bhajana means that when a
devotee performs devotional service with a particular
motive, then Śrī Kṛṣṇa fulfills that desire. This is
known as Śrī Kṛṣṇa reciprocating with His devotee’s
bhajana. Another type of befitting reciprocation is
where, in whatever bhāva one wishes to please Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
He makes every effort to satisfy that devotee. However,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa cannot reciprocate with both types of devotee.
And considering that the perfected gopīs do not have
even the slightest scent of desire for their own
enjoyment, what is the question of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
reciprocating by bestowing great happiness upon them?
They only wish to give happiness and pleasure to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; if Śrī Kṛṣṇa wishes to fulfill their desire, then
He alone receives happiness by doing that. The gopīs of
Vraja have completely abandoned everything to offer
their whole selves to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. However, Śrī Kṛṣṇa can
never abandon any number of gopīs for a single gopī.
What to speak of many gopīs, He cannot even abandon one
of His ordinary devotees. Thus He cannot reciprocate
with the service of the gopīs. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself has
accepted this fact in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.22):



8.92

na pāraye ‘haṁ niravadya-saṁyujāṁ

sva-sādhu-kṛtyaṁ vibudhāyuṣāpi vaḥ

yā mābhajan durjara-geha-śṛṅkhalāḥ


                             90
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

saṁvṛścya tad vaḥ pratiyātu sādhunā



“?ëMy darling gopīs, your meeting Me is innocent and
immaculate in every respect because it is devoid of even
a single iota of desire for your own happiness. It is
overflowing with supremely pure love. Although the bonds
of affection for the members of one’s own home are
impossible to overcome, you have completely demolished
them. Thus, for loving service to Me, you have
transgressed the moral laws of this world. Even if I
lived as long as the gods I would be unable to requite
even one drop of your love, sacrifice, and service. All
of you may free Me from debt simply by your own gentle
nature, but I am forever the debtor of your prema, and
will always continue to be.’




The quality that makes this kāntā-prema the most
excellent is that only in this rasa has Śrī Kṛṣṇa
allowed Himself to fall into debt. This prema-mādhurya
of the gopīs is the axle and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the wheel upon
that axle, resting and rotating upon that central
object. If one removes the axle, or the gopīs, from the
wheel, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then He becomes nirviśeṣa, or
featureless (impersonal), in the sense that He can do
nothing. The sentiments of the gopīs are the cause of
the increase in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty.

When and why did Śrī Kṛṣṇa become indebted to the gopīs?
The reply is that when rāsa-līlā was going on, the other
gopīs developed pride in their own good fortune, and the
daughter of Śrī Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, Śrī Rādhā, became
sulky. To establish in this world the super-excellence
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mood of separation and also in
order for Śrī Kṛṣṇa to directly taste and hear the
nectar of Śrī Rādhā and the other gopīs’ talks in
separation from Him, He disappeared from rāsa-līlā.

The gopīs, absorbed in their moods of separation from
Kṛṣṇa, began inquiring about Him from the trees,
creepers, tulasī, and the Yamunā, but they received no
reply from them. Suddenly they saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
footprints, and with them the footprints of a young
girl. The other gopīs began to extol the good fortune of
that particular gopī, who was alone with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They
began to follow the footprints until they encountered
Śrī Rādhā lying upon the ground, unconscious in
separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, looking like a golden doll.
The other gopīs pacified Her. After this all the gopīs
gathered together on the banks of the river Yamunā in
like-minded groups, and while weeping they began
kīrtana. This singing of the gopīs is known as the Gopī-
gīta. Upon hearing this song, Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not check
Himself and came into their presence.

All the gopīs took their veils, which were covered with
kuṅkuma from their breasts, and laying them upon the
ground they prepared a seat for Him, on which He was
seated. The gopīs, being situated in mādhurya-rasa,

                             91
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

proceeded to ask Śrī Śyāmasundara a variety of
questions, and He cleverly answered all of them. But
those questions that were completely overflowing with
prema, Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not answer, and He became
eternally indebted to the gopīs.

Our most worshipful Gosvāmīs mention that not even the
eulogies composed by Lord Brahmā can give Him the joy He
experienced in becoming indebted to the gopīs. At
certain opportune instances, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has released
Himself from His indebtedness to the devotees of all the
other rasas, but when He attempted to free Himself from
His debt to the gopīs in mādhurya-rasa, He became even
more indebted.

8.93

yadyapi saundarya kṛṣṇa-mādhuryera dhurya

vraja-devīra saṅge tāṅra bāḍaye mādhurya



“Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa represents the ultimate limit of
unparalleled beauty and sweetness, still in the
association of the Vraja gopīs His beauty and sweetness
increases ad infinitum.




Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty and sweetness, upon reaching
their utmost limit, have no opportunity for increasing
any further, whenever the gopīs and Kṛṣṇa see one
another, His beauty and sweetness repeatedly increase.
This sweetness contains such inconceivable and
astonishing power that when the gopīs encounter His
beauty and sweetness they become filled with joy, and
when Śrī Kṛṣṇa sees their joyful happiness, then He
becomes exceedingly pleased. Śrī Kṛṣṇa understands that
He is giving happiness to the gopīs, and the gopīs
become joyful because they know that their service is
giving Him happiness. In this mutual dealing of pleasing
one another, there exists an eternal rivalry.



8.94

tatrātiśuśubhe tābhir bhagavān devakī-sutaḥ

madhye maṇīnāṁ haimānāṁ mahā-marakato yathā



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.6)



“?ëIn the midst of the dancing gopīs, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
appears most beautiful, like an exquisite sapphire in
the midst of golden ornaments.’?”


                              92
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




Haimānāṁ — looking like a jewel encrusted in a golden
necklace.

Mahā-marakata — a brilliant blue sapphire. The gopīs
resemble golden beads, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, due to His dark
bodily effulgence, appears like a blue sapphire.

Madhye maṇīnāṁ yathā. As a blue sapphire appears
beautiful when set in a golden necklace, so the
sapphire-like Śrī Kṛṣṇa is exquisite when surrounded by
the golden ornament-like gopīs.

Tatrātiśuśubhe. While mahā-rāsa was going on, both Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, surrounded by the gopīs, and the gopīs,
surrounded by Śrī Kṛṣṇa, appeared extraordinarily
beautiful. In fact, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s natural beauty and
sweetness were unparalleled, but being in the presence
of His special associates, His beauty and sweetness
increased. Only amidst the beauty of the gopīs does He
reveal the summit of His beauty and sweetness.

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa went to Dvārakā, He experienced complete
absorption in the emotions of Vraja and went mad. When
Lord Brahmā saw Him in this condition, he created
another Vṛndāvana named Nava-vṛndāvana to revive Him
from His internal state. While He was in Nava-vṛndāvana,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa looked upon the statue of the daughter of Śrī
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja surrounded by Her friends. At that
time, His nature as the very charmer of Cupid himself
was enhanced even more. When Padmā, Kaṁsa’s mother, saw
this form, she could not check herself and in kāntā-
bhāva, she ran towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Finally, Mother Rohiṇī
caught hold of her.

Bhagavān:

aiśvaryasya samagrasya

vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ

jñāna-vairāgyayoś caiva

saṇṇāṁ bhaga itiṅgana

Viṣṇu Purāṇa (6.5.47)



“Śrī Bhagavān is the Supreme Truth (parama-tattva), who
is fully endowed with six inconceivable qualities:
complete wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge, and
renunciation.”

Regarding the incarnations, some are portions of
Kāraṇābdhiśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu (Viṣṇu lying on the Causal
Ocean) and others are empowered incarnations. According
to Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (4.7):




                             93
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham



“O Bhārata, whenever there is a decline in religious
practice, and an increase of irreligion, I personally
descend.”

The incarnations of Bhagavān appear in every millenium
(yuga) in order to protect the earth when it is
oppressed by the demons. Even Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is the
root of all these incarnations and the origin of the
other puruṣa-avatāras, is but a plenary expansion of
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam:



ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ mṛḍayanti yuge yuge

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28)



At this point a question may arise: When the rāsa-līlā
is saturated with unlimited sweetness, why has the word
bhagavān, which denotes opulence, been used here —
tatrātiśuśubhe tābhir bhagavān devakī-sutaḥ? The
reconciliation comes by understanding that there were
many different types of listeners in the assembly of Śrī
Parīkṣit Mahārāja. There were karmīs, jñānīs, yogīs,
tapasvīs (ascetics or performers of various types of
austerities), devotees of mixed moods, and pure
devotees. In order that those seated at this gathering
would not think Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be an ordinary mortal, and
His pastimes, associates and holy abode to be in any way
mundane, the word bhagavān has been used. It is only
Bhagavān Himself who may enact pastimes such as these.

Here our worshipful Gosvāmīs have presented the
additional siddhānta that it is not possible for
Bhagavān to perform any pastime without the foundation
of aiśvarya (opulence). It is never possible for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa to divest Himself of His opulence in any
condition. However, because of excessive sweetness, or
the profuse overflowing of that mādhurya in the pastimes
of Vraja, the aiśvarya becomes integrated into mādhurya.
Thus in order to temper or pacify unqualified persons,
opulence is sometimes shown. But then it immediately
becomes hidden once more, just as a blade of grass in a
large pot of boiling milk may be seen for a moment
before again being submerged in the unlimited ocean of
sweetness.

Devakī-suta. It is definitely incorrect to take this
word as an indication that Kṛṣṇa who is performing the
rāsa-līlā is the son of Devakī and Vasudeva. Here, Śrī
Śukadeva Gosvāmī is actually indicating the son of
Yaśodā. In his commentary, Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura has also directly explained that another name of

                             94
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Yaśodā was Devakī. Evidence of this is found in Bṛhad-
viṣṇu Purāṇa:



dve nāmnī nanda-bhāryāyā

yaśodā devakīti ca

ataḥ sakhyam abhūt tasya

devakyā śauri-jāyayā

“The wife of Nanda had two names, Yaśodā and also
Devakī. Because of their natural friendship, she [the
wife of Nanda] and Devakī, the wife of Śauri [Vasudeva]
share the same name.”



Only one Kṛṣṇa danced with countless millions of gopīs,
assuming as many forms as there were gopīs. It is also
stated that Śrī Kṛṣṇa danced with such velocity that,
just as the whirling of a burning torch in complete
circle gives the appearance of an unbroken circle of
fire, He appeared simultaneously at the side of each of
the countless gopīs.



8.95

prabhu kahe,ó”ei ësādhyāvadhi’ suniścaya

kṛpā kari’ kaha, yadi āge kichu haya”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu replied, “This conclusion — that
kāntā-prema is certainly the highest limit of perfection
— is incontrovertible. However, Śrī Rāya, please speak
more if there is something else.”



8.96

rāya kahe,ó”īhāra āge puche hena jane

eta-dina nāhi jāni, āchaye bhuvane



Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda replied, “Until this day I did not
know anyone within the three worlds who could inquire
beyond this.




Rādhā-prema — Śrī Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa



                             95
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017




8.97

iṅhāra madhye rādhāra premaóësādhya-śiromaṇi’

yāṅhāra mahimā sarva-śāstrete vākhāni



“Within the kāntā-prema of the gopīs, Śrī Rādhā’s prema
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the topmost essence of all perfection,
and the glories of Her love are described in all the
revealed scriptures.




The proper understanding of kāntā-prema is the prema of
the gopīs of Vraja for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda
became amazed to hear how deeply Mahāprabhu could relate
to the astonishing moods that he had just described. It
is impossible for sādhakas to attain the prema of Śrī
Rādhā, which is the crown jewel of all perfections.
However, in the stage of perfection, the jīva becomes
qualified for the highest mood of kṛṣṇa-prema (love for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa), which is subservient to and follows the
loving moods of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. In the stage of
practice, or sādhana, the jīva must practice under the
guidance of Śrī Rādhikā’s female companions, or sakhīs.
(This is called mañjarī-bhāva.) Uddhava witnessed these
moods of Śrī Rādhā, and we can also observe them in the
life and character of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Mahāprabhu
tasted the moods of Śrī Rādhā in both Her separation
from Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Her meeting with Him.



8.98

yathā rādhā priyā viṣṇos tasyāḥ kuṇḍaṁ priyaṁ tathā

sarva-gopīṣu saivaikā viṣṇor atyanta-vallabhā



Padma Purāṇa, Laghu Bhāgavatāmṛta (2.1.45)

“?ëJust as Śrī Rādhā is most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Her
lake, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, is also exceedingly dear to Him.
Among all the gopīs, Śrī Rādhā is Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra’s most
dearly beloved.’




When the treasured daughter of Śrī Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja,
Śrī Rādhā, enters into māna (jealous anger) and when,
being unable to break that anger, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is defeated,
He goes to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, because He accepts Her lake to
be Śrī Rādhā Herself. Hoping to gain Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s

                             96
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

merciful glance, He performs austerities to fulfill His
heart’s desire, and finally Rādhā-kuṇḍa indeed answers
His prayer:



agha-ripur api yatnād atra devyāḥ prasāda-

prasara-kṛta-kaṭākṣa-prāpti-kāmaḥ prakāmam

anusarati yad uccaiḥ snāna-sevānubandhaiḥ

tad ati-surabhi rādhā-kuṇḍam evāśrayo me

Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍāṣṭaka (3)

by Śrī Ragunātha dāsa Gosvāmī



“For the pleasure of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, even Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself, yearning to attain Her merciful sidelong
glance, performs difficult austerities at the very
precious and fragrant Rādhā-kuṇḍa, regularly bathing and
carefully observing all the appropriate rituals. May
that supremely enchanting Rādhā-kuṇḍa be my shelter.”



8.99

anayārādhito nūnaṁ bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ

yan no vihāya govindaḥ prīto yām anayad rahaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.30.28)



“?ëO sakhīs, the gopī whom Kṛṣṇa has taken away to a
secluded place, leaving aside all of us, must have
definitely worshiped the Supreme Controller Śrī Hari
very grandly.’?”




This verse has a confidential meaning. The special gopī
mentioned here is the crown jewel of all of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
beloveds; therefore Her name is “Rādhikā.”

These words were spoken by the vipakṣā-gopīs, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s rivals, during the mahā-rāsa-līlā that took
place under the full autumn moon. This verse firmly
proves the super-excellence of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s prema.
At the time of the rāsa-līlā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed a vast
variety of loving pastimes with the Vraja gopīs, which
caused them to experience such pleasure that they became
proud of their good fortune. Furthermore, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā fell into a jealous pout when She noticed that
while Śrī Kṛṣṇa was dancing and singing amorously with

                             97
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017

Her, displaying a variety of poses, He was doing the
very same with the other gopīs. Thus, to pacify Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s anger and to check the other gopīs’ false
pride in their good fortune, Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappeared from
the rāsa-līlā, taking Rādhikā with Him.

As Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were moving from one secluded
kuñja to another, Śrī Rādhikā’s footprints left special
marks in the sand: beneath the big toe on the right foot
was a barleycorn, beneath the second toe was a wheel,
below this was an umbrella, and underneath that was a
bangle. In between the big toe and the second toe was a
long vertical line reaching down to the middle of Her
foot; under the middle toe was a lotus-flower, beneath
which was a flag. Below this flag was a creeper, which
bore one flower. Beneath the mount of the little toe was
an elephant goad, and on the heel was a half-moon. In
the left footprint, there was a conch shell at the base
of the big toe, and under this was a club; on the mount
of the little toe was an altar, below which there was an
earring, and below this a spear. Below the second,
third, fourth, and little toes were mountains,
underneath them was a chariot, and on the heel a fish.
Similarly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s footprints also left their
characteristic marks in the sand — flag, thunderbolt,
elephant goad, lotus, etc.

padāni vyaktam etāni nanda-sūnor mahātmanaḥ

lakṣyante hi dhvajāmbhoja-vajrāṅkuśa-yavādibhiḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.30.25)

[Seeing the footprints, the gopīs spoke among
themselves:] “Without a doubt these footprints belong to
the most illustrious son of Nanda Mahārāja, Śrī
Śyāmasundara, because the marks of a flag, lotus,
thunderbolt, elephant goad, barleycorn, and so forth are
clearly seen.”



Śrī Rādhā Herself was unaware of Her own footprints.

Under the cover of a very dense grove of trees, Śrī
Śyāmasundara appeased the angry Rādhā by decorating Her
and performing other services. By so doing, He managed
to pacify Her māna, which was extremely strong and
difficult to curb. Not being able to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa once
He had disappeared from rāsa, the other gopīs became
extremely distressed, as if their lives had left them.
They began searching for Śrī Kṛṣṇa everywhere.

After some time they saw His footprints and also noticed
that next to them were the footprints of a lady. Seeing
them, the rival vipakṣā-gopīs said to each other, “Just
as a she-elephant accompanies her beloved king of
elephants, similarly that greatly fortune girl walked
away with Nanda-nandana Śyāmasundara, keeping Her hand
on His shoulder. Who is She? She must definitely have
worshiped the omnipotent Bhagavān Śrī Hari very grandly,
because Her worship has pleased Him so much that our

                             98
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

beloved Śrī Śyāmasundara has taken Her away to a
solitary place, leaving all of us behind.”

The svapakṣā-gopīs (Śrī Rādhā’s own group) could
recognize that these were the footprints of their sakhī
Śrī Rādhā, and although this fact made them blossom with
happiness, they did not manifest any emotions outwardly,
because other groups of gopīs — vipakṣā (those who are
opposed to Her), taṭasthā (those who are neutral), and
suhṛdā (those who are friendly) — were also present. If
these other groups had understood that the footprints
belonged to Śrī Rādhā, their anger toward Her and their
jealousy of Her would have only increased. Therefore, as
if ignorant of whom the footprints belonged to, the
svapakṣā-gopīs continued following them. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written:



rādhikā-caraṇa-padma, sakala śreyera sadma,

yatane ye nāhi ārādhila

rādhā-padāṅkita-dhāma, vṛndāvana yāṅra nāma,

tāhā ye nā āśraya karila (1)

rādhikā-bhāva-gambhīra, citta jebā mahādhīra,

gaṇa-saṅga nā kaila jīvane

kemane se śyāmānanda, rasasindhu-snānānanda,

labhibe bujhaba ekamane (2)



rādhikā ujjvala-rasera ācārya

rādhā-mādhava-śuddha-prema vicārya (3)



ye dharila rādhā-pada parama yatane

se pāila kṛṣṇa-pada amūlyaratane (4)

rādhā-pada binā kabhu kṛṣṇa nāhi mile

rādhāra dāsīra kṛṣṇa, sarva-vede bale (5)



choḍata dhana-jana, kalatra-suta-mita,

choḍata karama-geyāna

rādhā-pada paṅkaja, madhurata-sevana,

bhakativinoda paramāṇa (6)

“For those who never take shelter of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
abode, Śrī Vṛndāvana, which is beautified by the marks
of Her lotus feet, which are the abode of all good

                              99
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

fortune; for those who never worship Śrī Rādhā’s lotus
feet; for those who never take the association of Śrī
Rādhā’s devotees, whose hearts are fixed in Her worship
and whose moods are very deep and grave — please
consider how it will ever be possible for them obtain
the joy of bathing in the ocean of bliss that comes from
serving Śrī Śyāmasundara?

“Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the ācārya of amorous love. The pure
love between Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava is meant to be discussed
and contemplated. Only those who carefully take full
shelter of the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā may very
easily attain the priceless jewels of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
feet. Without taking Her shelter, it is simply not
possible. All of the Vedic scriptures declare that those
who within their hearts consider themselves to be
maidservants of Śrī Rādhā, can easily attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”



8.100

prabhu kahe,ó”āge kaha, śunite pāi sukhe

apūrvāmṛta-nadī vahe tomāra mukhe



Upon hearing the previous verse, Mahāprabhu’s voice
choked up and He said, “Speak more, Rāya! Hearing this
gives Me tremendous joy. An unprecedented, unparalleled,
and astonishing river of nectar is flowing from your
mouth.



8.101

curi kari’ rādhāke nila gopī-gaṇera ḍare

anyāpekṣā haile premera gāḍhatā nā sphure



“Rāya, by the verse anayārādhito nūnam, you have implied
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa secretly took Śrī Rādhā to a solitary
place out of fear of the other gopīs. Consequently, one
might think that She is just like the other gopīs, since
it may be understood that He did not steal Śrī Rādhā
away directly before them as He loves them as well. If
He had stolen Her away directly in front of the others,
they would have become angry. Seeing that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
dependent on other gopīs, the intensity of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s prema is not established as superior to
theirs.



8.102

rādhā lāgi’ gopīre yadi sākṣāt kare tyāga

tabe jāni,órādhāya kṛṣṇera gāḍha-anurāga”


                             100
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



“If Śrī Kṛṣṇa had rejected all the other gopīs by taking
Śrī Rādhā away directly before them, then one could
understand that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s passion for Śrī Rādhā was
deeper.”




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains how Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
profound, exclusive love for Śrīmatī Rādhikā could not
manifest in front of the other gopīs. Fearing them, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa secretly stole Rādhā away from the other gopīs
during the rāsa-līlā. Only in this way was the complete
and ultimate mellow actually reached, and rāsa-līlā was
accomplished. Removing Rādhā from that situation
pacified Her māna, and then it was possible to quell the
other gopīs’ pride in their own good fortune. In
addition, it enabled the other gopīs’ hearts to come
together in a sweet way, mitigating all differences
between them.

Śrīman Mahāprabhu concealed the depth of Rādhā’s prema,
and He raised a doubt concerning Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s love for
Her. Without this question, it would otherwise have been
impossible to establish the full glories of Rādhā’s
prema. The conceptual streams originating from our
worshipful Gosvāmīs regarding Their disappearance from
rāsa-līlā are herewith presented.



(1) When both ārādhikā (the worshiper, or Śrī Rādhā) and
ārādhya (the worshiped, or Śrī Kṛṣṇa) disappeared from
the arena of rāsa-līlā, the gopīs of Śrī Rādhā’s group
could not at first understand that their mistress and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa had disappeared together. Therefore, at the
same time that the other gopīs began to search for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs of Śrī Rādhā’s group also began looking
for their mistress. They were not sure whether She had
departed with Śyāmasundara or had left separately.

(2) Once they had begun their search, the svapakṣā-gopīs
(the gopīs in Śrī Rādhā’s group) then observed a set of
footprints which they immediately understood as Śrī
Rādhā’s, because they had received the good fortune of
serving Her lotus feet. This put all of their doubts to
rest and thus Śrī Rādhā was perfectly established as the
most beloved of all of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dear gopīs.

It was Mahāprabhu’s intention here that Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda should further explain the super-excellence of
the glories of Śrī Rādhā’s prema.



8.103

rāya kahe,ó”tabe śuna premera mahimā

trijagate rādhā-premera nāhika upamā


                             101
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya said, “Now listen to the glories of
Rādhā’s prema. There is nothing superior to Her prema
within the three worlds.

8.104

gopī-gaṇera rāsa-nṛtya-maṇḍalī chāḍiyā

rādhā cāhi’ vane phire vilāpa kariyā



“Śrī Kṛṣṇa left the other gopīs in the dancing arena.
Lamenting over Śrī Rādhā’s disappearance, He began
wandering through in the forest in search of Her.




With great expertise, Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda refuted Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s objection, saying, “O Lord, in śāradiya-
rāsa Śrī Kṛṣṇa secretly took Śrī Rādhā away from the
other gopīs in order to associate with Her alone.” That
is true! Furthermore, it is an established and likewise
proven fact that Śrī Kṛṣṇa also remains dependent on the
other gopīs, but we do not always find this to be the
case. The Vaiṣṇava poet, Śrī Jayadeva, has conclusively
proved this in his description of vāsantī-rāsa-līlā,
which took place in the springtime at Govardhana.

Rāsa-līlā started with countless millions of gopīs being
present. Suddenly Śrī Kṛṣṇa noticed that Rāseśvarī Śrī
Rādhā (the presiding Goddess of rāsa-līlā) was no longer
present. That very instant, He abandoned the rāsa-līlā
arena, and lamenting with a saddened heart, He ran from
forest to forest, searching for Her everywhere. Millions
of gopīs were still waiting at the dance arena, but Śrī
Kṛṣṇa did not once look at them again, not even to tell
them where He was going. He ran off in front of
everyone, not waiting for any other gopī. From this
account, we can identify Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unwavering and
heightened attraction for Śrī Rādhā.

Even if we derive our understanding from Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s description, our worshipful Gosvāmīs have
explained that when Śrī Kṛṣṇa sometimes shows attachment
to other gopīs, the desire to taste varieties of rasa
must be the cause. If Śrī Kṛṣṇa had stolen Śrī Rādhā
away, directly in front of the other gopīs, their pride
would not have been destroyed. Rather, jealousy would
have arisen in them instead, and then the great rāsa
festival would have been over. By referring to this
verse, Śrīman Mahāprabhu draws further attention to the
description of vāsantī-rāsa in Śrī Gītā-govinda,
composed by the great poet Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī.



8.105

kaṁsārir api saṁsāra-

                             102
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


vāsanā-bandha-śṛṅkhalām

rādhām ādhāya hṛdaye

tatyāja vraja-sundarīḥ



Gītā-govinda (3.1)



“?ëHis heart bound by the chain of Rādhā’s love, Kaṁsāri
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Kaṁsā, firmly clasped Her to His
chest and, taking Her away from the site of the rāsa-
līlā, which is the complete essence of all His desires,
He left aside all the other beautiful Vraja maidens.’



8.106

itas tatas tām anusṛtya rādhikām

anaṅga-bāṇa-vraṇa-khinna-mānasaḥ

kṛtānutāpaḥ sa kalinda-nandinī

taṭānta-kuñje viṣasāda mādhavaḥ



Gītā-govinda (3.2)



“?ëStruck by Cupid’s arrows, Mādhava ran here and there
along the banks of the Yamunā searching for Śrī Rādhā.
Becoming despondent at not finding Her, He wept in a
kuñja (forest bower).’?”




During the vāsantī-rāsa, as soon Śrī Rādhā left the
rāsa-līlā arena, the flow of nectar immediately stopped,
despite millions of gopīs being there. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa
saw that Rāseśvarī Śrī Rādhā was not there, He also left
straight away to go looking for Her. He did not even
tell the other gopīs, “Wait for Me for a moment. I am
coming right back.”

In fact, in the presence of Śrī Rādhā, He does not
maintain an attachment for any other gopī. The arrows of
Kāmadeva (Cupid) mentioned here are the arrows of
Rādhā’s prema specifically. These arrows so much wound
Śrī Kṛṣṇa that He cannot even remain on His feet. Just
as a diseased person has need of a healthy person’s
assistance, similarly the afflicted Śrī Kṛṣṇa can only
again become healthy by the medicine of Śrī Rādhā’s
darśana. Do any of the other gopīs possess this kind of
power? It is only Śrī Rādhā who completely fulfills

                             103
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

every object of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s desires.

Afflicted by the fire of Cupid, Śrī Kṛṣṇa searched for
Śrī Rādhā but in vain. He became so deeply affected by
separation that, upon remembering Her prema, He fell
into an unfathomable ocean of self-reproach. He
understood that He had indeed behaved with Śrī Rādhā as
He had with the other gopīs, even though She deserved
greater honor. Repeatedly falling down and getting up,
all the while reproaching Himself, He came to a kuñja on
the bank of the river Yamunā, where He thought,
“Prāṇeśvarī Śrī Rādhā, the mistress of My life, must
have come to this kuñja.” But when He did not find Her
there, He fell into an ocean of despair and began
lamenting.



8.107

ei dui-ślokera artha vicārile jāni

vicārite uṭhe yena amṛtera khani



Śrīman Mahāprabhu pondered the meaning of these two
verses and understood that they were a reservoir of
nectar. Repeatedly chewing them, He began to taste
ambrosia, cup after cup.



8.108

śata-koṭi gopī-saṅge rāsa-vilāsa

tāra madhye eka-mūrtye rahe rādhā-pāśa



Śrī Rāmānanda continued: “Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed the rāsa-
līlā with millions of gopīs, and in their midst He
stayed by Śrī Rādhā’s side with one of His forms.



8.109

sādhāraṇa-preme dekhi’ sarvatra ësamatā’

rādhāra kuṭila-preme ha-ila ëvāmatā’



“Seeing that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s love for Her was the same as
His love for the other gopīs, Śrī Rādhā exhibited a
contrary, or leftist mood (vāmya-bhāva), because it is
the nature of prema to be crooked.




                             104
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

Although both mādhurya (sweetness) and aiśvarya
(opulence) are not only present but also complete in
Vraja, the opulence stays in a hidden form, under the
auspices of sweetness. Whenever the necessity to present
itself arises, majesty manifests to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
opulence cannot abandon Him. When millions of gopīs
gathered for the rāsa festival, aiśvarya-mūrti (the
personification of opulence, Yogamāyā) manifested
millions of forms of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. However, the power of
His own aiśvarya-śakti prevented He Himself from
realizing this fact. Every gopī thought that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
was there with her exclusively. If Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the very
form of fully condensed ecstasy, were right there next
to oneself, then why would one look to see what another
gopī was doing?

Suddenly Śrī Rādhā glanced at another gopī and realized
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa was with her, and She also noticed Him
with all the other gopīs. She could perceive that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa would leave one gopī and move to the next, then
leave that gopī and go on to the next, and dance with
each of them. Suddenly She beheld Śrī Kṛṣṇa there, with
Her also. Seeing this She became very angry, because She
understood that all along He had been sporting with
other gopīs. “He has come to Me last. He is a magician
and a debauchee. He loves all the other gopīs just as
much as He loves Me!” Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s crooked prema
took on a leftist mood, and becoming angry, She
indignantly left the rāsa arena.



8.110

aher iva gatiḥ premṇaḥ svabhāva-kuṭilā bhavet

ato hetor ahetoś ca yūnor māna udañcati



Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (15.102)



“?ëThe movements of prema are naturally crooked like a
snake; therefore, young lovers experience māna, that is,
they become sulky, sometimes with cause and sometimes
without.’



8.111—114

krodha kari’ rāsa chāḍi’ gelā māna kari’

tāṅre nā dekhiyā vyākula haila hari



samyak vāsanā kṛṣṇera, icchā rāsa-līlā

rāsa-līlā-vāsanāte rādhikā śṛṅkhalā



                             105
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


tāṅhā vina rāsa-līlā nāhi tāṅra citte

maṇḍalī chāḍiyā gelā rādhā anveṣite



itas-tataḥ bhrami’ kāṅhā rādhā nā pāñā

viṣāda karena kāma-bāṇe khinna hañā



“Śrī Rādhā became jealous, and with good reason; thus
She left the site of the rāsa-līlā. Śrī Hari experienced
extreme distress at not seeing Her. Rāsa-līlā is the
condensation of all Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s yearnings, and thus,
certainly, it is His most prominent desire. Śrī Rādhā is
surely the vital link of the chain of His desire to
perform rāsa-līlā. Without Her presence, Śrī Kṛṣṇa did
not feel happy within His heart, and therefore He left
the rāsa-līlā to search for Her. He looked everywhere
but when He could not find Her, being pierced by the
arrows of amorous desire, He became hopeless and wept.




Here, the purpose of Rādhā’s anger is not to fulfill Her
own desires, because She does not have even the
slightest desire for Her own happiness. Prema is crooked
by nature, thus contrariety automatically arises, which
enhances the taste of prema. Because all of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
desires are present within His rāsa-līlā, it was His
primary desire to perform this līlā. And in fulfilling
His desires, Śrī Rādhā is the crucial link. Actually,
Śrī Rādhā Herself is the reason that Kṛṣṇa desires to
enact rāsa-līlā and thus She is the supreme abode of
this pastime. This is why, despite the presence of
millions of other gopīs, right in front of them, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa also left that place.

It is obvious that Śrī Kṛṣṇa did not take away Rādhā by
stealth. The statement here is very clear: owing to
māna, She left rāsa-līlā on Her own. Śrī Kṛṣṇa was
wounded by kāma, but this does not mean material lust;
rather it is the mutual eagerness between lovers to give
one another happiness. Śrī Rādhā’s tendency to perform
amorous service is of the highest standard. Furthermore,
as long as Śrī Kṛṣṇa has not fulfilled Her desire He
feels pain in His heart.



8.115

śata-koṭi-gopīte nahe kāma-nirvāpaṇa

tāhātei anumāni śrī-rādhikāra guṇa



“Even millions of gopīs were not able to extinguish the

                             106
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

kāma of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. From this alone, one can infer the
greatness of Śrī Rādhā’s qualities. Without Her, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s desire to taste kāntā-prema would not be met.”



8.116

prabhu kaheó”ye lāgi’ āilāma tomā-sthāne

sei saba tattva-vastu haila mora jñāne



After hearing the deep explanation of prema-tattva from
Śrī Rāya

Rāmānanda, Mahāprabhu became very satisfied, and with a
choked voice He explained, “Rāya, I have come to see you
to receive know-ledge of all these tattvas. My coming to
you has proven successful.



8.117

ebe se jāniluṅ sādhya-sādhana-nirṇaya

āge āra āche kichu, śunite mana haya



“I have understood the tattva of both the sādhya (goal)
and the sādhana (means to achieve it); but please speak
further, for my mind desires to hear more.




Even after hearing such a deep deliberation on sādhya-
sādhana-tattva from the lotus mouth of Śrī Rāmānanda
Rāya, Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s curiosity was still not
pacified. It seemed that He wanted to know more about
the special glories of Śrī Rādhā’s nature. Therefore, He
cleverly yet indirectly asked:



8.118—119

ëkṛṣṇera svarūpa’ kaha ërādhāra svarūpa’

ërasa’ókon tattva, ëprema’ókon tattva-rūpa



kṛpā kari’ ei tattva kaha ta’ āmāre

tomā-vinā keha ihā nirūpite nāre”



“O Rāmānanda, what is the nature of Śrī Rādhā and of Śrī

                             107
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa? What is rasa-tattva? In addition, what is the
intrinsic nature of prema-tattva? Please be merciful and
explain all of these truths to Me. Except for you there
is no one else who can explain these things.”



8.120—122

rāya kahe,ó”ihā āmi kichui nā jāni

tumi yei kahāo, sei kahi āmi vāṇī



tomāra śikṣāya paḍi yena śuka-pāṭha

sākṣāt īśvara tumi, ke bujhe tomāra nāṭa



hṛdaye preraṇa kara, jihvāya kahāo vāṇī

ki kahiye bhāla-manda, kichui nā jāni”



Hearing Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s question, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
said, “I do not know anything about this subject. I
utter only those instructions You speak through me.
Whatever teachings I receive from You, I recite just
like a parrot. You are directly the Supreme Controller —
who can understand Your drama? My tongue will vibrate
those very same instructions You have inspired within my
heart as the Supersoul. Whether I am speaking correctly
or incorrectly, I do not know.”



8.123

prabhu kahe,ó”māyāvādī āmi ta’ sannyāsī

bhakti-tattva nāhi jāni, māyāvāde bhāsi



Hearing Rāmānanda Rāya’s humble words Mahāprabhu said,
“I am a Māyāvādī sannyāsī. How can I understand bhakti-
tattva? I always remain entangled in māyāvada
philosophy.




We should understand that these words, spoken by Śrīman
Mahāprabhu in full humility, were actually meant to
conceal His real identity.



8.124—125


                             108
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

sārvabhauma-saṅge mora mana nirmala ha-ila

ëkṛṣṇa-bhakti-tattva kaha’, tāṅhāre puchila



teṅho kahe,óëāmi nāhi jāni kṛṣṇa-kathā

sabe rāmānanda jāne, teṅho nāhi ethā’



“Staying with Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya My mind has been
purified. I inquired from him about the fundamental
truth of kṛṣṇa-bhakti. However, he said to Me, ëI do not
know topics of Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda knows
everything, but he is not here now.’



8.126

tomāra ṭhāñi āilāṅa tomāra mahimā śuniyā

tumi more stuti kara ësannyāsī’ jāniyā



“O Rāmānanda Rāya, hearing of your glories I have come
to you, but understanding Me to be a sannyāsī you began
to praise Me.



8.127

kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya

yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei ëguru’ haya



“Whether or not one is a brāhmaṇa, a sannyāsī or a
śūdra, if one knows kṛṣṇa-tattva, he in reality is guru.




By this statement, Mahāprabhu’s intention is that
Rāmānanda Rāya should not entertain the idea that
because Mahāprabhu has accepted birth in a brāhmaṇa
family and is also a sannyāsī, He cannot take religious
instructions from a śūdra.

For anyone following varṇāśrama-dharma who desires to
receive religious instruction and initiation, a guru
from the brāhmaṇa caste is indispensable. Yet because
knowledge of kṛṣṇa-tattva is the supreme goal of all
jīvas, the scriptural conclusion is that anyone who
knows bhakti-tattva is actually a spiritual master. It
is said:

tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

                             109
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham



Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (1.2.12)



“In order to obtain knowledge of the Supreme Truth, one
must approach a bona fide guru who knows the Vedas and
is fixed in the Absolute Truth, taking ingredients for
sacrifice in hand.”

varṇottame ‘tha ca gurau

sati yā viśrute ‘pi ca

sva-deśato ‘tha vānyatra

nedaṁ kāryaṁ śubhārthinā

Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (1.51)



“If a famous brāhmaṇa spiritual master is present in
one’s own district, a person who desires auspiciousness
will not travel elsewhere to accept initiation from
someone other than him.”



A person from a low caste should not undertake the work
of bestowing mantras [thus becoming an initiating
spiritual master]. A qualified person of a high caste
should not receive a mantra from one in a lower caste.
These are ordinary mundane instructions, meant for those
who have pride in their caste. However, for those pure
persons devoted to bhakti, who are devoid of the false
ego arising from caste, this regulation does not apply.
Instead, the prescription for them is that only those
who are knowledgeable in the science of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
expert in the process of devotional service, and expert
in tasting devotional mellows should be accepted as
spiritual masters, whether they are from a brāhmaṇa
family or from a śūdra family.

The sāttvata scriptures (the Vaiṣṇava scriptures)
explain that those who have taken initiation into a
viṣṇu-mantra are known as dvijādhika, meaning they are
even superior to the dvijas, or twice-born brāhmaṇas.
This is because an ordinary vipra (brāhmaṇa) is only
qualified for karma-kāṇḍa, whereas a person initiated
into a viṣṇu-mantra possesses the qualification for the
topmost religious process called bhāgavata-dharma. It is
stated in Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata that such darśana of
the Absolute Truth (Parabrahman) as was revealed to Śrī
Haridāsa Ṭhākura, who was born into a yavana (outcaste)
family, was rarely achieved, even by Lord Brahmā, the
creator of the material castes, what to speak of those
who merely belong to the highest castes.

In Bhakti-sandarbha, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī draws evidence

                             110
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

from Garuḍa Purāṇa (as quoted below), and stipulates
that a single brāhmaṇa who performs many sacrifices, is
superior to one thousand ordinary brāhmaṇas, but one
devotee of Viṣṇu is superior to one thousand of these
yājñika-brāhmaṇas. And just one exclusive devotee of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is superior to one thousand devotees of Lord
Viṣṇu:

brāhmaṇānāṁ sahasrebhyaḥ satra-yājī viśiṣyate

satra-yāji-sahasrebhyaḥ sarva vedānta-pāragaḥ

sarva-vedānta-vit-koṭyā viṣṇu-bhakto viśiṣyate

vaiṣṇavānāṁ sahasrebhya ekānty eko viśiṣyate



Gauḍiya ācāryas, like Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura, Śrī
Narahari Sarakāra Ṭhākura, Śrī Mukunda Datta, Śrī Kānu
Ṭhākura, Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu, and Śrī Rasikānanda
Prabhu, appeared in other castes such as kāyastha,
vaidya, gopa, and karaṇa. Nevertheless, many brāhmaṇas
and kṣatriyas accepted initiation from them. The verdict
of all bona fide scriptures is that, regardless of the
varṇa or āśrama from which the spiritual master comes,
the real prerequisite is that he must be a Vaiṣṇava.
With regard to this point, Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (1.40—
41) quotes these verses from the Padma Purāṇa:

mahākula prasūto ‘pi

sarva yajñeṣu īkṣitaḥ

sahasra śākhādhyāyī ca

na guruḥ syād avaiṣṇavaḥ



“Even if someone takes birth in a high-class family, is
initiated into the performance of all Vedic sacrifices,
and is even a brāhmaṇa learned in a thousand branches of
the Vedas but yet is not a Vaiṣṇava, then he is not
qualified to be a guru.”



gṛhīta-viṣṇu-dīkṣāko

viṣṇu-pūjā-paro naraḥ

vaiṣṇavo ‘bhihito ‘bhijñair

itaro ‘smād avaiṣṇavaḥ

“A Vaiṣṇava is one who is properly initiated into a
viṣṇu-mantra and who is dedicated to the worship of
Viṣṇu. Apart from these there are no other Vaiṣṇavas.”



To be “properly initiated into the chanting of a viṣṇu-
mantra” signifies that the practitioner must have a

                             111
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

connection with and receive the mantra from a genuine
guru in a bona fide and unbroken disciplic succession,
or sampradāya. Śrī Gautamīya-tantra states: “sampradāya-
vihīnā ye mantrās te niṣphalā matāḥ — That mantra which
is not taken from the āmnāya-paramparā, or in other
words, heard directly from the guru-paramparā that
begins with Śrī Kṛṣṇa and descends down to Brahmā,
Nārada, and other ṛṣis, is niṣphala, or fruitless.”

Śrī Jīva Gosvāmīpāda conveys the meaning of the word
vipra as one who is expert in parā-vidyā, or the topmost
knowledge. Actually, this parā-vidyā is synonymous with
bhakti. Thus a vipra is really one who is expert in the
performance of bhakti. Śrī Saṅkṣepa-vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī
(10.16.2) may be cited in support of this siddhānta,
wherein it states “veda pāṭhād bhaved vipraḥ — one who
recites the Vedas is termed a vipra.” The principle
result of reading the Vedas is that one receives divya-
jñāna, or transcendental knowledge. This knowledge goes
hand-in-hand with vaiṣṇava-dīkṣā, because an
understanding of one’s relationship with Bhagavān comes
through the mantra one obtains upon initiation. Thus by
receiving dīkṣā, the status of vipra is attained as a
concomitant result.



8.128

ësannyāsī’ baliyā more nā kariha vañcana

kṛṣṇa-rādhā-tattva kahi’ pūrṇa kara māna”



“O Rāmānanda Rāya, do not cheat Me by thinking of Me as
a sannyāsī. Please fulfill My heart’s desires by
describing the tattva of both Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rādhā.”



8.129—130

yadyapi rāyaópremī, mahā-bhāgavate

tāṅra mana kṛṣṇa-māyā nāre ācchādite



tathāpi prabhura icchāóparama prabala

jānileha rāyera mana haila ṭalamala



Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya was a mahā-bhāgavata and thus full of
prema. His mind could not be covered by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
illusory potency, māyā. Furthermore, he knew the inner
identity of Mahāprabhu. Despite this, because
Mahāprabhu’s desire was so strong, his mind became
restless.




                             112
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



Although Rāmānanda Rāya plainly realized and
acknowledged the fact apparent that the form of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu present before him was none other
than Bhagavān, nonetheless, by the influence of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s intense desire, he forgot this fact. Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya then answered His question. It was the
strong desire of Mahāprabhu that Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
should give a comprehensive presentation of every
tattva.

8.131—132

rāya kahe,ó”āmiónaṭa, tumiósūtra-dhāra

yei mata nācāo, sei mata cāhi nācibāra



mora jihvāóvīṇā-yantra, tumióvīṇā-dhārī

tomāra mane yei uṭhe, tāhāi uccāri



Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya said, “I am only a puppet, and You
are the puppeteer pulling the strings. I will dance as
You make me. My tongue is like a vīṇā, and You are the
musician playing the vīṇā. Whatever Your mind desires to
hear, I speak.




Kṛṣṇa-tattva




8.133—135

parama īśvara kṛṣṇaósvayaṁ bhagavān

sarva-avatārī, sarva-kāraṇa-pradhāna



ananta vaikuṇṭha, āra ananta avatāra

ananta brahmāṇḍa ihāṅ,ósabāra ādhāra



sac-cid-ānanda-tanu, vrajendra-nandana

sarvaiśvarya-sarvaśakti-sarvarasa-pūrṇa



“Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Controller and He is Svayam
Bhagavān, the original Supreme Person; He is both the

                             113
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

source of all other incarnations and the principal cause
of all causes. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the root of unlimited
Vaikuṇṭha planets, innumerable incarnations, and
infinite universes. He is the actual form of eternality,
knowledge, and bliss, yet still He is the son of Nanda
Bābā, the king of Vraja. He is the eternal son of Nanda
Mahārāja, even though factually He is unborn, being the
primordial beginning of everything. Not only does Nanda
Bābā feel “I am Kṛṣṇa’s father,” but Śrī Kṛṣṇa also
maintains the eternal self-conception, “I am Nanda and
Yaśodā’s son.” He is the definitive master of all
opulences and all energies. Ultimately, He is raso vai
saḥ, replete with all rasas, and rasa-svarūpa, the very
embodiment of rasa.



8.136

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam



Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā (5.1)

“?ëThis same Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the very embodiment of
eternality, knowledge, and bliss, is truly the supreme
controller of all other controllers. He is the original
two-handed form of Kṛṣṇa (svayam-rūpa). Furthermore, He
is without beginning and He is the source of everything
else. He is Govinda, the absolute cause of all causes.’




In the previous verse, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya explained that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and now he gives evidence of this in this
verse, wherein Śrī Kṛṣṇa is addressed as īśvaraḥ
paramaḥ. This denotes that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Controller and the original Personality of Godhead, the
source of all other forms of the Lord — ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ
puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
1.3.28). Here “Kṛṣṇa” is the proper noun, and all the
remaining terms are adjectives qualifying that noun. Śrī
Brahmā said to Devarṣi Nārada, “O sinless one, I have
described to you countless incarnations of the Lord, and
I have counted Śrī Kṛṣṇa as one of these.” However, no
one should think that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is another incarnation
of these three puruṣa-avatāras. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the source
of all other incarnations, including even Śrī Rāma and
Śrī Nṛsiṁha. Therefore, it is clear that only Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is Svayam Bhagavān, or the original Supreme Person. This
is also confirmed in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha (Anuccheda 82,
text 36):

avatārā hy asaṅkhyātāḥ

kathitā me tavāgrataḥ

paraṁ samyak pravakṣyāmi

                             114
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam



“Now that I have described the innumerable incarnations
of Godhead to you, I shall tell you that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the original form of Bhagavān.”



At the time of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s advent in this world, Śrī
Gargācārya said, kṛṣṇatāṁ gatāḥ, meaning “Now all the
other incarnations that appeared in the previous ages
have appeared within this blackish complexioned child.”
In other words, all of the incarnations have entered
into the body of Kṛṣṇa, and They have attained oneness
within Him. According to the logic of payasā kumbhaṁ
pūrayati (filling a clay pot with milk), or just as the
pores of a clay pot becomes soaked with milk, the name
“Śrī Kṛṣṇa” pervades the scriptures. He who is the
supreme controller of all, the topmost reality and the
nondual Absolute Truth, is known by the name Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
In the conversation between Śrī Nārada and Kuśadhvaja
that is included in the Prabhāsa-khaṇḍa [of the
Mahābhārata] and the Padma Purāṇa, Śrī Bhagavān Himself
declares: “nāmnāṁ mukhyatamaṁ nāma kṛṣṇākhyaṁ me
parantapa — O Arjuna, subduer of enemies, of all My
names, the most prominent is Kṛṣṇa.”

Here in the verse under discussion (īśvaraḥ paramaḥ
kṛṣṇa), Śrī Brahmā glorifies Śrī Kṛṣṇa by the name
Govinda, who is none other than Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. He
who maintains the cows, gopas, and gopīs, as well as all
the other residents of Vraja is Śrī Govinda. His special
characteristic is being the indra, or Lord, of the cows.
In the context of the verse, the etymology of the word
“Kṛṣṇa” is as follows:



kṛṣir bhū-vācakaḥ śabdo

ṇaś ca nirvṛtti-vācakaḥ

tayor aikyaṁ paraṁ brahma

kṛṣṇa ity abhidhīyate

Mahābhārata, Udyoga-parva (71.4)



This verse is related to Kṛṣṇa. The verbal root kṛṣ
indicates all that exists (bhū- or satta-vācaka), and ṇa
indicates His blissful nature (ānanda-vācaka), or He who
generates an attraction towards Himself that negates
attraction to everything else (nirvṛtti-vācaka).

Regarding the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Gautamīya-
tantra, one of the sāttvata-tantras (Vaiṣṇava
scriptures) says:



                             115
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


kṛṣi-śabdasya sattārtho

ṇaś cānanda-svarūpakaḥ

sukha-rūpo bhaved ātmā

bhavānandamayas tataḥ

“The word kṛṣi indicates existence, or truth, and ṇa
refers to the embodiment of natural bliss. The combined
meaning is ëone whose existence is characterized by
bliss’ or ëone who attracts all and bestows bliss upon
them.’”



He is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the embodiment of happiness and He who
is full of the topmost bliss.

Sadaiva saumya idamagramāsīt. This means, “O saumya, O
gentle one, before the creation was manifest, there was
only sat-svarūpa Bhagavān (He whose form is eternal).”
He is a storehouse of total bliss. The Vāsudeva Upaniṣad
also tells us: “devakī-nandano nikhilam ānandayet — The
son of Devakī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, makes all moving and nonmoving
living entities blissful.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is
Parabrahman, the Absolute Truth.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.10.48) states that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
Absolute Truth appearing under cover as a human being —
gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma manuṣya-liṅgam. The Gopāla-tāpanī
Upaniṣad also states “yo ‘sau paraṁ brahma — Lord Gopāla
is the Supreme Truth.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself says:



brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham

amṛtasyāvyayasya ca

śāśvatasya ca dharmasya

sukhasyaikāntikasya ca

Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (14.27)

“I, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, am nirguṇa-saviśeṣa-tattva-svarūpa — My
form is possessed of all transcendental qualities, while
devoid of even a scent of matter. It is I who am the
shelter or source of the brahmajyoti (Brahman
effulgence), which is the topmost goal of the
impersonalists.”



Immortality, immutability, eternality, nitya-dharma
(prema), and vraja-rasa, the mellow of Vraja that
bestows exclusive happiness — all these rest upon Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental form, which is devoid of material
qualities (nirguṇa) and full of all varieties of
transcendental qualities (sa-viśeṣa). “Kṛṣṇo vai paramaṁ
daivatam — Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead”
(Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad 1.2). As Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the

                             116
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

Supreme Person (parama-puruṣa), He is also the Original
Person (ādi-puruṣa):



śrutvā ‘jitaṁ jarāsandhaṁ

nṛpater dhyāyato hariḥ

āhopāyaṁ tam evādya

uddhavo yam uvāca ha



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.72.15)



“After conquering all directions, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira
was contemplating how to defeat Jarāsandha, who seemed
invincible. At that moment Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, indeed
the original personality, suggested a method that He had
heard from Uddhava.”

From this evidence, it is determined that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the original Śrī Hari — this is certain. It is not only
because He is the source of all avatāras that He has the
quality of being the original cause; it is also because
He is anādi, He has no beginning. He is the sat-cit-
ānanda-vigraha, or the very form of eternality,
knowledge, and bliss. His body is His soul, and His soul
is indeed His body. “Ānandaṁ brahmaṇo rūpam — the form
of the Supreme Person is ānanda (bliss)” (Taittirīya
Upaniṣad 2.4.1).

In Vraja during His pastimes as a baby, a child, and a
youth, He was called Vrajendra-nandana or Govinda. Śrī
Sūta Gosvāmī says:



śrī-kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa-sakha vṛṣṇy-ṛṣabhāvani-dhrug-

rājanya-vaṁśa-dahanānapavarga-vīrya

govinda gopa-vanitā-vraja-bhṛtya-gīta

tīrtha-śravaḥ śravaṇa-maṅgala pāhi bhṛtyān

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.11.25)



“O Kṛṣṇa! O friend of Arjuna! O best of the Vṛṣṇi
dynasty! O destroyer of the royal dynasties who are
ravishing the Earth! O You whose splendors bestow
auspiciousness upon all who hear about them! O You whose
sacred glories are sung by the cowherd men and women of
Vraja! O Govinda! O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, please protect us, Your
servants.”

The Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.27.20) states
that while ceremonially bathing Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Surabhī

                             117
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017

cow addressed Him as Govinda and said: “tvaṁ na indro
jagat-pate — O You who are endowed with powerful,
inconceivable energies! O You, the Supersoul of the
entire universe! O Acyuta, who never fall from Your
position! O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! O Jagatpati, Lord of the
universe! You alone are our worshipful Lord. You, not
Indra, are the maintainer of the universe.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa
received the name “Śrī Govinda” after His bathing
ceremony was completed. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.27.23)
states: “govinda iti cābhyadhāt — Indra named the Lord
ëGovinda’.”

In his prayers at the end of this subject in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.26.25), Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī also invokes
the name Govinda: “prīyān na indro gavām — O indra of
the cows (Govinda), be pleased with us.” In the
Gautamīya Tantra, there is the following description:



gopīṁ tu prakṛtiṁ vidyāj janas tattva-samūhakaḥ

anayor āśrayo vyāptyā kāraṇatvena ceśvaraḥ

sāndrānandaṁ paraṁ jyotir vallabhatvena ca kathyate

athavā gopī prakṛtir janas tad-aṁśa-maṇḍalam

anayor vallabhaḥ proktaḥ svāmī kṛṣṇāś ca īśvaraḥ

kārya-kāraṇayor īśaḥ śrutibhis tena gīyate

aneka-janma-siddhānāṁ gopīnāṁ patir eva vā

nanda-nandana ity uktas trailokyānanda-vardhanaḥ

“He who is famous amongst the cows, the Earth, and the
Vedas, and, who is the shelter of all of these is Śrī
Govinda-deva. He who is surrounded by the cows and is
full of unparalleled opulence and sweetness is expert at
manifesting His unlimited pastimes freely. He who is
famous in all the worlds and in the Vedas, who always
stays in Śrī Nanda-Gokula, and whose dark complexion is
the color of fresh rain clouds, enchants the minds of
the residents of Vraja. He expands His supremely sweet
pastimes, and His sweet activities are sung loudly by
the Vedas throughout all the worlds. That moon of
Gokula, Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, who wears the dress of a
cowherd boy, is indeed called ëGovinda’.”



It is clear that to the extent of the increase of prema-
rasa in Lord Brahmā’s heart, his greed to obtain the
sweet form of Govinda increases to that same degree.
Initially, he began to surrender himself unto the
svarūpa of Govinda within Śrī Kṛṣṇa, that is, to Gopāla,
a cowherd boy who is the son of Śrī Nanda Mahārāja, the
king of Vraja, and who is the life and soul of Mother
Yaśodā.

When that prema-rasa matured and filled the rasika heart
of Brahmā, he became exceedingly restless to attain the
supremely beautiful, dark complexioned Śyāmasundara, who

                             118
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

is an ever-fresh youth (nava-kiśora), who is the
greatest dancer (naṭavara), and whose beauty bewilders
even Cupid himself (madana-mohana), especially when He
is surrounded by the lotus-eyed vraja-gopīs.
Furthermore, he offered himself unto gopī-jana-vallabha
(the beloved of the gopīs) within Kṛṣṇa. Brahmā’s heart
was restless to taste the nectar of gopī-prema; thus he
was not satisfied simply by chanting kṛṣṇāya svāhā (I
offer myself to Kṛṣṇa) or kṛṣṇāya govindāya svāhā (I
offer myself to Kṛṣṇa who is Govinda). His satisfaction
came by only chanting kṛṣṇāya govindāya gopī-jana-
vallabhāya svāhā (I offer myself to Kṛṣṇa who is Govinda
and the beloved of the gopīs).

From the verbal root gupa comes the word gopī, which
means “to protect and to maintain.” In this case, the
meaning refers to the special śakti that bestows prema
and maintains the devotees — that energy is the hlādinī-
śakti, which is embodied in Rādhā. The phrase gopī-jana
consists of the words gopī, or rādhā, and jana, which
indicates the associates who are Her expansions.
Therefore, the phrase applies to the circle of Rādhā’s
associates, who are Her direct bodily expansions. One
should understand the word gopī-jana to indicate Śrī
Rādhā and Her kāya-vyūha expansions such as Lalitā and
Viśākhā. Their vallabha, or most beloved, is Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Thus, gopī-jana-vallabha means “that form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
whom Śrī Rādhā embraces eternally.” Therefore, the use
of gopī-jana-vallabha naturally signifies the Divine
Couple, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.



8.137—138

vṛndāvane ëaprākṛta navīna madana’

kāma-gāyatrī, kāma-bīje yāṅra upāsana



puruṣa, yoṣit, kibā sthāvara-jaṅgama

sarva-cittākarṣaka, sākṣāt manmatha-madana



“In Vṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the ever-fresh
transcendental Cupid. He is worshiped by the kāma-
gāyatrī and the kāma-bīja, the seed sound vibration
klīṁ. He attracts the hearts of all living entities —
male and female, moving and non-moving alike — and He is
directly the very attractor of Cupid himself.




Rasika-śekhara Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is present in
Vṛndāvana as Madana-mohana, the very enchanter of Cupid,
with Śrī Rādhikā, who is surrounded by the ever-fresh,
beautiful, lotus-eyed young gopīs. Even after attaining
Him, one’s greed to be with Him simply goes on
increasing more and more. His beauty and sweetness are

                             119
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017

realized every second in eternally new ways. For this
reason, He is the transcendental ever-fresh Cupid
(aprākṛta-navīna-madana). In the hearts of those who
worship Him as Cupid, a very powerful, spiritual amorous
love (kāma) awakens, and a type of madness ensues. His
ever-fresh Madana form is beyond material nature. The
ordinary Cupid only operates in this material world,
inciting attraction towards the flesh. This is simply
lust, which is grossly materialistic and quite
detestable. Those in the bodily conception of life are
bound by this material Cupid and forced to submit to
material lust.

Knowledge of one’s relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa marks the
onset of the jīva being situated in the transcendental
position. This spiritual position is of two kinds:
svarūpa-gata and vastu-gata. In the beginning stage, the
sādhaka does not gain liberation from his relationship
with matter. Only partial spiritualization arises in him
at that point. Although he may come to live in
Vṛndāvana, he is not a factual resident. This is
svarūpa-gata. Once the materialistic tendency of the
gross and subtle bodies is destroyed, the practitioner
gradually achieves his factual position in Vṛndāvana by
Kṛṣṇa’s desire. At this point, during the stage of
sādhana (spiritual practice), the jīva worships Śrī
Kṛṣṇa by the kāma-gāyatrī and the transcendental kāma-
bīja. “Gāyantaṁ trāyate yasmāt gāyatrī tvaṁ tataḥ smṛtaḥ
— that which delivers the chanter is known as gāyatrī.’’
The kāma-gāyatrī bestows appreciation of the form of the
ever-fresh, transcendental Cupid, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
reciting it makes that form manifest in the heart.
Furthermore, by evoking a momentary glimpse of that
form, it gives that person who meditates upon it an
intense desire to obtain Him completely.

As revealed in Hayaśīrṣa-paṅcarātra, those who are well-
versed in understanding of fundamental truths have
explained that the ultimate object — the Lord who is
signified by His mantra — the reciter, the presiding
deity, and the mantra itself are all non-different. The
kāma-bīja, or the seed syllable of the kāma-gāyatrī, is
klīṁ. Just as the kāma-gāyatrī is the rasātmaka-svarūpa
(the form that is full of rasa) of the ordinary Vedic
gāyatrī, the kāma-bīja is likewise the rasātmaka-svarūpa
of the original sound vibration, praṇava, or oṁkāra. The
kāma-bīja — klīṁ — consists of the four letters ka, la,
ī, bindu, and anusvāra. The Bṛhad-gautamīya-tantra
states:



ka-kāraḥ puruṣaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

ī-kāraḥ prakṛtī rādhā nitya vṛndāvaneśvarī

laścānandātmakaṁ premasukhaṁ tayośca kīrttitam

cumbana-ānanda-mādhuryaṁ nādabinduḥ samīritaḥ



The letter ka means Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Person, whose
body is composed of eternality, knowledge, and bliss.

                             120
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

The letter ī designates the supreme power and the
eternal presiding Goddess of Vṛndāvana (Vṛndāvaneśvarī)
Śrī Rādhā. The letter la indicates the bliss of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and the nāda-bindu suggests the mādhurya
that comes from the happiness of Their kissing each
other. Thus, the kāma-gāyatrī, composed of twenty-four
and a half syllables, is the very form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
This mantra makes the whole universe restless to attain
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. From the verbal root kam (to
desire), the word kāma is derived. Kāma is the object
that one desires. Kāmadeva is the name of Madana-mohana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the ever-fresh transcendental Cupid, who is
endowed with beauty, sweetness, and all divine qualities
such as vaidagdhya (cleverness). As the emperor and the
very embodiment of amorous love, He attracts the minds
of all.

There are twenty-five syllables of the kāma-gāyatrī: kā,
ma, de, vā, ya, vi, dma, he, pu, ṣpa, bā, ṇā, ya, dhī,
ma, hi, ta, nno, na, ṅgaḥ, pra, co, da, yā, and t. The
syllable ya of the word kāma-devāya (the last syllable)
is considered a half-syllable. Four aspects of Kṛṣṇa —
the holy name, the mantra, His body (or deity form), and
His svarūpa (nature) — are non-different from Him and
from each other. Every syllable of the kāma-gāyatrī
represents one of the “moons” within His form. One of
these twenty-four moons is manifest upon every one of
His limbs. His ten fingernails and ten toenails are
twenty of these moons, two are His cheeks, one whole
moon corresponds to His entire face, another is the drop
of musk decorating His chin, and the half-moon is Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s forehead.

Moved by a feeling of doubt and unable to discover the
half-syllable of the kāma-gāyatrī, Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura went to the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa to
give up his life; but Śrī Rādhā revealed to him in a
dream: vi-kārānta-ya-kāreṇa (ca cārddhākṣaraṁ)
prakīrttitam. The Varṇāgama-bhāsvata, which is a
Sanskrit grammar book, also gives the same conclusion.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā explained that when the letter ya
precedes the letter vi, then ya is considered a half-
syllable. It is stated in this book that except for the
letter ya that precedes the letter vi, all other
syllables are complete and are considered full-moons:
“vyanta ya-kāro ‘rdhākṣam lalāṭe ‘rdha-candra-bimbaḥ,
tad-itaraṁ purṇākṣaraṁ purṇa-candraḥ iti — The forehead
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the half-moon, the half-syllable.”

Śrī Śyāmasundara, who churns even the mind of Cupid,
attracts the hearts of the entire world with His
astonishingly beautiful attire:



madhuraṁ madhuraṁ vapur asya vibhor

madhuraṁ madhuraṁ vadanaṁ madhuram

madhu-gandhi mṛdu-smitam etad aho

madhuraṁ madhuraṁ madhuraṁ madhuram

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (92)

                             121
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


The composer of Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta, Śrī Bilvamaṅgala
Ṭhākura, says, “Ah! The body of unlimited Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
exceedingly sweet. Atop this body, His moon-like face is
even sweeter still. Upon His face, His soft and mild
smile and fragrant breath are even sweeter than the
sweetest. Everything about Śrī Kṛṣṇa is sweet, sweet,
sweet. This person, who is the ultimate extent of
sweetness, completely blossoms when He is with Śrī
Rādhā.”

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappeared from the rāsa-līlā, leaving
the gopīs behind, they became distressed in separation
and lamented. Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī achieved oneness of
mood (tādātmya) with these gopīs and said:



8.139

tāsām āvirabhūc chauriḥ

smayamāna-mukhāmbujaḥ

pītāmbara-dharaḥ sragvī

sākṣān manmatha-manmathaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.2)



“?ëWhen Śrī Kṛṣṇa again appeared before the beautiful
ladies of Vraja, He was wearing a yellow cloth. He was
also wearing a garland made of blossoming forest
flowers, and upon His lotus face was a sweet smile.
Indeed, the beauty of such a form bewilders the mind of
even Cupid, who agitates the minds of all beings.’




The god of love (Kāmadeva), who is in the svarūpa of
both Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs, was himself situated there
in order to achieve Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the mood of the gopīs.
Encountering such beauty and elegance, Kāmadeva himself
fainted, being wounded by the arrows of love.



8.140

nānā-bhaktera rasāmṛta nānā-vidha haya

sei saba rasāmṛtera ëviṣaya’ ëāśraya’



“The previously mentioned five types of devotees (śānta,
dāsya, etc.) have various moods of worship. According to
their devotional sentiments, they experience varieties

                             122
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

of rasa. Both the worshipable object and shelter of all
of these different rasas is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.




It is stated in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu that there are
twelve rasas. There are five mukhya, or primary rasas,
namely, śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, and mādhurya;
and the gauṇa, or secondary rasas, are seven in number,
namely, laughter (hāsya), compassion (karuṇa), chivalry
(vīra), fear (bhayānaka ), disgust (vībhatsa), and
astonishment (adbhuta). The object (viṣaya) and the
receptacle (āśraya), or the object of relish (āsvādya)
and the relisher (āsvādaka), of all of these rasas is
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.

A description of the two aspects of sakhya-rasa is given
as an example here. Upon His defeat, Śrī Kṛṣṇa carried
His friends upon His shoulders. At this time He becomes
the āśraya of sakhya-rasa; and when He is victorious and
climbs upon the shoulders of His friends, He becomes the
viṣaya, or the taster of sakhya-rasa.



8.141

akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ

prasṛmara-ruci-ruddha-tārakā-pāliḥ

kalita-śyāmā-lalito

rādhā-preyān vidhur jayati



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.1)



“?ëAll glories to Him, all glories to Him, the complete
embodiment of all nectarean loving mellows (rasas), who
by the diffusion of His bodily effulgence, kept both the
gopīs named Tārakā and Pālī most subjugated, who also
controlled Lalitā and Śyāmā Sakhī, and who is the most
beloved of Śrī Rādhā.’




This verse presents three adjectives establishing that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the sole object of all rasas. Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the epitome of all nectarean rasa, is the only one who
tastes the rasa of Śrī Rādhā, She who surpasses everyone
in qualities, sweetness, and cleverness. Furthermore, He
is the supreme and exclusive enjoyer of all the gopīs,
who are the receptacles of love. He controls them all,
including sva-pakṣā Lalitā, vi-pakṣā Tārakā or
Candrāvalī, suhṛt-pakṣā Śyāmala, and taṭasthā-pakṣā
Bhadrā (Pāli).

                             123
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


In rāsa-līlā, when Śrī Kṛṣṇa once more came before the
gopīs, wearing a garland that was placed around His neck
by a beloved in a solitary place, then Śrī Rādhā, who
was full of loving anger, launched Her crooked glances
at Him. Chastising Him She said, “O crest jewel of
magicians, the use of Your loving poison on us was
successful. You took the life out of our bodies. Have
You come back to burn us on the funeral pyre?” Śrīmatī
Rādhikā is the crest jewel of all of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
beloveds. She is full of crookedness that arises from
Her honey-sweet affection for Śrī Kṛṣṇa (madhu-sneha),
thus She is full of the feeling that “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
Mine.” Situated on the next level beneath Rādhā in
loving affairs are Śyāmā and Lalitā, while Tārakā and
other gopīs such as Pālikā are on the third level.



8.142

śṛṅgāra-rasarāja-maya-mūrti-dhara

ataeva ātma-paryanta-sarva-citta-hara



“Of all the various rasas, the amorous mellow (śṛṅgāra-
rasa) is the topmost. This rasa is the emperor of all
transcendental mellows and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the embodiment
and the king of this mellow. This form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
all-attractive, even to Himself.



8.143

viśveṣām anurañjanena janayann ānandam indīvara-

śreṇī-śyāmala-komalair upanayann aṅgair anaṅgotsavam

svacchandaṁ vraja-sundarībhir abhitaḥ praty-aṅgam
āliṅgitaḥ

śṛṅgāraḥ sakhī mūrtimān iva madhau mugdho hariḥ krīḍati



Śrī Gītā-govinda (1.48)



“?ëO sakhī, in this spring season, Śrī Hari has become
amorous love incarnate and intoxicated by this rasa is
enjoying loving pastimes. With the limbs of His body,
which are softer, darker, and more beautiful than a blue
lotus, He begins the festival of love. With ever-
increasing ardor, He is satisfying the gopīs’ unbridled
passion far in excess of their expectations, and having
taken on an aggressive mood, the beautiful Vraja maidens
are fully and unrestrainedly embracing each and every
limb of His body.’



                             124
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




This verse establishes that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the very
personification of the amorous mellow, or śṛṅgāra-rasa.



8.144

lakṣmī-kāntādi avatārera hare mana

lakṣmī-ādi nārī-gaṇera kare ākarṣaṇa



“Śrī Nārāyaṇa, who is the beloved of Lakṣmī, and all the
incarnations of Bhagavān, as well as Lakṣmī and all the
other female energies of these incarnations — all are
attracted to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.




Śrī Kṛṣṇa attracts the hearts of Bhūmā-puruṣa (Mahā-
Viṣṇu), puruṣa-avatāras, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, Lakṣmī, and all
others.



8.145

dvijātmajā me yuvayor didṛkṣuṇā

mayopanītā bhuvi dharma-guptaye

kalāvatīrṇāv avaner bharāsurān

hatveha bhūyas tvarayetam anti me



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.89.58)



“The Bhūmā-puruṣa (Lord Mahā-Viṣṇu) said to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
ëO Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who possesses all potencies! O Arjuna!
Only to see both of you did I bring the sons of the
brāhmaṇa to My abode. You have appeared with Your
plenary portion to take away the burden of the Earth and
to protect religion. After removing the burden of the
Earth by killing the demons, please quickly return.’




Discussed here is an event that occurred in Dvārakā when
a brāhmaṇa’s new-born son died as soon as that child
touched the Earth. Taking up his son’s dead body, the
brāhmaṇa placed it on the doorway of the royal palace
and said, “Without a doubt, because of the bad behavior

                             125
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

of this greedy, licentious, materialistic king, who is
envious of the brāhmaṇas, my son has died. A king who is
coarse and violent and whose senses are uncontrolled
ensures that his subjects will always remain poor and
unhappy.”

The eight sons of the brāhmaṇa died successively in the
same manner. The brāhmaṇa placed all the bodies of his
dead sons at the palace gate. When the ninth of his sons
died, Arjuna, who was standing near Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
said, “O brāhmaṇa, is there no kṣatriya here in Dvārakā
who carries a bow? This time I will protect your son.”
The brāhmaṇa replied, “If my sons could not be protected
by Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, then what can you
do?” Arjuna said, “My name is Arjuna, and the name of my
bow is Gāṇḍīva. After I fight with Yamarāja, the god of
death, I will protect your son.”

When the time came for the brāhmaṇa’s wife to have their
next son, the brāhmaṇa sent word to Arjuna, who arrived
there and by his barrage of arrows formed a complete
cage around the maternity house. At the time of birth,
the brāhmaṇa’s son cried and cried until suddenly, the
child completely disappeared from the maternity room.

By the strength of his mystic power, Arjuna went to many
planets, looking for the child. When he could not find
him anywhere, he prepared to give up his life by
entering fire and immolating himself. Witnessing this,
Bhagavān said to Arjuna, “Come with Me. I will show you
all the sons of the brāhmaṇa.” Both Arjuna and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
mounted the chariot and crossed the seven islands and
seven mountain ranges of this universe. As they
approached Lokāloka Mountain, such a dense darkness came
upon them that even the four horses pulling Bhagavān’s
chariot, namely, Śaibya, Sugrīva, Meghapuṣpa, and
Balāhaka, became bewildered and could no longer discern
the correct path. Then Śrī Kṛṣṇa ordered His Sudarśana
cakra to proceed ahead of the chariot to show

the way. Moving onwards, Arjuna and Śrī Kṛṣṇa entered
Mahākāla-purī, the city of Bhūmā-puruṣa (Śeṣa-nāga).
That Śrī Bhūmā-puruṣa rests on the Causal Ocean. He is
the Lord of the spiritual sky and non-different from Śrī
Nārāyaṇa. That Bhūmā-puruṣa spoke this verse to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna.

Thus, it is clear that Śrī Kṛṣṇa captures the hearts of
Bhūmā-puruṣa, or Nārāyaṇa, and indeed of all of
Bhagavān’s incarnations. This verse gives evidence of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s all-attractiveness. The next verse presents
further evidence of this:



8.146

kasyānubhāvo ‘sya na deva vidmahe

tavāṅghri-reṇu-sparaśādhikāraḥ

yad-vāñchayā śrīr lalanācarat tapo

vihāya kāmān su-ciraṁ dhṛta-vratā

                             126
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.16.35)



“The wives of the serpent Kāliya said, ëO Bhagavān, we
cannot understand which sādhana this Kāliya serpent has
performed that rewarded him with the qualification to
receive the dust of Your lotus feet on his head. To
attain the dust of Your feet is so rare that even
Lakṣmī, who is Your wife, performed severe austerities,
in a very regulated manner, giving up all types of
pleasures for a very long time.’




In essence, Lakṣmī was so attracted by the beauty of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa that she left behind the enjoyment of intimate
association with her husband, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, in favor of
performing very severe austerities to avail herself of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s association. Yet even so, she still did not
achieve the qualification to touch His lotus feet. She
could only attain a faint glimmer, or shadow, of His
association by becoming a fine golden line upon Śrī
Śyāmasundara’s chest.

By contrast, what pious activities did the serpent
Kāliya perform that Śrī Kṛṣṇa bestowed His causeless
mercy upon him by dancing upon his hoods, while Lakṣmī,
to this day, is still performing severe austerities?

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa inquired from Lakṣmī the reason behind
her austerities, she replied, “I want to sport in
Vṛndāvana with You just like the gopīs do, and receive a
form like theirs.” Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “Lakṣmī, it
will be most difficult for you to attain that.” From
this it is clear that the beauty and sweetness of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa stole the mind of even the wife of Śrī Nārāyaṇa.



8.147

āpana-mādhurye hare āpanāra mana

āpanā āpani cāhe karite āliṅgana



“The sweetness of Śrī Śyāmasundara is so unparalleled
that it enchants His own mind. Becoming bewildered, He
even wants to embrace Himself.



8.148

aparikalita-pūrvaḥ kaś camatkāra-kārī

sphurati mama garīyān eṣa mādhurya-pūraḥ

                             127
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017


ayam aham api hanta prekṣya yaṁ lubdha-cetāḥ

sa-rabhasam upabhoktuṁ kāmaye rādhikeva



Lalita-mādhava (8.34)



“Seeing His own sweetness reflected in a bejeweled
pillar, Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, ëHow wonderful! How astonishing
and indescribable is My profound beauty, which is the
cause of great wonderment. I am enchanted by this
beauty, which is arousing the eager desire to embrace
and enjoy Myself, exactly like Śrīmatī Rādhikā does.’?”




Rādhā-tattva




8.149—151

ei ta’ saṅkṣepe kahila kṛṣṇera svarūpa

ebe saṅkṣepe kahi rādhā-tattva-rūpa



kṛṣṇera ananta-śakti, tāte tinaópradhāna

ëcic-chakti’, ëmāyā-śakti’, ëjīva-śakti’-nāma



ëantaraṅgā’, ëbahiraṅgā’, ëtaṭasthā’ kahi yāre

antaraṅgā ësvarūpa-śakti’ósabāra upare



Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya then said, “I have thus briefly
explained the fundamentals of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s original form.
Now please hear as I give a brief description of Śrī
Rādhā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa has unlimited potencies, of which three
are prominent. These are the spiritual potency (cit-
śakti), the material potency (māyā-śakti), and the
marginal potency (?jīva-śakti), which is otherwise known
as the living entities. These are also known
respectively as the internal potency (antaraṅgā-śakti),
the external potency (bahiraṅgā-śakti), and the marginal
potency (taṭasthā-śakti); but the internal potency, or
svarūpa-śakti, predominates.




                             128
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017


The Supersoul (Parabrahman) does not perform any
material activities since He does not have material
hands or feet. He performs His transcendental pastimes
without any material cause. By His transcendental body,
He resides everywhere in the whole universe at the same
time. There is mention of this cit-śakti (spiritual
potency) in the Upaniṣads:



te dhyāna-yogānugatā apaśyan

devātma-śaktiṁ sva-guṇair nigūḍhām

yaḥ kāraṇāni nikhilāni tāni

kālātma-yuktāny adhitiṣṭhaty ekaḥ



Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (1.3)

“Those brahmavādī ṛṣis who know the fundamental truths
are firmly situated in the trance of samādhi-yoga and
are empowered by the qualities of Parabrahman. While
rapt in meditation, they have seen, by the influence of
the Lord’s energies, the exceedingly confidential divine
potency born from His very form. He is the cause of all
other causes, and the sole predominant and presiding
deity of the living entities, of time, of material
nature, and of activity.”



Māyā-śakti is described in the following verse:



chandāṁsi yajñā kratavo vratāni

bhūtaṁ bhāvyaṁ yac ca vedā vadanti

asmān mayi sṛjate viśvam etat

tasmiṁś cānyo māyayā sanniruddhaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.9)



“Paramātmā, who is the master of the deluding material
nature, has created all the teachings of the Vedas. He
has also created special yajñas, such as jyotiṣṭoma,
that are performed with ghee; various types of vrata
(fasts, sacrifices, penances); and everything else in
existence in the past, present, and future. In other
words, He has created the entire world, the description
of which is found in the Vedas. The master of māyā has
created all of this, and the ignorant jīvas are bound by
His māyā.”

It is possible to find further descriptions of this
māyā-śakti in the other Upaniṣads:

                             129
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




ajām ekāṁ lohita-śukla-kṛṣṇāṁ bahvīḥ prajāḥ sṛjamānāṁ
sarūpāḥ

ajo hy eko juṣamāṇo ‘nuśete jahāty enāṁ bhukta-bhogām
ajo ‘nyaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.5)



“There are two types of unborn jīvas. Jīvas of the first
type are ignorant and worship Bhagavān’s material
potency called prakṛti. That prakṛti, whose modes are
red, white, and black (raja, sattva, and tama), is also
unborn like Bhagavān. However, unborn jīvas of the
second type of are knowledgeable. They have overcome
ignorance, and therefore have completely renounced that
material energy which the others strive to enjoy.”



There are two types of jīvas: one type is knowledgeable
(jñānīs). They worship the Supreme Soul, completely
renouncing the material energy that others are striving
to enjoy. The other type of jīvas remains ignorant,
engaging in the service of the material energy (māyā).

Although non-different from His own inconceivable
internal potency, Bhagavān’s desires are independent.
That Supreme Person has an eternal, transcendental form
whose glories are self-manifesting. The Supreme and
Absolute Truth is eternally self-manifested. The
following Vedic mantra provides another account of the
three energies of that self-manifesting Truth:



sa viśva-kṛd viśva-vid ātma-yoniḥ

jñaḥ kāla-kālo guṇī sarva-vid yaḥ

pradhāna-kṣetrajña-patir guṇeśaḥ

saṁsāra-mokṣa-sthiti-bandha-hetuḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.16)



“That Paramātmā is omniscient and the creator of the
universe. He is self-born, the controller of time
(kāla), the knower of all, the Lord of the material
energy (pradhāna), and the controller of all jīvas. He
is full of all transcendental qualities and beyond all
material qualities, yet He is their master. He binds the
jīvas in the repeated cycle of birth and death, places
them in their respective situations, and also liberates
them from that cycle.”




                             130
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

This mantra mentions the following three divisions of
the internal energy of Bhagavān:

(1) pradhāna — the total manifestation of the three
modes of material nature. This indicates māyā-śakti, or
the illusory energy.

(2) kṣetra-jñā — the knower of the body. This indicates
jīva-śakti, the individual souls.

(3) kṣetra-pati — the internal potency, or cit-śakti.



There is an axiom of logic that states, “śakti-
śaktimator abhedaḥ — Bhagavān is non-different from His
own multifarious potencies; śakti (potency) and
śaktimāna (the possessor of potencies) are non-
different.” In accordance with this logical principle,
we may understand that this world is the work of the
external potency known as māyā-śakti; the manifestation
of the countless individual souls is the work of the
jīva-śakti; and the manifestation of the spiritual world
is the work of the internal potency known as cit-śakti.

By the same logic we may appreciate that despite all the
work performed by His energy, Bhagavān Himself remains
unaffected and immutable at all times. Māyā-śakti is the
shadow of cit-śakti. This can be understood by the
example of someone’s reflection in a large mirror. At
first glance the person and his reflection might appear
to be identical, but upon a more thorough examination it
becomes apparent that both are, in fact, diametrically
opposite each other. One is the person himself and the
other is simply his reflection. In a similar fashion,
the varieties within the spiritual and material world
might at first appear to be alike, but a more careful
examination would in fact reveal them to be quite
opposite.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is said to be svarūpa-śakti. Just as
musk and its fragrance or fire and its potency to burn
are inseparable from one another, similarly, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are always inseparable, even
though They are eternally distinct in the matter of
relishing nectarean līlā. Svarūpa-śakti performs three
kinds of functions: manifesting the internal potency
(cit-śakti), māyā-śakti, and jīva-śakti.

An alternative name of cit-śakti is antaraṅgā-śakti (the
internal potency), another name of māyā-śakti is
bahiraṅgā-śakti (the external potency), and lastly,
another name for jīva-śakti is taṭasthā-śakti (the
marginal potency). Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the root cause and the
shelter of limitless incarnations of Bhagavān, and
infinite abodes of those incarnations, as well as
unlimited universes. Yet despite personally being the
limitless ocean of rasa who attracts the hearts of all,
and despite directly being the very attractor of Cupid
himself, still He is controlled by the prema of Śrī
Rādhā.




                             131
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

8.152

viṣṇu-śaktiḥ parā proktā

kṣetra-jñākhyā tathā parā

avidyā-karma-saṁjñānyā

tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate



Viṣṇu Purāṇa (6.7.61)



“?ëŚrī Viṣṇu has three energies: the internal potency
(parā-śakti), the living entity (kṣetrajñā), and the
illusory energy (avidyā-śakti). The internal potency of
Viṣṇu is known as svarūpa-śakti, or cit-śakti; the
living entity potency is also known as taṭasthā-śakti,
or jīva-śakti; and the illusory potency is also known as
māyā-śakti, or the external material energy.’



8.153—154

sac-cid-ānanda-maya kṛṣṇera svarūpa

ataeva svarūpa-śakti haya tina rūpa



ānandāṁśe ëhlādinī’, sad-aṁśe ësandhinī’

cid-aṁśe ësaṁvit’, yāre jñāna kari’ māni



“Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental form is composed of
eternity, bliss, and knowledge (sac-cid-ānanda-maya);
therefore His internal potency also has three different
forms. From His aspect of eternality, or existence,
comes sandhinī, from His aspect of bliss comes hlādinī,
and from His aspect of knowledge comes saṁvit. The
cognizance portion of the internal potency has been
accepted as real jñāna (knowledge).

8.155

hlādinī sandhinī samvit

tvay ekā sarva-saṁsthitau

hlāda-tāpa-karī miśrā

tvayi no guṇa-varjite



Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.12.69)



                             132
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


“?ëO Bhagavān! You are the shelter of everything. Your
three spiritual potencies — hlādinī, sandhinī, and
saṁvit — are always present within You. When the
material energy acts upon the conditioned soul, he
experiences happiness, misery, and a mixture of the two.
None of these, however, are able to touch You, as the
material energy has no influence upon You.’




The meaning here is that the three potencies — hlādinī,
sandhinī, and saṁvit — exists within Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own
form, so they are always within Him, but they are never
fully within the jīvas. Bhagavān is beyond the influence
of the material energy, which consists of the modes of
goodness, passion, and ignorance. Thus it is never
possible for the potency of the mode of goodness, which
gives material happiness to the mind; the potency of the
mode of ignorance, which gives suffering; and the
potency of the mode of passion, which gives a mixture of
both; to touch Śrī Kṛṣṇa. But when the individual soul,
who is a minute particle of consciousness, is controlled
by the material energy, he obtains the three different
results when he takes shelter of the three modes of the
material energy.

Bhagavān, who is beyond the modes of materal nature, and
His svarūpa-śakti are always one. She is always present
in a supremely pure state devoid of any touch of the
material qualities. Thus, the internal potency is always
separate from these three modes of nature. Furthermore,
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the presiding deity of these three
modes of material nature, headed by the mode of
goodness. These material energies permanently reside
under the shelter of the Lord, as do the bliss and other
potencies. The difference is that the three varieties of
svarūpa-śakti (hlādinī, sandhinī, and saṁvit) are always
non-different from the actual svarūpa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Goodness, passion, and ignorance are functions of His
external, illusory potency, and they are not in the
category of His internal energy. Thus, even though He is
the presiding deity of the external potency, which is
endowed with the three modes of nature, still He always
remains untouched by them.



8.156—157

kṛṣṇake āhlāde, tā’te nāmaóëāhlādinī’

sei śakti-dvāre sukha āsvāde āpani



sukha-rūpa kṛṣṇa kare sukha āsvādana

bhakta-gaṇe sukha dite ëhlādinī’ókāraṇa




                             133
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017

“The potency that gives Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
transcendental pleasure is called hlādinī. By this
pleasure potency, Śrī Kṛṣṇa personally tastes all
spiritual pleasure, even though He is the very
embodiment of bliss. This potency also gives happiness
to the devotees.




Every one of the eternal symptoms of svarūpa-śakti is
present in full in cit-śakti, minutely present in jīva-
śakti, and present in a distorted manner in the external
energy, māyā-śakti. As mentioned above, hlādinī,
sandhinī, and saṁvit are three functions of svarūpa-
śakti. In Daśa-mūla-śikṣā [instruction on the ten
fundamental principles] by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura,
we find this explanation:

sa vai hlādinyāś ca praṇaya-vikṛter hlādana-ratas

tathā samvic-chakti-prakaṭita-raho-bhāva-rasitaḥ

tayā śrī-sandhinyā kṛta-viśada tad-dhāma-nicaye

rasāmbhodhau magno vraja-rasa-vilāsī vijayate



Daśa-mūla (4)



“There are three functions of svarūpa-śakti. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
remains perpetually immersed in the ecstatic
transformations of the bliss potency (hlādinī-śakti). By
manifesting the internal and confidential devotional
sentiments through knowledge potency (saṁvit-śakti), He
is always enjoying the mellows of loving exchanges. And
by the existence potency (sandhinī-śakti), the pure
abode of Vṛndāvana is manifested, where Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
always performs blissful pastimes, eternally sinks by
His own volition in the ocean of vraja-rasa.”



In summary, the influence of the three aspects of
svarūpa-śakti — hlādinī, sandhinī, and saṁvit — is seen
throughout all the activities of the cognizence potency,
the marginal potency, and the external potency. The
daughter of Śrī Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, is
the personification of the the pleasure function of
svarūpa-śakti and She always bestows complete
transcendental happiness upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrīmatī Rādhikā
is made of mahābhāva and She is always giving all
varieties of bliss to Him. Her non-different expansions
(kāya-vyūha-svarūpa), in the form of the eight principal
gopīs, are Her eight different bhāvas; and Her four
moods of service eternally manifest as the four types of
sakhīs, namely, priya-sakhī, prāṇa-sakhī, narma-sakhī,
and parama-preṣṭha-sakhī. All of them are eternally
perfected sakhīs (nitya-siddha sakhīs) present in the
Vṛndāvana of the spiritual realm. The cognizance

                             134
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

(saṁvit) function of svarūpa-śakti manifests all of the
different relationships in Vraja.

The existence function (sandhinī-vṛtti) manifests the
transcendental land, bodies of water, villages, primary
and subsidiary forests, mountains like Śrī Giri-
Govardhana, and other scenic places where Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
His associates perform their pastimes. Moreover, the
sandhinī-vṛtti gives rise to the transcendental forms of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā, the sakhās and sakhīs, cows, and
every other servant and maidservant of Vraja, as well as
all of the completely spiritual paraphernalia used in
their pastimes. Śrī Kṛṣṇa forever remains immersed in
the supreme bliss of the loving transformations of the
pleasure function (hlādinī-vṛtti), while the full
variety of bhāvas generated by the cognizance function
(saṁvit-vṛtti) provides Him with the tastes of loving
mellows, or rasa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa expands such pastimes as
attracting the gopīs by playing His flute, cow grazing,
rāsa-līlā, and other such pastimes by the agency of the
cognizance function of His internal energy (parā-śakti).
Vraja-vilāsī Śrī Kṛṣṇa, He who eternally enjoys pastimes
in Vṛndāvana, always remains absorbed in the divine
abode, manifested by the existence function (sandhinī-
vṛtti).

The jīva-śakti is a minute potency that is reliant upon
svarūpa-śakti. The three tendencies of svarūpa-śakti are
only present minutely in the jīva-śakti. In the jīva,
the bliss function (hlādinī-vṛtti) is present in the
form of brahmānanda (the bliss achieved through
realization of the formless Brahman); the cognizance
function (saṁvit-vṛtti) is present as knowledge of that
impersonal Brahman; and the existence function
(sandhinī-vṛtti) is always present as minute individual
consciousness.

Likewise, the three functions of svarūpa-śakti are
present in māyā-śakti. The bliss function is present in
the form of material happiness, the cognizance function
is present as material knowledge, and the existence
function takes the form of the entire material creation,
including this universe composed of fourteen planetary
systems and the material bodies of the jīvas.

Māyā-śakti is a perverted or reflected form of the
superior, internal energy of Bhagavān. In fact, māyā-
śakti is only a name for the transformation of
Bhagavān’s parā-śakti and is its shadow. It is not a
separate, independent power. Māyā is the sole cause of
the jīva’s bondage and also his liberation. When the
jīva’s orientation is opposed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, māyā at once
places him in bondage and punishes him. And when the
jīva turns towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, māyā bestows knowledge of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa upon the jīva by manifesting the material mode
of goodness (sattva-guṇa) and liberates him from the
ocean of birth and death, thus making him qualified for
kṛṣṇa-prema. Bound by māyā in the form of the three
modes of material nature, the jīva is unable to
understand that the pure form of māyā is the svarūpa-
śakti of Bhagavān and instead considers the shadow known
as māyā to be the prominent potency.



                             135
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


8.158—159

hlādinīra sāra aṁśa, tāra ëprema’ nāma

ānanda-cinmaya-rūpa rasera ākhyāna



premera parama-sāra ëmahābhāva’ jāni

sei mahābhāva-rūpā rādhā-ṭhākurāṇī



“The most essential part of this pleasure potency, or
hlādinī-śakti, is called prema, also known as ānanda-
cinmaya-rasa, the mellow of transcendental bliss. This
mellow can only be tasted by prema. The essence of prema
is called mahābhāva, which is personified in Śrī Rādhā
Ṭhākurānī.



8.160

tayor apy ubhayor madhye

rādhikā sarvathādhikā

mahābhāva-svarūpeyaṁ

guṇair ativarīyasī



Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (4.3)



“?ëBetween the two gopīs [Rādhikā and Candrāvalī], Śrī
Rādhikā is superior in every respect, because Her very
form is composed of the highest expressions of love
(mahābhāva). By qualities, She far outshines all the
other beautiful damsels of Vraja.’




Tāpanī-śrutis call Śrī Rādhā “Gāndharvā.” The
fundamental truths about Śrī Rādhā are unprecedented and
astonishing.



8.161

premera ësvarūpa-deha’ópremera bhāvita

ëkṛṣṇera preyasī-śreṣṭha’ jagate vidita




                             136
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

“Śrī Rādhā’s nature (svarūpa) is comprised of prema and
Her body is also made of prema. She is the most
excellent of all of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds. This
fundamental truth is known throughout the entire
creation.



8.162

ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis

tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ

goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Brahma-saṁhitā (5.37)



“?ëŚrī Govinda, who is all-pervading and who exists
within the hearts of all, resides in His Goloka-dhāma
along with Śrī Rādhā, who is the embodiment of His
pleasure potency and the counterpart of His own
spiritual form. She is the epitome of transcendental
rasa, and is expert in sixty-four arts. They are also
accompanied by the sakhīs, who are expansions of Śrī
Rādhā’s own transcendental body, and who are infused
with blissful, spiritual rasa. I worship that original
personality, Śrī Govinda.’




Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī identifies the planet of the gopīs as
none other than Goloka-dhāma. Śrī Kṛṣṇa only resides
where the gopīs reside. The phrase nija-rūpatayā
kalābhiḥ means that the gopī beloveds of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are
actually His parts, non-different from Himself, and the
very embodiment of the essential function of hlādinī-
śakti. They are expansions of unnatojjvala-rasa, or the
amorous mellow, and because of their complete immersion
in transcendental ecstasy, they are certainly Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s dear-most beloveds. The word pratibhāvita
indicates those gopīs who have immersed themselves
completely in the prema-rasa for the king of mellows,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Moreover, it indicates those gopīs whose
hearts, being inundated by a deluge of this loving
affection, have themselves been loved by Him. By
offering Him such wonderful and expert affection, the
gopīs bestowed upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa a greatly beneficial gift.

The functions (vṛtti) of the pleasure potency (hlādinī-
śakti) are all manifested in the form of different arts.
The arts number sixty-four: (1) nṛtya — dancing, (2)
gīta — singing, (3) vādya — playing on musical
instruments, (4) nāṭya — performing theater, (5) ālekhya
— painting, (6) viśeṣakacchedya — painting the face and
body with colored unguents and cosmetics, (7) taṇḍula-

                             137
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

kusuma-balī-vikāra — preparing offerings from rice and
flowers, (8) puṣpāstaraṇa — making coverings of flowers
for a bed, (9) daśana-vasanāṅga-rāga — applying
preparations for cleansing the teeth and coloring the
cloth and body, (10) maṇi-bhūmikā-karma — making a
groundwork of jewels, (11) śayyā-racana — preparing the
pastime bed, (12) udaka-vādya — playing music on the
water or udaka-ghāta — splashing with water, (13) citra-
yoga — painting, (14) mālya-grathana-vikalpa — designing
varieties of garlands, (15) śekharāpīḍa-yojana — setting
a crown upon the head, (16) nepathya-yoga — dressing in
the retiring room, (17) karṇapātra-bhaṅga — decorating
the ears, (18) sugandha-yukti — applying scents, (19)
bhūṣaṇa-yojana — applying or setting ornaments, (20)
aindra-jāla — performing jugglery, (21) kaucumāra-yoga —
engaging in decorative art, (22) hasta-lāghava —
tricking others with sleight of hand, (23) citra-śākā-
pūpa-bhakṣya-vikāra-kriyā — preparing varieties of
salad, bread, cake and delicious edibles, (24) pānaka-
rasa-rāgāsava-yojana — preparing palatable drinks and
tingeing drinks with a red color, (25) sūcī-vāya-karma —
doing needlework and weaving, (26) sūtra-krīḍā — playing
with thread, (27) vīṇā-ḍamarūka-vādya — playing on the
lute and small x-shaped drum, (28) prahelikā — posing
and solving riddles, (29) pratimālā — reciting a verse
as a trial of memory or skill, (30) durvacaka-yoga —
speaking in a way that is difficult to understand, (31)
pustaka-vācana — reciting books, (32) nāṭikākhyāyikā-
darśana — enacting short plays and anecdotes, (33)
kāvya-samasyā-pūraṇa — resolving unfathomable
statements, verses, or poetry, (34) paṭṭikā-vetra-bāṇa-
vikalpa — designing shields, canes, and arrows, (35)
tarku-karma — spinning, (36) takṣaṇa — doing carpentry,
(37) vāstu-vidyā — engineering, (38) rūpya-ratna-parīkṣā
— testing silver and jewels, (39) dhātu-vāda —
practicing metallurgy, (40) maṇi-rāga-jñāna — coloring
jewels, (41) ākara-jñāna — practicing mineralogy, (42)
vṛkṣāyurveda-yoga — practicing medical treatment by
herbs, (43) meṣa-kukkuṭa-śāvaka-yuddha-vidhi — training
rams, cocks, and birds to fight, (44) śuka-sārikā-
pralāpana — training male and female parrots to
converse, and also understanding their conversations,
(45) utsādana — using perfumes to heal or cleanse a
person, (46) keśa-mārjana-kauśala — combing and
decorating hair, (47) akṣara-muṣṭikā-kathana — talking
with letters and fingers, (48) mlecchita-kutarka-vikalpa
— fabricating barbarous philosophies or foreign
sophistry, (49) deśa-bhāṣā-jñāna — knowing provincial
dialects, (50) puṣpa-śakaṭikā-nirmiti-jñāna — preparing
of toy carts using flowers, (51) yantra-mātṛkā — knowing
the art of designing yantras, (52) dhāraṇa-mātṛkā —
wearing and using yantras, (53) samvācya — conversing,
(54) mānasī-kāvya-kriyā — composing verses mentally,
(55) kriyā-vikalpa — designing a literary work or a
medical remedy, (56) chalitaka-yoga — juggling words to
defeat another, (57) abhidhāna-koṣa-cchando-jñāna —
using lexicography and meters, (58) vastra-gopana —
concealing cloths, (59) dyūta-viśeṣa — specific
gambling, (60) ākarṣa-krīḍā — playing with dice by using
magnets, (61) bālaka-krīḍanaka — using children’s toys,
(62) vaināyikī vidyā — enforcing discipline, (63)
vaijayikī vidyā — gaining victory, and (64) vaitālikī
vidyā — awakening one’s master with music at dawn.


                             138
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

All of these artistic abilities are eternally present in
their personified forms in Goloka-dhāma. By the help of
His beloved friend — the flute — Śrī Govinda, the hero
of Goloka, accepts the self-conception of being the
unmarried lover (upapati) of the gopīs, and enacts His
pastimes such as rāsa-līlā. There, too, the gopīs, since
time without beginning, retain the feeling that they are
His beloveds, while married to another man. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
tastes this mood in one form in the spiritual realm
(Goloka), and in another form in the Vṛndāvana of this
world (Gokula).



8.163—180

seī mahābhāva haya ëcintāmaṇi-sāra’

kṛṣṇa-vāñchā pūrṇa kare ei kārya tāṅra



ëmahābhāva-cintāmaṇi’ rādhāra svarūpa

lalitādi sakhīótāṅra kāya-vyūha-rūpa



rādhā-prati kṛṣṇa-snehaósugandhi udvartana

tā’te ati sugandhi dehaóujjvala-varaṇa



kāruṇyāmṛta-dhārāya snāna prathama

tāruṇyāmṛta-dhārāya snāna madhyama



lāvaṇyāmṛta-dhārāya tad-upari snāna

nija-lajjā-śyāma-paṭṭasāṭi-paridhāna



kṛṣṇa-anurāgaódvitīya aruṇa-vasana

praṇaya-māna-kañculikāya vakṣa ācchādana



saundaryaókuṅkuma, sakhī-praṇayaócandana

smita-kāntiókarpūra, tineóaṅge vilepana



kṛṣṇera ujjvala-rasaómṛgamada-bhara

sei mṛgamade vicitra kalevara




                             139
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

pracchanna-māna-vāmyaódhammilla-vinyāsa

ëdhīrādhīrātmaka’ guṇaóaṅge paṭa-vāsa



rāga-tāmbūla-rāge adhara ujjvala

prema-kauṭilyaónetra-yugale kajjala



ësūddīpta-sāttvika’ bhāva, harṣādi ësañcārī’

ei saba bhāva-bhūṣaṇa saba aṅge bhari’



ëkila-kiñcitādi’-bhāva-viṁśati-bhūṣita

guṇa-śreṇī-puṣpamālā sarvāṅge pūrita



saubhāgya-tilaka cāru-lalāṭe ujjvala

prema-vaicittyaóratna, hṛdayaótarala



madhya-vayasa, sakhī-skandhe kara-nyāsa

kṛṣṇalīlā-manovṛtti-sakhī āśa-pāśa



nijāṅga-saurabhālaye garva-paryaṅka

tā’te vasi’ āche, sadā cinte kṛṣṇa-saṅga



kṛṣṇa-nāma-guṇa-yaśaóavataṁsa kāṇe

kṛṣṇa-nāma-guṇa-yaśa-pravāha-vacane



kṛṣṇake karāya śyāma-rasa-madhu pāna

nirantara pūrṇa kare kṛṣṇera sarva-kāma



kṛṣṇera viśuddha-prema-ratnera ākara

anupama-guṇagaṇa-pūrṇa kalevara



“Mahābhāva is the essence of all perfection and is like
a wish fulfilling desire stone; its only business is to
fulfill all of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s desires. Śrī Rādhā is the
topmost spiritual gem, and the other gopīs such as Śrī

                             140
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Lalitā are Her direct expansions (kāya-vyūha). Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s affection for Her is like a perfumed massage,
which makes Śrī Rādhā’s transcendental body brilliantly
lustrous and fragrant.

“Śrī Rādhā takes Her first bath in the shower of the
nectar of compassion, and She takes Her second bath at
mid-day in the nectar waves of fresh youth. Later on,
Rādhārāṇī takes Her third and last bath in the nectar-
ocean of bodily luster. She wears the garment of
shyness, in the form of a very fine, dark blue silk
sārī.

“Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s affection for Kṛṣṇa is Her upper
cloth, which is reddish in color. She then covers Her
breasts with a bodice comprised of overwhelming
affection (praṇaya) and jealous anger (māna) for Kṛṣṇa.
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s personal beauty is the reddish
vermilion (saffron) powder known as kuṅkuma placed upon
Her body. Her affection for Her sakhīs is sandalwood
pulp, and the sweetness of Her gentle smile is camphor.
These three combined — camphor, sandalwood pulp, and
kuṅkuma — are smeared over Her body.

“Amorous love for Kṛṣṇa is the fragrance of musk, and
special decorative pictures drawn with that musk nicely
decorate Her entire divine body. Concealed sulkiness and
Her unsubmissive leftist mood constitute Her hair style.
The quality of dhīrādhīra — an indignant heroine who
greets her faithless beau sometimes with wry politeness
while rebuffing him with ambiguous words, and sometimes
with harshness, caustically rejecting him — is the silk
garment covering Her body. Her attachment for Kṛṣṇa is
the reddish stain from betel nuts upon Her lips, which
causes them to shine brilliantly. Her crookedness in
loving affairs is the decorative black mascara around
Her eyes. The ornaments on Her body are the forms of Her
eight types of fully blazing devotional ecstatic
transformations (sāttvika-bhāvas) and the other sañcārī-
bhāvas (thirty-three transitory emotions that swell from
the ocean of sthāyi-bhāva) headed by jubilation. All
these ecstasies are like the decorations that
beautifully embellish Her body.

“These bodily ornaments constitute twenty kinds of
ecstatic symptoms, beginning with kila-kiñcita-bhāva (a
mixture of seven moods — pride, desire, crying,
laughing, malice, fear, and anger — that manifest
simultaneously). Her transcendental qualities such as
sweetness are the flower garland hanging upon Her whole
body. A supremely beautiful tilaka of good fortune
adorns Her forehead. Her various loving moods such as
prema-vaicittya are the various gems from which Her
necklace is composed, and Her heart is the locket of Her
affection, which nicely decorates Her.

“She rests Her hands on the shoulder of a sakhī, who
represents eternal, fresh adolescence. Rādhā’s sakhīs,
who always stay close by Her, are the forms of Her
various mental activities, which all dwell upon the
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Within Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s
palace, which represents Her bodily beauty, is Her
bedstead composed of pride itself; She is always seated
there thinking of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s intimate association.

                             141
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


“Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, fame, and qualities decorate Her
ears, and His name and fame flow continually from Her
speech. Śrī Rādhā induces Kṛṣṇa to drink the honey of
amorous pleasure, and She completely satisfies all of
His desires. Her body is exactly like the valuable jewel
of completely pure prema, the only object of which is
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. These unparalleled spiritual qualities always
decorate Śrī Rādhā’s transcendental body.




Śrī Rādhā is mahābhāva-cintāmaṇi-svarūpa — She is the
embodiment of mahābhāva and is just like a wish
fulfilling spiritual jewel. As a cintāmaṇi fulfills all
of one’s desires, so Śrī Rādhā fulfills all of the
desires of Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the hero
of unlimited universes and the crest-jewel of those who
taste ecstatic devotional mellows. If Śrī Kṛṣṇa has any
desire to taste the rasa of associating with the gopīs
who are opposed to Śrī Rādhā (the vipakṣa gopīs), then
Śrī Rādhā manifests Herself as Candrāvalī, and in that
form fulfills Her beloved’s desire. All of the vraja-
gopīs are personifications of the different moods of Śrī
Rādhā. In harmony with Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s particular desire,
She presents Herself accordingly.

The queens of Dvārakā and the different incarnations of
Lakṣmī are all Śrī Rādhā’s pastime expansions (vaibhava-
vilāsa). Some are aṁśa (parts), and some are kalā (part
of a part). Śrī Rādhā has assumed all of these various
forms, thus they are Her non-different bodily
expansions, known as kāya-vyūha. Each of these forms is
always happy and alert to fulfill each of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
desires, but only cintāmaṇi-svarūpā Śrī Rādhā can
satisfy all of His desires.

The term kāya-vyūha signifies the multiple distinct
forms that are manifest simultaneously in order to
perform a variety of different activities. Each kāya-
vyūha body is similar to the original one.

Śrī Rādhā’s sakhīs increase the wonder and astonishment
of the love-filled pastimes. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s affection for
Śrī Rādhā is such that it is extremely fragrant. When
Śrī Rādhā recalls Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s astonishing love, Her
entire body becomes supremely fragrant and brilliantly
radiant. She is the confluence, or meeting place, of the
three currents known as kāruṇya-amṛta (the nectar of
mercy), tāruṇya-amṛta (the nectar of youth), and
lāvaṇya-amṛta (the nectar of beauty).

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.1.64) states: “para-duḥkhāsaho
yas tu karuṇaḥ sa nigadyate — One who cannot tolerate
the unhappiness of others is called merciful.” When an
adjective is formed, the noun “mercy” becomes
“merciful.” In addition, the nectar of mercy, or
kāruṇya-amṛta, is a wave upon the current of prema, and
it is in this nectar of mercy that Śrī Rādhā takes Her
first bath. It is very auspicious to bathe in the early
morning in a river, as it makes the body extremely
smooth, glistening, and soft. For this reason, Śrī Rādhā

                             142
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

takes bath in the waves of the nectar of compassion,
first thing in the morning. “Early morning” indicates
Śrī Rādhā’s age, known as vayasa-sandhi (the conjunction
of two ages) and at this time, all the restlessness of
infancy (bālya) and childhood (paugaṇḍa) disappear.

At midday, Śrī Rādhā takes Her second bath in tāruṇya-
amṛta, or the nectar flow of just-rising youthfulness.
Upon completing Her morning bath, Śrī Rādhā goes to Śrī
Nanda Bābā’s palace, and after preparing edibles for Her
treasured Śrī Kṛṣṇa, She goes to Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa to
bathe. Making some excuse to get away from His friends,
Śrī Śyāmasundara joins Her there. As soon as Śrī Rādhā
catches sight of Him, His body automatically blossoms
with ever-fresh youthfulness. Now They very expertly
perform boating pastimes, water-sports, and other water
pastimes (jala-vihāra), and lastly They take an ecstatic
bath in Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa together. This bath is full of
wondrous, mutual loving sentiments. After this midday
bath the waves of youthful nectar cover Them both, and
Śrī Rādhā’s natural youthfulness becomes fully blazing:



muktāphaleṣu chāyāyās taralatvam ivāntarā

pratibhāti yad aṅgeṣu lāvaṇyaṁ tad ihocyate

Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (10.28)



“Just as one can perceive the luster of a pearl from any
direction, similarly one can see the heartfelt
devotional sentiments radiating from within the body of
Śrī Rādhā.”

These bhāvas make Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s beauty shine even
more brightly. When She goes to meet with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
the night at the appointed meeting place, Her budding
youth and exceeding beauty manifest fully. It is by this
lāvaṇya-amṛta (nectar of Her beauty) that She fulfills
all the desires of Her most beloved, giving Him the
topmost happiness. It is in this flow of lāvaṇya-amṛta
in the evening that She takes Her third bath.

Therefore, Śrī Rādhā is the root cause and shelter of
all mercy, youthfulness, and beauty. As She approaches
Her budding, fresh youth, Her body takes on a sense of
gravity, and very naturally, shyness starts to make its
appearance in Her. To cover Her femininity, She wears a
dark blue sārī, which is the actualized form of the
amorous mellow, or śṛṅgāra-rasa. It appears as if Her
shyness has wrapped Her entire body with this blue
cloth.

Over Her sārī She wears a veil the color of the rising
sun that represents Her attraction for Śrī Kṛṣṇa:



sadānubhūtam api yaḥ kuryyān nava-navaṁ priyam

rāgo bhavan nava-navaḥ so ‘nurāga itīryate

                             143
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.146)



“That ever fresh, all-consuming attraction (rāga) which
itself causes one to realize one’s beloved in a novel
manner every moment, is called anurāga.”



Since Śrī Rādhā wishes to remain constantly absorbed in
this anurāga, She always covers Her upper torso with red
cloth.

At all times She is beautifully decorated with sixteen
decorative items (ṣoḍaśa-śṛṅgāra): a bath, a shining
bejeweled nose-piece, blue cloth, an ornamented belt
around Her waist, a braid, swaying earrings, an ointment
of camphor, musk, and sandalwood smeared on Her body,
flowers decorating Her hair, a garland about Her neck, a
pastime lotus in Her hand, tāmbūla in Her mouth, a spot
of musk on Her chin, kajjala (black mascara) on Her
eyes, tilaka on Her forehead, dolphins (makarī — the
aquatic animals on the flag of Cupid) drawn in musk on
Her pinkish cheeks, and Her feet tinted with red dye.

Twelve more ornaments (dvādaśa-ābharaṇa) beautifully
decorate Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s body: an effulgent jeweled
crown, large golden earrings, a golden waist sash, a
silver necklace, small golden ear studs and hair pin,
rings on Her fingers, a neck ornament, and bangles on
Her wrist. Upon Her chest is a glittering chain, upon
Her arm are amulets, and on Her ankles and toes are
jeweled ankle bells and toe rings.

The following transcendental qualities are always within
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s possession: She is wonderfully
beautiful to behold, She is situated in the prime of
fresh youth, She has restless eyes and casts sidelong
glances, She is always adorned with a mild, sweet smile,
and the soles of Her feet are marked with enchanting
lines indicating unlimited auspiciousness. Her bodily
fragrance maddens Kṛṣṇa, Her singing of the fifth note
equals the sweetness of a cuckoo, and She is expert in
the science of singing with music. She speaks sweetly,
She is expert at joking, She is humble, merciful,
extremely clever, and expert in all activities. She is
shy and follows proper etiquette. Thus She shows
respectful behavior to Her superiors. (This respectful
behavior is of three types: inborn, learned from others,
and deemed proper by Her own deliberation.) She is
patient, grave, expert in knowing appropriate rhythm and
tune, and possessed of ecstatic symptoms such as hāva
and bhāva. She demonstrates the highest form of love
called mahābhāva. Seeing Her, the hearts of all the
residents of Gokula flood with prema. Her fame is spread
throughout the universe, She is most beloved of Her
superiors, She is controlled by the love of Her
girlfriends, She is the most prominent of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
beloveds, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa always obeys Her orders.




                             144
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017



Prema-tattva




8.181

kā kṛṣṇasya praṇaya-jani-bhūḥ śrīmatī rādhikaikā

kāsya preyasy anupama-guṇā rādhikaikā na cānyā

jaihmyaṁ keśe dṛśi taralatā niṣṭhuratvaṁ kuce ‘syā

vāñchā-pūrtyai prabhavati hare rādhikaikā na cānyā



Śrī Govinda-līlāmṛta (11.112)



“?ëWho is the source of love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa? The answer
is it is Śrī Rādhā only. Who is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s most
beloved? The answer is Śrī Rādhā, the repository of all
transcendental qualities, and no one else. Her hair is
very curly, Her eyes are always darting back and forth,
and Her breasts are firm. Thus, Śrī Rādhā alone is able
to fulfill all of Kṛṣṇa’s desires, no one else.’



8.182—184

yāṅra saubhāgya-guṇa vāñche satyabhāmā

yāṅra ṭhāñi kalā-vilāsa śikhe vraja-rāmā



yāṅra saundaryādi-guṇa vāñche lakṣmī-pārvatī

yāṅra pativratā-dharma vāñche arundhatī



yāṅra sadguṇa-gaṇane kṛṣṇa nā pāya pāra

tāṅra guṇa gaṇibe kemane jīva chāra”



“Satyabhāmā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s other queens eternally long
for the good fortune and excellent qualities of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, from whom all the gopīs have learned the
various arts. Even the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī, and
Lord Śiva’s wife Pārvatī yearn for Her standard of
beauty. The respected Arundhatī also, the celebrated
chaste wife of Vasiṣṭha, desires to rise to the level of
Her chastity and religious observance. Even Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself cannot fully enumerate Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s
transcendental qualities. How, then, could an

                             145
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

insignificant living entity possibly estimate them?”




Vilāsa-tattva




8.185—186

prabhu kahe,ó”jāniluṅ kṛṣṇa-rādhā-prema-tattva

śunite cāhiye duṅhāra vilāsa-mahattva”



rāya kahe,ó”kṛṣṇa haya ëdhīra-lalita’

nirantara kāma-krīḍāóyāṅhāra carita



After hearing these descriptions of kṛṣṇa-tattva, rādhā-
tattva, and prema-tattva from Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu replied, “O Rāya, I have come to understand
the truths about Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā, and prema itself.
Now I wish to hear the glories of Their playful loving
exchanges.”

Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda replied, “Lord Kṛṣṇa is dhīra-lalita-
nāyaka, and He is ever devoted to lusty affairs (kāma-
krīḍā).




Expert in relishing loving exchanges, ever youthful,
clever at joking, and always carefree — these are the
qualities of the dhīra-lalita-nāyaka, a hero controlled
by his beloved. When the hero is symptomized as being
completely favorable to the heroine and unable to remain
apart from her, he is called dhīra-lalita-anukūla-
nāyaka. In his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
says:



8.187

vidagdho nava-tāruṇyaḥ

parihāsa-viśāradaḥ

niścinto dhīra-lalitaḥ

syāt prāyaḥ preyasī-vaśaḥ



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.1.230)

                             146
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


“?ëHe who is expert in the art of love, ever youthful,
clever at joking, happy-go-lucky, and subjugated by the
love of his sweethearts is called a dhīra-lalita-
nāyaka.’




Śrī Paurṇamāsī said to Nāndīmukhī: “O Nāndīmukhī,
because of their indescribable, compelling love for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā never burden their son with
any specific responsibility. Thus, being fully carefree,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa continuously plays with Śrī Rādhā on the banks
of the Yamunā River, decorating the kuñjas there with
His very presence.”



8.188

rātri-dina kuñje krīḍā kare rādhā-saṅge

kaiśora-vayasa saphala kaila krīḍā-raṅge



“Day and night Śrī Kṛṣṇa continuously sports, jokes, and
enjoys in various ways with Śrī Rādhā in the kuñjas. In
this way, through His amorous diversions He makes His
youth successful.




The meaning of amorous play (krīḍā-raṅga) in the present
context is prema-līlā, pastimes of love, which are
ongoing, meaning “whenever the opportunity arises.” If
the meaning were taken as “every moment,” then the
sequence in the flow of the līlās would be disrupted,
giving no chance for Kṛṣṇa to perform His cow-grazing
and other pastimes. These other līlās are essential
limbs of the principle pastimes of meeting with the
vraja-gopīs, and all of the līlās have their own
appropriate timings.



8.189

vācā sūcita-śarvarī-rati-kalā-prāgalbhyayā rādhikāṁ

vrīḍā-kuñcita-locanāṁ viracayann agre sakhīnām asau

tad-vakṣoruha-citra-keli-makarī-pāṇḍitya-pāraṁ gataḥ

kaiśoraṁ saphalī-karoti kalayan kuñje vihāraṁ hariḥ



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.1.231)


                             147
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

“?ëŚrī Kṛṣṇa impudently boasted of His amorous escapades
of the previous night in front of the sakhīs, making Śrī
Rādhā close Her eyes out of embarrassment. At that
moment, He painted some charming, playful makarī
[Cupid’s dolphin carrier] upon Her breasts, and thus
manifested the pinnacle of cleverness. By such loving
pastimes in the kuñjas, Śrī Hari made His youth
successful.’?”



8.190—192

prabhu kahe,ó”eho haya, āge kaha āra”

rāya kahe,ó”ihā vai buddhi-gati nāhi āra



yebā ëprema-vilāsa-vivarta’ eka haya

tāhā śuni’ tomāra sukha haya, ki nā haya”



eta bali’ āpana-kṛta gīta eka gāhila

preme prabhu sva-haste tāṅra mukha ācchādila



Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “Whatever you have said
regarding the loving exchanges between Śrī Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa is all right, but please say something more.” Śrī
Rāya Rāmānanda replied, “O Lord, my intelligence cannot
penetrate this subject any further, but there is another
stage called prema-vilāsa-vivarta. However I do not know
if such a description will be to Your satisfaction or
not.” Saying this, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya began to sing his
own composition, but Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu immediately
covered Rāmānanda’s mouth with His lotus hand.




According to Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, in the present
verse, it is Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s intention here to
confirm that in Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya’s deliberation on the
goal of human life, he has described the prema between
Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and illuminated the greatness
of Their pastimes when Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifests His dhīra-
lalita-nāyaka form. This deliberation describes the
glories of the amorous pastimes between Śrī Rādhā and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa — Rādhā who is the source or sum total of all
rasa (akhaṇḍa-rasa-vallabhā), the embodiment of
mahābhāva, and the personification of kāntā-prema, and
Kṛṣṇa who is the unlimited ocean of all rasas (akhila-
rasāmṛta-sindhu), the personification of śrṅgāra-rasa,
amorous love, the king of all mellows, and the direct
attracter of even Cupid himself.

Yet Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked, “Can you explain more than
this?”

                             148
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017


Śrī Rāmānanda replied, “Since such topics are beyond
material intelligence, it is extremely rare to find
anyone qualified enough to hear or speak on them.
However, there is one topic, namely prema-vilāsa-
vivarta, that I shall describe, but I do not know
whether this will make You happy or not. This is my
doubt.

“Prema-vilāsa is of two types. One is meeting (sambhoga)
and the other is separation (vipralambha). Without
separation, there is no joy or sustenance in meeting. In
the stage of adhirūḍha-mahābhāva, this condition of
bewilderment, or illusion, (vivarta) causes feelings of
separation even within meeting. Meeting for the duration
of a day of Brahmā seems to last only for a moment. Even
though Śrī Kṛṣṇa is happy, one iota of difficulty for
Him still causes great unhappiness [for the devotee].
Although the devotee is beyond illusion, when he is in
separation from Kṛṣṇa, he automatically forgets
everything and considers even a moment to be like
millions upon millions of years.

The words prema-vilāsa mean “the loving, playful
pastimes that are generated from prema,” and vivarta
means “mistaking one thing for something else.” It also
means “opposite, bewildered, and completely ripened.”
During prema-vilāsa-vivarta there is cause for some
pastimes to flow in a seemingly contradictory manner.
This stage is most astonishing and the ultimate
expression of loving exchanges. Thus we find the
statement:

advaitād girijāṁ harārdha-vapuṣaṁ sakhyāt priyoraḥ-
sthitāṁ,

lakṣmīm acyuta-citta-bhṛṅga-nalinīṁ satyāṁ ca
saubhāgyataḥ

mādhuryān madhureśa-jīvita-sakhīṁ candrāvalīṁ ca kṣipan,

paśyāruddha hariṁ prasārya laharīṁ rādhānurāgāmbudhiḥ



Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.178)

“The waves of the great ocean of Śrī Rādhā’s compelling
love now completely cover Śrī Kṛṣṇa with their waters
because She actually identifies as Him. Thus She defeats
all other goddesses, including Pārvatī, who, being non-
different from Lord Śiva, is his wife; Lakṣmī, who,
because of intimate friendship with Śrī Nārāyaṇa,
reclines on His chest; Satyabhāmā, who because of her
great good fortune, is like a lotus flower that attracts
the bumble-bee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mind; and also Candrāvalī,
who, because of her sweetness, is the life and soul of
Madhureśa (the Lord of all sweetness).”



Prema-vilāsa means “loving pastimes,” and vivarta
indicates prema-vaicittya, which is the topmost level of
prema. In this stage of the performance of loving

                             149
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

exchanges, the knowledge of the difference between the
lover and his beloved is annihilated. Everything else
apart from the joy of meeting, including their own
existence, is forgotten. Their heart and mind melt to
such a degree that both of them become one, and they do
not recognize any difference between each other. In this
profusion of prema, absorption in oneness reaches its
highest stage. The knowledge “I am the heroine (beloved)
and you are the hero (lover)” becomes covered due to a
delusion that arises in the course of amorous exchanges.
In this stage, sometimes Śrī Rādhā mistakenly considers
Herself to be the hero (ramaṇa), and Śrī Kṛṣṇa thinks
Himself to be the heroine (ramaṇī). This is viparīta-
bhāva, in which roles are reversed.

When Madhumaṅgala says, “O Rādhā, Madhusūdana has gone
away,” Śrī Rādhā begins to lament in separation from
Him, even though Śrī Kṛṣṇa is right next to Her. This is
prema-vilāsa-vivarta.

The following song was composed by Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda:



8.193

“pahilehi rāga nayana-bhaṅge bhela

anudina bāḍhala, avadhi nā gela



nā so ramaṇa, nā hāma ramaṇī

duṅhu-mana manobhava peṣala jāni’



e sakhī, se-saba prema-kāhinī

kānu-ṭhāme kahabi vichurala jāni’



nā khoṅjaluṅ dūtī, nā khoṅjaluṅ ān

duṅhuko milane madhya ta pāṅca-bāṇa



ab sohi virāga, tuṅhu bheli dūtī

su-purukha-premaki aichana rīti”



“Lamenting in separation, Śrīmatī Rādhikā says, ëAlas,
before We ever met, We first experienced an initial
attachment to each other instigated by an exchange of
glances. In just a blink of the eyelid, without a
moment’s delay, an emotion named rāga (driving
attachment) immediately arose between Us. This
compelling love grew day by day, and in no time at all,
in just a few days, it developed so much that there was

                             150
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

no limit to it. That attachment flowed without stop and
continued to increase.’




rādhā-premā vibhuóyāra bāḍīte nāhi ṭhāñi

tathāpi se kṣaṇe kṣaṇe bāḍaye sadai

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (4.128)

“Śrī Rādhā’s love extends everywhere, leaving no space
for it to expand any further. Still it continuously
increases every second.”



Śrī Kṛṣṇa also says:



man-mādhurya, rādhāra premaódoṅhe hoḍa kari’

kṣaṇe kṣaṇe bāḍe doṅhe, keha nāhi hāri

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (4.142)



“My sweetness and Rādhā’s prema increase every moment,
and neither knows defeat.”

“That rāga, or attraction, arises naturally in both of
Us.” It is Śrī Rādhā’s desire to give happiness to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa continuously, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa desires to do the same
for Śrī Rādhā. Neither Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the lover par
excellence, nor Śrī Rādhā, the pre-eminent beloved, is
the cause of this spontaneous attraction, but it awakens
just from seeing each other and turns into Cupid, who
grinding or melting Their minds together, makes them
one. Their hearts and minds, desiring only to give
happiness to one another, become non-different from each
other. At that time, They become obsessed with desire to
engage in loving pastimes and They forget all else
except meeting together. In essence, at that time, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa forgets that He is a hero, or lover, and Śrī Rādhā
also loses the feeling that She is a heroine, or
beloved. “Se-saba prema-kāhinī — these are all topics of
prema.”

“O sakhī! If you think that, due to Our separation from
each other, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has forgotten all of Our previous
loving affairs, please tell Him that the influence of
Mathurā is such that it causes everyone who goes there
to forget their previous existence. If you go, then
kindly remind Him that at the time of Our first meeting
there was no messenger between Us, nor did I request
anyone to arrange Our meeting. Indeed, only Our great
mutual eagerness to meet one another, or Cupid’s five
arrows, were Our via media and the one and only cause.”

This demonstrates Śrī Rādhā’s feminine virtue of

                             151
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

dedication (lalanā-niṣṭha)[xvii]16 to meet Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
known as mañjiṣṭhā[xviii]17-rāga[xix]18.

Furthermore, one can see that this special attraction
(rāga) in Her heart is completely pure, free from
material designations and independent of everything
else. No helper, messenger, or other intermediary was
required to facilitate Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s meeting.

Sohi. “O sakhī, now Kṛṣṇa has lost His intense
attraction for Me. Due to the powerful influence of this
anurāga, He came to Me on His own, without the
intervention of anyone else, but now He has forgotten
all this.” At this time of separation, the attachment
(rāga) of meeting has transformed into an exceptional
attachment (vi-rāga or viccheda-gata-rāga, a very
special, unbroken and unlimited attraction felt in
separation), otherwise named adhirūḍha-bhāva — highly
elevated ecstatic love. Here, this virāga, or adhirūḍha-
bhāva, is addressed as a female friend (sakhī) and asked
to become a messenger to Kṛṣṇa: “Tuṅhu bheli dūtī. O
sakhī! You should act as My envoy. I am sending you to
Him with a message. Su-purukha-premaki aichana rīti —
you should go and ask Him, ëIs it the conduct of an
expert lover, a cultured gentleman, to first establish
prema and then sometime later forget it?’?” Here Śrī
Rādhā is speaking in jest. The purport is, “It is
completely improper for a skilled suitor like You to
display such a profusion of intense love and later on,
just drop it.”

All of this essentially means that at the time of
meeting, rāga, or attraction, remains as an emissary in
the form of Cupid. Then, during separation, that rāga
awakens up to the stage of adhirūḍha-bhāva and
ultimately becomes prema-vilāsa-vivarta. Moreover, while
experiencing feelings of separation, if one has a vision
within the heart (sphūrti) of meeting, then that vision
takes the form of a female messenger. Śrī Rādhā
addresses this messenger as sakhī (dear friend), and
then speaks with her. The happiness that one experiences
in this state of meeting in prema-vilāsa, is, in truth,
also experienced in separation. Similarly, because one
becomes so absorbed in Śrī Kṛṣṇa when parted from Him,
the mood of service reaches to the topmost peak. This
variety of vivarta gives rise to adhirūḍha-mahābhāva.
This is a type of meeting in which, for example, Śrī
Rādhā, mistakes a blackish tamāla tree for Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
and runs to embrace it.

Upon hearing a portion of Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya’s song,
Śrīman Mahāprabhu became maddened in prema. Arising,
Mahāprabhu covered Śrī Rāmānanda’s mouth with His own
hand. In this song, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya reveals Śrī
Rādhā’s visions in Her states of separation. The rāga
described is the embodiment of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s very
nature. Neither Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the lover par excellence, nor
Śrī Rādhā, the pre-eminent beloved, is the cause of this
rāga; rather, this rāga is self-propelling, and ascends
to the stage of mādanākhya-mahābhāva. In this stage, all
the bhāvas manifest in a fully jubilant state. This
condition is unprecedented and indescribable because
within it one directly and simultaneously experiences
all of the countless types of happiness and distress

                             152
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

that are experienced both in meeting and in separation
respectively. The words nā so ramaṇa, nā hāma ramaṇī
indicate all the bhāvas experienced in the fully ripened
stage of meeting in prema-vilāsa, while the words ab
sohi virāga indicate mutual feelings of separation.

In the commentary on such verses as “vakāre sumukhi
nava-vivartaḥ — O enemy of Bakāsura, this beautiful
faced maiden is manifesting a new type of transformation
of love towards You,” (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi). Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī writes vivartaḥ paripākaḥ. He defines the word
vivarta as paripāka, or completely matured, meaning that
the state of vivarta is a manifestation of fully matured
passion. In the first act of the drama Śrī Lalita-
mādhava, in the commentary on the line paurṇa putri
māyāvivattau ‘yaṁ, there is a discussion about prema-
vilāsa-vivarta. Anya dharma tyāyatrāropo vivarttaḥ. When
a foreign quality is superimposed upon something, it is
called vivarta. The meaning of prema is “desire,” the
meaning of vilāsa is “pastimes,” and the meaning of
vivarta is “a reversal.” Thus, prema-vivarta means “the
culmination of loving pastimes in which the hero and
heroine exchange roles, or viparīta-kāma-krīḍā.” Instead
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa leading the amorous sports, Śrī Rādhikā
assumes the dominant role in Their love-play. This
pastime of enacting opposite roles (viparīta-vilāsa) is
exceedingly high-class and pure, and no other enjoyment
is more exalted. It is in this fully matured condition
of loving pastimes that Śrī Rādhā said, “Nā so ramaṇa,
nā hāma ramaṇī.” After that the intolerable state of
separation described by the words ab sohi virāga
appeared in Her life. Therefore, to prevent this being
spoken out loud, Śrīman Mahāprabhu covered Śrī Rāmānanda
Rāya’s mouth.

Śacīnandana Śrī Gaurasundara is the combined form of
rasa-rāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa and mahābhāva-svarūpiṇī Śrī Rādhā.
“Rādhā-bhāva-dyuti-suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa-svarūpam — I
bow down to that Śrī Gaurasundara who has manifested
Himself with the moods and luster of Śrī Rādhā although
He is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-
līlā 4.55). However, Śrī Gaurahari wished to conceal His
nature as being Śrī Kṛṣṇa internally, covered by a
golden complexion. He did not want Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya to
reveal His identity, so He covered Rāmānanda’s mouth
before he could utter this fact.

Jagad-guru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
Prabhupāda says that there is also another reason why
Śrīman Mahāprabhu covered Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya’s mouth: it
remains completely impossible for members of the
sampradāya of the mundane prākṛta-sahajiyās to follow
the conception of vilāsa-vivarta (reversal of roles
during the pastimes) and vilāsa-vaicitrya
(variegatedness within the pastimes) of the different
types of adhirūḍha-mahābhāva such as mādana (meeting)
and mohana (separation), which Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya had
explained. To reveal such highly and extraordinarily
confidential, indescribable, and unprecedented subject
matter about the path of devotional service to dull-
headed philosophical speculators is always improper. For
this very reason, Śrīman Mahāprabhu covered Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya’s mouth to prevent him from speaking
further.

                             153
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


Śrī Kavi Karṇapūra elaborates on this in his drama Śrī
Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka (7.87): “nirupādhi hi prema
kathañcid apy upādhiṁ na sahate iti pūrvārdha bhagavatoḥ
rādhā-kṛṣṇayor anupādhi prema śrutvā tad eva puruṣārthī-
kṛtaṁ, bhagavatā mukha-pidhānañcāsya tad-rahasyatva-
prakāśakam — The absolute love that Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa bear
for one another is completely pure and free from any
imperfection. Just by hearing about it, Śrī Caitanya-
deva could understand that this prema was the ultimate
spiritual attainment. After hearing the most
confidential subject matter of prema as issued from the
mouth of Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
immediately covered the speaker’s mouth. The Lord did
not want that the supremely confidential topics of Śrī
Rādhā’s extraordinary prema-vilāsa be broadcasted
everywhere.” In verse 83 of this same drama it states:



sakhi na sa ramaṇo nāṭaṁ

ramaṇīti bhidāvarovāste

prema-rasenobhaya ina

madano nidi peṣa balāt

and,

ahaṁ kāntā kāntas tvam iti na tadānīṁ matir abhūn

mano-vṛttir luptā tvam aham iti nau dhīr api hatā

bhavān bhartā bhāryāham iti yad idānīṁ vyavasitas

tathāpi prāṇānāṁ sthitir iti vicitraṁ kim aparam

Śrī Rādhā says, “I no longer think, ëI am Your beloved
and You are My beloved.’ For Us the conception of ëI’
and ëYou’ is now destroyed. There is no longer any
distinction between Us. It seems like Cupid has ground
Our hearts together with great vigor, while sprinkling
them with the ambrosia of perfect love.

“O friend, the feeling that He is My lover and I am His
beloved has not come to My mind. My mind and
intelligence have ceased to function. Now I am thinking
He is My beloved, and I am His beloved, but when prema
strongly manifests then Our beings melt together. When
We are apart We think We are two, but when meeting We
become one. How astonishing this is!”



The intent behind Śrī Rādhā’s words is that right from
childhood there was some kāma, or amorous desire,
present in Her heart. The very first time Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa saw each other, lust sprouted; rāga awoke with
Their first exchange of glances. They had not actually
met yet. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī calls this state pūrva-rāga.
This rāga grew with each day until it became full-blown,
bringing Śrī Rādhā to say: “nā so ramaṇa, nā hāma ramaṇī
— Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not My lover, and I am not His mistress.

                             154
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Kandarpa (the transcendental Cupid) has melted both of
Our hearts and made them one. The feeling no longer
remains that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the ramaṇa, the hero who
initiates amorous attraction (rati), and I (Rādhā) am
the ramaṇī or the heroine, the bestower of rati, or
intimate enjoyment. In the absence of such feelings,
Cupid has ground Our hearts together and made them one,
and in the ensuing powder, the enjoyer (ramaṇa) or the
enjoyed (ramaṇī) are not separate. Now, abandoned by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, this separation has herself become the female
messenger. Respectable persons’ dealings in love are not
like this.”



8.194

rādhāyā bhavataś ca citta-jatunī svedair vilāpya kramād

yuñjann adri-nikuñja-kuñjara-pate nirdhūta-bheda-bhramam

citrāya svayamambaraṁ jayad iha brahmāṇḍa-harmyodare

bhūyobhir nava-rāga-hiṅgula-bharaiḥ śṛṅgāra-kāruḥ kṛtī



Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.155)



“?ëO King of mad elephants (Śrī Kṛṣṇa), who dallies in
Govardhana’s love bowers, there is an accomplished
artist of the name śṛṅgāra-rasa (Kāmadeva) and upon the
fire generated from the heat of the emotions coming from
both You and Śrī Rādhā, he has slowly melted the
shellac-like hearts of You both and made them one. Then
mixing that with profuse quantities of the kuṅkuma of
Your ever-fresh driving love, he is painting an
astonishing picture upon the inner walls of the grand
temple of the universe.’?”




The topmost special manifestation of mahābhāva is called
mādanākhya. When Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked the final
question about prema, He covered Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya’s
mouth just when He received that most complete answer.

In the verse at hand, Śrī Vṛndā-devī describes the
joyful sweetness of mahābhāva. Once, when Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa were tasting Their mutual sweetness, Their bodies
became beautifully decorated with the fully blazing
symptoms of rapture, or uddīpta-sāttvika-bhāvas. To
paint a palace red, and wishing to delight everyone, an
artist places shellac in a fire, and prepares an
extraordinarily shining mixture by completely blending
the melted shellac with a red dye. In just the same way,
the artist of the personified amorous mellow places the
shellac of Śrī Rādhā’s and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s hearts, which are
completely full of mahābhāva, into the fire of prema and
slowly melts them into one. He then mixes this with the

                             155
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

color of Their eternally ever-fresh rāga, or Their
compelling attraction for each other, and by so doing,
he creates an astonishingly wonderful mixture.

Adri-nikuñja-kuñjara-pate. Śrī Vṛndā-devī has addressed
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the master of the forest bowers at
Govardhana. Just as an intoxicated king of elephants
independently sports with many she-elephants, similarly
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, intoxicated with prema, sports with Śrī Rādhā
in Giri-Govardhana’s secluded caves and bowers. By the
heat of the fire of Their emotions — perspiration coming
as a sāttvika-bhāva (ecstatic transformation) — Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s shellac-like hearts have been melted.

Hiṅgula — fresh rāga, or attraction, with which the
interior and exterior of Their hearts have been even
more excessively colored. Just as shellac is red through
and through, similarly mañjiṣṭhā-rāga thoroughly colors
both of Their hearts. This indeed is the intrinsic
nature of mādanākhya-mahābhāva.

Kṛtī. Here it means “expert in his activities.” Being
most adept, the artist of the personified amorous mellow
has melted the shellac of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s hearts and,
completely mixing them together, has added the color of
Their ever-fresh, compelling mutual attraction (rāga). A
skilled artist will paint the interior of a royal palace
with wonderfully beautiful and variegated illustrations,
which completely astonish the materialists. In the same
way, the artist of the personified amorous mellow has
painted a picture using Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s hearts, which,
by the influence of Their prema, have attained
mahābhāva. Their hearts have become so completely
amalgamated that one can no longer distinguish between
them. The artist of the personified amorous mellow did
so with a particular intention: all devotees throughout
the world should be amazed upon realizing that, due to
the agitation caused by mahābhāva’s activities, Their
hearts have been decorated and melted together.




Under the Guidance of the Sakhīs




8.195—204

prabhu kahe,ó”sādhya-vastura avadhi’ ei haya

tomāra prasāde ihā jāniluṅ niścaya



ësādhya-vastu’ ësādhana’-vinā keha nāhi pāya

kṛpā kari’ kaha, rāya, pābāra upāya”




                             156
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

rāya kahe,ó”yei kahāo, sei kahi vāṇī

ki kahiye bhāla-manda, kichui nā jāni



tribhuvana-madhye aiche haya kon dhīra

ye tomāra māyā-nāṭe ha-ibeka sthira



mora mukhe vaktā tumi, tumi hao śrotā

atyanta rahasya, śuna, sādhanera kathā



rādhā-kṛṣṇera līlā ei ati gūḍhatara

dāsya-vātsalyādi-bhāve nā haya gocara



sabe eka sakhī-gaṇera ihāṅ adhikāra

sakhī haite haya ei līlāra vistāra



sakhī binā ei līlā puṣṭa nāhi haya

sakhī līlā vistāriyā, sakhī āsvādaya



sakhī binā ei līlāya anyera nāhi gati

sakhī-bhāve ye tāṅre kare anugati



rādhā-kṛṣṇa-kuñjasevā sādhya sei pāya

sei sādhya pāite āra nāhika upāya



Having heard Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya singing his own
composition, Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “O Rāya, that is
sufficient. You have described the topmost limit of
sādhya-vastu, or the ultimate object of attainment. By
your mercy (here Mahāprabhu reveals His humility), I
have understood the different gradations of this subject
matter. However without the appropriate sādhana, one
cannot attain this rare sādhya. Therefore, please be
kind enough to describe the method to achieve this
goal.”

Hearing this, Rāmānanda Rāya said in great meekness, “I
am only speaking those instructions which You desire me
to speak. Among my statements I cannot discern what is
good or bad. Who within these three worlds is so
forbearing that he is not shaken upon seeing the drama

                             157
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

enacted by Your illusory potency? You are the one who
speaks from within my mouth, and You have also become
the audience. Please now hear the discussion of this
most confidential sādhana. These pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa are extremely private. They are beyond the
understanding of those associates of the Lord who have
taken shelter of dāsya, sakhya, and vātsalya rasa. Being
inaccessible, they are extremely rare.

“These līlās come only within the jurisdiction of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sakhīs, because mahābhāva is found
exclusively within them. These pastimes develop only due
to the sakhīs’ participation; the sakhīs alone have the
right to taste them. Apart from those situated in this
sakhī-bhāva, no other associates may enter into these
līlās. Only the sādhakas who remain under the guidance
of those with this sakhī-bhāva may enter the domain of
ultimate attainment — rendering service to Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa within the groves of Vṛndāvana. Apart from this
method, there is no other means to achieve this goal.




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that only when
Mahāprabhu had heard everything in full, does He affirm
that the topic of sādhya has been discussed
comprehensively. Now Mahāprabhu inquires, “What is the
sādhana of achieving this ultimate goal? Please speak
about that.” Śrī Rāmānanda reviewed the premise that
those sādhakas who worship in the moods of dāsya,
sakhya, and vātsalya are unable to attain entrance into
this most confidential subject matter. Only the sakhīs
of Vraja are situated in mahābhāva; they alone have
accepted this mood, and solely by the performance of
sādhana under their guidance is it possible to attain
the most brilliant, most confidential, most mysterious,
and most intensely sweet goal — the kuñja-sevā of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. There is no other process to attain this
goal.

No one except the sakhīs can enter this līlā. This
infers that Lalitā, Viśākhā, and other sakhīs such as
Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī are eternal associates of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s kuñja-sevā. It is thus essential to perform
sādhana under their guidance (ānugatya).

Owing to a lack of association with pure saintly
devotees, there remains present within the jīvas a wide
variety of material desires such as a yearning for
residence in the heavenly planets, the longing for
liberation, and desires to attain the abodes of the
other incarnations of Bhagavān. Śrī Bhagavān fulfills
all of these desires, also. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is the incarnation of prema (premāvatārī) and
the combined form of rasa-rāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa and mahābhāva-
mayī Śrī Rādhikā. It is He who distributed the glories
of the pure prema of Vraja, and who tasted unnata-
ujjvala-prema, especially the mādanākhya-bhāva of Śrī
Rādhā. And it was He who, in order to bestow mercy upon
the pure sādhakas, asked this topmost question, and also
spoke these confidential and secretive truths from the
mouth of Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya. Only by the mercy of Śrīman

                             158
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

Mahāprabhu, and only by staying under the guidance of
His devotees, can one understand the difference between
loving sentiments for the Lord in awe and reverence
(aiśvarya-prema) and sentiments for Śrī Kṛṣṇa
predominated by feelings of sweetness and intimacy
(mādhurya-prema).

This mahābhāva is not found within the sentiments of
dāsya, sakhya, and vātsalya. And actually, the mādhurya-
rasa or śṛṅgāra-rasa present in Vaikuṇṭha, Ayodhyā,
Dvārakā, and Mathurā is called svakīya (when the hero
and heroine are married), and is mixed with sentiments
of awe and reverence (aiśvarya). Śrī Kṛṣṇa cannot be
controlled completely by those moods. The fact that Śrī
Lakṣmī-devī herself is performing austerities in Belvana
(a forest within Vraja-maṇḍala) in order to achieve the
transcendental amorous love of the gopīs, proves this.
The sakhīs of Śrī Rādhā are the exclusive proprietors
and presiding goddesses of this highest aspect of bhāva
found in the nikuñja-sevā. Therefore, remaining under
their guidance is the topmost sādhana for achieving
service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

8.205

vibhur api sukha-rūpaḥ sva-prakāśo ‘pi bhāvaḥ

kṣaṇam api na hi rādhā-kṛṣṇayor yā ṛte svāḥ

pravahati rasa-puṣṭiṁ cid-vibhūtīr iveśaḥ

śrayati na padam āsāṁ kaḥ sakhīnāṁ rasa-jñaḥ



Govinda-līlāmṛta (10.17)



“?ëŚrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s bhāvas are self-manifest,
unlimited, and composed of complete ecstasy. Even so,
not even one iota of rasa can be experienced without the
sakhīs, just as Iśvara, the Supreme Controller, is never
manifested without His spiritual potencies or opulences.
Therefore, what knower of rasa will try to enter these
pastimes without taking the shelter and guidance of the
lotus feet of the sakhīs?’




The bhāvas of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are exceedingly full of
happiness; indeed, they are the very embodiment of the
highest form of joy. A sādhaka of transcendental amorous
love who is filled with this prema can automatically
savor the sweetness of this rasa. By this sweetness he,
also, is able to experience great happiness, just as a
person automatically tastes the sweetness of sugar candy
by keeping it within his mouth. However, without the
grace of the sakhīs, the prema of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa cannot
reach its fullest state of blissful completeness.

The question may arise: if this is so, then what is the

                             159
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

necessity of mentioning the self-manifesting and
unlimited nature of the love of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa?
Svarūpa-śakti is unlimited, she is also completely
spiritual (brahma-vastu), and her special play is prema,
or bhakti. If prema, or bhakti, were not in fact
unlimited, then how could she have brought the complete
spiritual entity Bhagavān under her control? The Śrutis
say, “bhaktir eva garīyasī — bhakti is indeed glorious”
and “bhakti-vaśaḥ puruṣaḥ — the Supreme is controlled by
bhakti.”

The ocean is an immeasurable body of water, and by the
force of the wind, waves rise up, making it appear as if
the ocean is leaping. Similarly, even though the oceanic
prema of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is self-manifesting, still it
is supported and nourished by the assistance of the
wave-like sakhīs. In the axiom about the love of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, the sakhīs’ glories are extraordinary.
Despite Himself being the unlimited, omnipresent, and
self-manifesting Supreme Controller, His quality of
being the controller is even further enhanced by the
assistance of cit-śakti. Similarly, śrṅgāra-rasa is even
more deeply nurtured by the ministration of the sakhīs.
Prema and the sakhīs are not separate entities; indeed,
the development of prema hinges on their participation.
The sakhīs are prema-svarūpiṇī, meaning that they are
composed of prema and they are also embodiments of
prema, as well as expansions of the bliss potency
(hlādinī-śakti).



8.206—209

sakhīra svabhāva eka akathya-kathana

kṛṣṇa-saha nija-līlāya nāhi sakhīra mana



kṛṣṇa saha rādhikāra līlā ye karāya

nija-sukha haite tāte koṭi sukha pāya



rādhāra svarūpaókṛṣṇa-prema-kalpalatā

sakhī-gaṇa haya tāra pallava-puṣpa-pātā



kṛṣṇa-līlāmṛta yadi latāke siñcaya

nija-sukha haite pallavādyera koṭi-sukha haya



“The nature of the sakhīs is unparalleled and
indescribable. Never does the thought of finding their
own happiness in an intimate meeting with Śrī Kṛṣṇa even
appear within their minds. The happiness they experience
by arranging the solitary meeting of Śrī Rādhikā with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they accept as being millions of times

                             160
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

greater than what they would experience by being with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa directly. Śrī Rādhā is likened to the truly
personified form of the wish-fulfilling vine of prema
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa; and the various sakhīs are the leaves,
twigs, and flowers that take shelter of this desire-
fulfilling creeper. By sprinkling the creeper with the
nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, the sprouts, flowers,
and leaves become happier than if someone sprinkles them
directly.




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura confirms that Śrī Rādhā is
the transcendental wish-fulfilling vine of kṛṣṇa-prema,
and all the various sakhīs are its leaves, buds, and
flowers. When this vine in the form of Śrī Rādhā is
watered, then the flowers and buds, who have taken
shelter of the vine, are automatically nurtured. In the
same way, the gopīs do not directly enjoy the happiness
of meeting with Śrī Kṛṣṇa; rather by arranging Śrī
Rādhā’s meeting with Śrī Kṛṣṇa they become joyful.



8.210

sakhyaḥ śrī-rādhikāyā vraja-kumuda-vidhor hlādinī-nāma-
śakteḥ

sārāṁśa-prema-vallyāḥ kiśalaya-dala-puṣpādi-tulyāḥ sva-
tulyāḥ

siktāyāḥ kṛṣṇa-līlāmṛta-rasa-nicayair ullasantyām
amuṣyāṁ

jātollāsāṁ sva-sekāc chata-guṇam adhikaṁ santi yat tan
na citram



Govinda-līlāmṛta (10.16)



“?ëThe sakhīs of Vraja are similar to Śrī Rādhā. They
are the essential parts of Vraja-kumuda-candra’s[xx]19
hlādinī, or pleasure potency, known as Śrī Rādhikā, who
is the personification of His internal energy. She is
the wish-fulfilling creeper of prema and the other gopīs
are that vine’s buds, leaves, and flowers. When the
nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is showered on the supremely
blissful Śrī Rādhikā, all the gopīs experience the
pleasure a hundred times more than if they were showered
themselves. This is not at all surprising.’




Vraja-kumuda-vidhoḥ. Here it refers to none other than
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is just like the moon for the lotus-like
gopīs of Vraja. The word vidhoḥ is given in the

                             161
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

possessive case (ṣaṣṭhī, sixth conjunction indicating a
relationship). Here vidhoḥ indicates Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s energy
known as hlādinī. This is confirmed by use of the words
prema-vallarī (creeper of love), which signify the
essential principle of this hlādinī-śakti. The ṣaṣṭhī is
again used for the noun sakhyaḥ-śrī-rādhikāyāḥ, with
reference to the sakhīs of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The phrase
kisalaya-dala-puṣpādi-tulyāḥ describes the gopīs, who
are likened to new leaves, sprouts, and flowers. Here
sva-tulyāḥ refers to those gopīs who look like Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and who are Her non-different expansions (kāya-
vyūha-svarūpā).

Just as the night lotus blossoms naturally upon the
rising of the moon, similarly the residents of Vraja,
who are like night lotuses, naturally blossom once they
obtain darśana of the moon of Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Of all
the Vrajavāsīs, the gopīs especially become pleased.
Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa has been called vraja-kumuda-vidhu, or
the moon for the lotuses of Vraja. The essence of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s internal potency, or pleasure potency, is prema,
and the vine of this prema is Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Herself, Śrī Rādhā. The various gopīs are the newly
blossomed sprouts, flowers, and leaves of this vine.
These sakhīs are the beauty of this wish-fulfilling vine
of prema, Śrī Rādhā. Her happiness, indeed, constitutes
the happiness of these gopīs. If water is supplied to
the actual root of the vine then all of the flowers,
leaves, and twigs are also nourished; there is no need
to water each part separately. In a similar manner, all
of the other gopīs, who are compared to the leaves,
sprouts, and flowers, automatically reap supreme
satisfaction from Śrī Rādhā’s happiness.



8.211—214

yadyapi sakhīra kṛṣṇa-saṅgame nāhi mana

tathāpi rādhikā yatne karāna saṅgama



nānā-cchale kṛṣṇe preri’ saṅgama karāya

ātma-sukha-saṅga haite koṭi-sukha pāya



anyonya viśuddha preme kare rasa puṣṭa

tāṅ-sabāra prema dekhi’ kṛṣṇa haya tuṣṭa



sahaja gopīra prema,ónahe prākṛta kāma

kāma-krīḍā-sāmye tāra kahi ëkāma’-nāma



“Although the sakhīs do not possess even the slightest
desire to enjoy themselves with Śrī Kṛṣṇa directly,

                             162
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

still Rādhikā makes an active effort that enables them
to meet with Him. She sends the gopīs to Kṛṣṇa,
employing a great variety of clever ruses, as well as
inspiring His heart with a desire to meet them. At such
times, She enjoys a happiness ten million times greater
than the happiness She experiences when directly meeting
with Him. Since the internal consciousness of Śrī
Rādhikā and the gopīs is pervaded by viśuddha-sattva, or
pure spiritual existence, Śrīmati Rādhikā always remains
engaged in continuously bestowing happiness upon the
gopīs, and vice versa. They are ever absorbed in
nourishing, or expanding, sentiments of rasa. Upon
seeing their mutual exchanges, Śrī Kṛṣṇa becomes most
satisfied. The prema of the gopīs is completely natural.
There is not even the slightest scent of profane lust
within them. Due to its resembling mundane lusty
affairs, this prema is often called kāma, or lust.




Even though the kāma of the gopīs and the kāma of this
material world bear a resemblance to each other,
factually the difference between them is like that of
heaven and hell. In this aprākṛta-kāma, or
transcendental (non-material) lust, there is not even a
trace of desire for one’s own happiness; rather, the
sole desire is an abiding, continuous thirst to bestow
happiness upon one’s beloved. Thus this kāma is viśuddha
(transcendentally pure) prema. The kāma of the material
world is self-centered, performed for one’s own
enjoyment, insignificant, detestable, and the path to
hell.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that Śrī Rādhikā engages
the sakhīs in the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and the sakhīs
find happiness in arranging for Her to meet with Him.
People devoid of rasa and intelligence say that Śrī
Rādhā and the gopīs desire to meet with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Is
this a form of material lust, in which they are seeking
their own enjoyment, or not? Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
says, “No, no, it is not. Factually, intimately meeting
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa or arranging for Śrī Kṛṣṇa to meet with
others is performed only out of love for Him. Seeing Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure, the gopīs also feel happiness, and
they think that their lives have become successful,
being engaged in His service. The people of this
material world cannot conceive of even a shadow of this
prema, what to speak of approach it. Thus, due to their
polluted tendencies, people see this completely pure and
sacred prema to be the same as insignificant, profane
lust.”



8.215

premaiva gopa-rāmāṇāṁ

kāma ity agamat prathām

ity uddhavādayo ‘py etaṁ


                             163
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

vāñchanti bhāgavat-priyāḥ



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.285—286)



“?ëThe prema of the beautiful maidens of Vraja is known
as kāma, or lust. However, by constitution that prema
has no mundane lust in its makeup. It is for this reason
that Uddhava and other devotees of the Lord also desire
this prema.’




Although both iron and gold are categorized as metals,
there is an enormous difference between them. Likewise,
both material lust (kāma) and pure love (prema) appear
somewhat similar, but they are in fact totally distinct.
Lust is a function of the illusory potency known as
māyā, while prema is a function of the all-spiritual
svarūpa-śakti. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura further says
that there are various alluring desires presented in the
Vedic scriptures such as the desire for elevation to
higher worlds, the desire for progeny, especially sons,
and the desire for material wealth and opulence.

These material desires give rise to worldly religiosity;
the religious principles enunciated in the Vedas; the
pursuance of religious principles according to one’s
birth and body; desires for self-happiness in the form
of mukti, or liberation; adherence to the path of
elevated society; the maintenance of affection for one’s
family members; performance of fruitive actions (karma);
womanly shyness; patience; chastisement from family
members and friends; and fear. All of these are self-
seeking behaviors and forms of self-indulgence,
performed for one’s own sense enjoyment and to fulfill
one’s own desires. They are all material, and performed
for one’s personal pleasure and success.[xxi]20 There is
a difference of heaven and hell between prema (love) and
kāma (sacrilegious lust); the kāma of the gopīs is
beyond material intelligence.



8.216—217

nijendriya-sukha-hetu kāmera tātparya

kṛṣṇa-sukha-tātparya gopī-bhāva-varya



nijendriya-sukha-vāñchā nāhi gopikāra

kṛṣṇe sukha dite kare saṅgama-vihāra



“Kāma is the desire to give pleasure to one’s own

                             164
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

senses. The topmost sentiment of the gopīs is called
prema, and its only intention is to give pleasure to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. These gopīs never have any desire for their own
enjoyment; all of their intimate meetings with Śrī Kṛṣṇa
are only for the purpose of giving Him pleasure.




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains that the tendency to
perform the topmost service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is Himself
the very embodiment of pure and complete spiritual
knowledge (saṁvit-vigraha), can never be said to be
kāma, or mundane lust. Rather, abandoning Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
happiness, to pursue other forms of enjoyment is called
kāma. May one’s life be dedicated to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and may
the service performed to Him be prema-mayī, or loving
service, then Śrī Kṛṣṇa may be pleased. The sakhīs are
entirely composed of these selfless desires, which are
present within them to an unrestricted extent, and these
gopīs, who are the embodiment of prema, remain committed
to eagerly serve in this manner.



8.218

yat te sujāta-caraṇāmburuhaṁ staneṣu

bhītāḥ śanaiḥ priya dadhīmahi karkaśeṣu

tenāṭavīm aṭasi tad vyathate na kiṁ svit

kūrpādibhir bhramati dhīr bhāvad-āyuṣāṁ naḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.19)



“The gopīs, afflicted by feelings of separation from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, lament, ëYour divine feet, even softer than a
lotus, we place upon our hard breasts — very timidly and
very carefully, lest we hurt them. Those same soft lotus
feet carry You through the dark forest. Are they feeling
any pain, being wounded by pebbles and stones? Simply
the thought of this sets our heads spinning, causing us
to fall in a swoon. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! O Śyāmasundara! O
Prāṇanātha, O possessor of our lives! We live only for
Your sake; we are Yours, we are Yours.’




Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmīpāda explains that after this the
gopīs began crying very loudly. They then became
senseless and fell upon the ground. In this way, simply
by the mere thought of the slightest pain to their
beloved, the gopīs fell unconscious, whereupon Śrī Kṛṣṇa
appeared amongst them. Thus seeing their prāṇa-vallabha,
their dear-most beloved, Śrī Śyāmasundara, whose beauty

                             165
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

defeats that of millions upon millions of Cupids, the
Vraja gopīs again took possession of their life airs,
which returned to their bodies. All together they stood
up and with loving glances from their blossoming eyes
they looked towards Him in a mood of great happiness.



8.219—222

sei gopi-bhāvāmṛte yāṅra lobha haya

veda-dharma-loka tyaji’ se kṛṣṇke bhajaya



rāgānuga-mārge tāṅre bhaje yei jana

sei jana pāya vraje vrajendra-nandana



vraja-lokera kona bhāva lañā yei bhaje

bhāva-yogya deha pāñā kṛṣṇa pāya vraje



tāhāte dṛṣṭāntaóupaniṣad śruti-gaṇa

rāga-mārge bhaji’ pāila vrajendra-nandana



“One who has developed greed to attain the gopīs’
nectarean prema completely abandons the regulative
principles of Vedic life, such as the varṇāśrama system,
as well as various materialistic goals such as attaining
residence in the heavenly planets. Rather, the devotee
completely surrenders unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa and performs
exclusive bhajana to Him. Those devotees who are
inclined towards the path of rāgānuga-bhakti, or
spontaneous devotional service, adopt the sentiment of
ānugatya, or remaining under guidance of superiors. They
perform service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and in the holy abode of
Śrī Vṛndāvana, they attain Śrī Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Whoever accepts one of the moods of the various
eternal associates of Vraja-maṇḍala and performs bhajana
following their moods of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, after
receiving an appropriate spiritual body (siddha-deha),
achieves the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. The
Upaniṣads and the Śrutis serve as testimony to those who
achieved the service of Śrī Vrajendra-nandana by doing
bhajana in the mood of rāga-mārga.




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that the sixty-four
limbs of bhakti are especially pertinent in vaidhī-
bhakti. By performing these limbs of devotion with pure
faith, or śraddhā, one receives the qualification to
enter into bhakti. Sometimes, however, after

                             166
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

appreciating the loving service combined with the
natural anurāga, or deep attraction, that the residents
of Vraja feel towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, a greed may awaken in
the hearts of some extremely fortunate persons to also
achieve the same loving service towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa that
the residents of Vraja have, and they will become fully
dedicated to attaining that desire. This is the path of
rāgānuga-bhakti. Greed to attain the nectarean moods of
the vraja-gopīs bestows the qualification to enter the
path of rāgānuga-bhakti. After entering the path of
spontaneous devotion (rāga-mārga), and then performing
this bhajana, attachment for the path of Vedic
principles, such as the following of varṇāśrama, is
automatically and easily dispelled.

Within the realm of Vraja are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s servants
Raktaka and Patraka, His friends Śrīdāma and Subala, and
His parents Nanda and Yaśodā. They naturally serve Him
according to their particular moods. Although one may
have great enthusiasm to perform this vraja-rasa-bhajana
(devotional service in the mellow of Vraja), still one
will have a special greed for a particular rasa. And it
is in accordance with that particular greed that one
will receive a completely spiritual body that is also
compatible to one’s mood. In this way, at the time of
attaining perfection, one achieves Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The
Upaniṣads and the Śrutis give evidence of this. The
Śrutis have expounded that one cannot attain the
qualification to perform bhajana of Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja without being under the guidance of
the vraja-gopīs. In this consideration, the Śrutis too
accepted the supervision of the vraja-gopīs, and by
following the path of rāga-bhakti in their spiritual
forms as gopīs, the Śrutis served Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that one should take
shelter of the lotus feet of the vraja-rasa-rasika
Vaiṣṇavas, who are expert in tasting the rasa of Vraja.
Accepting both initiation (dīkṣā) and instructions
(śikṣā) from such personalities, one should reside in
Vṛndāvana under their guidance, and perform bhajana
according to the principles of rāgānuga-bhakti.
Additionally, in one’s bhajana one should follow the
guidance of a specific, eternally perfected associate of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thus, one should perform mānasī-sevā (service
performed in the mind). More precisely, by serving
internally with one’s eternally perfect spiritual body
(siddha-deha), one should thus follow the associates of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa such as Śrī Rādhā, Lalitā, Viśākhā, and Śrī
Rūpa Mañjarī. One should also serve as a sādhaka by
one’s physical body, following the example set by
devotees such as Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana, and other
residents of Vraja.

It is only in the Lord’s absolutely perfected eternal
associates (nitya-siddha-parikaras) that rāgātmika-
bhakti is found. This pure devotion is always present
within their hearts. Wholly perfect, absorption in one’s
desired object is called rāga. Those persons in whom
this rāga naturally resides are called rāgātmika
devotees. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained all this:



                             167
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


iṣṭe svārasikī rāgaḥ

paramāviṣṭatā bhavet

tanmayī yā bhaved bhaktiḥ

sāt ‘ra rāgātmikoditā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.272)



“Rāga is the unquenchable loving thirst for the object
of one’s affection, which gives rise to spontaneous and
intense absorption in that object. Rāgamayī-bhakti is
the performance of sevā, such as stringing garlands,
with such intense rāga.”

virājantīm abhivyaktāṁ

vraja-vāsi-janādiṣu

rāgātmikām anusṛtā

yā sā rāgānugocyate



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.270)

“Devotional service imbued with spontaneous, profound
love and attachment (rāgātmika-bhakti), is vividly
expressed and manifested by the eternal residents of
Vṛndāvana. Devotional service that follows their
devotional mood is called rāgānuga-bhakti, or devotional
service following in the wake of the rāgātmika
associates of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja.”

The following evidence shows that the personified Vedas
performed bhajana in rāga-mārga:



8.223

nibhṛta-marun-mano ‘kṣa-dṛḍha-yoga-yujo hṛdi yan

munaya upāsate tad arayo ‘pi yayuḥ smaraṇāt

striya uragendra-bhoga-bhuja-daṇḍa-viṣakta-dhiyo

vayam api te samāḥ sama-dṛśo ‘ṅghri-saroja-sudhāḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.87.23)



“The personified Vedas are praying, ëO Lord! Greatly
learned sages and yogīs, having conquered the life-airs,
mind, and senses by strictly practicing the mystic yoga
system and worshiping the impersonal Brahman effulgence,

                             168
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

have ultimately achieved the position of nirvāṇa, or
liberation. But even Your enemies have attained that
position, simply by thinking of You in enmity and always
desiring Your ruination.

ëŚrī Rādhikā and Your other eternal beloveds place Your
nectar-filled lotus feet on their firm breasts, being
attracted and bound by the beauty of Your supremely
soft, rounded, elongated, and nicely decorated arms,
which are like the king of serpents. We have also tasted
the nectar of Your lotus feet in exactly the same way as
have Your eternal beloveds, the gopīs, by following in
their footsteps.’




In this verse, the word arayaḥ indicates the enemies of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa such as Kaṁsa, who always thought ill of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, or to be precise, who always thought of Him in
fear. By remembering Him in this way, His enemies
achieved liberation, or brahma-sāyujya, the very same
destination achieved by yogīs and saints after millions
of years of extremely difficult austerities. That is the
first astonishing thing.

The second amazing point is that the same destination is
achieved by both saintly personalities through their
constant meditation upon Bhagavān and those demons who
also think incessantly of Bhagavān. Third, saintly
persons who faithfully worship Bhagavān with full devo-
tion and knowledge achieve the same destination as the
enemies of the Lord who consider Him to be an ordinary
human and even harbor feelings of hatred and violence
towards Him. There is another utterly remarkable concept
in the words “uragendra-bhoga-bhuja-daṇḍa-viṣakta-dhiyaḥ
— the hearts of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds were attracted by
His charming arms which, being soft, rounded, and
elongated, resembled the body of the king of snakes.”
Those gopīs who were embraced by His arms, and who
considered the all-pervading Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be limited,
clasped His soft lotus feet to their breasts. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s heart, burning with the fire of lust, thus
became supremely cool.

In this context samā refers to following the gopīs, and
by so doing, the personified Vedas achieved the bodies
of gopīs, and received the nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
feet. Here is one more point that merits deeper thought
— the eternally perfected gopīs considered Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
their upapati, or unwedded lover, and they also regarded
His form to be localized, or limited. The Śrutis,
however, considered Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be the Supreme Truth
and therefore they accepted Śrī Kṛṣṇa as all-pervading
and unlimited. Hence the Śrutis offered prayers and
attained the bodies of gopīs, the accomplishment of
which is extremely hard. Only by virtue of being under
the guidance of the gopīs did it become possible.

It is also worth bearing in mind that the gopīs are Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s eternal beloveds; therefore it is completely
natural for them to hold His lotus feet to their
breasts. The Śrutis, however, are not Śrī Rādhā’s

                             169
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

kāyavyūha-rūpā (bodily expansions) and not His eternal
beloveds; still they, too, held Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet
upon their breasts, which is very rarely attained. The
Bṛhad-Vāmana Purāṇa testifies that the Śrutis had been
praying unto Bhagavān for a long time. This pleased
Bhagavān, and when He asked them to choose a benediction
they replied, “We want to perform loving service to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa as the vraja-gopīs do.” Bhagavān said, “O
goddesses, this desire of yours is very difficult to
fulfill, however your desire shall certainly come to
pass.” At that very moment, by the mercy of Bhagavān,
the Śrutis achieved birth as gopīs in Vraja, and
attained the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the mood of
aupapatya-bhāva, or unwedded relationship.



8.224—225

ësama-dṛśaḥ’-śabde kahe ësei bhāve anugati’

ësamāḥ’-śabde kahe śrutira gopī-deha-prāpti



ëaṅghri-padma-sudhā’ya kahe ëkṛṣṇa-saṅgānanda’

vidhi-mārge nā pāiye vraje kṛṣṇacandra



“The phrase sama-dṛśaḥ means to accept the ānugatya
(guidance) of the vraja-gopīs and to perform bhajana
following their moods. Thus these words signify the
acceptance of aupapatya-bhāva, or the mood of the gopīs
as being in an unwedded relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Use
of the word samāḥ specifies that by bhajana the Śrutis
attained beautiful bodies just like those of the vraja-
gopīs, thus they are called samāḥ, which means ëthe
same,’ or ëequal.’ The words aṅghri-padma-sudhā mean
ëthe nectar emanating from the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’
or ëthe happiness generated by the service or the
intimate association with Him.’ The Śrutis accepted the
guidance of the vraja-gopīs, and did bhajana, taking on
the gopīs’ bhāva towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They received
accordingly the bodies of gopīs in Vraja and it was in
these bodies that they obtained the intimate association
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the ecstasy of His service. By
contrast, one cannot attain Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa
by practicing vidhi-mārga, the path of devotion
according to regulative principles. Only those who
practice rāgānuga-bhakti, or spontaneous devotional
service, like the personified Vedas, can achieve that.




In support of this, the following verse is quoted:



8.226


                             170
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

nāyaṁ sukhāpo bhagavān dehināṁ gopikā-sutaḥ

jñānināṁ cātma-bhūtānāṁ yathā bhakti-matām iha



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.21)

“Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī is saying to Parīkṣit Mahārāja,
ëBhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Mother Yaśodā, is easily
attained by those devotees engaged in spontaneous loving
service, but He is not as easily accessible to the
performers of severe austerities who remain attached to
the body, or to the mental speculators, the jñānīs, who
are striving for self-realization, or to the seers of
the self.’




Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa allowed Mother Yaśodā to experience
indescribable joy in considering Him to be an ordinary
child, as she witnessed His childish restlessness and
bound Him with a rope. This joy is not possible for
anyone other than those in Śrī Yaśodā’s own group. Such
inexplicable joy is unavailable to those who perform
great austerities, all the while identifying with the
body. The performer of austerities may receive some
minute realization of Śrī Kṛṣṇa if any mahā-bhāgavata
bestows mercy upon him and then offers those endeavors
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Again, by the mercy of association with devotees, both
he who is ātma-bhūta, meaning “free from identifying the
body as the self,” and he who considers himself to be
non-different from the Supreme, may also partially
realize the svarūpa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the formless
impersonal Brahman. The performers of austerities and
the jñānīs never directly realize Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s saviśeṣa
feature, full of all transcendental attributes. Without
following the vraja-gopīs, even Brahmā, Śiva, and Lakṣmī
herself are unable to achieve the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the son of the King of Vraja. In this way, Śrī Śukadeva
Gosvāmī has glorified to Parīkṣit Mahārāja the
transcendental, natural quality of the rāgātmika-bhakti
of Mother Yaśodā and the other ladies of Vraja, with
which they can easily bring Śrī Kṛṣṇa under their
control.



8.227—230

ataeva gopī-bhāva kari’ aṅgīkāra

rātri-dina cinte rādhā-kṛṣṇera vihāra



siddha-dehe cinti’ kare tāṅhāñi sevana

sakhī-bhāve pāya rādhā-kṛṣṇera caraṇa


                             171
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



gopī-ānugatya vinā aiśvarya-jñāne

bhajileha nāhi pāya vrajendra-nandane



tāhāte dṛṣṭāntaólakṣmī karila bhajana

tathāpi nā pāila vraje vrajendra-nandana



“Only on the path of rāgānuga-bhakti, or spontaneous
devo-tional service, does one achieve the service of
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. That same
achievement is not possible on the path of vaidhī-
bhakti, or regulative devotional service. Therefore the
sādhaka should submit himself to the mood of the gopīs,
and day and night always think of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes that occur at that time of the day. Holding in
mind the spiritual body that one has received from the
spiritual master, and being endowed with the moods of
the sakhīs, one should perform service via the
appropriate, internally conceived spiritual form
(mānasī-sevā) to the feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, according
to the appropriate place and time that their pastimes
are being performed.

“One can only attain service to the Divine Couple’s
lotus feet by adopting the mood of the sakhīs. Without
accepting the guidance of the vraja-gopīs, and being
endowed with the moods of awe and reverence instead,
despite being engaged in devotional service, a person
will be overcome by knowledge of the Lord’s opulence and
will not be able to attain the prema-mayī sevā of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. The goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī-devī, who
worships the Lord in the mood of awe and reverence,
could not, despite performing very severe austerities
and worship, achieve loving service to Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa like that of the gopīs of Vraja, without
becoming subservient to them.




By the mantra and bhāva[xxii]21 received from the guru
who is expert in tasting the mellows of Vraja, and by
following the appropriate sentiments of one’s particular
relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one should become absorbed
day and night in the remembrance of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā, Their eternal pastimes performed
throughout the day.

Externally, by the sādhaka-deha, one should follow the
limbs of bhakti such as singing kīrtana, chanting a
fixed number of holy names daily, and offering
prostrated obeisances [to the deities, the Vaiṣṇavas,
and to the Lord’s dhāmas, associates, and pastime
places]. Internally however, in one’s mentally conceived
spiritual body, one should remain absorbed in the eight-
fold daily pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa so that one may

                             172
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

achieve perfection. If one does not accept the ānugatya
of the mood of the gopīs, and remains fixed in the
concept of awe and reverence, thinking, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
Svayam Bhagavān, the Supreme controller, the Lord of
unlimited universes, and I am a most insignificant
jīva,” then even despite performing bhajana, one can
never achieve Vrajendra-nandana. Being attracted by that
service rendered by the Vrajavāsīs, particularly by the
gopīs, even Lakṣmī-devī, who is worshipful for everyone,
came to Vraja to serve Śrī Vrajendra-nandana; yet
because of her knowledge of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s opulence
(aiśvarya-jñāna) and because of her not coming under the
guidance of the vraja-gopīs, she remains cheated of that
service to this very day.

In his commentary on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta called Śrī
Anubhāṣya, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda
has stated that beyond the present gross and subtle
material bodies exists the spiritual body appropriate
for the service of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, which is called the
siddha-deha. As a result of mundane fruitive activities,
the jīva receives a material body, which due to desires
for gross material enjoyment, eventually transforms into
the attainment of yet another material body. The jīva
becomes covered by a subtle body, the mind, by desiring
to enjoy materially, and then uses the mind to
accomplish this; thereafter, upon death, he achieves
another gross body.

In this way, under the influence of his lusty material
desires, the pure spirit soul accepts birth in this
material world, temporarily taking on both gross and
subtle bodies. However, when the nature of his desires
changes, the happiness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa becomes everything
to him, and he receives an eternal spiritual body in
Vaikuṇṭha or Goloka-dhāma, in which he performs
transcendental service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. For the
subtle material body, it is impossible to comprehend an
object that is beyond either matter or the purview of
its own enjoyment. Therefore, only the devotee who is
beyond the influence of the three modes of material
nature, being attracted by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental
qualities, becomes situated in his own appropriate
spiritual body. Assisted by his transcendental senses,
he contemplates that object, which is non-material. He
performs transcendental service under the guidance of
the transcendental moods of the sakhīs to achieve, at
last, transcendental service unto the lotus feet of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Without the ānugatya of the vraja-gopīs, one does not
achieve the service of Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
despite performing bhajana with a mood of great awe and
reverence. The verse mentioned below from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam proves this:



8.231

nāyaṁ śriyo ‘ṅga u nitānta-rateḥ prasādaḥ

sa-yoṣitāṁ nalina-gandha-rucāṁ kuto ‘nyāḥ


                             173
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

rāsotsave ‘sya bhuja-daṇḍa-gṛhīta-kaṇṭha-

labdhāśiṣāṁ ya udagād vraja-sundarīṇām



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.60)



“ëAt the time of the festival of rāsa-līlā, Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa enfolded His arms around the necks of the gopīs of
Vraja and fulfilled all of their desires. The mercy and
prema that He bestowed upon those gopīs was never
enjoyed even by the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī-devī, who
is the eternal loving consort of Bhagavān and who always
resides on His chest. Nor was such a boon achieved by
the most beautiful heavenly damsels, whose bodily luster
and aroma are like a lotus flower, what to speak of the
beautiful women of this world.’”




The vraja-gopīs are glorified everywhere because of
their above mentioned adhirūḍha-bhāva, yet for Śrī
Lakṣmī-devī, who always resides upon the chest of the
Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, there is no such
example of this exalted good fortune. In the same way,
despite being the source of all incarnations, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
performed actions which society and the common man
regard as low-class, such as cow-grazing, eating with
monkeys and cowherd boys, stealing butter and yoghurt,
and clutching at and stealing the clothes of young
girls. Yet, still, He is glorified everywhere and has
achieved the utmost limit of exaltedness. Likewise,
although the vraja-gopīs are non-different from
Bhagavān’s own self, being the crown jewel of His
pleasure giving potency (hlādinī-śakti), they are
renowned as ladies of the forest-dwelling cowherd
community who decorate their bodies with the harsh words
used against them by society, which [because they gave
up their marriage vows] regards them as being of low
character.

Even so, the good fortune that the vraja-gopīs have
attained is still far more exalted than that of Lakṣmī
and other beloveds of Bhagavān. Despite being the one
and only beloved of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, and always situated
upon His chest, Lakṣmī is still not able to receive the
good fortune of the vraja-gopīs. If even Lakṣmī cannot
achieve such good fortune, then what to speak of the
wives of other incarnations of Bhagavān, such Śrī
Upendra, who have attained great beauty and good
fortune, and whose bodily fragrance and luster are just
like those of the lotus flower? In the rāsa-līlā
festival, the vraja-gopīs, when embraced by the arms of
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, became exclusive recipients of the
utmost limit of exalted and merciful good fortune.



8.232—243

                             174
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017


eta śuni’ prabhu tāṅre kaila āliṅgana

dui jane galāgali karena krandana



ei-mata premāveśe rātri goṅāilā

prātaḥ-kāle nija-nija-kārye duṅhe gelā



vidāya-samaye prabhura caraṇe dhariyā

rāmānanda rāya kahe vinati kariyā



“more kṛpā karite tomāra ihāṅ āgamana

dina daśa rahi’ śodha mora duṣṭa mana



tomā vinā anya nāhi jīva uddhārite

tomā vinā anya nāhi kṛṣṇa-prema dite”



prabhu kahe,ó”āilāṅa śuni’ tomāra guṇa

kṛṣṇa-kathā śuni, śuddha karāite mana



yaiche śuniluṅ, taiche dekhiluṅ tomāra mahimā

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-premarasa-jñānera tumi sīmā



daśa dinera kā-kathā, yāvat āmi jība’

tāvat tomāra saṅga chāḍite nāriba



nīlācale tumi-āmi thākiba eka-saṅge

sukhe goṅāiba kāla kṛṣṇa-kathā-raṅge”



eta bali’ duṅhe nija-nija kārye gelā

sandhyā-kāle rāya punaḥ āsiyā mililā



anyonye mili’ duṅhe nibhṛte vasiyā

praśnottara-goṣṭhī kahe ānandita hañā

                             175
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




prabhu puche, rāmānanda karena uttara

ei mata sei rātre kathā paraspara



After hearing this most unprecedented rasa-siddhānta,
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu became overjoyed and embraced
Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya. Each embraced the neck of the other,
and both of them began to weep. They passed the entire
night in this manner, absorbed in discussions and
overwhelmed by ecstatic prema. In the morning they
departed, so as to tend to their respective duties.

When it became time to part from Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, Śrīman Rāmānanda Rāya caught hold of the
Lord’s lotus feet and spoke with extreme humility,
saying, “O Lord, You have come here just to bestow Your
mercy upon me. Therefore, please stay here for at least
ten days and purify my polluted mind. Other than You,
there is no one who can deliver this jīva, and You alone
can give love of Kṛṣṇa.”

Upon hearing Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya’s humble and love-filled
words, Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “Having heard about your
good qualities from the mouth of Śrī Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya, I have come here to hear about Kṛṣṇa from
you and thus purify My mind. Now I am seeing your
glories, which before I had only heard about. You are
the most learned in the tattvas of Śrī Rādhā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
prema, and rasa. What to speak of ten days, I will not
be able to leave you throughout My whole life. We will
remain together in Jagannātha Purī, where we shall spend
our time happily, completely delighted by speaking
kṛṣṇa-kathā.”

Speaking thus, they both went away to perform their
respective duties, and again at dusk, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
came to meet with Śrīman Mahāprabhu. After greeting each
other, they went to a solitary place and sat down. With
great happiness, they began to ask each other questions
and receive the answers. Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked the
questions, and Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya answered them. In this
way the entire night passed in discussion.




When the passage explains that they were weeping, it
actually means that both were affected by sāttvika-
bhāvas. For that reason their throats were choked, and
because their discussions were full of prema, both of
them began to cry. Here goṣṭhī, or meeting, particularly
refers to the conversation between them.




Questions and Answers

                             176
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017




What is the topmost knowledge?



8.244

prabhu kahe,ó”kon vidyā vidyā-madhye sāra?”

rāya kahe,ó”kṛṣṇa-bhakti vinā vidyā nāhi āra”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked, “Of all types of knowledge,
which is the most important?” Rāmānanda Rāya replied,
“Kṛṣṇa-bhakti is the essence of all knowledge. Apart
from this there is no other type of knowledge.”




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has explained that in the
first line Mahāprabhu asks a question, and in the second
line, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya gives the answer. Mahāprabhu
asked, “Which type of knowledge is the topmost?” and
Rāya replied, “Apart from knowledge of kṛṣṇa-bhakti,
there is no other knowledge.” This means that, although
the jīva is an eternal servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, because of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s external, or illusionary, potency, the jīva
forgets his constitutional position and considers his
temporary gross body to be his eternal identity.

The knowledge about how to become situated in one’s pure
eternal form from such a condition, and to realize one’s
nature as being a servant of Kṛṣṇa — this constitutes
sādhana, specifically the performance of bhakti to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. By this knowledge one can understand jīva-tattva,
māyā-tattva, bhāgavat-tattva, and all other tattvas
progressively. Ultimately, the unconquerable Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is controlled by the śuddha-bhakti of a devotee. That
knowledge, or vidyā, which is above all others, is
knowledge of the nature of devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Material knowledge (jaḍa-vidyā) leads to material
enjoyment, but that vidyā which gives knowledge of
viṣṇu-bhakti is far superior to even knowledge of the
impersonal Brahman (brahma-vidyā), which is beyond any
material knowledge. However, even superior to knowledge
of viṣṇu-bhakti is knowledge of kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam supports this siddhānta in so many
places:



tat karma hari-toṣaṁ yat

sā vidyā tan-matir yayā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.49)

                             177
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




“Factual work, or karma, is that by which one can
satisfy Śrī Hari. Factual vidyā, or knowledge, is that
by which one’s mind is absorbed in Bhagavān.”

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau

bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā

kriyeta bhāgavaty addhā

tan manye ‘dhītam uttamam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.23—24)



Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja says, “The bhakti of Bhagavān
Viṣṇu has nine limbs: hearing and chanting about the
transcendental holy name, form, qualities, and pastimes
of Lord Viṣṇu; remembering them; serving His lotus feet;
offering the Lord respectful worship; offering prayers
to the Lord; becoming His servant; becoming His friend;
and surrendering everything unto Him. If one performs
these nine limbs of devotion with a mood of surrender,
then we should know this to be the topmost knowledge of
the scriptures. His cultivation of the scriptures is
successful.”



And it is also described here:



idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā

sviṣṭasya sūktasya ca buddhi-dattayoḥ

avicyuto ‘rthaḥ kavibhir nirūpito

yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.22)



“Learned persons accept as the pinnacle of knowledge the
very best verses, which describe Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s qualities
and activities.”

In the following verses spoken between Śrīman Mahāprabhu
and Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, there is a gradation and
comparison between the relative worth of material

                             178
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

objects and transcendental objects, as well as a
discussion of subject matter affiliated with Goloka and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unmotivated devotional service. The material
conception is thus defeated and the worth of
transcendence is established.




What is the most glorious act?



8.245

ëkīrti-gaṇa-madhye jīvera kon baḍa kīrti?’

ëkṛṣṇa-bhakta baliyā yāṅhāra haya khyāti’



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu then asked, “Out of all glorious
activities of the jīva, which is the greatest?” Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “To be called a devotee of Lord
Kṛṣṇa is the topmost glory of the jīva.”




In the material world there are many, many glories that
may be attributed to a jīva, like wealth, wonderful
qualities, intelligence, or fame. However, all such
reputation is related to this material body. Upon the
body’s demise, this fame is destroyed along with it. The
greatest form of fame in this world is therefore to
become a premī-bhakta, because such fame is directly
related to the soul. The soul is unending and eternal.
Factually, it is composed of eternality, knowledge, and
bliss (sac-cid-ānanda-maya). Since the soul is never
destroyed, the devotees of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are likewise never
destroyed. Devotees of Kṛṣṇa are just like a boat, and
one cannot know how many jīvas they shelter and ferry
across the ocean of birth and death. The devotees alone
secure the qualification to serve their worshipful Lord.
Performing such service, they successfully dispel
lamentation, illusion, and attachment forever.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.19.40) says, “vidyātmani bhidā-
bādhaḥ — knowledge of the soul nullifies duality.” To be
known as a devotee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the greatest fame. It
is the jīva’s considered opinion, due to his greed for
material objects of sense enjoyment, that service to
inert matter constitutes the greatest fame. Actually,
the best position is to be known as a viṣṇu-bhakta,
which is superior even to the topmost fame within this
material world. This means to be afforded the position
of a knower of Brahman. Yet, greater than the glory of
being a devotee of Śrī Viṣṇu is to be renowned as a
devotee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Indra states in Garuḍa Purāṇa:




                             179
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017

kalau bhāgavataṁ nāma

durlabhaṁ naiva labhyate

brahma-rudra-padotkṛṣṭaṁ

guruṇā kathitaṁ mama

“In this Age of Kali, it is extremely rare to find one
who is celebrated as an excellent devotee, or a
bhāgavata. However, such a position is superior to that
of the major demigods like Brahmā and Mahādeva.”



In Itihāsa-samuccaya, in the conversation between Śrī
Nārada and Puṇḍarīka, Śrī Nārada says:

janmāntara-sahasreṣu

yasya syād buddhir īdṛśī

dāso ‘haṁ vāsudevasya

sarvān lokān samuddharet

“ëI am Bhagavān Vāsudeva’s servant.’ A person who
realizes this after thousands and thousands of births
can deliver the entire universe.”



In the conversation between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, as
recorded in the Ādi Purāṇa it states: “bhaktānām
anugacchanti muktayaḥ śrutibhiḥ saha — The liberated
souls (mukta-puruṣas) and the Vedic literatures follow
the footsteps of the devotees of the Lord.”

In Bṛhad-nāradīya Purāṇa, it is further stated:



adyāpi ca muni-śreṣṭhā brahmādyā api devatāḥ

prabhāvaṁ na vijānanti viṣṇu-bhakti-ratātmanām

“Until today, even the great sages and demigods such as
Brahmā did not know the influence of a devotee absorbed
in viṣṇu-bhakti.”



The Garuḍa Purāṇa similarly states:

brāhmaṇānāṁ sahasrebhyaḥ satra-yājī viśiṣyate

satra-yāji-sahasrebhyaḥ sarva-vedānta-pāragaḥ

sarva-vedānta-vit-koṭyā viṣṇu-bhakto viśiṣyate

vaiṣṇavānāṁ sahasrebhya ekānty eko viśiṣyate

ekāntinastu puruṣā gacchanti parama padam


                             180
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



“Out of thousands of brāhmaṇas, one who is qualified to
perform sacrifices is the best, and out of many
thousands of such qualified brāhmaṇas, one who is
learned in the Vedānta is considered the best among all.
Out of thousands of such knowledgeable brāhmaṇas, one
who is a devotee of Lord Viṣṇu is the best, and out of
many thousands of devotees of Viṣṇu, one who is a one-
pointed Vaiṣṇava is the best. Indeed, such an unalloyed
Vaiṣṇava certainly attains the supreme destination.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.13.4), it is stated:

śrutasya puṁsāṁ sucira-śramasya

nanv añjasā sūribhir īḍito ‘rthaḥ

tat-tad-guṇānuśravaṇaṁ mukunda-

pādāravindaṁ hṛdayeṣu yeṣām



“O muni, hearing the qualities of a devotee in whose
heart the lotus feet of Śrī Mukunda are always present
is the main fruit of one who has undergone long, hard
endeavor in the study of the scriptures. This is the
opinion of learned persons.”

In Nārāyaṇa-vyūha-stava it is said:

nāhaṁ brahmāpi bhūyāsaṁ

tvad-bhakti-rahito hare

tvayi bhaktas tu kīṭo ‘pi

bhūyāsaṁ janma-janmasu



“I do not aspire to take birth as a Brahmā, if I am to
be a Brahmā devoid of devotion. I am praying to get the
association of Your devotees, even if I have to take
thousands of births as an insect.”

sva-dharma-niṣṭhaḥ śata-janmabhiḥ pumān

viriñcatām eti tataḥ paraṁ hi mām

avyākṛtaṁ bhāgavato ‘tha vaiṣṇavaṁ

padaṁ yathāhaṁ vibudhāḥ kalātyaye



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.24.29)



Śrī Mahādeva says to Śrī Maitreya, “A person who
properly executes his occupational duty, or varṇāśrama-
dharma, for one hundred births becomes qualified to

                             181
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

occupy the post of Brahmā, and if he becomes even more
pious, he can approach me (Lord Śiva). A person who is
an unalloyed devotee of Śrī Viṣṇu is immediately
promoted after death to the supreme destination, which
is completely beyond the material universe. I myself in
my Rudra form, as well as other ruling demigods, attain
these planets only after the destruction of this
material world and our positions within it.”

śriyam anucaratīṁ tad-arthinaś ca

dvipada-patīn vibudhāṁś ca yat sva-pūrṇaḥ

na bhajati nija-bhṛtya-varga-tantraḥ

katham amum udvisṛjet pumān kṛta-jñaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.31.22)



“By nature Bhagavān is completely full of bliss. He does
not care for the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī, who always
remains engaged in His service, or for the kings who
perform everything to attain her favor, or for the other
demigods. Despite this, He becomes dependent on His
devotees. Aho! How could a person who is actually
grateful, be able to leave Śrī Hari, who is such an
ocean of mercy, even for a moment?”



In the words of Śrī Brahmā:



tad astu me nātha sa bhūri-bhāgo

bhave ‘tra vānyatra tu vā tiraścām

yenāham eko ‘pi bhāvaj-janānāṁ

bhūtvā niṣeve tava pāda-pallavam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.30)



“Therefore, O Bhagavān, I pray to be so fortunate that
in this life or the next, whether I take birth as any
kind of bird or beast, I may be a servant of any of Your
servants, and again be able to engage in devotional
service to Your lotus feet.”

In regard to Śrī Prahlāda being the best of all the
devotees, Śrī Rudra says:



bhakta eva hi tattvena

kṛṣṇaṁ jānāti na tv aham

sarveṣu hari-bhakteṣu

                             182
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


prahlādo ‘ti-mahattamaḥ

Skanda Purāṇa



“A devotee is one who understands Kṛṣṇa in truth. I am
not among them. Amongst all of Śrī Hari’s devotees,
Prahlāda Mahārāja is the best.”

In addition:

kvāhaṁ rajaḥ-prabhāva īśa tamo ‘dhike ‘smin,

jātaḥ suretara-kule kva tavānukampā

na brahmaṇo na tu bhavasya na vai ramāyā,

yan me ‘rpitaḥ śirasi padma-karaḥ prasādaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.9.26)

Prahlāda Mahārāja is saying, “O my Lord, just look at my
position. I was born in a demonic family full of the
hellish material qualities of passion and ignorance.
What is to be said of Your causeless mercy? You are
glorious! You offered Your supreme mercy and kept Your
lotus hand on my head. This is the topmost reward and
fully removes material miseries. You never did this for
Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, or even for Lakṣmī.”



bhāvanti puruṣā loke

mad-bhaktās tvām anuvratāḥ

bhavān me khalu bhaktānāṁ

sarveṣāṁ pratirūpa-dhṛk



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.10.21)

Bhagavān Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva is saying, “O My son Prahlāda!
The people in this material world who will follow your
example will become My devotees. You are an ideal for
all of My devotees.”



The Pāṇḍavas are far superior, even to bhakta Prahlāda:

yūyaṁ nṛ-loke bata bhūri-bhāgā

lokaṁ punānā munayo ‘bhiyanti

yeṣāṁ gṛhān āvasatīti sākṣād

gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma manuṣya-liṅgam

                             183
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


sa vā ayaṁ brahma mahad-vimṛgya-

kaivalya-nirvāṇa-sukhānubhūtiḥ

priyaḥ suhṛd vaḥ khalu mātuleya

ātmārhaṇīyo vidhi-kṛd guruś ca



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.10.48—49)

The spiritual master of the demigods, Śrī Nārada Muni,
said to the Pāṇḍavas: “O Yudhiṣṭhira, of all the people
on this Earth planet, your good fortune is exceedingly
glorious, because the Absolute Truth, Parabrahman, the
all-pervading Supersoul, has taken a human form and
secretly lives in your palace. Great saintly persons,
who purify the entire creation, again and again visit
you and your palace for His darśana.

“Great saintly persons continually search for Him, the
Paramātmā, the Parabrahman, and the all peaceful
embodiment of topmost ecstasy, who is completely devoid
of even the slightest trace of māyā. That same Śrī Kṛṣṇa
for whom they search is your beloved friend, well-
wisher, your maternal cousin, worshipful deity, obedient
servant, and spiritual master. Indeed, He is like your
very own self.”



Superior to the Pāṇḍavas are the Yādavas:

aho bhoja-pate yūyaṁ

janma-bhājo nṛṇām iha

yat paśyathāsakṛt kṛṣṇaṁ

durdarśam api yoginām



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.82.28)



At the time of the solar eclipse at Kurukṣetra, the
assembled earthly kings said, “O King of the Bhojas,
Ugrasena, among all the men of this world, only the
lives of you Yadus are truly successful. You are
glorious! You are greatly blessed, because you
continuously behold Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is rarely visible
even to great yogīs.”

tad-darśana-sparśanānupatha-prajalpa-

śayyāsanāśana-sayauna-sapiṇḍa-bandhaḥ

yeṣāṁ gṛhe niraya-vartmani vartatāṁ vaḥ

svargāpavarga-viramaḥ svayam āsa viṣṇuḥ

                             184
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.82.30)

“O Ugrasena, you have marital and blood relationships
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Not only that, you constantly see and
touch Him, and you walk, talk, sleep, sit, and dine with
Him. You are caught in the net of family affairs, which
is the path to hell, but in your palace the all-
pervading Lord Viṣṇu, the mere darśana of whom makes one
forget about residence in heaven and liberation, has
taken one form and resides there with you.”



Uddhava is superior to the Yadus:

na tathā me priyatama

ātma-yonir na śaṅkaraḥ

na ca saṅkarṣaṇo na śrīr

naivātmā ca yathā bhavān



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.15)



“O Uddhava, as a premī-bhakta you are more dear to Me
than My son, Brahmā; than Śaṅkara; than My real brother
Balarāma; and than Lakṣmī, who is My wife. You are more
dear to Me than My own self.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.16.29), Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “tvaṁ
tu bhāgavateṣv aham — O Uddhava, you represent Me
amongst My premī-bhaktas; indeed, you are Me,” and also
again in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.4.31), “noddhavo ‘ṇv api
man-nyūno — Uddhava, you are not even fractionally less
than Me.”



Superior to Śrī Uddhava are the gopīs of Vraja:

etāḥ paraṁ tanu-bhṛto bhuvi gopa-vadhvo

govinda eva nikhilātmani rūḍha-bhāvāḥ

vāñchanti yad bhāva-bhiyo munayo vayaṁ ca

kiṁ brahma-janmabhir ananta-kathā-rasasya



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.58)

Śrī Uddhava prayed, “Of all embodied beings upon this
earth, these gopīs are certainly the best and they alone
are successful, because they have the utmost divine
ecstasy named mahābhāva for the soul of all souls,

                             185
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Their most exalted loving position
is coveted not only by those who are desirous of
liberation due to being afraid of material existence,
nor only by greats saints and liberated mukta-puruṣas,
but also by devotees such as myself. However we are
unable to achieve it. If one cannot achieve the rasa
emanating from topics of the kathā of Bhagavān, then
what is the benefit of taking birth again and again as
Lord Brahmā and having a life span of millions of
years?”



In Bṛhad-vāmana Purāṇa, Śrī Brahmā says to Bhṛgu and the
other ṛṣis:

śaṣṭi-varśa-sahasrāṇi mayā taptaṁ tapaḥ purā

nanda-gopa-vraja-strīṇāṁ pāda-reṇūpalabdhaye

tathāpi na mayā prāptās tāsāṁ vai pāda-reṇavaḥ

nāhaṁ śivaśca śeṣaśca śrīśca tābhiḥ samāḥ kvacit



“Although I performed severe austerities for sixty
thousand years to attain the dust from the vraja-gopīs’
lotus feet, I was unable to attain it. You should
clearly understand that I (Brahmā), Śaṅkara, Śeṣa, and
Lakṣmī are not equal to the vraja-gopīs.”

In the Ādi Purāṇa, Śrī Bhagavān says:



na tathā me priyatamo brahmā rudraś ca pārthiva

na ca lakṣmīr na cātmā ca yathā gopī-jano mama

“O Pārtha (Arjuna), not even Brahmā, Śiva, Lakṣmī-devī,
or even My own self is as dear to Me as the gopīs of
Vraja.”



Among the vraja-gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the most
excellent, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is indeed Her dear-most
beloved. Taking Her mood and complexion He came as Śrī
Gaurāṅga, whose topmost confidential servitor is Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda. Śrī Rūpa’s single-pointed followers
are widely celebrated as rūpānugas, and he is described
thus in Caitanya-candrāmṛta:

āstāṁ vairāgya-koṭir bhavatu śama-dama-kṣānti-maitry-
ādi-koṭis

tattvānudhyāna-koṭir bhavatu bhavatu vā vaiṣṇavī-bhakti-
koṭiḥ

koṭy-aṁśo ‘py asya na syāt tad api guṇa-gaṇo yaḥ svataḥ-
siddha āste

śrīmac-caitanya-candra-priya-caraṇa-nakha-jyotir-āmoda-

                             186
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

bhājām

“Persons who are receiving the bliss coming from the
rays of the effulgent toe nails of the lotus feet of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s beloved devotees are fully
qualified with all transcendental qualities. The
unlimited good qualities that are found in the devotees
of Viṣṇu, such as strong renunciation, equanimity, sense
control, forgiveness, and friendship with all living
entities, even if multiplied millions of times, cannot
be compared to a fraction of the transcendental
attributes of those who are the recipients of the mercy
of the devotees of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.”




What is the greatest treasure?



8.246

ësampattira madhye jīvera kon sampatti gaṇi?’

ërādhā-kṛṣṇe prema yāṅra, sei baḍa dhanī’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked, “Of all the different varieties
of riches, what is the greatest treasure of the jīva?”
Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “Whoever possesses the
wealth of prema to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is the wealthiest.”




In this world, the jīvas possess many sorts of wealth,
but these material riches are destructible. From the
ancient past till now they have they not given anyone
any real happiness, nor shall they ever do so in the
future. Never mind the ordinary jīvas, Indra’s opulences
and Lord Brahmā’s own planet are destructible and thus
are merely fleeting. Such wealth may be destroyed at any
moment. Yet, whoever possesses the wealth of prema to
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is truly the wealthiest person. Even
Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the wealth of the
wealthy, personally runs behind such a person. In actual
fact, such a premī-bhakta is able to bestow his
incalculable wealth of prema upon another and make him
completely happy forever.

The suffering jīva is full of material desires to enjoy,
and is totally addicted to matter. He pursues sense
gratification and so considers the attainment of
material wealth to be his primary duty. But if one
comprehensively deliberates upon the various categories
of wealth, with subtle spiritual discrimination, then
factually no other wealth can compare with the wealth of
prema for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.



                             187
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017


kim alabhyaṁ bhāgavati

prasanne śrī-niketane



tathāpi tat-parā rājan

na hi vāñchanti kiñcana

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.39.2)



“O Parīkṣit, is there anything unattainable for those
devotees who have pleased Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the shelter
of Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune? Such devotees can
obtain whatever they may fancy, even though they do not
desire anything.”



What is the greatest distress?



8.247

ëduḥkha-madhye kona duḥkha haya gurutara?’

ëkṛṣṇa-bhakta viraha vinā duḥkha nāhi dekhi para’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked, “Of all kinds of unhappiness,
which is the most distressful?” Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
replied, “Separation from the devotee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
truly the greatest misery. There is no suffering worse
than this.”




Only they who know the essence of bhakti can really know
the glories of the devotees of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and they alone
can appreciate the association of a devotee as being the
supreme gain. No one else can understand this. It has
been said:



sva-jīvanādhika-prārthya-śrī-viṣṇu-jana-saṅgateḥ

vicchedena kṣaṇañ cātra na sukhāṁśaṁ labhāmahe



Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (1.5.54)



Mahārāja Śrī Yudhiṣṭhira said: “In fact, the association

                             188
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

of devotees of Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu is more precious to us
than our own life. On the other hand, due to separation
from those very devotees in this world, we cannot get
even a moment of happiness now.”

Kṛṣṇa says elsewhere:



mām anārādhya duḥkhārtaḥ

kuṭumbāsakta-mānasaḥ

sat-saṅga-rahito martyo

vṛddha-sevā-paricyutaḥ

“One who fails to worship Me, who is overly absorbed in
material life, who does not stick to the path of
devotional service, who does not affiliate with saintly
personalities, and who does not serve his elders, is a
most unhappy fellow.”




Who is truly liberated?



8.248

ëmukta-madhye kon jīva mukta kari’ māni?’

ëkṛṣṇa-prema yāṅra, sei mukta-śiromaṇi’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu then said, “Out of all liberated
persons, which jīva should be accepted as truly
liberated?” Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “He who has prema
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the crown jewel of all liberated
persons.”




The real meaning of mukta, or liberated soul, is one who
is freed from material bondage. Those fortunate persons
in whom kṛṣṇa-prema is present are factually the crown
jewels among liberated personalities. Parīkṣit Mahārāja
has said:



muktānām api siddhānāṁ

nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

su-durlabhaḥ praśāntātmā

kotiṣv api mahā-mune

                             189
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.14.5)



“O great sage, even out of many millions of perfected
and liberated persons, it is very difficult to meet a
mahā-puruṣa who is completely and exclusively dedicated
to Bhagavān. Such a premī-bhakta day and night remains
immersed in the pure nectar of kṛṣṇa-prema and by
continually savoring that indescribable nectar, he
becomes forgetful of his own body.”

jāya prema bhayo mana-mohana se

vānai choḍa diyā sabaro ghara bārā

bhāva-vibhora rahe niśi-dina

aura nayana bahata avirala dhārā



masta rahe, alamasta rahe

bāke pīche ḍolata nanda ko lālā

ësundara’ aise bhakta ke hita

bauhe pasārata madana gopālā

“Those who have love and affection for Madana-mohana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, leave everything for Him, including wife,
children, relatives, and home. They are always sinking
in love and affection for Him, and due to that love,
tears continually flow from their eyes. Such devotees
are always blissful, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa always follows behind
them wherever they may go. Madana-mohana Śrī Kṛṣṇa waits
to embrace such devotees with arms wide open.”



A kṛṣṇa-premī-bhakta is factually liberated in the above
manner.




What is the greatest song?



8.249

ëgāna-madhye kona gānaójīvera nija dharma?’

ërādhā-kṛṣṇera prema-keli’óyei gītera marma’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked, “Among many songs, which one is
the natural activity of the living entity?” Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “Songs that describe Śrī Rādhā-

                             190
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa’s love-filled pastimes (prema-keli-līlā) are the
vital core of all.”




Without intrinsic dharma, nothing can exist; without the
intrinisic dharma of the soul, the soul cannot exist.
Every question asked by Śrīman Mahāprabhu referred to
the soul; He never inquired using the words “human
beings” or “mankind.” For the benefit of the jīvas,
Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked about duties pertaining to the
intrinsic activity (svarūpa-dharma) of the jīva.
Therefore, it is the constitutional position of the
living being to perform saṅkīrtana, or congregational
chanting, of the loving pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.
Owing to the great ecstasy of prema inherent within
Their amorous pastimes, simply hearing such songs
creates an awakening within one’s internal
consciousness. Thus, a song that intrinsically consists
of such glorification is the real essence of all songs.
Those songs that are found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam — such
as Veṇu-gīta, Gopī-gīta, Bhramara-gīta, and Yugala-gīta
— are classified as being svarūpa-dharma, or the
constitutional function of the spirit soul. Sāma Veda is
a body of prayers that are also accepted as songs. By
nature the jīva is the eternal servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It
is, therefore, his factual religion to sing about the
pastimes of his worshipful deity.



anugrahāya bhaktānāṁ

mānuṣaṁ deham āsthitaḥ

bhajate tādṛśīḥ krīḍa

yāḥ śrutvā tat-paro bhavet

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.36)



In order to bestow His mercy upon the jīvas, Śrī
Bhagavān manifests His human-like form and performs such
pastimes that induce anyone who hears about them to
become devoted to Him. The living beings, now dedicated
to the Lord, become ecstatic in prema and begin to sing
of His pastimes.

The best of saints, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, has said that
when Śrī Kṛṣṇa goes to the forest for cow-grazing, He
gets tired from walking so far. Using a friend’s lap as
a pillow, He falls asleep. Some friends massage His
feet, while others fan Him very slowly. To please Him
while He rests happily, the animals and birds sing of
His amorous pastimes with Śrī Rādhā.




                             191
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

What is the most beneficial activity?



8.250

ëśreyo-madhye kona śreyaḥ jīvera haya sāra?’

ëkṛṣṇa-bhakta-saṅga vinā śreyaḥ nāhi āra’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked, “Out of all beneficial
activities, which is the most favorable for the living
entities?” Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “There is no pursuit
more auspicious than to associate with Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
devotees.”




Śreya means “auspicious.” The result of affiliating with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s devotees is that one is able to obtain
kṛṣṇa-prema. Therefore, the association of these
devotees is the ultimate form of good fortune. Having
forgotten his svarūpa as the eternal servant of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the jīva instead becomes the servant of the
illusory potency (māyā), and as he is ground upon the
mortar of māyā, he suffers great misery. However, when
the jīva gains the association of one of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
devotees by devotional activities that he has performed
unknowingly or even accidentally (ajñāta-sukṛti), then
under the shelter of those elevated souls, he is
gradually enabled to comprehend his state of opposition
to Bhagavān, whereupon he abandons sensual happiness,
and begins to internalize himself. The devotees of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa are just like veritable touch-stones, which
convert iron into gold, and they can transform the jīvas
who come in their association into touch-stones as well.



manye bhāgavataḥ sākṣāt

pārṣadān vo madhu-dvisaḥ

viṣṇor bhūtāni lokānāṁ

pāvanāya caranti hi

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.28)

The king of Videha, Śrī Nimi Mahārāja, is saying to Śrī
Nārada, the saint among the demigods, “My lord, I
understand that you are indeed an eternal associate of
Bhagavān Madhusūdana, because such eternal associates
travel everywhere in order to purify the materialistic
living entities.”

ata ātyantikaṁ kṣemaṁ

pṛcchāmo bhāvato ‘naghāḥ


                             192
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

saṁsāre ‘smin kṣaṇārdho ‘pi

sat-saṅgaḥ śevadhir nṛṇām



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.30)

“O great souls, who purify the three worlds! I ask you —
what is the svarūpa, or nature, of supreme
auspiciousness? And what is the sādhana to attain that?
In this world, even half a moment’s association with a
devotee is the cause of supreme good fortune for
mankind.”




Who should the living entity remember at every moment?



8.251

ëkāṅhāra smaraṇa jīva karibe anukṣaṇa?’

ëkṛṣṇa-nāma-guṇa-līlāópradhāna smaraṇa’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu   asked, “Whom should the jīva remember
at every moment?”   Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “The
principle objects   to keep in mind are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names,
forms, qualities,   and pastimes.”




In the first stage of sādhana, remembrance is done
forcefully, but as the living being’s oppositional
stance towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa gradually diminishes, to that
extent the natural remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names,
forms, qualities, and pastimes takes place. Ultimately,
the devotee will not desire to discuss mundane topics,
even for a second. Dedicated to not wasting even one
second of time, he thus considers wasting a mere moment
as being equivalent to universal devastation:



tasmāt sarvātmanā rājan

hariḥ sarvatra sarvadā

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyo bhagavān nṛṇām

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.2.36)




                             193
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

“Therefore, O Parīkṣit, human beings, always and in
every circumstance, with their complete energy, should
remember, glorify, and hear about Bhagavān Śrī Hari.”

Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī in Śrī Bhakti-sandarbha has described
five types of smaraṇa, or remembrance. They are:

(1) smaraṇa — to initially inquire, just slightly, about
Śrī Kṛṣṇa

(2) dhāraṇā — to remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa to a limited extent

(3) dhyāna — to experience a partial manifestation, or
catch a momentary vision, of Śrī Bhagavān in the heart;
or to glimpse His form, dress, or ornaments

(4) dṛḍha-smṛti — to retain a fixed meditation upon
Bhagavān

(5) samādhi — to receive darśana, or sphūrti, of
Bhagavān’s līlās, which are filled with varieties of
rasa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, and pastimes are all of the same
nature as Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
most important remembrance, of which the foundation, or
root, is the congregational chanting of the holy name:



ëkṛṣṇa-nāma’, ëkṛṣṇa-guṇa’, ëkṛṣṇa-līlā’-vṛnda

kṛṣṇera svarūpa-samaósaba cid-ānanda

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā (17.135)

“The holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, His transcendental
qualities and pastimes as well as the very svarūpa of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, are all equal. They are all cidānanda, or
spiritual and full of bliss.”




What is the most important meditation?



8.252

ëdhyeya-madhye jīvera kartavya kon dhyāna?’

ërādhā-kṛṣṇa-padāmbuja-dhyānaópradhāna’



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked, “Of all types of
meditation, which one should the jīva engage in as his
actual religious duty?” Śrīla Rāmānanda Rāya replied,
“The most important meditation is to contemplate the
lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.”



                             194
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




The samādhi of the jñānīs and yogīs is nirvikalpa, a
state in which the meditator, the object of meditation,
and the act of meditation, do not endure. Since
everything becomes śūnya, or zero, neither the
realization nor the perceiver live on. Conversely, in
the samādhi of the devotees, the the meditator, the
object of meditation (Śrī Bhagavān), and the meditation
process all continue. Meditating upon the divine
pastimes of the Supreme Person, the devotee obtains a
sphūrti, or a vision within the heart, of them, and he
actually sees his object of meditation:



tasmād ekena manasā

bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

dhyeyaḥ pūjyaś ca nityadā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.14)



“Therefore, with a one-pointed mind, one should
constantly hear about, chant, meditate upon, and worship
Bhagavān, who is very affectionate to His devotees.”



Where should one reside?



8.253

ësarva tyaji’ jīvera kartavya kāṅhā vāsa?’

ëśrī-vṛndāvana-bhūmi yāṅhā nitya-līlā-rāsa’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked, “Where should the jīva reside,
abandoning everything?” Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “One
should live in Vraja-bhūmi, Śrī Vṛndāvana, where the
rāsa-līlā is eternally performed.”

Among the diverse pastimes of akhila-rasāmṛta-sindhu Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the rāsa-līlā festival reigns as the crest jewel
of all. Every other pastime is contained within this
rāsa-līlā, which occurred in the supreme abode Śrī
Vṛndāvana. Whoever possesses the single-minded greed to
attain vraja-prema should reside only in Śrī Vṛndāvana.
Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya’s precise meaning is that one should
live in Vṛndāvana, which is manifest here on earth, and
which is special as it provides the setting for the
extraordinary rāsa-līlā. There are three principle
manifestations of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma: aprakaṭa,
prakaṭa, and dṛśyamāna.

                             195
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


(1) aprakaṭa — the supreme abode, Śrī Goloka-dhāma,
which exists eternally and which is entirely beyond the
material elements.

(2) prakaṭa — everything that accompanies the Lord’s
appearance in this world. Because Bhagavān performs His
manifest pastimes here in this world, the material
nature is involved in His pastimes.

(3) dṛśyamāna — that which is within the common, sensual
jurisdiction of general people.



āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.61)

Śrī Uddhava is saying, “The best thing that could
possibly happen for me is that I take birth in this
Vṛndāvana as a forest bush, creeper, herb, or even a
medicinal root. Ah! If I could become one of these then
I would continuously be able to serve the foot-dust from
the lotus feet of the vraja-gopīs. If I could bathe
myself in their foot-dust then I would become most
fortunate. How blessed are those gopīs. Just see! They
have abandoned those things that are most difficult to
give up — relations with their family members and the
restrictions imposed by society and seniors. They have
obtained the lotus feet of Bhagavān, complete absorption
in those feet, and the topmost love for Him. What more
can I say? Even the Śrutis, which are the Vedic
instructions that emanate from the breathing of the
Supreme Lord, are still searching for that the same
super-excellent, love-laden form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but they
cannot attain it.”




What is the best topic to hear?

8.254

ëśravaṇa-madhye jīvera kon śreṣṭha śravaṇa?’

ërādhā-kṛṣṇa-prema-keli karṇa-rasāyana’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked, “Out of all topics to hear,
which topic is the best for the living entity?” Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “Hearing about the amorous
affairs of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, which is like a medicinal
tonic for the ears (karṇa-rasāyana), is the best of
all.”

                             196
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




What to speak of the jīvas, even rasika-śekhara Śrī
Kṛṣṇa hears the songs describing His own loving affairs.
After taking complete sannyāsa, Śrī Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura
was traveling towards Śrī Vṛndāvana, singing about the
sweet amorous pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Being unable
to withhold Himself, Śrī Kṛṣṇa began following behind
him, listening to his singing. Eventually, those songs
were compiled into a book by the same Śrī Bilvamaṅgala
Ṭhākura, entitled Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta [meaning “that
which pours nectar into the ears of Śrī Kṛṣṇa”]. The
amorous affairs of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are compared to the
most vital rasāyana, life-restoring tonic. Śravaṇa, or
hearing, is of two types: vicāra-pradhāna and ruci-
pradhāna. In vicāra[xxiii]22-pradhāna, the hearer is
full of doubts, just like Arjuna. In ruci-pradhāna, the
hearer has no doubts in the statements of the
scriptures, and he hears the descriptions of the
qualities of the Lord, with great relish. Śrī Nārada is
an example of this. It is also written:



vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ

śraddānvito ‘nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ

bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhāgavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ

hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.40)



“O Parīkṣit, a grave person who faithfully and
continuously hears the narrations of the transcendental
pastimes that Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed with the
young girls of Vraja, and then describes those pastimes
accordingly, achieves supreme devotion for the lotus
feet of Bhagavān. He very quickly attains freedom from
the diseases of the heart, which are the transformations
of lust.”



What is the most worshipable object?



8.255

ëupāsyera madhye kon upāsya pradhāna?’

ëśreṣṭha upāsyaóyugala ërādhā-kṛṣṇa’ nāma’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked, “Among all worshipable objects,
which is the best?” Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “The

                             197
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

holy names of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are the chief worshipable
object.”




Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has said:



rādheti nāma nava-sundara gīta-mugdhaṁ

kṛṣṇeti nāma madhurādbhuta-gāḍha-rūpam

sarva-kṣaṇaṁ surabhi-rāga-himena ramyaṁ

kṛtvā tad eva piba me rasane kṣudhārte



Abhīṣṭa-sūcana, text 10



“The name ëRādhā’ is just like fresh, pleasing nectar
that enchants the mind, and the name ëKṛṣṇa’ is like
astonishingly sweet and thick condensed milk. O tongue
tortured by thirst, mix the two together, add the
fragrant ice of anurāga and continuously drink this
superb beverage.”

Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura also says: “rādhā-kṛṣṇa nāma gāṇa,
ei se parama dhyāna, āra nā kariha paramāṇa — the
chanting of the holy names of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is the
supreme meditation. Do not accept any other process as
the goal” (Śrī Prema-bhakti-candrikā, song 6 text 15).

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the very source, or root cause, of all
incarnations (bhāgavat-svarūpa), and His hlādinī-śakti
is Śrī Rādhā. Among couples such as Śrī Śiva-Pārvatī,
Śrī Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Sītā-Rāma, and Śrī Rukmiṇī-
Kṛṣṇa, the name of the Divine Couple Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is
indeed the ultimate object of worship for the jīvas:



etāvān eva loke ‘smin

puṁsāṁ dharmaḥ paraḥ smṛtaḥ

bhakti-yogo bhāgavati

tan-nāma-grahaṇādibhiḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.3.22)



“The supreme religious activity, or duty, for the jīvas
of this world is to attain devotional sentiments for the
lotus feet of the Lord, by methods such as chanting the
holy names.”


                             198
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017

What is the fate of those desiring liberation and those
desiring sense gratification?



8.256

ëmukti, bhukti vāñche yei, kāṅhā duṅhāra gati?’

ësthāvara-deha, deva-deha yaiche avasthiti’



Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked, “What is the fate of those who
desire liberation and of those who desire sense
gratification?” Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “Those who
desire liberation and those who desire sense
gratification achieve the bodies of non-moving species
and demigods, respectively.




Those who perform pious activities in this world achieve
the bodies of Indra (the king of heaven) or other
demigods. Alternatively, they are born into a high-class
human family. And those who perform inauspicious
activities repeatedly take the bodies of non-moving
species (such as trees), worms, insects, birds, and
beasts. Those desirous of liberation, who do not have
any desire to enjoy materially, or in other words, those
whose activities are bereft of consciousness and whose
consciousness is in a sleep-like state, attain the
bodies of non-moving species of life; while those who
are dedicated to material enjoyment attain bodies
appropriate for their desires by taking birth in the
higher planets as demigods.



muktyai yaḥ prastaratvāya śāstramūce mahāmuniḥ

gautamaṁ taṁ vijānītha yathā vittha tathaiva saḥ

“Those who merge in the undifferentiated Brahman
(sāyujya-mukti) become unconscious like stones, and
achieve a state of spiritual inactivity (destruction).
And those who follow the theories of Gautama become
liberated and achieve a similar state.”



The following pertains to those who are possessed of
desires for material enjoyment:

iṣṭveha devatā yajñaiḥ

svar-lokaṁ yāti yājñikaḥ

bhuñjīta deva-vat tatra

bhogān divyān nijārjitān


                             199
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.10.23)



“One who worships the demigods, upon receiving the
result of his pious activities, goes to the heavenly
planets where he enjoys just like a demigod.”

kvacit pumān kvacic ca strī

kvacin nobhayam andha-dhīḥ

devo manuṣyas tiryag vā

yathā-karma-guṇaṁ bhāvaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.29)

“According to the work he has performed and the modes of
nature he has acquired, the living entity takes birth
sometimes as a human being, sometimes as a demigod, and
sometimes as a bird, an animal, and so on. Blinded by
ignorance, the jīva sometimes becomes a man, a woman,
and sometimes a eunuch.”



In the Śrīmad Bhāgavad-gītā (9.20—21), also, it says:

trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā

yajñair iṣṭvā svar-gatiṁ prārthayante

te puṇyam āsādya surendra-lokam

aśnanti divyān divi deva-bhogān



te taṁ bhuktvā svarga-lokaṁ viśālaṁ

kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti

evaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannā

gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante

“Those who are full of material desires and dedicated to
fruitive activities mentioned in the three Vedas,
worship Me and drink soma-rasa, the remnants of yajña,
and pray to ascend to heaven. By the result of their
pious activities, they achieve the planet of Indra and
enjoy the divine paraphernalia suitable for the
demigods.

“After having enjoyed the vast expanses of the heavenly
planets, when their stock of pious activities is
exhausted, then again they fall into this world of birth
and death. Thus, persons who practice this sakāma-karma,
or reward oriented activity as described in the three

                             200
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Vedas, are full of petty material desires, and they
repeatedly wander in the cycle of birth and death.”



The observation has been made that in some books, the
words mukti-bhukti have been substituted for the words
mukti-bhakti. It follows that those who desire bhakti,
at the time of perfection, achieve the bodies of
associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that are suitable to their
moods, and render loving service to Him in concordance
with their respective bhāvas, or feelings of servitude.
Their attainment of this service to the Lord has been
compared to attaining the body of demigods. As a result
of gaining service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and obtaining a body
like that of a demigod, the word bhakti is sometimes
used instead of bhukti, for just as the demigods have
freedom to enjoy varieties of happiness, so, too, a
devotee attaining an associate’s body gets to taste an
array of the most astonishing rasa by participating in
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.



8.257—260

arasa-jña kāka cuṣe jñāna-nimba-phale

rasa-jña kokila khāya premāmra-mukule



abhāgiyā jñānī āsvādaye śuṣka jñāna

kṛṣṇa-premāmṛta pāna kare bhāgyavān



ei-mata dui jana kṛṣṇa-kathā-rase

nṛtya-gīta-rodane haila rātri-śeṣe



doṅhe nija-nija-kārye calilā vihāne

sandhyā-kāle rāya āsi’ mililā āra dine



“Impersonalists (brahma-jñānīs) who are devoid of
knowledge of transcendental mellows are like the crows
that continue to eat the bitter and tasteless fruit of
the neem tree, whereas those who enjoy the mellows of
bhakti-rasa (rasikas) are like the cuckoos who taste the
soft and fragrant buds of the mango of prema. The
unfortunate empiric speculators (jñānīs) simply
experience the happiness of dry and tasteless impersonal
knowledge, and consider themselves fortunate. However,
those who are truly fortunate constantly drink the
nectar of kṛṣṇa-prema. The jñānīs remain ignorant of the
happiness of bhakti-rasa, and merely desire to achieve
the sāyujya-mukti of merging into Brahman, which is dry
(nīrasa), devoid of attributes, and which has no taste,

                             201
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

form, qualities, pastimes, or astonishing varieties of
bliss. Thus they remain absorbed in the delusion of the
supposed oneness of the jīva and Brahman (brahma-aikya-
jñāna), which has no real existence at all. Being
cheated of bhakti-rasa, they simply chew the fruits of
the neem tree in the form of the four supposed mahā-
vākyas, or principle statements, of the Vedas, by
chanting aham brahmāsmi (I am Brahman), etc.”




Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has said that this false
knowledge is like the bitter fruit of the neem tree,
which is very unpalatable and which is enjoyed by crow-
like jīvas who are quarrelsome and attached to false
logic. Thus prema is likened to the buds of a mango
tree, whose taste is sweet, well liked, and full of
flavorful juice. The devotees of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who taste
this are compared to cuckoos. They are fortunate, while
the jñānīs are bereft of good fortune.

In this way, Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Rāmānanda Rāya passed
the full night, relishing the rasa of kṛṣṇa-kathā, or
topics of Kṛṣṇa, and thus as they chanted, danced, and
wept, the night ended. The next morning they departed to
perform their respective duties, but in the evening Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya returned to meet the Lord again and pass
the whole night as before.




The Final Evening




8.261—264

iṣṭa-goṣṭhī kṛṣṇa-kathā kahi’ katakṣaṇa

prabhu-pada dhari’ rāya kare nivedana



“?ëkṛṣṇa-tattva’, ërādhā-tattva’, ëprema-tattva-sāra’

ërasa-tattva’, ëlīlā-tattva’ vividha prakāra



eta tattva mora citte kaile prakāśana

brahmāke veda yena paḍāila nārāyaṇa



antaryāmī īśvarera ei rīti haye

bāhire nā kahe, vastu prakāśe hṛdaye


                             202
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



That evening, when Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya came to meet
Śrīman Mahāprabhu, they discussed topics of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
for some time. After this, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya caught
hold of the lotus feet of the Lord and prayed with great
humility: “You have manifested within my heart the
truths about Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā, prema, rasa, and varieties of
pastimes. This is exactly how Śrī Nārāyaṇa imparted the
Vedas to Lord Brahmā. The Supersoul, or the supreme
controller within everyone’s heart, always speaks
internally, not externally, thus granting a
manifestation of the desired object within. This is His
general practice.




As the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8) describes, Śrī
Bhagavān manifested and compiled the Vedas, which were
disclosed within the heart of Brahmā:



yo brahmāṇaṁ vidadhāti pūrvam

yo vai vedāṁś ca prahiṇoti tasmai

taṁ ha devam ātma-buddhi-prakāśaṁ

mumukṣur vai śaraṇam ahaṁ prapadye



“I accept the shelter of that Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who in
the beginning of creation inspired, or manifested, the
Vedic knowledge within the heart of Brahmā, and who
manifests knowledge of the self (ātma-buddhi).”



It is also said:



prāha bhāgavataṁ nāma

purāṇaṁ brahma-sammitam

brahmaṇe bhāgavat-proktaṁ

brahma-kalpa upāgate

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.8.28)



“Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī spoke this Śrīmad-Bhāgavata Mahā
Purāṇa, which is equal to the Vedas, in the same manner
that Bhagavān Himself spoke to Lord Brahmā at the
beginning of the creation.”

kālena naṣṭā pralaye

                             203
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


vāṇīyaṁ veda-saṁjñitā

mayā ‘dau brahmaṇe proktā

dharmo yasyāṁ mad-ātmakaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.3)

“O My dear Uddhava, with the passage of time, this
message of Vedic knowledge was lost when the
annihilation took place. Thus when the time of creation
came again, I took it upon Myself to instruct Brahmā,
and in these instructions I indeed described devotional
service to Me (bhāgavata-dharma).”



līlā-kathās te kathitāḥ samāsataḥ

kārtsnyena nājo ‘py abhidhātum īśaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.4.39)



“O best of the Kurus, I have given a brief exposition of
Śrī Bhagavān’s pastimes. Even Lord Brahmā himself would
be incapable of describing these pastimes in their
entirety.”



kasmai yena vibhāsito ‘yam atulo jñāna-pradīpaḥ purā



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.13.19)

“This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the best manifestation of
knowledge of the truth of the Supreme Lord. Bhagavān
Nārāyaṇa had previously manifested it to Lord Brahmā”



Śrī Rāya’s purpose here is to show the similarity
between the way that the original poet Śrī Brahmā
received complete Vedic knowledge within his mind,
simply by the will of Śrī Bhagavān, and the way that
Śrīman Mahāprabhu manifested all these truths in the
heart of Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya and then had him reveal
these same truths by speaking them.

The next verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.1.1) gives
evidence for Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya’s statement:



8.265

janmādy asya yato ‘nvayād itarataś cārtheṣv abhijñaḥ
svarāṭ

                             204
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


tene brahma hṛdā ya ādi-kavaye muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ

tejo-vāri-mṛdāṁ yathā vinimayo yatra tri-sargo ‘mṛṣā

dhāmnā svena sadā nirasta-kuhakaṁ satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi



“?ëWe meditate on that Paramātma, that form of
eternality and truth, by whom this world is created,
maintained, and destroyed; He who pervades all spiritual
substances. From that transcendental Being come the
spiritual world and the individual living being, both of
which are similar in nature to Him. The temporary
material creation, however, is different from Him: He is
not inert matter, He is conscious; He is not dependent,
He is self-manifest; He is not Hiraṇyagarbha Brahmā (who
appeared from the navel of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu), rather
He bestowed the Vedic knowledge upon Brahmā. He causes
even greatly learned scholars to become bewildered, in
the way that illusion creates mirages, such as the so-
called appearance of water in the effulgent sunrays,
land in water, and water on dry land. This material
creation consisting of the states of sleep, dreaming,
and deep dreamless sleep, is brought about by the three
modes of material nature. By His illusionary potency,
this material creation appears eternal, although
temporary. By His own self-manifest effulgence, He
remains always and in every condition liberated from the
illusory potency named māyā, and her activities.’?”




This explanation is based on the commentary by Śrīla
Śrīdhara Svāmī. Our Gosvāmī lineage has also presented
the following explanation of this verse:



“All evidence ascertains that it is that Supreme Truth
which creates, maintains, and destroys this universe.
Upon deliberating on both the apparent and hidden
meanings, one sees that only He is to be known, as He is
the original form of all existence. It is He alone who
is the self-manifest and independent master of this
world that we see. It is He who, as the indwelling
Supersoul, gave teachings to ādi-kavi (the original
poet) Lord Brahmā on that all-pervading truth.
Contemplating Him, all greatly learned scholars and
paṇḍitas fall into illusion again and again. The five
material elements seem to exist in Him, but this is like
a mirage in the desert. In Him the three types of
creative potency — jīva-śakti, which manifests the
jīvas, māyā śakti, which manifests the temporary
universe, and cit-śakti, which manifests the spiritual
world — are present in a real form. By the potency
generated from His own svarūpa, not from another agent,
or His ātma-śakti, He remains eternally beyond
ignorance. We meditate upon that Absolute Truth Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.”


                             205
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has given another translation
of this verse in his book Śrī Bhāgavat-arka-marīci-mālā:
A minute portion of the internal potency (svarūpa-śakti)
is the taṭasthā-, or jīva-śakti, and the shadow portion
of that internal potency is called the external potency,
or māyā-śakti. From the taṭasthā-, or jīva-śakti of
Bhagavān, the individual spirit souls are manifest, and
from māyā-śakti, the material world has manifested. Due
to having a consciousness of separatism, and thus being
opposed to the service of Bhagavān since time
immemorial, the soul is put into a condition whereby he
is illusioned into thinking that he is controlled by
material nature. Bewildered by the false ego and
mistaking an object for something else altogether, he
considers the material body to be the real self. The
soul thus remains connected to this material world. The
conclusion is that the material world, full of both
moving and non-moving entities, is manifested both
directly and indirectly from Bhagavān.

Mixing together puruṣa, prakṛti, and the maha-tattva,
[xxiv]23 there are a total of twenty-eight ingredients
in the creation. From these twenty-eight tattvas all of
the other moving and non-moving groups of living
entities are said to be manifest; and of all these
tattvas, the omniscient Supreme Person is the knower and
the embodiment of real knowledge. Scholars have
described the method by which one may differentiate
between two objects, even though their intrinsic natures
may be identical. Among the twenty-eight elements of the
creation, there are two types of puruṣas, or conscious
entities. One is pūrṇa-puruṣa, the Supreme Controller,
He who is the Lord of the illusory potency called māyā,
and the second is aṇu-puruṣa, or the infinitesimal
conscious entity, the jīva, who can be controlled by
māyā. Thus Bhagavān (the Complete Consciousness) is He
who knows both the created and the uncreated.

That Bhagavān, who is perfectly served by the strength
of His own svarūpa-śakti, is situated in His own svarūpa
even before the creation. Thus He is complete and self-
manifesting.

After bestowing mercy upon the heart of the original
poet, Śrī Brahmā was able to manifest the real meaning
of the Vedas, which due to being exceedingly difficult
to understand even for vastly learned persons, are the
cause of their bewilderment.

There are three types of creation, namely, that
pertaining to spirit, that pertaining to the jīva, and
that pertaining to dull matter. There are some examples
of creation pertaining to spirit, such as fire. Just as
fire stays unmanifest until forced to appear, upon the
rubbing of two sticks, in the same way even though the
entire spiritual creation is eternally present, it only
manifests according to the desire of Bhagavān.

There are other examples pertaining to the creation of
the jīva, such as water. Upon becoming excessively cold,
water becomes hard like stone, and upon being
excessively heated it becomes vaporous. The jīva
emanates as a tiny particle of spirit (cit-kaṇa) from
the sun-like Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Upon becoming opposed to the

                             206
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

service of Bhagavān, the jīva takes shelter of a
transformation of his original dharma and becomes bound
by the deluding potency called māyā. When the jīva
becomes inclined towards Bhagavān and takes shelter of
bhagavat-prema, his heart melts and becomes exceedingly
soft and affectionate. The fruit of this is the
inclination to engage in the service of Bhagavān.

Pertaining to the creation of inert matter the example
of the element earth is given. By fashioning clay we can
make pots and earthen bowls. In the same way, the
material creation is simply a transformation of the sum
total of the material elements (pradhāna). By Bhagavān’s
inconceivable potency (acintya-śakti), the creation is
certainly a reality; it is not false, because it has
emanated from satya-svarūpa Bhagavān (the very form of
truth) even though it is temporary and destructible by
nature.

Śrī Bhagavān, the object of His devotees’ love,
mercifully performs all types of activities by His
potencies (jīva-śakti and māyā-śakti), but He always
remains separate from these activities. Immutable, He is
situated in His supreme abode, in His own svarūpa,
resplendent with His full potency [Śrī Rādhā].

The moving and non-moving material creation is
manifested directly and indirectly from Śrī Bhagāvan,
who is endowed with complete potencies, and who is all-
knowing, complete, self-manifest, and beyond any
transformation. It is by His mercy that the factual
meaning of the Vedas was manifested in the heart of Lord
Brahmā, and by His inconceivable potency He remains
unchanged even though performing the creation of the
spiritual world, the jīvas, and the material world. I
worship that Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Goloka,
whose spiritual form is true and eternal. We will
worship Him by remembering and chanting His name, form,
qualities, and pastimes, which are all spiritual, being
composed of sat, cit, and ānanda.

The sublime philosophy of inconceivable simultaneous
oneness and difference between Bhagavān and His
potencies (acintya-bhedābheda) as preached by Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, is established in the explanation
of this verse.

Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, in quoting all of the above
mentioned evidence, intentionally attests that Śrī
Gaurasundara alone is factually the controller and
instigator of intelligence, to which the Gāyatrī mantra
refers with the word bhargo. He reveals that none other
than Śrī Gaurasundara has given this kṛṣṇa-tattva,
rādhā-tattva, prema-tattva, and vilāsa-rasa-tattva, as
spoken from his, Rāya’s, mouth.



pracoditā yena purā sarasvatī

vitanvatājasya satīṁ smṛtiṁ hṛdi

sva-lakṣaṇā prādurabhūt kilāsyataḥ


                             207
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

sa me ṛṣīṇām ṛṣabhaḥ prasīdatām

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.4.22)

“At the time of creation, in order to awaken within
Brahmā remembrance of the previous kalpa, He inspired
the presiding goddess of knowledge, who manifested
herself through the mouth of Brahmā in the form of the
Vedas and as the different limbs of knowledge. May Śrī
Bhagavān (Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu), who is the root
cause of all knowledge, be merciful upon me, and
manifest Himself within my heart.”



Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī says that the word satyam indicates
jñānam-anantaṁ brahma, or the Supreme Truth. This para-
tattva is — in terms of His svarūpa, His energy, His
thinking, feeling strength, and willing — completely
independent and eternally all-pervading. The para-tattva
is sarva-śaktimān (omnipotent), sarva-avatārī (the
source of all incarnations), sarveśvara (the Supreme
Controller), param-satya (the Supreme Truth), and para-
brahma (the Supreme Soul) — He is Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

In his commentary, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
explains that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is directly and indirectly the
upādāna-kāraṇa, or the ingredient cause of creation, and
also nimitta-kāraṇa, the efficient cause. The universe
is created, maintained, and destroyed by Him. He has
complete knowledge of matter and spirit. He is self-
manifest and independent; He does not rely on anyone or
anything. By Him, even learned persons are bewildered.
Solely by virtue of His desire, He manifested the Vedic
knowledge in the heart of Brahmā. One may confuse the
three elements of water, fire, and earth, considering
any one to be the other — seeing water in earth [a
mirage], earth in water [a reflection], or fire in water
[the sunrise]. In the same manner, by dint of one’s
faulty intelligence created from the three modes of
material nature, one might consider the body of that
Supreme Controller to be false, or knowledge of Him also
to be falsehood. Consequently, any object resulting from
the mixing together of earth, water, fire, and air is a
product of māyā’s creation, and as such is also false or
temporary. He who directs the creative potency of māyā,
is not false or temporary. He who by His own potency
(svarūpa-śakti) dispels the influence of māyā, or the
illusory energy, and is forever present in His eternal
abode. I meditate upon that Supreme Controller.

The verse janmādasya yataḥ also depicts the pastimes of
Śrī Gaurāṅga:

Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, who descended to this world, is
Kṛṣṇa covered by His āśraya-svarūpa [Śrī Rādhā] in order
to taste His [Kṛṣṇa’s] own sweetness [ādasya]. He
manifested His pastimes of birth [janma] in the house of
Śrī Śacī-devī and Śrī Jagannātha Miśra [yataḥ], from
Navadvīpa-dhāma [tataḥ], and He later traveled [anvayāt]
to Śrī Nīlācala-dhāma [itaraśca]. He is expert
[abhijñaḥ] in the subject matter of the wealth of prema
[artheṣu], and He [yaḥ] expanded [tene] the essence of

                             208
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

the Vedas, kṛṣṇa-tattva [hṛdā] before the best of poets
Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya [ya ādi-kavaye]. In front of Him,
even learned scholars [sūrayaḥ] are placed into
bewilderment [muhyanti]. When the five material elements
— earth, water, fire, air, and ether [tejo-vāri-mṛdāṁ]
[xxv]24 — interact in the right proportions in the
presence of Mahāprabhu, then an astonishing level of
bhakti arises which allows those proud scholars, the
fools, the poor, forest tribes, hunters, aboriginals,
bears, trees, creepers, etc., to attain the mercy of
prema-bhakti and become inclined towards Bhagavān. By
the effect of His own [svena] internal potency [dhāmnā],
He dispelled the illusion [nirasta-kuhakaṁ] of jñānī-
sādhakas such as Śrī Vāsudeva Sārvabhauma. He [yatra]
manifested His opulence and glories in the three
blissful dhāmas of Navadvīpa, Nīlācala, and Śrī
Vṛndāvana [tri-sargaḥ]; He is always true and eternal
[amṛṣā]. I always meditate [dhīmahi] upon that para-
tattva Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, who is satya-svarūpa,
whose form and nature are eternal and true [satyaṁ
paraṁ].



8.266—270

eka saṁśaya mora āchaye hṛdaye

kṛpā kari’ kaha more tāhāra niścaye



pahile dekhiluṅ tomāra sannyāsi-svarūpa

ebe tomā dekhi muñi śyāma-gopa-rūpa



tomāra sammukhe dekhi kāñcana-pañcālikā

tāṅra gaura-kāntye tomāra sarva aṅga ḍhākā



tāhāte prakaṭa dekhi sa-vaṁśī vadana

nānā bhāve cañcala tāhe kamala-nayana



ei-mata tomā dekhi’ haya camatkāra

akapaṭe kaha, prabhu, kāraṇa ihāra”



Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya asked, “O Lord! I have but one more
doubt remaining within my heart. Please be merciful upon
me and reconcile this. At first I saw Your form as a
sannyāsī, but now I am seeing Your dark-complexioned
form as a cowherd boy (Śrī Śyāmasundara) and also before
You I see a golden doll, by whose golden bodily
effulgence Your entire body appears now covered. A flute
rests upon Your lips, and varieties of ecstatic emotions

                             209
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

are causing Your lotus eyes to restlessly rove about.
After seeing Your svarūpa in this manner, a most
astonishing bhāva awoke within my heart. O Prabhu,
please abandon Your deception and explain the factual
cause of this.”




Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya is witnessing both the sannyāsī-
svarūpa of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and also His
rasarāja-mahābhāva-svarūpa. His sannyāsī form is Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, eternally in separation from Himself, performing
austerities; and His mahābhāva-svarūpa is a
manifestation of the special, eternal mood of adhirūḍha-
mahābhāva. Being supremely merciful, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
now desires to reveal the truth of His identity. Thus, a
mood of majesty is manifesting here to some degree. Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya uses the word sandeha (doubt), which
should be taken to mean “astonishment” in this context.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, standing in His threefold-bending pose, with
a flute to His lips, and covered by a golden complexion,
is the actual svarūpa of Mahāprabhu.



8.271—273

prabhu kahe,ó”kṛṣṇe tomāra gāḍha-prema haya

premāra svabhāva ei jāniha niścaya



mahā-bhāgavata dekhe sthāvara-jaṅgama

tāṅhā tāṅhā haya tāṅra śrī-kṛṣṇa-sphuraṇa



sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe, nā dekhe tāra mūrti

sarvatra haya tāṅra iṣṭa-deva-sphūrti



Keeping His true self concealed, Śrīman Mahāprabhu said
to Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, “You possess an exceedingly deep
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and it is the nature of a mahā-
bhāgavata who has such deep ecstatic love for the Lord
to not see everything simply as movable or inert; rather
he sees Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifest everywhere. He does not see
the moving or non-moving living entities or their forms.
He only sees his worshipful Lord everywhere.




The pure devotee possessing unalloyed love for the Lord
does not see the forms of the moving and non-moving
living entities; rather, everything is a reminder
(uddīpana) of the sweet pastimes of His worshipful

                             210
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

Master. In the same manner, the jñānīs see the whole
world as the all-pervading Brahman, and the yogīs see
the presence of the Paramātmā everywhere, and everything
within the Paramātmā: “yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra, sarvaṁ
ca mayi paśyati / tasyāhaṁ na praṇaśyāmi, sa ca me na
praṇaśyati — For one who sees Me in all beings and sees
all beings in Me, I am never lost, nor is he ever lost
to Me” (Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā 6.30).

What, then, will a loving, pure devotee who is expert in
tasting the rasa of devotional service be capable of
perceiving?! His heart melts and he realizes that
everything, everywhere, awakens the special ecstasies of
remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.



8.274

sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed

bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ

bhūtāni bhāgavaty ātmany

eṣa bhāgavatottamaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.45)



“The second amongst the nine Yogendras, namely Śrī Havi
Mahārāja, said to Nimi Mahārāja, ëO King, he who sees in
all living entities and all forms of life, Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
the very soul of all souls, and who sees all living
entities as parts and parcels of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is the
topmost amongst all devotees, a mahā-bhāgavata.’




Essentially, the parama-bhāgavata sees his beloved Lord
within all living entities, and sees that same prema
which he has for his worshipful deity present within all
living entities. Only those great devotees like Vyāsa,
who know tattva fully and who are expert in spiritual
attainment, are able to understand Bhagavān. They make
the incarnations of Bhagavān, His personal character,
form, activities, and His supremely pure ecstatic
transformations, their one true goal; consequently, they
can genuinely understand His tattva. However, it is
completely impossible for the demonic jīvas, covered by
the modes of passion and ignorance, to understand
Bhagavān.

The Lord keeps Himself hidden too, just as Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is doing here, but when it comes to the mahā-
bhāgavatas, the Lord cannot fool them. Every object is
limited, or bound, by the three confines of time, place,
and circumstance. Yet Bhagavān’s nature, which is of
unparalleled depth, crosses beyond all of the

                             211
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

restrictions presented by these three limits. By His
potency known as the yogamāyā-śakti, Bhagavān conceals
His own form; nevertheless, His exclusive devotees are
always able to have His darśana.

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda
describes how Mahārāja Nimi, the king of Videha,
inquired from Śrī Havi Mahārāja, one of the nine
Yogendras, about the vision, behavior, characteristics,
and speech of each of the three levels of devotees,
namely, the uttama (topmost), madhyama (middle class),
and the kaniṣṭha (neophyte). Śrī Havi Mahārāja replied:

Ātmanaḥ — One who is free from material desires, and
transcendentally situated; bhagavad-bhāvam — and who has
attained a spiritual body (siddha-deha) appropriate for
the service of Bhagavān, paśyet — sees; ātmany bhāgavaty
— one’s own eternal transcendental spiritual body
(siddha-deha); bhūtāni paśyed — in all living entities,
[and who sees]; yaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu — all conscious
entities contained within the moving and non-moving
species of life, [within Bhagavān]; eṣaḥ bhāgavatottamaḥ
— [is] the topmost devotee, the mahā-bhāgavat, who
always sees the mood of sevya, (the one who is to be
served, i.e., Śrī Kṛṣṇa), and sevaka (the who serves,
i.e., the Vrajavāsīs) in everything because he possesses
profuse sentiments of devotion and is not subject to
external vision.



8.275

vana-latās tarava ātmani viṣṇuṁ

vyañjayantya iva puṣpa-phalāḍhyāḥ

praṇata-bhāra-viṭapā madhu-dhārāḥ

prema-hṛṣṭa-tanavo vavṛṣuḥ sma



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.35.9)



“The gopīs, afflicted by separation and sunk deeply in
the remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, said, ëThe trees and
creepers, heavily laden with flowers, and fruit, are
bowing down with their branches. These creepers are
horripilating on the pretext of bringing forth blooming
flowers and are revealing that Viṣṇu is present in their
hearts. In manifesting this, their happiness is flowing
as a stream of honey, and the trees, who are the
husbands of those creepers, are showing their happiness
in a similar manner.’




This verse is spoken by the lovely maidens of Vraja, who
are afflicted by separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Their love

                             212
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

and affection for Him is immensely deep. On seeing the
trees and creepers of the forest, the gopīs think,
“These trees and creepers of the forest are supremely
attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as we are. Just as the tears flow
effortlessly from our eyes when we see Śrī Kṛṣṇa, so
these trees and creepers are weeping streams of sweet
honey.” The gopīs are exhibiting the symptom of
mahābhāva, superimposing their own moods upon others.
They are extolling others’ good fortune, and out of
humility, considering themselves to be worthless and
destitute. It is not that Bhagavān’s qualities are not
revealed in the heart of the gopīs; rather, they are
attributing their own sweet and most desirable bhāvas
upon the trees and creepers, and describing that.



8.276—280

rādhā-kṛṣṇe tomāra mahā-prema haya

yāṅhā tāṅhā rādhā-kṛṣṇa tomāre sphuraya”



rāya kahe,ó”prabhu tumi chāḍa bhāri-bhūri

mora āge nija-rūpa nā kariha curi



rādhikāra bhāva-kānti kari’ aṅgīkāra

nija-rasa āsvādite kariyācha avatāra



nija-gūḍha-kārya tomāraóprema-āsvādana

ānuṣaṅge premamaya kaile tribhuvana



āpane āile more karite uddhāra

ebe kapaṭa kara,ótomāra kona vyavahāra”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu continued, “My dear Rāmānanda, you
have great prema for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa within your heart,
and therefore, you see Them manifested everywhere.”

Hearing this Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “My dear Lord,
please give up all this cleverness. Do not conceal Your
real form from me. In order to taste rasa, You have
assumed the ecstasy and bodily complexion of Śrī
Rādhikā. Savoring prema is Your supremely confidential
business. Automatically, You have also filled the three
worlds with prema. You have come here to deliver me.
Why, then, are You still acting with cunning? What is
this behavior of Yours?”



                             213
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


8.281—284

tabe hāsi’ tāṅre prabhu dekhāila svarūpa

ërasarāja’, ëmahābhāva’ódui eka rūpa



dekhi’ rāmānanda hailā ānande mūrcchite

dharite nā pāre deha, paḍilā bhūmite



prabhu tāṅre hasta sparśi’ karāilā cetana

sannyāsīra veṣa dekhi’ vismita haila mana



āliṅgana kari’ prabhu kaila āśvāsana

“tomā binā ei-rūpa nā dekhe anya-jana



After hearing Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya’s statements,
Mahāprabhu laughed and revealed His svarūpa. What was
the nature of that svarūpa? It was the combined form of
the personification and king of the amorous mellow
(śrṅgāra-rasarāja), Śrī Kṛṣṇa, together with the
personification of mahābhāva, Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Upon
seeing this unprecedented form, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya lost
consciousness due to excessive transcendental bliss and
fell to the ground. With the touch of His lotus hand,
Śrīman Mahāprabhu revived him. Upon regaining
consciousness, and again seeing His sannyāsī form, Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya became exceedingly astonished. After
embracing and pacifying Rāmānanda Rāya, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu said, “Rāya, apart from you, no one else can
see this form.”



8.285—288

mora tattva-līlā-rasa tomāra gocare

ataeva ei-rūpa dekhāiluṅ tomāre



gaura aṅga nahe moraórādhāṅga-sparśana

gopendra-suta vinā teṅho nā sparśe anya-jana



tāṅra bhāve bhāvita kari’ ātma-mana

tabe nija-mādhurya kari āsvādana



                             214
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


tomāra ṭhāñi āmāra kichu gupta nāhi karma

lukāile prema-bale jāna sarva-marma



Śrīman Mahāprabhu again said, “You know everything
concerning My internal identity and the truth of My
ambrosial activities. Therefore I have shown My special
form to you. Actually, My complexion is not golden, but
by the touch of the body of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, it has
become golden, and apart from the son of the king of
Vṛndāvana, Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, She never
touches another person. I am able to taste My own
sweetness by making My mind and soul one with the mood
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Before you, I am not able to conceal
anything about My true identity. I definitely tried to
conceal Myself from you, but because of the extremely
powerful nature of your prema, I was unable to succeed
in this. You have understood My internal form — you know
who I am.”




Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya could understand very well that
Śrīman Mahāprabhu was certainly Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Śyāmasundara. In Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not taste the
mādanākhya-bhāva of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and for this
reason, He became Śrī Gaurāṅga by taking Her bhāva and
complexion, and came to this world. By Śrī Gaurāṅga’s
mercy, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya now remembered his factual
position, or his previous birth as Śrī Viśākhā Sakhī,
who is qualified for the darśana of rasarāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and mahābhāva Śrī Rādhā. Bhagavān is the crest jewel of
the clever, but the devotee is more clever still. It
does not please Bhagavān to defeat His devotee; rather
He is very pleased to be defeated by the devotee. Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya detected Mahāprabhu’s deception in
concealing Himself and defeated Him, thus forcing Him to
reveal His form as Gopendra-suta, the son of the king of
the cowherds, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīman Rāmānanda Rāya did not fall unconscious upon
seeing the sannyāsī form of Mahāprabhu, or upon seeing
His form as Śrī Vrajendra-nandana playing upon the
flute. But He did fall into a swoon when he saw the
combined form of rasarāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa and mahābhāva Śrī
Rādhā. This is as it should be; Śrī Viśākhā becomes
exceedingly blissful upon seeing the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
as well as the form of Śrī Rādhā. However, seeing Their
combined form caused her to be so overwhelmed with bhāva
that it became extremely difficult for her to maintain
her equanimity, and she lost consciousness. In fact,
this form as rasarāja-mahābhāva is the essence of all
the qualities of all the incarnations of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

It is said that both Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī
Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu are the very essence of Godhead, but
how has this duality come about in the Supreme Lord? Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaura are not separate tattvas, rather

                             215
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                      5/5/2017

they are one. Externally Śrī Gaura is golden due to
accepting Śrī Rādhā’s sentiments and complexion, but
internally He is Kṛṣṇa. In much the same way that in His
manifest pastimes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa assumed various disguises
such as a lady florist, a doctor, and a lady bangle
peddler, thus performing His pastimes of disguised
identity, likewise, He has assumed the form of Śrī
Gaurasundara, concealing His internal form in order to
taste mahābhāva. He covered His opulence and displayed
His sannyāsī form. The mood of the viṣaya (the enjoyer,
the object of the devotees’ prema) is prominent in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the king of the transcendental amorous mellow;
whereas in Śrīman Mahāprabhu, where the blackish body of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is covered by the golden complexion of Śrī
Rādhā, whose very nature consists of the highest ecstasy
of mādanākhya-mahābhāva, the prominent mood is of the
āśraya (the enjoyed, the receptacle of prema for
Bhagavān).

Without mādanākhya-mahābhāva, it is not possible to
taste Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unparalleled sweetness. Each and every
one of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s limbs is covered by the limbs of Śrī
Rādhā. Factually, the complexion of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s body is
not golden; it is simply because each one of His limbs
is covered by the golden limbs of Śrī Rādhā that He is
seen as having a fair complexion. Both Śrī Gaura and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa are the self-same Kṛṣṇa, and both are the enjoyers
of sambhoga-rasa (the happiness of meeting), which means
that both are the enjoyers, or viṣaya-vigraha.
Furthermore, taking shelter of the golden complexion and
sentiments of the āśraya-vigraha Śrī Rādhā, in the mood
of separation, or vipralambha-rasa, then Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya.

Dhīra-lalita-nāyaka[xxvi]25 Śrī Nanda-nandana, the
original Godhead, is the only form of Śrī Viṣṇu able to
enjoy Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa-śakti, Śrī Rādhā, who is the
complete cit-śakti. No other form of Viṣṇu, only
Gopendra-suta Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of the
cowherd community, partakes of śṛṅgāra-rasa (the mellow
of amorous love) and is dhīra-lalita-nāyaka. All others
have strong feelings of aiśvarya.

Therefore, Śrī Rādhā alone is described thus:

govindānandinī, rādhā, govinda-mohinī

govinda-sarvasva, sarva-kāntā-śiromaṇi



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (4.82)



“Śrī Rādhā gives pleasure to Govinda. She is His
enchantress, His all-in-all, and the crown jewel of all
His sweethearts.”



8.289—290

gupte rākhiha, kāṅhā nā kariha prakāśa

                             216
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


āmāra bātula-ceṣṭā loke upahāsa



āmióeka bātula, tumiódvitīya bātula

ataeva tomāya-āmāya ha-i sama-tula”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, “O Rāmānanda Rāya, please keep
My actual identity, the axiomatic truths, and what I
have shown you, secret. Do not reveal them to anyone.
People may laugh, since I always act like a madman.
Actually, I am a madman, and you are also. Therefore
both of us are on the same platform.”




Full of humility, Sri Caitanya Mahāprabhu is explaining
that in this world of mundane logic and dry speculative
knowledge, one should not present these talks before the
unqualified non-devotees. Such persons, who are subject
to mundane material intelligence, and addicted to logic,
argument, and word jugglery, cannot understand the value
of such topics, and by laughing at such topics, they
will become offenders. We should properly understand the
word pāgala, or madman, to mean premonmāda, or one
maddened by the influence of prema.

One whose every endeavor is performed under the
influence of prema, for the happiness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
who is intoxicated by the nectar of the path of
rāgānuga-bhakti, cannot be understood by persons
absorbed in the rasa of material enjoyment. The
materialists will consider the prema-filled endeavors of
the devotees to be a form of madness. When someone is
attracted by kṛṣṇa-prema, he abandons all material
endeavors and is said to be divinely intoxicated, or
transcendentally maddened.

Śrīman Mahāprabhu declared, “O Rāmānanda, you are seeing
Me as a separate golden person, but I am not. I am
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. My mood as Gaura has come
about by the touch of the body of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and
it is eternal. Whoever is able to understand the basic
truth of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa can,
by the mercy of Śrī Svarūpa Gosvāmī, be enabled to
obtain eternal service, according to his actual eternal
form.”



8.291—294

ei-rūpa daśa-rātri rāmānanda-saṅge

sukhe goṅāilā prabhu kṛṣṇa-kathā-raṅge




                             217
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

nigūḍha vrajera rasa-līlāra vicāra

aneka kahila, tāra nā pāila pāra



tāmā, kāṅsā, rūpā, sonā, ratna-cintāmaṇi

keha yadi kāṅhā potā pāya eka-khāni



krame uṭhāite seha uttama vastu pāya

aiche praśnottara kaila prabhu-rāmarāya



Śrīman Mahāprabhu spent ten nights like this with Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya, happily discussing topics of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
The pastimes in Vṛndāvana are very confidential. They
described these pastimes at great length, but still they
could not exhaust the subject matter. Consider a person
who digs and extracts from a mine many varieties of
valuable substances such as copper, bell-metal, silver,
gold, jewels, and wish-fulfilling jewels, and in the
process he extracts items of increasing value one after
the other. Exactly thus, by the method of questions and
answers, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
extracted higher and higher axiomatic truths.




In the current verses, Śrī Kavirāja Gosvāmī has given
copper, bell-metal, silver, etc., as examples to
describe a variety of sādhyas, each one superior to the
previous. The descriptions begin with varṇāśrama-dharma
and conclude by revealing the topmost limit of sādhya,
which is mādanākhya-mahābhāva. All of this is
accomplished by the stratagem of questions and answers.

Śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, and mādhurya rasas are
compared to copper, bell-metal, silver, gold, and
cintāmaṇi jewels, respectively. In Vṛndāvana, the water
of Yamunā, the sand of the riverbanks, the kadamba
trees, cows, sticks, and flutes are all manifestations
of śānta-rasa. Citraka, Patraka, Raktaka, and others are
embodiments of dāsya-rasa. Dāma, Śrīdāma, Subala, and
others are embodiments of sakhya-rasa, and Śrī Nanda and
Yaśodā are the embodiments of vātsalya-rasa. Lastly, Śrī
Rādhā, Lalitā, and the other gopīs of Vraja are wealthy
in their own respective bhāvas in mādhurya-rasa.
Starting from copper, the succeeding metals increase in
value through bell-metal and silver to gold, etc. In the
same way, from the initial sādhya of varṇāśrama-dharma
there is an incremental scale of bhakti, in terms of
superiority.

There is a gradation in the examples given. Copper is
like following varṇāśrama-dharma. As copper is common,
of little value, and considered not worth keeping, it is
thus rejectable. This varṇāśrama-dharma is within the

                             218
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                       5/5/2017

category of āropa-siddhā-bhakti (an activity which is
not in itself composed of bhakti, but is termed bhakti).
Bell-metal (bronze) is a mixture of the two metals:
copper and tin, and is equivalent to jñāna-miśrā-bhakti,
which is not the topmost sādhya. Pure silver is like
svarūpa-siddhā-bhakti, which is superior to an alloy (a
mixed metal). Gold is compared with prema-bhakti in the
mood of dāsya; it is better and more developed than
svarūpa-siddhā-bhakti.

Jewels correspond to sakhya- and vātsalya-prema-bhakti,
by which Śrī Kṛṣṇa is controlled. The ultimate jewel is
the cintāmaṇi, or the wish-fulfilling jewel,
representing the mādanākhya-mahābhāva of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. This is extremely rare and fulfills each and
every one of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s desires.



8.295—302

āra dina rāya-pāśe vidāya māgilā

vidāyera kāle tāṅre ei ājñā dilā



“viṣaya chāḍiyā tumi yāha nīlācale

āmi tīrtha kari’ tāṅhā āsiba alpa-kāle



dui-jane nīlācale rahiba eka-saṅge

sukhe goṅāiba kāla kṛṣṇa-kathā-raṅge”



eta bali’ rāmānande kari’ āliṅgana

tāṅre ghare pāṭhāiyā karila śayana



prātaḥ-kāle uṭhi’ prabhu dekhi’ hanumān

tāṅre namaskari’ prabhu dakṣiṇe karilā prayāṇa



ëvidyāpūre’ nānā-mata loka vaise yata

prabhu-darśane ëvaiṣṇava’ haila chāḍi’ nija-mata



rāmānanda hailā prabhura virahe vihvala

prabhura dhyāne rahe viṣaya chāḍiyā sakala



saṅkṣepe kahiluṅ rāmānandera milana

                             219
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017


vistāri varṇite nāre sahasra-vadana



The next day, Śrīman Mahāprabhu begged Śrī Rāmānanda
Rāya to permit Him to leave. When departing the Lord
ordered him, “Give up all material business and go to
Nīlācala (Śrī Jagannātha Purī). I will quickly finish
touring the holy places and return there. The two of us
shall remain together at Nīlācala and happily pass our
time discussing topics of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Saying this Śrīman Mahāprabhu then embraced Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya, and after sending him back to his home,
the Lord also left there in order to take rest. After
rising from bed the next morning, Mahāprabhu had darśana
of Hanumān, and after offering him obeisances, the Lord
departed for South India to continue His tour of the
holy places.




After this He arrived in Vidyāpura, where all the
residents followed different religious persuasions, but
after seeing Śrīman Mahāprabhu, they gave up their own
philosophies and became Vaiṣṇavas. On the other hand,
Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya was so overwhelmed in separation from
the Lord that he gave up all his material affairs, and
became completely immersed in meditation upon Him. Śrīla
Kavirāja Gosvāmī explains here, “I have briefly
described the meeting between Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
and Rāmānanda Rāya. No one can actually describe this
meeting completely. It is even impossible for Bhagavān
Śrī Śeṣa Nāga, who has thousands of mouths.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura describes that the worship of
Hanumān is performed in Vidyānagara. He is the deity of
that village, and after offering His respects to him,
Śrīman Mahāprabhu continued on His tour of the holy
places in South India.



8.303—307

sahaje caitanya-caritraóghana-dugdha-pūra

rāmānanda-caritra tāhe khaṇḍa pracura



rādhā-kṛṣṇa-līlāótāte karpūra-milana

bhāgyavān yei, sei kare āsvādana



ye ihā eka-bāra piye karṇa-dvāre

tāra karṇa lobhe ihā chāḍite nā pāre


                             220
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



ërasa-tattva-jñāna’ haya ihāra śravaṇe

ëprema-bhakti’ haya rādhā-kṛṣṇera caraṇe



caitanyera gūḍha-tattva jāni ihā haite

viśvāsa kari’ śuna, tarka nā kariha citte



The character and activities of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
are just like condensed milk, and the character of Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya is like sweet sugar candy. Mixing them
together produces a supremely sweet substance. The
pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are like adding camphor. One
who is able to taste this substance is most fortunate.
Anyone who even once receives this through the doorway
of the ears becomes greedy to relish it further still,
and His ears will never want to stop hearing it. By
hearing the talks between Rāmānanda Rāya and Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu one becomes enlightened with the
complete transcendental knowledge of rasa-tattva (the
mellows of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes), and he can
achieve prema-bhakti for the Divine Couple’s lotus feet.
The activities of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu are supremely
confidential, and this confidential knowledge is
received only by submissive hearing. Do not allow your
mind to make any type of speculation in this regard, and
hear these talks with full faith.



8.308—312

alaukika līlā ei parama nigūḍha

viśvāse pāiye, tarke haya bahu-dūra



śrī-caitanya-nityānanda-advaita-caraṇa

yāṅhāra sarvasva, tāṅre mile ei dhana



rāmānanda rāye mora koṭī namaskāra

yāṅra mukhe kaila prabhu rasera vistāra



dāmodara-svarūpera kaḍacā-anusāre

rāmānanda-milana-līlā karila pracāre



śrī-rūpa-raghunātha-pade yāra āśa


                             221
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

caitanya-caritāmṛta kahe kṛṣṇadāsa



This part of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s pastimes is most deep
and confidential. One who has faith can achieve this,
while it remains very far from those subject to faulty
mundane logic. He who has accepted the lotus feet of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and Śrī
Advaita Ācārya Prabhu as his all-in-all can attain this
transcendental treasure of rasa.

I (Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī) am offering
millions of obeisances to the lotus feet of Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya, from whose lotus mouth Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has spread the wealth of prema-rasa. This
pastime of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s meeting with Śrī
Rāmānanda Rāya has been described in accordance with the
notebooks of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara. Desiring the mercy of
the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Raghunātha Gosvāmīs,
I, Kṛṣṇadāsa, narrate this Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.




* * *




[i] Adhirūḍha-bhāva — the final limit of mahābhāva,
which is the very essence of Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure-giving
potency. Adhirūḍha-mahābhāva is characterized by the
feeling that each moment is like a day of Brahmā when
one is separated from Kṛṣṇa, and the feeling that a day
of Brahmā is like a moment when one is meeting Him.




[ii] Svārasikī-upāsanā — The pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
performed in various places of Goloka Vṛndāvana are of
many types; therefore, the worship that is performed
through the limbs of bhakti, such as remembering,
hearing, and chanting about those pastimes, which flow
one after another, is called svārasikī-upāsanā.




[iii] Rāgānuga — spontaneous devotional service which
follows in the footsteps of the perfected souls.
Rūpānuga — that rāgānuga-bhakti that specifically
follows the moods of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.




[iv] When sneha (deep affection) is imbued with intense

                             222
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017

longing it is known as rāga. With the appearance of
rāga, even a moment of separation is intolerable, and at
that time even distress seems to be happiness. When rāga
always experiences its object (the most beloved Kṛṣṇa)
in ever-fresh ways then it is called anurāga.




[v] The supreme state of exaltation in which all the
various stages of prema, from rati to mahābhāva, are
manifest simultaneously in their most radiant form is
called mādanākhya-bhāva.




[vi] In Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī defines
praṇaya as the state in which the hearts of both the
hero (nāyaka) and heroine (nāyikā) become one.




[vii] Ekāyana means “one path” or “exclusive devotion.”
On December 30, 1928 the great scholar Pramathanātha
Tarkabhūṣaṇa came to the Gauḍīya Maṭha and heard an
extensive explanation of the daiva-varṇāśrama system
from Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. In January of 1929, Śrīla
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura established the Ekāyana Gauḍīya Maṭḥa
in Kṛṣṇanagara. At the opening ceremony, he gave a
lecture with an original explanation on the single path
of exclusive devotion (ekāyana), showing that it is the
trunk of the Vedic tree and the various other paths
(bahvāyana) are its branches. [Taken from Associates of
Śrī Caitanya, Volume 2, by Śrīpada Bhakti-vallabha
Tīrtha Mahārāja]




[viii] Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī explains the five subjects as
the worshipable Supreme Lord; His supreme abode of
Vaikuṇṭha; His assets, or tadīya (the pure devotees);
His mantras; and the living entities.




[ix] Sāṣṭānga-daṇḍavat-pranāma. A respectful obeisance
executed by prostrating eight limbs of the body, namely
the thighs, feet, hands, chest, mind, head, voice, and
closed eyes, by falling flat like a stick on the ground.




[x] Lord Kṛṣṇa and His incarnations.

                             223
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




[xi] Asmitā: the false egoism arising from the
conceptions of “I” and “mine” in relation to the
material body.




[xii] Kānta-bhāva — another name for mādhurya-bhāva.




[xiii] Here in this verse Rāya Rāmānanda is explaining,
that when the devotee has prema and yearns for Kṛṣṇa to
accept his offering, then the love in the devotee causes
a hunger and thirst in Kṛṣṇa. The devotee’s affection
creates in Kṛṣṇa a hunger and thirst to accept the
offering. The offering itself may consist of ordinary
items, but still Kṛṣṇa comes, and with great relish He
tastes what the devotee has offered. Why? It is because
the prema in the heart of the devotee has created a
great hunger in Him.




[xiv] Bhakti-rasa — attachment to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the mood
and manner of those eternally perfected devotees,
particularly the Vrajavāsīs.




[xv] The word kiṅkara comes from kiṁ karomi, meaning,
“What may I do? What service can I do?”




[xvi] In some versions of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, this
verse is included in the dialogue as the 91st verse, but
Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has given this verse in his
commentary on the 90th verse, drawing reference from
other versions of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.




[xvii] Lalanā-niṣṭha-svarūpa is a self-manifest rati
that is expressed as an involuntary impulse towards Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, even when one has not seen Him or heard about His
beauty and qualities.


                             224
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017




[xviii] Mañjiṣṭhā is a plant, Indian madder, which
produces a very bright and long-lasting red dye.




[xix] Mañjiṣṭhā-rāga is the rāga that is self-manifest;
that is, it is not dependent on others; it is never
destroyed; it is always steadfast; and it is never
dulled. Such rāga is found in Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.




[xx] Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the moon that gives pleasures to
the lotus-like inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi.




[xxi] Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (4.167—169)
gives the evidence:



loka-dharma, veda-dharma, deha-dharma, karma

lajjā, dhairya, deha-sukha, ātma-sukha-marma



dustyaja ārya-patha, nija parijana

sva-jane karaye yata tāḍana-bhartsana



sarva-tyāga kari’ kare kṛṣṇera bhajana

kṛṣṇa-sukha-hetu kare prema-sevana



“The gopīs have completley abandoned worldly social
conventions, the injunctions of the Vedas, the demands
of the body, the performance of work with a desire for
the fruits, shyness, forbearance, bodily pleasures,
personal satisfaction, and the path of varṇāśrama-
dharma, all of which are difficult to give up. They have
forsaken their families, and suffered punishment and
admon-ishment from their relatives, all so that they can
serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Indeed, only for His happiness do they
serve Him with great love.”




                             225
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                     5/5/2017



[xxii] Here bhāvas refers to ekādaśa bhāvas — the eleven
integral parts of one’s spiritual form as a resident of
the transcendental Vraja-dhāma, and pañca-daśā — five
stages of development in one’s spiritual absorption,
culminating in samādhi.




[xxiii] Vicāra means “analysis,” or “deliberation.”




[xxiv] Puruṣa — conscious being; prakṛti — material
nature; maha-tattva — the total material elements.




[xxv] The five elements represent Mahāprabhu’s
experiencing aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāvas. For example, when
śuddha-sattva takes the shelter of water, an incessant
flow of tears comes from His eyes, when it takes shelter
of fire there is perspiration on His body, when it takes
shelter of earth He becomes stunned; air — trembling;
ether — pallor. The manifestation of His sāttvika-
vikāras suffuses bhakti into the whole atmosphere.




[xxvi] Śrī Kṛṣṇa is portrayed as dhīra-lalita-nāyaka.
This hero is characterized by skill in amorous pastimes,
fresh youthfulness, expertise in humour, the absence of
anxiety, and submission to his beloveds.




Table of Contents

Introduction

Maṅgalācaraṇa

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Meets Rāmānanda Rāya

Varṇāśrama-dharma

Offering the results of one’s activities to Kṛṣṇa

Renouncing Occupational Duties

Bhakti Mixed with Empiric Knowledge

Bhakti Devoid of Empiric Knowledge

                             226
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017


Prema-bhakti

Dāsya-prema — the love of a servant for Kṛṣṇa

Sakhya-prema — the love of a friend for Kṛṣṇa

Vātsalya-prema — the love of a parent for Kṛṣṇa

Kāntā-prema — the love of a beloved for Kṛṣṇa

Rādhā-prema — Śrī Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa

Kṛṣṇa-tattva

Rādhā-tattva

Prema-tattva

Vilāsa-tattva

Under the Guidance of the Sakhīs

Questions and Answers

The Final Evening

[i]

[ii]

[iii]

[iv]

[v]

[vi]

[vii]

[viii]

[ix]

[x]

[xi]

[xii]

[xiii]

[xiv]

[xv]

[xvi]

[xvii]

[xviii]

[xix]

                             227
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt                        5/5/2017


[xx]

[xxi]

[xxii]

[xxiii]

[xxiv]

[xxv]

[xxvi]




Table of Contents

Introduction

Maṅgalācaraṇa

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Meets Rāmānanda Rāya

Varṇāśrama-dharma

Offering the results of one’s activities to Kṛṣṇa

Renouncing Occupational Duties

Bhakti Mixed with Empiric Knowledge

Bhakti Devoid of Empiric Knowledge

Prema-bhakti

Dāsya-prema — the love of a servant for Kṛṣṇa

Sakhya-prema — the love of a friend for Kṛṣṇa

Vātsalya-prema — the love of a parent for Kṛṣṇa

Kāntā-prema — the love of a beloved for Kṛṣṇa

Rādhā-prema — Śrī Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa

Kṛṣṇa-tattva

Rādhā-tattva

Prema-tattva

Vilāsa-tattva

Under the Guidance of the Sakhīs

Questions and Answers

The Final Evening

[i]

                             228
Raya_Ramananda_Samvada.txt         5/5/2017


[ii]

[iii]

[iv]

[v]

[vi]

[vii]

[viii]

[ix]

[x]

[xi]

[xii]

[xiii]

[xiv]

[xv]

[xvi]

[xvii]

[xviii]

[xix]

[xx]

[xxi]

[xxii]

[xxiii]

[xxiv]

[xxv]

[xxvi]




                             229
