Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

GVP (2011)



Tags: Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's Śrī
Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's Śrī Saṅkalpa-
kalpadrumaḥ Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārājattt



* * *




* * *




śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's

Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ

The Desire-tree of Auspicious Resolve

translated from the Hindi edition of

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




Contents

Foreword (translated from the first Hindi edition)

The Life History of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

Protecting the honour of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya
through Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa

Attainment of the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī by the
mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā

Re-establishing the doctrine of parakīyā


                           1
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017

The glories and legacy of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura



Pradoṣānte abhisāraḥ (rendezvous at the close of early
evening)

Nakta-līlā (pastimes during the night)

Niśānta-līlā (pastimes at the end of night)

Prātar-līlā (early morning pastimes)

Pūrvāhna-līlā (pastimes during forenoon)

Madhyāhna-līlā (pastimes at midday)

Aparāhna-līlā (pastimes during the early afternoon)

Sāyaṁ-līlā (pastimes during the evening)

Pradoṣa-līlā (pastimes during the first part of the
night)

Atha prārthanā (prayers)

Diva-līlā (pastimes during the day)

Rātri-līlā (pastimes during the night)



Index of principal personalities in this book




Foreword

(translated from the first Hindi edition)


Today I am most joyful to be able to present this Hindi
edition of Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ to the faithful
reader. This scripture is composed by the crown jewel
among Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, the greatly learned
scholar, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Just as
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ is like a
table of contents of the pastimes described in his Śrī
Gopāla-campuḥ, this book by Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī is
like an index of his Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta. This Śrī
Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ is originally the twenty-first
prayer of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Śrī
Stavāmṛta-laharī.

Although there are many available Bengali and Hindi
editions of Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s Bengali translation, on which we have based
this present Hindi edition, is from various points of
view unequalled. This particular translation will enable
the learned devotees in the line of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura and Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura to

                           2
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

further appreciate the importance of this book by Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

There are a total of 104 verses in this Śrī Saṅkalpa-
kalpadrumaḥ. In the first 88 verses, the author
anxiously prays to Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-rāja-nandinī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā to be able to perform intimate sevā to Her. In
the next three verses (89—91), he humbly prays to the
great personalities in his guru-paramparā, mentioning
the names of their eternal spiritual forms; and in
verses 92—94, he prays to attain the guidance of
Mañjulālī Sakhī, Guṇa Mañjarī, Rasa Mañjarī, Bhānumatī,
Lavaṅga Mañjarī, Rūpa Mañjarī and others. In the
following verses (95—103), he prays to Śrī Kṛṣṇa (or Śrī
Gaurahari), to Śrī Lalitā-devī, to Śrī Viśakhā-devī, to
all the priya-sakhās and priyanarma-sakhīs, to Śrī
Girirāja-Govardhana, to Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, to Yogapīṭha,
to Śrī Vṛndā-devī and to Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva for his
aspirations to bear fruit. In the last verse (104), the
author indicates the state of his heart and advises the
devotees who have a strong desire to relish the ocean of
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s playful pastimes in Vṛndāvana to
take shelter of this Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ with great
faith.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura himself is an
eternal associate of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda. For the
supreme welfare of the qualified sādhakas, however, he
has clearly described here what the ultimate ambitions
of the bhakti-sādhakas coming in the line of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu should be and has also shown how these
ambitions can enter one’s heart. And at the same time,
he has delineated how to accept the guidance of the
residents of Vraja in order to fulfil these ambitions.

After taking shelter of this desire-tree of auspicious
resolve presented by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, that is to say, in order to attain the desire
for the sevā described in this compilation, one should
sincerely, and without duplicity, with body, mind and
words, remain under the guidance of the devoted persons
who are completely immersed in this sevā. These topmost,
incomparable and transcendental aspirations can then
quickly be fulfilled. Thus, the name of this book, Śrī
Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ, is appropriate, because it makes
one’s desires bear fruit. The sādhaka’s life attains
success only when the impetus to obtain these
transcendental aspirations appear in the heart by the
causeless mercy of the guru and Vaiṣṇavas.

When Śrīman Mahāprabhu prescribed to Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī his duties, He concluded by saying, “vraje
rādhā-kṛṣṇa sevā mānase karibe — render service within
the mind to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja” (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 6.237). From this instruction of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu, it is clearly understood that He is
inspiring all practising devotees, through the example
of Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, to attain this kind of
qualification.

In this present literary work, mānasī-sevā, or the
remembrance of the eight-fold daily pastimes of Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa within the purified mind, has been
specifically described. However, in order to attain the

                           3
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                         5/5/2017

qualification for such remembrance, the practising
devotees should also carefully follow the other
instructions of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, such as (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 6.236—7):



grāmya-kathā nā śunibe, grāmya-vārtā nā kahibe

bhāla nā khāibe āra bhāla nā paribe



Do not listen to ordinary talks, do not speak about
ordinary matters. Do not eat palatable dishes and do not
dress opulently.



amānī mānada hañā kṛṣṇa-nāma sadā la’be



Do not expect any respect, but offer it to others. In
this way, always chant Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s holy name.



If these instructions are not followed, one’s efforts
will only result in anarthas, or desires unbeneficial
for spiritual life, not artha, or prosperity.




The Life History of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura appeared in a family
of brāhmaṇas from the Rāḍhīya community of the Nadiyā
district in West Bengal. He was celebrated by the name
Hari-vallabha, and he had two older brothers, Rāmabhadra
and Raghunātha. During his childhood, he completed his
study of grammar in Devagrāma village. He then studied
devotional scripture at the home of his spiritual master
in the Śaiyadābāda village of the Murśidābād district.
While living in Śaiyadābāda, he wrote Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu-bindu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa and Bhāgavatāmṛta-
kaṇā. Soon after, he renounced household life and went
to Vṛndāvana, where he wrote many other books and
commentaries.

After the disappearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
the six Gosvāmīs of Vraja, the current of unalloyed
devotion (śuddha-bhakti) continued to flow through the
influence of three great personalities: Śrī Narottama
dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīnivāsa Ācārya and Śrī Śyāmānanda
Prabhu. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is fourth in
the line of disciplic succession coming from Śrīla
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura.

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura’s disciple, Śrīla Gaṅgā-
nārāyaṇa Cakravartī Mahāśaya, lived in Bālūcara Gambhilā
in the Murśidābād district. He had a daughter named

                           4
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

Viṣṇupriyā but no sons, so he adopted the devotee Śrī
Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa. Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa was the youngest son of
another disciple of Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura named
Rāmakṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭācārya, who was from the brāhmaṇa
community of Vārendra. Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa’s disciple was
Śrī Rādhāramaṇa Cakravartī, the spiritual master of
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

In his commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam named Sārārtha-
darśinī, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written
the following verse at the beginning of the five
chapters describing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa dance (Rāsa-
pañcādhyāyī):



śrī-rāma-kṛṣṇa-gaṅgā-caraṇānnatvā gurūnuru-premnaḥ

śrīla-narottama-nātha śrī-gaurāṅga-prabhuṁ naumi



Here, the name “Śrī Rāma” refers to Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s spiritual master, Śrī Rādhāramaṇa;
“Kṛṣṇa” refers to his grand spiritual master, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
caraṇa; “Gaṅgā-caraṇa” refers to his great grand
spiritual master, Śrī Gaṅgā-caraṇa; “Narottama” refers
to his great-great grand spiritual master, Śrīla
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura; and the word nātha refers to
Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura’s spiritual master, Śrī
Lokanātha Gosvāmī. In this way, he offers obeisances to
all those in his disciplic succession up to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu.

Refuting the opinions of the atibāḍī[i]1 Rūpa Kavirāja

Hemalatā Ṭhākurāṇī was the learned Vaiṣṇavī daughter of
Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. Once, an estranged disciple of hers
named Rūpa Kavirāja concocted his own doctrine which
opposed the philosophical conclusions of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism. He taught that the position of ācārya could
only be occupied by one in the renounced order — never
by a householder. Rūpa Kavirāja disregarded the
necessity of following vidhi-mārga (the path of
regulated devotional practice) and propagated a so
called rāga-mārga (doctrine of spontaneous attraction)
that was undisciplined and disorderly. His new doctrine
stated that one could abandon the practices of hearing
and chanting and practise rāgānuga-bhakti by remembrance
alone. For this, Hemalatā Ṭhākurāṇī ensured that Rūpa
Kavirāja was expelled from the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
community. Since that time, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas have known
him as an atibāḍī.

Fortunately, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura was present at
this time, and he refuted Rūpa Kavirāja’s false
conclusions in his Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam’s Third Canto. Śrīla Cakravartī proved
unequivocally that qualified householder descendants of
an ācārya may act as ācārya. He said that it is unlawful
and contrary to the statements of scripture for unfit
descendants of ācārya families to adopt the title
“Gosvāmī” out of greed for disciples and wealth.


                           5
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

Householder disciples in the line of Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu’s son, Vīrabhadra, and descendants of the
rejected sons of Śrī Advaita Ācārya award and accept the
title “Gosvāmī”, an action considered improper by
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas. Although Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura
acted as an ācārya, he personally never used the title
“Gosvāmī”, in order to instruct the foolish and unfit
descendants of ācārya families of modern times.




Protecting the honour of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya
through Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa

In his old age, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
spent most of his time in a semi-conscious or internal
state, deeply absorbed in bhajana. During that time, a
debate broke out in Jaipur between the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
and Vaiṣṇavas who supported the doctrine of svakīyāvāda,
or the Lord’s pastimes of wedded love.

The Vaiṣṇavas from the antagonistic camp [of the Śrī
Rāmānuja line] had led King Jaya Singh II of Jaipur to
believe that the worship of Śrīmatī Rādhikā with Śrī
Govindadeva is not supported by the scriptures. Their
contention was that Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s name is neither
mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam nor in the Viṣṇu
Purāṇa, and that She was never married to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
according to Vedic ritual.

The antagonistic Vaiṣṇavas further objected that the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas did not belong to a recognised
sampradāya, or line of disciplic succession. From time
immemorial, there have been four Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas:
the Śrīsampradāya, the Brahma sampradāya, the Rudra
sampradāya and the Sanaka (Kumāra) sampradāya. In this
age of Kali, the principal ācāryas of these four
sampradāyas are, respectively, Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva,
Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī and Śrī Nimbāditya. The Rāmānuja
Vaiṣṇavas said that Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas were outside these
four sampradāyas and therefore without pure lineage.
Further, they argued that because Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas did
not have their own commentary on Brahma-sūtra (also
known as Vedānta-sūtra), they could not be following a
genuine Vaiṣṇava disciplic succession.

Mahārāja Jaya Singh knew that the prominent Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas of Vṛndāvana were followers of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, and he summoned them to Jaipur to take up
the challenge of the Śrī Rāmānuja Vaiṣṇavas. The elderly
Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura was fully absorbed in the
transcendental bliss of bhajana, so he sent his student
Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa to address the Jaipur
assembly. Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava vedāntācārya Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, the crown of the assembly of learned
scholars and the greatest among exalted teachers of
Vedānta, left for Jaipur accompanied by Śrīla Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s disciple Śrī Kṛṣṇadeva.

The caste gosvāmīs had forgotten their own connection
with the Madhva sampradāya and disrespected the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas’ doctrinal view, saying it has no connection

                           6
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

with Vedānta. This caused considerable disturbance to
the true Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. But Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa used irrefutable logic combined with
powerful scriptural evidence to prove the Gauḍīya
sampradāya to be a pure Vaiṣṇava sampradāya, called the
Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava sampradāya, coming in
the line of Śrī Madhvācārya. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Kavi Karṇapūra and other previous ācāryas also accepted
this as fact. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas accept Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam as the genuine commentary on Vedānta-sūtra.
For this reason, no one in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
sampradāya had written a separate commentary on Vedānta-
sūtra.

The name of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the personification of the
pleasure-giving potency (hlādinī-śakti) and the eternal
beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is mentioned in various Purāṇas.
Throughout Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, particularly the Tenth
Canto in connection with the description of the Lord’s
Vṛndāvana pastimes, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is referred to
indirectly and discreetly. Only rasika and bhāvuka
devotees conversant with the conclusions of scriptures
can understand this confidential mystery.

In the learned assembly in Jaipur, Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa refuted the arguments and doubts of the
opposing party, and they were silenced by his
presentation. He established that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
are in the disciplic succession from Śrī Madhvācārya.
Despite his victory, however, the contesting party did
not accept the Gauḍīya sampradāya to be of pure Vaiṣṇava
lineage because the Gauḍīyas had no commentary on
Vedānta-sūtra. Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa therefore
composed the famous Gauḍīya commentary, Śrī Govinda-
bhāṣya. Once again the worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda
commenced in the temple of Śrī Govindadeva, and the
validity of the Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya sampradāya was
firmly established.

It was only on the authority of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was
able to write Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya and prove the
connection of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas with the Madhva
sampradāya. There should be no doubt in this regard.
This accomplishment of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, performed on behalf of the sampradāya, will be
recorded in golden script in the history of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism.




Attainment of the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī by the
mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā


In his Mantrārtha-dīpikā, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura describes a special event. Once, while reading
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, he came upon a verse (Madhya-
līlā 21.125) describing the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī-
mantra:



                           7
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                          5/5/2017


kāma-gāyatrī-mantra-rūpa, haya kṛṣṇera svarūpa,

sārdha-cabbiśa akṣara tāra haya

se akṣara ëcandra’ haya, kṛṣṇe kari’ udaya,

trijagat kailā kāmamaya



The kāma-gāyatrī is identical with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In this
king of mantras, there are twenty-four-and-a-half
syllables, and each syllable is a full moon. This
aggregate of moons has caused the moon of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to
rise and fill the three worlds with prema.



This verse establishes that the kāma-gāyatrī is composed
of twenty-four-and-a-half syllables, but despite deep
deliberation Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura could
not ascertain which syllable in the mantra was the half-
syllable. He scrutinised grammar books, Purāṇas,
Tantras, scriptures dealing with drama and rhetoric, and
other great texts. Among the vowel and consonant groups
in Śrī Harināmāmṛta-vyākaraṇa, the grammar methodology
of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, he found mention of only fifty
letters. He studied the arrangement of letters in texts
such as Mātṛkānyāsa, and in the Rādhikā-sahasra-nāma-
stotra of Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa he found that
Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā is also named Pañcāśad-
varṇa-rūpiṇī, one whose form is composed of fifty
syllables. In all the literatures he studied, however,
he found mention of only fifty vowels and consonants.
There was no mention of any half-syllable.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s doubt increased.
He wondered whether Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmīmay
have made a mistake in his writing. Of course this could
not have been possible because Śrīla Kavirāja is
omniscient and therefore free from material defects such
as falling into illusion or error.

If the fragmented letter “t” (the final letter of the
kāma-gāyatrī) were taken as the half-syllable, then
Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī would be guilty of the
fault of disorder, for in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 21.126—8) he has given the following
description:



sakhi he! kṛṣṇa-mukhaódvija-rāja-rāja

kṛṣṇa-vapu-siṁhāsane, vasi’ rājya-śāsane,

kare saṅge candrera samāja



dui gaṇḍa sucikkaṇa, jini’ maṇi-sudarpaṇa,

sei dui pūrṇa-candra jāni

                             8
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                         5/5/2017


lalāṭe aṣṭamī-indu, tāhāte candana-bindu,

sei eka pūrṇa-candra māni



kara-nakha-cāndera ṭhāṭa, vaṁṣī-upara kare nāṭa,

tāra gīta muralīra tāna

pada-nakha-candra-gaṇa, tale kare nartana,

nūpurera dhvani yāra gāna



In these lines, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī
describes Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s face as the first full moon; His
cheeks are two further full moons; the dot of sandalwood
on the upper portion of His forehead is the fourth full
moon; and just below this is the moon of the eighth day
(aṣṭamī), in other words, a half-moon. According to this
description, the fifth syllable is a half-syllable. Yet
if the fragmented “t”, the final letter of the kāma-
gāyatrī mantra, is seen to be a half-syllable, then the
fifth syllable cannot be seen as such.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was in a profound
dilemma because he could not decipher the mysterious
half-syllable. He concluded that if the syllables would
not reveal themselves, he would be unable to behold the
worshipful deity of the mantra. He decided that if he
could not obtain the audience of the deity of the
mantra, it would be better to die. Thinking this way, he
set out at night to the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa to give up
his life.

After the second division of the night had passed, Śrī
Cakravartī Ṭhākura fell into light sleep when the
daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
appeared before him. “O Viśvanātha, O Hari-vallabha,”
She said affectionately, “do not lament. What Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja has written is the absolute truth. By
My grace, he knows all the inner sentiments of My heart.
Have no doubt about his statements. The kāma-gāyatrī is
a mantra to worship My dearly beloved and Me, and We
become revealed to the devotees through the syllables of
this mantra. No one can know Us without My kindness. The
half-syllable is described in the book Varṇāgama-
bhāsvat. It was after consulting this text that Śrī
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja determined the actual identity of the
kāma-gāyatrī. Study this book and broadcast its meaning
for the benefit of all faithful people.”

When he   heard this instruction from Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Śrīmatī   Rādhikā Herself, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura arose,
calling   out in great lamentation, “O Rādhā, O Rādhā!”
When he   regained composure, he proceeded to carry out
Śrīmatī   Rādhikā’s order.

According to Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s indication, the letter
“ya” preceding “vi” in the mantra is considered a half-
syllable, and all the other syllables are full

                             9
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

syllables, or full moons.

Thus, by Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mercy, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura became acquainted with the deep
meaning of the mantra. He attained the direct audience
of his worshipful deity, and in his internal, perfected
spiritual body (siddha-deha), he was able to participate
in the Lord’s eternal pastimes as His loving associate.
He established the deity of Śrī Gokulānanda on the bank
of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and while residing there, he experienced
the sweetness (mādhurya) of the eternal pastimes of Śrī
Vṛndāvana. It was at this time that he wrote his Sukha-
varttinī commentary on Śrīla Kavi Karṇapūra’s Ānanda-
vṛndāvana-campūḥ and stated therein:



rādhā-parastīra-kuṭīra-vartinaḥ

prāptavya-vṛndāvana-cakravartinaḥ

ānanda-campū-vivṛti-pravartinaḥ

sānto-gatir me sumahā-nivartinaḥ



I, Cakravartī, completely leave aside all other things
and only desire to attain Śrī Vṛndāvana. Residing in a
simple hut on the bank of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, the topmost
place of Śrī Rādhā’s pastimes, I write this commentary
on Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campūḥ.



In his old age, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura spent most of
his time in a fully internal state or in a semi-
conscious state, deeply absorbed in bhajana. His
principal disciple, Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, took over
the responsibility of teaching the scriptures.




Re-establishing the doctrine of parakīyā

When a slight decline in the influence of the six
Gosvāmīs in Śrī Vṛndāvana took place, a controversy
arose around the doctrines of wedded love (svakīyāvāda)
versus paramour love (parakīyāvāda). To dispel
misconceptions regarding svakīyāvāda, Śrīla Cakravartī
Ṭhākura wrote Rāga-vartma-candrikā and Gopī-premāmṛta,
both of which are replete with scriptural philosophical
conclusions. Thereafter, in his Ānanda-candrikā
commentary on the verse laghutvam atra yat proktam, of
Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (1.21), he showed that the theory
of svakīyāvāda was fallacious, and he established the
conception of parakīyā with scriptural evidence and
irrefutable arguments. Further, in his Sārārtha-darśinī
commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he gave strong support
to parakīyā-bhāva.

Once, certain scholars opposed the conclusions of Śrīla

                            10
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

Cakravartī Ṭhākura on worship in the mood of parakīyā.
When he defeated them with superior erudition and sound
reasoning they resolved out of envy to kill him. They
knew that Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura used to circumambulate
Śrī Vṛndāvana early each morning, so they hid in a dark,
dense grove and waited for him to walk by. As his
adversaries watched him approach, he suddenly
disappeared, and in his place, a beautiful young girl of
Vraja appeared, picking flowers with her friends.

The scholars asked the girl, “Dear child, just a moment
ago a great devotee was coming this way. Did you see
where he went?” The girl replied that she had seen him,
but that she did not know where he had gone. Her
astonishing beauty, gentle smile, graceful manner and
sidelong glances captivated the scholars. Their hearts
melted, and all the impurities in their minds were
vanquished. They asked the girl who she was, and she
replied, “I am a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is
presently at Her in-laws’ house at Yāvaṭa, and She sent
me here to pick flowers.” Having spoken thus, the girl
disappeared, and in her place the scholars saw Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura once again. They fell at his feet and
prayed for forgiveness, and he forgave them all. There
are many such astonishing occurrences in the life of
Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

In this way, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura refuted the theory
of svakīyāvāda and established the truth of pure
parakīyā — an achievement of great import for the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura not only protected
the integrity of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava dharma, but he
also re-established its influence in Śrī Vṛndāvana.
Anyone who evaluates this accomplishment will be struck
with wonder at his uncommon genius. Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas have composed the following verse in praise of
his extraordinary work:



viśvasya nātharupo ‘sau bhakti-vartma-pradarśanāt

bhakta-cakre vartitatvāt cakravarty ākhyayābhavat



He is known by the name Viśvanātha, lord of the
universe, because he indicates the path of bhakti; and
he is known as Cakravartī, or he around whom the circle
or assembly turns, because he always remains within the
assembly (cakra) of pure devotees. Therefore, his name
is Viśvanātha Cakravartī.



In about 1754, on the fifth day of the light phase of
the moon in the month of Māgha (January—February), when
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was around a hundred
years old, he left this material world in Vṛndāvana,
deeply absorbed in internal consciousness. His samādhi
stands today next to the temple of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Gokulānanda in Śrī Dhāma Vṛndāvana.

                           11
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                          5/5/2017




The glories and legacy of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura

Following in the footsteps of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura composed an abundance of
transcendental literature on bhakti, thereby
establishing in this world the innermost desire of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s heart. He also refuted faulty
conclusions opposed to the genuine following of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī (rūpānuga) and is thus revered in the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava society as an illustrious ācārya and an
authoritative, self-realised soul. He is renowned as a
great transcendental philosopher and poet, and a rasika
devotee.

A Vaiṣṇava poet, Kṛṣṇa dāsa, has written the following
lines at the conclusion of his translation of Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Mādhurya-kādambinī:




mādhurya-kādambinī-grantha jagata kaila dhanya

cakravartī-mukhe vaktā āpani śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya




Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has blessed the
whole world by writing Mādhurya-kādambinī. In reality,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu has spoken this work
through the mouth of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura.



keha kahena-cakravartī śrī-rūpera avatāra

kaṭhina ye tattva sarala karite pracāra



Some say Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura is an incarnation of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. He is expert in the art of
describing complex truths in a way that is easy to
understand.



ohe guṇa-nidhi śrī-viśvanātha cakravartī

ki jāniba tomāra guṇa muñi mūḍha-mati



O ocean of mercy, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. I
am a foolish person, so how can I understand your

                           12
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

qualities? (Therefore, kindly reveal your transcendental
qualities within my heart. This is my prayer at your
lotus feet.)



Few Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas have written as many books
as Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura. The following proverb
regarding three of his books is quoted among Vaiṣṇavas
to this day: “kiraṇa-bindu-kaṇā, ei tina niye
vaiṣṇavapanā — Having attained a proper understanding of
these three books, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa, Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu and Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā, one can
claim to be a Vaiṣṇava.”

Below is a list of his books, commentaries and prayers,
which comprise a storehouse of incomparable wealth of
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava devotional literature:



(1) Vraja-rīti-cintāmaṇi

(2) Śrī Camatkāra-candrikā

(3) Śrī Prema-sampuṭa (khaṇḍa-kāvyam)

(4) Gītāvalī

(5) Subodhinī (commentary on Alaṅkāra-kaustubha)

(6) Ānanda-candrikā (commentary on Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi)

(7) commmentary on Śrī Gopāla-tāpanī

(8) Stavāmṛta-laharī, which includes:



(a) Śrī Guru-tattvāṣṭakam

(b) Mantra-dātṛ-gurorāṣṭakam

(c) Parama-gurorāṣṭakam

(d) Parātpara-gurorāṣṭakam

(e) Parama-parātpara-gurorāṣṭakam

(f) Śrī Lokanāthāṣṭakam

(g) Śrī Śacīnandanāṣṭakam

(h) Śrī Svarūpa-caritāmṛtam

(i) Śrī Svapna-vilāsāmṛtam

(j) Śrī Gopāladevāṣṭakam

(k) Śrī Madana-mohanāṣṭakam

(l) Śrī Govindāṣṭakam

(m) Śrī Gopināthāṣṭakam

                              13
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017


(n) Śrī Gokulānandāṣṭakam

(o) Svayam-bhagavattāṣṭakam

(p) Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍāṣṭakam

(q) Jaganmohanāṣṭakam

(r) Anurāgavallī

(s) Śrī Vṛndādevyāṣṭakam

(t) Śrī Rādhikā-dhyānāmṛtam

(u) Śrī Rūpa-cintāmaṇiḥ

(v) Śrī Nandīśvarāṣṭakam

(w) Śrī Vṛndāvanāṣṭakam

(x) Śrī Govardhanāṣṭakam

(y) Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ

(z) Śrī Nikuñja-keli-virudāvalī (virutkāvya)

(aa) Surata-kathāmṛtam (āryaśatakam)

(bb) Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍāṣṭakam



(9) Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam Mahākāvyam

(10) Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā

(11) Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa

(12) Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu

(13) Rāga-vartma-candrikā

(14) Aiśvarya-kādambinī (unavailable)

(15) Mādhurya-kādambinī

(16) commentary on Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu

(17) commentary on Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū

(18) commentary on Dāna-keli-kaumudī

(19) commentary on Śrī Lalita-mādhava-nāṭaka

(20) commentary on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (incomplete)

(21) commentary on Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā

(22) Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary on Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā

(23) Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam



                              14
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017




The heartfelt desire of my most revered Śrī Gurudeva,
nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, was that
the literature of our Gosvāmīs and previous ācāryas in
our disciplic succession would be published in Hindi,
English, Bengali and all the other languages of the
world. I have a strong belief that he will be very happy
upon seeing this Hindi edition of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ.

With these prayers, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura,
who is the most learned in established spiritual
philosophy and the crown jewel of all rasikas, nourishes
only the mood of becoming a maidservant of the
maidservant of the maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. May
this book purify our and the readers’ aspirations and
thus fulfil them. This is my only desire. Without a
doubt, this [Hindi edition of] Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ
will be like the polestar, guiding the Hindi-speaking
readers to enter remembrance of aṣṭa-kāliya līlā.

I have full faith that rasika and bhāvuka sādhakas, as
well as sādhakas on the path of rāgānuga-bhakti eager to
attain vraja-rasa, will hold this book in great
veneration. Faithful people who study it will be able to
enter Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s prema-dharma, the
eternal religion of pure, transcendental loving service
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

May my most worshipful Śrīla Gurupādapadma, who is the
embodiment of the Supreme Lord’s compassion, shower his
abundant mercy upon me. In that way, I may attain ever-
increasing qualification to fulfil his innermost desire
through my service. This is my humble prayer at his
lotus feet, which can bestow prema.



An aspirant for a particle of mercy from Śrī Hari, Guru
and the Vaiṣṇavas,



Humble and insignificant,

Tridaṇḍibhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



Śrī Annadā Ekādaśī

27 August 2008




Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ

The Desire-tree of Auspicious Resolve


                            15
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

namo vṛndāvaneśvaryai




vṛndāvaneśvari vayo-guṇa-rūpa-līlā-

saubhāgya-keli-karuṇā-jaladhe ‘vadhehi

dāsī bhavāni sukhayāni sadā sa-kāntāṁ

tvām ālibhiḥ parivṛtām idam eva yāce (1)




O Queen of Vṛndāvana, O ocean of youthfulness, good
qualities, beauty, pastimes, good fortune, amorous love,
and compassion! My petition to You, who are always
surrounded by Your sakhīs, is that I may become Your
maidservant and forever please You by serving You when
You are with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (1)




Pradoṣānte abhisāraḥ

(rendezvous at the close of early evening)


śṛṅgārayāṇi bhavatīm abhisārayāṇi

vīkṣayaiva kānta-vadanaṁ parivṛtya yāntīm

dhṛtvāñcalena hari-sannidhim ānayāni

samprāpya tarjana-sudhāṁ sukhitā bhavāni (2)



I will dress and decorate You and then take You to meet
Your beloved. Upon seeing the face of Your beloved Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, You turn away slightly [because of Your contrary
nature][ii]2 and remain standing. At that time I will
take hold of the border of Your dress and take You to
Him. As I bathe in the consequent shower-like nectar of
Your scolding, I will become most blissful. (2)




pāde nipatya śirasānunayāni ruṣṭāṁ

tāṁ praty apāṅga-kalikām api cālayāni

tvad-dor-dvayena sahasā parirambhayāni

romāñca-kāñcukavatīm avalokayāni (3)


                           16
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017



When You thus become angry I will place my head at Your
lotus feet in supplication. I will direct Your crooked
glance, which is like an unopened flower bud, toward Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. [In other words, Your blooming lotus eyes have
contracted like a flower bud due to Your feeling of
contrariness (māna) upon seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa. I will,
however, beseech You to cast a sidelong glance in His
direction.] I will quickly make Your arms embrace Him,
by which Your entire body will thrill in ecstasy. Full
of bliss, I will gaze at You in that condition. (3)




prāṇa-priye kusuma-talpam alaṅkuru tvam

iti acyutokti-makaranda-rasaṁ dhayāni

mā muñca mādhava satīm iti gadgadārdra

vācā tavetya nikaṭaṁ harim ākṣipāṇi (4)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa will say to You, “O beloved of My life, please
decorate this flower bed.” I will relish these nectar-
like words of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and, with a faltering voice and
heart-melting words, I will say, “O Mādhava, do not let
go of this chaste woman; keep Her in Your arms.” I will
then nudge Śrī Kṛṣṇa even closer to You. (4)




vāmām udasya nija-vakṣasi tena ruddhām

ānanda-bāṣpa-timitāṁ muhur ucchalantīm

vyastālakāṁ skhalita-veṇīm abaddha-nīviṁ

tvāṁ vīkṣya sādhu-janur eva kṛtārthayāni (5)



When Śrī Kṛṣṇa confines You to His chest [meaning, when
You remain caught in the trap of His arms, despite Your
trying to separate Yourself from Him], You will make
tears of joy flow constantly from Your eyes and drops of
perspiration will beautify Your body, all due to Your
contrary nature. The tresses of Your hair will scatter
here and there, Your braid will open and the knot of
Your lower garments will loosen. Seeing You in such a
state, I will consider my birth completely successful.
(5)




Nakta-līlā

                           17
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017


(pastimes during the night)


talpe mayaiva racite bahu-śilpa-bhāji

pauṣpe niveśya bhavatīṁ na na neti-vācam

kṛṣṇaṁ sukhena ramayantam ananta-līlaṁ

vātāyanātta-nayanaiva nibhālayāni (6)



In spite of Your saying “No, no, no,” I will place You
on a flower bed, artistically made by me. Then, through
the lattice-work of the pastime bower, I will behold Śrī
Kṛṣṇa immersed in amorous play with You. (6)




sthitvā bahir vyajana-yantra-nibaddha-ḍorī-

pāṇir vikarṣaṇa-vaśān mṛdu vījayāni

uttuṅga-keli-kalita-śrama-bindu-jālam

ālopayāni manitaiḥ smitam āharāṇi (7)



Sitting outside the kuñja I will catch hold of the rope
to a fan and slowly pull it. [Although sitting outside
like this,] I will gradually, through this sevā of mine,
remove the perspiration from both of You that is caused
by Your exalted pastimes, and I will carefully listen to
Your soft, sweet laughter. (7)




śrī-rūpa-mañjari-mukha-priya-kiṅkarīṇāṁ

ādeśam eva satataṁ śirasā vahāni

tenaiva hanta tulasī-paramānukampā-

pātrī-bhavāni karavāṇi sukhena sevām (8)



I will carry on my head the orders of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī
and the other dear, leading maidservants (kiṅkarīs).
Thus becoming the object of Tulasī’s great mercy, I will
serve with joy. (8)




mālyādi-hāra-kaṭakādi-mṛjī-vicitra-

                              18
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017


vartī-sitāṁśu-ghusṛṇāguru-candanādi

vīṭī-lavaṅga-khapūrādi-yutā sakhībhiḥ

sārdhaṁ mudā viracayāni kalā-prakāśaḥ (9)



I will string garlands and so forth as well as clean
necklaces, belts and other ornaments and make various
brushes for painting makarīs[iii]3 and other pictures on
Your body. I will prepare an ointment of camphor,
kuṁkuma, aguru, sandalwood and so forth, and along with
the sakhīs, I will blissfully prepare tāmbula with great
skill by placing lime, catechu, cloves and betel nuts,
in betel leaves. (9)




tvāṁ srasta-veśa-vasanābharaṇāṁ sa-kāntāṁ

vīkṣya prasādhana-vidhau drutam udyatābhiḥ

śrī-rūpa-raṅga-tulasī-rati-mañjarībhiḥ

diṣṭānayāni tava sammukham eva tāni (10)



Observing that the dress, decorations and ornaments of
You and Your beloved are scattered and in disorder [due
to Cupid’s battle], I will, on the order of Śrī Rūpa,
Raṅga, Tulasī and Rati Mañjarīs and other sakhīs, bring
all the items [mentioned in the previous verse] before
You, to again decorate You nicely. (10)




tvām āśikhā-caraṇa-mūḍha-vicitra-veśāṁ

spraṣṭuṁ punaś ca dhṛta-tṛṣṇam avekṣya kṛṣṇam

āyāntam eva vikaṭa-bhru-kuṭī-vibhaṅga-

huṅkṛty-udañcita-mukhī vinivartayāni (11)



Seeing You wonderfully dressed from head to foot, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, full of desire, is approaching You to again touch
You. When I observe this, I will frown with crooked
eyebrows, lift my face, and shout at Him threateningly,
forbidding Him to do so. (11)




tatretya vismayavatīṁ lalitāṁ yadāha

                           19
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017


sādhvītva-kanṭaka-viniṣkramaṇāya devyāḥ

vṛttaṁ nyaṣedhad ayi mām iyam eva dhūrt iti

uktyā hareḥ sva-hṛdayaṁ rasayāni nityam (12)



After the pastime, Lalitā intends to tease Śrī Rādhā and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa for Their clothes and ornaments being
scattered after Their amorous sporting. When she sees
that Rādhikā’s dress and ornaments are not at all in
disarray, she will become astonished at the possibility
that love-play did not take place. Seeing her reaction,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa will say, “Indeed, Lalitā, I was engaged in
removing the thorn-like chastity of Rādhikā-devī, but
this villain [pointing His finger towards me] prevented
Me.” With these kinds of remarks by Śrī Kṛṣṇa, my heart
will constantly fill with nectar. (12)




niṣkramya kuñja-bhavanād vipine riharttuṁ

kāntaika-bāhu-parirabdha-tanuṁ prayāntīm

tvām ālibhiḥ saha kathopakathā-praphulla-

vaktrām ahaṁ vyajana-pāṇir anuprayāṇi (13)



When, to enjoy pastimes in the forest, You come out of
the kuñja, clinging to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s arm with both Your
hands and resting Your head on His shoulder, Your lotus
face will bloom as You converse with Your sakhīs. At
that time, I will also follow You, carrying a fan in my
hand. (13)




gāyāni te guṇa-gaṇāṁs tava vartma-gamyaṁ

puṣpāstarair mṛdulayāni sugandhayāni

sālī-tatīḥ pratipadaṁ sumano ‘bhivṛṣṭiḥ

svāminy ahaṁ pratidiśaṁ tanavāni bāḍham (14)



O Svāminī, O my mistress, while singing Your glories, I
will make Your path soft and fragrant with the aroma
emanating from flowers. As both of You proceed with Your
sakhīs, I will, with my every step, shower flowers in
all directions and thus enhance Your bliss. (14)




                           20
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017



preṣṭha-sva-pāṇi-kṛta-kausuma-hāra-kāñcī-

keyūra-kuṇḍala-kirīṭa-virājitāṅgīm

tvāṁ bhūṣayāṇi punar ātma-kavitva-puṣpaiḥ

āsvādayāni rasikāli-tatīrimāni (15)



With the blossoms of my poetry I will adorn You, who are
decorated with necklaces, a belt, armlets, ear ornaments
and a crown that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself made from flowers
with His own hands. [In other words, when, with His own
hands, Your beloved has decorated You with ornaments He
made from flowers that He Himself has picked, I will
depict the sentiments of Your heart and of His
activities, bodily expressions and moods with my poetry.
In this way, I will decorate You with the flowers of
shyness.] In this way, I will make all Your companions,
who are expert in relishing poetry, enjoy the rasa of
poetry. (15)




candrāṁśu-rūpya-salilair avasikta-rodha-

syañcat-kadamba-surabhāvali-gīta-kīrttim

ārabdha-rāsa-rabhasāṁ hariṇā saha tvāṁ

tvat-pāṭhitaiva viduṣī kalayāni vīṇām (16)



The water of the moonbeams, white like silver, is
sprinkled on the bank of the river, which is fragrant
with the scent of kadamba flowers. There, You, who are
glorified by the song of the bumble bees, will begin
Your rāsa-līlā with Śrī Hari, and I will expertly play
the vīṇā, which I have learnt from You. (16)




rāsaṁ samāpya dayitena samaṁ sakhībhiḥ

viśrānti-bhāji nava mālatikā-nikuñje

tvayy ānayāmi rasavit[iv]4 karakāmra-rambhā-

drākṣādikāni sarasaṁ pariveśayāni (17)



When the rāsa is brought to an end, You will take the
sakhīs with You and rest with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a kuñja of
nava-mālatī flowers. Then I, who am a connoisseur of
rasa, will bring juicy fruits such as pomegranates,

                           21
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

mangos, bananas and grapes and happily serve them to
You. (17)




talpe saroja-dala-kliptam anaṅga-keli-

paryāptam āpta-kalayā racite tulasya

tvāṁ preyasā saha rasād adhiśāyayāni

tāmbūlam āśayitum ulbanam ullasāni (18)



Tulasī, who is expert in many different kinds of arts,
will then prepare a bed made out of lotus petals,
suitable for amorous pastimes. I will lay You on this
bed with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, offer You betel nuts and thus become
overjoyed. (18)




samvāhayāni caraṇāu alakaiḥ spṛśāni

jighrāṇi saurabha-samūḍha-camatkriyābdhiḥ

akṣṇor dadhāmi urasijau parirambhayāni

cumbāmi alakṣitam avekṣita-saukumāryāḥ (19)



I will massage Your tender feet, and being overwhelmed,
I will behold them, touch them and smell the
intoxicating fragrance emanating from them. I will hold
them before my eyes, kiss them unobserved by others and
clasp them to my breasts. (19)




Niśānta-līlā

(pastimes at the end of night)


ante niśantanutara-prasṛtālakālyāḥ

tāḍaṅka-hāra-tati-gandhavahāgra-muktāḥ

preṣṭhasya te tava ca saṁślathitā nibhālya

tatrānayāni paramāpta-sakhīḥ prabodhya (20)



At the end of night, seeing Your hair dishevelled and
Your most beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s earrings and necklaces, as

                           22
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017

well as the pearl at the tip of His nose, slightly
loosened, I will awaken the parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs and
bring them to this place. (20)




tā darśayāni sukha-sindhuṣu majjayāni

tābhyaḥ prasādam atulaṁ sahasāpnuvāni

tan-nūpurādi-raṇitair gata-gāḍha-nidrāṁ

śayyotthitāṁ sa-cakitāṁ bhavatīṁ bhajāni (21)



I will show the parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs the condition of
both You and Your beloved and thus immerse them in an
ocean of bliss. As a result, I will instantly receive
their unequalled mercy. Your deep sleep will be broken
by the sound of the sakhīs’ ankle-bells and sounds
coming from their other ornaments. Startled, You will
sit up on the bed, and at that time I will serve You.
(21)




he svāmini priya-sakhī-trapayākulāyāḥ

kāntāṅgatas tava viyoktum apārayantyāḥ

udgranthayāni alaka-kuṇḍala-mālya-muktā-

granthiṁ vicakṣaṇatayāṅguli-kauśalena (22)



O Svāminī, seeing Your dear sakhīs You will feel shy,
and when trying to rise up, You will not be able to
separate Yourself from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s limbs because Your
hair, earrings and so forth are entangled with His
ornaments. Seeing this state of Yours, I will use my
fingers with great skill to carefully disentangle Your
hair, earrings, nose-pearl and garland. (22)




nāsāgrataḥ śruti-yugāc ca viyojayāni

tad-bhūṣaṇaṁ maṇi-sarāṁs tu visūtrayāṇi

prāṇārbudād adhikam eva sadā tavaikaṁ

romāpi devi kalayāni kṛtāvadhānā (23)



I will remove the ornament at the tip of Your nose and

                           23
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

both Your earrings. I will also take off Your jewelled
necklaces. Considering just one of Your tresses of hair
more dear to me than a hundred million of my lives, I
will always attentively serve You, releasing, with great
care, Your hair from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments. (23)




tvāṁ sālim ātma-sadanaṁ nibhṛtaṁ vrajantīṁ

tyaktvā harer anupathaṁ tad-alakṣito ‘ham

tāṁ khaṇḍitām anunayantam avekṣya candrāṁ

tad-vṛttam āli-tati-saṁsadi varṇayāni (24)



You will then secretly return to Your residence in
Yāvaṭa, together with Your sakhīs. I will leave Your
association and, unseen, follow Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Seeing Śrī
Kṛṣṇa entreating Candrāvalī, who is in the mood of a
khaṇḍitā[v]5, I will return and describe the entire
event in the assembly of the sakhīs. (24)




Prātar-līlā

(early morning pastimes)


prakṣālayāni vadanaṁ salilaiḥ sugandhaiḥ

dantān rasālaja-dalais tava dhāvayāni

nirṇejayāni rasanāṁ tanu-hema-patryā

sandārśayāni mukuraṁ nipuṇaṁ pramṛjya (25)



I will wash Your face with fragrant water, clean Your
teeth with soft mango-leaves and cleanse Your tongue
with a thin golden tongue-scraper. I will then present
an expertly polished mirror before You. (25)




snānāya sūkṣma-vasanaṁ paridhāpayāni

hārāṅgadādy-apaghanād avatārayāṇi

abhyañjayāṇy aruṇa-saurabha-hṛdya-tailaiḥ

udvartayāni nava-kumkuma-candra-cūrṇaiḥ (26)



                           24
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017


I will then dress You in fine cloth for Your bath. I
will remove the garlands and necklaces from Your neck. I
will massage Your body with reddish surabhihṛdya[vi]6
oil, and afterward I will apply an ointment made of
fresh kuṁkuma and ground camphor. (26)




nīrair mahā-surabhibhiḥ snapayāni gātrād

ambhāṁsi-sūkṣma-vasanair apasārayāṇi

keśān javād aguru-dhūma-kulena yatnād

āśoṣayāṇi rabhasena sugandhayāni (27)



I will bathe You with exceedingly fragrant water and
then remove that water from Your divine limbs with a
fine cloth. I will then quickly dry Your hair with smoke
of aguru and thus make it fragrant. (27)




vāso mano ‘bhirucitaṁ paridhāpayāni

sauvarṇa-kaṅkaṭikayā cikurān viśodhya

gumphāṇi venīm amalaiḥ kusumair vicitrām

agre lasac-camarikā-maṇi-jāta-bhāntīm (28)



I will dress You in garments according to the taste of
Your mind, comb Your hair with a golden comb and then
braid it with a variety of flowers. Then, on the upper
part of the braid I will place a wonderfully shining
camarī[vii]7 jewel. (28)




cūḍāmaṇiṁ śirasi mauktika-patra-pāśyāṁ

bhāle vicitra-tilakañ ca mudā viracya

aktvākṣiṇī śruti-yugaṁ maṇi-kunḍalāḍhyaṁ

nāsām alaṅkṛti-matīṁ karavāṇi devi (29)



O Devī, I will place a cūḍāmaṇi[viii]8 and a string of
pearls upon Your head. I will blissfully paint a
wonderful tilaka on Your forehead. I will beautify Your
eyes with kājala and Your ears with jewelled earrings,

                           25
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

and I will also adorn Your nose with an ornament. (29)




gaṇḍa-dvaye makarike cibuke vilikhya

kastūrikeṣṭa-pṛṣataṁ kucayoś ca citram

bāhvos tavāṅgada-yugaṁ maṇi-bandha-yugme

cūḍāṁ masāra-kalitāṁ kalayāni yatnāt (30)



I will paint makaris[ix]9 on both Your cheeks and place
a dot of musk on Your chin. On Your breasts, I will
paint other designs. I will carefully place armlets on
Your arms and bangles made of indranīla jewels on Your
wrists. (30)




pāṇy-aṅgulīḥ kanaka-ratna-mayormikābhiḥ

abhyarcayāni hṛdayaṁ padakottamena

muktota-kañcu-likayoḥ asijau vicitra-

mālyena hāra-nicayena ca kaṇṭha-deśam (31)



I will place golden, jewel-studded rings on Your fingers
and a most excellent pendant on Your chest. I will cover
Your breasts with a blouse embroidered with pearls and
decorate Your neck with various kinds of garlands and
necklaces. (31)




kāñcyā nitambam atha haṁsaka-nūpurābhyāṁ

pādāmbuje dala-tatīṁ kvaṇad aṅgurīyaiḥ

lākṣā-rasair aruṇam apy anurañjayāni

he devi tat-tala-yugaṁ kṛta-puṇya-puñjā (32)



O Devī, having accumulated great pious merits, I will be
able to hang a waist-belt (kāñcī) around Your hips, put
sweetly tinkling haṁsaka[x]10 ankle-bells around Your
lotus feet, place toe-rings studded with tiny bells on
Your toes and apply red lac to the reddish soles of Your
feet. (32)



                           26
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017




aṅgāni sāhajika-saurabhayānti athāpi

devy arcayāni nava-kumkuma-carcayaiva

līlāmbujaṁ karatale tava dhārayāṇi

tvāṁ darśayāni maṇi-darpaṇam arpayitvā (33)



O Devī, I will worship You by anointing Your naturally
fragrant limbs with fresh kuṁkuma. I will place a
pastime lotus in Your hand, and then, for You to behold
Your appearance, I will hold in my hands a jewelled
mirror. (33)




saundaryam adbhutam avekṣya nijaṁ sva-kānta-

netrāli-lobhanam avetya vilola-gātrīm

prāṇārbudena vidhu vārtika-dīpakaiś ca

nirmañchayāni nayanāmbu-nimajjitāṅgī (34)



Upon seeing the wondrous beauty of Your lover, which
charms Your bumblebee-like eyes, You will become
restless [due to trembling, one of the aṣṭa-sāttvika
transformations, which are most excellent]. [Not being
able to properly decide what my duty is at that time,] I
will, with my limbs soaked with tears, worship You with
a camphor lamp and offer my life to You millions of
times. (34)




goṣṭheśvarī-prahitayā saha kuṇḍavalyā

prabhātika-priyatamāśana-sādhanāya

yāntīṁ samaṁ priya-sakhībhiḥ anuprayāṇi

tāmbūla-sampuṭa-maṇi-vyajanādi-pāṇiḥ (35)



In the morning, You, along with Kundalatā and Your dear
sakhīs, will proceed to Nanda-bhavana to cook breakfast
for Your beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa at the request of Goṣṭheśvarī
Śrī Yaśodā. At that time, I will follow behind, carrying
a container with tāmbula, a jewelled fan and other
items. (35)



                           27
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                          5/5/2017




goṣṭheśvarī-sadanam etya pade praṇamya

tasyās tad-āpta-bhavikāṁ trapayāvṛtāṅgīm

vrātāṁ tayā śirasi tan-nayanāmbu-siktām

tvāṁ vīkṣya tām api mudā praṇamāmi bhaktyā (36)



At Goṣṭheśvarī’s residence, You offer respects at her
feet and become overcome with shyness. Goṣṭheśvarī will
bless You by smelling Your head and will moisten You
with her tears. Seeing her great affection for You, I
will joyfully bow down to her with reverence. (36)




mūrttaṁ tapo ‘si vṛṣabhānu-kulasya bhāgyaṁ

gehasya me ‘si tanayasya ca me varāṅgi

nairujya-dāsy-amṛta-pāṇir abhūr vareṇa

durvāsaso yad iti tad-vacasā hasāni (37)



Śrī Yaśodā will say, “O Rādhā, although You are the
epitome of austerity and detachment, You are a blessing
for Vṛṣabhānu’s family, for my house and for my son. O
beautiful-limbed one, by Durvāsā’s boon, whatever You
cook is more nourishing than nectar, and thus You have
become the cause of my son’s good health.” [The
preparations made by these hands increase the strength,
intelligence, beauty and life-span of the person
partaking of them. Or, a more concealed meaning is that
by the mere touch of these hands, the fire of separation
is mitigated, which is otherwise not possible, even by
drinking nectar.] Hearing these words of Śrī Yaśodā, I
will smile. (37)




snātānulipta-vapuṣo dayitasya tāvat

tāt-kālike madhurimāṇy atilolitākṣīm

svāminy avetya bhavatīṁ kvacana-pradeśe

tatraiva kena ca miṣeṇa samānayāni (38)



O Svāminī, upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa bathing and being anointed
with various fragrances, He is immediately embellished
with a greater sweetness. Seeing His beauty at that

                           28
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

time, You will also be exceedingly attracted to Him. On
some pretext, I will take You to a secluded place in
Nanda-bhavana so You can, without any obstruction, drink
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness. (38)




prakṣālayāni caraṇau bhavad-aṅgataḥ sraṅ-

mālyādi-pāka-racanānupayogi yat tat

uttārayāṇi tad idaṁ tu tavāstv iti tvad

vācollasāni vikasan-madhu-mādhavīva (39)



Some time later, I will wash Your feet and remove
garlands, necklaces and other ornaments that will
interfere with Your cooking. At that time, You will say,
“I give these ornaments to you.” Hearing this, my heart
will blossom like a mādhavī flower in the spring season.
(39)




paktvā sthitaṁ madhura-pāyasa-śāka-sūpa-

bhāji-prabhṛty-amṛta-nindi-catur-vidhānnam

tvāṁ lokayāni na na neti muhur vadantīṁ

goṣṭheśayāpi pariveśayituṁ nidiṣṭām (40)



When You have finished cooking rice in milk and sugar,
as well as rabaḍī (a milk sweet), green leafy
vegetables, juicy vegetables, chutney, rice, puris,
chapatis and more of the four kinds of
preparations[xi]11 that all defeat even the taste of
nectar, Goṣṭheśvarī will order You to serve them. At
that time, I will watch as You repeatedly say, “No, no,
no.” (40)




tṛpty-utthitāṁ priyatamāṅga-ruciṁ dhayantyā

vātāyanārpita-dṛśaḥ sahasollasantyāḥ

ānandaja-dyuti-taraṅga-bhare manoja-

mañjū-kṛte tava mano mama majjayāni (41)



Having finished His meal, Your beloved feels most

                           29
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                          5/5/2017

satisfied. At that time, You peep through the latticed
window to drink His beauty through Your eyes and
instantly become filled with bliss. Upon seeing You at
that moment, adorned with the mood of amorous desire,
and with a charming beauty emanating from Your bliss, I
will immerse my heart in that very state of Yours. (41)




rādhe tavaiva gṛham etad ahañ ca jāte

sūnoḥ śubhe kim aparāṁ bhavatīm avaimi

tad bhuṅkṣa sammukham iti vraja-pā girā tvad-

vāktraṁ smitaṁ sva-hṛdayaṁ rasayāni nityam (42)



Śrī Yaśodā will say, “O Rādhā, this house is Yours and I
am also Yours. You are the cause of my son’s well-being.
What more can I say? O daughter, take Your meal in front
of me.” Hearing this, a gentle and sweet smile will
appear on Your innocent lotus face. By this, I will
experience continuous pleasure. (42)




Pūrvāhna-līlā

(pastimes during forenoon)


yāntaṁ vanāya sakhibhiḥ samamātmakāntaṁ

pitrādibhiḥ sa-ruditair anugamyamānam

vīkṣyāpta-gaurava-gṛhāṁ dina-nātha-pūjā-

vyājena labdha-gahanāṁ bhavatīṁ bhajāmi (43)



The dear-most beloved of Your heart will then go to the
forest with His sakhās, while His father Śrī Nanda and
others, all weeping, follow behind Him. After seeing
this scene, You will arrive at Your house in Yāvaṭa, and
on the pretext of worshipping the Sun-god, You will go
from there to the forest. At that time, I will also
worship You — serving You appropriate to the time by
going to the forest. (43)




Madhyāhna-līlā

(pastimes at midday)


                             30
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017


kāntaṁ vilokya kusumāvacaye pravṛttām

ādāya pātra-puṭikām anuyāmy ahaṁ tvām

kā tāskarīyam iti tad-vacasā na kāpi iti

uktyā[xii]12 tad-arpita-dṛśaṁ bhavatīṁ smarāmi (44)



Upon seeing Your dearest, You pretend to pick flowers.
At that time, I will take up a flower basket fashioned
from leaves and walk behind You. Śrī Kṛṣṇa will say,
“Who is this thief?” You will answer, “No one,” and I
will remember You casting Your glance towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
fully understanding the sentiments in Your heart and
taking shelter of You in my mind. (44)




puṣpāṇi darśaya kiyanti hṛtāni cauri iti

uktau ca puṣpa-puṭikam api gopayāni

tad-vīkṣya hanta mama kakṣa-tale kṣipantaṁ

pāṇiṁ balāt tam abhimṛśya bhavāni dūnā (45)



Looking towards me, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will say, “Show Me how
many flowers you all have stolen.” Hearing this from
Him, I will hide the flower-basket. Seeing me do so, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa will forcefully place His hand under my arm,
making me most unhappy. (45)




rakṣādya devi kṛpayā nija-dāsikāṁ mām

iti ucca-kātara-girā śaraṇaṁ vrajāmi

kiṁ dhūrtta duḥkhayasi maj-janam iti amuṣya

bāhuṁ kareṇa tudatīṁ bhavatīṁ śrayāni (46)




At that time, I will call out in a voice of distress, “O
Devī, please be kind today and protect this maidservant
of Yours! I am taking shelter of You.” [You will scold
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and say,] “Rascal! Why are You giving distress
to My near and dear one?” You will then personally free
me from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s arms. Seeing You filled with this
mood, I will take shelter of You. (46)



                           31
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017




tyaktvaiva māṁ bhavad-uraḥ kavacaṁ vikhaṇḍya

prāptāṁ srajaṁ tava galāt sva-gale nidhāya

puṣpāṇi cauri mama kiṁ tava kaṇṭha-hetoḥ

tvat-kaṇṭham eva rabhasaṁ paripīḍayāni (47)



Upon releasing me, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will remove the pallu, or
upper end of Your sari, the armour of Your chest. He
will then take the garland from Your neck and put it
around His own. “O thief,” He will say, “are these
flowers of Mine blossoming for the sole purpose of
decorating Your neck?” [Being desirous to embrace You,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa will catch hold of Your neck and say in jest,]
“Just see, for this crime I will forcefully cause Your
neck pain. (47)




rājāsti kandara-tale cala tatra dhūrte

tasyājñayaiva sahasaiva vivastrayiṣye

tvāṁ vīkṣya hṛṣyati sa vai nija-divya-muktā-

mālāṁ pradāsyati lalāṭa-taṭe madīye (48)



“O cunning one, a king is sitting within this cave. Let
Us go to him. On his order, I will at once remove Your
apparel. When he sees You, he will certainly become
satisfied and place a divine garland of pearls upon My
forehead.” (48)




doṣo na te vrajapates tanayo ‘pi tasya

duṣṭasya yan nara-pateḥ khalu sevako bhūḥ

tvad-buddhir īdṛg abhavan mama cātra sādhavī

bhāle kim etad abhaval likhitaṁ vidhātrā (49)



When You hear these words of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You will
jokingly say, “O Vrajendra-nandana, You are not at fault
in speaking such words because You have become a servant
of the wicked King Cupid. [In other words, You are
speaking like this only as a result of Your association
with that wicked one.] I accept that Your wicked
intelligence and My good intelligence are solely

                           32
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

ordained by the Creator.” (49)




ity ādi vāṇmaya-sudhām ahaha śrutibhyāṁ

premnā[xiii]13 pibāny udara-pūram athekṣaṇābhyām

rūpāmṛtaṁ tava sakāntatayā vilāsa-

sīdhuñ ca devi vitarāṇyatha mādayāni (50)



I will thus lovingly drink to my full satisfaction the
nectar of Your words through my ears and the nectar of
Your beauty through my eyes. I will distribute in the
assembly of the sakhīs the nectar of Your playful loving
exchanges with Your beloved and thus bring them delight.
(50)




preṣṭhe sarasy abhinavaiḥ kusumair vicitrāṁ

hindolikāṁ priyatamena sahādhirūḍhām

tvāṁ dolayāny atha kirāṇi parāga-rājī-

rgāyāni cāru-mahatīm api vādayāni (51)



I will swing You as You sit with Your beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa
on a wonderful swing made of fresh flowers on the bank
of Your dear pond (Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa). I will shower an
abundance of fragrant pollen on You both, sing beautiful
songs and play on the vīṇā and other musical
instruments. (51)




vṛndāvane sura-mahīruha-yogapīṭhe

siṁhāsane sva-ramaṇena virājamānām

pādyārghya-dhūpa-vidhūdīpa-catur-vidhānna-

srag-bhūṣaṇādibhir ahaṁ paripūjayāni (52)



While You and Śrī Kṛṣṇa remain gracefully situated on a
throne under a desire tree at the Yogapīṭha in Śrī
Vṛndāvana, I will worship You with pādya, arghya, a
camphor lamp, the four kinds of foodstuffs, garlands and
ornaments. (52)


                           33
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017




govardhane madhu-vaneṣu madhūtsavena

vidrāvit-trapa-sakhī-śata-vāhinīkām

piṣṭāta-yuddham anukānta-jayāya yāntīṁ

tvāṁ grāhayāṇi nava-jātuṣa-kūpikālīḥ (53)



In the forest of spring at Govardhana, at the time of
the spring festival (Holi), You will, without shyness,
come together with an army of hundreds of sakhīs. With
the intention of defeating Your beloved, You will engage
in a war of squirting big syringes filled with colour.
At that time, I will provide You with containers of
kuṁkuma made of lac. (53)




agre sthito ‘smi tava niścala-vakṣa eva

udghāṭya kanduka-cayaṁ kṣipa ced baliṣṭhā

udghāṭya kañcuka-muraḥ kila dārśayantī

tvaṁ cāpi tiṣṭha yadi te hṛdi vīratāsti (54)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa will say to You, “[What will happen when the
sharp current of colour sprays forth from Your syringe?]
I stand before You with My chest bare. If, at this
moment, You have any strength, uncover Your breasts and
hit My chest.” You will then exhibit Your uncovered
bosom and say, “If Your heart possesses any valour, then
stay and fight.” (54)




yat kathyate tad ayam eva tava sva-bhāvo

yat pūrva-janmani bhavān ajitaḥ kilāsīt

mithyaiva tad yad iha bhoḥ katiśo jito ‘bhūḥ

mat-kiṅkarībhir api tad-vigata-trapo ‘si (55)



[Upon hearing Your words, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, will proudly say,
“Yes, yes. Come, come; just come forward.” You will then
respond,] “It is Your nature to speak proudly about Your
heroism, or to boast of Your own glories. Although we
have heard from Paurṇamāsī that in a previous birth You
appeared as Ajita (“the unconquerable one”), it is quite

                           34
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017

evident that this statement is completely false because
how many times, O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, have My maidservants
defeated You? Still, You so shamelessly boast in this
way.” (55)




ity evam utpulakinī kalayāni vācaṁ

siñjāna-kaṅkaṇa-raṇatkṛta-dundubhīkam

yuddhaṁ mukhāmukhi radāradi cāru-bāhā-

bāhavyamanda-nakharā-nakhari stuvāni (56)



When I hear You both speaking like this, I will become
exceedingly delighted. Accompanied by the sound of tiny
bells on anklets and bangles sounding like kettledrums,
a face-to-face, tooth-to-tooth, hand-to-hand and nail-
to-nail war will start between You. I will glorify this
battle, describing it in the assembly of the sakhīs.
(56)




kasyāñcid adri-nṛpa-divya-dupatyakāyāṁ

sa-preyasi tvayi sakhī-śata-veṣṭitāyām

viśrānti-bhāji vana-devatayopanītā-

nīṣṭāni sīdhu-caṣakāni puro dadhāni (57)



When You take rest with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a splendid place
[in some valley] near Girirāja-Govardhana, surrounded by
hundreds of sakhīs, I will place near You the pitchers
of desired nectar and honey-wine as supplied by a forest
goddess. (57)




hā kiṁ ki-kiṁ dha-dharaṇī ghu-ghu-ghūrṇatīyaṁ

dhā-dhā-dha-dhāvati bhayād vi-vi-vṛkṣa-puñjaḥ

bhī-bhī- bhi-bhīrur aham atra kathaṁ jijīvā-

my evaṁ lagiṣyasi yadā dayitasya kaṇṭhe (58)



Exhilarated by the honey-wine, You will say, “Oh, oh,
the earth is spinning, and the trees are fleeing in
fear! I am so frightened! How will I now survive?”

                           35
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

Saying this, You will strongly clasp Your beloved’s neck
and embrace Him. (58)




tvat-svāminī pralapatīyam imāṁ gadena

hīnāṁ karomi kalayā taditaḥ prayāhi

ity ukti-sīdhura-satarpita-hṛt tadaiva

niṣkramya jāla-vitatau nidadhāni netre (59)



At that time, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will say to me, “Your mistress
is speaking incoherently because She is intoxicated on
the honey. I will cure Her with kisses, embraces and
other amorous arts. It will be good if you leave this
place.” Satisfied at heart by these nectarean words of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I will leave the kuñja and fix my eyes at the
narrow slits in the latticework, meaning that I will
observe Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s activities. (59)




ghrāṇākṣi-karṇa-vadane jala-seka-nītyā

kṛṣṇas tvayā jita itaḥ sahasā nimajya

grāho bhavan sa khalu yat kurute sma tat tu

jānāmy ahaṁ tava mukhāmbujam eva vīkṣya (60)



While engaging in water-sports, You will splash water in
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nose, eyes, ears and mouth, thus defeating
Him. Quickly, He will submerge Himself in the water like
a crocodile, and what He does next I will understand by
seeing Your lotus face. (60)




abhyañjayāni sa-sakhī-dayitāṁ sahāliḥ

tvāṁ snāpayāni vasanābharaṇair vicitram

śṛṅgārayāṇi maṇi-mandira-puṣpa-talpe

saṁbhojayāni karakādy atha śāpayāni (61)



Together with the sakhīs, to whom You are most dear, I
will massage You with oil and then bathe You. I will
decorate You with beautiful garments and ornaments. I
will feed You pomegranates and other fruits, and then I

                           36
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017

will put You to rest on a flowerbed in a temple made of
jewels. (61)




vānīra-kuñja iha tiṣṭhati kṛṣṇa devī

nihnutya mṛgyasi kathaṁ taditaḥ paratra

satyām imāṁ mama giraṁ tam aviśvasan taṁ

yāntaṁ pradarśya bhavatīm atiharṣayāṇi (62)



While playing hide-and-seek, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will search for
You [in the kuñja where You are hiding, outside which I
am standing. But upon being unsuccessful in finding You,
He will proceed to some other place. Perturbed, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa will look for You here and there]. At that time, I
will say, “O Kṛṣṇa, my Queen is in this vānīra-kuñja.
Why are You leaving and searching for Her elsewhere?”
Even though I speak the truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will not
believe me and will leave for another place. I will show
You this condition of His and thus fill You with
happiness. (62)




svāminy amūtra harir asti kadamba-kuñje

nihnutya mṛgyasi kathaṁ tad itaḥ paratra

satyām imāṁ mama giraṁ khalu viśvasantyāḥ

pāṇau jayaṁ tava nayāni tam āpnuvantyāḥ (63)



When You search for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I will say, “O Svāminī,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is hiding in this kadamba grove. Why are You
leaving this place to search for Him elsewhere?” Knowing
I speak the truth, You will believe my words. [In this
way,] I will make You triumphant in the game of hide-
and-seek. (63)




rādhe jitā ca jayinī ca paṇaṁ na datu-

mādātum apy ahaha cumbanam īśiṣe tvam

nāśleṣa-cumbana-madhurādhara-pānato ‘nyat

dyūte glahaṁ rasa-vidaḥ pravaraṁ vadanti (64)




                           37
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

“O Rādhā, the wager in this dice-game is kisses on the
lips. If defeated, You must give Me this reward, and if
You win, You will have to accept it from Me.” [Although
You will become extremely happy at heart to hear these
words of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You will show indifference and say,
“Why stake such a useless wager? What is the necessity
of wasting My time for that?” Hearing Your words, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa will say,] “Why are You disagreeing? Look,
paṇḍitas expert in rasa say that in dice-games there can
be no better wager than embraces, kisses and tasting the
nectar of the other’s lips.” (64)




govarddhane hi mama kāpi sakhī pulinda-

kanyāsti bhṛṅgy atitarāṁ nipuṇedṛṣe ‘rthe

mad-grāhya-deya-paṇa-vastuni man-niyuktā

sā te grahīṣyati ca dāsyati copagūham (65)



Hearing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s words, You will agree. “Okay, then,”
You reply, “if You have such a desire for this stake,
then listen. My friend Bhṛṅgī, a Pulinda girl who lives
here at Govardhana, is very expert in these matters and
is also always searching for these kinds of proposals.
She is appointed [circumstantially] to accept the reward
on My behalf and to give it on My behalf, also. She will
embrace You and also accept Your embrace.” (65)




uktvettham ātma-dayitaṁ prativakṣyase māṁ

yāhīty athotpulakinī druta-pāda-pātā

tām ānayāny upamukundam athāsayāni

taṁ lajjayāni sumukhīr atihāsayāni (66)



After speaking like this to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You will order me
to bring that Pulinda girl. Filled with delight, I will
quickly bring her and seat her next to Mukunda.
[Pointing her out,] I will make the beautiful sakhīs
laugh and make Śrī Kṛṣṇa embarrassed. (66)




svayā kila vraja-pure muralī tavaikā

prābhūnnatām api bhavān avituṁ sva-bhāryyām

sā lampaṭāpi bhavato ‘dhara-sīdhu-siktā-

                           38
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                         5/5/2017


py anyaṁ pumāṁsam iha mṛgyati citram etat (67)



[At the sight of Bhṛṅgī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will give up the
wager of kisses and stake His flute instead. But upon
searching for it, He will be unable to find it because
You hid it earlier. When the sakhīs see Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
distress over His flute, they will taunt Him, saying,]
“O Kṛṣṇa, in this Vraja the flute is Your only wedded
wife. But You are not even capable of protecting Your
wife. Moreover, she is also licentious, because although
she is filled with the nectar of Your lips, she is
searching for another man. This is most astonishing.”
(67)




vaṁśīṁ satīṁ gunavatīṁ subhagāṁ dviṣantyo

‘sādhvyo bhavatya iha tat samatām alabdhvā

tāṁ kvāpi bandham anayaṁs tad ahaṁ bhujābhyāṁ

baddhaiva vaḥ śikhari-gahvara-gāḥ karomi (68)



Hearing the sakhīs’ words, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will say, “My flute
is chaste, full of good qualities and extremely
fortunate. But you women are immoral, and because you
cannot become her equal, you show enmity towards her.
One of you has confined her somewhere. Therefore, in
this mountain cave, I will imprison you all between My
arms.” (68)




iti āgataṁ harim avekṣya rahas tadīya-

kakṣād ahaṁ muralikāṁ sahasā gṛhītvā

tāṁ gopayāni tad-alakṣitam eva citra-

puṣpeṣu-saṅgara-rasāṁ kalayāni ca tvām (69)



Seeing Śrī Hari approaching in this mood, I will deftly
and secretly take the muralī from beneath Your arm. I
will hide it, without revealing its location to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, and thus I will make You the object of Cupid’s
battle. (69)



brahmann imām anugṛhāṇa bhavantam eva

bhāsvantam arcayitum icchati me snuṣeyam

                           39
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017


ity āryayā praṇamitāṁ dhṛta-vipra-veśe

kṛṣṇe ‘rpitāñ ca bhavatīm smita-bhāg-bhajāni (70)



When Jaṭilā arrives at the temple of the Sun-god, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa will be there, dressed like a brāhmaṇa. “O
brāhmaṇa,” Jaṭilā will say, “please bestow Your mercy
upon this daughter-in-law of mine. She desires to
worship You in the form of the Sun, meaning that She
wants to choose You as Her priest to worship the Sun-
god.” Jaṭilā will make You bow down to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
disguised as a brāhmaṇa and offer You to Him. Upon
seeing all this, I will smile so slightly. (70)




Aparāhna-līlā

(pastimes during the early afternoon)


yāntīṁ gṛhaṁ sva-guru-nighnatayātilaulyāt

kāntāvalokana-kṛte miṣam āmṛśantīm

dūre ‘nuyāni yad ato ‘nuvivartitāsyām

ehi iti vakṣyasi tad-āsya-ruco dhayantīm (71)



Fearing the scolding of Your respectable elders, You
will go towards Your home, greatly troubled. As You walk
along, You will search [in Your mind] for an excuse to
turn around and once again gaze upon Your lover.
[Understanding the sentiments of Your heart,] I will
intentionally remain somewhat behind You and walk with
my head turned, to look behind me. [Seeing that I am not
with You, You will, on the pretext of calling to me,
turn around and again behold Your beloved.] Beckoning to
me, You will call “Come, come!” and I will behold Your
beauty. (71)




gehāgatāṁ virahiṇīṁ nava-puṣpa-talpe

tvāṁ śāyayāni parataḥ kila murmur ābhāt

tasmāt paratra śāyanaṁ visa-puñja-klipta-

madhyāsayāni vidhu-candana-paṅka-liptām (72)



When You arrive home, You will burn in separation from
Kṛṣṇa. Although I will lay You down on a bed made of

                           40
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

fresh flowers, that bed will become like smouldering
husks [being inflamed by Your burning]. Thus, soon
after, I will anoint You with camphor and sandal paste
and then lay You down to rest on a bed made of lotus
stems. (72)




ākarṇya candana-kalā kathitaṁ vrajeśā-

sandeśam utsuka mateḥ sahasā sahālyāḥ

sāyanta-nāśana-kṛte dayitasya navya-

kārpūra-keli-vaṭakādi-vinirmitau te (73)



lampāmi cullim atha tatra kaṭāha-maccha-

mārohayāṇi dahanaṁ racayāni dīptam

nīrājya-khaṇḍa-kadalī-maricendu-sīri-

godhūma-cūrṇa-mukha-vastu samānayāni (74)



After hearing Vrajeśvarī’s message through Candanakalā
Sakhī, You, being greatly eager, will quickly busy
Yourself, together with the sakhīs, in preparing navya-
karpūrakeli and other snacks for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s evening
meal. At that time, I will smear the stove with cow
dung, put a clean cooking vessel on it and ignite a
fire. I will bring water, ghee, sugar, bananas,
chillies, camphor, coconut pulp, different kinds of
wheat flour and other ingredients and put them before
You. (73—74)




atyadbhutaṁ malayaja-drava-secanena

vṛddhiṁ jagāma yad idaṁ virahānalaujaḥ

kārpūra-keli-vaṭakāvali-sādhanāgni-

jvālaiva śantim anayat tad iti bravāṇi (75)



[Jokingly] I will tell You, “The fire of separation from
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which was increasing despite anointing Your
body

with malayaja-candana, has now been reduced by the heat
of the fire that was ignited to prepare karpūra-kelī.
This is most amazing.” (75)



                           41
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017




dhūlir gavāṁ diśam arundha-hareḥ sahambā-

rāvoty udantam atulaṁ madhu pāyayāni

tat-pāna-sammada-nirasta-samasta-kṛtyāṁ

tvām utthitāṁ saha-gaṇām abhisārayāṇi (76)



“Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lowing cows are approaching, and the dust
from their hooves has covered all directions.” I will
bring this matchlessly sweet news for You to drink.
After drinking this nectar, You will abandon all Your
duties, and You and the sakhīs will become so excited.
At that time, I will take You for Your rendezvous. (76)




tat-kṛṣṇa-vartma nikaṭa-sthalam ānayāni

nirvāpayāṇi virahānalam unnataṁ te

āyata eṣa iti valli-nigūḍha-gātrīm

ākṛṣya mahyam ahaheśvari kopayāni (77)



I will bring You close to the path on which Śrī Kṛṣṇa
will return from grazing the cows and thus pacify Your
extreme fire of separation from Him. [For a brief,
interval You have forgotten Your suffering due to
Goṣṭheśvarī Śrī Yaśodā’s order and Your desire for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s future happiness.] When Śrī Kṛṣṇa approaches,
You will, out of shyness, hide Yourself amidst the
shelter of creepers. When, O Goddess, I forcefully pull
You out in front of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You will become angry
with me. (77)




śrī-kṛṣṇa-dṛṅ-madhu-lihā bhavad-āsya-padmam

āghrāpayāṇy atitṛṣan tava dṛk-cakorīm

tad-vāktra-candra-vikasat-smita-dhārayaiva

sañjīvayāni madhurimni nimajjayāni (78)



At that time, I will let Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s bee-like eyes smell
the scent of Your lotus face. Your extremely thirsty
cakorī bird-like eyes will be restored to life in the
stream of nectar emanating from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful,
slightly smiling moon-like face. I will then immerse

                           42
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

myself in that sweetness. (78)




Sāyaṁ-līlā

(pastimes during the evening)


vaivaśyam asya tava cādbhutam īkṣayāṇi

tvām ānayāni sadanaṁ lalitā-nideśāt

karpūra-kely-amṛta-keli-tati-pradātuṁ

goṣṭheśvarīm anusarāṇi samaṁ sakhībhiḥ (79)



I will behold Your and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s helplessness. On Śrī
Lalitā’s order, I will bring You home, and I will go
with the sakhīs to Goṣṭheśvarī to take her the karpūra-
keli, amṛta-keli and the other preparations. (79)




gatvā praṇamya tava śaṁ kathayāni devi

pṛṣṭā tayātha vaṭakāvalim arpayitvā

tāṁ harṣayāṇi bhavad-adbhuta-sad-guṇālīḥ

tat-kīrtitāḥ svavayase śṛṇavāni hṛṣṭā (80)



O Devī, upon arriving there, I will bow down before   Śrī
Yaśodā Maiyā and give her the snacks. When she asks   me
about You, I will tell Śrī Yaśodā that You are well   and
thus bring her untold joy. When she glorifies Your
wonderful qualities in the presence of the gopīs of   her
own age, I will listen with a happy heart. (80)




vīkṣyāgataṁ tanayam unnata-sambhramormi-

magnāṁ stanākṣi-payasām abhiṣicya pūraiḥ

abhyañjanādi-kṛtaye nija-dāsikās tā

māñcapi tāṁ nidiśatīṁ manasā stuvāni (81)



Seeing her son returning, Śrī Yaśodā Maiyā will be
plunged in waves of excitement. She will joyfully
sprinkle Śrī Kṛṣṇa with her breast-milk and tears, and

                           43
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017

she will order her maidservants and me to massage Him
with fragrant oil. I will praise that Yaśodā Maiyā
within my mind. (81)




snānānulepa-vasanābharaṇair vicitra-

śobhasya mitra-sahitasya tayā jananyā

snehena sādhu bahu-bhojita-pāyitasya

tasyāvaśeṣitam alakṣitam ādadāni (82)



After His bath, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will be beautified with sandal
paste and wonderful garments and ornaments. Mother
Yaśodā will then lovingly give Him food and drink. When
He has finished, I will, unseen by others, take His
remnants. (82)




tenaiva kānta-viraha-jvara-bheṣajena

tāt-kālikena tad udanta-rasena cāpi

āgatya sādhu śiśirī karavāṇi śīghraṁ

tvan-netra-karṇa-rasanā-hṛdayāni devi (83)



O Devī, to alleviate the fire of separation from Your
beloved that You experience at that time, I will give
You the remnants touched by the nectar of His lips as
medicine and the description of His bathing, eating and
so forth as a wholesome diet. Thus I will quickly cool
Your eyes, ears, tongue and heart. (83)




snānāya pāvana-taḍāga-jale nimagnāṁ

tīrthāntare tu nija-bandhu-vṛto jala-sthaḥ

sammajya tatra jala-madhyata etya sa tvā-

māliṅgya tatra gata eva samutthitaḥ syāt (84)



When, for Your bath, You immerse Yourself in the waters
of Pāvana-sarovara, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, surrounded by His sakhās,
will also dive into the water at another ghāṭa. [Śrī
Kṛṣṇa searches for a pretext on which He will make You
joyful and says to His friends, “Today, let us decide

                           44
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

who is the most powerful by seeing who can stay
underwater the longest.” With these words, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
will dive into the water along with His many sakhās.]
Having thus submerged Himself, He will embrace You
underwater and then emerge at His own ghāṭa. (84)




tan no vidur nikaṭa-gā api te nanandṛ-

śvaśrādayo na kila tasya sahodarādyāḥ

jñatvāham utpulakitaiva sahāliret-

ccāturyametya lalitāṁ prativarṇayāni (85)



Although Your sister-in-law and mother-in-law will be
present, and although Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s brother (Balarāma) and
others will be on the other bank, no one will be able to
understand what has happened. [Nevertheless, just by
seeing the expressions of Your face,] I will understand,
and being excited about the dexterity of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I
will narrate everything to Śrī Lalitā and the sakhīs.
(85)




udyāna-madhya-valabhīm adhiruhya tatra

vātāyanārpita-dṛśaṁ bhavatīṁ vidhāya

sandarśya te priyatamaṁ surabhīr duhānam

ānanda-vāridhi-mahormiṣu majjayāni (86)



[After bathing, You will return to Your home in Yāvaṭa
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa will leave to milk the cows.] I will on
any excuse take You to the candra-śālā[xiv]14, the room
on the roof in the garden. Through its small latticed
windows, I will show You the distant cowshed. Upon
seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa milking the cows, You will be immersed
in a huge wave in an ocean of bliss. (86)




gatvā mukundam atha bhojita-śayitaṁ taṁ

goṣṭheśayā tava daśāṁ nibhṛtaṁ nivedya

saṅkeṭa-kuñjam adhigatya punaḥ sametya

tvāṁ jñāpayāny ayi tad utkalikā-kulāni (87)



                           45
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017


After Goṣṭheśvarī has fed Śrī Kṛṣṇa and put Him to bed,
I will secretly go before Him to reveal Your condition.
I will receive information about the appointed
rendezvous and then return to You and describe Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s longing to meet with You. (87)




Pradoṣa-līlā

(pastimes during the first part of the night)


tvāṁ śukla-kṛṣṇa-rajanī-sarasābhisāra-

yogyair vicitra-vasanābharaṇair vibhūṣya

prāpayya kalpa-taru-kuñjam anaṅga-sindhau

kāntena tena saha te kalayāni kelīḥ (88)



For the meeting (abhisāra), I will dress and decorate
You wonderfully, in accordance with the waning or waxing
phase of the moon. I will bring You into the bower of
desire trees, where I will arrange for You and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
to immerse Yourselves in an ocean of amorous sports.
(88)




Atha prārthanā

(prayers)


he śrī-tulasy-uru-kṛpā-dyu-taraṅginī tvaṁ

yan-mūrdhni me caraṇa-paṅkajam ādadhāḥ svam

yac cāham apy apibam ambu manāk tadīyaṁ

tan me manasy udayam eti manoratho ‘yam (89)



O Tulasī, O river of profuse mercy, you have
compassionately placed your lotus feet upon my head. I
have drunk a small portion of the water that touched
your feet, and for this reason, all these desires have
arisen within my heart. (89)




kvāhaṁ paraḥ śata-nikṛty-anuviddha-cetāḥ


                           46
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017

saṅkalpa eṣa sahasā kva sudurlabhārthe

ekā kṛpaiva tava mām ajahāty upādhi-

śūnyaivam antum adadhāty agater gatir me (90)



Where am I, whose heart is filled with deceit and
hundreds of other faults, and where is this sudden
resolve concerning this rare subject matter? O Tulasī,
you are the personification of shelter for the helpless.
You are my only refuge. Your unconditional mercy
accepted me without counting my faults. (90)




he raṅga-mañjari kuruṣva mayi prasādaṁ

he prema-mañjari kirātra kṛpā-dṛṣaṁ svām

mām ānaya sva-padam eva vilāsa-mañjarī-

ālī-janaiḥ samam urī-kuru dāsya-dāne (91)



O Raṅga Mañjarī, please bestow your mercy upon me. O
Prema Mañjarī, please grace me with your compassionate
glance. O Vilāsa Mañjarī, attracting me to your lotus
feet and making me your servant, please accept me with
the other sakhīs. (91)




he mañjulāli nija-nātha-padābja-sevā-

sātatya-sampad-atulāsi mayi prasīda

tubhyaṁ namo ‘stu guṇa-mañjari māṁ dayasva

mām uddharasva rasike rasa-mañjari tvam (92)



O Mañjulālī, your wealth of perpetual service to the
lotus feet of your master is beyond compare; be pleased
with me. O Guṇa Mañjarī, I am bowing down to you; please
be merciful to me. O Rasa Mañjarī, you who are expert in
relishing divine mellows, please deliver me. (92)




he bhānumaty anupama-praṇayābdhi-magnā

sva-svāminos tvam asi māṁ padavīṁ naya svām

prema-pravāha-patitāsi lavaṅga-mañjarī-

                           47
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017


ātmīyatāmṛta-mayīṁ mayi dehi dṛṣṭim (93)



O Bhānumatī, you are submerged in the ocean of
incomparable love for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Please accept
me into performance of the same kind of sevā that you
do. O Lavaṅga Mañjarī, you are immersed in the current
of prema. Please cast your intimate nectar-like glance
upon me. (93)




he rūpa-mañjari sadāsi nikuñja-yūnoḥ

keli-kalā-rasa-vicitrita-citta-vṛttiḥ

tvad-datta-dṛṣṭir api yat samakalpayaṁ tat-

siddhau tavaiva karuṇā prabhutām upaitu (94)



O Rūpa Mañjarī, your heart is an image of the divine
mellows of the variegated amorous pastimes of the
Youthful Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who are
always engaged in loving exchanges within the nikuñjas.
On the strength

of the hope of attaining your mercy, I have made a
resolve, but in order to fulfil it, may I obtain the
greatness of your compassion. (94)




rādhāṅga-śaśvad-upagūhanatas tad-āpta-

dharma-dvayena tanu-citta-dhṛtena deva

gauro dayā-nidhir abhūr api nanda-sūno

tan me manoratha-latāṁ saphalī-kuru tvam (95)



O Nanda-nandana, by always embracing Śrī Rādhā You have
assumed a golden form, through Her transcendental
sentiments and bodily lustre. [In this golden form,] You
have appeared as supremely compassionate; therefore,
please make the creeper of my heartfelt wish bear fruit.
(95)




śrī-rādhikā-giribhṛtau lalitā-prasāda-

labhyāv iti vraja-vane mahatīṁ prasiddhim

                           48
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                         5/5/2017


śrutvāśrayāṇi lalite tava pāda-padmaṁ

kāruṇya-rañjita-dṛśaṁ mayi hā nidhehi (96)



In this forest of Vraja, it is especially well-known
that Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Giridhara can only be attained by the
mercy of Śrī Lalitā-devī. Hearing this, O Lalitā, I have
taken shelter of your lotus feet. Please bestow your
merciful glance upon me. (96)




tvaṁ nāma-rūpa-guṇa-śīla-vayobhir aikyād

rādheva bhāsi sudṛśāṁ sadasi prasiddhā

āgaḥ śatāny agaṇayanty ararī-kurusva

tan māṁ varāṅgi nirūpādhi-kṛpe viśākhe (97)



O most beautiful one, O causelessly merciful Viśākhā, in
the eyes of the beautiful damsels of Vraja, you equal
Śrī Rādhā in terms of name [Anurādhā], beauty, virtues,
nature and age. This is eternally well-known. Without
counting my hundreds and hundreds of offences, please
accept me. (97)




he prema-sampad-atulā vraja-navya-yūnoḥ

prāṇādhika-priya-sakha-priya-narma-sakhyaḥ

yuṣmākam eva caraṇābja-rajo ‘bhiṣekaṁ

sākṣād avāpya saphalo ‘stu mamaiva mūrdhā (98)



O priya-sakhās and priya-narma-sakhīs, you are dearer
than life for the eternally youthful Divine Couple of
Vraja due to your unequalled love for Them. Please, all
of you, bestow upon me such mercy that I may be bathed
in the dust of your lotus feet; thus my head [or my
resolve] may be crowned with success. (98)




vṛndāvanīya-mukuṭa-vraja-loka-sevya

govardhanācala-guro haridāsa-varya

tvat-sannidhi-sthiti-juṣo mama hṛt-śilāsu

                           49
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                         5/5/2017


api etā manoratha-latāḥ sahasodbhavantu (99)



Govardhana, you are the crown of Vṛndāvana, worshipful
for all the residents of Vraja, best among all of Śrī
Hari’s servants and a preceptor in the form of a
mountain. Please make all these creeper-like desires in
the stone-like heart of me, who resides near you,
quickly thrive. (99)




śrī-rādhayāsama tadīya-sarovara tvat

tīre vasāni samaye ca bhajāni saṁsthām

tvan-nīra-pāna-janitā mama tarṣa-valyaḥ

pālyas tvayā kusumitā phalitāś ca kāryāḥ (100)



O Rādhā-kuṇḍa, you are just like Śrī Rādhikā and   are Her
very own pond. My desire is that I may reside on   your
bank and there attain the final goal. It is from
drinking your waters that this creeper of desire   has
arisen. Please now nourish this creeper and make   it bear
flowers and fruits. (100)




vṛndāvanīya-sura-pādapa-yogapīṭha

svasmin balād iha nivāsayasi svayaṁ yat

tan me tvadīya tala-tasthuṣa eva sarva-

saṅkalpa-siddhim api sādhu kuruṣva śīghram (101)



O desire trees of Vṛndāvana, O Yogapīṭha, you have all
forcefully caused me to reside at this place. Please,
therefore, swiftly and nicely fulfil all the resolves of
this person residing at your base. (101)




vṛndāvana-sthira-carān paripālayitri

vṛnde tayo rasikayo rati-saubhagena

āḍhyāsi tat kuru kṛpāṁ gaṇanā yathaiva

śrī-rādhikā-parijaneṣu mamāpi sidhyet (102)


                           50
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                         5/5/2017



O Vṛndā, you are the protector and maintainer of all the
moving and non-moving living entities of Vṛndāvana. You
are wealthy by the great fortune of excessive love and
affection for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who are expert in
relishing rasa. Please bestow upon me such mercy by
which I will also be counted amongst Śrī Rādhikā’s near
and dear ones. (102)




vṛndāvanāvani-pate jaya soma-soma-

maule sanandana-sanātana-nāradeḍya

gopeśvara vraja-vilāsi-yugāṅghri-padme

prītiṁ prayaccha nitarāṁ nirupādhikāṁ me (103)



O king of the land of Vṛndāvana, O husband of Umā, O
Somamauli, you who carry the moon on your head! O you
who are worshipped by Sanandana, Sanātana and Nārada! O
Gopeśvara, please bestow upon me unconditional
transcendental love for the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, who perform loving pastimes in Vraja. (103)



hitvānyāḥ kila vāsanā bhaja sakhe vṛndāvanaṁ prema-daṁ

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-vilāsa-vāridhi-rasāsvādaṁ paraṁ vindasi

tal-labdhuṁ yadi kāmanā jhaṭiti te cetaḥ samudvarttate,

viśrabdhāḥ satataṁ samāśraya dṛḍhaṁ saṅkalpa-kalpadrumam
(104)




iti śrī-svarūpa-rūpa-raghunātha-kṛṣṇadāsa-narottama-

caraṇānuvartti rasikendra-mukuṭa-maulī śrīmad-

viśvanātha-cakravarttī-kavirāja-viracitaṁ

śrī-saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaṁ samāptam




Friends [O tendencies of my heart, O sādhaka jīvas], if
your only goal is to relish the rasa of the ocean of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s loving pastimes, and if you are
longing to attain this, then give up all other desires
and worship Śrī Vṛndāvana, the bestower of prema. And,
if the desire to quickly attain this relish is strong,

                           51
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

take shelter of this Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ — desire-tree
of my auspicious resolve — with firm faith and fixed
determination. (104)



Thus ends the bhāvānuvāda of the Śrī Saṅkalpa-
kalpadrumaḥ by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja.



Daṇḍātmikā-sevā

(service during the different daṇḍas[xv]15 of the day)




Diva-līlā

(pastimes during the day)


prātaḥ-kāle uṭhiyā śrī-rādhā ṭhākurānī

danta-dhāvanādi kriyā karilā āpani (1)



Upon arising in the early morning, Śrī Rādhā Ṭhākurānī
Herself cleans Her teeth and performs other morning
duties. (1)




udvarttanādi diyā sakhī karāila snāna

tabe veśa-bhūṣā karāila paridhāna (2)



Thereafter, the sakhīs massage Her body with different
ointments, bathe Her, and dress and decorate Her. (2)




ei kārye śrīmatīra eka daṇḍa jāya

utkaṇṭhita citta kṛṣṇa darśana āśāya (3)



One daṇḍa passes while Śrīmatī Rādhājī is doing this.
The hope of beholding Śrī Kṛṣṇa fills Her heart with
longing. (3)




                            52
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                          5/5/2017



kṛṣṇa lāgi randhana karite nandīśvare

pathe yāite eka daṇḍa haya ataḥpara (4)



After this, one more daṇḍa passes in going to Nandīśvara
(Nanda-bhavana) to cook for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (4)




dui daṇḍa kāla jāya randhana kriyāya

āra daṇḍa jāya kṛṣṇa bhojana līlāya (5)



Śrīmatī spends two daṇḍas in cooking and one in
beholding Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eating-pastimes. (5)




aṣṭama daṇḍete rādhāra prasāda sevana

avaśeṣa pāila tabe sarva sakhī-gaṇa (6)



During the eighth daṇḍa Śrī Rādhā honours prasāda and
then all the sakhīs partake of Her remnants. (6)




aṣṭa daṇḍottare kṛṣṇera goṣṭha-yātrā haya

daśa daṇḍe jāna rādhā āpana ālaya (7)



After the eighth daṇḍa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa sets out for the
pasturing-grounds, [Śrīmatī Rādhā spends one daṇḍa in
beholding Him,] and in the tenth daṇḍa, Rādhājī goes to
Her home. (7)




ekādaśa daṇḍe rādhā śvaśru ājñā laiyā

sūrya-pūjā-sajja kailā ati vyasta haiyā (8)



In the eleventh daṇḍa, with the permission of Her
mother-in-law, Śrī Rādhā, being very restless, prepares

                           53
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017

the articles needed for worship of the Sun-god. (8)




tina daṇḍa sūrya-kuṇḍa jāite jāya kāla

sūryera mandire rākhe pūjā-dravya-jāla (9)



Three daṇḍas pass in going to Sūrya-kuṇḍa. [As a show
for Her mother-in-law and sister-in-law,] She places all
the articles brought for Her worship in the temple of
the Sun-god. (9)




puṣpa-tulivāre jāya sakhī-gaṇa laiyā

rādhā-kuṇḍe jāya kṛṣṇa darśana lāgiyā (10)



Thereafter, She goes with the sakhīs to pick flowers,
and while doing so, they walk to Rādhā-kuṇḍa for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s darśana. (10)




dui daṇḍa jāya rāī nija kuṇḍa-tīre

śrī-kṛṣṇe darśana kaila sva-kuñja-kuṭīre (11)



Rāī (Śrīmatī Rādhikā) spends two daṇḍas reaching the
bank of Her pond. There, She attains Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s darśana
in Her kuñja. (11)




śrī-kṛṣṇa praṇāma kari mālā-candana dilā

deha preme garagara ānanda bāḍilā (12)



After greeting Śrī Kṛṣṇa, She gives Him garlands,
sandalwood paste and other such presentations. Her body
becomes overwhelmed by prema and Her bliss increases.
(12)




                           54
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

tabe nānā kautuka karilā duījana

hindolāya duṅhe dule ānandita mana (13)



Thereafter, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā perform many
kinds of festive pastimes. Filled with bliss, They swing
to and fro on a swing. (13)




sakhī-gaṇa laiyā tabe kare rasa-keli

kuñja-mājhe viharena duṅhe pāśā kheli (14)



With the sakhīs, They perform pastimes full of rasa, and
in the kuñja They both enjoy by playing dice. (14)




kṛṣṇa hārilena khelite rāī sane

kṛṣṇa bale bikāilāma tomāra caraṇe (15)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is defeated when playing with Rāī and says, “O
Rādhā, I have become a servant at Your divine feet.”
(15)




tabe kṛṣṇa miṣṭha anna bhojana karilā

sakhī-gaṇa laiyā rāī avaśeṣa pāilā (16)



[Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s heart melts upon hearing His words of
lamentation, and so She asks the sakhīs to bring some
sweets. Upon their doing so, Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself
serves them to Śrī Kṛṣṇa with Her lotus hands. While
drinking the sweetness of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s face in this
way,] Śrī Kṛṣṇa eats

the sweets, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the sakhīs take His
remnants. (16)




tabe duṅhe praveśilā śrī-maṇi-mandire

rasera vilāsa kailā praphulla antare (17)

                           55
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017




Thereafter, They both enter the jewelled palace, and
with cheerful hearts They engage Themselves in rasa-
vilāsa (amorous pastimes). (17)




ei rūpe vilāsa-rase jāya chaya daṇḍa

bāīśa daṇḍa uttare rāī jāna nija kuṇḍa (18)



In this way, six daṇḍas are spent in rasa-vilāsa. After
the twenty-second daṇḍa, Rāī again proceeds towards
Rādhā-kuṇḍa. (18)




duī daṇḍa sūryālaye karite gamane

tabe eka daṇḍa haya sūrya ārādhane (19)



From there, it takes two daṇḍas to go to the Sūrya
temple. The worship of the Sun-god then takes one daṇḍa.
(19)




tad-antare sakhī saṅge rāī gṛhe jāna

pathe cāri daṇḍa lāge karite prayāṇa (20)



Thereafter, Rāī and Her sakhīs go home. It takes four
daṇḍas to walk back. (20)




gṛhe giyā rāī tabe snāna samāpiyā

sūryera prasāda pāna sakhī-gaṇa laiyā (21)



After returning home, Rāī bathes and then, with the
sakhīs, She takes the prasāda of the Sun-god. (21)




                           56
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017


prasāda pāite rādhāra jāya eka daṇḍa

kṛṣṇe dekhi pāka kailā amṛtera khaṇḍa (22)



One daṇḍa passes while Śrī Rādhā takes prasāda. Seeing
that the time has come for Śrī Kṛṣṇa to return from
grazing

the cows, Śrī Rādhā begins to prepare amṛta-keli and
other snacks. (22)




pakvānna miṣṭhānna saba kṛṣṇera lāgiyā

tulasīra hāte tāhā dena pāṭhāiyā (23)



When many different kinds of fried preparations and
sweets for Śrī Kṛṣṇa have been prepared, She sends them
to Nanda-bhavana with Tulasī. (23)




ekatriśa daṇḍe rāī virale basiyā

mālā gāṅthe sukhe tabe kṛṣṇera lāgiyā (24)



In the thirty-first daṇḍa, Rāī sits in a secluded place
happily stringing a garland for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (24)




candana-gharṣaṇe āra tāmbula-sajjāya

sandhyā āsi upanīta esaba kriyāya (25)



While Śrī Rādhā is engaged in grinding sandalwood,
preparing tāmbula and other such activities, evening
time sets. (25)




ei batriśa daṇḍa haila divā līlā

sandhyā-kāle rāī kichu viśrāma karilā (26)



                           57
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017


In this way, the pastimes during the day last for
thirty-two daṇḍas. In the early evening, Śrīmatī Rādhikā
takes some rest. (26)



iti divālīlā samāpta

Thus ends the day pastimes.




Rātri-līlā

(pastimes during the night)


duī daṇḍa śrī-rādhāra śayyāya śayana

tabe duī daṇḍe rādhāra hayata randhana (1)



For two daṇḍas Śrī Rādhā rests on a bed. When She
arises, She spends two daṇḍas cooking. [After finishing
Her cooking, She sends the preparations for Śrī Kṛṣṇa to
Śrī Nanda’s house with a sakhī. Śrī Rādhā Herself sits
meditating upon what is happening in Śrī Nanda’s house.]
(1)




chaya daṇḍa pare kṛṣṇa prasāda āsila

sakhī saṅge rādhā tabe bhojana karila (2)



After six daṇḍas, the sakhī returns to Yāvaṭa with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s remnants, and with great pleasure, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā partakes of that with the sakhīs. (2)




sapta daṇḍe rāī punaḥ karila śayana

uṭhi daśa daṇḍa abhisāra āyojana (3)



In the seventh daṇda, Rāī again takes rest. She arises
at the tenth daṇḍa and gets ready for abhisāra. (3)




                              58
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

saṅketa kuñjete jete lāge daṇḍa duī

dvādaśa daṇḍete kuñje upasthita haī (4)



Śrī Rādhā spends two daṇḍas in walking to the appointed
meeting place. In the twelfth daṇḍa, She reaches the
kuñja. (4)




trayodaśa daṇḍe seve tāmbula candana

kṛṣṇa-sane rāsa-lāsya laye sakhī-gaṇa (5)



In the thirteenth daṇḍa, She performs tāmbula and
sandalwood sevā to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Then, longing to perform
rāsa with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, She prepares Herself, along with
the sakhīs. (5)




rāsādi kautuke tabe cāri daṇḍa jāya

sakhī-gaṇa mili rādhā-kṛṣṇa guṇa gāya (6)



Four daṇḍas pass in performing rāsa and other pleasant
activities, during which the sakhīs sing the glories of
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. (6)




prema-rase rādhā-kṛṣṇa ānandita mane

kuñjete śayana kare seve sakhī-gaṇe (7)



Immersed in the mellows of prema, Śrī Rādhā and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa become blissful and rest in the kuñja, with the
sakhīs serving Them. (7)




āṣṭādāśa daṇḍe punaḥ kuñjete vihāra

nānā puṣpa veśa haya nānā alaṅkāra (8)



During the eighteenth daṇḍa, They again perform pastimes

                           59
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

in the kuñja, and, in different ways, They decorate each
other in variegated styles of dresses made of flowers.
(8)




kusuma yuddhete eka daṇḍa pare jāya

puṣpa śayyā-pare duṅhe śayana karāya (9)



One daṇḍa passes during a flower-war. Both of Them then
rest on a bed of flowers. (9)




una-viṁśa daṇḍe punaḥ bhojana vilāsa

tāhe vṛndā-devī ādira manera ullāsa (10)



In the nineteenth daṇḍa, eating-pastimes again take
place. Seeing this, Vṛndā-devī and others become
blissful at heart. (10)




viṁśa daṇḍe rādhā-kṛṣṇa karena vilāsa

cāri daṇḍa vilāsete doṅhāra ullāsa (11)



During the twentieth daṇḍa, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa engage
in loving exchanges. For four daṇḍas, They remain
absorbed in the joy of Their pastimes. (11)




catur-viṁśa daṇḍe nidrā jāna dui-jane

dui daṇḍa kuñja nidrā ānandita mane (12)



In the twenty-fourth daṇḍa, They both fall asleep, and
for two daṇḍas, They sleep blissfully in the kuñja. (12)




ṣaḍ-viṁśete kuñja-bhaṅga viraha-bhāvanā


                           60
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017

parspara sudhālāpa sa-prema-jalpanā (13)



In the twenty-sixth daṇḍa, feelings of separation from
each other arise because the time to leave the kuñja has
arrived. Their nectar-like conversation is full of
prema. (13)




eīrūpe duī daṇḍa jāite jāite

kuñja chāḍi rādhā-kṛṣṇa calilā gṛhete (14)



In this way, it takes two daṇḍas for Them to rise and
leave the kuñja. Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa then go towards
Their respective homes. (14)




duī daṇḍe āsi rāī yāvaṭe paśilā

muhūrtteka rātri chila sukhe nidrā gelā (15)



After two daṇḍas, Rāī reaches Yāvaṭa from the kuñja. At
that time, because only a muhūrta[xvi]16 remains of the
night, Śrīmatī Rādhikā happily falls asleep. (15)




rādhā-kṛṣṇa līlā-khelā varṇane nā jāya

saṅkṣepe kahinu kichu sevāra nirṇaya (16)



Although it is not possible to describe Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s loving pastimes (līlā-vilāsa), still I have in
brief pointed out the sevā one is supposed to perform.
(16)




rāgānugā haiyā kara sādhya sādhana

siddha-dehe kara sadā mānasī sevana (17)



Perform sādhana in accordance with rāgānugā, with the
aim of attaining the goal (sādhya). Always perform

                           61
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                          5/5/2017

mānasī-sevā of your object of reverence in your
spiritually perfected form (siddha-deha). (17)




sthūla dehe kara sadā śravaṇa kīrttana

vaidha dharma thāki dharma karaha pālana (18)



In your external body, always perform śravaṇa (hearing)
and kīrtana (chanting). Stay within regulated religion;
in other words, follow the rules of the Śruti, Smṛti,
Purāṇas and Pañcarātra. Completely abandon the
sentiments of the prākṛta sahajiyās and follow the pure
religion of the soul (ātma-

dharma). (18)




ati śīghra aprākṛta deha vyakta habe

sthūla līṅga deha chāḍi, nitya sevā pābe (19)



By acting like this, a revelation (sphūrti) of your
transcendental form will quickly come. Then, when giving
up your gross and subtle body, you will attain your
eternal service. (19)




śrī-rūpa raghunātha pade jāra āśa

catuḥṣaṣṭi gupta sevā kahe kṛṣṇadāsa (20)



With the desire to attain the guidance of the lotus feet
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
Kṛṣṇa dāsa has described the sixty-four kinds of
confidential sevās. (20)



daṇḍātmikā sevā samāpta

Thus ends the description of the sevā during the
different daṇḍas.




Index of principal personalities in this book

                           62
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                          5/5/2017


verse # identity



Bhānumati 93 Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s eternal

form



Guṇa Mañjarī 92 Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s

eternal form



Lavaṅga Mañjarī 93 Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s

eternal form



Mañjulālī 92 Śrīla Lokanātha Gosvāmī’s

eternal form



Prema Mañjarī 91 the author’s (Śrīla Viśvanātha

Cakravartī Ṭhakura’s) great

grand spiritual master, Śrī

Gaṅgā-nārāyaṇa Cakravartī’s

eternal form



Raṅga Mañjarī 10, 91 the author’s grand spiritual

master, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa

Cakravartī’s eternal form



Rati Mañjarī 10 Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa

Gosvāmī’s eternal form



Rasa Mañjarī 92 Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa

Gosvāmī’s eternal form



Rūpa Mañjarī 8, 10, 94 Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s eternal

form

                              63
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017




Tulasī 8, 10, 18, the author’s dikṣa-guru Śrī

89, 90 Rādhāramaṇa Cakravartī’s

eternal form



Vilāsa Mañjarī 91 Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura’s

eternal form




* * *




[i] A member of one of the eleven unauthorised sahajiyā
communities who concoct their own methods of devotional
service.




[ii] In this book, all text within square brackets has
been inserted by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja to facilitate the reader’s understanding of a
certain pastime or mood.




[iii] The symbol of Kāmadeva.




[iv] An alternative reading for rasavit is rasavat.




[v] A khaṇḍitā is a heroine who is offended by the late
arrival of her lover and the evident signs of His
infidelity.




[vi] A fragrant oil that cools and brings relief even to
the heart.

                           64
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                       5/5/2017




[vii] A cluster of pearls and other precious stones, or
the jewel-like flowers of the kovidāra tree.




[viii] An ornament worn on the back, upper part of the
head.




[ix] The symbol of Kāmadeva.




[x] An ornament that covers the entire top and side of
the foot.




[xi] Foodstuffs that are chewed, sucked, licked and
drunk.




[xii] An alternative reading for iti uktyā is iti uktvā.




[xiii] An alternative reading for premnā is premnā
dadāmi.




[xiv] A roof-top room from where the rays of the moon
can be relished freely.




[xv] One daṇḍa equals twenty-four minutes.




                           65
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt                        5/5/2017


[xvi] One muhūrta equals two daṇḍas, in other words,
forty-eight minutes.




Table of Contents

Foreword (translated from the first Hindi edition)

The Life History of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

Protecting the honour of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya
through Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa

Attainment of the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī by the
mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā

Re-establishing the doctrine of parakīyā

The glories and legacy of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura

Pradoṣānte abhisāraḥ (rendezvous at the close of early
evening)

Nakta-līlā (pastimes during the night)

Niśānta-līlā (pastimes at the end of night)

Prātar-līlā (early morning pastimes)

Pūrvāhna-līlā (pastimes during forenoon)

Madhyāhna-līlā (pastimes at midday)

Aparāhna-līlā (pastimes during the early afternoon)

Sāyaṁ-līlā (pastimes during the evening)

Pradoṣa-līlā (pastimes during the first part of the
night)

Atha prārthanā (prayers)

Diva-līlā (pastimes during the day)

Rātri-līlā (pastimes during the night)

Index of principal personalities in this book

[i]

[ii]

[iii]

[iv]

[v]

[vi]

                           66
Sankalpa-kalpadrumah.txt        5/5/2017


[vii]

[viii]

[ix]

[x]

[xi]

[xii]

[xiii]

[xiv]

[xv]

[xvi]




                           67
