Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Tags: Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mah

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahttt



* * *




* * *




Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka

Contents

Preface

Introduction

Prayers to Lord Caitanya

Verse One

Verse Two

Verse Three

Verse Four

Verse Five

Verse Six

Verse Seven

Verse Eight




Preface


[translated from the Hindi edition]

                           1
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017




Not only in Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava literature, but in the
Śruti, Smṛti, Purāṇas and the entirety of Indian
literature, Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, issued from the divine mouth
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, shines as a supremely
radiant, transcendental jewel. It is a source of
boundless happiness to me that today, by the inspiration
and causeless mercy of my most revered spiritual master,
nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, this Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka is presented to the reading audience in the
Hindi language.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the incarnation who delivers
the fallen conditioned souls in the age of Kali, is
directly the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, overwhelmed with an intense desire to
relish a particular sentiment, assumed the heartfelt
ecstatic mood and bodily complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
the embodiment of His own pleasure potency (hlādinī-
śakti), and bestowed upon the entire world the gifts of
His holy name and divine love for Him. By His deep
scholarship, matchless renunciation, humility, supremely
radiant spotless character and pre-eminent
transcendental devotional sentiment, He not only
astounded renowned scholars, but also very easily
attracted ordinary religionists and elevated devotees to
the religion of unalloyed spiritual love.

Due to the distinctive and magnanimous characteristics,
not only of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, but of His
followers as well, from Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāya
Rāmānanda and the Six Gosvāmīs up to present day ācāryas
and devotees, the waves of devotion unto the Supreme
Lord (bhagavad-bhakti) have spread to every town and
village of the world. Everywhere, the sound of the
congregational chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s holy names (harināma-
saṅkīrtana) is resounding, accompanied by mṛdaṅga and
karatālas.

It is truly a source of great honour and happiness for
us that today the extensive Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava literatures
are appearing in many other major languages and Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism is being propagated around the world.
Nevertheless, it is a matter of great astonishment that,
in spite of being unlimitedly qualified, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu did not personally write any books like
spiritual teachers who propounded other opinions.
Instead, He inspired His followers to write books. Only
eight verses are famous as His own composition. Some
other verses have been attributed to Him, but up till
now this has not been substantiated.

This Śikṣāṣṭaka is the very essence of all the Vedas.
Although its Sanskrit language is quite simple, its
import is so profound that even if one studies it
throughout his life, his study will not come to an end.
Each time one reads and deliberates on this subject,
newer and newer meanings come to light. Therefore it
remains eternally fresh. This Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka is a
veritable necklace for all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.


                           2
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, the eternal associate of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu in the modern age and author of many
sacred texts expounding the glories of bhakti, has again
initiated the flow of the mighty Ganges-like river of
bhakti, inundating the entire world in the flood of love
of God (kṛṣṇa-prema). He has written a soul-stirring
commentary to these eight verses, filled with many
important philosophical conclusions. This commentary is
famous by the name of Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya, the
commentary that brings delight to the devotees. To
understand the hidden truths of the original verses
without careful study of this commentary is not only
difficult, but impossible. Concealed in these verses is
the paramount ecstatic sentiment (bhāva) of the full-
blown, spiritually radiant mellow of amorous love
(ujjvala-prema-rasa, or śṛṅgāra-rasa) situated within
the heart of the incarnation of divine love, Śrī
Śacīnandana Gaurahari. Beholding this incomparable bhāva
with the help of this captivating commentary, one is
sure to be astonished at every step. Furthermore, one’s
heart becomes deeply overwhelmed with transcendental
pleasure, and unprecedented faith and devotional
sentiment develop towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s holy name.

This subject is most important and its greatness is
unlimited. Moreover, the commentator has illuminated
this subject in summary yet in a very significant
manner. Therefore to write more is like holding a lamp
to illuminate the sun.

The truths of sambandha (knowledge relevant to the
development of one’s relationship with the Lord),
abhidheya (the process of devotional life) and prayojana
(the ultimate goal of one’s devotion) are very nicely
included in Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka. Although instructions
regarding abhidheya are inherent within all eight
verses, Verses One through Five deal with devotion in
the stage of practice (sādhana-bhakti), Verses Six and
Seven deal with devotion on the level of ecstatic
emotion (bhāva-bhakti), and Verses Seven and Eight
describe devotion performed on the platform of divine
love (prema-bhakti).

In Verses Seven and Eight, in particular, is found a
pre-eminent example of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s deep emotional
anguish due to love in separation (vipralambha-prema-
vaicittya), instigated by Her own adhirūḍha-mahābhāva.
[Prema-vaicittya refers to a state in which even in the
beloved’s presence, the lover, out of intense love,
fails to perceive the presence of the beloved and is
thus aggrieved with feelings of separation.]

Jagad-guru nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda, in the year 1929,
edited and published Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka in the Bengali
language within a book entitled Sādhana-paṭha. It
included the Sanmodana-bhāṣya and songs composed by
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and a short commentary of
his own known simply as Vivṛti (commentary). However,
its non-availability in Hindi was acutely felt by me. It
was the desire of my most revered spiritual master that
these Bengali devotional literatures of unparalleled
benefit be published in Hindi. He kindly inspired me to
fulfil this purpose.

                           3
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017


Lastly, I am especially obliged to the present day head
and ācārya of the Śrī Gaudīya Vedānta Samiti,
parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja. He is a very influential ācārya, deeply
immersed in spiritual knowledge. Moreover, he is an
object of great affection of our spiritual master. At
this time, he himself is engaged in preparing and
editing Gauḍīya devotional literature in the Bengali
language. This edition is being published by his special
enthusiasm and inspiration. May he kindly deliver this
precious Śikṣāṣṭaka into the lotus hands of our revered
śrī gurudeva and thus fulfil his innermost desire. This
is our fervent prayer at his respected feet.

I have complete faith that this book will be
respectfully received by faithful sādhakas possessed of
yearning for bhakti and by learned circles as well. By
studying this book, such persons may enter into the
spotless religion of divine love (prema-dharma)
propagated by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. This is our
desire.

Being aggrieved at the distress of others, may Śrī
Śacīnandana Gaurahari and our most revered spiritual
master, who is the direct embodiment of the Lord’s
mercy, be pleased and bestow upon us eligibility to
serve their inner heart’s desire — this is our sole
heartfelt prayer at their lotus feet.



An aspirant for a particle of mercy

of śrī guru and the Vaiṣṇavas,



Tridaṇḍi-bhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



Gaura-pūrṇimā, the divine appearance day

of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu

17th March, 1984

Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha

Mathurā, Uttar Pradesh, India




Introduction


Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, adorned with the inner
sentiment and bodily splendour of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
appeared in this world in order to taste the ecstatic
moods of Her love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Simultaneously, He
distributed the holy name of Kṛṣṇa profusely for the

                              4
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

deliverance of the fallen conditioned souls of the age
of Kali. But which holy name did He distribute?

The chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra already
existed prior to the appearance of Mahāprabhu. The
principles of Vaiṣṇavism were established and spread all
over India by renowned preceptors such as Śrī
Rāmānujācārya, Śrī Madhvācārya, Śrī Nimbāditya, Śrī
Viṣṇu Svāmī and others. But prior to the advent of Śrī
Gaurāṅga, the practices of bhakti and even the chanting
of the mahā-mantra were directed towards the attainment
of Vaikuṇṭha.

The holy name can deliver to the performer whatever he
may desire. But unless one is infused with the highest
aspiration, its full potential will not be realised.
Therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s unique contribution
was that He revealed the confidential loving moods of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and thus inspired the living entities to
aspire for the highest attainment — the spontaneous
loving service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Goloka
Vṛndāvana. This is indicated in the following verses
from Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.15—16):

prema-rasa-niryāsa karite āsvādana

rāga-mārga-bhakti loke karite pracāraṇa



rasika-śekhara kṛṣṇa parama-karuṇa

ei dui hetu haite icchāra udgama



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s desire to appear was born from two principal
causes: He wanted to taste the sweet essence of the
liquid mellows of divine love (prema-rasa), and He
wanted to propagate bhakti in the world on the platform
of spontaneous attraction (rāga-mārga). Thus He is known
as rasika-śekhara, the topmost relisher of
transcendental mellows, and as parama-karuṇa, the most
merciful of all.

The chanting of the holy name must be accompanied by
sambandha-jñāna, knowledge relevant to the development
of one’s relationship with the Lord. In the eight verses
known as Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has
expressed the essence of His teachings. If we chant
according to the method outlined in these verses, we are
assured of attaining that most precious and confidential
gift which Śrī Gaurāṅga came to distribute.

The teachings of Śrī Gaurasundara, which appear in
condensed form in the Śikṣāṣṭaka, have been expanded
upon elaborately in the writings of His followers like
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura, Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura and others.

It was the intention of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His
confidential associates that His present-day followers

                           5
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

should have access to all these literatures in order to
firmly implant in their hearts the desire to follow in
the footsteps of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates in
Vraja. These books enunciate the exact method by which
this goal may be attained.

With this in mind, our exalted Śrīla Gurudeva, oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, has inspired the presentation of this
edition of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka in the English language. By
studying its contents carefully, one can easily gain
access to the wealth of literature left by the Gosvāmīs.
The deep and confidential mysteries of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka
have been revealed in this volume through the
commentaries of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda. Without their
insights, we would have no access to the truths that are
contained in these verses. Yet even in revealing these
secrets, they have inserted in select places still other
secrets to be discovered by those who have acquired the
eyes to see. The insights of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
have been invaluable in bringing out all the subtleties
of meaning in these commentaries. The result is an
astonishingly clear presentation of very deep and
esoteric truths. Śrīla Gurudeva has illuminated selected
points of this book with his own comments. These give us
a perception of topics that would otherwise have to
remain beyond our vision. They have been identified in
the book simply as “Comment”. The end of such comments
are indicated by a lotus flower symbol, at which point
the text returns to the translation of the commentaries.

In his commentary, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura often
quotes Hari-bhakti-vilāsa and Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. In
some places we have added the comments of Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī and Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī on those verses to
clarify certain philosophical points. The commentary on
Verse Seven has been greatly enlarged from Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s original edition by adding verses
and commentary from Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi and Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu. The Ṭhākura’s commentary on Verse Seven
is drawn from Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s Prīti-sandarbha
(Anuccheda 84), which describes the development of prīti
from rati to mahābhāva. The verses and commentary that
have been added significantly help the reader to
understand each of the stages in this development.

In his ongoing presentation of Vaiṣṇava literature in
the English language, Śrīla Gurudeva is quick to mention
that he is merely following in the footsteps of his dear
friend and instructing spiritual master, nitya-līlā-
praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad A.C. Bhaktivedānta
Swami Prabhupāda. By publishing Teachings of Lord
Caitanya and the entire Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta in
English, Śrīla Prabhupāda served as the great pioneer
who broadcast the glories of Śrīman Mahāprabhu around
the entire world. For this immense act of munificence
the living entities of this world will remain forever in
his debt.

This is the third English edition of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka,
translated directly from Śrīla Gurudeva’s Hindi edition.
Although the basic translation is the same as the first
two editions, the language has been improved in some

                           6
Siksastaka.txt                                     5/5/2017

places to make the subject matter easier to understand.
We have also endeavoured to minimise the use of Sanskrit
terminology, thereby making the book accessible to a
broader audience. Additionally, the typography has been
brought up to professional standards. Grateful
acknowledgment is extended to Lavaṅga-latā dāsī for
copy-editing this edition, to Śānti dāsī and Giridhārī
dāsa for proofreading the final manuscript, to Śrīpāda
Bhaktivedānta Bhāgavata Mahārāja, Atula-kṛṣṇa dāsa and
Ananta-kṛṣṇa dāsa for checking the Sanskrit, to Kṛṣṇa-
prema dāsa for designing the new cover and to Subala-
sakhā dāsa for providing the new photograph of Śrīla
Gurudeva. On behalf of the many devotees serving in
Gauḍīya Vedānta Publications, we pray that Śrīla
Gurudeva will be pleased with this humble attempt.

An aspirant for the service of the

lotus feet of śrī guru and the Vaiṣṇavas,

Prema-vilāsa dāsa

Śrī Rādhāṣṭami, the divine appearance day of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā

4th September, 2003

Gopīnātha-bhavana, Śrī Vṛndāvana




Prayers to Lord Caitanya




anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ

May Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari, resplendent with the
radiance of molten gold (having adopted the bodily
splendour of Śrīmatī Rādhikā), ever manifest Himself
within your hearts. He has descended in the age of Kali
out of His causeless mercy to bestow upon the world that
which had not been given for a long time, the most
confidential wealth of devotion unto Him, the highest
and most radiant mellow of amorous love.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Vidagdha-mādhava-nāṭaka (1.2),

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.4)



rādhā-kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktir asmād

ekātmanāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau

                           7
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017


caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptaṁ

rādhā-bhāva-dyuti-suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa-svarūpam

Although Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are one in identity, They
perpetually exist in two forms because of the eternality
of the principle of exchanging amorous pastimes. This is
brought about by the pleasure aspect (hlādinī) of the
internal potency, which exhibits itself in the form of
the transformation of Their love. At this time these two
personalities have manifested as one person in the form
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. I offer my respectful
obeisances unto Him who has assumed the form of Lord
Gaura, but who is the very same Lord Kṛṣṇa, covered with
the sentiment and bodily splendour of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, Kaḍaca,

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.5)



Verses




Verse One


What is the most excellent form of sādhana?



ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ

śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ

sarvātma-snapanaṁ paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam

Anvaya

param — only, or supreme; vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam
— may the chanting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s holy names be
especially victorious; ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam — which
cleanses the mirror of the heart; nirvāpaṇam — which
extinguishes; mahā-dāvāgni — the blazing forest fire;
bhava — of material existence; candrikā-vitaraṇam —
which spreads the moonlight of spiritual ecstasy;
śreyaḥ-kairava — bringing to bloom the living entity’s
white lotus of good fortune; vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam — which
is the life and soul in the form of transcendental
knowledge, like a

wife; ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam — which expands the ocean
of transcendental bliss; prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanam —
which enables one to taste complete nectar at every
step; sarvātma-snapanam — and which cleanses and cools
the self, one’s nature, one’s determination, and the
body both inside and out, by a thorough bath.

                           8
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


Translation

Let there be supreme victory for the chanting of the
holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone, which cleanses the mirror
of the heart and completely extinguishes the blazing
forest fire of material existence. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana
diffuses the soothing moon rays of spiritual ecstasy
(bhāva) that cause the living entity’s white lotus of
good fortune to bloom. The holy name is the life and
soul of transcendental knowledge, which is here compared
to a wife. It continuously expands the ocean of
transcendental bliss, enabling one to taste complete
nectar at every step. The holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
thoroughly cleanses and cools the self, one’s nature and
one’s determination, as well as the body, both
internally and externally.

Maṅgalācaraṇa

In spite of being very low and insignificant, and
thoroughly incompetent, I am engaged in translating this
Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya by the mercy of my most revered
spiritual master, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda
aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja; Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, the eternal
associate of Śrī Gaurasundara and writer of the Śrī
Sanmodana-bhāṣya; and the original author of Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the
incarnation who delivers the fallen conditioned souls of
Kali-yuga, and who is the very self-same personality
known as Śrī Nanda-nandana. Holding in my heart their
lotus feet, which grant all desires, I am engaged in
this work in order to fulfil their inner hearts’
longing.

Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya

pa—ca-tattvānvitaṁ nityaṁ

praṇipatya mahāprabhum

nāmnā sanmodanaṁ śikṣā-

ṣṭaka-bhāṣyaṁ praṇīyate

Offering my humble obeisances at the lotus feet of the
original Supreme Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is
the bestower of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa and love for Him,
and who is eternally accompanied by His four primary
associates in the pa—ca-tattva, I am writing a
commentary named Śrī Sanmodana on Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, which
issued from the lotus mouth of the Lord.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.2.34) it is said:

bhagavān brahma kārtsnyena

trir anvīkṣya manīṣayā

tad adhyavasyat kūṭa-stho

ratir ātmany ato bhavet


                             9
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

How can there be any benefit for the living entities who
are oblivious to the Lord, having fallen into the cycle
of repeated birth and death in material existence?
Preoccupied with this question, Śrī Brahmā, who knows
the fundamental truths regarding the Lord, thought long
to find its solution. With resolute attention, he
scrutinised all the Vedas three times, and by his
intelligence he concluded that the topmost perfection of
religion is that by which one can obtain exclusive love
for Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the Supersoul of all
existence.

This conclusion of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.2.34) clearly
establishes that only devotion unto the Supreme Lord
(bhagavad-bhakti) is the topmost process of religion
bestowing ultimate good for the living entities.
Fruitive activity, the cultivation of knowledge aimed at
impersonal liberation, the practice of yoga, the
performance of austerities, and other processes do not
bestow the ultimate good and therefore they are not the
topmost religious process. But this bhakti is extremely
rare. It is obtainable only by transcendental faith
(pāramārthika-śraddhā).

Such pāramārthika-śraddhā is of two kinds: (1)
śāstrārtha-avadhāraṇamayī-śraddhā — faith that brings
about engagement in the path of bhakti inspired by the
governing principles of the scriptures and (2) bhagavad-
līlā-mādhurya-lobhamayī-śraddhā — faith that brings
about engagement in bhakti due to intense longing
(lobha), arisen out of some extreme good fortune by
hearing about the unparalleled sweetness of Bhagavān’s
pastimes.

Even if one of these two kinds of faith arises,
unalloyed devotion (śuddha-bhakti) can develop only by
continuous engagement in pure hari-kathā in the form of
hearing (śravaṇa) and chanting (kīrtana) in the
association of unadulterated pure devotees. If one does
not regularly engage in such hari-kathā in the
association of saintly persons, his faith will gradually
dwindle and then vanish altogether. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.25.25) the Lord has said:

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

In the association of saintly persons, one has the
opportunity to hear narrations that illuminate My
glories and that are very pleasing to both the ear and
the heart. By such engagement in hearing and chanting
saturated with love, ignorance is immediately destroyed
and faith (śraddhā), intense loving attachment (rati)
and devotion on the platform of divine love (prema-
bhakti) develop one after another.

Therefore, by faithfully hearing and chanting about the
names, form, qualities and pastimes of Bhagavān in the
association of pure devotees, pure saṅkīrtana is
possible — otherwise not.

The glories of pure saṅkīrtana are the very first thing
spoken of in the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

                           10
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

Because the chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s holy names is the very
identity of all auspiciousness, the word param has been
used in the fourth line of Verse One. The word param
(meaning “supreme”) here specifically indicates pure
śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana, which is obtained in progressive
stages beginning from faith (śraddhā), followed by
saintly association (sādhu-saṅga), and leading to
execution of the limbs of bhakti (bhajana-kriyā). It
does not refer to hari-kīrtana that is within the
jurisdiction of pratibimba-bhakti-ābhāsa. [Pratibimba-
bhakti-ābhāsa refers to a semblance of devotion that is
undertaken by persons whose sole motivation is to attain
liberation or promotion to the heavenly planets.]

In this Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, the ocean of mercy Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, appearing like a practitioner of the
devotional path (bhakti-sādhaka), is singing the glories
of śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana and of the transcendental form
and identity of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in order to enlighten the
living entities with the truths of

sambandha (knowledge relevant to the development of
one’s relationship with the Lord), abhidheya (the
process of devotional life) and prayojana (the ultimate
goal of one’s devotion). In this commentary, the very
same truths of sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana are
being discussed in summary fashion.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is the Supreme Lord of all
and whose lotus feet are constantly served by pure
Vaiṣṇavas, says, “paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam.”
In other words let there be supreme victory only for the
chanting of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. A question may
be raised here. Can śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana, which is non-
material (aprākṛta) and beyond the range of the illusory
potency (māyā), become victorious in this material world
created by the external energy? Yes, even in this
illusory material world śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana can be
thoroughly victorious. Please hear how this is possible.



The absolute truth:

1. Prominence of the personal feature of the absolute
truth

From the statement of the Śrutis the oneness of the
absolute truth is established. This is expressed in the
Chāndogya Upaniṣad (6.2.1): “ekam evādvitīyam — the
absolute truth is one without a second.” Another
statement of the Śrutis establishes that the absolute
truth is nirviśeṣa, devoid of material form, attributes
and qualities. This is expressed in the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka
Upaniṣad (4.4.19): “neha nānāsti kiñcana — other than
the one non-dual absolute truth (advaya-brahma), there
is no existence of any separate forms.” Yet another
statement of the Śrutis establishes that the absolute is
saviśeṣa, possessing eternal attributes and qualities.
This is expressed in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad (3.14.1):
“sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma — this entire creation is the
form of the absolute truth.”

Therefore, according to the Śrutis, the absolute truth

                           11
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

is simultaneously saviśeṣa, personal, and nirviśeṣa,
impersonal. The impersonal feature, however, is
imperceptible. The mere non-possession of material
qualities and attributes does not define what is the
absolute, and thus it remains but a vague notion. But
the personal feature directly ascertains what is the
absolute by describing His transcendental names, form,
qualities, activities, associates and abode. Because of
the intangibility of the impersonal feature and because
of the eternal tangibility of the personal feature, it
is the personal feature that is prominent and superior.



2. Four features of the absolute truth

In his Bhagavat-sandarbha (Anuccheda 16.16), Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī, our ācārya on such philosophical conclusions,
has stated that by the influence of His inherent
inconceivable potency (svābhāvikī acintya-śakti), the
one absolute truth eternally exists in four features:
(1) svarūpa — His original form, (2) tad-rūpa-vaibhava —
His personal splendour, which includes His abode,
eternal associates, and expansions such as Lord
Nārāyaṇa, (3) jīvas — the living entities and (4)
pradhāna — the unmanifest state of the three modes of
material nature.

He compares these four features to the four aspects of
the sun: (1) the effulgence situated in the interior of
the sun planet, (2) the sun globe, (3) the atomic
particles of sunlight emanating from the sun and (4) the
reflected rays of the sun. Although the sun is one, it
exists in these four forms.



3. The absolute truth as potency and the possessor of
all potency

The absolute truth described above is further explained
here. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is replete with six
opulences, is the absolute truth. He is sarva-śaktimān,
the one who possesses all potencies. In the Brahma-sūtra
it is said: “śakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ — there is no
difference between śakti, the Lord’s potency, and
śaktimān, He who possesses all potency.” According to
this statement śakti and śaktimān are non-different. But
that one transcendental potency known as para-śakti is
perceivable in different forms — parāsya śaktir
vividhaiva śrūyate (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8)).

From this Vedic mantra it is proved that the Lord’s
inconceivable potency known as acintya-śakti is adept in
carrying out that which is unfeasible. In the material
world we cannot conceive of anything that is one and
different simultaneously. If potency and the possessor
of all potency are one, how can they be different? Yet
if the Lord’s potency is one in all respects, how can it
manifest in different forms as above stated? This
inconceivable power is known as aghaṭana-ghaṭana-
paṭīyasī; in other words the Lord’s acintya-śakti makes
possible even that which is impossible. Therefore the
eternal difference between śakti and śaktimān is also

                           12
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

inevitable. The unqualified monists (kevalādvaita-vādīs)
advocate that the absolute truth known as Brahman is
impersonal, formless and divested of potencies. The
conclusion established above proves that this opinion is
contrary to the scriptures and to reasoning.



The Lord’s potencies:

1. The internal potency

The one para-śakti, or superior potency, described
above, is manifest in three forms: (1) antaraṅga-śakti —
the internal potency, (2) taṭastha-śakti — the marginal
potency and (3) bahiraṅga-śakti — the external potency.
By the Lord’s internal potency, the supreme absolute
truth in His complete and original feature eternally
exists as Bhagavān, who is devoid of all faults,
supremely auspicious and the basis of all transcendental
qualities.

In addition to this the Lord’s feature known as tad-
rūpa-vaibhava, which refers to His transcendental abode,
Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma, His eternal associates and the
variegated manifestations of Lord Nārāyaṇa, is eternally
established by the same all-accommodating internal
potency for the accomplishment of His transcendental
pastimes.



2. The marginal potency

The same absolute truth, when endowed with the marginal
potency (taṭastha-śakti), exists as the innumerable,
infinitesimal, conscious living entities, who are
separated expansions of the Lord (vibhinnāṁśa-svarūpa).
Just as innumerable tiny molecular particles of light
continuously shimmer in the rays of the sun, the
numberless, infinitesimal jīvas exist like atomic
particles of spirit in the rays of the Lord’s marginal
potency.

The tiny molecular particles within the rays of sunshine
have no independent existence from the sun, nor can they
ever be equated with the sun. Similarly, the
infinitesimal, conscious living entities have no
separate existence from the Lord, neither can they ever
be addressed as the Lord, nor become the Lord.



3. The external potency

Again, the supreme absolute truth, Bhagavān, has
manifested this entire material world, the display of
His external splendour, by His inferior potency known as
bahiraṅga-māyā-śakti. This material world is a
transformation of the Lord’s māyā-śakti or pradhāna,
which refers to the sum total of material existence.
Just as the reflected rays of the sun create a colourful
rainbow, the Lord’s māyā-śakti or pradhāna manifests
this fascinating material world. The material world is a

                           13
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

shadow of the spiritual world, which is manifested by
the Lord’s internal potency. As such, the material world
is also not separate from the absolute truth.



4. Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva: Simultaneous oneness and
difference of the Lord and His potencies

From the above discussion, it is proved that the living
entities (jīvas), the material world (jaḍa-jagat) and
the Lord’s personal splendour as regards His Vaikuṇṭha
existence (tad-rūpa-vaibhava) are inconceivably one with
and different from His original spiritual form
(bhagavat-svarūpa). The infinitesimal living entities,
on account of being dependent on the Lord, are His
separated parts and parcels — in this is found their
non-distinction from the Lord (abheda). However, due to
an absence of knowledge of the Supreme Lord, they are
preoccupied with the material energy — in this lies
their difference (bheda).



The process by which hari-kīrtana

becomes successful for the living entity:

1. The meaning of the living entity as marginal potency

Just as the sun’s rays are covered by the clouds, the
living entities are covered by the influence of illusion
(māyā) or ignorance (avidyā). How is it possible for a
conscious entity to be covered by matter? In this we see
application of the principle of aghaṭana-ghaṭana-
patīyasī. That which is impossible is made possible by
the Lord’s inconceivable potencies. The infinitesimal
living entity, manifested by the taṭastha-śakti of the
Lord, becomes covered by māyā on account of being an
instrument for the Lord’s pastimes in the matter of the
material creation. Otherwise how can the conscious jīva
be covered by inert matter?

Because he is manifested by the marginal potency, the
nature of the jīva is also marginal. This means that he
is prone to be influenced either by the internal potency
known as svarūpa-śakti or by the Lord’s external potency
known as māyā-śakti. When his connection with svarūpa-
śakti is established, he obtains the happiness of
serving the Supreme Lord in the liberated condition.
When the living entity desires material enjoyment, he is
covered by māyā.

The living entity, bewildered by māyā, suffers the pangs
of material existence. But when he establishes his
relationship with the svarūpa-śakti, the external
potency in the form of ignorance is dissipated. As a
result, he is liberated from the material condition and
becomes situated in his pure constitutional form
(śuddha-svarūpa).



2. The process of conquering illusion

                           14
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


The living entity, bewildered by māyā, is crushed again
and again by the miseries of material existence.
Becoming exasperated with these miseries, he may obtain
the service of saintly persons by some great fortune. At
that time his faith awakens towards devotion unto the
Supreme Lord as being the exclusive goal of the
scriptures. Alternatively, he may awaken intense longing
for the unparalleled sweetness of Bhagavān (this is a
reference again to the two types of faith that one can
develop, as previously mentioned). At that time, he
attains eligibility for bhakti, which is predominated by
the pleasure-giving aspect (hlādinī) of the Lord’s
internal potency.

Upon the awakening of faith, he first of all takes
shelter of the lotus feet of a spiritual master by
accepting harināma initiation from him. Thereafter, in
the association of the spiritual master and pure
Vaiṣṇavas, he obtains an excellent opportunity to hear
the truths of the scriptures. When he begins to perform
kīrtana of the holy names (nāma), form (rūpa), qualities
(guṇa) and pastimes (līlā) of Kṛṣṇa, the process of
conquering māyā begins. This means that his ignorance
and the impediments that obstruct his spiritual progress
(anarthas) begin to vanish. Simultaneously, the pure
form of the jīva starts to become clear.

This is the process by which hari-kīrtana becomes
victorious within the phenomenal world of matter. By
this process, hari-kīrtana makes its descent into this
illusory world. By performing hari-kīrtana according to
this system, one obtains seven excellent results. These
seven kinds of results are spoken of in Verse One by the
words ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam and so on. Each of these
will now be separately discussed.



Seven excellent results of śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana:

1. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam:

Cleanses the mirror of the heart

By the initial words ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam, the truth
concerning the identity of the living entity is
disclosed. The conclusion of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī regarding
this subject is that the individual living entity is
only one insignificant portion of the supreme absolute
truth who is endowed with the conglomerate potency
represented by the sum total of all jīvas. Like the
atomic particles of sunlight that have emerged from the
accumulated effulgence within the sun, the living
entities are infinitesimal particles of spirit emanated
from the absolute truth who is always situated in His
intrinsic form and who is the personification of
undivided transcendental rasa.

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, who wrote a commentary on the
Vedānta-sūtra known as Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya, has also
analysed the Supreme Lord as vibhu-caitanya, the all-
pervading consciousness, and the living entity as aṇu-
caitanya, infinitesimal consciousness. Unlimited

                            15
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

transcendental qualities that bestow all good fortune
eternally exist in the Supreme Lord. In Him pure ego
exists both as absolute knowledge and as the knower (ego
is here defined as the sense of I-ness). Similarly, the
jīva also has transcendental qualities in minute
quantity and a pure ego that manifests both as knowledge
and as the knower. This is not contrary to logic because
qualities such as heat and light that can be seen in the
sun are also observed in the particles of sunlight.

Amongst the Lord and the living entities, the Lord is
one, independent and the embodiment of all potencies. He
enters into material nature and regulates it. He creates
the material world and maintains it. He is the
concentrated form of spiritual bliss. Being eternally
situated in His own intrinsic form and being the
bestower of the ecstatic mellows of divine love (prema-
rasa) through the medium of bhakti, He causes it to be
tasted by others.

But the living entities are innumerable. They are
situated in many conditions of life, both conditioned
and liberated. When their vision is averted from the
Lord, they become bound by material nature. When their
attention is turned towards the Lord, the covering of
māyā, which covers the pure identity and qualities of
the jīva, is withdrawn. Thereafter they directly
perceive their own spiritual form.

From this conclusion it is clear that the jīvas are
particles of spiritual consciousness. They have a
spiritual identity that consists of pure ego, pure
consciousness and a spiritual body. When their vision is
averted from the Lord and engrossed in illusory material
enjoyment, their pure ego and pure consciousness become
contaminated with the filth of ignorance.

Here the heart has been compared to a mirror. Just as
one’s face cannot be seen in a dirty mirror covered by
dust, the living entity cannot see his actual form in
the heart that is contaminated by the filth of
ignorance. When the practice of bhakti predominated by
the hlādinī potency of the Lord begins, one engages in
the process of śravaṇam, hearing. Thereafter, śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtana automatically appears and thoroughly cleanses
the filth of ignorance.

At that time the jīva’s pure consciousness manifests,
and he becomes situated in his pure ego. From this, he
begins to see factually in the mirror of his pure
consciousness the following five truths: (1) īśvara —
the Supreme Lord, (2) jīva — the living entities, (3)
prakṛti — material nature, (4) kāla — time and (5) karma
— fruitive activities. When the mirror of the heart is
completely cleansed and purified, the vision of one’s
own constitutional form (svarūpa) and, consequently, his
constitutional occupation (svadharma), is made possible.
The constitutional occupation of the living entity is to
engage in the service of Bhagavān.



2. Bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam:


                           16
Siksastaka.txt                                   5/5/2017

Extinguishes the forest fire of material existence

By engaging steadily in the service of Bhagavān, the
materialistic demeanour is transformed into the
inclination for rendering service to Lord Kṛṣṇa. The
purport of the word bhava, or mundane existence, is that
the jīva has to take birth in this material world again
and again. Repeated birth and death is compared to a
great forest fire (mahā-dāvāgni). This blazing forest
fire cannot be extinguished by any means other than śrī-
kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana.

The question may be raised here that upon attainment of
the knowledge of one’s constitutional duty, does one
cease to chant the holy name? The answer is that this
never happens. Hari-saṅkīrtana is the eternal occupation
of the living entity. The phrase śreyaḥ-kairava-
candrikā-vitaraṇam has been used in a qualifying sense
to point out that the holy name is eternally the natural
and characteristic function of the living entity.



3. Śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇam:

Diffuses the moonrays of bhāva-bhakti

for the highest good of the living entity

For the living entities ensnared by māyā, material
enjoyment alone is desirable, and it is on this account
that they have to rotate in the cycle of repeated birth
and death in this material world, suffering the
threefold miseries. In complete opposition to this,
aversion towards māyā and constant engagement in the
service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the highest achievement
(śreyaḥ). This highest achievement is compared to the
white water lotus. Just as the soothing rays of the moon
cause the white lotus to blossom, śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana,
diffusing the moon rays of bhāva-bhakti, causes the
white lotus of good fortune to bloom for the living
entities.

According to the statement of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.3.31): “bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyā — bhakti arises
from bhakti”, one must first continuously engage in the
process of sādhana-bhakti through hearing, chanting and
so on. At this stage one’s devotion is said to be an
ābhāsa, or semblance, of real bhakti. By such practice,
unalloyed devotion makes its appearance in the heart of
the faithful living entity. Here śrī-kṛṣṇa-sankīrtana
has been compared with the moon. Just as the nectarean
light emitted from the moon causes the white lotus to
bloom, śrī-kṛṣṇa-sankīrtana causes ecstatic emotion
(bhāva), which is predominated by the hlādinī potency,
to appear within the hearts of the living entities. All
kinds of benedictions arise as a consequence of this.



4. Vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam:

It is the life of all transcendental knowledge


                           17
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

A question may be raised here: when will those who have
already attained unalloyed devotion obtain their pure
spiritual forms? In reply to this question, Śrī
Śacīnandana Gauracandra says: “vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam —
saṅkīrtana is the life of transcendental knowledge.” In
reality Bhagavān has but one potency. Its two functions
are vidyā (knowledge) and avidyā (ignorance). The Lord’s
internal potency known as Yogamāyā svarūpa-śakti is
called vidyā. The external potency or Mahāmāyā, which is
responsible for the creation of the material world and
which covers the original spiritual form of the living
entity and the qualities associated with that form, is
called avidyā.

When unalloyed devotion arises in the heart of the
sādhaka by continual practice of hearing and chanting,
Bhakti-devī, who dispels all desires other than that for
the service of the Lord, removes this avidyā. By the
function of the knowledge potency (vidyā-vṛtti), Bhakti-
devī destroys the gross and subtle bodies of the living
entity. Simultaneously, Bhakti-devī manifests the
original pure spiritual form of the jīva, to the extent
that one receives the purely spiritual form of a gopī,
if by qualification one is fit to taste mādhurya-rasa,
the mellow of amorous love. [One may attain a form in
any of the five transcendental relationships of śānta
(neutrality), dāsya (servitude), sakhya (friendship),
vātsalya (parenthood) or mādhurya in accordance with
one’s eligibility, or in other words, in accordance with
the sthāyibhāva, one’s eternal and dominant devotional
sentiment.]

Thus, it is proved that śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtana is the life of
all transcendental knowledge that has been compared to a
vadhū, a wife or consort. The internal potency’s being
compared to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s consort is especially notable in
context of the description of His sportive amorous
pastimes known as līlā-vilāsa.

Comment

Bhakti is a function of the Lord’s internal potency
(svarūpa-śakti). Śuddha-sattva is the essence of the
combination of the hlādinī and saṁvit aspects of the
internal potency. When śuddha-sattva is obtained, bhakti
is also present. By executing the various practices of
sādhana-bhakti, such as hearing, chanting and so on,
śuddha-sattva arises in the heart. Śuddha-sattva is
eternally existing in the hearts of the Lord’s eternal
associates. By performing bhakti under their guidance,
śuddha-sattva manifests in the heart.

This śuddha-sattva is also known as rati or bhāva. By
further execution of bhakti in the stage of rati, bhāva-
bhakti is transformed into prema-bhakti. The essence of
prema-bhakti is bhāva [not to be confused with bhāva-
bhakti, but rather a stage that comes in the systematic
development of prema, i.e. rati, sneha, māna, praṇaya,
rāga, anurāga, bhāva, mahābhāva] and the essence of
bhāva is mahābhāva. This mahābhāva is the very form of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, or otherwise stated, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
the embodiment of mahābhāva. Therefore, where mahābhāva
is present, the form of Rādhikā is present.


                           18
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is eternally the hlādinī aspect of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s internal potency. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the possessor of
potency and Śrīmatī Rādhikā is His potency. Consequently
They are one in Their identity. For the purpose of
sportive transcendental pastimes (līlā-vilāsa), They
manifest as two personalities. Śrīmatī Rādhikā further
manifests as all the gopīs. Bhakti, as the essential
function of the internal potency, is always present
within the hearts of the gopīs. In particular, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā is the personification of the svarūpa-śakti and,
consequently, the personification of bhakti. Therefore
the svarūpa-śakti, as well as bhakti, have been compared
to the beloved consort of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



5. Ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam:

Increases the ocean of bliss

When the gross and subtle bodies of the living entity
have been completely destroyed, his infinitesimal nature
becomes evident. At that time, on account of the jīva’s
inherent nature being infinitesimal, it may be assumed
that his constitutional happiness is also infinitesimal.
In order to dispel this apprehension, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu informs us that the holy name is an ever
increasing ocean of bliss, ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam. In
other words śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana, performed in the
liberated condition (upon the living entity’s attainment
of his pure spiritual form), unlimitedly expands the
inherent transcendental pleasure of the living entity by
virtue of the hlādinī potency.



6. Prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanam:

Enables one to taste complete nectar at every step

In that condition, the jīva, being eternally situated in
one of the transcendental rasas of dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya or mādhurya, relishes complete nectar at every
step by virtue of the ever-increasing freshness of his
attachment to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa has four unique
qualities: (1) līlā-mādhurya — He is a surging ocean of
astonishing pastimes, out of which the rāsa-līlā is
supremely captivating; (2) prema-mādhurya — He is
surrounded by devotees who possess incomparably sweet
loving sentiments that develop up to the stage of
mahābhāva; (3) veṇu-mādhurya — the sweet and mellow
sound of His flute attracts the minds of everyone within
the three worlds; and (4) rūpa-mādhurya — His
extraordinary beauty astonishes all moving and non-
moving entities. These four unique qualities of Bhagavān
Śrī Kṛṣṇa are eternally fresh. Although the jīvas who
have awakened their love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa continuously
drink these aspects of the Lord’s sweetness, they remain
unsatiated and hanker for more. Therefore they
unceasingly drink that sweetness in endlessly new
varieties.




                             19
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

7. Sarvātma-snapanam:

Premānanda is completely pure

A doubt may be raised here. The longing or endeavour for
one’s own enjoyment is opposed to purely spiritual love
(viśuddha-prema). When the living entity is relishing
the ever-fresh bliss of prema, he is also enjoying. So
how can this condition be called nirmala-premānanda, the
untainted spiritual bliss of divine love? As if to
dispel this doubt, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the crest
jewel of all sannyāsīs, has used the qualifying
statement: “sarvātma-snapanam — śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana
thoroughly bathes the living entity both internally and
externally, leaving him very clean and cool.”

In the condition of prema, Kṛṣṇa’s blissful feelings are
completely pure. In other words, because the living
entity in the status of prema gives unadulterated
ecstatic pleasure to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he is devoid of any
selfish motives for personal enjoyment. Obtaining one’s
spiritual form, the jīva becomes a maidservant of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the embodiment of the hlādinī
potency and who is always absorbed in the ecstasy of
mahābhāva. The living entity thus tastes unlimited
spiritual bliss in connection with the love sports
(prema-vilāsa) of the Divine Couple. Therefore there is
no possibility of his having even the faintest trace of
material desire (kāma), which is completely opposed to
the nature of prema.

The two words sarvātma-snapanam have been used to
indicate supreme purity, completely devoid of the faults
of merging into the impersonal Brahman, known as
sāyujya-mukti, and selfish sense enjoyment.

Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana is thus decorated with seven
transcendental qualities. It is the embodiment of
eternity, bliss and knowledge. May śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana
be thoroughly victorious, especially in revealing the
astonishing pastimes of love of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala.

Comment

The holy name is like a new bud of a lotus flower. By
constant chanting, the holy name first makes its
appearance within the heart of the sādhaka. Thereafter,
Kṛṣṇa’s form, transcendental qualities, pastimes, and
associates such as the gopas and gopīs, all become
manifest within the heart. The devotee directly
perceives all of these within his heart. He also
perceives the amorous sports of the Lord. In the end, he
gives up this material body and obtaining his eternal
form, enters into the pastimes of the Lord. It is,
therefore, said that the holy name that reveals the love
sports (prema-vilāsa) of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa should be
especially glorified.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 20.11, 13–14)

nāma-saṅkīrtana haite sarvānartha-nāśa



                           20
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


sarva-śubhodaya, kṛṣṇa-premera ullāsa



saṅkīrtana haite pāpa-saṁsāra-nāśana



citta-śuddhi, sarva-bhakti-sādhana-udgama



kṛṣṇa-premodgama, premāmṛta-āsvādana



kṛṣṇa-prāpti, sevāmṛta-samudre majjana



By the performance of śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana, all kinds of
impediments to spiritual purification (anarthas) are
destroyed and the heart becomes purified. The reactions
to many lifetimes of sinful activities are eradicated
and along with them, material existence consisting of
repeated birth and death, which is a by-product of those
sins. All kinds of benedictions arise from śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtana, which instigates all varieties of sādhana
giving rise to prema-bhakti. Kṛṣṇa-prema appears and one
begins to taste its nectar. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is then obtained.
Finally, one achieves spotless purity and is thoroughly
cooled and refreshed by complete immersion in the nectar
ocean of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śikṣāṣṭaka: Song One (from Gītāvalī)

pīta-varaṇa kali-pāvana gorā



gāoyai aichana bhāva-vibhorā



citta-darpaṇa-parimārjana-kārī



kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya citta-vihārī



helā-bhava-dāva-nirvāpaṇa-vṛtti



kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya kleśa-nivṛtti



śreyaḥ-kumuda-vidhu-jyotsnā-prakāśa



                           21
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya bhakti-vilāsa



viśuddha-vidyā-vadhū-jīvana-rūpa



kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya siddha-svarūpa



ānanda-payo-nidhi-vardhana-kīrti



kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya plāvana-mūrti



pade pade pīyūṣa-svāda-pradātā



kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya prema-vidhātā



bhaktivinoda-svātma-snapana-vidhāna



kṛṣṇa-kīrtana jaya prema-nidāna



Adopting the sentiment and golden lustre of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari, the supreme
deliverer of the fallen conditioned souls of Kali-yuga,
would chant the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa absorbed in a
deep emotional state. By the potency of His kīrtana, not
only the sinful and materially afflicted people of Kali-
yuga were delivered, but the birds, beasts, insects and
worms as well. While describing the glories of the holy
name, He spoke as follows:

“The chanting of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa thoroughly
cleanses the mirror of the heart. It very easily
extinguishes the blazing forest fire of material
existence and dissipates, once and for all, the
threefold miseries: (1) ādhyātmika — miseries arising
from one’s own body and mind, (2) ādhibhautika —
miseries arising from other living entities and (3)
ādhidaivika — miseries arising from material nature or
the demigods.

“As the moon, by its nectarean soothing and cooling
rays, causes the white lotus to bloom, the holy name
brings to blossom the white lotus of bhāva-bhakti, which
is the highest benediction for the living entities. May
there be all victory for śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana, the
embodiment of the variegated manifestations of bhakti.


                           22
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

“Unalloyed devotion is the embodiment of the highest
knowledge and it is like a new wife (vadhū). Śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtana is the life of transcendental knowledge in
the form of bhakti. May there be all victory again and
again for the chanting of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
which manifests the eternal constitutional form of the
living entities.

“Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana expands the unfathomable,
unlimited ocean of transcendental bliss. May there be
all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, which is an inundation of transcendental bliss.
Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana enables one to taste ever-
increasingly fresh nectar at every step.

“May there be all victory again and again for the
chanting of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which bestows
love for Him. The holy name forever bathes and immerses
the chanter in this love. May there be all victory again
and again for the chanting of the holy name of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, which is a storehouse of love of God.”

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s

Vivṛti (commentary)

śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtanāya namaḥ



śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana-kārī śrī gurudevera



o śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtana-vigraha



śrī-gaurasundarera jaya hauka



I offer my respectful obeisances unto śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtana.
May there be all victory to the spiritual master, who is
constantly engaged in the performance of śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtana, and to Śrī Gaurasundara, who is the
personification of śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtana.

Out of innumerable different kinds of sādhana-bhakti,
many limbs of bhakti have been described in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. In sādhana-
bhakti, there are principally sixty-four limbs of
devotion that have been described in connection with
vaidhī- and rāgānuga-bhakti. In the statements of
Prahlāda Mahārāja as well, found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
we find reference to unalloyed devotion (śuddha-bhakti).
Śrī Gaurasundara has said, “Śrī-nāma-saṅkīrtana is the
topmost performance out of all the various limbs of
bhakti.”

Learned scholars of the absolute truth have described
the supreme non-dual substance known as advaya-jñāna-
vastu in three different stages. When that non-dual
substance is realised exclusively by knowledge, or in

                              23
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

others words through the function of the cit potency, it
is referred to as Brahman. When realised through the
combined functions of the sat and cit potencies, it is
referred to as Paramātmā, and when realised through the
functions of all potencies — sat, cit and ānanda — that
supreme truth is referred to as Bhagavān.

When the absolute truth, or in other words Bhagavān, is
viewed in terms of His opulences or majesty (aiśvarya),
He is perceived as Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, and when viewed in
terms of His sweetness (mādhurya), He is perceived as
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the topmost
relisher of transcendental rasa. Śrī Nārāyaṇa is the
worshipful object of two-and-a-half rasas. He is served
primarily in the moods of śānta and dāsya. The
relationships of sakhya and vātsalya are faintly
present, but because the natural feelings of intimacy
are somewhat crippled by the sense of the Lord’s
majesty, they are only counted as half. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
served in all five principal transcendental rasas known
as mukhya-rasa.

Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the supreme
truth, the original source of all manifestations. His
vaibhava-prakāśa expansion, Śrī Baladeva Prabhu,
manifests the abode of Mahā-Vaikuṇṭha. He is situated
there in His eternal catur-vyuha expansions: Vāsudeva,
Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.

When a mantra is recited only within the mind, it is
called japa. At that time the chanter attains the
perfection of the goal upon which he has fixed his mind.
But kīrtana, which is executed with vibration of the
lips, yields a greater result than japa. When chanting
is done audibly with movement of the lips, it is called
kīrtana. Kīrtana is superior to japa within the mind,
because one derives great benefit by hearing the sound
vibration. Simultaneously, others who hear such kīrtana
also derive benefit. Thus there is benefit both for the
chanter and for the hearers.

The word saṅkīrtana means sarvatobhāvena kīrtana,
complete kīrtana, or in other words, kīrtana that is
performed in full knowledge of sambandha-jñāna and free
from all obstructions (anarthas) and offences
(aparādhas). This refers to that kīrtana, the
performance of which requires no assistance from any
other limbs of sādhana. Partial kīrtana of the holy name
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not called saṅkīrtana. When there is
partial or imperfect chanting of the holy name of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the jīva does not attain the full effect. As a
result, many people fall into doubt about the potency of
the holy name. Therefore let there be all victory for
the perfect and complete chanting of the holy name of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

By discussing material topics, one obtains fragmentary
material happiness. In the transcendental realm, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the only object of attainment. There is no
possibility of any material objects being there.
Therefore, by chanting the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one
obtains all kinds of perfections that are transcendental
to material nature. Out of the various types of
perfection, seven in particular are certainly obtained

                           24
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

by śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana. These seven types of perfection
are being described here.



1. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam:

Cleanses the mirror of the heart

The chanting of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa cleanses the
dust from the mirror of the heart of the living entity.
The mirror of the heart of the conditioned living entity
is thoroughly covered by the dust of material
contamination. This material contamination, indicative
of the jīva’s disregard for the Lord, is of three types:
(1) anyābhilāṣa — the living entity who is distracted
from the Lord is filled with desires separate from the
interest of the Lord, (2) phala-bhoga — enjoyment of the
fruits of worldly activities and (3) phala-tyāga —
renunciation that is not undertaken for the pleasure of
the Lord.

The chanting of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the most
effective instrument for cleansing the dirt from the
mirror of the living entity’s heart. As long as the dirt
of material contamination is present, the pure spiritual
form of the living entity is not reflected in the mirror
of his heart. Therefore the three kinds of contamination
mentioned above are all forms of deceit that obscure the
true vision of the self. They are obstacles that
completely cover the heart of the jīva.

By the chanting of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, all these
obstacles are removed. Finally, when the mirror of the
heart is cleansed by complete chanting of the holy name,
one’s pure spiritual form is reflected in the mirror of
the heart and one understands, “I am the servant of Lord
Kṛṣṇa.”



2. Bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam:

Extinguishes the blazing forest fire of material
existence

Externally, this material world appears very beautiful,
charming and pleasing. But in reality, it is just like a
blazing fire within a dense forest. This material world
is blazing with innumerable sufferings, which come under
three headings: (1) ādhyātmika, (2) ādhidaivika and (3)
ādhibhautika.

As a blazing fire thoroughly destroys all the trees and
animals of the forest, the forest fire of material
existence in the shape of repeated birth and death
constantly burns the living entities who are distracted
from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. But when one takes up the chanting of
the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa under the expert guidance of
a qualified guru and Vaiṣṇavas, then even while residing
in this material world, one obtains relief from the
blazing fire of material existence. This is due to one’s
adopting an attitude that is favourably disposed towards
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. By śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana, all these

                            25
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

miseries are driven away.



3. Śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇam:

Diffuses the moonrays of bhāva-bhakti

for the highest good of the living entity

Complete chanting of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa diffuses
the radiance of supreme auspiciousness. The word śreyaḥ
means “auspiciousness”; kairava means “white lilies”;
and candrikā means “the rays of the moon”. Just as the
soothing rays of the rising moon cause the white lilies
to bloom and thus enhance their whiteness, the chanting
of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa expands the good fortune
of the living entities. Good fortune cannot be had by
separate desires (anyābhilāṣa), fruitive activity
(karma) or the cultivation of impersonal knowledge
(jñāna). But śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana promotes the highest
welfare of the living entity.



4. Vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam:

The life of all transcendental knowledge

Two kinds of knowledge have been described in the
Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad: (1) material knowledge (laukikī-vidyā)
and (2) transcendental knowledge (parā-vidyā).
Indirectly, śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana is the life of material
knowledge, but it is primarily the life of
transcendental knowledge. By the influence of śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtana, the living entity is liberated from the
false ego arising from mundane knowledge, and he obtains
sambandha-jñāna. The goal to be obtained by
transcendental knowledge is śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana (that
is, the chanting of the holy name of Vrajendra-nandana
Śyāmasundara Śrī Kṛṣṇa). By this, Kṛṣṇa Himself is
obtained.



5. Ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam:

Increases the ocean of transcendental bliss

Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana expands the ocean of transcendental
bliss for the living entities. The word “ocean” cannot
be applied to a small reservoir of water. Therefore the
unlimited bliss that arises from the chanting of the
holy name is comparable only with a boundless ocean.



6. Prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanam:

Enables one to taste nectar at every step

Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana causes one to taste complete nectar
at every step. In the relishing of transcendental rasa,
there is neither deficiency nor incompleteness of

                             26
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

pleasure (ānanda). By the performance of śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtana, one relishes the complete and uninterrupted
bliss of rasa at every moment.



7. Sarvātma-snapanam:

Completely bathes the body, mind and soul

Even transcendental objects become softened by the
chanting of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In the material
realm, the body, mind and soul are not only purified by
śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana, but are undoubtedly softened as
well.

The living entity who is engrossed in bodily
designations becomes covered with the dirt of the gross
and subtle bodies. By the power of the holy name, all
these contaminations are cleansed away. When attachment
towards mundane existence is vanquished, the living
entity devoted to Śrī Kṛṣṇa obtains the cooling and
soothing service of His lotus feet.

Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has written in Bhakti-sandarbha (273)
and in his Krama-sandarbha commentary on Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam:

ata eva yadyapy anyā bhaktiḥ kalau kartavyā

tadā kīrtanākhyā-bhakti-saṁyogenaiva

This means that although in Kali-yuga it is necessary to
perform the other eight limbs of bhakti (that is,
hearing (śravaṇam), remembering the glories of the Lord
(smaraṇam), serving His lotus feet (pāda-sevanam),
worshipping Him (arcanam), praying to Him (vandanam),
carrying out His orders (dāsyam), making friends with
Him (sakhyam), and offering one’s very self to Him
(ātma-nivedanam)), they must be performed in connection
with the chanting of the holy name

(kīrtanam). By this method, bhakti is fully
accomplished.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Śrī Bhajana-rahasya verses

Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam

In material existence, the heart is covered by
attachment for mundane enjoyment, offensive conduct,
lust, anger, greed, intoxication, illusion and envy. The
mirror of the heart is cleansed from all these
impurities by the chanting of the Lord’s holy names.
This is possible because the holy name is eternal, fully
cognisant and spiritually blissful (sac-cid-ānanda), as
described by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Śrī Nāmāṣṭaka (7),
taken from Stava-mālā:

sūditāśrita-janārtir-āśaye

ramya-cid-ghana sukha-svarūpiṇe

nāma! gokula mahotsavāya te

                              27
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017


kṛṣṇa! pūrṇa-vapuṣe namo namaḥ

O Holy Name, O Kṛṣṇa, You destroy all the sufferings
(arising from offences committed unto You) of those who
have taken shelter of You. You are the form of supreme
beauty, concentrated consciousness and spiritual
happiness, and You are the embodiment of bliss for the
residents of Gokula (the gopas, gopīs, cows, calves and
all other life forms of Gokula). Therefore I offer
repeated obeisances unto You, who are the
personification of the complete manifestation of
Vaikuṇṭha.

Bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nīrvāpaṇam

The blazing forest fire of material existence in the
form of repeated birth and death, and the threefold
miseries arising thereof, is effortlessly extinguished
by performing nāma-saṅkīrtana. This is confirmed in
Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.371), quoting from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (6.2.46):

nātaḥ paraṁ karma-nibandha-kṛntanaṁ

mumukṣatāṁ tīrtha-padānukīrtanāt

na yat punaḥ karmasu sajjate mano

rajas-tamobhyāṁ kalilaṁ tato ’nyathā

Therefore, for persons desiring release from material
bondage, there is no method superior to the chanting of
the holy name of the Supreme Lord, at whose feet all the
places of pilgrimage reside. Such chanting destroys the
root cause of sinful activity. Consequently, by the
performance of nāma-saṅkīrtana, one will never again
become implicated in fruitive activities (karma-kāṇḍa).
This is not the case, however, with material methods of
atonement, because even after such performances, the
heart again becomes contaminated by the modes of passion
and ignorance.

Śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇam

The holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa emits nectarean rays that
cause the white lily of supreme fortune to bloom. As the
moon, by its rays, causes the white lilies to blossom
and become very fragrant, the holy name, by the
transmission of its potency, causes all kinds of good
fortune to arise for the jīvas. The following verse from
the Prabhāsa-khaṇḍa of the Skanda Purāṇa has been cited
as evidence of this in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.451):

madhura-madhuram etan maṅgalaṁ maṅgalānāṁ

sakala-nigama-vallī-sat-phalaṁ cit-svarūpaṁ

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛgu-vara nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma

Of all that is auspicious, the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
stands supreme. Of all that is sweet, the holy name is

                           28
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

sweeter still. It is the eternal spiritual fruit of the
wish-fulfilling tree of the entire Vedas and the
embodiment of the absolute truth endowed with full
consciousness. O best of the Bhṛgus, if anyone even once
chants the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, either with faith or
indifferently, the holy name delivers him from the ocean
of material existence.

Comment

In his Dig-darśinī commentary on the verse above, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī has explained that the word cit-
svarūpam means caitanya-brahma-svarūpam. This means that
the holy name is the embodiment of that Brahman which is
endowed with full consciousness. In other words the holy
name is identical with the Supreme Lord Himself. The
words sakṛd api mean that if the holy name is chanted
even once, everything even up to liberation follows as a
necessary result. Sanātana Gosvāmī emphasises this point
by using the imperative form (bhavet) meaning that it
must be so. He says that the suffix pari in parigītam
indicates that even if the holy name is uttered
indistinctly or incompletely, it will deliver such a
result.

The suffix pari alters the meaning of words in many
different ways. It expresses the following ideas:
against, opposite to, away from, except, round about,
abundantly, richly, in high degree, and so on. Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda has interpreted the
word pari in a different sense. He takes it in the sense
of distinctly or fully, meaning that the holy name
should be chanted without offence. If the holy name is
chanted in this way, it will immediately deliver the
chanter.



Vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

The holy name is the life of all transcendental
knowledge, which is here compared to a wife. This is
supported in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.441), quoting from
the Garuḍa Purāṇa:

yadīcchasi paraṁ j—ānaṁ

j—ānād yat paramaṁ padaṁ

tadādareṇa rājendra

kuru govinda-kīrtanam

O best of kings, if you desire to obtain that topmost
knowledge by which the supreme goal is attained, then
with great respect and devotion, chant the holy name of
Śrī Govinda.

Comment

In his Dig-darśinī commentary on this verse, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī explains that the word jñānam here
refers to knowledge concerning the glories of the
topmost bhagavad-bhakti. By chanting the holy name of

                           29
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

Govinda one easily obtains such knowledge and,
consequently, the supreme destination known as paraṁ
padam. Paraṁ padam does not refer to impersonal
liberation. Beyond Brahman, beyond Vaikuṇṭha, beyond
even Ayodhyā and Mathurā — the attainment of the service
of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja is what is here
referred to as paraṁ padam. This fruit is obtained by
the chanting of the name of Govinda, not by any ordinary
knowledge.



It is further stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.5.40):

dhātar yad asmin bhava īśa jīvās

tāpa-trayeṇābhihatā na śarma

ātman labhante bhagavaṁs tavāṅghri-

cchāyāṁ sa-vidyām ata āśrayema

O maintainer of the universe, O Lord, in this material
world the living entities who disregard the Lord are
always overwhelmed by the threefold miseries:
ādhyātmika, ādhibhautika and ādhidaivika. Thus they are
unable to find any happiness or peace. Therefore, O
Bhagavān, in full knowledge, we are taking shelter of
the shade of Your lotus feet.

Comment

The words sa-vidyām — with full knowledge — mean “with
bhakti”. Out of all types of knowledge, bhakti is the
best, because by it Bhagavān becomes known.



In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.49) it is stated: “sā vidyā
tan-matir yayā — that by which one’s attention is
concentrated upon the Supreme Lord is called vidyā.”
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has composed two verses in
this connection explaining how the holy name of Kṛṣṇa is
the life of such knowledge (Bhajana-rahasya (1.21)):

ye śaktite kṛṣṇe mati kare udbhāvana



vidyā-nāme sei kare avidyā-khaṇḍana



kṛṣṇa-nāma sei vidyā-vadhūra jīvana



kṛṣṇa-pāda-padme ye karaye sthira mana



That potency by which one’s intelligence is aroused
towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa is known as vidyā. Only by bhakti can
one’s attention be drawn upon the lotus feet of

                           30
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

Bhagavān. Therefore the knowledge being referred to here
is bhakti. This knowledge dissipates ignorance. The holy
name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the life of transcendental
knowledge by which the consciousness becomes firmly
situated at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, and one is engaged
in the service of His lotus feet.



Ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam

Nāma-kīrtana expands the ocean of transcendental bliss
within the heart, as it is stated in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
(10.193), quoting from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (8.3.20):

ekāntino yasya na ka—canārthaṁ

vā—chanti ye vai bhagavat-prapannāḥ

aty-adbhutaṁ tac-caritaṁ sumaṅgalaṁ

gāyanta ānanda-samudra-magnāḥ

Devotees who are fully and exclusively surrendered unto
the Lord become immersed in the ocean of bliss by
chanting and reciting His transcendental pastimes, which
are astonishing and supremely auspicious. They have no
desire other than to obtain the lotus feet of Bhagavān.
I pray unto that supreme Brahman, who is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.



Prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanam

When the mirror of the heart is cleansed by chanting the
holy name of the Lord, then all types of good fortune
arise for the chanter. Thereafter, he attains perception
of his constitutional identity. For one who chants the
holy name in that stage of attainment, the ocean of
transcendental bliss is enlarged, and he tastes complete
nectar in newer and newer varieties at every step.

Comment

An ordinary conditioned soul will not experience
spiritual pleasure when he chants the holy name. When,
however, one chants the holy name according to this
process — in other words after having freed oneself from
all impediments to his devotion (anarthas) and having
realised one’s eternal identity (svarūpa), one then
chants the holy name with love and spiritual emotion
(bhāva) — he will taste the nectar of the name at every
step.




It is therefore said in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.504),
quoting from the Padma Purāṇa:

tebhyo namo ’stu bhava-vāridhi-jīrṇa-paṅka-


                           31
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

sammagna-mokṣaṇa-vicakṣaṇa-pādukebhyaḥ

kṛṣṇeti varṇa-yugalaṁ śravaṇena yeṣāṁ

ānandathur bhavati nartita-roma-vṛndaḥ

I offer my respectful obeisances again and again unto
the sandals of the lotus feet of that person whose heart
trembles with bliss upon chanting and hearing the holy
name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose bodily hairs stand on end and
dance due to ecstasy, and who is expert in delivering
the conditioned souls who are sunk in the mud of the
ocean of material existence.



Sarvātma-snapanam

The self is thoroughly cleansed by bathing in the holy
name, as it is stated in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.359),
quoting from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.12.48):

saṅkīrtyamāno bhagavān anantaḥ

śrutānubhāvo vyasanaṁ hi puṁsām

praviśya cittaṁ vidhunoty aśeṣaṁ

yathā tamo ’rko ’bhram ivāti-vātaḥ

By describing the transcendental characteristics or
pastimes of Bhagavān Śrī Hari, or by hearing of His
glories, the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa enters within the
heart (as hari-kathā) and drives away all ignorance
exactly as the sun drives away darkness. And as a
powerful wind blows away a mass of clouds, the hearing
of narrations of the Lord’s pastimes eradicates all the
sufferings of material existence.

The ignorance referred to here means the various
contaminations of the heart such as anarthas and
aparādhas.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has composed the following
Bengali verses in this connection (Bhajana-rahasya
(1.24)):

śruta anubhūta yata anartha-saṁyoga



śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtane saba haya ta viyoga



je rūpa vāyute megha sūrya tamaḥ nāśe



citte praveśiyā doṣa aśeṣa vināśe



kṛṣṇa-nāmāśraye citta-darpaṇa-mārjana

                           32
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017




atiśighra labhe jīva kṛṣṇa-prema-dhana



All varieties of anartha that have ever been heard of or
experienced are destroyed by chanting the holy name of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. As the wind disperses the clouds or as the
sun dissipates the darkness, the Supreme Lord, through
the medium of hearing narrations of His transcendental
pastimes, enters the heart and completely destroys the
extensive material contamination. By taking shelter of
the name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the mirror of the heart is
cleansed and very quickly the living entity attains the
treasure of love for Him (kṛṣṇa-prema).

The holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is caitanya, fully conscious,
and it is the personification of mādhurya, sweetness,
and of transcendental rasa. As stated in the Nāmāṣṭaka
(8):

nārada-vīṇojjīvana!

sudhormi-niryāsa-mādhurī-pūra!

tvaṁ kṛṣṇa-nāma! kāmaṁ

sphura me rasane rasena sadā

O holy name of Kṛṣṇa, You are the life-support of Śrī
Nārada’s vīṇā. You are the crest upon the waves of
nectar arising from the ocean of sweetness. May You, by
Your sweet will, always appear very prominently on my
tongue, accompanied by great attachment.

The holy name is worshipful particularly for liberated
persons. Simply by nāma-ābhāsa, a semblance of pure
chanting, all misery and distress are dissipated. As
stated in the Nāmāṣṭaka (2):

jaya nāmadheya! muni-vṛnda-geya!

jana-ra—janāya param akṣarākṛte

tvam anādarād api manāg udīritaṁ

nikhilogra-tāpa-paṭalīṁ vilumpasi

O Nāmadheya (Kṛṣṇa appearing in the form of the holy
name), great sages such as Nārada and others constantly
chant Your glories. For the delight of all humanity, You
have appeared in the form of transcendental syllables.
Although You are directly the supreme Brahman, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself, You appear in the form of syllables for the
benefit of people in general. Even if one chants the
holy name of the Lord indifferently, or in other words,
with the four kinds of nāma-ābhāsa – to indicate
something else, jokingly, for musical entertainment and
neglectfully – the holy name is competent to destroy the
most grievous sins and thus nullify all severe material
afflictions. Therefore, O Holy Name, may there be all
victory unto You!

                           33
Siksastaka.txt                                     5/5/2017


It is therefore stated in Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata
(Madhya-khaṇḍa 23.76—8):

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare



hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



prabhu kahe – kahilāṅ ei mahā-mantra



ihā japa, giyā sabe kariyā nirbandha



ihā haite sarva-siddhi haibe sabāra



sarva-kṣaṇa bala’ ithe vidhi nāhi āra



[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:] I have spoken this mahā-
mantra, now all of you return home and perform japa and

kīrtana of the holy name with great love and faith,
keeping track of the number of rounds you chant. By this
practice, all types of perfection will arise. Always
chant the holy name, for there are no rules and
regulations regarding its performance. At every moment,
utter this mahā-mantra.




Verse Two


Why is the holy name so accessible?



nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis

tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ

etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi

durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ

Anvaya

(he) bhagavan — O Bhagavān (being compelled by causeless
mercy); akāri bahudhā nāmnām — You have manifested
innumerable names such as Kṛṣṇa and Govinda just to
benefit the living entities; tatra — and in all those
names; arpitā — You have invested; nija-sarva-śaktiḥ —

                           34
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

all the potencies of Your respective personal forms;
smaraṇe kālaḥ api — moreover, in remembering the holy
names of the Lord; na niyamitaḥ — You have not imposed
any restrictions as is the case with sandhyā-vandanā, or
sāvitrī-gāyatrī, which must be chanted by brāhmaṇas only
at specified times of the day. In other words, at any
time of the day or night, the holy name can be chanted
and remembered. This is the provision You have made;
tava etādṛśī kṛpā — although Your mercy is so great;
mama īdṛśam durdaivam — my misfortune (in the form of
offences to the holy name) is such that; anurāgaḥ na
ajani — I have not awoken attachment; iha — for these
holy names, which award all benedictions and are so
easily accessible.

Translation

O Bhagavān, Your holy name bestows all auspiciousness
upon the living entities. Therefore, for the benefit of
the living entities, You eternally manifest Your
innumerable names, such as Rāma, Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa,
Mukunda, Mādhava, Govinda, Dāmodara and so on. You have
invested those names with all the potencies of Your
respective personal forms. Out of causeless mercy, You
have not even imposed any restrictions on the chanting
and remembrance of such names, as is the case with
sandhyā-vandanā, which must be chanted only at specified
times of the day. In other words, at any time of the day
or night, the holy name can be chanted and remembered.
This is the provision You have made. O Lord, this is
Your causeless mercy upon the living entities.
Nonetheless, I am so unfortunate due to committing
offences that I have not awoken any attachment for Your
holy name, which is so easily accessible and bestows all
good fortune.

Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya

Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana is of four varieties, being
distinguished by names (nāma), forms (rūpa), qualities
(guṇa) and pastimes (līlā). The holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is the original seed of all happiness. The word nāmī
literally means “one who possesses a name”. It is used
almost exclusively with reference to the Supreme Lord to
indicate the personality whom the holy name addresses.
Śrī-nāma, the holy name, and śrī-nāmī, the possessor of
the name, are one and the same fundamental truth; there
is no difference between Them. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana
is extremely beneficial for everyone in all respects.
Therefore, in order to arouse faith in the living
entities towards the holy name of the Lord, Svayam
Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu personally broadcast
the supreme utility of kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana.

He says, “O Bhagavān, O most merciful one, seeing me
devoid of all shelter, You have manifested Your holy
names, being moved by Your causeless mercy. You have
many names, which are all non-different from You. These
are classified into two groups: (1) mukhya — principal
and (2) gauṇa — secondary. The names Hari, Kṛṣṇa,
Govinda, Acyuta, Rāma, Ananta, Viṣṇu and so on, are
principal names, whereas the names Brahma, Paramātmā,
Niyantā (the controller), Pātā (the maintainer), Sraṣṭā
(the creator) and Mahendra (the supreme monarch) are

                           35
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

secondary names. Furthermore, You have invested Your
principal names with all the potencies and perfect
competence of Your svarūpa-śakti.”

This is proved by the statements of many scriptures. The
first reference describes the holy name’s power to
destroy sins. This verse is found in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
(11.486), quoting from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.16.44):

na hi bhagavann aghaṭitam idaṁ

tvad-darśanān nṛṇām akhila-pāpa-kṣayaḥ

yan-nāma sakṛc chravaṇāt

pukkaśo ’pi vimucyate saṁsārāt

O Bhagavān, just by seeing You, all the sins of mankind
become destroyed. This is not at all impossible, for
even a low-class dog-eater (caṇḍāla) who hears Your holy
name but once is liberated from material existence.

The next two verses explain the superiority of chanting
the holy name to study of the Vedas. These verses are
found in Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 265), quoting from
the Viṣṇu-dharmottara Purāṇa. The second verse in this
series is also found in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.378):

vedākṣarāṇī yāvanti

paṭhitāni dvijātibhiḥ

tāvanti harināmāni

kīrtitāni na saṁśayaḥ

ṛg-vedo yajur-vedaḥ

sāma-vedo ’py atharvaṇaḥ

adhītās tena yenoktaṁ

harir ity akṣara-dvayam

The extent to which the twice-born brāhmaṇas recite the
syllables of the Vedas, they most certainly (indirectly)
chant the holy name of the Lord. Of this there is no
doubt. But one who has uttered the two syllables “Ha-ri”
should be understood to have completed his study of all
the Vedas – the Ṝg Veda, Yajur Veda, Sāma Veda and
Atharva Veda.

The next verse is also on the same theme. It is found in
Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 265) and in Hari-bhakti-
vilāsa (11.379), quoting from the Skanda Purāṇa:

mā ṛco mā yajus tāta

mā sāma paṭha ki—cana

govindeti harer-nāma

geyaṁ gāyasva nityaśaḥ


                           36
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

Therefore do not study the Ṝg, Yajur, Sāma, Atharva or
any other of the Vedas. Just sing the name of Govinda,
and in this way engage constantly in the chanting of the
holy name of the Lord.

The next verse shows the effect of disrespecting the
holy name. It is found in Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda
265) and in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.509), quoted from the
Vaiśākha-māhātmya of the Padma Purāṇa:

avamanya ca ye yānti

bhagavat-kīrtanaṁ narāḥ

te yānti narakaṁ ghoraṁ

tena pāpena karmaṇā

Those persons who disrespect the chanting of the holy
name of the Supreme Lord and go about their way fall
down into formidable hell as a consequence of such a
sinful act.

The next verse establishes that the chanting of the holy
name is the most effective method of sādhana both for
the practising devotees and for the perfected souls.
This verse is found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.1.11). It
has been cited in Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 265),
Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.414) and Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.2.230):

etan nirvidyamānānām

icchatām akutobhayam

yogināṁ nṛpa nirṇītaṁ

harer nāmānukīrtanam

[Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:] O King, it is the opinion
of all scriptures and all previous ācāryas that whether
one is an unalloyed devotee, detached from material
existence on account of direct experience of the misery
of material life, whether one is desirous of elevation
to the heavenly planets or liberation, or whether one be
a self-satisfied yogī (ātmārāma), one should chant the
holy name of the Lord with great love.

In his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu commentary on this verse,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that the
term nirvidyamānānām means “of those who are devoid of
all desires, including the desire for liberation”. This
term refers to the devotees who are fully and
exclusively surrendered (ekānta-bhaktas). The word
icchatām means “of those who seek the heavenly planets
and liberation”. This refers to the jñānīs and karmīs.
The word yoginām means “of the yogīs”. This refers to
the ātmārāmas, those who take pleasure in the self.

The word akutobhayam means that there is absolutely no
doubt about the efficacy of nāma-kīrtana. It does not
depend on time, place, person, articles of worship,
purity or impurity. Even if the holy name comes in
contact with an uncultured meat-eater (mleccha) who is

                           37
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

intolerant of the service of the Lord, the holy name
will act. The words nāma-anukīrtanam mean either
“constant chanting” or “chanting to an extent that is
appropriate for one’s practice of bhakti”. This practice
is suitable in the stage of both sādhana, practice, and
sādhya, perfection. The purport of the word nirṇītam
(meaning “it has been decided”) is that this fact has
been decided by the common consent of previous sages who
became devoid of all doubt after direct experience and
realisation.

The next verse describes the self-revealing power of the
holy name and its ability to deliver the living entities
from material existence. This verse is found in Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa (11.512), quoted from the Ṝg Veda
(1.156.3):

āsya jānanto nāma cid-viviktana



mahas te viṣṇo sumatiṁ bhajāmahe



oṁ ity etad brahmaṇopadiṣṭaṁ nāma



yasmād uccāryamāṇam eva saṁsāra



bhayāt tārayati tasmād ucyate tāraḥ



O Viṣṇu, Your name is fully spiritual, and thus it is
self-manifested. Although we are not perfectly
acquainted with the glories of uttering Your holy name,
if we chant, knowing just a little of its glories, we
will obtain full knowledge of that subject. Brahmājī
propagated the transcendental sound oṁ, the mere
utterance of which liberates one from the fear of
material existence. Therefore the vibration oṁ is known
as tāraka-brahma.

The word tāraka-brahma means “that form of Brahman which
liberates or enables one to cross over”.

The next verse shows how the mere utterance of the holy
name makes one a fit candidate for liberation. This
verse is quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.417), taken
from the Padma Purāṇa (Uttara-khaṇḍa, Chapter 46):

sakṛd uccāritaṁ yena

harir ity akṣara-dvayam

baddhaḥ parikaras tena

mokṣāya gamanaṁ prati

Those who are free from all offences and who utter even

                           38
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

once the two syllables “Ha-ri” become resolute to obtain
liberation from material existence and the service of
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

In his Dig-darśinī commentary on this verse, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī has explained that the words baddhaḥ
parikaraḥ, to tighten one’s girth, mean “he becomes
immediately prepared”, and mokṣāya gamanaṁ prati mean
“for obtaining liberation”. He says that by this simple
act one’s sādhana is complete, sādhanaṁ samyag
anuṣṭhitam ity arthaḥ.

The next verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.3.24) shows by
indirect indication the power of the holy name to melt
the heart. It is cited in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.505):

tad aśma-sāraṁ hṛdayaṁ batedaṁ

yad gṛhyamāṇair hari-nāmadheyaiḥ

na vikriyetātha yadā vikāro

netre jalaṁ gātra-ruheṣu harṣaḥ

O Sūta, if one’s heart does not melt and begin to flow
towards the Supreme Lord upon hearing and chanting His
holy name, if one’s eyes do not fill with tears and the
hairs of one’s body do not stand on end due to ecstasy,
then one should know that one’s heart has become as hard
as iron due to committing nāma-aparādha.

The next verse confirms that the holy name is the
ripened fruit of all the Vedas and can thus easily
deliver one from material existence. This verse is found
in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.451), quoting from the
Prabhāsa-khaṇḍa of the Skanda Purāṇa:

madhura-madhuram etan maṅgalaṁ maṅgalānāṁ

sakala-nigama-vallī-satphalaṁ cit-svarūpam

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛgu-vara naramātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma

Of all that is auspicious, the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
stands supreme. Of all that is sweet, the holy name is
sweeter still. It is the eternal spiritual fruit of the
wish-fulfilling tree of the entire Vedas and the
embodiment of the absolute truth endowed with full
consciousness. O best of the Bhṛgus, if anyone even once
chants the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, either with faith or
indifferently, the holy name delivers him from the ocean
of material existence.

The next verse, from the Ādi Purāṇa, proves the power of
the holy name to bring Kṛṣṇa under control. This verse
is quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.446) and Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.231):

gītvā ca mama nāmāni

vicaren mama sannidhau


                              39
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

iti bravīmi te satyaṁ

krīto ’haṁ tasya cārjuna!

O Arjuna, I declare this truth unto you, that those who
approach Me chanting My name certainly purchase Me. I
become completely subservient to them.

The last two verses in this section, quoted from the
Padma Purāṇa, establish that the holy name is completely
beyond material nature and, therefore, cannot be grasped
with the material senses. These verses appear in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.233—4). The first verse in the
series also appears in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.503):

nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrnaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

’bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ

The holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa awards all benedictions, just
like the cintāmaṇi stone. It is Kṛṣṇa Himself, the
embodiment of all transcendental mellows (caitanya-rasa-
vigraha). The holy name is complete, beyond the
influence of māyā and eternally liberated, since Kṛṣṇa’s
name and Kṛṣṇa Himself are non-different.

ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

Therefore the transcendental names, form, qualities and
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa cannot be perceived with the gross
material senses. They automatically manifest themselves
on the tongue and other senses that have awakened
eagerness for the transcendental service of the Lord.

Thus the existence of all potencies in the holy name is
established by the statements of the Śruti, the Smṛti
and the Tantras. After explaining how Bhagavān has
mercifully invested all powers in His holy names, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, “In the processes of fruitive
activity (karma), impersonal knowledge (jñāna) and
mystic yoga, emphasis is placed on the rules or
considerations regarding time, place and performer. But
in the chanting and remembering of Your holy name, You
have not imposed any restrictions regarding time, place
and performer. This is an example of Your limitless
mercy upon us. In spite of this, we are so unfortunate
that we have failed to obtain even the slightest
attraction towards Your most munificent names.”

The word durbhāgya, misfortune, indicates the presence
of offences to the holy name (nāma-aparādha). Nāma-
aparādha will be briefly described in the discussion
ahead. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu continues, “In this
material world fashioned by the illusory energy, the

                              40
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

living entities who are distracted from the Lord are
bound by attachment to innumerable types of sense
gratification. They never make any endeavour to direct
their attention towards the Lord. They are always
engrossed in karma, jñāna and other methods that simply
produce misery. But the jīva can never achieve eternal
welfare by these methods.

“Thinking thus, the unlimitedly merciful Śrī Kṛṣṇa
manifested His holy names to the living entities as the
method of obtaining bhakti. Bhakti is predominated by
the hlādinī potency of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa-śakti, and by
the chanting of the holy name it is transmitted into the
hearts of the living entities. But in spite of hearing
and chanting, the jīvas do not obtain attachment towards
the holy name on account of offences. Therefore persons
possessing faith should receive the holy name from the
mouth of a spiritual master. Being attentive to avoid
committing offences, they should perform japa and nāma-
saṅkīrtana with great faith, as far as their capacity
allows.”



Offences are of ten kinds

The ten offences to the holy name are mentioned in the
Padma Purāṇa (Svarga-khaṇḍa 48). They have also been
quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.521—4) and Bhakti-
sandarbha (Anuccheda 265):

(1) satām nindā nāmnaḥ paramam aparādhaṁ vitanute; yataḥ
khyātiṁ yātaṁ katham u sahate tad vigarhām — To
criticise the devotees of the Lord is a very grievous
offence to the holy name. How can Śrī Kṛṣṇa tolerate
criticism of those great souls who are deeply devoted to
the holy name and who spread its glories throughout the
world? Therefore criticism of saintly persons and
devotees is the first offence against the holy name.

(2) śivasya śrī-viṣṇor ya iha guṇa-nāmādi-sakalam; dhiyā
bhinnaṁ paśyet sa khalu harināmāhita-karaḥ — In this
world, those persons who, by mundane intelligence, see a
difference in the all-auspicious, transcendental holy
names, forms, qualities and pastimes of Śrī Viṣṇu — in
other words who consider them to be like material
phenomena and thus different from the Lord Himself —
commit an offence against the holy name. Furthermore,
one who considers the qualities, names and other
attributes of Lord Śiva to be different from those of
Viṣṇu commits a serious offence.

In his Dig-darśinī commentary on this verse quoted in
Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.521), Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has
said: “ādi-śabdena rūpa-līlādi, dhiyāpi harināmni ahitam
aparādhaṁ karotīti tathā saḥ — the word ādi refers to
the other attributes of Śrī Śiva such as his form and
pastimes. If one even thinks that Śiva’s names, forms,
qualities and pastimes are different from those of Śrī
Viṣṇu, he commits a serious offence against the holy
name.”

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has nicely explained the meaning of
this statement in Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 265). He

                            41
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

says that if the possessive case is used, then the word
ca (meaning “and”) must be used after Śrī Viṣṇu. This
means that the names, forms, qualities and pastimes of
Śiva and those of Śrī Viṣṇu are identical. The meaning
here is that the Śiva being referred to is none other
than Viṣṇu in another form. The word śrī in the verse
appears in front of Viṣṇu and not in front of Śiva to
give prominence to Viṣṇu. The word nāma-aparādha used
with

reference to Śiva signifies that the name Śiva here
simply indicates Śrī Viṣṇu. The name of Śiva has also
been listed in this way in the thousand names of Viṣṇu.
Therefore the oneness referred to simply means that Śiva
is nothing but a manifestation of Viṣṇu in another form.
Consequently one should not see any difference between
them. Otherwise if one thinks that Śiva is a separate
and independently powerful Lord, that is an offence to
the holy name.

(3) guror avajñā — To disregard the spiritual master who
is established in all the truths regarding the holy
name, considering him to be an ordinary man possessing a
perishable body composed of material elements, is the
third offence against the holy name.

(4) śruti-śāstra-nindanam — The fourth offence is to
find fault with the Vedas, the Purāṇas that are in the
mode of goodness [some are considered to be in the lower
modes], and other scriptures.

(5) tathārtha-vādo — The fifth offence is to consider
the glories of the holy name to be exaggerated.

(6) hari-nāmni kalpanam — The sixth offence is to
ascribe one’s own imaginary meaning to the holy name.

(7) nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhir na vidyate tasya
yamair hi śuddhiḥ — Persons who have the tendency to
commit sinful actions on the strength of the holy name
cannot be purified by any artificial processes of yoga,
such as yama (control of the senses), niyama (control of
the mind), dhāraṇā (steadying the mind), dhyāna
(meditation) and so on. This is certain.

(8) dharma-vrata-tyāga-hutādi-karma-śubha-kriyā-sāmyam
api pramādaḥ — To consider routine religion, penances,
renunciation, sacrifices and other ordinary pious
activities in the material mode of goodness (sat-karma)
to be equal to the transcendental holy name of the Lord
is negligence and is thus considered an offence.

(9) aśraddadhāne vimukhe ‘py aśṛṇvati yaś copadeśaḥ
śiva-nāma-aparādhaḥ — To instruct the glories of the
holy name to faithless persons who are averse to hearing
and chanting the holy name is also an offence.

(10) śrutvāpi nāma-māhātmyaṁ yaḥ prīti-rahito ‘dhamaḥ
ahaṁ-mamādi-paramo nāmni so ‘py aparādha-kṛt — Those
who, in spite of hearing the astonishing glories of the
holy name, maintain the conception that “I am this
material body” and that worldly objects are “mine”, and
who display no persistence in or love for the utterance
of the holy name, are also offenders to the holy name.

                           42
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017


It is essential to chant the holy name free from these
ten kinds of offence. A chanter of the holy name does
not have to endeavour to dissipate sins by sat-karma,
nor does he endeavour to accumulate pious credits like
the fruitive workers. Such fruitive activities are no
longer under his jurisdiction. In other words he has
already relinquished the authority as well as the
obligation to perform them.

If, however, one commits any offence against the holy
name, he should constantly chant the holy name, feeling
very aggrieved at heart. By such constant chanting of
harināma, there will be no opportunity to commit further
offences and all previous offences will be destroyed.

This is stated in the Padma Purāṇa (Svarga-khaṇḍa 64):

nāma-aparādha-yuktānāṁ

nāmāny eva haranty agham

aviśrānti prayuktāni

tāny evārtha-karāṇi ca

Only the holy name is able to destroy the sins of
persons who are infested with nāma-aparādha. Therefore
one should constantly chant the holy name of the Lord.
By this process, all offences will be dissipated and one
will obtain love for Kṛṣṇa, the highest attainment of
life.

When all offences have thus been nullified, attachment
will awaken for the holy name. At that time complete
spiritual perfection will be attained. Here “complete
spiritual perfection” implies love for Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-
prema). This is the second instruction of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 20.17–19)

aneka-lokera vā—chā – aneka-prakāra



kṛpāte karila aneka-nāmera pracāra



khāite śuite yathā tathā nāma laya



kāla-deśa-niyama nāhi, sarva siddhi haya



“sarva-śakti nāme dilā kariyā vibhāga



āmāra durdaiva – nāme nāhi anurāga!”


                           43
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017



Those who are distracted from the Lord, being bound by
the illusory energy, have innumerable desires for sense
enjoyment in their hearts. Therefore they are cheated
and deprived of their constitutional occupation, which
is to engage in bhagavad-bhakti. The Supreme Lord is
very merciful. Moved by great compassion, He has
manifested His many names, and in the vibration of such
names, He has not imposed any restrictions in regard to
time, place or person. Even by chanting the holy name of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa at the time of eating, drinking and sleeping,
all perfection is attained. Alas, Kṛṣṇa has invested all
His potencies in His holy names, but I am so unfortunate
that I have not even the slightest attachment for them.

Śikṣāṣṭaka: Song Two (Gītāvalī)

tuṅhu dayā-sāgara tārayite prāṇī



nāma aneka tuyā śikhāoli āni’



sakala śakati dei nāme tohārā



grahaṇe rākhali nāhi kāla-vicārā



śrī-nāma-cintāmaṇi tohāri samānā



viśve bilāoli karuṇā-nidānā



tuyā dayā aichana parama udārā



atiśaya manda nātha bhāga hāmārā



nāhi janamala nāme anurāga mora



bhakativinoda-citta duḥkhe vibhora



O ocean of mercy Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You have manifested Your
innumerable names in this world just to deliver the
living entities from the ocean of material existence.
Out of Your kindness, You have invested all the
potencies of Your respective transcendental forms into
those names. In the chanting of the holy name, You have

                              44
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

not placed any restrictions regarding time, place or
other considerations. At any time, in any place, under
any circumstance, the practising devotee can perform
japa, kīrtana or smaraṇa of the holy name. Like Your
transcendental form, the holy name is eternal, fully
cognisant and spiritually blissful (sac-cid-ānanda), and
it is superior even to cintāmaṇi, touchstone. You have
distributed this touchstone-like holy name throughout
the entire world. This is the topmost display of Your
mercy. On the one hand Your mercy is extremely generous
and beyond compare. Yet my misfortune is very great, for
I have not even the slightest attraction towards the
magnanimous name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Bhaktivinoda
says, “My heart is overwhelmed with sadness. What shall
I do? O Lord! Now I am simply waiting expectantly upon
Your causeless mercy.”

Vivṛti

“O Bhagavān, out of Your causeless mercy, You have
manifested innumerable names for the benefit of the
entire world. You have invested each of those names with
all the potencies of Your respective personal forms. In
the chanting and remembrance of these names, You have
not imposed any restrictions regarding when such
chanting should be done. Even while eating, reclining or
sleeping — at any time — one can chant the holy name of
the Lord. There is no inconvenience in this whatsoever.
Yet I am so unfortunate that I have not even the
slightest attachment for chanting or remembering such
liberal and magnanimous names.”



Primary and secondary names

It is mentioned above that the Lord manifests
innumerable (bahu) names. The word bahu indicates that
the Lord’s holy names are of two types: primary (mukhya)
and secondary (gauṇa). The primary names are also of two
types: mādhurya — names that represent the sweet,
intimate, loving feature of the Lord, and aiśvarya —
names that represent His opulent and reverential
feature. Included in the first category are Kṛṣṇa,
Rādhā-ramaṇa and Gopījana-vallabha; in the second
category are Vāsudeva, Rāma and Nṛsiṁha. The separated
expansions of the Lord, or in other words, His partial
manifestations such as Brahma, Paramātmā and so on, are
included in the secondary names of the Lord. The
principal names of the Lord are non-different from Him
and are endowed with all the potencies that are to be
found within His personal form. The secondary names are
only partially endowed with select potencies.



The meaning of durdaiva

The living entity is cetana, conscious. The principal
meaning of the word cetana is that the living entity has
independence. But when the jīva misuses his independence
and remains uninterested in the Lord, he is bound in the
perishable kingdom of māyā. This is his durdaiva,
misfortune. The word durdaiva refers to the living

                              45
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

entity’s apathy towards the service of Bhagavān known as
bhagavat-sevā-vimukhatā.

When the living entity embarks upon the threefold path
of enjoyment — namely, anyābhilāṣitā, karma and jñāna —
he forgets his true identity and thus meets with
disaster. The term anyābhilāṣitā literally means
“desirousness”. It refers to the state of being driven
or impelled by material desires. Under the sway of
anyābhilāṣitā, the living entity becomes intoxicated
with desires to satisfy his own mind and body. In this
way he becomes attached to the happiness of this inert
material world.

The word karma refers to the duties prescribed in the
Vedas directed towards superior enjoyment. The living
entity engages in sat-karma in order to obtain fleeting
heavenly pleasures. When, in the midst of such
enjoyment, he is forced to experience distress, he
renounces the inclination for material enjoyment. He
then cultivates knowledge (jñāna) directed towards the
liberation of merging into the impersonal,
undifferentiated feature of the Supreme.



The name chanted with offences, the semblance of the
holy name and the pure name

By some great fortune, the jīva obtains the association
of the Lord’s devotees. By the association of those
devotees, by the instructions received from the
spiritual master and by the mercy of the Lord, the
living entity awakens a desire to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This
is the eternal occupational duty of the jīva in his
constitutional position.

At present, because the living entity remains covered by
the impurities of the three paths cited above, his good
fortune is severely impaired. Sometimes he remains busy
in the pursuit of threefold material happiness — namely,
religiosity (dharma), accumulation of wealth (artha) and
sense enjoyment (kāma). Sometimes, being disgraced by
irreligiosity, personal defects and unsatisfied material
desires, the jīva takes up the chanting of the holy
name. Because he is infested with the ten offences, he
commits still more offences to the name. At that time,
the name he chants is not the pure holy name (śuddha-
nāma), but the name chanted with offences (nāma-
aparādha).

Sometimes, being harassed by his restless state, he
avoids material sense gratification, hoping to obtain
peace. For his welfare, he takes up the chanting of the
holy name, but remains indifferent towards the
cultivation of sambandha-jñāna. At that time also, the
name that he chants is not the pure name, but nāma-
ābhāsa, a semblance of the holy name. By chanting in the
stage of nāma-ābhāsa, he becomes liberated from the
materialistic conception of life and becomes eligible to
take up the service of the Lord.

Pure devotees, having rid themselves of misfortune in
the shape of mundane existence and impersonal

                           46
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

liberation, chant the pure holy name of the Lord;
consequently, they attain unalloyed love for Kṛṣṇa
(kṛṣṇa-prema).



The process to attain freedom from nāma-aparādha

Observing the predicament of the conditioned living
entities, Śrī Gaurasundara instructed them on the system
for performing nāma-bhajana. The jīvas’ absence of
attachment for the holy name of Bhagavān is their
misfortune. But in spite of such misfortune, the mercy
of Bhagavān is always present. There is a method of
becoming freed from the hands of nāma-aparādha.
Considering offences to be like a thunderbolt, one
should never engage in them, and by incessantly chanting
the holy name, there will be no occasion to commit such
offences.

By chanting a semblance of the name, one obtains mukti,
or in other words, freedom from attachment to material
sense enjoyment. Thereafter, the jīva obtains
qualification to chant the holy name purely. The
attainment of all such opportunities is an indication of
the mercy of Bhagavān. By the influence of the primary
names — that is, Rādhā-kānta, Rādhā-ramaṇa, Madana-
mohana, Govinda, Madhusūdana and other such names — the
living entities attain exceptional and exclusive
benefit.



Niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ

As far as the fulfilment of desires for insignificant
material sense enjoyment is concerned, there are rigid
considerations regarding time, place, person,
eligibility and so on. But out of His mercy, Bhagavān
has exonerated those who chant the holy name from the
iron shackles of such inflexible strictures. At all
times and in any condition, one can chant the holy name
of Bhagavān.

In this connection, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said the
following in Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata (Madhya-khaṇḍa
28.28, 23.78):

ki śayane, ki bhojane, kivā jāgaraṇe



ahar-niśa cinta kṛṣṇa, balaha vadane



Whether sleeping, eating or waking – day and night –
chant and remember the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

sarva-kṣana bala’ ithe vidhi nāhi āra



Just chant the holy name of the Lord at every moment!

                             47
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

Other than this, there is no strict rule or regulation.

It is further stated in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-
līlā 20.18):

khāite śuite yathā tathā nāma laya



kāla-deśa-niyama nāhi, sarva siddhi haya



The holy name may be chanted at any time, even while
eating or sleeping. In this matter, there are no
considerations of time and place. By chanting the holy
name, one will attain all perfection.

Śrī Bhajana-rahasya Verses

Nija-sarva-śaktiḥ tatrārpitā

Śrī Kṛṣṇa has invested all potencies in His holy names,
as stated in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.398), quoting from
the Skanda Purāṇa:

dāna-vrata-tapas-tīrtha-kṣetrādīnāṁ ca yāḥ sthitaḥ

śaktayo deva-mahatāṁ sarva-pāpa-harāḥ śubhāḥ

rājasūyāśvamedhānāṁ j—ānasyādhyātma-vastunaḥ

ākṛṣya hariṇā sarvāḥ sthāpitāḥ sveṣu nāmasu

Śrī Kṛṣṇa invested all potencies in His holy names.
Whatever potencies are to be found within the demigods
to destroy sins or to bestow benedictions, as well as
all potencies that are present within charity, vows,
penances, holy places, the royal and horse sacrifices,
or knowledge of spiritual phenomena, have been assembled
by the Supreme Lord and invested in His holy names.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has composed the following
Bengali verse in this connection (Bhajana-rahasya
(2.3)):

dharma-yaj—a-yoga-j—āne yata śakti chila



saba hari-nāme kṛṣṇa svayaṁ samarpila



Śrī Kṛṣṇa extracted all the potencies that are present
in the strict observation of the rules and regulations
related to one’s caste or creed (dharma), the
performance of sacrifices (yaj—a), the practice of
mystic yoga and the cultivation of spiritual knowledge
(j—āna), and conferred them upon His holy names.

Niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ

There are no rules regarding the time for chanting and

                             48
Siksastaka.txt                                   5/5/2017

remembering the name of Bhagavān. In the performance of
nāma-bhajana, there are no considerations such as
whether one is clean or unclean, purified or unpurified,
or whether the occasion is timely or untimely. This is
corroborated in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.411), quoting
from the Vaiśvānara-saṁhitā:

na deśa-kāla-niyamo

na śaucāśauca-nirṇayaḥ

paraṁ saṅkīrtanād eva

rāma-rāmeti mucyate

In nāma-bhajana, there are no rules regarding time and
place, nor are there any considerations of cleanliness
or uncleanliness. Simply by repeating the holy names
“Rāma, Rāma”, the living entities obtain liberation from
material existence.

Durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ

But we are so unfortunate that we have not even the
least attachment for Your holy name, which bestows all
benedictions. The characteristics of such misfortune
have been stated in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.466), quoting
from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.9.7):

daivena te hata-dhiyo bhavataḥ prasaṅgāt

sarvāśubhopaśamanād vimukhendriyā ye

kurvanti kāma-sukha-leśa-lavāya dīnā

lobhābhibhūta-manaso ’kuśalāni śaśvat

O Bhagavān, by hearing, chanting and remembering
narrations of Your divine pastimes, all misfortune is
driven away. Persons who are averse to such hearing and
chanting, which mitigate all distress, continuously
engage in inauspicious activities, their hearts being
overcome with an obsession to enjoy worthless material
sense gratification. Due to their ill-fate, they are
unfortunate and bereft of all good sense.




Verse Three


What is the process of chanting the holy name?



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

                           49
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


Anvaya

tṛṇāt api sunīcena — being completely free from
materialistic pride and considering oneself even lower
and more worthless than insignificant grass that has
been trampled beneath everyone’s feet; taroḥ api
sahiṣṇunā — being more tolerant than a tree; amāninā —
being prideless; mānadena — giving respect to others in
accordance with their respective positions; sadā hariḥ
kīrtanīyaḥ — always incessantly chant the holy name of
Śrī Hari.

Translation

Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass that has been trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless and offering respect to all others according
to their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.

Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya

Four symptoms are observed in the sādhaka who chants the
holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa free from all offences: (1)
natural humility born of complete detachment from
material sense gratification, (2) pure compassion devoid
of envy, (3) purity of heart free from materialistic
false ego and (4) an attitude of respect towards
everyone in accordance with their respective positions.



1. Tṛṇād api sunīcena: Humbler than a blade of grass

When the holy name, which is the personification of
transcendental rasa, makes its appearance in the heart
of the sādhaka, it overwhelms his heart and he begins to
think thus: “Aho, I am by nature infinitesimal
consciousness and a servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. I have
absolutely no use for mundane material objects. Alas!
Alas! Due to my apathy towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I now find
myself in a miserable plight. I have fallen into the
cycle of repeated birth and death, and I am being
scorched by various kinds of afflictions. By the mercy
of the spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas, I have now
understood that my indifference can be dissipated only
by executing the sādhana of devotion unto the Supreme
Lord.

“By becoming situated again in my constitutional
identity, I can obtain love for the Lord. Therefore
until, by the grace of Bhagavān, I obtain release from
material existence, I shall have to take support of the
principle of appropriate renunciation (yukta-vairāgya).
While cultivating that knowledge which is relevant to
the development of my relationship with Bhagavān
(sambandha-jñāna), I will accept only those things which
are appropriate for the maintenance of life.

“Misery arising from scarcity, disease, lamentation and
old age, as well as happiness arising from wealth, good
health, strength, knowledge and so on are all manifest

                           50
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

reactions of previous activities, known as prārabdha-
karma. These I will certainly have to enjoy or suffer.
Loss and gain, life and death, happiness and distress
are not pāramārthika, meaning that they have nothing to
do with ultimate spiritual reality. Therefore

I have absolutely no use for these mundane subjects.
Thinking in this way, I shall say with great humility,
ëAlas, Alas! Kṛṣṇa! Gauracandra! O Lord of my very life!
When shall I obtain unadulterated service unto You?
Please be merciful upon this wretched and fallen soul,
and accept me without delay.’ Speaking in this way, I
shall pass my days, somehow or other, living either at
home or in the forest.

“Even though grass is a material object, its ego in
respect to matter is natural and reasonable. But my ego
in respect to the present subtle and gross material
bodies is fundamentally wrong, because it is not related
to my pure constitutional nature. The ego of grass is
real, but my material ego is unreal. Therefore it is
only proper for me to become even lower than a blade of
grass.”



2. Taror api sahiṣṇunā: More tolerant than a tree

The meaning of the statement taror api sahiṣṇunā is that
the tree is so tolerant it does not neglect to offer its
shade and sweet fruits even to the person who comes to
cut it down. Because the devotee of Kṛṣṇa is even more
merciful than the tree, he does good to all — both
friend and enemy. This compassion, free from envy, is
the second symptom of saintly persons engaged in the
performance of harināma-kīrtana.

Persons who chant the holy name free from all offences
think as follows: “O Lord, my associates, who are all
among the group of conditioned souls, are very
unfortunate. How may they obtain attachment for Your
all-auspicious holy name? Being blinded by the illusory
energy, they are submerged in the happiness and distress
of wife and children, wealth and property, victory and
defeat, loss and gain, and birth and death. They are
filled with anarthas, and have not even the slightest
detachment from mundane matter. They are bound by the
stringent ropes of innumerable desires for sense
enjoyment. At all times, they are busily engaged in
seeking the fruit of karma and jñāna. The fruit of karma
is the momentary happiness of material enjoyment
available in this world or in the heavenly planets. This
momentary happiness ultimately leads to suffering. The
fruit of jñāna is impersonal liberation. How may the
desire be awakened in them to perceive their actual
form?” Speaking thus, the practising devotee, being
deeply moved with emotion, begins to sing in a very loud
voice (Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa (38.126)):

harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

                            51
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017


nāsty eva gatir anyathā

In Kali-yuga, there is no other way, there is no other
way, there is no other way, than chanting the holy name,
chanting the holy name, chanting the holy name of Lord
Hari.



3. Amānī: Absence of false prestige

The word amānī indicates the third symptom of the
sādhaka engaged in the performance of kīrtana, namely
that he is free from false ego. All egotism arising from
mystic powers, material opulence, wealth, beauty, high
birth, social status, strength, prestige and high
position associated with the gross and subtle bodies of
the living entity who is bound by the illusory energy,
is false and opposed to his real identity. To be free
from such false designations is to be devoid of false
ego.

One who, in spite of possessing all these
qualifications, is further ornamented with the qualities
of tolerance and freedom from false ego is most
competent to chant the holy name. Such a pure practising
devotee, completely renouncing the pride of being a
brāhmaṇa householder, or the egotism of being in the
renounced order of life, fixes his mind exclusively on
the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and engages constantly in
the kīrtana of Kṛṣṇa’s name.

4. Mānada: Offering all respect to others

Lastly, the word mānada indicates the fourth symptom of
a sādhaka engaged in the chanting of the holy name,
namely that he offers respect to everyone as befits
their respective position. Understanding all living
entities to be servants of Kṛṣṇa, they bear no attitude
of malice or vengeance towards anyone. They please
everyone with their sweet words and auspicious
behaviour, which are intended for the good of the entire
world. They humbly offer respect as befits any
individual’s position, whether he be a qualified
brāhmaṇa or other dignified person of this world, or
whether he be an exalted demigod such as Brahmā or
Rudra. They pray to them for the awakening of devotion
unto the Supreme Lord. In particular, they thoroughly
and lovingly engage themselves in the service of the
pure devotees of the Lord.

Thus śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana, performed with the four
above-mentioned symptoms, is the only method of
attaining the topmost perfection of human life. This is
the instruction of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the
incarnation who delivers the conditioned souls in Kali-
yuga.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 20.22–6)

uttama ha—ā āpanāke māne tṛṇādhama



                           52
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


dui-prakāre sahiṣṇutā kare vṛkṣa-sama



vṛkṣa yena kāṭileha kichu nā bolaya



śukā—ā maileha kāre pānī nā māgaya



yei ye māgaye, tāre deya āpana-dhana



gharma-vṛṣṭi sahe, ānera karaye rakṣaṇa



uttama ha—ā vaiṣṇava habe nirabhimāna



jīve sammāna dibe jāni’ ‘kṛṣṇa’-adhiṣṭhāna



ei-mata ha—ā yei kṛṣṇa-nāma laya



śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇe tāṅra prema upajaya



In spite of being very exalted, a chanter of the holy
name considers himself to be even more worthless and
insignificant than lowly grass. He is as tolerant as a
tree in two ways. Even at the time of being cut, a tree
raises no protest. Although being dried up and on the
verge of death, it will ask water from no one. Yet to
anyone who requests something from it, the tree will
offer its fruit, flowers, wood, bark and sap –
everything that it has. The tree, while personally
tolerating all kinds of heat and rain, offers protection
to others from the same hardships. Similarly, a Vaiṣṇava
desires nothing for himself, but gives everything to
others and offers them protection to the extent of
giving them their constitutional occupation of kṛṣṇa-
prema. In spite of being the most elevated person, a
Vaiṣṇava is devoid of false ego. He offers respect to
everyone as befits their position, knowing everyone to
be the residence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Such a person is
genuinely fit to chant Kṛṣṇa’s name. Only those who
chant the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa endowed with such
qualifications obtain love for Him.

Śikṣāṣṭaka: Song Three (Gītāvalī)

śrī-kṛṣṇa-kīrtane yadi mānasa tohāra



                           53
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


parama yatane taṅhi labha adhikāra



tṛṇādhika hīna, dīna, aki—cana chāra



āpane mānabi sadā chāḍi’ ahaṅkāra



vṛkṣa-sama kṣamā-guṇa karabi sādhana



pratihiṁsā tyaji’ anye karabi pālana



jīvana-nirvāhe āne udvega nā dibe



para-upakāre nija-sukha pāsaribe



haile-o sarva-guṇe guṇī mahāśaya



pratiṣṭhāśā chāḍi’ kara amānī hṛdaya



kṛṣṇa-adhiṣṭhāna sarva-jīve jāni’ sadā



karabi sammāna sabe ādare sarvadā



dainya, dayā, anye māna, pratiṣṭhā-varjana



cāri guṇe guṇī hai’, karaha kīrtana



bhakativinoda kāṅdi, bale prabhu-pāya



hena adhikāra kabe dibe he āmāya



If you desire to chant the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then
you must sincerely endeavour to acquire proper
qualification. Give up your false material ego and

                           54
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

consider yourself to be more fallen and insignificant
than lowly grass. Become as tolerant and forgiving as a
tree. Abandon violence and the spirit of vengeance, and
give protection and maintenance to all. For the
maintenance of your own existence, do not create anxiety
for anyone. Renounce your own happiness and work for the
welfare of all others. Although you may be a repository
of all good qualities, shun the aspiration to acquire
reputation and prestige. Know all living entities to be
the residence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and humbly offer respect to
everyone according to their position. Being thus
possessed of four qualities – humility, compassion,
respect for others and renunciation of the desire for
personal prestige, chant the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Crying again and again, Bhaktivinoda prays at the lotus
feet of the Supreme Lord: “O my Lord, when will You give
me the qualification to chant the holy name?”

Vivṛti

By his constitutional nature, the jīva is an eternal
servant of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, whether residing in this
world or in the spiritual world, the chanting of the
holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the eternal occupational duty
of the living entity. The holy name is both the means of
attainment (upāya) as well as the object to be obtained
(upeya), both for self-fulfilment and for rendering
benefit to others. Nothing else can compare with it. By
the chanting of the holy name, all types of
auspiciousness arise, both for oneself and for others.
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, out of His mercy upon the
living entities, composed the verse tṛṇād api sunīcena
in order to describe how the jīvas may chant the holy
name free from nāma-aparādha and nāma-ābhāsa.

Those who have no inclination at heart to serve Kṛṣṇa
and who are intoxicated with material enjoyment can
never acknowledge their insignificance. Such recognition
is foreign to the functional make-up of the hedonists.
Tolerance is also absent from their character. The
hedonists can never give up their false ego and material
prestige. No material sense enjoyer is inclined to offer
respect to another material sense enjoyer. Their nature
is to be envious of one another.

On the other hand, the Vaiṣṇavas, who are forever
dedicated to the worship of the holy name, are even
humbler than a blade of grass; they are more tolerant
than a tree; and while remaining indifferent towards
their own prestige, they are always eager to offer
respect to others. In this material world, they alone
are competent and able to chant the holy name of the
Lord constantly.

The respect that pure Vaiṣṇavas offer to their
respective spiritual masters and other Vaiṣṇavas is
inspired by their innate propensity to honour others.
This is known as svabhāvika-mānada-dharma. In order to
enthuse their followers or dependents in bhajana, pure
devotees display affection and encouragement towards
them. This is done out of their natural pridelessness.
This is known as amāni-svabhāva. In other words the
respect, honour and affection that such devotees offer
is due to the innate feeling of the heart. Pure devotees

                           55
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

do not consider such affectionate words of appreciation
to be cheap material flattery. Furthermore, by
tolerating the taunting remarks of the foolish, they
exhibit their quality of forbearance.

Pure devotees constantly engaged in chanting the holy
name consider themselves to be even lower than the straw
in the street that is trampled beneath the feet of all
living entities in this world. They never think of
themselves as gurus or Vaiṣṇavas. They consider
themselves to be disciples of the entire world and the
most fallen and insignificant of all. Knowing every atom
and every infinitesimal living entity to be the
residence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they do not consider anything to
be inferior to themselves. Devotees absorbed in chanting
the holy name never desire nor request anything for
themselves from anyone else in this world. Even if
others bear malice towards them or commit violence
against them, they never retaliate nor adopt a vengeful
attitude; on the contrary, they pray to the Lord for the
welfare of their tormentors.

The devotees who chant the holy name adorned with the
above-mentioned qualities never abandon the devotional
process received from their spiritual master in order to
propagate new and divergent views. They do not fabricate
concocted verses and chant those in place of the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. To preach the glories of the holy
name, to write books based on unalloyed devotion and to
perform kīrtana, all under the guidance of the spiritual
master, is not opposed to the principle of Vaiṣṇava
humility. In such activities there is no transgression
of humility, for the devotee always considers himself to
be low and fallen. Conversely, a false display of
humility through speech or behaviour to deceive others
for some ulterior motive, in one who is lacking genuine
simplicity, is not the true sign of humility.

The topmost devotees of the Lord (uttama-mahā-
bhāgavatas), while engaged in chanting the holy name of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, never consider the moving and stationary
entities within this material world to be items for
their own enjoyment; rather, they see this entire
material world as favourable for the service of Kṛṣṇa
and the devotees of Kṛṣṇa. In other words they see
everything in this world as related to Kṛṣṇa; they see
all moving entities as servants of Kṛṣṇa and all non-
moving entities as enjoyable by Kṛṣṇa.

They never think this material world to be for their own
enjoyment, but for Kṛṣṇa’s enjoyment. They never invent
new mantras, giving up the chanting of the mahā-mantra
that they obtained from their spiritual master. They do
not engage in propagating new theories and opinions.

To regard oneself as a guru of Vaiṣṇavas is an
impediment to one’s humility. Those who do not listen to
the instructions of Śikṣāṣṭaka set forth by Śrī
Gaurasundara, who are forgetful of their actual
spiritual identity, who are greedy for prestige and
material gain and who are thus anxious to obtain the
status of Vaiṣṇava or guru to satisfy their senses, can
never chant the holy name of the Lord. A disciple who
has faith in the kīrtana performances of such persons

                           56
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

also cannot obtain qualification for hearing the holy
name. Therefore one should chant the holy name of the
Lord while considering oneself lower than the straw in
the street, being more tolerant than a tree, devoid of
false prestige and offering all respect to others.

Śrī Bhajana-rahasya Verses

Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

Everyone should chant the holy name of the Lord at all
times. This is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.1.11):

etan nirvidyamānānām

icchatām akutobhayam

yogināṁ nṛpa nirṇītaṁ

harer nāmānukīrtanam

[Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:] O King, it has been decided
by previous ācāryas that whether one be an unalloyed
devotee, thoroughly detached from material existence,
whether one be desirous of elevation to the heavenly
planets or liberation, or whether one be a self-
satisfied yogī, one should in all cases hear, chant and
remember the transcendental names, form, qualities and
pastimes of Śrī Hari. These three activities are
considered to be the supreme form of sādhana and sādhya.
In other words previous ācāryas have determined that
these three activities are both the means of attaining
perfection as well as the goal to be obtained by such
practice for all types of persons.

First of all, one must give up the bodily conception of
life. This is stated by Śrīman Kulaśekhara in the
Mukunda-mālā-stotra (37):

idaṁ śarīraṁ śata-sandhi-jarjjaraṁ

pataty avaśyaṁ pariṇāma-peśalam

kim auṣadhiṁ pṛcchasi mūḍha durmate

nirāmayaṁ kṛṣṇa-rasāyanaṁ piba

O fool, O dull-headed creature, this constantly mutable
body, which is afflicted by innumerable attachments,
will surely perish one day. What medicine are you
seeking to remedy this situation? Just incessantly drink
the medicine of the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which
destroys the disease of this material existence, the
source of all other diseases.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has composed the following
Bengali verses in this connection (Bhajana-rahasya
(3.3)):

śata sandhi jara-jara, tava ei kalevara,

patana haibe eka-dina

bhasma, kṛmi, viṣṭhā habe, sakalera ghṛṇya tabe,

                             57
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


ihāte mamatā arvācīna

ore mana, śuna mora e satya-vacana,

e rogera mahauṣadhi, kṛṣṇa-nāma-niravadhi,

nirāmaya kṛṣṇa-rasāyana

Your material body, which is afflicted by hundreds of
attachments, will undoubtedly perish one day. It will
then transform into ashes, worms and stool, and become
most abominable to all. Therefore to become attached to
this body is certainly foolish. O mind, just listen to
my truthful words. The only remedy for this disease is
to constantly hear, chant and remember the holy name of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This elixir (rasāyana) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s holy
name is the only cure for all diseases.




Verse Four


What is the desire of the sādhaka?



na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ

kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye

mama janmani janmanīśvare

bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi

Anvaya

(he) jagadīśa! (aham) dhanam na, janam na, sundarīm
kavitām vā na kāmaye — O Lord of the universe, I do not
desire wealth, followers such as wife, sons and
relatives, or mundane knowledge expressed in poetic
language; mama janmani janmani — my only prayer is that
in birth after birth; tvayi īśvare ahaitukī bhaktiḥ
bhavatāt — (I) may have unadulterated devotion unto You,
my dear Lord.

Translation

O Lord of the universe, I do not desire wealth,
followers such as wife, sons, friends and relatives, or
mundane knowledge expressed in poetic language. My only
desire, O Lord, is that in birth after birth I may have
unmotivated devotion unto Your lotus feet.

Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya

The sādhaka possessed of faith should first of all hear
the holy name of Śrī Hari emanating from the mouth of
the spiritual master. Thereafter, being freed from all
offences, he should chant harināma with great faith. By
chanting the Lord’s name according to this method, the

                             58
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

four symptoms mentioned in Verse Three will manifest in
his heart. But accompanying this positive assertion
(anvaya) is a negative consideration (vyatireka). If the
sādhaka does not give up all connection with the sensual
happiness of this material world, his pure spiritual
form will not arise. Without the awakening of his real
spiritual identity, bhakti, whose essence is the hlādinī
potency, cannot be transformed into bhāva-bhakti,
devotion characterised by ecstatic love.

It is in consideration of this that the pure character
of sādhana-bhakti in the form of śrī-nāma-saṅkīrtana is
being clearly described by negative indication in the
first two lines of this verse (na dhanam na janam,
etc.). The positive indication refers to svarūpa-
lakṣaṇa, the intrinsic characteristic of bhakti. In
defining an object the svarūpa-lakṣaṇa refers to those
characteristics which are part of its fundamental nature
(svarūpa). The intrinsic characteristic of bhakti is
that it involves the cultivation of activities
favourable to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is known as ānukūlyamaya
kṛṣṇānuśīlana.

The negative indication refers to taṭastha-lakṣaṇa, the
extrinsic characteristics of bhakti. In defining an
object the taṭastha-lakṣaṇa refers either to those
characteristics which are visible by-products of the
inherent quality, or symptoms which are excluded from
the object. In the second case they help to define the
object by describing what it is not. There are two
extrinsic characteristics of bhakti: (1) anyābhilāṣitā-
śunya — bhakti is devoid of all desires for anything
other than the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa and (2) jñāna-karmādy-
anāvṛta — bhakti should not be covered by fruitive
activity (karma), the cultivation of impersonal
knowledge (jñāna) and so on. As long as the cultivation
of activities favourable to Śrī Kṛṣṇa remains covered by
anyābhilāṣa, karma, jñāna and yoga, it does not become
śuddha- or uttama-bhakti; rather, it remains as a mere
semblance of bhakti.

In order to dissipate the semblance (ābhāsa) referred to
here, the following instruction is being given: “O
Jagadīśa, I do not desire wealth, followers or beautiful
poetry.” The word dhana refers to the wealth of
religiosity of those who are devoutly engaged in the
performance of duties in varṇāśrama. It also refers to
all varieties of desires for material enjoyment in this
world and in the heavenly planets, and all paraphernalia
for the enjoyment of the gross and subtle senses, such
as wealth, property and so on.

The word jana refers to women, sons, servants,
maidservants, subjects, friends and relatives. The word
vidyā is defined in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.49): “sā
vidyā tan-matir yayā — that by which the intellect
remains firmly situated at the lotus feet of Bhagavān is
known as real knowledge.” But the words sundarī kavitā
refer to ordinary knowledge related to mundane poetry.
They do not refer to transcendental poetry related to
the descriptions of Bhagavān’s pastimes, philosophical
principles establishing Him as the Supreme, and
glorifications of Him.


                           59
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

Lord Caitanya, praying in the mood of a devotee, says:
“I do not pray to You for all these things. My only
prayer is that birth after birth I may have unmotivated
devotion (ahaitukī-bhakti) unto You, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord
of my life.” Ahaitukī-bhakti is here defined as having
the following characteristics: (1) phala-anusandhāna-
rahita — it is devoid of the result-seeking mentality,
(2) cinmaya-svabhāva-āśraya — it is fully transcendental
and sentient in nature, (3) kṛṣṇānanda-rūpa — it gives
pleasure to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, (4) śuddha — it is pure, (5)
kevalā — it is exclusive, (6) amiśrā — it is unmixed and
(7) akiñcana — it is free from all material attachments.

The endeavour to remove the miseries of material
existence in the form of repeated birth and death is a
matter beyond the ability of the living entities, for it
depends exclusively on the will of Bhagavān. One’s
liberation from all miseries occurs automatically upon
cessation of the cycle of birth and death, which takes
place by the will of the Lord. Therefore what is the
need of praying for the removal of such miseries, when
such a mentality is opposed to bhakti? Lord Caitanya
thus prays: “Until the cycle of birth and death is
terminated by the will of Bhagavān, let me have
unmotivated devotion unto His lotus feet birth after
birth, regardless of my material circumstances — this is
my only prayer.”

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 20.27, 28, 30–1)

‘śuddha-bhakti’ kṛṣṇa-ṭhā—i māgite lāgilā

premera svabhāva – yāhāṅ premera sambandha

sei māne,—‘kṛṣṇe mora nāhi prema gandha’

dhana, jana nāhi māgoṅ, kavitā sundarī

‘śuddha-bhakti’ deha’ more, kṛṣṇa kṛpā kari

ati-dainye punaḥ māge dāsya-bhakti-dāna

āpanāre kare saṁsārī jīva-abhimāna

Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, considering
Himself to be an ordinary conditioned soul, prays to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa for unalloyed devotion. The nature of divine love
(prema) is such that whoever possesses it begins to
think that they have not even a scent of kṛṣṇa-bhakti.
Therefore Śrīman Mahāprabhu, who is the very embodiment
of prema, says: “I do not want wealth, followers such as
wife, sons, friends and relatives, or the pleasure of
mundane knowledge expressed in poetic language. O most
compassionate Śrī Kṛṣṇa, please bestow causeless mercy
upon me and give me only pure devotion for You. Again
and again I humbly beg for the gift of devotional
service at Your lotus feet.”

Śikṣāṣṭaka: Song Four (Gītāvalī)

prabhu tava pada-yuge mora nivedana




                           60
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

nāhi māgi deha-sukha, vidyā, dhana, jana



nāhi māgi svarga, āra mokṣa nāhi māgi



nā kari prārthanā kona vibhūtira lāgi’



nija-karma-guṇa-doṣe ye ye janma pāi



janme janme yena tava nāma-guṇa gāi



ei mātra āśā mama tomāra caraṇe



ahaitukī bhakti hṛde jāge anukṣaṇe



viṣaye ye prīti ebe āchaye āmāra



sei-mata prīti hauka caraṇe tomāra



vipade sampade tāhā thākuka samabhāve



dine dine vṛddhi hauka nāmera prabhāve



paśu-pakṣī ha’ye thāki svarge vā niraye



tava bhakti rahu bhaktivinoda-hṛdaye



O merciful Lord, this is my specific submission at Your
lotus feet. I do not ask for bodily happiness,
knowledge, wealth, followers, attainment of the heavenly
planets, liberation from material existence, or any
other such thing. I do not ask You for any kind of
opulence or perfection. In whatever species I may take
birth as a consequence of my good and evil deeds, may I
continuously chant Your sweet names and describe Your
transcendental qualities. In every birth, may
unmotivated devotion ever remain awakened within my
heart – this is my only prayer at Your lotus feet. Let
whatever attraction I presently have for material sense

                           61
Siksastaka.txt                                    5/5/2017

enjoyment be transformed into attraction and affection
for Your lotus feet. I pray not only that this affection
for Your lotus feet remain steady in all circumstances
of happiness and distress, but that day after day it
continues to grow by the influence of the chanting of
Your holy names. Wherever I take birth, be it in the
animal species, in the heavenly planets, or in hell, may
unadulterated devotion ever grace the heart of this
servant, Bhaktivinoda.

Vivṛti

“O Lord of the universe, I do not desire wealth,
followers or the pleasure of chanting beautiful poetry
adorned with literary embellishments. You are my
worshipful Lord birth after birth. My only desire is
that I may have unmotivated devotion unto Your lotus
feet.”

The words sundarī kavitā refer to material religiosity
prescribed in the Vedas. The word dhana refers to
wealth, and jana refers to wife, children, family and so
on.

“I reject not only bhukti, material enjoyment, in the
form of religiosity (dharma), accumulation of wealth
(artha) and sense enjoyment (kāma), but liberation
(mokṣa) as well. I do not desire liberation from the
cycle of repeated birth and death. I do not desire
engagement in service unto You in order to obtain the
four Vedic goals: dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa. I
desire to serve You only for Your own pleasure.”

The prayer of King Kulaśekhara from Mukunda-mālā-stotra
(4—5) is worthy of consideration here:

nāhaṁ vande tava-caraṇayor dvandvam advandva-hetoḥ

kumbhīpākaṁ gurum api hare nārakaṁ nāpanetum

ramyā-rāmā-mṛdu-tanu-latā nandane nābhirantuṁ

bhāve bhāve hṛdaya-bhavane bhāvayeyaṁ bhavantam

O Lord Hari, I do not pray to Your lotus feet to obtain
monistic liberation. I do not pray for deliverance from
the hell known as Kumbhīpāka or any other dreadful hell.
I do not pray to enjoy the company of exquisitely
beautiful, heavenly damsels in the Nandana-kānana
pleasure gardens of the heavenly planets. I only pray
that life after life I can meditate upon You with great
love in the temple of my heart.

nāsthā dharme na vasu-nicaye naiva kāmopabhoge

yad yad bhavyaṁ bhavatu bhagavan pūrva-karmānurūpam

etad prārthyaṁ mama bahu-mataṁ janma-janmāntare ’pi

tvat-pādāmbhoruha-yuga-gatā niścalā bhaktir astu

O Bhagavān, I have no regard for varṇāśrama-dharma,
which consists of pious activities related to the body
and mind. I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor to

                           62
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

enjoy material pleasure. Whatever reactions I am
destined to suffer or enjoy for the activities of my
previous life, let them come. My only prayer is that in
birth after birth I may have unflinching prema-bhakti
towards Your lotus feet.

Persons possessing faith in the Vedas and who are
desirous of routine religiosity worship Sūrya, the sun-
god. Those who desire wealth worship Gaṇeśa. Those who
desire varieties of sensual enjoyment worship the
goddess Durgā. Those who desire liberation worship Śiva,
and the adulterated devotees worship Lord Viṣṇu through
sakāma-bhakti, devotion mixed with material desires.
Worship of these five personalities is known as
pañcopāsana. Pañcopāsana is sakāma-upāsana, worship with
material desires. Whereas worship of the Lord’s
undifferentiated impersonal feature, Brahman, is
effected in the niṣkāma stage of freedom from attachment
to the results of one’s activities, Lord Viṣṇu is
worshipped purely by devotion free from adulteration or
personal motivation.

Śrī Bhajana-rahasya Verses

Exclusive unmotivated devotional service, known as
ekāntikī-ahaitukī-bhakti, is depicted in various places
in the scriptures, as in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.14):

tasmād ekena manasā

bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

dhyeyaḥ pūjyaś ca nityadā

With one-pointed attention, pure devotees, being devoid
of all desires for mundane religiosity, accumulation of
wealth, sense enjoyment and liberation, should
constantly hear about, glorify, meditate upon and
worship the names, form, qualities and pastimes of
Bhagavān Śrī Hari, who is the protector of the devotees.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says in this connection
(Bhajana-rahasya (4.6)):

ananya-bhāvete kara śravaṇa-kīrtana



nāma-rūpa-guṇa-dhyāna-kṛṣṇa-ārādhana



saṅge saṅge anartha-nāśera yatna kara



bhakti-latā phala-dāna karibe satvara



One should hear about, glorify and meditate upon the
transcendental names, form, qualities, pastimes and

                             63
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with undivided attention.
Simultaneously, one should worship Kṛṣṇa in all
respects. One should endeavour to eliminate all
anarthas, the impediments to spiritual advancement. Only
then can the creeper of devotion quickly bear fruit.

The devotee has no desire to attain the heavenly
planets, Brahmaloka, sovereignty over the entire earth,
rulership of Rasātala, or the eight or eighteen mystic
perfections. All these things are worthless to him. This
is confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.11.25):

na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ

na sārvabhaumaṁ na rasādhipatyam

na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā

sama—jasa tvā virahayya kāṅkṣe

[Śrī Vṛtrāsura prayed:] O Lord, who are the abode of all
auspiciousness, I have no desire to attain Dhruvaloka,
Brahmaloka or sovereignty over the Earth. I do not
desire the eight mystic perfections (such as aṇimā and
mahimā), the nine priceless jewels of Kuvera (padma,
mahāpadma, śaṅkha, makara, kacchapa, kunda, mukunda,
nīla and kharva), nor even liberation, if I have to give
up service to You.

The symptoms of advancement in unmotivated devotion are
given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.42):

bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir

anyatra caiṣa trika eka-kālaḥ

prapadyamānasya yathāśnataḥ syus

tuṣṭiḥ puṣṭiḥ kṣud-apāyo ’nughāsam

[Śrī Kavi said:] With each morsel of food that a hungry
person takes, three effects are simultaneously
accomplished: he obtains satisfaction, nourishment and
cessation of hunger. Similarly, surrendered souls
engaged in the performance of bhajana simultaneously
experience three effects: the awakening of bhakti
ultimately developing into prema, direct manifestation
of the Lord’s beloved form and detachment from material
objects.

One should endeavour to attain devotion that is purely
unmotivated. This is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(1.5.18):

tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido

na labhyate yad bhramatām upary-adhaḥ

tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ

kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā

[Śrī Nārada said:] As misery is obtained without any
endeavour by the effect of one’s past fruitive

                           64
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

activities, material happiness is also acquired
automatically by the unfathomable influence of
irrepressible time. Therefore intelligent persons should
strive for that supreme object which cannot be achieved
even by wandering from the highest region of the
universe, Brahmaloka, down to the lowest position of
stationary life.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has expressed the same in
these Bengali verses (Bhajana-rahasya (4.15)):

vinā yatne duḥkhera ghaṭanā yena haya



sei rūpa kāla-krame sukhera udaya



ataeva caudda-loke durlabha ye dhana



sei bhakti janya yatna kare budha-gaṇa



As misery is obtained without any endeavour, happiness
will also come of its own accord in due course of time.
Therefore intelligent persons do not endeavour even
slightly for mundane religiosity, accumulation of
wealth, sense gratification, liberation and so forth.
They endeavour only for bhakti, which is the rarest
treasure within the fourteen planetary systems.




Verse Five


What is the intrinsic form of the sādhaka?



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya

Anvaya

ayi nanda-tanuja — O son of Mahārāja Nanda; mām kṛpayā —
being merciful upon me; kiṅkaram — Your eternal servant;
patitam — fallen; viṣame bhava-ambudhau — in the
dreadful ocean of material existence; vicintaya — please
consider (me); dhūlī-sadṛśam — like a particle of dust;
tava pāda-paṅkaja-sthita — affixed to Your lotus feet
(in other words as Your eternally purchased servant).


                            65
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

Translation

O son of Nanda Mahārāja, please be merciful upon me,
Your eternal servant, fallen in the dreadful ocean of
material existence as a result of my fruitive actions.
Please consider me as a particle of dust affixed to Your
lotus feet and accept me forever as Your purchased
servant.

Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya

Is it proper for the sādhaka who has taken up the
process of harināma-saṅkīrtana to reflect upon the
miseries of material existence? To dispel this doubt,
Śrī Gaurasundara has presented us this verse.

“O Nanda-nandana, in reality, I am Your eternal servant.
But now I have fallen into this dreadful ocean of
material existence as a result of my own misdeeds. Lust,
anger, envy and other contaminations are like crocodiles
with ferocious gaping mouths ready to swallow me up.
Drifting here and there in the waves of wicked hopes and
misplaced anxieties, I am severely oppressed. The
powerful blasts of wind in the form of corrupt
association have scattered my wits. In such a condition,
I have no shelter other than You.

“Fruitive activity, impersonal knowledge, mystic yoga,
austerity and so on are like bunches of straw that are
seen floating here and there. But has anyone succeeded
in crossing the ocean of material existence by taking
shelter of them? Sometimes persons drowning in the ocean
of material existence grab hold of these bunches of
straw and pull them down along with them.

“Now there is no refuge other than Your mercy. Your holy
name alone is the only sturdy boat, taking shelter of
which, the jīva can easily cross the ocean of material
existence. Considering all this, I have taken shelter of
the very firm boat of Your holy name by the causeless
mercy of the lotus feet of the spiritual master. You are
very affectionate to the surrendered souls. Please
forgive all my faults, because I am without any other
shelter, and consider me as a particle of dust at Your
lotus feet. Then I shall never be separate from Your
lotus feet.”

This is the purport of the above-mentioned verse. It is
to be understood from this that the bhakti-sādhaka must
completely renounce the desires for material enjoyment
and liberation.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 20.33–5)

tomāra nitya-dāsa mui, tomā pāsariyā



paḍiyāchoṅ bhavārṇave māyā-baddha ha—ā



kṛpā kari’ kara more pada-dhūli-sama


                           66
Siksastaka.txt                                   5/5/2017



tomāra sevaka karoṅ tomāra sevana



punaḥ ati-utkaṇṭhā, dainya haila udgama



kṛṣṇa-ṭhā—i māge prema-nāma-saṅkīrtana



“O Lord, I am Your eternal servant. Due to great
misfortune, I have abandoned You. Being bound by māyā, I
am drowning in the bottomless ocean of material
existence. Kindly accept me as a particle of dust at
Your lotus feet. I shall become Your servant and
eternally render service unto You.” Speaking in this
way, great longing welled up within the heart of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In a very humble mood, He again
began to pray to Śrī Kṛṣṇa to awaken love for nāma-
saṅkīrtana.

Śikṣāṣṭaka: Song Five (Gītāvalī)

anādi karama-phale, paḍi’ bhavārṇava jale,

taribāre nā dekhi upāya

e viṣaya-halāhale, divā-niśi hiyā jvale,

mana kabhu sukha nāhi pāya

āśā-pāśa śata-śata, kleśa deya avirata,

pravṛtti-ūrmira tāhe khelā

kāma-krodha-ādi chaya, vāṭapāḍe deya bhaya,

avasāna haila āsi’ belā

jñāna-karma-ṭhaga-dui, more pratāriyā lai,

avaśeṣe phele sindhu-jale

e hena samaye bandhu, tumi kṛṣṇa kṛpā-sindhu,

kṛpā kari’ tola more bale

patita-kiṅkare dhari,’ pāda-padma-dhūli kari,’

deha bhaktivinoda āśraya

āmi tava nitya-dāsa, bhuliyā māyāra pāśa,

baddha ha’ye āchi dayāmaya

O supremely merciful Kṛṣṇa, I am drowning in the
bottomless ocean of material existence as a consequence
of my fruitive activities, which are without any
beginning. I can see no means of crossing this ocean. My
heart is being scorched with the deadly poison of sense

                             67
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

gratification. My mind is greatly perturbed. I am
continuously troubled, being bound by the stringent
ropes of unlimited lusty desires. I am being tossed here
and there, struck by the violent crashing of the waves
of material nature. On the one hand, my life duration is
dwindling and death is approaching. On the other hand,
lust, anger, illusion, envy, greed and madness are like
six thieves that have pounced upon me. Karma and j—āna
are like two swindlers who have cheated me and thrown me
into a bottomless ocean. O ocean of mercy, at such a
time of formidable distress, You are the only friend. O
Kṛṣṇa, kindly deliver me. I am Your eternal servant. I
have forgotten You and thus become tightly bound by the
illusory energy. Please accept this fallen servant,
Bhaktivinoda, and fix me as a particle of dust at Your
lotus feet.

Vivṛti

Śrī Nanda-nandana is the worshipful object for all
living entities. Every jīva is by nature a servant of
Kṛṣṇa. Servitude unto Kṛṣṇa is inherent within the
eternal, constitutional nature of every living entity.
The jīva, having become indifferent to the sense of
servitorship towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is drowning in the
insurmountable and fearful ocean of material existence.
On this account he is tormented by the threefold
miseries of material life. In this condition, the living
entity’s only support is the mercy of the Lord. If Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, out of His causeless mercy, accepts the jīva as a
particle of dust at His lotus feet, then the jīva’s
covered identity and eternal disposition of servitorship
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa can become manifest once again.

The attempt to attain the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa by
one’s own endeavour is called āroha-panthā. Kṛṣṇa cannot
be obtained by this method, because it is opposed to the
jīva’s inherent function. Only by adopting a service
attitude that is in accordance with Kṛṣṇa’s will is it
possible to attain His lotus feet. Endowed with such
firm faith, one should engage in the process of sādhana
and bhajana. The words pāda-dhūlī, dust particle,
indicate the living entity’s eternal identity as an
infinitesimal part and parcel of Bhagavān known as
vibhinnāṁśa.

As long as the jīva is not situated in his inherent
spiritual form, unwanted things that impede his
advancement (anarthas) are inevitable. In such a
condition, ascertainment of the ultimate goal remains
ambiguous. Pure harināma-saṅkīrtana begins upon the
awakening of sambandha-jñāna, and only by such pure
chanting is prema obtained. When the heart is purified
by continuous chanting of the pure name of the Lord,
rati is manifested in the heart of the living entity.
This rati, also known as bhāva, is the initial sprout of
unalloyed love for Kṛṣṇa. It is a combination of the
saṁvit and hlādinī potencies of the Lord’s internal
potency and is eternally situated in the hearts’ of the
Lord’s eternal associates. By the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
the spiritual master, this bhāva is transmitted into the
living entity’s heart, at which time he is known as a
jāta-rati-bhakta, a devotee in whom rati or bhāva has
manifested.

                           68
Siksastaka.txt                                    5/5/2017


There is a difference between the nāma-saṅkīrtana of an
ajāta-rati-bhakta (one in whom rati is not manifest) and
a jāta-rati-bhakta. To deceitfully present oneself as a
jāta-rati-bhakta before having attained to such a stage
is completely improper. After cleansing oneself of the
impediments to devotional practice (anartha-nivṛtti),
one becomes situated in nairantarya, uninterrupted
steadiness in the practice of sādhana. Next, one attains
svecchā-pūrvikā, meditation on the pastimes of the Lord
by one’s own will. This is an advanced stage of
remembrance of the Lord that comes in the stage of
āsakti. This is followed by the condition known as
svārasikī when the pastimes of the Lord automatically
manifest in one’s heart as an uninterrupted flow. This
comes in the stage of bhāva after the pure spiritual
energy of śuddha-sattva manifests in the heart. At last
one comes to the stage of kṛṣṇa-prema.

Śrī Bhajana-rahasya Verses

When bhāva manifests in the heart of the sādhaka, then
dāsya-rati is easily awakened. The dāsya-rati mentioned
here is general. It refers to the natural inborn
inclination to serve Kṛṣṇa. Without the manifestation of
bhāva, one’s service to Kṛṣṇa is superficial. But when
śuddha-sattva manifests in the heart, then one naturally
wants to serve Kṛṣṇa with full expression of the heart.
This is supported in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.11.24):

ahaṁ hare tava pādaika-mūla-

dāsānudāso bhavitāsmi bhūyaḥ

manaḥ smaretāsu-pater guṇāṁs te

gṛṇīta vāk karma karotu kāyaḥ

[Śrī Vṛtrāsura said:] O Lord Hari, will I again be able
to become a servant of Your servants who have taken
exclusive shelter at Your lotus feet? I pray that my
mind may always remain engaged in remembering Your
transcendental qualities, my words in describing those
qualities, and my body in rendering varieties of service
to You, who are the Lord of my life.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura then says (Bhajana-rahasya
(5.6)):

chinu tava nitya-dāsa, gale bāṅdhi’ māyā-pāśa,

saṁsāre pāinu nānā-kleśa

ebe punaḥ kari āśa, haña tava dāsera dāsa,

bhaji’ pāi tava bhakti-leśa

prāṇeśvara tava guṇa, smaruka mana punaḥ punaḥ,

tava nāma jihvā karuka gāna

kara-dvaya tava karma, kariyā labhuka śarma,

tava pade saṅpinu parāṇa

                              69
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


I am Your eternal servant, but due to my own misfortune,
I have forgotten You. Consequently, māyā has captured me
and, binding me by the neck, she has cast me down into
this material atmosphere. I have been wandering here and
there in this material existence and rotating through
thousands and millions of different species of life. I
am being crushed by varieties of different miseries. Now
in the association of the Vaiṣṇavas, my intelligence has
become aroused. Now the only aspiration in my heart is
that I may become a servant of the servant of Your
servants. I may then engage in bhajana unto You and
obtain a particle of bhakti. O Lord of my life and soul,
let my mind be constantly engaged in remembering Your
transcendental glories and attributes; let my tongue be
always engaged in chanting Your holy names, form,
qualities and pastimes; let my two hands be engaged in
rendering various types of service unto You. I shall
thus taste the bliss of service to You. My entire being
is offered at Your lotus feet.

By his constitutional nature, the living entity is meant
to be enjoyed (bhogya), whereas Kṛṣṇa is the supreme
enjoyer (bhoktā). Therefore, by continuous practice of
bhajana, an ardent desire will arise in the heart to
become a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the
embodiment of transcendental bliss (ānandamayī). At that
time gopī-bhāva, the loving sentiment exhibited by the
cowherd girls of Vraja, awakens in the heart. This is
confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.38):

tan naḥ prasīda vṛjinārdana te ’ṅghri-mūlaṁ

prāptā visṛjya vasatīs tvad-upāsanāśāḥ

tvat-sundara-smita-nirīkṣaṇa-tīvra-kāma-

taptātmanāṁ puruṣa-bhūṣaṇa dehi dāsyam

[The gopīs said:] O master, You mitigate the sufferings
of anyone who takes shelter of Your lotus feet. Now
please be kind to us also and make us the objects of
Your mercy. With a desire to serve You, we have
abandoned our families, relatives, households and
village, and come to take shelter at Your lotus feet. O
dearest one, there is no opportunity to serve You there.
O jewel amongst men, seeing Your enticingly sweet smile
and compelling glance, our hearts are inflamed with
anxious longing. Please accept us as Your maidservants
and grant us the service of Your feet.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has expressed this in the
form of Bengali verses (Bhajana-rahasya (5.7)):

tava-dāsya-āśe chāḍiyāchi ghara dvāra

dayā kari deha kṛṣṇa, caraṇa tomāra

tava hāsya-mukha-nirīkṣaṇa-kāmi-jane

tomāra kaiṅkarya deha praphulla-vadane

With a desire to serve You, we have forsaken house and
home. Please be merciful, O Kṛṣṇa, and give us the

                           70
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

service of Your feet. Seeing Your sweet smiling face has
kindled a burning fire within our hearts to meet with
You. Please grant us the vision of Your blossoming lotus
face and accept us as Your maidservants.

The necessity of taking shelter of the lotus feet of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is expressed by Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī in Śrī Stavāvalī (Sva-saṅkalpa-prakāśa-stotram
(1)):

anārādhya rādhā-padāmbhoja reṇum

anāsritya vṛndāṭavīṁ tat-padāṅkām

asambhāṣya tad-bhāva-gambhīra-cittān

kutaḥ śyāma-sindho rasasyāvagāhaḥ

If you have never worshipped the dust of the lotus feet
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, or taken shelter of Śrī Vṛndāvana,
which is marked with the impressions of Her lotus feet,
or spoken with the devotees whose hearts are deeply
submerged in the profound loving sentiments of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, how can you become immersed in the blackish
ocean of nectar known as śyāma-sindhu-rasa?

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung (Bhajana-rahasya
(5.10)):

rādhā-padāmbhoja-reṇu nāhi ārādhile



tāṅhāra padāṅka-pūta vraja nā bhajile



nā sevile rādhikā-gambhīra-bhāva-bhakta



śyāma-sindhu-rase kise habe anurakta?



If you have never worshipped the dust of the lotus feet
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā or the land of Vraja, which is marked
with the impressions of Her lotus feet, or have not
served the feet of those devotees who taste the profound
loving sentiments of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, how will you
become attached to the blackish ocean of nectar known as
śyāma-sindhu-rasa?

Attainment of the service of the lotus feet of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā is the one and only goal of the devotees
situated in the stage of ecstatic emotion (bhāvuka-
bhaktas). This is exhibited in the eighth verse of
Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, taken from Stavāvalī:

devi duḥkha-kula-sāgarodare

dūyamānam ati-durgataṁ janaṁ

tvaṁ kṛpā-prabala-naukayā ’dbhutaṁ

                              71
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


prāpaya sva-pada-paṅkajālayam

O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who are adept in amorous sports, I am
drowning in an unlimited ocean of horrible miseries. I
am severely oppressed and shelterless. Kindly place me
on the infallible boat of Your causeless mercy and guide
me to the extraordinary shelter of Your lotus feet.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung (Bhajana-rahasya
(5.17)):

duḥkha-sindhu-mājhe devi, durgata e jana



kṛpā-pote pāda-padme uṭhāo ekhana



O Goddess, this wretched soul is drowning in the ocean
of misery. Please lift me now on the boat of Your mercy
and place me at Your lotus feet.

Comment

Those who taste rasa are called rasika, and those who
taste bhāva are called bhāvuka. The gopīs and Kṛṣṇa are
both rasika and bhāvuka. When viśuddha-sattva, or in
other words bhāva, descends from the gopīs upon those
who are in the stage of sādhana, they attain svarūpa-
siddhi, or perception of their permanent devotional
sentiment (sthāyibhāva), but they have not yet attained
their perfected spiritual body. At that stage they are
known as bhāvuka-bhaktas. When, by further advancement,
the sthāyibhāva mixes with the elements of vibhāva,
anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and vyabhicāri-bhāva and one is
able to taste bhakti-rasa, instigated by hearing the
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then one is called a rasika.

Just like in the rāsa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa is dancing and all the
gopīs are dancing. Kṛṣṇa is continuously taking cups of
rasa and giving them to the gopīs — they are rasika, and
those hearing all these things, who are drinking
unlimited cups of that rasa within their hearts — they
are also rasika and bhāvuka. Those who meditate upon and
remember the bhāva exchanged between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, or
that which is found in the gopīs, the sakhās, or in
vātsalya-rasa, are called bhāvuka. Bhāva is the
spiritual emotion of the soul; it is not of this bodily
heart.

For example, Kṛṣṇa addressed Śrīmatī Rādhikā: “Who are
You? How have You come here (at Govardhana or Rādhā-
kuṇḍa)? Why are You stealing all My flowers and breaking
all My creepers, which are very dear to Me?” Then
Śrīmatī stopped, turned towards Kṛṣṇa, and without
saying a word, She glared at Him with an angry mood.
What does this mean? Although She said nothing, Her look
expressed everything. This is bhāva. What bhāva? “Are
You a thief, or am I a thief? You are a thief, so don’t
accuse Me in this way.” She did not say this, but
everything was expressed in Her gaze.


                           72
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017



Those devotees who aspire to become maidservants of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā constantly seek Kṛṣṇa’s mercy through
intent saṅkīrtana. This is stated in Śrī Rādhā-rasa-
sudhā-nidhi (259):

dhyāyaṁs taṁ śikhi-piccha maulim aniśaṁ tan-nāma-
saṅkīrtayan

nityaṁ tac-caraṇāmbujaṁ paricaran tan-mantra-varyaṁ
japan

śrī-rādhā-pada-dāsyam eva paramābhīṣṭaṁ hṛdā dhārayan

karhi syāṁ tad-anugraheṇa paramādbhutānurāgotsavaḥ

Keeping in my heart my highest aspiration to obtain the
service of the feet of Śrī Rādhā, I constantly meditate
on Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose head is bedecked with a peacock
feather, chant His sweet holy names, serve His lotus
feet and utter His mantras. When, by His mercy, will the
supreme festival of unabated love towards the service of
the feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā awaken in my heart?

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung (Bhajana-rahasya
(5.14)):

nirantara kṛṣṇa-dhyāna, tan-nāma-kīrtana

kṛṣṇa-pāda-padma-sevā tan-mantra-japana

rādhā-pada-dāsya-mātra abhīṣṭa-cintana

kṛpāya labhiba rādhā-rāgānubhāvana

My only desire is to obtain the service of the lotus
feet of Śrī Rādhā. Having fixed this goal in my heart, I
constantly meditate on Śrī Kṛṣṇa, chant His names, serve
His lotus feet and utter His mantras. In this way I
shall obtain His mercy, and deep spontaneous attachment
will awaken towards Her lotus feet.




Verse Six


What are the external symptoms of perfection?



nayanaṁ galad-aśru-dhārayā

vadanaṁ gadgada-ruddhayā girā

pulakair nicitaṁ vapuḥ kadā

tava nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati

Anvaya


                              73
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

(O my Lord) tava nāma-grahaṇe — at the time of chanting
Your holy name; (mama — my); nayanam — eyes; galad-aśru-
dhārayā — flooded by a stream of tears; vadanam — my
throat; gadgada — stammering; ruddhayā girā — with a
choked voice; vapuḥ — and all the limbs of my body;
pulakaiḥ nicitam — pervaded by rows of hair standing
erect due to ecstasy; kadā bhaviṣyati — when will this
take place?

Translation

O Lord, when will my eyes be filled with a stream of
tears? When will my voice choke up? And when will the
hairs of my body stand erect in ecstasy as I chant Your
holy name?

Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya

In the five previous verses the systematic development
of parama-dharma has been described. Parama-dharma
refers to the unfolding of the eternal constitutional
identity of the living entity, which takes place through
the medium of bhakti predominated by the hlādinī potency
of the Lord. This systematic development, which begins
with faith (śraddhā), is described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.4.15—16):

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-

saṅgo ’tha bhajana-kriyā

tato ’nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt

tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas

tataḥ premābhyuda—cati

sādhakānām ayaṁ premnaḥ

prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

Faith leads one to associate with saintly persons,
sādhu-saṅga. In their association one begins to practise
the ninefold path of bhakti consisting of hearing
(śravaṇa), chanting (kīrtana), remembering (smaraṇa),
serving the lotus feet of the Lord (pāda-sevana),
worship of the deity form of the Lord (arcana), offering
prayers and obeisances (vandana), servitude (dāsya),
friendship (sakhya) and full surrender of the self
(ātma-nivedana). By execution of these items, one
attains self-realisation (ātma-svarūpa), as a result of
which all anarthas in the form of ignorance are
destroyed. Thereafter, one attains steadiness (niṣṭhā),
taste (ruci), attachment for the Lord (āsakti) and
finally devotion steeped in feelings of ecstasy (bhāva).

Upon the attainment of bhāva, bhakti attains to its pure
identity, which is now unbreakable. Bhāva is also called
rati. It is regarded as the sprout (aṅkura) of prema.
Prema is the fully blossomed state of bhakti. Of the
various limbs of bhakti, such as hearing and chanting
practised in the stage of sādhana-bhakti, śrī-kṛṣṇa-

                             74
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

nāma-saṅkīrtana in particular becomes intensified in the
stage of bhāva-bhakti.



Nine characteristics of bhāva

In the stage of bhāva, the following nine symptoms
become manifest, as described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.3.25—6):

kṣāntir avyartha-kālatvaṁ

viraktir māna-śūnyatā

āśā-bandhaḥ samutkaṇṭhā

nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ

āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne

prītis tad-vasati-sthale

ity ādayo ’nubhāvāḥ syur

jāta-bhāvāṅkure jane

(1) kṣānti — even though a cause for agitation may be
present, the devotee’s heart remains unagitated, (2)
avyartha-kālatva — a devotee does not waste time in
activities that are not directed towards the cultivation
of bhakti, (3) virakti — detachment from the objects of
sense enjoyment, (4) māna-śūnyatā — pridelessness, (5)
āśā-bandha — a firm hope of attaining Bhagavān, (6)
utkaṇṭhā — intense longing for the Lord, (7) nāma-gāne
sadā ruci — ever relishing a strong taste to chant the
holy name, (8) āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne — attachment for
hearing and chanting the qualities of Bhagavān and (9)
prītis tad-vasati-sthale — love for the places where the
Lord enacted His transcendental pastimes.



The constitutional nature of bhāva

Bhāva-bhakti is described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.3.1):

śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā

prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmyabhāk

rucibhiś citta-māsṛṇya-

kṛd asau bhāva ucyate

When the heart becomes melted by ruci, or in other words
an intense longing to attain the Lord, then what was
previously sādhana-bhakti is called bhāva-bhakti. The
primary characteristic of bhāva is that it is a
phenomenon constituted entirely of viśuddha-sattva.
Viśuddha-sattva is the self-revealing agency of the
internal potency (cit-śakti), comprised of hlādinī,
sandhinī and saṁvit, through which the Lord and His

                            75
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

paraphernalia are revealed to the devotees. This means
that bhāva is completely beyond the influence of
material nature, and as such it is

compared to a ray of the sun of prema-bhakti. The
conclusion established by the above verse is that bhāva-
bhakti is the sprout of prema and an atom of prema. This
fact is further established by the following two verses
from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.2—3). The first verse
is quoted from the Tantra and the second from the Padma
Purāṇa:

premṇas tu prathamāvasthā

bhāva ity abhidhīyate

sāttvikāḥ svalpa-mātrāḥ syur

atrāśru-pulakādayaḥ

dhyāyaṁ dhyāyaṁ bhagavataḥ

pādāmbhuja-yugaṁ tadā

īṣad-vikriyamāṇātmā

sārdra-dṛṣṭir abhūd asau

In its initial stage, prema is called bhāva. In that
stage, various transformations of ecstasy arising from
viśuddha-sattva such as tears, hairs of the body
standing on end, and so on, are observed to a very
slight extent. Because such symptoms arise from
viśuddha-sattva they are known as sāttvika-bhāvas. In
the stage of bhāva, while meditating on the lotus feet
of Bhagavān, the heart melts and tears begin to flow
from the eyes.

According to this statement, the anubhāvas and sāttvika-
bhāvas that manifest very powerfully in the stage of
prema are visible to a slight extent in the stage of
bhāva.



Anubhāvas of bhāva-bhakti

The external transformations or symptoms that illustrate
the emotions experienced within the heart are called
anubhāvas. The anubhāvas are thirteen in number, as
described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.2.2):

nṛtyaṁ viluṭhitaṁ gītaṁ

krośanaṁ tanu-moṭanam

huṅkāro jṛmbhaṇaṁ śvāsa-

bhūmā lokānapekṣitā

lālāsravo ’ṭṭa-hāsaś ca

ghūrṇā-hikkādayo ’pi ca


                             76
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

(1) nṛtya — dancing, (2) viluṭhita — rolling on the
ground, (3) gīta — singing, (4) krośana — loud crying,
(5) tanu-moṭana — writhing of the body, (6) huṅkāra —
roaring, (7) jṛmbhaṇa — yawning, (8) śvāsa-bhūmā —
breathing heavily, (9) lokānapekṣitā — neglecting
others, (10) lālāśrava — drooling, (11) aṭṭa-hāsa — loud
laughter, (12) ghūrṇā — staggering about and (13) hikkā
— a fit of hiccups.



Sāttvika-bhāvas of bhāva-bhakti

The sāttvika-bhāvas, or transformations of ecstasy
arising from viśuddha-sattva, are eight in number, as
described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.3.16):

te stambha-sveda-romā—cāḥ

svara-bhedo ’tha vepathuḥ

vaivarṇyam aśru pralaya

ity aṣṭau sāttvikāḥ smṛtāḥ

(1) stambha — becoming stunned, (2) sveda —
perspiration, (3) romāñca — standing of the hairs on
end, (4) svara-bheda — faltering of the voice, (5) kampa
— trembling, (6) vaivarṇya — loss of colour, (7) aśru —
tears and (8) pralaya — all activity is arrested and one
loses consciousness. Out of all these symptoms
(sāttvika-bhāvas and anubhāvas), dancing, singing,
tears, standing of the hairs on end and faltering of the
voice are especially observed in the stage of bhāva. The
crest jewel of instructors, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, has
indicated the condition of bhāva while speaking in this
way: “O Kṛṣṇa, son of Nanda Mahārāja, when will streams
of tears flow from my eyes while chanting Your holy
name? When will my throat become choked up due to a
faltering voice? And when will the hairs of my body
stand on end due to ecstasy? O Lord, please be merciful
so that all these symptoms will arise in me as soon as
possible while chanting Your holy name.”

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 20.37)

prema-dhana vinā vyartha daridra-jīvana

‘dāsa’ kari’ vetana more deha prema-dhana

Without the wealth of love of God, this wretched life is
useless. O Lord, please accept me as Your servant and
give me the wages of prema.

Śikṣāṣṭaka: Song Six (Gītāvalī)

aparādha phale mama, citta bhela vajra-sama,

tuyā nāme nā labhe vikāra

hatāśa haiye hari, tava nāma ucca kari,

baḍa duḥkhe ḍāki bāra bāra


                             77
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

dīna dayāmaya karuṇā-nidāna



bhāva-bindu dei’ rākhaha parāṇa



kaba tuyā nāma uccāraṇe mora



nayane jharaba dara dara lora



gadgada-svara kaṇṭhe upajaba



mukhe bola ādha ādha bāhirāba



pulake bharaba śarīra hāmāra



sveda-kampa-stambha habe bāra-bāra



vivarṇa-śarīre hārāobuṅ j—āna



nāma-samāśraye dharabuṅ parāṇa



milaba hāmāra kiye aiche dina



ro-oye bhaktivinoda mati-hīna



As a result of my offences, my heart has become as hard
as a thunderbolt. Consequently, it does not melt even
slightly when I chant Your holy name. O Lord, now I am
feeling very despondent. Being very aggrieved with
distress, I am calling Your name again and again. You
are very merciful. Kindly give me just a single drop of
ecstatic love and save my agitated life. When will that
auspicious day arrive when, upon chanting Your holy
name, a stream of tears will flow from my eyes? When
will my throat become choked up, causing my words to
become garbled? When will the hairs of my body stand
erect due to ecstasy? When will I become soaked with
perspiration? When will the limbs of my body begin to
tremble? O Lord, when will my body become stunned?
Becoming overwhelmed with bhāva, when will my colour
fade, and when at last will I lose all consciousness?

                              78
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

Regaining my consciousness once again, I will maintain
this life simply by taking shelter of Your holy name.
Crying incessantly, this Bhaktivinoda, who is devoid of
all intelligence, says, “Will there ever be such a day
for this unfortunate soul?”

Vivṛti

“O Gopījana-vallabha, when will a stream of tears
lovingly flow from the eyes of this gopī while chanting
Your holy name? When will my voice choke up, and when
will the hairs of my body stand on end due to ecstasy?
When will I be overtaken

by such a condition?” This prayer is an example of
lālasāmayī-vijñapti. The word vijñapti means a kind of
entreaty or

submissive prayer. These have been described to be of
three kinds: (1) samprārthanātmikā — a prayer with
whole-hearted submission of mind, body and everything to
the Lord. This is a prayer for the awakening of rati or
bhāva of one in whom it is not yet aroused; (2) dainya-
bodhikā — making known one’s insignificance and
worthlessness; and (3) lālasāmayī — this kind of prayer
applies only to one in whom rati has already been
awakened.

Lālasā means “intense yearning”. After rati manifests in
the heart, an intense yearning will come to serve the
Lord in a

particular manner in accordance with one’s permanent
devotional disposition (sthāyibhāva). This is a prayer
to obtain that service for which one always hankers.
Another example of lālasāmayī-vijñapti is given in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.156):

kadāhaṁ yamunā-tīre

nāmāni tava kīrtayan

udbāṣpaḥ puṇḍarīkākṣa

racayiṣyāmi tāṇḍavam

[Nārada Muni addressesd the Lord as follows:] O lotus-
eyed Lord Kṛṣṇa, while chanting Your holy name on the
bank of the Yamunā, when will my throat choke up and my
voice stammer with ecstasy? When will I become absorbed
in deep spiritual sentiment and dance just like a
madman, not caring for

outsiders?

In regard to the secondary names of the Lord, such as
Brahma, Paramātmā, àśvara, Jagannātha and so on, it is
not possible to perform saṅkīrtana with prema. Only
while chanting the principal names of the Lord, such as
Kṛṣṇa, Govinda and Rāma, is it possible to perform
saṅkīrtana with prema. Therefore Śrī Gaurasundara has
said: “śrutam apy aupaniṣadaṁ dūre hari-kathāmṛtāt yan
na santi dravac-citta-kampāśru-pulakādayaḥ — the subject
of the Upaniṣads is far removed from the nectarean

                           79
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

topics of Lord Hari. Therefore they are unable to melt
the heart or cause one to experience ecstatic trembling,
tears or standing of the bodily hairs on end.”

Comment

When anyone chants the secondary names of the Lord,
there will be no expression of prema because there are
no pastimes included within those names and no mamatā, a
sense of intimate relationship with the Lord
characterised by feelings of possessiveness. Mamatā is
the primary characteristic of prema. When an intimate
relationship is there, then so many beautiful pastimes
will also be there. Without these things there is no
feeling of prema. But when one chants Kṛṣṇa’s primary
names and remembers His pastimes with the gopīs, a
special kind of prema comes. Then the devotee
automatically forgets his body and everything. Sometimes
he rolls on the ground, sometimes cries, sometimes
laughs, dances or sings. This cannot take place when one
chants the secondary names because there are no pastimes
and no sense of possessiveness. When you chant Yaśodā-
nandana, “hā śrī yaśodā-tanaya prasīda — O son of
Yaśodā, be pleased with me,” so many expressions are
coming. But when you chant the name àśvara, for
instance, nothing will come.



The subject of Brahman that has been described in the
Upaniṣads is far removed from the nectarean topics of
Lord Hari. When there is a discussion of hari-kathā, the
heart may become melted, giving rise to the eight
sāttvika-bhāvas such as shedding of tears, trembling of
the bodily limbs, standing of the hairs on end, and so
on. This verse does not refer to those who shed tears
very easily by acquired nature, as is the case with
women, nor does it apply to those who delight in making
a show of such symptoms without actually being situated
in rati or bhāva. Such a display is known as bhāva-
ābhāsa, the semblance of ecstatic devotion; it is not
pure bhakti.

But when the pure spirit soul becomes spontaneously
inclined to the service of the Lord, his mind and entire
body, which have become completely favourable to Kṛṣṇa’s
pleasure, can no longer stand in opposition to the
nitya-bhāva situated in his heart. At such a time, the
heart naturally melts and the sāttvika-bhāvas and bodily
transformations of ecstasy are displayed in pure
devotees who are free from all anarthas.

Those of weak faith deceive others by imitating the
behaviour of the topmost devotees (mahā-bhāgavatas) and
by pretentiously displaying so-called symptoms of
ecstasy. The emotion displayed by such imitative and
deceptive practice is thoroughly opposed to the
awakening of unalloyed devotion. By following in the
footsteps of pure devotees and by continuous engagement
in bhakti, the sāttvika-bhāvas and anubhāvas will arise
automatically in a pure devotee in whom rati has
manifested.

Śrī Bhajana-rahasya Verses

                             80
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017


The following references from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.30
—1) show the necessity of performing ardent practice of
nāma-

bhajana and kīrtana in the association of pure devotees
in order to attain bhakti characterised by feelings of
ecstasy (rati):

parasparānu-kathanaṁ

pāvanaṁ bhagavad-yaśaḥ

mitho ratir mithas tuṣṭir

nivṛttir mitha ātmanaḥ

smarantaḥ smārayantaś ca

mitho ’ghaugha-haraṁ harim

bhaktyā sa—jātayā bhaktyā

bibhraty utpulakāṁ tanum

[Śrī Prabuddha said:] In the association of pure
devotees, there is constant chanting and discussion of
the glories of the Lord’s transcendental pastimes, which
are by nature purifying and produce the highest virtue.
By such association there will be three effects: the
feelings of mutual affection and love between devotees
will be increased, mutual happiness will be experienced,
and devotees will help each other to become free from
all material attachments and distress. All this is
learnt in the association of devotees. In this way,
devotees constantly remember Lord Hari, who destroys all
sins. They also cause the remembrance of the Lord to
appear within each others’ hearts. Thus by prema-bhakti
awakened through the steadfast performance of sādhana,
they always remain engaged in thinking of Bhagavān and
exhibit transcendental symptoms of ecstasy in their
bodies such as standing of the hairs on end.

In this connection, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has
composed the following verses (Bhajana-rahasya (6.12)):

bhakta-gaṇa paraspara kṛṣṇa-kathā gāya



tāhe rati, tuṣṭi, sukha paraspara pāya



hari-smṛti nije kare, anyere karāya



sādhane udita-bhāve pulakāśru pāya



Devotees constantly hear and chant the topics concerning
Lord Kṛṣṇa amongst themselves. They become intently

                             81
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

absorbed in such discussions, which become the basis of
mutual loving relationships, satisfaction and happiness.
They themselves remember Bhagavān Śrī Hari and cause
others to do the same. By continuous engagement in
sādhana, bhāva is manifested in their hearts, giving
rise to the eight sāttvika-bhāvas, such as tears and
standing of the hairs on end.

The symptoms of ecstasy displayed by devotees in the
stage of bhāva are described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.3.32):

kvacid rudanty acyuta-cintayā kvacid

vasanti nandanti vadanty alaukikāḥ

nṛtyanti gāyanty anuśīlayanty ajaṁ

bhavanti tūṣṇīṁ parametya nirvṛtāḥ

[Śrī Prabuddha said:] Thereafter, having obtained
freedom from the misconception of identifying the self
with the body, they are distinguished from ordinary
worldly persons by their deep absorption in constant
remembrance of the Lord in the stage characterised by
consummated endeavours for bhakti (in other words in the
stage of bhāva). In this condition, they sometimes cry,
sometimes laugh, sometimes become delighted, sometimes
speak out to the Lord, sometimes dance, sometimes sing
and sometimes enact the transcendental pastimes of Lord
Hari. Thereafter, having obtained the personal audience
of the Lord, they become peaceful and silent.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says in this connection
(Bhajana-rahasya (6.14)):

bhāvodaye kabhu kāṅde kṛṣṇa-cintā phale



hāse ānandita haya, alaukika bale



nāce gāya, kṛṣṇa-ālocane sukha pāya



līlā-anubhave haya, tuṣṇīmbhūta prāya



After the awakening of bhāva within the heart, when one
becomes deeply absorbed in thinking of Kṛṣṇa, sometimes
tears come to the eyes, sometimes one laughs, sometimes
one becomes overjoyed with deep ecstasy, sometimes one
speaks in an extraordinary manner, sometimes one dances
or sings, sometimes one experiences great happiness by a
direct perception of Kṛṣṇa, and sometimes one becomes
silent at heart by witnessing the pastimes of the Lord.

At that time, love towards the places that are dear to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is observed. This is stated in the following
verse from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.156):

                           82
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017


kadāhaṁ yamunā-tīre

nāmāni tava kīrtayan

udbāṣpaḥ puṇḍarīkākṣa

racayiṣyāmi tāṇḍavam

[Nārada Muni addressed the Lord:] O lotus-eyed Lord,
when, on the bank of the Yamunā, will my throat become
choked up with ecstasy as I chant Your holy names, and
when will I dance just like a madman, not caring for
outsiders?




Verse Seven


What are the internal symptoms of perfection?



yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa

cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam

śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ

govinda-viraheṇa me

Anvaya

govinda viraheṇa — in separation from Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nimeṣeṇa — even a moment; yugāyitam — seems
like a millenium; cakṣuṣā — from my eyes; prāvṛṣāyitam —
tears flow like rain from the monsoon clouds; sarvam
jagat — this entire world; śūnyāyitam — seems void; me —
to me.

Translation

O sakhī, in separation from Govinda, even a moment seems
like a millenium to me. Tears begin to shower from my
eyes like rain from the clouds, and this entire world
seems void to me.

Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya

Rati has been described in the previous verse. When
bhakti is endowed with this rati, it assumes the form of
the sthāyibhāva, which refers to the ruling emotion of
the heart in one of the five transcendental
relationships with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. When it then mixes with
the other four bhāvas — vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-
bhāva and vyabhicāri-bhāva — it is transformed into the
relishable experience known as bhakti-rasa. In that
state the anubhāvas and sāttvika-bhāvas of bhakti are
fully exhibited. In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.4.1) Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī establishes the definition of prema in the
following words:

                           83
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017


samyaṅ masṛṇita-svānto

mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ

bhāva sa eva sāndrātmā

budhaiḥ premā nigadyate

Bhāva-bhakti which melts the heart much more thoroughly
than in its beginning stage thus making it completely
soft, which produces supreme exultation of
transcendental bliss, and which gives rise to a very
deep sense of possessiveness (mamatā) in relation to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, is called prema by learned persons.

According to the philosophical conclusion of this verse,
bhāva-bhakti that is fully matured owing to the upsurge
of a very powerful sense of mamatā in relation to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa should be understood to be prema.

In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu it is described that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is the viṣaya or object of prema for the devotees. The
devotees are the āśraya or receptacle of prema for
Kṛṣṇa. In the mutual exchange of love between Kṛṣṇa and
the devotees, five types of relationships are possible:
śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya. These five
primary relationships are known as mukhya-rati.

In each of these there is a particular ruling emotion
known as the sthāyibhāva. In śānta the ruling emotion is
śānti-rati, tranquility. In dāsya the ruling emotion is
prīti-rati, affection in servitude. In sakhya the ruling
emotion is sakhya-rati, affection in friendship. In
vātsalya the ruling emotion is vātsalya-rati, parental
affection. And in mādhurya the ruling emotion is
priyatā-rati, affection in amorous love. When these five
types of mukhya-rati combine with the sentiments of
vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and vyabhicāri-bhāva,
then affection becomes converted into the relishable
sentiment known as mukhya-bhakti-rasa, as described in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.5.115):

mukhyas tu pa—cadhā śāntaḥ

prītaḥ preyāṁś ca vatsalaḥ

madhuraś cety amī j—eyā

yathā-pūrvam anuttamāḥ

Mukya-rasa is of five varieties: (1) śānta –
tranquility, (2) prīta (dāsya) – servitude, (3) preyas
(sakhya) – friendship, (4) vātsalya – parental affection
and (5) mādhurya – amorous love. Each one of these is
successively better than the previous one.

The primary ruling emotion is always present in a
devotee who has awakened prema for Kṛṣṇa, and it is
therefore known as the sthāyibhāva, permanent emotion.
Yet sometimes the devotee’s ruling emotion recedes and
gives nourishment to secondary emotions known as gauṇa-
rati. Gauṇa-rati is of seven types and when they combine
with the emotions of vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva

                             84
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

and vyabhicāri-bhāva, they produce the relishable
sentiments known as gauṇa-rasa. These are described in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.5.116):

hāsyo ’dbhutas tathā vīraḥ

karuṇo raudra ity api

bhayānakaḥ sa bībhatsa

iti gauṇaś ca saptadhā

Gauṇa-rasa is of seven varieties: (1) hāsya – laughter,
(2) adbhuta – astonishment, (3) vīra – heroism, (4)
karuṇa – compassion, (5) raudra – anger, (6) bhayānaka –
fear and (7) bībhatsa – disgust.

Out of the five types of mukhya-rasa, mādhurya-rasa is
the highest. As the intensity of prīti or love for Kṛṣṇa
increases within the mukhya-rasas, it takes the form of
prema, praṇaya, māna, sneha, rāga, anurāga, bhāva and
mahābhava.



Development of prīti from rati to mahābhāva



Rati

The development of prīti is described in Prīti-sandarbha
(Anuccheda 84). The initial stage of prīti is known as
rati and it is defined as follows: “tatrollāsa-
mātrādhikya-vyañjikā prītiḥ ratiḥ, yasyāṁ jātāyāṁ tad-
ekaṁ tātparyam anyatra tucchatva buddhiś ca jāyate —
prīti that is predominated only by a feeling of ullāsa,
elation, is called rati. This prīti beginning from rati
is exclusively fixed on Śrī Bhagavān, and therefore all
other things that are not related to the Lord are
considered as worthless.” Prīti that extends only to the
level of rati is indicative of śānta-rasa.



Prema

Prīti that increases to the level of prema is defined as
follows: “mamatātiśayāvirbhāvena samṛddhā prītiḥ premā,
yasmin jāte tat prīti-bhaṅga-hetavo yad īyam udyamaṁ
svarūpaṁ vā na glapayitum īśate — when prīti is
augmented due to the appearance of a strong sense of
possessiveness (mamatā) in relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
it is called prema. On the appearance of prema, prīti is
so deep that even though multiple causes may appear to
bring about a break in affection, they are completely
unable to dampen either the enthusiasm or the
fundamental character of that love.” Prīti that extends
to the level of prema is indicative of dāsya-rasa. The
character of prema in dāsya-rasa is illustrated in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.169):

dviṣadbhiḥ kṣodiṣṭair jagad avihatecchasya bhavataḥ


                             85
Siksastaka.txt                                     5/5/2017

karād ākṛṣyeva prasabham abhimanyāv api hate

subhadrāyāḥ prītir danuja-damana! tvad-viṣayikā

prapede kalyāṇī na hi malini-mānaṁ lavam api

[Śrī Nārada said to Kṛṣṇa:] O slayer of the demons, in
this world no one can oppose Your will. Everything is
happening according to Your desire. Yet, it was from
Your hands that Abhimanyu was forcibly snatched away and
killed by trifling enemies like Karṇa and Jayadratha.
Nonetheless, Subhadrā’s endearing love for You was not
tarnished even in the least.

Subhadrā was the younger sister of Kṛṣṇa, and therefore
she had the attitude of being cared for by Kṛṣṇa, which
comes under the heading of gaurava-prīti, a division of
dāsya-rasa. She knew that without Kṛṣṇa’s sanction, her
son Abhimanyu could never have been killed, yet her
prema for Kṛṣṇa was not affected. This is the symptom of
prema.



Praṇaya

Following prema is praṇaya: “atha viśrambhātiśayātmakaḥ
premā praṇayaḥ, yasmin jāte sambhramādi yogyatāyām api
tad-abhāvaḥ — when prema is imbued with an exceptional
feeling of intimacy, known as viśrambha, it is called
praṇaya. When praṇaya is present, there is a complete
absence of awe and reverence towards the beloved even in
the midst of a circumstance that would normally evoke
such feelings.” A vivid example of this is given in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.3.109):

surais tripurajin-mukhair api vidhīyamāna-stuter

api prathayataḥ parām adhika-pārameṣṭhya-śriyam

dadhat pulakinaṁ harer adhi-śirodhi savyaṁ bhujaṁ

samaskuruta pāṁśulān śirasi candrakān arjunaḥ

Even though Tripurāri (Lord Śiva) accompanied by the
other demigods approached Śrī Kṛṣṇa and began to offer
prayers proclaiming His supreme opulence and supremacy,
His cowherd friend Arjuna lovingly placed his left arm
on Kṛṣṇa’s shoulder and flicked the dust from the
peacock feather that adorned His head.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī mentions in his commentary that such
a pastime should be understood to have occurred after
the killing of some demon. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura mentions that this occurred in Vraja and that
the Arjuna referred to is a priya-narma-sakhā.

This praṇaya is the very life of sakhya-rasa. Its basis
is the sense of deep faith devoid of reverence known as
viśrambha. Viśrambha is defined as the feeling of being
identical with the beloved. Such a feeling causes one to
consider one’s mind, life, intelligence, body and
possessions to be one with the mind, life, intelligence,
body and possessions of the beloved. The feeling of

                           86
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

oneness being referred to means that out of great love
one feels equally at ease with the beloved as one does
with oneself, and this feeling is mutually experienced.



Māna

Māna is described as follows: “priyatvātiśayābhimānena
kauṭilyābhāsa-pūrvaka-bhāva-vaicitrīṁ dadhat praṇayo
mānaḥ, yasmin jāte śrī-bhagavān api tat-praṇaya-kopāt
prema-mayaṁ bhayaṁ bhajate — when the devotee’s self
conception of being extremely dear to the Lord causes
praṇaya to assume a crooked appearance and thus attain
to a surprising and unusual state, it is known as māna.
When māna is present, even Śrī Bhagavān Himself becomes
fearful out of love due to the praṇaya-kopa of His
beloved.”

The term praṇaya-kopa means “anger out of affection”.
When Kṛṣṇa’s beloved exhibits māna, He is compelled to
appease her, just to savour her loving sentiment of
anger aroused by their lover’s quarrel. The words
priyatva-atiśaya-abhimāna literally mean “the egoism of
being very dear to Kṛṣṇa”. Such a feeling causes the
heroine to think thus: “My love for Him is so great that
it has no limit. He is under the control of my prema.”
It is due to this type of pride that praṇaya externally
exhibits a feature of crookedness that is referred to by
the words kauṭilya-ābhāsa. This crookedness in turn
causes praṇaya to attain a most astonishing state,
bhāva-vaicitrī, which is then known as māna. In Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi (15.74), the symptoms of māna are described:

dam-patyor bhāva ekatra

sator apy anuraktayoḥ

svābhīṣṭāśleṣa-vīkṣādi-

nirodhī māna ucyate

Although the lover and beloved are present together,
although they are deeply attached to one another, and
although their inner longing is to embrace, to behold
each other and to exchange affectionate words, the
sentiment that prevents them from doing so is known as
māna.

If affection is lacking, if the lover and beloved are
not present together, or if there is no desire to
embrace, then there is nothing astonishing. But in māna
all three conditions are present and yet the exchange
that is desired by both of them does not occur. This is
the bhāva-vaicitrī referred to above. Although rejection
is exhibited externally, there is no diminution of
attachment within due to the presence of praṇaya.



Sneha

Sneha is described as follows: “ceto dravātiśayātmakaḥ
premaiva snehaḥ, yasmin jāte tat-sambandhābhāsenāpi

                           87
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

mahā-bāṣpādi-vikāraḥ priya-darśanādy-atṛptis tasya
parama-sāmarthyādau saty api keṣāñcid aniṣṭāśaṅkā ca
jāyate — only that prema which melts the heart to an
abundant extent is called sneha. Due to the appearance
of sneha, even slight contact with the beloved gives
rise to a great profusion of tears. One never feels
satiated in beholding the beloved, and although Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is supremely competent, the devotee becomes
apprehensive that some harm may come to Him.” These last
two symptoms are especially observed in vātsalya-rasa.
The character of sneha in vātsalya-rasa is illustrated
in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.4.58):

pīyūṣa-dyutibhiḥ stanādri-patitaiḥ kṣīrotkarair jāhnavī

kālindī ca vilocanābja-janitair jātā—jana-śyāmalaiḥ

ārān madhyama-vedim āpatitayoḥ klinnā tayoḥ saṅgame

vṛttāsi vraja-rāj—i! tat-suta-mukha-prekṣāṁ sphuṭaṁ vā—
chasi

[On the pretext of observing a solar eclipse, Śrī Yaśodā
went to Kurukṣetra with an overpowering desire to see
her son. When an ascetic lady who was previously
acquainted with Yaśodā saw her, she said:] O Vrajeśvarī,
the splendid stream of milk-nectar flowing from the
mountain of your breasts is the Jāhnavī river. The
stream of water from your lotus eyes, made blackish by
mixing with your collyrium, is the Kālindī river. These
two rivers have met at the Prayāga of your waist.
Strange it is, though, that in spite of bathing in the
confluence of these two rivers, you still openly desire
only to see the face of your son.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains in his
commentary on this verse that it is well known that
people go to bathe at the holy place of Prayāga only
with the desire of obtaining darśana of Bhagavān. But
Yaśodā, in spite of having completed her bath, did not
hanker for darśana of Bhagavān. She desired only to see
the face of her son, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The symptoms of streams
of tears, milk flowing from the breasts and unabated
desire to see her son are all characteristics of sneha
in vātsalya-rasa.



Rāga

Rāga is described as follows: “sneha
evābhilāṣātiśayātmako rāgaḥ, yasmin jāte kṣaṇikasyāpi
virahasyātyantaivāsahiṣṇutā, tat-saṁyoge paraṁ duḥkham
api sukhatvena bhāti, tad-viyoge tad-viparītam — sneha
that is endowed with intense longing is called rāga. Due
to the appearance of rāga, even a moment’s separation
from the beloved is intolerable. In meeting, great
sorrow appears like happiness, whereas in separation, it
is just the opposite (that is, great happiness becomes a
source of unbearable distress).” An example of pain
being experienced as happiness due to rāga is found in
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.127):

tīvrārka-dyuti-dīpatair asilatā dhārā karālāsribhir

                           88
Siksastaka.txt                                     5/5/2017


mārttaṇḍopala-maṇḍalaiḥ sthapuṭite ’py adres taṭe
tasthuṣī

paśyantī paśupendra-nandanam asāv indīvarair āstṛte

talle nyasta-padāmbujeva muditā na spandate rādhikā

[Lalitā, accompanied by her friends, saw Śrīmatī Rādhikā
from a distance. Savouring Rādhā’s rāga, Lalitā said to
her friends:] O sakhīs, just see! It is midday at the
height of summer. The terrain of Govardhana is rugged
and uneven and in some places the stones are as jagged
as swords. The stones are like blazing coals at this
time of day due to the intense heat of the sun. Although
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, standing at the edge of Giri-
Govardhana, is experiencing unbearable pain, She is
merged in the ocean of bliss by beholding Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is grazing the cows nearby in great happiness,
surrounded by His cowherd friends. Absorbed in the bliss
of seeing Kṛṣṇa, it appears to Her as if Her lotus feet
are placed on a bed of soft lotus petals, and thus She
is not moving even an inch.

In this example the pain resulting from contact with
extremely hot, jagged, hard stones is experienced as
happiness because of seeing Kṛṣṇa. This is the symptom
of rāga.



Anurāga

Anurāga is defined as follows: “sa eva rāgo ‘nukṣaṇaṁ
sva-viṣayaṁ nava-navatvenānubhāvayan svayaṁ ca nava-navī
bhavann anurāgaḥ, yasmin jāte paraspara-vaśī
bhāvātiśayaḥ, prema-vaicittyam, tat-sambandhiny aprāṇiny
api janma-lālasā, vipralambhe visphūrtiś ca jāyate —
only that rāga which causes its object of affection to
be experienced in newer and newer varieties at every
moment, and which is itself experienced in ever new
varieties, is known as anurāga. Due to the appearance of
anurāga, four symptoms become manifest: (1) paraspara-

vaśī bhāvātiśaya — a tremendous increase of the
sentiment exchanged between the lover and beloved of
having been brought under one another’s control, (2)
prema-vaicittya — fear of separation from the beloved
even while in their presence, (3) aprāṇiny api janma-
lālasā — the desire to take birth as inanimate objects
that are connected to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and (4) vipralambhe
visphūrti — in separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the beloved
begins to see Kṛṣṇa everywhere, as if He were directly
before her. This type of vision or appearance is known
as visphūrti.”

The quality of anurāga causing the beloved to be newly
experienced is illustrated in two examples from Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi (14.147—8). The first example is taken from
Dāna-keli-kaumudī (28):

prapannaḥ panthānaṁ harir asakṛd asman-nayanayor

apūrvo ’yaṁ pūrvaṁ kvacid api na dṛṣṭo madhurimā

                           89
Siksastaka.txt                                    5/5/2017


pratīke ’py ekasya sphurati muhur aṅgasya sakhi yā

śriyas tasyāḥ pātuṁ lavam api samarthā na dṛg iyam

[Seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa from a distance at Dāna-ghāṭī, Śrī
Rādhā said to Vṛndā:] O sakhī, I have seen Śrī Kṛṣṇa
many times, but I have never before seen such
unprecedented sweetness. My eyes are unable to even
partially relish the splendour that is radiating from
even a single portion of His limbs.

ko ’yaṁ kṛṣṇa iti vyudasyati dhṛtiṁ yas tanvi karṇaṁ
viśan

rāgāndhe kim idaṁ sadaiva bhavatī tasyorasi krīḍati

hāsyaṁ mā kuru mohite tvam adhunā nyastāsya haste mayā

satyaṁ satyam asau dṛg-aṅganam agād adyaiva vidyun-
nibhaḥ

[Once while talking about Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā became
overwhelmed by intense longing that incited in Her heart
a

powerful upsurge of anurāga. She began to speak with
Lalitā:] “O thin-waisted girl (Kṛśodarī), Lalitā, who is
that person who goes by the name of Kṛṣṇa? When those
two syllables enter My ears, My gravity completely
vanishes.” Lalitā said, “O You who are blinded by
attachment (Rāgāndhā), what are you saying? You are
always sporting upon His chest.” Śrī Rādhā: “O sakhī,
don’t ridicule Me. Why are you speaking such impossible
words?” Lalitā: “Rādhā, what I am saying is neither
impossible, nor derisive, nor false. O bewildered one
(Mohitā), just a moment ago I offered You into His
hands.” Śrī Rādhā: “Lalitā, you are certainly truthful,
but it seems to Me that until this very moment, I have
never in my life laid eyes on Him before, and even then
the experience was so brief that it was like a flash of
lightning.”

Each of the four symptoms of anurāga will now be
illustrated by examples from Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi.

(1) Paraspara-vaśibhāva — (14.150):

samārambhaṁ pārasparika-vijayāya prathayathor

apūrvā ke ’yaṁ vām agha-damana saṁrambha-laharī

mano-hastī baddhas tava yad anayā rāga-nigaḍais

tvayāpy asyāḥ premotsava-nava-guṇaiś citta-hariṇaḥ

[Impelled by intense longing, Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
while searching for each other, met along the path by a
ku—ja and bathed each other in a stream of bliss.
Kundalatā, who suddenly appeared there, tasted the
sweetness that emerged from that meeting and with great
delight and astonishment, she spoke to Kṛṣṇa:] O slayer
of Agha, both You and Śrī Rādhā are expanding the waves
of Your efforts to defeat each other. The astonishing

                           90
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

zeal that You are both displaying in this attempt is
indescribable. Just see, the mad elephant of Your mind
has been bound by the ropes of Śrī Rādhā’s anurāga, and
You have bound the deer of Her heart with the new ropes
of the festival of Your prema.

(2) Prema-vaicittya — (14.151):

prema-vaicittya saṁj—as tu

vipralambhaḥ sa vakṣyate

Prema-vaicittya will be described ahead under the
heading of vipralambha, separation.

In other words, although prema-vaicittya is a symptom of
anurāga, it is a special condition of vipralambha and is
therefore described separately there. Consequently
prema-vaicittya is a type of vipralambha that is
inspired by prema in the condition of anurāga.

In the section on vipralambha, prema-vaicittya is
defined as follows (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (15.147)):

priyasya sannikarṣe ’pi

premotkarṣa-svabhāvataḥ

yā viśleṣa-dhiyārtis tat-

prema-vaicittyam ucyate

The distress that is experienced due to fear of
separation even in the presence of the beloved, brought
about by the inherent nature of an exceptional quality
of prema is known as prema-vaicittya.

In his commentary on this verse, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
defines the word prema-vaicittya as prema-janita-
vicittatā, the perplexity that arises due to prema. This
refers to an altered state of consciousness wherein the
mind becomes so absorbed in a particular thing that it
loses touch with other objects of perception. When the
consciousness meditates continuously on some object that
is related to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and becomes so deeply absorbed
in it that it attains a state of total identification
with that object, then at that time there is no
perception even of other objects that are related to
Kṛṣṇa. Thus even when Kṛṣṇa is directly present nearby,
one cannot recognise Him. One thus becomes overwhelmed
by the anguish of separation from Kṛṣṇa. This unique
condition of prema is known as prema-vaicittya.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that the
exceptional quality of prema that brings about this
condition refers to the sthāyibhāva in the state of
anurāga. This is clear from the fact that prema-
vaicittya was previously described as a symptom of
anurāga (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.149)). This anurāga is
rooted in such an overwhelmingly unquenchable thirst
that even an object which has been experienced over and
over seems as if it has never been experienced at all.

Sometimes in the state of anurāga the intelligence loses

                             91
Siksastaka.txt                                     5/5/2017

the subtlety to be able to experience Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the
sweetness of His qualities at the same time. When one is
experiencing Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one is unable to experience His
qualities, and when one experiences His qualities, one
is unable to experience Him directly. In sambhoga-rasa,
the relishing of union with Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā
sometimes becomes so totally immersed in thinking of
Kṛṣṇa’s qualities, such as His expertise in loving
affairs, the cleverness of His speech, His singing,
musical ability, dancing and other unlimited qualities,
that She loses perception of Kṛṣṇa directly. Then after
some time She remembers the person who possesses those
qualities and asks, “Where is He?” At that time She
abandons Her absorption in His qualities and begins to
seek Him out. Being overwhelmed by a feeling of
separation, She is unable to see Kṛsṇa, who is present
right before Her. Prema-vaicittya is illustrated in this
statement (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (15.148)):

abhīrendra-sute sphuraty api puras tīvrānurāgotthayā

viśleṣa-jvara-sampadā vivaśa-dhīr atyantam udghūrṇitā

kāntaṁ me sakhi darśayeti daśanair udgūrṇa śasyāṅkurā

rādhā hanta tathā vyaceṣṭata yataḥ kṛṣṇo ’py abhūd
vismitaḥ

[When Vṛndā saw the prema-vaicittya of Śrī Rādhā, she
said to Paurṇamāsī-devī:] Even in the presence of
Vrajendra-nandana, Śrī Rādhā’s intelligence became
overwhelmed by an acute fever of separation arising from
intense feelings of anurāga and, staggering about in
delusion, She exclaimed, “O sakhī, where is My most dear
one? Please show Him to Me just once.” Saying this, She
took a piece of straw between Her teeth and began to
behave in such a way that even Kṛṣṇa Himself became
completely astonished.

(3) Aprāṇiny api janma-lālasā — (14.152), taken from
Dānakeli-kaumudī (6):

tapasyāmaḥ kṣāmodari varayituṁ veṇuṣu janur

vareṇyaṁ manyethāḥ sakhi tad akhilānāṁ sujanuṣām

tapastomenoccair yad iyam urarī-kṛtya muralī

murārāter bimbādhara-madhurimāṇaṁ rasayati

[Śrī Rādhā, considering Herself unsuccessful in the
attempt to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa, said to Lalitā:] O thin-
waisted girl, what is the use of us having attained
these attractive human forms? We cannot attain Kṛṣṇa
through these forms. I will perform austerities to take
birth as a flute, because that is the highest possible
birth one may take. Just see, by the fruit of its potent
austerity, this flute is tasting the sweetness of the
bimba fruit of Kṛṣṇa’s lips.

(4) Vipralambhe visphūrti — (14.153):

brūyās tvaṁ mathurā-dhvanīn mathurā-nāthaṁ tam ity
uccakaiḥ

                           92
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


sandeśaṁ vraja-sundarī kam api te kācin mayā prāhiṇot

tatra kṣmāpati-pattane yadi gataḥ svacchanda gacchādhunā

kiṁ kliṣṭām api visphuran diśi diśi kliśnāsi hā me
sakhīm

[Lalitā said to a traveller who was on the way to
Mathurā:] Go to the master of Mathurā and loudly tell
Him that a vraja-

sundarī has sent Him this message through you: “O Kṛṣṇa,
now that You have gone off to the capital, You may go
wherever it pleases You. But why must You manifest Your
appearances (visphūrti) throughout the four directions
and thus again and again harass my anguished friend?”

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that when
Śrī Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā, Śrī Rādhā was seeing His
sphūrti in every direction due to the overwhelming
experience of anurāga. When Śrī Rādhā, afflicted by
separation, would see a sphūrti of Kṛṣṇa, She thought
that Kṛṣṇa had come to Her directly. Becoming delighted,
She would rush forward to embrace Him. But the vision
would then vanish and, not being able to see Him
anymore, She would sink into an ocean of grief. Her pain
of separation would then be multiplied many times over.
Lalitā could feel the acute suffering of Śrī Rādhā and
therefore she sent this message to Kṛṣṇa not to trouble
her sakhī in this way. Śrīla Cakravartīpāda also
mentions that from the example of Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura
it may be understood that sphūrtis of Kṛṣṇa are possible
in the stage of rati or bhāva. But the visphūrtis
experienced in the stage of anurāga are far more
powerful.



Bhāva or mahābhāva

Mahābhāva is described as follows: “anurāga
evāsamorddhva-camatkāreṇonmādako mahābhāvaḥ, yasmin jāte
yoge nimeṣāsahatā, kalpa-kṣaṇatvam ity ādikam, viyoge
kṣaṇa-kalpatvam ity ādikam, ubhayatra mahoddīptāśeṣa-
sāttvika-vikārādikaṁ jāyate — when anurāga becomes
matchless and filled with astonishment, it obtains a
state of complete madness (unmāda) and is called
mahābhāva. In the state of mahābhāva, when the devotee
is in Kṛṣṇa’s association, even a moment’s obstruction
in seeing Him due to the blinking of the eyes is
intolerable, and an entire millenium (kalpa) appears to
be but a moment. Conversely, when the devotee is
separated from Kṛṣṇa, even a moment appears to be like a
kalpa. In the state of mahābhāva, both in union and in
separation, the sāttvika-bhāvas are displayed up to
their highest possible limit of intensity known as mahā-
uddīpta.”

In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu a gradation of sāttvika-bhāvas
is given of which uddīpta is the highest state. Yet in
the condition of mahābhāva this state is converted into
suddīpta-sāttvika-bhāva, in which all eight symptoms
simultaneously manifest to the ultimate limit of their

                           93
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

brilliance. This same condition is here referred to as
mahā-uddīpta.

In Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has used the
terms bhāva and mahābhāva interchangeably. He uses both
words to refer to the same state. This is seen in at
least two instances. In the section on sthāyibhāva
(14.57) he says that when samartha-rati1 is matured it
attains to the state of mahābhāva. Immediately after
that (14.59) he says that as prema intensifies it is
transformed successively into sneha, māna, praṇaya,
rāga, anurāga and bhāva. In this progression bhāva is
mentioned as the final stage, which was just previously
referred to as

mahābhāva. Later on (14.154) he defines bhāva. Then he
says (14.156), “This bhāva is extremely difficult for
any of Kṛṣṇa’s queens to obtain. It can be experienced
only by the damsels of Vraja, and it is known as
mahābhāva.” Here again he has used the two terms to
refer to the same state.

In Jīva Gosvāmī’s commentary on the verse defining bhāva
(14.154), he says: “bhāva-śabdasya tatraiva vṛttiḥ
parākāṣṭhā, bhagavac-chabdasya śrī kṛṣṇa iveti bhāvaḥ,
mahābhāva-śabdasya tu kvacit tatra prayogaḥ svayaṁ
bhagavac-chabdasyeva jñeyaḥ — in this circumstance the
word bhāva refers to the highest possible limit of the
development of the function of prema. In this sense it
is used in exactly the same way that Śrī Kṛṣṇa expresses
the highest possible limit of the term Bhagavān. The
word mahābhāva is sometimes used elsewhere and should
then be understood in the same sense as the term Svayam
Bhagavān.” He is showing here how both bhāva and
mahābhāva refer to the highest development of prema in
exactly the same way that Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Svayam Bhagavān
both refer to the highest and original form of Bhagavān.

In Jīva Gosvāmī’s description from Prīti-sandarbha, we
do not find any separate mention of the state of bhāva.
According to this description, when anurāga is
intensified it is converted into mahābhāva. Therefore
here also no distinction is made between bhāva and
mahābhāva. Bhāva is defined in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi
(14.154):

anurāgaḥ sva-saṁvedya-

daśāṁ prāpya prakāśitaḥ

yāvad-āśraya-vṛttiś ced

bhāva ity abhidhīyate

When anurāga reaches a special state of intensity, it is
known as bhāva. This state of intensity has three
characteristics: (1) anurāga reaches the state of sva-
saṁvedya, which means that it becomes the object of its
own experience, (2) it becomes prakāśita, radiantly
manifest, which means that all eight sāttvika-bhāvas
become prominently displayed, and (3) it attains the
state of yāvad-āśraya-vṛtti, which means that the active
ingredient of this intensified state of anurāga
transmits the experience of Rādhā’s and Kṛṣṇa’s bhāva to

                           94
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

whomever may be present and qualified to receive it.
This includes both the practising and perfected
devotees.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura have given detailed explanations of this verse.
The word saṁvedya means “capable of being known or
realised”. This comes from the word saṁvedana, which
means “to thoroughly understand or experience”. The word
sva means “oneself”. Thus the term sva-saṁvedya
literally means “that which has the power to be fully
tasted or experienced by itself”. When anurāga reaches
the state where it becomes the object of its own
experience, it is known as sva-saṁvedya.

There are three fundamental features of this heightened
state of anurāga: (1) bhāva-svarūpa — the experience of
tasting, (2) karaṇa-svarūpa — the cause of tasting and
(3) karma-svarūpa — that which is tasted. Bhāva-svarūpa
refers to the act of experiencing Kṛṣṇa by virtue of the
hlādinī aspect present within the intensified condition
of anurāga. When Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness is experienced along
with a powerful yearning in the developed state of
anurāga, then the relisher becomes so absorbed in the
exceptional taste of that sweetness that he completely
forgets himself and even the object he is tasting and
simply becomes immersed in the act of tasting or
experiencing itself. This is known as the bhāva-svarūpa
of anurāga.

Next is the karaṇa-svarūpa of anurāga. The word karaṇa
means “a cause”. That by which something is accomplished
is known as its karaṇa. Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness is tasted by
anurāga in its saṁvit aspect. Therefore the intensified
state of anurāga is the cause of Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness being
tasted. When anurāga reaches its highest limit, Kṛṣṇa’s
sweetness can also be tasted to its highest limit.

Next is the karma-svarūpa of anurāga. Karma refers to
the object of any action. That which is tasted is known
as the object of taste. As the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa is
tasted by the excellence of anurāga, the excellence of
anurāga is also experienced by Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness. By the
influence of anurāga, Kṛṣṇa’s incomparable sweetness
increases, and as a result of tasting Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness
the eminence of anurāga also increases beyond measure.
Thus both Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness and anurāga itself are the
karma of anurāga.

When anurāga is fully manifested in these three features
— bhāva, karaṇa and karma — spiritual ecstasy (ānanda)
is fully experienced. That state is known as sva-
saṁvedya. Anurāga is a highly intensified condition of
rati, and rati is a function of the Lord’s internal
poterncy (svarūpa-śakti) predominated by the hlādinī and
saṁvit potencies. Therefore hlādinī and saṁvit are
present in anurāga. When it is said that anurāga attains
the state of sva-saṁvedya, this means that the bhāva,
karaṇa and karma of anurāga each become objects of the
experience of anurāga. Each of these are realised one
after another. First, by virtue of the hlādinī aspect in
anurāga, the act of experiencing or tasting Kṛṣṇa is
realised. Then by the saṁvit aspect in anurāga, Kṛṣṇa is
tasted due to the causality of anurāga. Finally, by a

                           95
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

combination of both the hlādinī and saṁvit potencies,
anurāga itself becomes the object of taste due to the
effect of tasting Kṛṣṇa. In reality, rati itself is
imbued with taste, and it becomes the cause of tasting
Kṛṣṇa.

The term prakāśita means that in the stage of bhāva the
sāttvika-bhāvas manifest externally to the degree of
intensity known as uddīpta. When five, six or all eight
of the sāttvika-bhāvas manifest simultaneously and
attain supreme exultation, this condition is known as
uddīpta. Thus, when the intensified condition of anurāga
causes the sāttvika-bhāvas to manifest to this degree of
intensity, anurāga is said to have attained the quality
of prakāśita.

In the term yāvad-āśraya-vṛtti, yāvat means “whomever”
and āśraya means “the receptacle or abode of the
experience of anurāga”. This refers to both the
practising and perfected devotees. The word vṛtti means
“function” or “activity”. The function or transaction
that extends its influence to whomever is in a position
to receive it is known as yāvad-āśraya-vṛtti. When
anurāga reaches the zenith of expression in Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa and extends its influence to the hearts of
whatever devotees may be present, then it is said that
anurāga has reached the state of yāvad-āśraya-vṛtti.

The extent to which the heart is moved by the influence
of the anurāga situated in Rādhā’s and Kṛṣṇa’s hearts is
dependent on one’s eligibility. Not everyone’s heart is
moved to the same extent. In the material world the moon
is supreme amongst cool objects, and the sun is supreme
amongst hot objects. Although the moon distributes its
cooling rays equally, not all objects have the same
degree of coolness. Similarly, the sun distributes its
heat equally, but not all objects radiate the same
degree of heat. In the same way, the anurāga in Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s heart, as it exists in its intensified state,
is transmitted to whatever practising and perfected
devotees are present to receive it. Yet the degree to
which it is experienced is dependent on their
eligibility.

Yāvad-āśraya-vṛtti has a second meaning. Āśraya can be
taken to mean “basis” or “foundation”. In that case it
means that rāga is the basis of anurāga. Vṛtti can also
mean “state” or “existence”. Yāvat will then mean “as
much as” or “to its topmost limit”. When rāga reaches
its ultimate state or condition, it is called yāvad-
āśraya-vṛtti. The question may be raised as to why the
word rāga is used here when it is a stage prior to
anurāga. Rāga is defined as the condition wherein
distress is experienced as great pleasure if it affords
one the opportunity to meet with Kṛṣṇa. The word rāga is
used here to indicate that when the extreme limit of
distress is turned into the greatest happiness, rāga
reaches its highest point and is known as yāvad-āśraya-
vṛtti.

What is the highest limit of distress for the vraja-
sundarīs? For chaste girls there is no greater suffering
than to abandon the path of righteousness. To preserve
their chastity such girls are prepared to enter a lake

                           96
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

of fire and give up their life without flinching. But
for the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa the chaste vraja-sundarīs
give up family and the path of righteousness without
hesitation. That supreme difficulty is experienced by
them as the greatest happiness. This condition is known
as the yāvad-āśraya-vṛtti of anurāga.

To summarise, when anurāga reaches its highest limit of
intensity, it causes one to fully experience the bliss
of tasting Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s incomparable sweetness. As a
result of tasting Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness, one fully
experiences the relish produced from the supreme
excellence of anurāga. By the combined experience of
these two tastes, one becomes so immersed in the
extraordinary quality of taste that one forgets himself
and the object of relish and remains conscious only of
the experience of tasting. In that state five, six or
all eight sāttvika-bhāvas manifest very prominently. Due
to the superexcellence of rāga in that condition the
chaste girls of Vraja abandon without shame even their
own families and the path of righteousness for the
service of Kṛṣṇa and they experience such difficulty as
the greatest happiness. In that intensified condition
anurāga extends its influence into the hearts of
whatever practising and perfected devotees may be
present at the time. When all this takes place, it is
known as bhāva.

An example of bhāva is given in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi
(14.155):

rādhāyā bhavataś ca citta-jatunī svedair vilāpya kramāt

yu—jann adri-niku—ja-ku—jara-pate nirdhūta-bheda-bhramaṁ

citrāya svayam anvara—jayad iha brahmāṇḍa-harmyodare

bhūyobhir nava-rāga-hiṅgula-bharaiḥ śṛṅgāra-kāruḥ kṛtī

[In a ku—ja on Govardhana Hill, Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
were immersed in tasting each other’s sweetness. Their
bodies were decorated by uddīpta-sāttvika-bhāvas.
Appreciating the sweetness of Their mahābhāva, Vṛndā
said:] O king of elephants who sports in the groves on
Govardhana Hill, amorous love itself is a highly skilled
artist who has slowly melted the shellac of Your hearts
with the heat of Your perspiration, thus liquifying them
into an undifferentiated, unified substance. He is
mixing that with a full measure of the vermillion of
Your new rāga in order to paint an extraordinary picture
on the interior walls of the palace of this universe.

In his commentary on this verse, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that just as all
incarnations are present in Svayam Bhagavān, all the
stages of prīti beginning from rati are present in
mahābhāva. He then explains how in this example all the
stages of prema are exhibited, as well as the special
symptoms of mahābhāva.

In the above verse the words śṛṅgāra-kāruḥ kṛtī mean
that the artist of amorous love is expert in his craft.
This refers to rati, because rati is the basis of
śṛṅgāra-rasa. In Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.1) it is said:

                           97
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

“sthāyi-bhāvo ‘tra śṛṅgāre kathyate madhurā rati —
madhura-rati is the sthāyibhāva of śṛṅgāra-rasa.” The
sthāyibhāva is the ruling emotion that brings all the
subsidiary emotions under its control. This means that
madhura-rati is an artist who deftly mixes the colours
of various emotions and paints a picture of śṛṅgāra-
rasa.

The words rādhāyā bhavataś ca mean “of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa”.
The fact that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are mentioned together is
suggestive of paramour love. Rādhā’s and Kṛṣṇa’s
disregard for the infamy They may receive in this world
and the next due to Their paramour love means that Their
love is unaffected even when there is cause for that
love to break. This is the symptom of prema.

Rādhā’s and Kṛṣṇa’s hearts are compared to shellac that
is melted by the heat of Their prema exhibited in the
form of perspiration. This melting of the hearts is a
symptom of sneha. The word yuñjan means that Rādhā’s and
Kṛṣṇa’s hearts are combined together into one substance.
This complete intimacy is the symptom of praṇaya. The
words nirdhūta-bheda-bhrama mean “having cast off the
illusion of duality”. This means that Their hearts are
so completely unified that there is no chance that any
consciousness of duality may arise. This type of oneness
is a symptom of susakhya, intimate friendship, which is
described elsewhere as viśrambha. Viśrambha is also a
symptom of praṇaya.

The word kramāt means “slowly” or “gradually”. This
indicates the presence of vāmya, contrariety, which is
suggestive of māna. If māna were not present, Their
hearts would be melted all at once, without any
hesitation.

The words adri-nikuñja-kuñjara-pate mean “the king of
elephants who sports in the groves on Govardhana Hill”.
This is suggestive of rāga. With an anxious longing to
meet in day or night, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa come and go along
the rough terrain of Govardhana Hill, which is full of
sharp stones and thorns. This causes great pain to Their
soft feet. Yet They experience this pain as great
happiness. This is the symptom of rāga.

The words nava-rāga-hiṅgula-bharaiḥ mean “by a full
measure of the vermillion of new attachment”. This is
indicative of anurāga, because it shows the ever-fresh
quality of rāga and its abundance. The word bhūyobhiḥ
means “with tremendous profusion”. This means that the
ever-fresh quality of anurāga is experienced in a highly
intensified condition that is indicative of mahābhāva.

After analysing how all the stages of prema from rati to
mahābhāva have been illustrated in this verse, the three
special characteristics of mahābhāva are now shown. The
substance of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s commentary on this is
that Rādhā’s and Kṛṣṇa’s hearts are melted and unified
to such an extent that not only is there no knowledge of
duality between Their hearts, but there is not even an
illusion of such duality. From this it may be understood
that Their absorption in the experience of tasting each
other is so complete that They have no awareness of
anything else. Nothing else can penetrate Their

                           98
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

awareness. Neither is this perception dependent on any
other object. Their anurāga is both the cause and the
object of its own experience. This is the symptom of
sva-saṁvedya.

Jīva Gosvāmī then explains that, when shellac is
repeatedly exposed to the heat of fire, it becomes
completely melted both inside and out. Similarly, when
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are repeatedly exposed to the upsurge of
the sāttvika-bhāva known as sveda, perspiration, Their
hearts melt both inside and out. This indicates the
presence of uddīpta-sāttvika-bhāva, which is the symptom
of anurāga manifesting its prakāśita feature.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that in
order to paint a picture inside a wealthy person’s
mansion, an expert artist slowly melts shellac, which is
inherently red, by the heat of fire. He then mixes in an
abundant quantity of vermillion to prepare an excellent
colour. When he paints the inside of the mansion with
that mixture, he attracts the hearts of all people and
they become overwhelmed with astonishment. Similarly,
anurāga melts the hearts of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, who are
experiencing the condition of mahābhāva. Their hearts
are then infused with a great inundation of ever-fresh
rāga. At the time of Their manifest pastimes (prakaṭa-
līlā), the devotees within the universe experience the
exhilaration of Rādhā’s and Kṛṣṇa’s hearts due to the
condition of mahābhāva and become astonished. The effect
of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s mahābhāva-saturated pastimes is
experienced by whatever devotees are present there as
far as their qualification allows. This is the symptom
of anurāga manifesting the condition known as yāvad-
āśraya-vṛtti. In this way all the symptoms have been
displayed by this verse.

Thus with the help of the statements of Prīti-sandarbha,
it has been shown how Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in one
verse, has very concisely expressed the essence of the
systematic development of prema through its various
stages. In particular, He has described the gopīs’ fully
developed and radiant love in the amorous mellow
(unnata-ujjvala-mādhurya-prema-rasa).

Comment

It may be noted that the order of the stages of prema
that is given by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in the Prīti-
sandarbha differs slightly from that which is given by
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. In Prīti-
sandarbha the order is given as rati, prema, praṇaya,
māna, sneha, rāga, anurāga and mahābhava; whereas in
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi it is given as rati, prema, sneha,
māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga and mahābhāva. There is no

contradiction between these two different views because
sometimes the order of sneha, māna and praṇaya is
reversed in accordance with different rasas.



The word yugāyitam, meaning “appearing like a
millenium”, is simple and straightforward. The phrase
govinda-viraheṇa expresses the attitude of separation

                           99
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

(vipralambha) from Govinda. Vipralambha is defined in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.5.25):

sa pūrva-rāgo mānaś ca

pravāsādi-mayas tathā

vipralambho bahu-vidho

vidvadbhir iha kathyate

Self-realised rasika devotees have described vipralambha
to be of many varieties, such as pūrva-rāga – the mutual
attachment and anticipation of meeting that exists
between lovers who have not yet met, māna – anger which
prevents a loving couple from consummating their desire
for union, and pravāsa – separation due to living at a
distant place.

The esoteric mystery implied in Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s statement is that the practising devotee
who is still within the world of matter is fit to taste
love in separation only in the condition of pūrva-rāga.

Comment

It is essential for devotees in the stage of practice to
cultivate the mood of separation, and because they have
never experienced meeting with Kṛṣṇa, their feelings of
separation will come only in the category of pūrva-rāga.
But without having ever met with Kṛṣṇa, how can they
experience separation from Him in pūrva-rāga?

By hearing narrations of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes from
others, pūrva-rāga is awakened. This was the case with
the dvija-patnīs as well as the ladies of Mathurā prior
to Kṛṣṇa’s arrival there. Rukmiṇī also had never seen
Kṛṣṇa, but by hearing about Him from Śrī Nārada, pūrva-
rāga arose within her heart. Thus, she became
exceedingly anxious to meet with Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, by
hearing from the spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas or
by reading the scriptures, the living entities may have
vipralambha-pūrva-rāga awakened within their hearts. The
living entities have qualification only up to this
extent because they have never experienced meeting with
Kṛṣṇa. Therefore the other types of separation such as
māna and pravāsa are not possible for them.



There are ten conditions which arise due to separation:
(1) cintā — anxious consideration, (2) jāgaraṇa —
sleeplessness, (3) udvega — agitation, (4) tānava-kṛśatā
— emaciation of the body, (5) malināṅgatā — discolouring
of the limbs of the body, (6) pralāpa — incoherent
speech, (7) vyādhi — being stricken with a tormenting
ailment, (8) unmāda — madness, (9) moha — bewilderment
and (10) mṛtyu — death, which is also known as mūrcchā —
unconsciousness.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 20.40–1)

udvege divasa nā jāya, ‘kṣaṇa’ haila ‘yuga’-sama


                          100
Siksastaka.txt                                    5/5/2017

varṣāra megha-prāya aśru varṣe nayana

govinda-virahe śūnya haila tribhuvana

tuṣānale poḍe – yena nā jāya jīvana

[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, absorbed in intense feelings
of separation in the ecstasy of mahābhāva, speaks as
follows:] O sakhī, without the son of Nanda Mahārāja, I
am so agitated and

distressed that my days simply do not pass. Each and
every moment appears to be like an entire millenium.
Tears are flowing incessantly from my eyes just like
torrents of rain from the clouds. Now I simply cannot
tolerate separation from Govinda. This entire universe
appears as if void. My body is always burning in the
fire of separation as if my limbs had been bound by
straw and set ablaze. Yet I remain alive. What am I to
do now?

Śikṣāṣṭaka: Song Seven in four parts (Gītāvalī)

(7-a)

gāite gāite nāma ki daśā haila



kṛṣṇa-nitya-dāsa mu—i hṛdaye sphurila



jānilāma māyā-pāśe e jaḍa-jagate



govinda-virahe duḥkha pāi nānā-mate



āra ye saṁsāra mora nāhi lāge bhāla



kāṅhā yāi kṛṣṇa heri e cintā viśāla



kāṅdite kāṅdite mora āṅkhi variṣaya



varṣā-dhārā hena cakṣe haila udaya



nimeṣa haila mora śata yuga sama



govinda-viraha āra sahite akṣama



                          101
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


While repeatedly chanting the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I
was overtaken with a most astonishing condition. The
realisation that I am the eternal servant of Lord Kṛṣṇa
began to manifest within my heart. Because my attention
has been diverted from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I have been bound in
the dreadful grip of māyā. Thus I am suffering from
various kinds of miseries in this material world. Now
this material world no longer holds any attraction for
me. Where shall I go now? What shall I do? Where will I
meet Śrī Kṛṣṇa? Without seeing Him, I can get no relief.
This has become a great anxiety. As I cry repeatedly,
the tears are flowing from my eyes in an incessant
downpour, like rain falling from the clouds in the
monsoon season. In separation from Śrī Govinda, a single
moment appears like hundreds of millenniums. O sakhī,
now I cannot tolerate separation from Śrī Govinda.



(7-b)

śūnya dharātala, caudike dekhiye,

parāṇa udāsa haya

ki kari ki kari, sthira nāhi haya,

jīvana nāhika raya

vraja-vāsī-gana, mora prāṇa rākha,

dekhāo śrī rādhānāthe

bhakativinoda, minati māniyā,

laohe tāhāre sāthe

śrī kṛṣṇa-viraha āra sahite nā pāri



parāṇa chāḍite āra dina dūi cāri



Now this entire universe seems void, and my life has
become gloomy. Where shall I go? What shall I do? I am
unable to attain any sense of calm. My vital air is on
the verge of quitting this body. O residents of Vraja-
dhāma, give me a glimpse of Śrī Rādhānātha and save my
life. Please hear the prayer of this Bhaktivinoda and
take him along with you. Otherwise, I cannot tolerate
separation from Kṛṣṇa anymore. Within a few days I shall
give up my life.



(7-c)

gāite govinda-nāma, upajila bhāva-grāma,

dekhilāma yamunāra kūle


                          102
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

vṛṣabhānu-sutā-saṅge, śyāma naṭavara raṅge,

vāṅsarī bājāya nīpa-mūle

dekhiyā yugala-dhana, asthira haila mana,

jñāna-hārā hailuṅ takhana

kata-kṣaṇe nāhi jāni, jñāna-lābha haila māni,

āra nāhi bhela daraśana

Aho! When I began to chant the holy name of Śrī Govinda
in a loud voice, various symptoms of ecstasy began to
manifest in my body. Suddenly, I saw the beautiful shore
of the Yamunā. In a charming and lush green grove
beneath a kadamba tree, the best of dancers,
Śyāmasundara, was displaying His graceful threefold
bending form and playing the flute accompanied by Śrī
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī. Seeing the unprecedented couple, I
could not remain steady. I lost consciousness and fell
upon the ground. How long I lay in that condition, I do
not know. When I awoke, I looked here and there. But in
spite of searching for a long time with great effort, I
was unable to obtain Their darśana.



(7-d)

sakhi go kemane dhariba parāṇa



nimeṣa haila yugera samāna



śrāvaṇera dhārā, āṅkhi variṣaya,

śūnya bhela dharātala

govinda-virahe, prāṇa nāhi rahe,

kemane vāñciba bala

bhakativinoda, asthira haiyā,

punaḥ nāmāśraya kari’

ḍāke rādhānātha, diyā daraśana,

prāṇa rākha, nahe mari

Now this entire universe has begun to appear void.
Streams of tears flow from my eyes like torrents of rain
during the month of Śrāvaṇa. O sakhī, the life air
within this body has become very restless and agitated.
I feel that my life is about to come to an end – how
shall I go on? In separation from Govinda, a single
moment appears like hundreds of millenniums. Deeply
agitated, this Bhaktivinoda chants the holy name again
and loudly cries, “O Kṛṣṇa! O Rādhā! Please, both of You
give me Your darśana and save my life. Otherwise, I will

                             103
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

surely perish.”

Vivṛti

“O Govinda, in separation from You, this entire universe
seems void to me. A stream of tears is incessantly
flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain during the
monsoon season, and the batting of an eyelash appears
like a millennium.”

This is a vivid example of vipralambha-rasa, the mellow
taste of divine separation. For devotees in whom
ecstatic feelings of bhāva have arisen (jāta-rati-
bhaktas), it is absolutely essential that one seek to
experience vipralambha-rasa, without concern for union
with the Lord (sambhoga). This verse has been cited in
order to demonstrate this point.

Feelings of separation that are experienced in material
relationships are simply full of misery, whereas in
transcendental vipralambha-rasa, one experiences supreme
bliss within the heart even though externally it appears
like intense suffering. Therefore it has been said
regarding the feelings of separation experienced by a
Vaiṣṇava: “yata dekha vaiṣṇavera vyavahāra duḥkha,
niścaya jānio sei parānanda-sukha — although the
feelings of separation experienced by a Vaiṣṇava appear
like ordinary distress, you should know them to be
transcendental bliss.” Vipralambha-rasa always gives
nourishment to sambhoga.

In the condition known as prema-vaicittya, which comes
under the heading of vipralambha, there is an external
appearance of sambhoga. In this condition, although one
is directly in Kṛṣṇa’s presence, one feels intense grief
due to the internal conception of separation that is
generated by the unique excellence of prema. By contrast
with this, when one is physically separated from Kṛṣṇa,
remembrance of Him is so intense that there is no
possibility of forgetting Him even for a moment. This
stage is the culmination point of all bhajana.

The group known as Gaura-nāgarī, who are actually
oblivious to Lord Kṛṣṇa, make a licentious display of
sambhoga-rasa. Due to their negligence of Kṛṣṇa, they
simply create obstacles to the development of genuine,
transcendental rasa. Those who aspire for sambhoga
always endeavour for the selfish satisfaction of their
own senses. Therefore they are devoid of kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.165) it is said:
“ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā tāre bali ëkāma’, krṣṇendriya-
prīti-icchā dhare ëprema’ nāma — the desire to gratify
one’s own senses is kāma, but the desire to please the
senses of Lord Kṛṣṇa is prema.” If the Gaura-nāgarīs
understood the meaning of this verse, they would not be
so quick to place Śrī Gaurāṅga in the position of
nāgara, the enjoyer, and themselves as nāgarī, the
enjoyed, with an urgent desire to promote their own
sambhoga-rasa. One should abandon this and perform
bhajana unto the Supreme Lord purely under the guidance
of Vaiṣṇavas.

The confidential secret of Lord Gaurāṅga’s pastimes is

                          104
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, accepting the mood of an āśraya-
jātīya (a receptacle of loving sentiments, or in other
words, a devotee), is always situated in the mood of
vipralambha. The fullest display of the sentiment of the
āśraya-jātīya-jīva who is seeking to give nourishment to
sambhoga-rasa is found in the mood of vipralambha. In
order to demonstrate this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifests His
eternal form of Śrī Gaura, who is the incarnation of
vipralambha-rasa. From this it can be concluded that the
misplaced endeavours of those who aspire for sambhoga
can never become successful.

Śrī Bhajana-rahasya Verses

The following verse from Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (41) is an
example of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s pralāpa (incoherence or
speech filled with lamentation) instigated by feelings
of separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This verse is also quoted
in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.100) as an example of the
vyabhicāri-bhāva known as autsukya, anxious longing,
experienced in the condition of separation from Kṛṣṇa:

amūny adhanyāni dināntarāṇi

hare tvad-ālokanam antareṇa

anātha-bandho karuṇaika-sindho

hā hanta hā hanta kathaṁ nayāmi

O Anātha-bandhu (friend of the destitute), O Hari, O
Karuṇā-sindhu (ocean of compassion)! Alas, alas! How can
I bear the passing of these miserable days and nights,
being bereft of Your association?

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has composed the following
verse in this connection (Bhajana-rahasya (7.14)):

nā heriye tava mukha, hṛdaye dāruṇa-duḥkha

dīna-bandho karuṇā-sāgara

e adhanya divā-niśi, kemane kāṭābe dāsī,

upāya balaha ataḥ para

Being unable to see Your face, my heart is filled with
unbearable distress. O friend of the fallen, ocean of
compassion! How shall I pass these miserable days and
nights? I am Your maidservant. Therefore please tell me
immediately, what am I to do about this?

The following verse from Padyāvalī (330) is a statement
of Śrī Mādhavendra Purī that illustrates Śrī Rādhā’s
bhāvocchvāsa. [Bhāvocchvāsa is a deep outburst of
feeling that expresses the spiritual sentiment hidden in
the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. There are many different
instances of this. The one mentioned here is instigated
by feelings of separation. In the references from
Bhajana-rahasya given in Verse Eight, there is a
statement from Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta that shows an example of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s bhāvocchvāsa instigated by meeting
with Kṛṣṇa. See the comments given there on pp. 148 and
150 for further explanation of bhāvocchvāsa.]

                             105
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017


ayi dīna-dayārdra-nātha he

mathurā-nātha kadāvalokyase

hṛdayaṁ tvad-aloka-kātaraṁ

dayita bhrāmyati kiṁ karomy aham

O Lord whose heart melts with compassion for the
destitute, O Lord of Mathurā, when will I obtain Your
darśana? Being bereft of Your association, My sorrowful
heart has become greatly agitated and unsteady. O dearly
beloved, what shall I do now?

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings (Bhajana-rahasya
(7.7)):

‘he dīna-dayārdra-nātha, he kṛṣṇa, mathurā-nātha,

kabe punaḥ pāba daraśana

na dekhi se cāṅda-mukha, vyathita hṛdaye duḥkha,

he dayita ki kari ekhana’

O Lord whose heart melts with compassion for the
destitute, O Kṛṣṇa, master of Mathurā, when will I see
You again? My heart is greatly distressed because of not
seeing Your moonlike face. O beloved, what shall I do
now?

The following verse from Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (15.167)
describes ten conditions that arise due to separation
from Śrī Kṛṣṇa and that thus promote the state of
bhāvonmāda in Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Bhāvonmāda is a kind of
divine madness that comes in the stage of mahābhāva:

cintātra jāgarodvegau

tānavaṁ malināṅgatā

pralāpo vyādhir unmādo

moho mṛtyur daśā daśa

There are ten conditions that arise in sudūra-pravāsa-
vipralambha, separation due to living at a distant
place. These conditions are as follows: (1) cintā –
anxious consideration, (2) jāgaraṇa – sleeplessness, (3)
udvega – agitation, (4) tānava-kṛśatā – emaciation of
the body, (5) malināṅgatā – discolouring of the limbs of
the body, (6) pralāpa – incoherent speech, (7) vyādhi –
being stricken with a tormenting ailment, (8) unmāda –
madness, (9) moha – bewilderment and (10) mṛtyu – death,
which is also known as mūrcchā – unconsciousness.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings (Bhajana-rahasya
(7.11)):

jāgara, udvega, cintā, tānavāṅga-malinatā,

pralāpa, unmāda āra vyādhi


                             106
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

moha, mṛtyu daśā daśa, tāhe rādhā suvivaśa,

pāila duḥkha-kulera avadhi

When Śrī Rādhikā is stricken with these ten conditions
due to separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, She attains to the
ultimate limit of distress.




Verse Eight


Steadiness in perfection



āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu mām

adarśanān marma-hatāṁ karotu vā

yathā tathā vā vidadhātu lampaṭo

mat-prāṇa-nāthas tu sa eva nāparaḥ

Anvaya

saḥ lampaṭaḥ — that debauchee, who acts for His own
pleasure; vā — either; pinaṣṭu — let Him crush (make me
His very own); mām — me (a maidservant); pāda-ratām —
attached to the service of His lotus feet; āśliṣya — by
a deep embrace; vā — or; marma-hatām karotu — let Him
break my heart; adarśanāt — by not being visible;
vidadhātu — let Him do; yathā tathā vā — whatever He
likes (let Him even enjoy the association of other
lovers); tu eva — nonetheless (He only); mat-prāṇa-
nāthaḥ — is the Lord of my life; aparaḥ na — there is no
one other than Him.

Translation

Let Kṛṣṇa tightly embrace this maidservant who is
attached to the service of His lotus feet, and thus make
me His very own. Or let Him break my heart by not being
present before me. He is a debauchee and can do whatever
He likes. Even if He sports with other lovers directly
in front of me, He is still the Lord of my life. There
is no one other than Him.

Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya

In this verse we are acquainted with the mental
condition of the living entity upon attainment of the
status of prema. “That crest jewel of debauchees may
delight this maidservant who is attached to the service
of His lotus feet by tightly embracing me. Or He may
trample me, or break my heart by not being present
before me. He may do whatever He likes. Even if He
sports with other lovers directly in front of me, He is
still the Lord of my life. There is no one other than
Him.” This characteristic of one-pointed devotion to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is known as kṛṣṇaika-niṣṭhitā. This is also

                             107
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

demonstrated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.29.34):

martyo yadā tyakta-samasta-karmā

niveditātmā vicikīrṣito me

tadāmṛtatvaṁ pratipadyamāno

mayātma-bhūyāya ca kalpate vai

[Śrī Bhagavān said to Uddhava:] When mortal beings
abandon all fruitive activities and surrender themselves
fully unto Me, I become desirous of bestowing some
special benediction upon them. At that time, I cause
them to attain their immortal forms and promote them to
the status of My dear eternal associates.

From this characteristic it is understood that in the
stage of prema, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only life, wealth and
heart of the devotee. In that condition, the perfection
of religion is fully exhibited in the form of the mutual
attraction between Bhagavān and the devotee. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (7.5.14) Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja has said:

yathā bhrāmyaty ayo brahman

svayam ākarṣa-sannidhau

tathā me bhidyate cetaś

cakra-pāṇer yadṛcchayā

O brāhmaṇa, just as iron is automatically attracted
towards a magnet, my consciousness has become released
from this mundane existence and forcibly attracted to
Cakrapāṇi Bhagavān, the Lord who carries a discus in His
hand, by the irresistible force of the Lord’s willing
potency, known as icchā-śakti.

This statement supports the idea that a svabhāvika-
dharma or natural function does exist between the
infinitesimal living entity and the all-pervading Lord
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and that it involves mutual reciprocity. When
the jīva is in the state of indifference to the Lord,
this natural function is practically non-existent. But
when, by some great fortune, the living entity’s nature
becomes cleansed and purified, this eternally
established natural function that exists between Kṛṣṇa
and the living entity is manifested again.

At such a time, the attraction of the living entity for
the Lord is exactly like the attraction of clean iron
for a magnet. Consequently, the sole purpose of religion
is to bring into effect this eternally existing natural
function. Religion has no purpose other than this.
Therefore it should be understood that in the sādhana
leading to the manifestation of prema, the pure living
entity is completely devoid of desire for any other
result. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.22) Kṛṣṇa Himself
has given support to this in the following words:

na pāraye ’haṁ niravadya-saṁyujāṁ

sva-sādhu-kṛtyaṁ vibudhāyuṣāpi vaḥ

                             108
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


yā mābhajan durjara-geha-śṛṅkhalāḥ

saṁvṛścya tad vaḥ pratiyātu sādhunā

My beloved gopīs, your meeting with Me is completely
pure and faultless. You have completely broken the
tenacious bonds of household life just to serve Me. Even
if I obtain a fantastic span of life like that of the
demigods, it will not be possible for Me to repay your
love, service and renunciation. Therefore you will have
to be satisfied by accepting your own auspicious
activities as repayment.

By this statement of the Lord it is proved that love for
Kṛṣṇa is itself the fruit of loving Kṛṣṇa. In other
words the devotees are completely devoid of any desire
for their own happiness. They serve Kṛṣṇa, offer their
love to Him and meet with Him. The sole purpose of
whatever they do is to please Kṛṣṇa.

In this verse of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, the words adarśanān
marma-hatām mean “breaking the heart due to separation”.
In reality, the anguish of the heart related to
separation is not a source of distress, but of supreme
happiness. This is evidenced by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s statement in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.21):

evaṁ mad-arthojjhita-loka-veda-

svānāṁ hi vo mayy anuvṛttaye ’balāḥ

mayā parokṣaṁ bhajatā tirohitaṁ

māsūyituṁ mārhatha tat priyaṁ priyāḥ

O beloved gopīs, O tender-hearted friends, for My sake,
you abandoned social conventions, Vedic regulations and
even your family relationships. I disappeared from you
only to increase the intensity of your feelings for Me,
and I was secretly listening to your love-intoxicated
speeches. I am your beloved. Therefore don’t be
displeased with Me.

Another important point spoken of in this Verse Eight is
that in the statement “delighting me by your embrace”,
there is not even a scent of desire for personal
happiness. The purport of this statement is that the
devotee simply wants to offer his love to Kṛṣṇa, and to
bring happiness to Him. Therefore this statement is
thoroughly appropriate. It is in complete conformity
with the nature of prema and the conclusions of the
scriptures.

Significance of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka as related through the
life and experience of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu

The glory of this Śikṣāṣṭaka will now be summarised.
What is the greatness of the transcendental love of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the personification of the
Lord’s internal potency (svarūpa-śakti)? What is the
extraordinary sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that She tastes
through Her love? And what is the indescribable
happiness that She experiences when She tastes the

                          109
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa? The supreme absolute truth, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, desiring to fulfil these three inner longings,
assumes the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
Deeply absorbed in the mood of munificence (audārya), He
eternally performs unlimited pastimes in Śrī Navadvīpa-
dhāma, which is situated in a special section of
Vaikuṇṭha named Goloka. There in the seat of His eternal
transcendental pastimes He tastes these three
sentiments.

Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, united with the bodily complexion and
sentiment of Śrī Rādhā, appears in this universe only
once in a day of Brahmā in the form of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. He appeared just recently on the sacred
banks of the Bhāgīrathī (Gaṅgā) within the Nadia
district of West Bengal, in Śrī Navadvīpa-Māyāpura,
which is non-different from Śrī Vṛndāvana. He appeared
in the year 1486, on a Saturday at dusk of the full moon
night of the month of Phālgunī (February—March) during a
lunar eclipse. At that time, due to the lunar eclipse,
the entire town vibrated the melodious sound of
harināma-saṅkīrtana.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s father’s name was Paṇḍita Śrī
Jagannātha Miśra, and His mother’s name was Śrīmatī
Śacī-devī. By His transcendental pastimes, enacted at
different stages of life, He inundated the entire land
of Gauḍa with transcendental bliss. In childhood He
displayed His childlike mischievousness, and
occasionally demonstrated astonishing superhuman
pastimes. In boyhood He was immersed in the pastimes of
education and study. In youth He was married according
to the regulations of scripture and set an ideal example
of how to execute the duties of householder life. It was
at this time also that He began to discourse on the
principles of bhakti.

Thereafter He went to Gayā and accepted initiation into
the ten-syllable gopāla-mantra from Śrī Īśvara Purī, who
was the foremost mendicant of the Śrī Madhva sampradāya.
By doing so, He instructed all living entities about
their duty to take shelter of the lotus feet of a bona
fide spiritual master who is endowed with all the
characteristics described in the scriptures. Returning
from Gayā, He submerged all of Gauḍa-bhūmi in the flow
of the river of bhakti by performing śrī-harināma-
sankīrtana in the company of His devotees. At the age of
twenty-four, He abandoned householder life for good, and
accepted the renounced order of life from Śrī Keśava
Bhāratī, who was a sannyāsī in the line of Śrī
Śaṅkarācārya.

Afterwards, on the pretext of going for pilgrimage, He
spent six years travelling throughout Bengal, Orissa,
South India, Maharastra, Uttar Pradesh (Mathurā,
Vṛndāvana, Prayāga and Kāśī) and Bihar (Kānāi Nāṭaśālā
and Rāja Mahala). During His travels, He inspired
hundreds of thousands of people to obtain the ultimate
goal by bestowing upon them love for the holy name.
Everywhere He went, He propagated the doctrine of
unalloyed devotion (śuddha-bhakti). Through logical
debate He defeated many persons who subscribed to
doctrines that were opposed to the principles of
scripture. He clearly established His own doctrine that

                          110
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

is the essence of all conclusions of the four Vaiṣṇava
sampradāyas. This is known as acintya-bhedābheda-tattva,
the inconceivable truth of the oneness and difference
that exists between the Lord, His energies and the
living entities.

Thereafter, He remained in Śrī Jagannātha Purī
continuously for eighteen years. In order to fulfil His
three inner longings, He tasted the nectar of divine
love in the company of His eternal associates. He sent
His influential preachers of śuddha-bhakti all over and
propagated His pure doctrine through them. Thus, He
submerged all of India in the flow of śrī-kṛṣṇa-prema.

In the meantime, He empowered the hearts of His eternal
associates like Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda, Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, Śrī Rūpa, Śrī
Sanātana, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa, Śrī Gopāla-bhaṭṭa, Śrī
Jīva, Śrī Kavi Karṇapura and others. He inspired them to
write many jewels of transcendental literature and thus
gave nourishment to His own ideals.

That very same Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva Himself composed the Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka, which is filled with all the conclusions of
bhakti, and instructed it to persons of all different
levels of qualification. He often tasted the nectarean
essence of this Śikṣāṣṭaka in a secluded place in the
company of His two most confidential associates, Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda. This topic is found
in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and other literatures.

In this way, by His pastimes as an ideal practitioner of
bhakti within the gṛhastha-āśrama, Svayam Bhagavān Śrī
Gaurāṅgadeva instructed all religious householders how
to properly carry out family life. Likewise, by His
pastimes as a sannyāsī, He instructed all renunciants,
showing them an ideal example of renunciation combined
with the highest devotional sentiment. The glory of this
Śikṣāṣṭaka is unlimited.

Benediction for the readers of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka

Faithful persons who with great devotion read and study
this Śikṣāṣṭaka, which emanated from the lotus mouth of
Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva, will become infatuated with greed to
taste the honey from the lotus feet of Śrī Gaurasundara.
Moreover, they will be submerged in the reservoir of
love for Murāri, Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra. Four hundred and one
years after the appearance of Śrī Gaurāṅga, this
commentary on Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka named Sanmodana-bhāṣya has
been composed by me — Kedāranātha Bhaktivinoda.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s concluding wordsto Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda’s commentary

For pure rasika Vaiṣṇavas who taste mādhurya-rasa, this
Śikṣāṣṭaka is the essence of all the Vedas. Because it
emanated from the lotus mouth of Svayam Bhagavān, it is
an essential truth (mahā-vākya). Therefore all fortunate
persons should adorn their necks with the garland of
this Śikṣāṣṭaka by reading, studying and worshipping it
daily as a fixed principle.

Thus ends the translation of the commentary on Śrī

                          111
Siksastaka.txt                                   5/5/2017

Śikṣāṣṭaka, known as Sanmodana-bhāṣya, composed by the
greatly merciful eternal associate of Śrī Gaurāṅga,
Śrīla Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 20.48–52)

āmi kṛṣṇa-pada-dāsī, teṅho rasa-sukha-rāśi’

āliṅgiyā kare ātma-sātha

kivā nā deya daraśana, jārena mora tanu-mana,

tabu teṅho mora prāṇa-nātha

sakhi he, śuna mora manera niścaya

kivā anurāga kare, kivā duḥkha diyā māre,

mora prāṇeśvara kṛṣṇa – anya naya

chāḍi’ anya nārī-gaṇa, mora vaśa tanu-mana,

mora saubhāgya prakaṭa kariyā

tā-sabāre deya pīḍā, āmā-sane kare krīḍā,

sei nārī-gaṇe dekhā—ā

kivā teṅho lampaṭa, śaṭha, dhṛṣṭa, sakapaṭa,

anya nārī-gaṇa kari’ sātha

more dite manaḥ-pīḍā, mora āge kare krīḍā,

tabu teṅho mora prāṇa-nātha

nā gaṇi āpana-duḥkha, sabe vā—chi tāṅra sukha,

tāṅra sukha āmāra tātparya

more yadi diyā duḥkha, tāṅra haila mahā-sukha,

sei duḥkha mora sukha-varya

[In the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
said:] O sakhī, I am a maidservant of the lotus feet of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He is the ocean of the topmost happiness of
transcendental rasa. He may take possession of me by
tightly embracing me, or He may cause my body and mind
to wither away by not giving me His darśana. Whatever He
does, He is still the Lord of my life. O sakhi, please
hear my heart’s conviction. Whether He loves me or
torments me, Kṛṣṇa is my master – there is no other.
Abandoning the other beautiful cowherd girls, He may
manifest my good fortune by submitting His mind and body
to my control. By sporting with me in front of those
girls, He will bring about their distress. Yet He is a
wicked, impudent and deceitful debauchee, who is
immersed only in the satisfaction of His own whims. He
may mortify me by frolicking with other cowherd girls in
my presence. Even then, He is the Lord of my life. I am
not the least bit concerned about my own distress. I
always desire His happiness alone. The basis of my life
is simply to please Him in every way. If by giving me

                             112
Siksastaka.txt                                   5/5/2017

distress, He is pleased, that distress becomes my
greatest happiness.

Śikṣāṣṭaka: Song Eight in two parts (Gītāvalī)

(8-a)

bandhu-gaṇa śunaha vacana mora

bhāvete vibhora, thākiye yakhana,

dekhā deya citta-cora

vicakṣaṇa kari’, dekhite cāhile,

haya āṅkhi-agocara

punaḥ nāhi dekhi’, kāṅdaye parāṇa,

duḥkhera nāhi thāke ora

jagatera bandhu sei kabhu more laya sātha



yathā tathā rākha more, āmāra se prāṇa-nātha



darśana-ānanda dāne, sukha deya mora prāṇe,

bale more praṇaya-vacana

punaḥ adarśana diyā, dagdha kare mora hiyā,

prāṇe more māre prāṇa-dhana

yāhe tā’ra sukha haya, sei sukha mama



nija sukhe duḥkhe mora sarvadā-i sama



bhakativinoda, saṁyoge, viyoge,

tāhe jāne prāṇeśvara

tā’ra sukhe sukhī, sei prāṇa-nātha,

se kabhu nā haya para

O dear friends, please hear my words. How shall I
describe the sentiment of my heart? When I am
overwhelmed with emotion, then I see that alluring
person who has stolen my heart. But as soon as I return
to full consciousness, I see that He has disappeared.
Even upon searching, He is not to be found anywhere. At
that time there is no limit to my distress. My body
begins to shake and tremble. My life air becomes
restless and agitated. “Alas! Alas! What am I to do? He
is the friend of the whole world. When will He take me
with Him? Wherever He may keep me, He is the Lord of my

                           113
Siksastaka.txt                                   5/5/2017

life. By giving me His darśana, He may delight me,
please me and appease me with affectionate words. Or He
may scorch my heart by not giving His darśana. Let Him
do whatever He likes. Even if He kills me by separation
from Him, He remains the very wealth of my life.
Whatever gives Him pleasure is my happiness. My own
happiness and distress are all the same to me. He is the
master of Bhaktivinoda both in separation and in union.
My happiness is only in His happiness. He alone is the
Lord of my life, there is no one else.

(8-b)

yoga-pīṭhopari-sthita, aṣṭa-sakhī-suveṣṭita,

vṛndāraṇye kadamba-kānane

rādhā-saha vaṁśī-dhārī, viśva-jana-citta-hārī,

prāṇa mora tāṅhāra caraṇe

sakhī-āj—ā-mata kari doṅhāra sevana



pālya-dāsī sadā bhāvi doṅhāra caraṇa



kabhu kṛpā kari’, mama hasta dhari’,

madhura vacana bole

tāmbūla laiyā, khāya dui jane,

mālā laya kutūhale

adarśana haya kakhana ki chale



nā dekhiyā doṅhe hiyā mora jvale



jekhāne sekhāne, thākuka du’jane,

āmi ta’ caraṇa dāsī

milane ānanda, virahe yātanā,

sakala samāna vāsi

rādhā-kṛṣṇa prāṇa mora jīvane maraṇe



more rākhi’ māri’ sukhe thākuka du’jane



bhakativinoda, āra nāhi jāne,

paḍi’ nija-sakhī-pāya

                            114
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017


rādhikāra gaṇe thākiyā satata,

yugala-caraṇa cāya

Śrī Nanda-nandana, who plays the flute and steals the
hearts of the entire universe, is graciously seated on a
jewelled throne with Śrīmatī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, at the
seat of Their transcendental pastimes, surrounded by the
eight principal sakhīs in a kadamba forest of
transcendental Vṛndāvana. The lotus feet of this
eternally youthful Divine Couple are my life and soul. I
have offered myself at Their lotus feet. I am Their
maidservant (pālyadāsī) engaged in the service of Their
lotus feet. Sometimes They take hold of my hands, and
with sweet voices, They request tāmbūla and then eat it.
Sometimes with great wonder, They take a garland from me
and wear it. While at other times, They disappear from
me on some pretext. O sakhī, happiness is found wherever
They are found. I am a maidservant of Their lotus feet.
Bliss obtained in Their company and torture endured in
Their separation are all the same to me. In life and in
death – at all times – Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are my very
life. Bhaktivinoda knows no one else but Them. Falling
at the lotus feet of Their dearmost sakhīs, I beg for
one thing alone: that they accept me into the personal
group of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and engage me always in the
service of the lotus feet of the Divine Couple.

Vivṛti

“I am a maidservant of the gopīs who are always engaged
in serving the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in varieties of
ways. He may embrace me, He may make me His very own, or
He may break my heart by not being present before me. He
is a debauchee who is always engaged in seducing the
young wives of the gopas. He may do whatever He likes,
yet He is the Lord of my life. There is no one other
than Him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the independent Supreme Person.
Acting in accordance with His desire is my only
religion. I have no interest separate from His, nor do I
have any inclination for service that is contrary to His
will.”

In the stage of perfection, the jīva is devoid of all
material designations pertaining to both the body and
the mind. At that time, the living entity becomes a
female attendant of the gopīs in the Vṛndāvana situated
in the spiritual sky, the place where Nanda-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa freely enacts His divine pastimes. There one is
engaged in fulfilling the desires of Śrī Kṛṣṇa through
spiritual senses in one’s spiritual body. This is the
actual nature of prema-bhakti.

The living entity should never consider himself as the
āśraya-vigraha. The āśraya-vigraha refers to the Lord’s
eternal associates who are naturally the receptacle of
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa and under whose guidance the aspiring
devotees place themselves in order to awaken their
spontaneous attraction towards the Lord. The āśraya-
vigraha here specifically refers to Śrīmatī Rādhikā. A
devotee never considers himself to be identical with the
āśraya-vigraha, but always feels himself to be their
follower and an aspirant for their mercy. When one

                          115
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

considers himself as the āśraya-vigraha, then his
worship becomes ahaṅgrahopāsanā.

Ahaṅgrahopāsanā refers to a type of worship in which the
devotee considers himself to be identical with the
object of worship. The unadulterated condition of the
pure jīva is to remain always under the guidance of the
āśraya-jātīya, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her confidential
associates. Although the living entity is dear to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, he is, by constitution and by the will of Kṛṣṇa,
the separated part and parcel of the Lord (vibhinnāṁśa).

Summary of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka

In all eight verses of Śikṣāṣṭaka, three subjects have
been explained: sambandha (knowledge relevant to the
development of one’s relationship with the Lord),
abhidheya (the process of devotional life) and prayojana
(the ultimate goal of one’s devotion). In Verse One,
sādhana in the form of śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana has been
described in a general way. In Verse Two, the awareness
of one’s incompetence to execute this super-excellent
form of sādhana is shown. Verse Three teaches the method
for chanting the holy name; Verse Four, the necessity of
eliminating unfavourable desires and deceit in the form
of the aspiration for liberation; Verse Five, knowledge
of the living entity’s original spiritual identity;
Verse Six, how one achieves good fortune by attaining
proximity to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; Verse Seven, the mood of
separation in those who have acquired the highest
qualification; and Verse Eight, the ultimate perfection
of one’s cherished goal.

In Verses One through Five, instructions have been given
on sambandha-jñāna, which is the basis of abhidheya. In
all eight Verses, abhidheya-tattva has been described.
In Verses Six through Eight, instructions regarding
prayojana, the ultimate goal, are found. In Verses One
through Five, the process of sādhana-bhakti is described
under the heading of abhidheya-tattva, and in Verses Six
and Seven, bhāva-bhakti. Verses Six to Eight, and
particularly Verses Seven and Eight, deal with sādhya,
the perfectional stage of bhakti, which culminates in
prema.

Presenting the following verse composed by Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, I offer my obeisances at
the feet of all the readers:

ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma vṛndāvanaṁ

ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ pramāṇam amalaṁ premā pum-artho mahān

śrī-caitanya-mahāprabhor matam idaṁ tatrādaro naḥ paraḥ

Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
transcendental abode Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma are my
worshipful objects. The most excellent method of
worshipping Kṛṣṇa is that adopted by the young wives of
Vraja. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the flawless and most
authoritative scripture, and kṛṣṇa-prema is the fifth
and highest achievement of human life beyond mundane

                            116
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

religiosity (dharma), accumulation of wealth (artha),
sense enjoyment (kāma) and liberation (mokṣa). It is
thus known as pa—cama-puruṣārtha or parama-puruṣārtha.
This is the opinion of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We have
supreme regard for this conclusion. We have no
inclination or respect for any other cheating opinions.

Śrī Bhajana-rahasya Verses

The following verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.11)
gives an example of the gopīs’ highly developed love for
Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa was wandering about in the forest with
bare feet chasing after the cows, the gopīs felt
tremendous anxiety thinking of the pain that Kṛṣṇa might
be experiencing, and spoke as follows:

calasi yad vrajāc cārayan paśūn

nalina-sundaraṁ nātha te padam

śila-tṛṇāṅkuraiḥ sīdatīti naḥ

kalilatāṁ manaḥ kānta gacchati

O master, O lover, when You set out from Vraja and head
for the forest to graze the cows, our hearts become
greatly anguished with the thought that Your feet, which
are softer and more delicate than a lotus flower, will
be pricked by jagged stones, spiked husks of grain, and
rough grass, shoots and thorns.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings (Bhajana-rahasya
(8.14)):

dhenu la’ye vraja ha’te yabe yāo vane



nalina-sundara tava kamala-caraṇa



śilāṅkure kaṣṭa habe manete vicāri’



mahā-duḥkha pāi morā ohe citta-hāri



O beloved who have stolen my heart, when You leave Vraja
and go to the forest taking the cows, my mind simply
thinks how Your beautiful, soft lotus feet will be
pained by sharp stones, and thus I experience tremendous
sorrow.

When the gopīs are unable to behold the lotus face of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which is encircled by curling locks of hair,
they consider each and every moment to be like hundreds
of millenniums. (The exact words used here to express a
moment are nimeṣa, which means the blinking of an eye,
and truṭi, which is the time occupied in the integration
of eighteen atomic particles, or in other words,
1/1687.5 of a second.) This is expressed in the

                             117
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

following verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.15):

aṭati yad bhavān ahni kānanaṁ

truṭi-yugāyate tvām apaśyatām

kuṭila-kuntalaṁ śrī-mukhaṁ ca te

jaḍa udīkṣatāṁ pakṣma-kṛd dṛśām

[The gopīs said:] O dear beloved, when You go to the
forest to herd the cows, we are unable to see You and
thus even a single moment (truṭi) appears to us to be
like an entire millennium. At the day’s end, we are able
to behold Your beautiful face encircled by curling locks
of hair. Yet even at that time, the blinking of our eyes
presents an obstruction in seeing You, which we are
unable to tolerate for even a moment (nimeṣa). We then
consider the creator of our eyelids to be a great fool.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings (Bhajana-rahasya
(8.15)):

pūrvāhne kānane tumi yāo go-cāraṇe



truṭi yuga-sama haya tava adarśane



kuṭila-kuntala tava śrī-candra-vadana



darśane nimeṣa-dātā vidhira nindana



At forenoon when You go to the forest to graze the cows,
a single moment in Your absence appears to us like an
entire

millennium. When we behold Your beautiful moonlike face
encircled by curling locks of hair, the blinking of our
eyelids interferes with our seeing You and thus we
severely rebuke the creator.

The following verse from Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (12) is an
example of the gopīs’ bhāvocchvāsa at the time of union
with Kṛṣṇa:

nikhila-bhuvana-lakṣmī-nitya-līlāspadābhyāṁ

kamala-vipina-vīthī-garva-sarvaṅkaṣābhyām

praṇamad-abhaya-dāna-prauḍhi-gāḍhādṛtābhyāṁ

kim api vahatu cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-pādāmbujābhyām

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet are the abode wherein Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, who is the original source of all goddesses of
fortune, conducts Her eternal pastimes. The beauty of
those feet completely shatters the pride of the forest

                          118
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

path decorated with rows of lotus flowers. They are
powerful and deeply attentive in bestowing fearlessness
upon the surrendered souls. May His lotus feet be ever
manifest in my heart, transmitting the indescribable
happiness of serving them.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings (Bhajana-rahasya
(8.17)):

nikhila-bhuvana-lakṣmī rādhikā-sundarī

tāṅra nitya-līlāspada parama-mādhurī

kamala-vipina-garva kṣaya yāhe haya

praṇata-abhaya-dāne prauḍha-śakti-maya

hena kṛṣṇa-pāda-padma, kṛṣṇa, mama mana

apūrva utsava-rati karuka vahana

May an unprecedented festival of love awaken in my heart
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His lotus feet, which are the highest
sweetness, being the abode of the eternal pastimes of
the divinely beautiful Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the source of
all goddesses of fortune, which shatter the pride of the
forest path bedecked with lotuses, and which are fully
competent to bestow fearlessness upon the surrendered
souls.

Comment

Śrī Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura is here praying with intense
longing to become immersed in the pleasure of serving
the Lord’s lotus feet. The word vahatu means “to bear”
or “to carry”, but it is used here in the sense of
shelter. Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura prays that his mind may
take shelter of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. The words kim api
used in combination with vahatu mean “vehemently” or “to
a great extent”. This means that he not only wants to
take shelter of those feet but he wants to serve them.
Or the word sukham, happiness, may be understood here.
In that case kim api means “a certain happiness”. The
fact that it is indefinite implies that it is so
extraordinary it cannot be described. This refers to the
happiness of serving Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet by massaging
them and so on. He prays that his mind take shelter only
of that happiness.

What is the attraction of those feet? The term nikhila-
bhuvana-lakṣmī refers to Śrīmatī Rādhikā. It means that
She is the original source of all goddesses of fortune,
who are of three types: the lakṣmīs of Vaikuṇṭha, the
queens of Dvārakā and the damsels of Vraja. The words
nitya-līlāspadābhyām mean that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet
are the abode wherein Śrīmatī Rādhikā enacts Her eternal
pastimes. Nikhila-bhuvana-lakṣmī also refers to the
beauty, opulence and splendour of all the worlds
including Vaikuṇṭha. In that case the words nitya-
līlāspadābhyām mean that all opulence, beauty and
splendour eternally and joyfully reside at Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
feet. In either case the beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s feet are
beyond compare. Consequently they completely shatter the
pride of a beautiful forest lined with rows of fragrant

                          119
Siksastaka.txt                                  5/5/2017

lotuses.

How may those extraordinary feet by obtained? Praṇamat —
simply by bowing down to them with great respect. To
those who bow down in this way, Kṛṣṇa’s feet bestow
fearlessness. And in doing so, they are prauḍhī, which
means that they are audacious. They display uncommon
boldness, and therefore nothing can stand in their way.
Furthermore, he says that they are gāḍhādṛta, deeply
attentive in bestowing such fearlessness. Thus although
those feet are so precious, he is confident of attaining
his goal.

The term bhāvocchvāsa [referred to on page 148] means
“an outburst of feeling that expresses the spiritual
sentiments hidden in the hearts of the gopīs”. How does
this occur?

The gopīs were silent and Kṛṣṇa was silent. They were
feeling the mood of separation. The gopīs were weeping
and feeling very distressed at heart. But suddenly Kṛṣṇa
approached Śrīmatī Rādhikā from behind and clasped His
hands in front of Her eyes. She knew it was Him by the
touch of His hands, but She did not let on that She
knew. She exclaimed, “Viśākhā,” and Kṛṣṇa laughed,
trying to restrain Himself. Śrīmatī Rādhikā was feeling
overjoyed. Then, just to increase Kṛṣṇa’s mood, She
said, “Yes, I know. You are Lalitā.”

Then Kṛṣṇa could not check Himself anymore and He at
once began to laugh very loudly. Then Śrīmatī Rādhikā
said, “Oh You, You, You, You!” After this They embraced.

This is an example of bhāvocchvāsa. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
always experiencing bhāva within Her heart. But if any
stimulus comes and makes these moods come out from the
heart so that everyone can see, it is called
bhāvocchvāsa. This bhāvocchvāsa is so powerful that it
cannot be checked by anything, just as the flow of a
swift-moving river cannot be checked.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s concluding words to Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka

Now in conclusion, this translator, who aspires for the
service of the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, cites a
verse from Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and humbly
bows at the respected feet of the faithful readers.

ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma vṛndāvanaṁ

ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ pramāṇam amalaṁ premā pum-artho mahān

śrī-caitanya-mahāprabhor matam idaṁ tatrādaro naḥ paraḥ

Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
transcendental abode Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma are my
worshipful objects. The most excellent method of
worshipping Kṛṣṇa is that adopted by the young wives of
Vraja. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the flawless and most
authoritative scripture, and kṛṣṇa-prema is the fifth
and highest achievement of human life beyond mundane

                          120
Siksastaka.txt                                 5/5/2017

religiosity (dharma), accumulation of wealth (artha),
sense enjoyment (kāma) and liberation (mokṣa). It is
thus known as pa—cama-puruṣārtha or parama-puruṣārtha.
This is the opinion of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We have
supreme regard for this conclusion. We have no
inclination or respect for any other cheating opinions.



Table of Contents

Preface

Introduction

Prayers to Lord Caitanya

Verse One

Verse Two

Verse Three

Verse Four

Verse Five

Verse Six

Verse Seven

Verse Eight




Table of Contents

Preface

Introduction

Prayers to Lord Caitanya

Verse One

Verse Two

Verse Three

Verse Four

Verse Five

Verse Six

Verse Seven

Verse Eight




                           121
Siksastaka.txt         5/5/2017




                 122
