Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

Śrī Ślokāmṛtam



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

(2011)



Tags: Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja Śrī
Ślokāmṛtam verses

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja Śrī
Ślokāmṛtam versesttt



* * *




* * *




Śrī Ślokāmṛtam

The Sublime Nectar of Ślokas



Compiled by Bhaktivedānta Giri Mahārāja and others

Under the guidance of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja

and his senior disciples



contents:

Introduction

Upadeśāvalī



1st Division: Sambandha-tattva

Chapter 1 — Guru-tattva

Chapter 2 — Vaiṣṇava-tattva

Chapter 3 — Bhāgavata-tattva - Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

Chapter 4 — Gaura tattva

Chapter 5 — Nityānanda, Advaita, Gadādhara and Śiva

                              1
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

tattvas

Chapter 6 — Kṛṣṇa-tattva

Chapter 7 — Śakti-tattva

Chapter 8 — Jīva-tattva

Chapter 9 — Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva

Chapter 10 — Varṇāśrama-dharma-tattva



2nd Division: Abhidheya-tattva

Chapter 11 — Abhidheya-tattva

Chapter 12 — Overcoming Impediments to Bhakti

Chapter 13 — Śraddhā, Śaranāgati, Humility

Chapter 14 - Sādhu-saṅga

Chapter 15 - Types of Bhakti

Chapter 16 - Sādhana-bhakti-tattva

Chapter 17 - Śravaṇa & Kīrtana

Chapter 18 — Nāma-tattva



3rd Division: Prayojana-tattva

Chapter 19 — Rasa-tattva

Chapter 20 — Bhāva-bhakti-tattva

Chapter 21 — Prema-bhakti-tattva

Chapter 22A — Vipralambha-rasa-tattva

Chapter 22B — Sambhoga-rasa-tattva

Chapter 23 — Rādhā-tattva

Chapter 24 — Rādhā-dāsyam



Additional Chapters

Chapter 25 — Pramāṇa-tattva

Chapter 26 — Other Topics

Chapter 27 — Madhureṇa Samāpayet

Samāpta




                              2
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

Introduction



The purpose of this śloka book is to help the devotees
study, remember and meditate on ślokas. Ślokas are
pathways to the spiritual world. Memorizing and
meditating on ślokas is an integral part of our sādhana-
bhajana. Hearing and reciting them create spiritual
impressions which help one to make progress in bhakti.
The ślokas of the Bhāgavatam are not merely words on
paper; they are all transcendental personalities, and
each and every śloka has its own svarūpa (personal form
and nature). Ślokas are conscious and, like the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, nourish our bhakti and are “food for
the soul—. Therefore, one should not try to master the
ślokas as if they were a mundane object of knowledge.
Rather, one should approach them with humility and
affection, coupled with a mood of service, just as one
would approach Śrī Guru. When we develop a little
affection for someone, we naturally become interestd in
them and they become interested in us. It is a matter of
relationship (sambandha). Similarly, As we pray to the
ślokas and meditate on them, we develop a relationship
with them. As this relationship becomes deeper, the
ślokas gradually unfold and reveal ever-new
realisations. They become familiar like dear friends,
walk into our hearts and enrich our spirtiual life with
a higher taste.

Hari-kathā narrated with the help of these exalted
ślokas causes pure bhakti to appear in the heart of a
faithful hearer. Familiarity with these ślokas improves
our ability to absorb and assimilate hari-kathā.
However, ślokas must be heard in sādhu-saṅga. Only
reading books or hearing recorded lectures is not
sufficient. We must hear directly from the lips of a
sādhu, a high-class Vaiṣṇava. This type of hearing
awards the highest possible benefit. When a Vaiṣṇava
speaks, the sound vibration emanating from his lotus
mouth is not material but purely spiritual - śabda-
brahma. It carries particles of saffron dust directly
from the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī Rādha-Kṛṣṇa and colours
our hearts with kṛṣṇa-prema. Such spiritual sound
vibration is extremely potent and causes a miraculous
transformation of the heart. As the heart becomes
purified, we develop ever-increasing taste, both for the
process of bhakti, and for the object of bhakti - kṛṣṇa-
prema.

My heartly blessings to all the devotees who helped to
compile and bring this book into completion. I pray to
Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that they will make rapid
progress in their Kṛṣṇa consciousness and attain pure
bhakti.

Tridaṇḍi Bhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



Editorial note




                           3
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

Śāstra and the ślokas through which śāstra is expressed,
are an unlimited ocean of nectar. Compiling a śloka book
is like attempting to capture this ocean of nectar in a
jar, which seems an impossible task. Nevertheless, with
a desire to give pleasure to my revered spiritual
master, śrī guru-pāda-padma, oṁ viṣṇupada rūpānugācārya-
varya aṣṭottara śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, I have collected some jewels from this
ocean of ślokas and endeavoured to string them into a
garland as a humble offering for him.

Many other śloka books are available, notably Śrī
Gauḍīya Kaṇṭhahara and “Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Ślokas—. The
question may be raised as to what is the need for
another verse book. What is the speciality of this one?
We are extremely fortunate to directly hear high-class
hari-kathā from a high-class Vaiṣṇava. Quite a few of
the ślokas we so often hear cannot be found in the other
śloka books. Therefore, a need has arisen for a
compilation that would include the particular set of
ślokas used by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. Another feature
is that word-for-word meanings (synonyms) have been
given for most ślokas. We have tried our best to weed
out mistakes and give precise translations while
retaining the essential meaning and mood of the ślokas.

The structure o f this śloka book follows that of Śrī
Gauḍīya Kaṇṭhahāra in that the ślokas are grouped
according to tattva or topics. Chapters are divided into
sections for clarity and ease of use. Additionally, the
book preserves the śāstric convention of presenting the
subject matter in proper sequence according to the three
divisions: sambandha (establishing knowledge of one's
relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa), abhidheya (engaging
oneself in the process to awaken love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa),
and prayojana (attaining the goal of kṛṣṇa-prema).
Headings precede the ślokas to give some indication of
the gist of the ślokas. Short commentaries by Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda and other ācāryas
supplement some of the ślokas in order to illuminate and
expand the deeper meanings of these ślokas.

Śrī Guru plants the seed of spiritual perfection through
harināma and dīkṣā-mantras. However, without repeated
watering in the form of hearing hari-kathā directly from
the lotus lips of a sādhu (a saintly devotee), combined
with a mood of rendering favourable service, nothing can
grow or mature into perfection. A sādhu may recite
rasika, sublime ślokas, which may be difficult for us
conditioned souls to fully understand. Yet these ślokas
are likened to transcendental seeds that will (for the
faithful hearer), flourish one day into fully blossomed
spiritual realisations.

This śloka book is an attempt to reflect the teachings
of our Guru paramparā. As the present ācārya in the line
of spiritual masters coming from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārajā is making
their mercy available to the whole wold. What Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to give through Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī and our Rūpānugā ācāryas, that special mood is
in the heart of Śrī Guru. His only aspiration is to
bestow this mood upon us and thus make our life

                           4
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

successful. This is his real mercy. Śāstra and ślokas
reveal themselves and the confidential moods they convey
to one who associates with, and serves the lotus feet of
Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas.

Because of a publication deadline, this first edition is
not nearly as complete or free from mistakes as we would
like it to be. I therefore beg the readers to forgive
any shortcomings and faults in this compilation.
Whatever is good about this book comes from my Gurudeva,
Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, from
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda, and from our
previous ācāryas. Whatever is lacking or superfluous is
due entirely to my own ineptitude.

Completed on Ramā Ekādaśī (17th August, 2006) during
Kārtika, the month of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. May She be
graciously pleased with this tiny, insignificant service
rendered to Her confidential servitor. On this
auspicious day, let me pray and weep for my Gurudeva’s
mercy. May he appear in my heart, help me to attain
guru-niṣṭhā, and guide me to the supreme spiritual
perfection of pure bhakti, Vraja-prema.



Ever aspiring for the footdust of Śrī Guru and the
Vaiṣṇavas,

Bhaktivedānta Giri




To śuddha-bhāgavata-pravara (the excellent pure devotee)
Srīmad Atīndriya Dāsādhikārī Bhakti-guṇākara

My dear disciple,

I have no words to express how happy I am to receive
this necklace strung by you. Sincerely I will take this
good opportunity to adorn the necks of the pure devotees
of our Gauḍīya disciplic succession (guru-varga) with
this garland. You have personally expressed this thought
in your letter to me. Many people, having taken shelter
of adulterated Gauḍīya bhakti, instead of taking shelter
of service to Śrī Hari, consider Him to be an object to
satisfy their own sense pleasure. I desire that these
people also place this garland upon their necks, for
thus they will also attain knowledge of their svarūpa
and they may also give up animosity towards persons such
as this niṣkiñcana sannyāsī who is lowly and spiritually
bankrupt.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Thākura, manifested His aprākṛṭa-līlā
(spiritual pastimes) by introducing himself as the
sweeper of the marketplace of śrī nāma. Now following in
the footsteps of that great soul, we shall, with
thousands of people, preach with thousands of mouths,
and shall sweep clean this material world. In other
words, through the means of this broom (Śrī Gauḍīya
Kaṇṭhahāra) we shall sweep far away the dirt in the
hearts of the conditioned souls, which is the avidyā of

                           5
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

their aversion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. We shall preach this
transcendental hari-kathā and endeavour to avoid the bad
association of materialistic people. Though the people
of the world may take this mission to be undesirable,
this book will bestow the ultimate auspiciousness upon
them.



Śrī Rādhāṣṭḥamī Tithi, Śrī Caitanyābda, 440

Patita-pāvana-nitya-dāsa nirāśīr nirnamaskriya,

Śrī Siddhānta Sarasvatī




Acknowledgements



This book has been made possible only by the causeless
mercy of my Gurudeva, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja. It has been compiled by his
inspiration and under his guidance, and that of his
senior disciples such as pūjyapāda Bhaktivevedānta
Mādhava Mahārāja and Śrīmatī Śyāmarāṇī dāsī (Jadurāṇī).
Special thanks to our Sanskrit editor pūjyapāda
Bhaktivedānta Bhagavata Mahārāja, to Jaya Gopāla dāsa
brahmacārī for cover and layout design, to pūjyapāda
Bhaktivedānta Daṇḍī Mahārāja for providing the perfect
setting for rendering this service (our countryside Śrī
Raṅganātha Gauḍīya Maṭha near Bangalore) and to
Mādhavendra Purī dāsa brahmacārī, Giridhārī dāsa
brahmacārī, pūjyapāda Bhaktivedānta Viṣṇu-daivata
Mahārāja, and pūjyapāda Bhaktivedānta Muni Mahārāja for
their comments and suggestions which helped to give this
book a more reasonable form and consistency. Numerous
other devotees helped me along with the complex and
painstaking task of compiling a śloka book and getting
it printed. I take the dust of your feet upon my head
and beg forgiveness for my offences.



***



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda’s quotes and any
other materials published by the BBT are (c) 1975
Bhaktivedānta Book Trust. All rights reserved. All such
materials are published pursuant to Title 17 U.S.C.
Section 107, Fair Use Exception.

A disclaimer: I have used (or adapted) translations and
quotes from a wide variety of sources. It is practically
impossible to identify and acknowledge the source of
each and every translation. I apologise to anyone whose
translations I have used without prior permission.
Please forgive this fallen soul for any transgressions
of etiquette I have knowingly or unknowingly committed.

                           6
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017




Upadeśāvalī

(a garland of instructions)

Ācārya Keśarī (the lion-like ācārya) Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī



1. Bhagavat-bhakti is attained by viśrambha-sevā
(intimate service) to the lotus feet of Śrī Guru.

2. Honest service to Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas is
actual guru-sevā.

3. The aṅga of bhakti known as kīrtana is the best and
most complete limb of bhakti.

4. Only through the medium of kīrtana are the other
limbs of bhakti accomplished.

5. Renouncing bad association is actual solitude, and
performing bhajana in the company of sādhus and
Vaiṣṇavas is the actual meaning of solitary bhajana.

6. Preaching hari-kathā always and everywhere is real
hari-kīrtana.

7. To speak hari-kathā always and everywhere or to be
absorbed in speaking about services related to Śrī Hari
is real silence.

8. Performing gaura-bhajana in the rūpānugā mood is the
actual vipralambha-bhajana of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

9. Taking shelter at the feet of a genuine guru, one
should serve Hari.

10. One should never give pain to any living entity by
body, mind, or words.

11. One should maintain his life by honest means.

12. One should always remember that Śrī Bhagavān is one,
not many.

13. Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the one and only
Svayam Bhagavān; He is the possessor of all śakti and
the origin of all avatāras. Rendering service to Him is
the primary duty of all living entities; all other
activities are secondary.

14. Those people who consider that Bhagavān is formless
are atheists, and one should never associate with them.

15. Attaining prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the real ultimate
objective of the jīva.

16. The service of Kṛṣṇa which is performed for His
pleasure with a favorable attitude, which is devoid of
all other desires, which is not covered by jñāna and

                              7
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

karma, and which is performed by the body, mind, words
and all of the senses, is our very life.




Upadeśāvalī

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda

1. “Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam — supreme
victory to the congregational chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s names”
— this is the Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha’s sole object of
worship.

2. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the viṣaya-vigraha or the object of
the devotee’s prema, is the sole enjoyer and all others
are to be enjoyed by Him.

3. Those who don’t perform hari-bhajana are ignorant and
murderers of their own souls.

4. The acceptance of śrī harināma and direct realisation
of Bhagavān are one and the same.

5. Those who equate the demigods with Viṣṇu are unable
to serve Bhagavān.

6. Establishing a printing press to print devotional
books and preaching by organizing nāma-hāṭṭa programs
constitutes genuine service to Śrī Mayapura.

7. We are not doers of good or bad deeds, nor are we
scholars or illiterate. Carrying the shoes of Hari’s
pure devotees as our duty, we are initiates into the
mantra “kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ.”

8. Preaching without proper conduct falls within the
category of karma, mundane activity. Without criticizing
the nature of others, one should correct one’s self —
this is my personal instruction.

9. Serving the Vrajavāsīs who felt great separation from
Kṛṣṇa when He left Vraja to reside in Mathurā is our
supreme constitutional occupation.

10. If we desire to follow an auspicious course in life,
we should disregard popular theories even if thay are
widely acceptable. Rather, we should hear instructions
only from a transcendental source.

11. Life as an animal, bird, insect, or any other of the
countless thousands of species is acceptable, but taking
shelter of deceit is thoroughly improper. Only an honest
person possesses real auspiciousness.

12. Being simple-hearted (saralatā) is synonymous with
Vaiṣṇavism. Servants of a paramahaṁsa Vaiṣṇava should be
simple-hearted, a quality which makes them the topmost
brāhmaṇas. [saralatā — simplicity, freedom from mental
duplicity]

13. Helping to pull conditioned souls away from their

                           8
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

perverted attachment to the material energy is the
greatest act of compassion. If even one soul is rescued
from Mahāmāyā’s fortress, that compassionate act is
infinitely more benevolent than the construction of
unlimited hospitals.

14. We have not come to this world to be construction
workers; we are the bearers of Śrī Caitanyadeva’s
instructions.

15. We will not remain in this world for long, and by
profusely performing hari kīrtana, upon relinquishing
these material bodies we will experience the ultimate
reward of embodied life.

16. The footdust of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, the fulfiller of
Śrī Caitanyadeva’s inner desires, is our lives— sole
desired object.

17. If I were to desist from lecturing about the
Absolute Truth due to being fearful that some listeners
may be displeased, I would be deviating from the path of
Vedic truth and accepting the path of untruth. I would
become one who is inimical to the Vedas, an atheist, and
would no longer possess faith in Bhagavān, the very
embodiment of truth.

18. Kṛṣṇa’s darśana can only be attained through the
medium of the ear as one hears hari-kathā from pure
Vaiṣṇavas; there is no other way.

19. Wherever hari-kathā is being spoken is a holy place.

20. Proper śravaṇa, hearing, is accomplished through the
medium of kīrtana, and this will give one the good
opportunity to practice smaraṇa, remembrance. Then
internal experience of rendering direct service to the
aṣṭakālīya-līlā, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in each of
the eight parts of the day, becomes possible.

21. We should understand that the loud calling out of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names is bhakti.

22. Bhagavān will not accept anything which is offered
by a person who doesn—t chant harināma one-hundred
thousand times daily [one lakh].

23. By sincerely endeavoring to chant harināma without
offences and remaining fixed in chanting constantly,
one’s offences will fade and pure Harināma will arise on
the tongue.

24. As mundane thoughts arise while taking harināma, one
should not become discouraged. A secondary consequence
of taking harināma is that these useless mundane
thoughts will gradually dissipate; therefore one should
not worry about this. By dedicating one’s mind, body,
and words to serving Śrī Nāma and continuing to chant
with great persistence, Śrī Nāma Prabhu will grant one
darśana of His supremely auspicious transcendental form.
And by continuing to chant until one’s anarthas are
fully eradicated, by the power of Śrī Nāma realization
of His form, qualities and pastimes will automatically
arise.

                           9
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017




1st Division: Sambandha-tattva



Knowledge of one’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa



Sambandha-tattva — The principle regarding the mutual
relationship between the Lord, the living entities and
the material energy.

Sambandha-jñāna — knowledge regarding sambandha-tattva.
The word sambandha means connection, relationship, and
binding. The living entities are eternally and
inseparably connected to the Supreme Lord, who is
therefore the true object of relationship (In simple
language, the purpose of existence is to love God). The
cement that binds the jīva and the Lord is Śrī Guru, who
bestows sambandha-jñāna. Therefore Guru-tattva (the
truth concerning Śrī Guru and our relationship with him)
is the foundation of all other tattvas. Without clearly
realising the paramount importance of Śrī Guru, we will
not be able to understand other tattvas properly or make
much progress in bhakti.

The general relationship between the living entities and
Śrī Bhagavān is one of servant and served. But in the
perfectional stage of bhakti, one becomes established in
a specific relationship (rasa) with the Lord either as a
servant, friend, parent, or conjugal lover.




Chapter 1 — Guru-tattva


Guru-niṣṭhā is the backbone of bhakti



1. The Qualities and Qualifications of Śrī Guru 29

2. The Absolute Necessity and Benefits of Accepting Śrī
Guru 41

3. The Dīkṣā and Śikṣā Gurus 50

4. The Qualifications, Proper Attitude & Duties of a
Disciple 54

5. The Hazards of Neglecting or Disobeying Śrī Guru 57

6. The Hazards of Accepting an Unqualified Guru 60

7. Prayers to Śrī Guru 64


                            10
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

8. Dīkṣā — Divine Knowledge 66




1) The Qualities and Qualifications of Śrī Guru



Definition of Śrī Guru

tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

SB 11.3.21/SBG p. 314/BRSB p. 38, 44/Arcana-dīpikā/—
Guru-Devatātmā— p. 11

tasmāt—therefore; gurum—a bona fide Guru; prapadyeta—one
should take shelter of; jijñāsuḥ—being inquisitive;
śreyaḥ uttamam—about the highest good; śābde—in the
Vedas; pare—in the Supreme Lord (Śrī Kṛṣṇa); ca—and;
niṣṇātam—perfectly knowledgeable, fully realised;
brahmaṇi—(in these two aspects) of the Absolute Truth;
upaśama-āśrayam—fixed in detachment from material
desires and conceptions.

Therefore (because we cannot attain real peace or
happiness in this material world), a person who
seriously desires the ultimate spiritual perfection must
seek a bona fide Guru and take shelter of him. The
qualifications of Śrī Guru is that (1) he has fully
realised the Vedic scriptures (śabda-brahma) and (2) the
Supreme Absolute Truth (para-brahma), and (3) for whom
the mundane world holds no charm whatsoever.

One must only accept a Guru who has fully realised both
Śāstra and Kṛṣṇa

tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham

Mundaka Upanisad 1.2.12/JD ch. 6, 20/SBG p. 313

tat-vijñāna-artham—to learn that transcendental subject
matter; saḥ—one; gurum—a spiritual master; eva—
certainly; ābhigacchet—must approach; samit-pāniḥ—
carrying the firewood (of sublime faith); śrotriyam—
expert in understanding the Vedic conclusions; brahma-
niṣṭham—has fully realised the Supreme Absolute Truth,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and is being directly engaged in His service
in the nitya-līlā.

To acquire transcendental knowledge of Śrī Bhagavān, one
must approach a Guru who knows the real import of the
Vedic śāstras and who has fully realised the Supreme
Absolute Truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One should offer him the
firewood of sublime faith for the performance of yajña
(i.e. the yajña of service to Śrī Hari; of assisting Śrī
Guru in the saṅkīrtana yajña; of turning the conditioned
souls into lovers of God).


                           11
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Śrī Guru is characterised by the three essential
qualities of pure bhakti described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
in this key śloka:

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

BRS 1.1.11/CC Madhya 19.167/MS p. 32 /JD ch. 8/BRSB p.
3/BPKG p. 364

anya-abhilāṣitā-śūnyam—devoid of desires other than
those for the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; jñāna—speculative
knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation; karma—fruitive
activities; ādi—artificial renunciation, yoga for mystic
powers, and so on; anāvṛtam—not covered by; ānukūlyena—
favourable; kṛṣṇa-anuśīlanaṁ—cultivation of service to
Kṛṣṇa; bhaktiḥ uttamā—first-class devotional service
(The prefix ānu indicates ānugatya — “under guidance,
following in the footsteps—. Ānu also means “continuous,
uninterrupted, like an unbroken stream of honey—).

Uttama-bhakti, pure devotional service, is the
cultivation of activities that are meant exclusively for
the benefit of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It is the uninterrupted flow
of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, performed through all endeavors
of body, mind and speech, well as through expression of
various spiritual sentiments (bhāvas). It is not covered
by jñāna (speculative knowledge aimed at impersonal
liberation), karma (reward-seeking activity), yoga or
austerities; and it is completely free from all desires
other than the aspiration to bring happiness to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

Editorial note: This śloka is usually quoted as the
definition of pure bhakti. See Chapter 16, Sādhana-
bhakti-tattva, first śloka.

Śrī Guru delivers the jīvas burning in the fire of
material existence

saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka trāṇāya kāruṇya-
ghanāghanatvam

prāptasya kalyāṇa guṇārṇavasya vande guroḥ śrī-
caraṇāravindam

saṁsāra—of material existence; dāva-anala—by the forest
fire; līḍha—afflicted; loka—of the people; trāṇāya—to
deliver; kāruṇya—of mercy; ghanāghana-tvam—the quality
of a condensed cloud; prāptasya—who has obtained;
kalyāṇa—auspicious; guṇa—of qualities; arṇavasya—who is
an ocean; vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—of my
spiritual master; śrī—auspicious; caraṇa-aravindam—unto
the lotus feet.

Just as a raincloud extinguishes a blazing forest fire
by showering its rain upon it, Śrī Gurudeva, by his rain
of divine mercy, delivers the people burning in the fire
of material existence, suffering the threefold miseries
(adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika). I offer prayers
unto the lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva, who manifests when
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy becomes very thick and who is an ocean of
auspicious qualities.

                           12
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Śrī Kṛṣṇa tells Uddhava that Śrī Guru is non-different
from Him

ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān nāvamanyeta karhicit

na martya-buddhyāsūyeta sarva-deva-mayo guruḥ

SB 11.17.27/CC Adi 1.46

ācāryam—the spiritual master; mām—(is equal to) Myself;
vijānīyāt—one should know; nāvamanyeta—one should never
disrespect; karhicit—at any time; na—never; martya-
buddhyā—with the idea of his being an ordinary man;
asūyeta—one should be envious; sarva-deva—of all the
demigods; mayaḥ—having the potencies; guruḥ—the Guru.

Oh Uddhava! Know the ācārya to be as good as Myself. He
is My very svarūpa (My expansion). At no time should
one, out of envy, neglect or disrespect the Guru as an
ordinary mortal, nor should he be considered to have any
faults, because the Guru is the sum total of all the
demigods.

Śrī Guru is simultaneously different and non-different
from Kṛṣṇa

yadyapi āmāra guru - caitanyera dāsa

tathāpi jāniye āmi tāṅhāra prakāśa

CC Ādi 1.44

yadyapi—even though; āmāra—my; guru—spiritual master;
caitanyera—of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu; dāsa—the
servitor; tathāpi—still; jāniye—know; āmi—I; tāṅhāra—of
the Lord; prakāśa—direct manifestation.

Although I know that my Guru is a servitor of Śrī
Caitanya, I also know that He is also a full
manifestation (prakāśa) of the Lord.

Śrī Guru is the direct representative of Śrī Kṛṣṇa

sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair

uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ

kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

Śrī Gurvāṣṭakam 7, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura/
SGG p. 21

sākṣāt—directly; hari-tvena—because of being endowed
with the same qualities as Śrī Hari; samasta—all;
śāstraiḥ—by scriptures; uktaḥ—acknowledged; tathā—thus;
bhāvyate—is considered; eva—also; sadbhiḥ—by great
saintly persons; kintu—indeed; prabhoḥ—of the Lord; yaḥ—
who; priyaḥ—dear; eva—certainly; tasya—of him (the
Guru); vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—of my Guru; śrī—
auspicious; caraṇa-aravindam—unto the lotus feet.


                           13
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

All the scriptures proclaim Śrī Gurudeva to be sākṣāt-
hari-tva, endowed with the potency of Śrī Hari, and he
is also considered by all the great saints to be His
direct representative. Indeed, Śrī Gurudeva is very dear
to the Lord, being His confidential servitor (acintya-
bhedābheda prakāśa-vigraha, the inconceivable different
and non-different worshipable manifestation of the
Lord). I offer prayers unto his lotus feet.

Śrī Gurudeva is very dear to Śrī Mukunda

guru-varaṁ mukunda-preṣṭhatve smara param ajasram

Manaḥ-śikṣā 2

guru-varam—the topmost Guru; mukunda-preṣṭhatve—most
dear to Śrī Mukunda (Kṛṣṇa); smara—meditate; param
ajasram—always, incessantly.

Always remember and meditate on Śrī Gurudeva as very
dear to Śrī Mukunda (because he is very dear to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, being Her confidential servitor).

[In the purport to CC Ādi-līlā 1.46, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Prabhupāda quotes from Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura's commentary called Anubhāṣya:] As mentioned
previously, a disciple should always respect the Guru as
a manifestation of Kṛṣṇa, but at the same time one
should always remember that a Guru is never authorized
to imitate the transcendental pastimes of the Lord.
False “gurus— pose themselves as identical with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in every respect to exploit the sentiments of
their followers, but such impersonalists can only
mislead their disciples, for their ultimate aim is to
become one with the Lord. This is against the principles
of pure devotion. The real Vedic philosophy is acintya-
bhedābheda-tattva, which establishes everything as one
with and different from the Lord. Śrīla Raghunātha dāsā
Gosvāmī confirms that this is the real position of a
bona fide Guru and says one should always think of the
spiritual master in terms of his intimate relationship
with Mukunda.

Śrī Guru serves in the nitya-lilā as a confidential
associate of Śrī Rādhā

nikuñja-yūno rati-keli-siddhyai

yā yālibhir yuktir apekṣanīyā

Śrī Gurvaṣṭakam 6, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

nikuñja-yūnaḥ—of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the youthful Divine
Couple in the groves; rati—conjugal love; keli—of the
pastimes; siddhyai—for the perfection; yā yā—whatever;
ālibhiḥ—by the gopīs; yuktiḥ—arrangements; apekṣaṇīyā—
desirable.

Śrī Gurudeva is always present with the sakhīs and
mañjarīs, arranging for the perfection of yugala-
kiśora’s amorous pastimes (rati-keli) within the kuñjas
of Vraja.

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda: Can one

                           14
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

worship Kṛṣṇa without being under the guidance of Śrī
Guru? Never. Only by getting the favour of the most
favoured is it possible to cultivate Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. When one is not under the guidance of the
most favoured, one will not find anything favourable for
the cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness or for the
pursuit of Kṛṣṇa’s happiness. Our only aim in life is to
cultivate Kṛṣṇa bhakti. This can only be done under the
guidance or instruction of a pure devotee. Śrī
Varṣabhānavī-devī (Śrīmatī Rādhikā) is most favoured by
Kṛṣṇa. Worshipping Her is most favourable for
worshipping Kṛṣṇa. No one is more favourable than Śrī
Rādhā. Those who are very dear to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī are
all our spiritual masters (in the Rūpānuga line). We,
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, are more on the side of Rādhārāṇī
than on the side of Kṛṣṇa. Indeed, Śrī Gurudeva is the
non-different representative of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. (“Guru-
tattva— paper p. 1)

One-pointedness to Śrī Guru and Śrīmatī Rādhikā

tvaṁ gopikā vṛṣa-raves tanayāntike “si

sevādhikāriṇi guro nija-pāda-padme

dāsyaṁ pradāya kuru māṁ vraja-kānane śrī-

rādhāṅghri-sevana-rase sukhinīṁ sukhābdhau

Stava Kalpadruma, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī

tvaṁ—You; asi—you are; gopikā—a young gopī; antike—
nearby; tanayā—the daughter; vṛṣa-raveḥ—of King
Vṛṣabhānu; sevā-adhikāriṇi—You are encharged with Her
service; guro—O Śrī Guru; pradāya—bestowing; dāsyaṁ—
service; nija-pāda-padme—at your own lotus feet; kuru—
make; māṁ—me; vraja-kānane—in the forest of Vraja; śrī-
rādhā-aṅghri—Śrī-Rādhā’s lotus feet; sevana-rase—of the
rasa of service to Her; sukhābdhau—in the ocean of
ecstatic bliss.

O Gurudeva! You are the beloved gopīkā of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and can bestow Her service. Bestowing upon me
the shelter of your lotus feet, kindly make me
blissfully engaged within the ocean of the blissfull
mellows of service to Her lotus feet in the kuñjas of
Vraja.

Śrī Guru is the mercy manifestation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in this
world

brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

CC Mad 19.151/BRSB p. 34/BPKG p. 396

brahmāṇḍa bhramite—wandering in this universe; kona—
some; bhāgyavān—most fortunate; jīva—living being; guru—
of the spiritual master; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; prasāde—by the
mercy; pāya—gets; bhakti-latā—of the creeper of
devotional service; bīja—the seed.

According to their karma, all living entities are

                           15
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

wandering throughout the entire universe. Out of many
millions of wandering living entities, one who is very
fortunate receives the mercy of both Śrī Guru and Kṛṣṇa,
who plant the seed of the bhakti creeper in his heart.

Śrī Guru must be a “Gosvāmī—, master of his senses and
subduer of the six urges

vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ

jihvā-vegam udaropastha-vegam

etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ

sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt

Upadeśāmṛta 1/STB p. 111

vācaḥ—of speech; vegam—the impetus; manasaḥ—of the mind;
krodha—of anger; vegam—urge; jihvā—of the tongue; vegam—
urge; udara-upastha—of the belly and genitals; vegam—
urge; etān—these; vegān—urges; yaḥ—whoever; viṣaheta—can
subdue; dhīraḥ—sober person; sarvām—entire; api—
certainly; imām—this; pṛthivīm—world; saḥ—that
personality; śiṣyāt—he can instruct.

A wise and self-composed person who can subdue the
impetus to speak, the agitation of the mind, the onset
of anger, the vehemence of the tongue, the urge of the
belly and the agitation of the genitals can instruct the
entire world. In other words, all persons may become
disciples of such a self-controlled Guru.

If one is well-versed in kṛṣṇa-tattva, he should be
accepted as Guru

kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya

yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei “guru— haya

CC Mad 8.128/BRSB p. 38/JD ch. 1/Arcana-dīpikā p. 118

kibā—whether; vipra—a brāhmaṇa; kibā—whether; nyāsī—a
sannyāsī; śūdra—a śūdra; kene—why; naya—not; yei—anyone
who; kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā—a knower of kṛṣṇa-tattva; sei—
that person; guru—the spiritual master; haya—is.

Whether one is a brāhmaṇa, a sannyāsī, a śūdra or
whatever, if he is fully conversant with kṛṣṇa-tattva,
he is eligible to become a Guru.

kibā varṇī, kibā śramī, kibā varṇāśrama hīna

kṛṣṇa tattva yei, sei ācārya pravīṇa

āsala kathā chādi' bhāi varṇe ye kare ādara

asad-guru kari' tā 'ra vinaṣṭa pūrvāpara

Prema-vivarta

One who is expert in the science of Kṛṣṇa, whatever
social order he may belong to, including śūdra and
outcaste, is to be accepted as an ācārya. One who

                           16
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

ignores this principle and accepts a Guru solely on the
basis of social position will be ruined.

A Vaiṣṇava, even if born a śūdra, can be the ācārya of
all varṇas because he is dear to Kṛṣṇa

vipra kṣatriya vaiśyās ca guravaḥ śūdra janmanām

śūdrāś ca guravas teṣāṁ trayāṇāṁ bhagavat-priyāḥ

Pādma Purāṇa

A brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya or vaiśya can be the Guru for the
śūdra class, but a Vaiṣṇava, even if born a śūdra, can
be the Guru of these higher varṇas, because he is so
dear to the Lord.

An ācārya teaches by personal example, and only one who
has such a Guru can know the truth

ācāryavān puruṣo veda

Candogya Upaniṣad 6.14.2/JD ch 20

ācārya—one who teaches by example, Śrī Guru; vān—one who
has or possesses; puruṣaḥ—a person; veda—knows.

Only one whose Guru is an ācārya can know the truth;
only one who follows the ācārya (and learns directly
from his ācāra - behaviour) can know things in truth.

An ācārya is he whose behaviour reflects his realisation

ācinoti yaḥ śāstrārtham ācāre sthāpayaty api

svayam ācarate yasmād ācāryas tena kīrttitaḥ

Vāyu Purāṇa

An ācārya is one who fully understands the conclusions
of the revealed scriptures and whose behavior reflects
his deep realisation. He is a living example because he
teaches the meaning of the scriptures both by word and
deed.

upanīya tu yaḥ śisyaṁ vedam adhyāpayed dvijaḥ

sakalpaṁ sa-rahasyaṁ ca tam ācāryaṁ pracakṣate

Manu-saṁhitā 2.140

An ācārya is not one who only confers the sacred thread.
He trains his disciples in sacrifice and teaches them
the confidential meaning of the Vedas. Such a spiritual
master is an ācārya according to saintly authorities.

Example is better than precept

yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhas tat tad evetaro janaḥ

sa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute lokas tad anuvartate

BG 3.21


                           17
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

yat yat—whatever; ācarati—he does; śreṣṭhaḥ—a
respectable leader; tat—that; tat—and that alone; eva—
certainly; itaraḥ—common; janaḥ—person; saḥ—he; yat—
whichever; pramāṇam—example; kurute—does perform; lokaḥ—
all the world; tat—that; anuvartate—follows in the
footsteps.

Whatever a great man does, common men follow. Whatever
standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world
pursues.

One who is perfect in both practice and preaching is the
Guru of the entire universe

āpane ācare keha, nā kare pracāra

pracāra karena keha, nā karena ācāra

“ācāra—, “pracāra— - nāmera karaha dui kārya

tumi sarva-guru, tumi jagatera ārya

CC Antya 4.102-3

āpane—personally; ācare—behaves; keha—someone; nā kare
pracāra—does not do preaching work; pracāra karena—does
preaching work; keha—someone; nā karena ācāra—does not
behave strictly according to the principles; ācāra
pracāra—behaving well and preaching; nāmera—of the holy
name; karaha—you do; dui—two; kārya—works; tumi—you;
sarva-guru—everyone’s spiritual master; tumi—you;
jagatera ārya—the most advanced devotee within this
world.

(Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī said to Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura:)
Some practice nāma-bhajana but do not preach the glories
of śrī-harināma, others preach but do not practice. You,
however, perform both duties to śrī-harināma and are
perfect in both practice and preaching. Hence you are
the jagat Guru and the foremost personality within this
world, for you practice what you preach.

The four defects do not occur in śāstra or in Śrī Guru

bhrama, pramāda, vipralipsā, karaṇāpāṭava

ārṣa-vijña-vākye nāhi doṣa ei saba

CC Ādi 2.86

bhrama—mistakes; pramāda—illusion; vipralipsā—cheating;
karaṇa-apāṭava—imperfectness of the senses; ārṣa—of the
authoritative sages; vijña-vākye—in the wise speech;
nāhi—not; doṣa—faults; ei—these; saba—all.

Mistakes and misconceptions (bhrama), illusions
(pramāda), cheating (vipralipsā) and defective
perception (karaṇa-apāṭava) do not occur in the sayings
of genuine sādhus [In other words, Śrī Guru is free from
material defects and therefore everything he does and
says is perfect].




                           18
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

A Guru must be a Vaiṣṇava

ṣaṭ-karma-nipuno vipro mantra-tantra viśāradaḥ

avaiṣṇavo gurur na syād vaiṣṇavaḥ śvapaco guruḥ

HBV/GKH 1.17/Arcana-dīpikā p. 118

ṣaṭ-karma—in the six prescribed duties of a brāhmaṇa;
nipuṇaḥ—expert; vipraḥ—a brāhmaṇa; mantra—in the matter
of hymns and mantras; tantra—and rules and regulations;
viśāradaḥ—very skilled; avaiṣṇavaḥ—not a devotee of
Kṛṣṇa; guruḥ—a spiritual master; na—not; syāt—may
become; vaiṣṇavaḥ—a devotee of Kṛṣṇa; śva-pacaḥ—even
though born in a family of dog-eaters; guruḥ—may become
a Guru.

A brāhmaṇa, though expert in the six kinds of duties
(performance of yajña, sacrifice, studying the śāstra
and teaching it to others, giving in charity and
accepting gifts from others, the skillful recitation of
mantras, and the use of tantras), cannot be accepted as
Guru if he is not a Vaiṣṇava. On the other hand, if a
person is born in the family of caṇdalas (dog eaters)
but is devotedly engaged in the worship of Śrī Viṣṇu, he
is fit to be accepted as Guru according to the śāstric
injunction.

A Guru must be a devotee

mahā-bhāgavata-śreṣṭho brāhmaṇo vai gurur nṛṇām

sarveṣām eva lokānāṁ asau pūjyo yathā hariḥ

mahā-kula-prasūto 'pi sarva-yajñeṣu dīkṣitaḥ

sahasra-śākhādhyāyī ca na guruḥ syād avaiṣṇavaḥ

Padma Purāṇa/HBV 53-54/CC Madhya 24.330 pt

mahā-bhāgavata-śreṣṭhaḥ—the best of great devotees;
brāhmaṇaḥ—a brāhmaṇa; vai—indeed; guruḥ—spiritual
master; nṛṇām—of men; sarveṣām—all; eva—and; lokānām—
people; asau—he; pūjyaḥ—to be worshiped; yathā—as; hariḥ
—Lord Kṛṣṇa; mahā-kula-prasūtaḥ—born in a noble family;
api—also; sarva-yajñeṣu—in all yajnas; dīkṣitaḥ—
initiated; sahasra-śākhādhyāyī—learned in a thousand
branches of the Vedas; ca—and; na—not; guruḥ—a spiritual
master; syāt—is; avaiṣṇavaḥ—not a devotee of the Lord.

A brāhmaṇa who is a great devotee of the Supreme Lord is
the spiritual master of all human beings. Everyone
should worship him as if he were Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself.
Conversly, a person born in an aristocratīc family,
initiated in all yajñas, and learned in a thousand
branches of the Vedas, but is not a devotee of Kṛṣṇa,
cannot be a genuine spiritual master.

The qualities of a genuine Guru

kṛpā-sindhuḥ su-saṁpūrnaḥ sarva-sattvopakārakaḥ

nispṛhaḥ sarvataḥ siddhaḥ sarva-vidyā-viśāradaḥ


                            19
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

sarva-saṁśaya-saṁchettā 'nalaso gurur āḥṛtah

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 1.45,46 quoted from Viṣṇu-smṛti
Vacana

kṛpā-sindhuḥ—an ocean of mercy; su-sampūrṇaḥ—completely
satisfied, contented; sarva-sattva—of all living beings;
upakārakaḥ—acting for the welfare; nispṛhaḥ—desireless;
sarvataḥ—in all ways; siddhaḥ—perfect; sarva-vidyā-
viśāradaḥ—expert in all knowledge; sarva-saṁśaya-
sañcchettā—able to cut apart all doubts; analasaḥ—not
lazy; guruḥ—spiritual master; āhṛtaḥ—is called.

One who is an ocean of mercy, who is completely self-
satisfied, who acts for the welfare of all souls, who is
desireless (free from lust), who is perfect in all
respects, who is well-versed in the scriptures (and
therefore knows Kṛṣṇa-tattva), who can cut apart all the
doubts of his disciples, and who is free from lethargy
is known as a genuine Guru.

A qualified Guru and disciple are very rare

śravaṇayāpi bahubhir yo na labhyaḥ

śṛṇvanto —pi bahavo yaṁ na vidyuḥ

āścaryo vaktā kuśalo —sya labdhā

āścaryo —sya jñātā kuśalānuśiṣṭaḥ

Kathā Upaniṣad 1.2.7

Very few have the great fortune of hearing about the
soul. Among the few who hear about it, most cannot
understand it, because it is hard to find a Guru who is
a genuine seer of the truth. Such a qualified, genuine
Guru, is very rare. Only those who follow his teachings
can realise the truth and become expert in the science
of bhakti. Such bona fide disciples are also very rare.



A bona fide Guru has no fear of material existence and
is everyone’s well-wisher

sa vai priyatamaś cātmā yato na bhayam aṇv api

iti veda sa vai vidvān yo vidvān sa gurur hariḥ

SB 4.29.51/GKH (P)

saḥ—He; ātmā—the Supersoul; vai—certainly; priyatamaḥ—
the most dear; ca—also; yataḥ—on account of Him; na—
never; bhayam—fear; aṇu—little; api—even; iti veda—(one
who) knows; saḥ—he; vai—certainly; vidvān—educated; yaḥ—
he who; vidvān—enlightened; saḥ—he; guruḥ—spiritual
master; hariḥ—(not different from) Śrī Hari.

Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
Supersoul and friend of all living beings, one who is
engaged in His devotional service has not the least fear
or disturbance in material existence. One who knows this
secret is actually enlightened. Such a bonafide

                           20
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

spiritual master is qualitatively one with Kṛṣṇa and is
His direct representative in the material world.

Śrī Guru is āśrayā Bhagavān (servitor Bhagavān, abode of
bhakti)

ayatim niyatiṁ caiva (or: utpattiṁ pralayaṁ caiva)

bhūtānam agatiṁ gatim

vetti vidyām avidyāṁ ca

sa vācyo bhagavān iti

Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.78/BB 1.5.37

ayatim—inauspicious; niyatim—auspicious; ca—also; eva—
certainly; (utpattiṁ—creation; pralayaṁ—destruction;
caiva—also indeed); bhūtānām—of living entities; agatim—
ominous destination; gatim—ultimate destination; vetti—
knows; vidyām—knowledge; avidyām—ignorance; ca—and; saḥ—
he; vācyaḥ—is designated; bhagavān—the Supreme Lord; iti
— thus.

A person who knows (1) the truth about knowledge
(spiritual reality) and ignorance (māyā); (2) the
auspicious, ultimate spiritual goal (sādhya) and the
inauspicious, conditioned material existence of the
living entities; and (3) the process of creation and the
destruction, only such a personality can be addressed as
“bhagavān”.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Original Guru of the whole world

vande kṛṣṇaṁ jagad-guruṁ

Śrī Garga saṁhitā/Nārada Pañcarātra

My obeisances to Kṛṣṇa who is the Guru of the whole
world.



However, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the Prema Guru of Śrī Kṛṣṇa

rādhikāra prema guru, āmi śiṣya naṭa

sadā āmā nānā nṛtye nācāya udbhaṭa

CC Ādi 4.124

rādhikāra—of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; prema—ecstatic
transcendental love; guru—teacher; āmi—I; śiṣya—
disciple; naṭa—dancer; sadā—always; āmā—Me; nānā—
various; nṛtye—in dances; nācāya—causes to dance;
udbhaṭa—novel.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “The prema of Rādhikā is My Guru, and I
am Her dancing student. Her prema makes Me dance various
novel dances.”



                           21
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


2) The Absolute Necessity and Benefits of Accepting Śrī
Guru



Bhagavān must be worshiped through Śrī Guru

prathaman tu guruṁ pūjyāṁ tataś caiva mamārcanam

kurvan siddhim avāpnoti hy anyathā niṣphalaṁ bhavet

HBV 4.344/Manaḥ-śikṣā 2 pt/GKH (P)

prathamam—firstly; tu—indeed; gurum—Śrī Guru; pūjyām—
should be worshipped; ca eva—and certainly; tataḥ—
thereafter; mama arcanam—My worship; hi—certainly;
kurvan—so doing; avāpnoti—one attains; siddhim—
perfection; anyathā—otherwise; bhavet—(one’s life) will
become; niṣphalaṁ—fruitless.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “One must always worship one’s Guru
first and only then worship Me. If one follows this
process properly, one will naturally attain all
perfection, but if one neglects this process everything
will be fruitless.”

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
(henceforward referred to as Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja):
“The first and foremost limb of bhakti is to serve Śrī
Guru and obey his orders.” (lec. 02.07.06 HK) “In the
histories of Upamanyu and Aruṇi, and also in the history
of Sudāmā and Kṛṣṇa, we find miraculous results as the
fruit of surrender to Śrī Gurudeva. There is no
possibility of attaining bhakti if we do not totally
follow our Gurudeva. One must be in ānugatya.” (“Guru-
Devatātmā—)

The essence of śāstra is revealed only to he who has
unflinching faith in the lotus feet of Śrī Guru and who
is equally devoted to both Guru and Kṛṣṇa

yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.23/BRSB p. 54/JD ch. 6, 12/BPKG
pp. 3, 377

yasya—of whom; deve—in the Supreme Lord; parā—
transcendental; bhaktiḥ—devotion; yathā-deve—as in the
Lord; tathā—in the same way; gurau—in the spiritual
master; tasya—to him; ete—these; kathitāḥ—as described;
hi—certainly; arthāḥ—the imports; prakāsante—are
revealed; mahātmanaḥ—of those great souls.

The conclusive essence of the scriptures is revealed
only to those great souls who have transcendental
devotion (parā-bhakti) unto Śrī Bhagavān and equal
devotion for Śrī Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Parā bhakti here refers to
bhakti which is under the direct shelter of Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī (because it is under the shelter of parā-śakti

                           22
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

- Śrīmatī Rādhikā).

It is everyone’s foremost duty in life to approach and
serve a Sad-Guru

sarva-deśa-kāla-daśāya janera kartavya

guru-pāśe sei bhakti praṣṭavya, śrotavya

CC Madhya 25.122

sarva—all; deśa—countries; kāla—times; daśāya—and in
circumstances; janera—of every man; kartavya—the duty;
guru-pāśe—in the care of a spiritual master; sei—that;
bhakti—devotional service; praṣṭavya—to be inquired;
śrotavya—and to be heard.

[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed Sanātana Gosvāmī:]
It is therefore the duty of every man—in every country,
in every circumstance and at all times—to approach a
bona fide spiritual master, question him about
devotional service and listen to him explain the
process.

Witout the medium of Guru the devotee will wither just
like a lotus out of water

nārāyaṇo “pi vikṛtiṁ yāti guroḥ pracyutasya durbuddheḥ

kamalaṁ jalād apetaṁ śoṣayati ravir na poṣayati

Jaladākhyāna Saṁhitā/MS 2, pt/Arcana-dīpikā p. 118/KGH
(P)

nārāyaṇaḥ—Lord Nārāyaṇa; api—similarly; vikṛtim—
alienated; yāti—becomes; guroḥ—Śrī Guru; pracyutasya—who
has left; durbuddheḥ—from that evil minded person;
kamalam—the lotus; jalāt—from the water; apetam—
detached; śoṣayati—dries; raviḥ—the sun; na poṣayati—
does not nourish it.

When a lotus flower is situated in water, the rays of
the sun cause it to blossom. The same sun, however, will
wither a lotus which is not situated in water. In this
example the disciple is compared to the lotus, Śrī Guru
to water, and the Supreme Lord to the sun.

Bhagavān is easily attained by service to Śrī Guru

sarva-sādhana-mukhyā hi guru-sevā sadādṛtā

yayā bhaktir bhagavati hy añjasā syāt sukhāvahā

Pañcaratra (Śrī Satvata Tantra) 4.57

sarva—of all; sādhana—activities of devotional service;
mukhyā—the most important; hi—indeed; guru-sevā—service
to the spiritual master; sadā—always; ādṛtā—respected;
yayā—by which; bhaktiḥ—devotional service; bhagavati—
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hi—indeed;
añjasā—quickly; syāt—is; sukhāvahā—easily and happily
attained.

Of all the activities of sādhana the most important is

                           23
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

service to Śrī Guru. By that service devotion to
Bhagavān is quickly, easily, and happily attained.

Accepting Śrī Guru as one’s life and soul is the only
means of being released from māyā and attaining pure
bhakti

bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo —smṛtiḥ

tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ

bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā

SB 11.2.37/CC Madhya 20.119, 24.127, 25.138/BR 2.13/BPKG
pp. 199, 371/—Guru-Devatātmā—

bhayam—fear; dvitīya—in something seemingly different
from the Lord, or in the idea of being an independent
enjoyer ; abhiniveśataḥ—because of absorption; syāt—will
arise; īśāt—from the Supreme Lord; apetasya—for one who
has turned away; viparyayaḥ—misidentification; asmṛtiḥ—
forgetfulness; tat—of the Lord; māyayā—by the deluding
potency, māyā; ataḥ—therefore; budhaḥ—an intelligent
person; ābhajet—should worship fully; tam—Him; bhaktyā—
with devotion; ekayā—unalloyed; īśam—his lord; guru-
devatā—his divine spiritual master; ātmā—as his very
life-and-soul.

Fear arises when a living entity misidentifies himself
as the material body because of absorption in māyā, the
external, deluding potency of the Lord. When the living
entity thus turns away from the Supreme Lord, he also
forgets his own constitutional position as a servant of
the Lord. Therefore, an intelligent person should engage
unflinchingly in the unalloyed devotional service of the
Lord, under the guidance of a sad-guru, whom he should
accept as his worshipable deity and as his very life and
soul.

At the lotus feet of Śrī Guru, divine relationship
(sambandha), practice (abhidheya), and and the ultimate
objective (prayojana), are all attained

tatra bhāgavatān dharmān śikṣed gurv-ātma-daivataḥ

amāyayānuvṛttyā yais tuṣyed ātmātma-do hariḥ

SB 11.3.22/BRSB p. 44, 51

tatra—there (in the association of the spiritual
master); bhāgavatān dharmān—the knowledge of devotional
service; śikṣet—should learn; guru-ātma-daivataḥ—he for
whom the Guru is his very life and soul; amāyayā—without
deceit; anuvṛttyā—by faithful service; yaiḥ—by which
(devotional knowledge); tuṣyet—can be satisfied; ātmā—
the Supreme Soul; ātma-daḥ—who bestows His own self;
hariḥ—Śrī Hari.

The divine practices of pure devotional service that
please Śrī Hari, who gives Himself to His pure devotees,
will be learned by continuously serving Śrī Guru with
full sincerity, knowing him to be one’s dearmost well-

                            24
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

wishing friend and the supremely worshipable embodiment
of Śrī Hari.

One must accept Śrī Guru and serve him with great faith
and devotion

guru-śuśrūṣayā bhaktyā sarva-labdhārpaṇena ca

saṅgena sādhu-bhaktānām īśvarārādhanena ca

śraddhayā tat-kathāyāṁ ca kīrtanair guṇa-karmaṇām

tat-pādāmburuha-dhyānāt tal-liṅgekṣārhaṇādibhiḥ

SB 7.7.30-31/GKH (P)

guru-śuśrūṣayā—by rendering service to the bona fide
spiritual master; bhaktyā—with faith and devotion; sarva
—all; labdha—of material gains; arpaṇena—by offering (to
Śrī Guru, or to Kṛṣṇa through the Guru); ca—and; saṅgena
—by the association; sādhu-bhaktānām—of devotees and
saintly persons; īśvara—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ārādhanena—by the worship; ca—and; śraddhayā—
with great faith; tat-kathāyām—in discourses about the
Lord; ca—and; kīrtanaiḥ—by glorifications; guṇa-karmaṇām
—of the transcendental qualities and activities of the
Lord; tat—His; pāda-amburuha—on the lotus feet; dhyānāt—
by meditation; tat—His; liṅga—forms (Deities); īkṣa—
observing; arhaṇa-ādibhiḥ—and by worshiping.

One must accept the bona fide Guru and render service
unto him with great faith and devotion. Whatever one has
in one’s possession should be offered to Guru, and one
must be in the association of saintly devotees. One
should worship the Lord, hear the glories of the Lord
with faith, glorify the transcendental qualities and
activities of the Lord, always meditate on the Lord’s
lotus feet, and worship the Deity of the Lord strictly
according to the injunctions of śāstra and Guru.

Ānugatya - Kṛṣṇa never forsakes one who takes shelter of
the Vaiṣṇavas, others live in vain

āśraya laiyā bhaje, tare kṛṣṇa nāhi tyaje, āra saba mare
akāraṇa

Ṭhākura Vaiṣṇava-Pada, BVT/SGG p. 30

One who performs bhajana under the shelter of saintly
devotees, who are the abode of love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is
never neglected by Kṛṣṇa; everyone else lives in vain.
One must be in ānugatya, under guidance of Śrī Guru, in
order to do bhajana.

The first and foremost of the 64 limbs of Bhakti is to
take shelter of Śrī Guru

guru-pādāśraya, dīkṣā, gurur sevana

sad-dharma-śikṣā-pṛcchā, sādhu-mārgānugamana

CC Mad 22.115

guru-pāda-āśraya—taking shelter at the feet of a bona

                           25
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

fide Guru; dīkṣā—accepting dīkṣā from; gurur sevana—
service to the Guru; sat-dharma-śikṣā—accepting śikṣā,
instructions and guidance in the transcendental process
of devotional service; pṛcchā—making inquiries; sādhu-
mārga—the path of transcendental devotional service;
anugamana—following strictly.

On the path of regulative devotional service, one must
observe the following items: (1) One must take shelter
of a bona fide spiritual master (accepting him as one’s
life and soul). (2) One must accept dīkṣā (initiation)
from him. (3) One must serve him faithfully. (4) One
must receive śikṣā (instructions on bhajana) from the
Guru and make inquiries in order to learn about
devotional service. (5) One must strictly follow in the
footsteps of the previous ācāryas as well as follow the
instructions of one’s own Guru.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: To worship means to be under
guidance. The first flower of pūjā is ānugatya. One who
does not worship/render service to Gurudeva by body,
mind and words, his service/worship of Kṛṣṇa is useless.
The connection will be cut off, no light will come
through. Give up your svatantra (independent mood). Do
that service by which Gurudeva is pleased. By pleasing
Gurudeva, Kṛṣṇa will be worshiped. This is guru-pūjā.
Offering your own heart to Gurudeva is real guru-pūjā.
(25.07.91, Guru-Purṇima at Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha)

One’s body is the boat, Guru is the captain and Śāstras
are the favourable winds; one who fails to take
advantage of this is a killer of his own soul

nṛ-deham ādyaṁ su-labhaṁ su-durlabhaṁ

plavaṁ su-kalpaṁ guru-karṇadhāram

mayānukūlena nabhasvateritaṁ

pumān bhavābdhiṁ na taret sa ātma-hā

SB 11.20.17/STB p. 23

nṛ—human; deham—body; ādyam—the source of all favourable
results; su-labham—effortlessly obtained; su-durlabham—
although rarely obtained; plavam—a boat; su-kalpam—
extremely well suited for its purpose; guru—the Guru;
karṇa-dhāram—as the captain of the boat (or the
chastiser who pulls one by the ear); mayā—by Me;
anukūlena—with favorable; nabhasvatā—winds; īritam—
impelled; pumān—a person; bhava—of material existence;
abdhim—the ocean; na—does not; taret—cross over; saḥ—he;
ātma-hā—the killer of his own soul.

The human body, which can award the ultimate benefit of
life, is automatically obtained by the laws of nature,
although it is very rarely achieved. This human body is
a perfectly constructed boat, the Guru is the captain,
(sādhu-saṅga is the sail) and the instructions of Kṛṣṇa
in the form of hari-kathā and śāstra are the favourable
winds impelling it towards spiritual perfection.
Considering all these advantages, a human being who does
not utilize his human life to cross the ocean of
material existence (and attain the ultimate perfection

                           26
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

of pure bhakti) must be considered the killer of his own
soul.

Śrī Guru and his Grace - By the mercy of Guru one gets
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy

yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo

yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto —pi

Śrī Gurvaṣṭakam 8, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

prasādāt—by the grace; yasya—of whom (Śrī Guru);
prasādaḥ—(one receives) the mercy; bhagavat—of Kṛṣṇa;
aprasādāt—without the grace; yasya—of Him; na—(there is)
no; gatiḥ—goal, spiritual perfection; kutaḥ api—(to be
attained) anywhere.

By the mercy of the Śrī Guru one receives the mercy of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Without the grace of Śrī Guru, one cannot
attain the goal of spiritual perfection.

One is bitten by time and burned by the flames of
repeated birth and death; therefore one must take
shelter of Śrī Guru

trāyasva bho jagannātha guro saṁsāra-vahninā

dagdhaṁ māṁ kāla-daṣṭaṁ ca tvām ahaṁ śaraṇaṁ gataḥ

Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilasa 101, Gopal Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmi/SGG p.
7

trāyasva—save; bhaḥ—O; jagannātha—master of the worlds;
guro—O spiritual master; saṁsāra-vahninā—by the fire of
repeated birth and death; dagdham—burned; mām—me; kāla—
by time; daṣṭam—bitten; ca—and; tvām—you; aham—I;
śaraṇam—to the shelter; gataḥ—gone.

O Gurudeva, master of the worlds, please rescue me, who
am bitten by time and burned by the flames of repeated
birth and death. I surrender to you and take shelter of
you.

Just as a person whose head is on fire must run towards
water, one must run to Śrī Guru for relief from the
burning fire of material existence

janana-maraṇādi-saṁsāranala-santapto dīpta-śirā jala-
rāśim iva upahāra-pāniḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭhaṁ gurum
upasṛtya tam anusarati

Vedānta-sāra 11/GKH 1.6

Just as a person whose head is afire must run towards
water, someone burning in the fire of material existence
(the saṁsāra cycle of birth, death, old age, and
disease) must run to Śrī Guru for relief. Such a Guru
must be fixed in the Absolute Truth and well-versed in
the scriptures. One should approach him with all that is
needed for sacrifice, submit oneself to him, and be
ready to carry out his every instruction.2

Sevā to Śrī Guru is the root cause of attaining

                           27
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

transcendental ecstasy

yat-sevayā bhagavataḥ kūṭa-sthasya madhu-dviṣaḥ

rati-rāso bhavet tīvraḥ pādayor vyasanārdanaḥ

durāpā hy alpa-tapasyā sevā vaikuṇṭha-vartmasu

SB 3.7.19-20/MS 7 pt

yat—to whom; sevayā—by service; bhagavataḥ—of Bhagavān
(both Guru and Kṛṣṇa); kūṭa-sthasya—of the unchangeable,
fixed; madhu-dviṣaḥ—the enemy of the Madhu demon; rati-
rāsaḥ—attachment in different relationships; bhavet—
develops; tīvraḥ—highly ecstatic; pādayoḥ—of the feet;
vyasana—distresses; ardanaḥ—vanquishing; durāpā—rarely
obtainable; hi—certainly; alpa-tapasaḥ—of one whose
austerity is meager; sevā—service; vaikuṇṭha—Vaikuṇṭha;
vartmasu—on the path of.

By serving the feet of Śrī Guru, one is able to develop
transcendental ecstasy in the service of Śrī Bhagavān,
who is the enemy of the Madhu demon and the remover of
His pure devotees— suffrings. Devotional service unto
him vanquishes one’s material distress. For those whose
austerity and pious credits are very meager, it is
extremely rare to obtain the service of Śrī Guru who is
very dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



By the mercy Guru one can taste the sweetness of both
Gaura and Kṛṣṇa līlā

caitanya līlā-amṛta-pūra, kṛṣṇa-līlā-sukarpūra,

duhe mili' haya sumādhurya

sādhu-guru-prasāde, tāhā yei āsvāde,

sei jāne mādhurya prācurya

CC Madhya 25.277

caitanya-līlā amṛta-pūra—the pastimes of Lord Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu are full of nectar; kṛṣṇa-līlā su-
karpūra—the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa are exactly like
camphor; duhe mili——the two meeting; haya—become; su-
mādhurya—very, very palatable; sādhu-guru-prasāde—by the
mercy of sad-guru and Vaiṣṇavas; tāhā—that; yei—anyone
who; āsvāde—relishes this palatable nectar; sei jāne—he
can understand; mādhurya-prācurya—the intense sweetness
of devotional service.

The pastimes of Śrī Caitanya are the abode of nectarean
love of Godhead. They are like thick condensed milk. The
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are like camphor. When these are
combined they are very sweet. By the mercy of a sad-guru
and the Vaiṣṇavas one can taste that intense sweetness
unlimitedly.



Faithful service to one’s Guru pleases Kṛṣṇa the most

                             28
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


nāham ijyā-prajātibhyāṁ tapasopaśamena vā

tuṣyeyaṁ sarva-bhūtātmā guru-śuśrūṣayā yathā

SB 10.80.34

na—not; aham—I; ijyā—by ritual worship; prajātibhyām—the
higher birth of brāhmaṇa initiation; tapasā—by
austerity; upaśamena—by self-control; vā—or; tuṣyeyam—
can be satisfied; sarva—of all; bhūta—beings; ātmā—the
Soul; guru—to one’s Guru; śuśrūṣayā—by faithful service;
yathā—as.

Kṛṣṇa says, “I, the Soul of all beings, am not as
satisfied by arcana (deity worship), brahminical
initiation, tapasya or self-discipline as I am by
faithful service rendered to one’s Guru.”

Being pleased with a disciple’s service to Śrī Guru
Kṛṣṇa reveals Himself

nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo

na medhayā na bahunā śrutena

yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas

tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanūṁ svām

Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.2.23/Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.2.3/JD ch. 10/
GG Intro

nāyam—mundane knowledge; ātmā—knowledge of the Self;
pravacanena—by discussing; labhyaḥ—comprehensible; na—
not; medhayā—by mental power; na—not; bahunā—much;
śrutena—by hearing; yam—for such a person; eva—indeed;
eṣaḥ—this knowledge; vṛṇute—is concealed; tena—by Him;
labhyaḥ—comprehensible; tasya—His; eṣaḥ—this; ātmā—
knowledge of Himself; vivṛṇute—He reveals; tanūm—His own
form; svām—by His own will.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Abolute Truth,
is beyond all sense perception, beyond intellectual or
philsophical speculation, beyond one’s intelligence or
mental powers. Kṛṣṇa reveals Himself only to whom He
chooses to reveal Himself. Only that person can realise
Him, no one else. Being pleased with that person’s
attitude of service (towards Śrī Guru), Kṛṣṇa manifests
to him His own form.3

Pure devotional service is attained by careful worship
of Śrī Guru

evaṁ gurūpāsanayaika-bhaktyā

vidyā-kuṭhāreṇa śitena dhīraḥ

vivṛścya jīvāśayam apramattaḥ

sampadya cātmānam atha tyajāstram

SB 11.12.24/GKH 1.59


                           29
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

evam—thus (with the knowledge I have given you); guru—of
the spiritual master; upāsanayā—developed by worship;
eka—unalloyed; bhaktyā—by loving devotional service;
vidyā—of knowledge; kuṭhāreṇa—by the sword; śitena—
sharp; dhīraḥ—one who is steady by knowledge; vivṛścya—
cutting down; jīva—of the living entity; āśayam—the
subtle body (filled with designations created by the
three modes of material nature); apramattaḥ—being very
careful in spiritual life; sampadya—achieving; ca—and;
ātmānam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atha—then;
tyaja—you should give up; astram—the means by which you
achieved perfection.

With steady intelligence you should develop unalloyed
devotional service by careful worship of the spiritual
master, and with the sharp sword of transcendental
knowledge you should cut off the subtle material
covering of the soul. Upon realising Bhagavān, you
should then lay down the sword of knowledge (and accept
only the path of pure bhakti).

Devotion to Śrī Bhagavān and devotion to Śrī Guru are
corrolaries

yāvanti bhagavad-bhakter aṅgāni kathitānīha

prāyas tāvanti tad-bhakta-bhakter api budhā viduḥ

BRS 1.2.219/MS 7 pt

The wise recognise that almost all the practices of
devotion for the Supreme Lord (described in BRS) also
apply automatically to the devotee of Bhagavān (Śrī
Guru).

Thus ends 2) The Absolute Necessity and Benefits of
Accepting Śrī Guru




3) The Dīkṣā and Śikṣā Gurus



Śrī Guru may manifest in more than one form

cintāmaṇir jayati somagirir gurur me

śikṣā-guruś ca bhagavān śikhi-piñcha-mauliḥ

yat-pāda-kalpataru-pallava-śekhareṣu

līlā-svayaṁvara-rasaṁ labhate jayaśrīḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Karṇāmṛta, Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura/CC Ādi 1.57

cintāmaṇiḥ jayati—all glory to Cintāmaṇi; soma-giriḥ—
Somagiri; guruḥ—spiritual master; me—my; śikṣā-guruḥ—
instructing spiritual master; ca—and; bhagavān—the
Supreme Lord; śikhi-piñcha—with peacock feathers; mauliḥ
—whose head; yat—whose; pāda—of the lotus feet; kalpa-
taru—like desire trees; pallava—like new leaves;

                           30
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

śekhareṣu—at the toe nails; līlā-svayam-vara—of conjugal
pastimes; rasam—the mellow; labhate—obtains; jaya-śrīḥ—
Śrīmatī Rādhīka.

All glories to Cintāmaṇi (vartma-pradarśaka-guru) and to
my initiating (dīkṣā) Guru, Somagiri. All glories to my
instructing (śikṣā) Guru, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who wears
peacock feathers in His crown. Under the shade of His
lotus feet, which are like desire trees, Jayaśrī Rādhikā
enjoys the transcendental mellow of an eternal consort.4

The Supreme Lord manifests in the form of both dīkṣa and
śikṣā Gurus

vande gurūn īśa-bhaktān īśam īśāvatārakān

tat-prakāśāṁś ca tac-chaktīḥ kṛṣṇa caitanya saṁjñakam

CC Ādi 1.1

vande—I offer respectful obeisances; gurūn—unto the
spiritual masters; īśa-bhaktān—unto the devotees of the
Supreme Lord; īśam—unto the Supreme Lord; īśa-avatārakān
—unto the incarnations of the Supreme Lord; tat—of the
Supreme Lord; prakāśān—unto the manifestations; ca—and;
tat—of the Supreme Lord; śaktīḥ—unto the potencies;
kṛṣṇa-caitanya—Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya; saṁjñakam—named.

I worship the Supreme Lord Śrī Caitanya, who appears in
six features as the instructing (śikṣā) and initiating
(dīkṣā) Gurus; the Lord's devotees, beginning with
Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura; His avatāras such as Advaita Ācārya;
His prakāśa, or full expansion, Nityānanda Prabhu; and
His śakti, Gadādhara Paṇḍita.



kṛṣṇa, gurudvaya, bhakta, śakti, avatāra, prakāśa

kṛṣṇa ei chaya-rūpe karena vilāsa

CC Ādi 1.32

kṛṣṇa—the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; gurudvaya—both dīkṣā
and śikṣā gurus; bhakta—the devotees; śakti—the
potencies; avatāra—the incarnations; prakāśa—plenary
portions; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; ei chaya-rūpe—in these six
features; karena vilāsa—enjoys His pastimes.

The Supreme Lord appears in six features. As Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the two kinds of gurus (dīkṣā and śikṣā), the devotees,
the incarnations of Godhead, the full expansions of His
own Self (puruṣas), and as His divine energy (śakti). In
these six features the Lord enjoys His transcendental
pastimes.

The Dīkṣā Guru is “Kṛṣṇa-rūpa— (the form of Kṛṣṇa)

guru kṛṣṇa-rūpa hana śāstrera pramāṇe

guru-rūpe kṛṣṇa kṛpā karena bhakta-gaṇe

CC Ādi 1.45/BRSB p. 40/BPKG p. 232


                           31
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

guru—the Guru; kṛṣṇa-rūpa—is Kṛṣṇa’s form ; hana—is;
śāstrera—of revealed scriptures; pramāṇe—by the
evidence; guru-rūpe—in the form of the Guru; kṛṣṇa—Lord
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; kṛpā—mercy; karena—distributes; bhakta-gaṇe—
unto His devotees;

According to śāstra the dīkṣā Guru is kṛṣṇa-rūpa (the
form of Kṛṣṇa), because it is in the form of Guru that
Kṛṣṇa bestows His mercy on the devotees.

The Śikṣā Guru is “Kṛṣṇa-svarūpa— (the personality of
Kṛṣṇa)

śikṣā-guruke ta— jāni kṛṣṇera svarūpa

antaryāmī, bhakta-śreṣṭha, ei dui rūpa

CC Ādi 1.47/BRSB p. 40/BPKG p. 232

śikṣā-guruke—the spiritual master who instructs; ta——
indeed; jāni—I know; kṛṣṇera—of Kṛṣṇa; sva-rūpa—own
nature, personality; antaryāmī—the indwelling Supersoul;
bhakta-śreṣṭha—the best devotee, the mahā-bhagavata; ei—
these; dui—two; rūpa—forms.

One should know the śikṣā Guru to be Kṛṣṇa’s
personality. In the form of the Supersoul (the Guru in
the heart, caitya-guru), Kṛṣṇa gives encouragement and
as the topmost devotee (bhakta-śreṣṭha, āśraya-bhagavān)
He gives association and instructions (śikṣā).5



The jīva cannot directly see the Supersoul, therefore
Kṛṣṇa manifests as śikṣā Guru

jīve sākṣāt nāhi tāte guru caittya-rūpe

śikṣā-guru haya kṛṣṇa-mahānta-svarūpe

CC Ādi 1.58

jīve—by the living entity; sākṣāt—direct experience;
nāhi—there is not; tāte—therefore; guru—the Guru;
caittya-rūpe—in the form of the Supersoul; śikṣā-guru—
the spiritual master who instructs; haya—appears; kṛṣṇa—
Kṛṣṇa; mahānta—the topmost devotee, the ācārya; sva-rūpe
—in His own form.

Since a conditioned soul cannot directly experience the
presence of the Supersoul [caittya-guru], He appears
before the jīva as the śikṣā-guru, the topmost ure
devotee. Such an exalted devotee is non-different from
Kṛṣṇa Himself.

A fortunate jīva is guided by the Supersoul within and
by Śrī Guru externally

kṛṣṇa yadi kṛpā kare kona bhāgyavāne

guru-antaryāmi-rūpe śikhāya āpane

CC Madhya 22.47


                           32
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; yadi—if; kṛpā kare—shows His mercy;
kona bhāgyavāne—to some fortunate person; guru—of Śrī
Guru; antaryāmi—of the Supersoul; rūpe—in the form;
śikhāya—teaches; āpane—personally.

By the mercy of Kṛṣṇa a fortunate soul is guided by the
Supersoul from within and by the Guru from without.

Mahāprabhu is the supreme śikṣā guru

āpane karimu bhakta-bhāva aṅgīkāre

āpani ācari' bhakti śikhāmu sabāre

āpani nā kaile dharma śikhāna nā yāya

CC Ādi 3.20-21

āpani—personally; karimu—I shall make; bhakta-bhāva—the
position or mood of a devotee; aṅgīkāre—acceptance;
āpani—personally; ācari——practicing; bhakti—devotional
service; śikhāimu—I shall teach; sabāre—to all; āpane—
personally; nā kaile—if not practiced; dharma—religion;
śikhāna—the teaching; nā yāya—does not advance.

I shall accept the role of a devotee, and I shall teach
bhakti to everyone by practicing it Myself. If I do not
do this Myself, then the true principles of religion
(pure bhakti) will not be taught.

Kṛṣṇa appears externally as the ācarya and internally as
the Supersoul

naivopayanty apacitiṁ kavayas taveśa

brahmāyuṣāpi kṛtam ṛddha-mudaḥ smarantaḥ

yo —ntar bahis tanu-bhṛtām aśubhaṁ vidhunvann

ācārya-caittya-vapuṣā sva-gatiṁ vyanakti

SB 11.29.6/CC Ādi 1.48, Madhya 22.48

na eva—not at all; upayanti—are able to express;
apacitim—their gratitude; kavayaḥ—learned devotees; tava
—Your; īśa—O Lord; brahma-āyuṣā—with a lifetime equal to
Lord Brahmā—s; api—in spite of; kṛtam—magnanimous work;
ṛddha—increased; mudaḥ—joy; smarantaḥ—remembering; yaḥ—
who; antaḥ—within; bahiḥ—outside; tanu-bhṛtām—of those
who are embodied; aśubham—misfortune; vidhunvan—
dissipating; ācārya—of the spiritual master; caittya—of
the Supersoul; vapuṣā—by the forms; sva—own; gatim—path;
vyanakti—shows.

[Śrī Uddhava said:] “O my Lord! Transcendental poets and
experts in spiritual science cannot fully express their
indebtedness to You, even if they were endowed with the
prolonged lifetime of Brahmā, for You appear in two
features—externally as the ācārya and internally as the
Supersoul—to deliver the conditioned souls by revealing
to them Your pure devotional service and teaching them
how to approach You on the path of pure love.



                           33
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017




4) The Qualifications, Proper Attitude and Duties of a
Disciple

Śrī Guru must be approached with surrender, service
attitude, and inquiries

tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

BG 4.34

tat—this knowledge (of the Absolute Truth); viddhi—you
must understand; praṇipātena—(by approaching Śrī Guru
through) prostrated obeisances (surrender); paripraśnena
— relevant and submissive inquiries; sevayā—rendering
devotional service; upadekṣyanti—will reveal; te—unto
you; jñānam—that knowledge; jñāninaḥ— those expert in
knowledge of śāstra; tattva-darśinaḥ—those who have
realised the Absolute Truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

To acquire knowledge of the Absolute Truth, one must
approach Śrī Guru by offering him prostrated obeisances,
by asking him relevant questions and by rendering
service to him. The Guru who is both a jñāni (expert in
the imports of śāstra) and a tattva-darśī (realised in
the Absolute Truth), will enlighten you with that
transcendental knowledge.

The qualifications of a bona fide disciple are described
by Kṛṣṇa to Uddhava

amāny amatsaro dakṣo nirmamo dṛḍha-sauhṛdaḥ

asatvaro —rtha-jijñāsur anasūyur amogha-vāk

SB 11.10.6/CC Madhya 24.330 pt

amānī—without false ego; amatsaraḥ—not considering
oneself to be the doer; dakṣaḥ—without laziness;
nirmamaḥ—without any sense of proprietorship over one’s
wife, children, home, society, etc.; dṛḍha-sauhṛdaḥ—
being fixed in the mood of loving friendship with the
spiritual master, who is one’s worshipable deity;
asatvaraḥ—without becoming bewildered due to material
passion; artha-jijñāsuḥ—desiring knowledge of the
Absolute Truth; anasūyuḥ—free from envy; amogha-vāk—
completely free from useless talks.

The servant or disciple of the spiritual master should
be free from false prestige, never considering himself
to be the doer. He should be active and never lazy and
should give up all sense of proprietorship over the
objects of the senses, including his wife, children,
home and society. He should be endowed with feelings of
loving friendship toward the spiritual master and should
never become deviated or bewildered. The servant or
disciple should always desire advancement in spiritual
understanding, should not envy anyone and should always
avoid useless conversation.


                           34
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

A disciple should not find or see any faults in Śrī Guru

avidyo vā savidyo vā gurur eva janārdanaḥ

marga-stho vāpy amarga-stho gurur eva sadā gatiḥ

HBV 4.359

Whether seems to be educated or uneducated, Śrī Guru is
as good as Janārdana (Kṛṣṇa - the maintainer of all
living entities). Whether he appears to follow the line
or deviate, still Śrī Guru is one’s only destination and
means of attaining perfection.



A disciple should never consider Śrī Guru to be an
ordinary mortal

gurur vikriya yadi dekhaha kakhon

tathāpi avajñā nahi kara kadācana

Guru Mahimā, Sanātana Dāsa (Bengali Gauḍīya Gīti-guccha)

If you sometimes see any faulty behaviour in Śrī Guru,
still you should never disobey him, considering him to
be an ordinary mortal.6



Even if the spiritual master hits him, the disciple
should not retaliate or do anything displeasing to him

na guror apriyaṁ kuryāt tāḍitaḥ pīḍito 'pi vā

nāvamānyeta tad-vākyaṁ nāpriyaṁ hi samācaret

Viṣṇu-smṛti/HBV 1.99

na—not; guroḥ—of the spiritual master; apriyam—
displeasing; kuryāt—should do; tāḍitaḥ—hit; pīḍitaḥ—
upset; api—even; vā—or; na—not; avamānyeta—should
disrespect; tad-vākyam—his words; na—not; apriyam—
displeasing; hi—indeed; samācaret—should do.

Even if the spiritual master hits him or gives him
trouble, the disciple should not retaliate or do
anything displeasing to him. The disciple should never
disrespect his spiritual master's words nor speak to him
in a displeasing way.

One who pleases his Guru attains the supreme destination

ācāryasya priyaṁ kuryāt prāṇair api dhanair api

karmaṇā manasā vācā sa yāti paramaṁ gatim

Viṣṇu-smṛti/HBV 1.100

ācāryasya—of the spiritual master; priyam—pleasure;
kuryāt—should do; prāṇaiḥ—with life; api—and; dhanaiḥ—
with wealth; api—and; karmaṇā—with deeds; manasā—with
mind; vācā—with words; sa—he; yāti—goes; paramam—to the

                           35
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

supreme; gatim—destination.

A disciple who with his life, wealth, actions, mind, and
words pleases his spiritual master goes to the supreme
destination.

Spare the cane - spoil the child (or disciple)



lālane bahavo doṣās tāḍane bahavo guṇāḥ

tasmāt putraṁ ca śiṣyaṁ ca tāḍayen na tu lālayet

Nīti Śāstra

lālane—in fondling; bahavaḥ—many; doṣāḥ—faults; tāḍane—
in administering punishment; bahavaḥ—many; guṇāḥ—good
qualities; tasmāt—therefore; putram—a son; ca—and;
śiṣyam—a disciple; ca—and; tāḍayet—should punish; na—
not; tu—but; lālayet—should fondle.

Leniency encourages bad qualities in a disciple or son,
and strictness helps develop good qualities. Therefore,
a teacher or parent should not pamper a child but
administer punishment for inappropriate behavior.

By faithful service to Śrī Guru a disciple will attain
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet

tāte kṛṣṇa bhaje, kare gurura sevana

māyā-jāla chuṭe, pāya kṛṣṇera caraṇa

CC Mad 22.25

tāte—therefore; kṛṣṇa bhaje—if one worships Lord Kṛṣṇa;
kare—performs; gurura sevana—service to his spiritual
master; māyā-jāla chuṭe—gets free from the binding net
of māyā; pāya—gets; kṛṣṇera caraṇa—shelter at the lotus
feet of Kṛṣṇa.

If the conditioned soul engages in the service of the
Lord and simultaneously carries out the orders of his
spiritual master and serves him, he can get out of the
clutches of māyā and become eligible for shelter at
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.



5) The Hazards of Neglecting or Disobeying Śrī Guru

One should never disrespect the Guru or disobey his
instructions

guror avajñā

Padma Purāṇa/Bhajana Rahasya p. 96/Jaiva Dharma p. 564

guroḥ—of the spiritual master; avajñā—disrespect or
disobedience.

It is a grave offence to disobey the orders of Śrī Guru
or to consider him an ordinary person (i.e. to consider

                              36
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

his body material).



Offending the Guru is unpardonable

harau ruṣṭe gurus trātā gurau ruṣṭe na kaścana

tasmāt sarva-prayatnena gurum eva prasādayet

Adityā Purāṇa/HBV 4.360/Bhakti San. A 237/BRSB p. 44/
Arcana-dīpikā p. 119/GKH (P)

harau—when Śrī Hari; ruṣṭe—is angered; guru—Śrī Guru;
trātā—delivers (one); gurau—when Śrī Guru; ruṣṭe—is
angered; na kaścana—no one; tasmāt—therefore; sarva-
prayatnena—with all endeavour; eva—certainly; prasādayet
—one should please; gurum—Śrī Guru.

If Kṛṣṇa is angry, the Śrī Guru will save you. If the
spiritual master is angry, no one can save you.
Therefore make all efforts to please your Guru.

Even Harināma cannot absolve offences committed against
a Vaiṣṇava

hari-sthāne aparādhe tāre harināma

toma-sthāne aparādhe nahika eḍāna

Ei-Bāra Karuṇā Kara, SGG p. 27

Offences committed at the lotus feet of Śrī Hari are
absolved by harināma. But for offences against you
(Vaiṣṇava or Śrī Guru) there is absolutely no means of
deliverance.

One should never disobey the spiritual master’s direct
order

prabhu kahe bhaṭṭācārya, karaha vicāra gurura kiṅkara
haya mānya se āmāra

tāṅhāre āpana-sevā karāite nā yuyāya guru ājñā
diyāchena, ki kari upāya

bhaṭṭa kahe gurura ājñā haya balavān guru-ājñā nā
laṅghiye, śāstra pramāṇa

CC Mad 10.142-44/BPKG p. 233

prabhu kahe—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said; bhaṭṭācārya—My
dear Bhaṭṭācārya; karaha vicāra—just consider; gurura
kiṅkara—the servant of My guru; haya—is; mānya—
respectable; se—he; āmāra—to Me; tāṅhāre—him; āpana-sevā
—personal service; karāite—to engage; nā yuyāya—is not
befitting; guru—the spiritual master; ājñā—order;
diyāchena—has given; ki—what; kari—can I do; upāya—
remedy; bhaṭṭa kahe—Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya said; gurura
ājñā—the order of the spiritual master; haya—is; balavān
—strong; guru-ājñā—the order of the spiritual master; nā
—not; laṅghiye—we can disobey; śāstra—scriptural;
pramāṇa—injunction.


                           37
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

The Lord asked, “Sir, please judge this matter. These
two are the servants of My spiritual master and the
objects of My respect. It is therefore improper from Me
to engage them in My service. But then again, it is My
spiritual master’s direct order for Me to do so. What
should I do?” Sārvabhauma answered, “The order of the
spiritual master takes precedence, because all
scriptures stress that one should never disobey the
spiritual master’s direct order.”

One should follow the Guru’s instruction without
duplicity

guru ājñā haya avicāranīya

BPKG p. 415

One should not deliberate on the validity of the order
of the Guru.

One who thinks Śrī Guru to be an ordinary man goes to
hell

ārcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīr guruṣu nara-matir vaiṣṇave jāti-
buddhir

viṣṇor vā vaiṣṇavānāṁ kali-mala-mathane pāda-tīrthe
“mbu-buddhiḥ

śrī-viṣṇor nāmni mantre sakala-kaluṣa-he śabda-sāmanya-
buddhir

viṣṇau sarveśvare tad-itara-sama-dhīr yasya vā nārakī
saḥ

Pādma Purāṇa/Padyāvalī 115/PJ 4.14/BPKG p. 3

ārcye—worshippable Deity; viṣṇau—of Lord Viṣṇu; śilā—as
stone; dhīḥ—the conception; guruṣu—of the spiritual
masters; nara—of being an ordinary man; matiḥ—the
conception; vaiṣṇave—to the vaiṣṇavas; jāti—of birth;
buddhiḥ—the conception; viṣṇoḥ—of Lord Viṣṇu; va—or;
vaiṣṇavānām—of the Vaiṣṇavas; kali—of Kali-yuga; mala—of
the impurity; mathane—in the destruction; pāda—of the
feet; tīrthe—in the pilgrimage place; ambu—of water;
buddhiḥ—the conception; śrī-viṣṇoḥ—of Lord Viṣṇu; nāmni—
in the name; mantre—a mantra; sakala—all; kaluṣa—
impurities; he—destroying; śabda—a sound; samanya—
ordinary; buddhiḥ—the conception; viṣṇau—to Lord Viṣṇu;
sarva—of all; īśvare—the master; tat—than Him; itara—
others; sama—equal; dhīḥ—the conception; yasya—of whom;
va—or; nārakī—a resident of hell; saḥ—he.

Anyone who considers the worshipable Deity to be stone;
who considers the Vaiṣṇava Guru to be a mortal man; who
considers a Vaisnava to be limited by the confines of
caste, lineage, or creed; who considers the holy foot-
wash of Lord Viṣṇu (Gaṅgā water), or of a Vaiṣṇava
(caraṇāmṛta), to be ordinary water; who considers the
holy name (the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra), which vanqishes
all sins, to be material sound vibration; and who
considers the God of gods, Lord Viṣṇu, to be merely on
the level of demigods, such a person becomes a resident
of hell.

                             38
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017




The following line (from the above śloka) is often used
alone

guruṣu nara-matir yasya vā nārakī saḥ

Pādma Purāṇa/GKH 1.56

One who thinks of the spiritual master as an ordinary
man is said to live in hell.

Thus ends 5) The Hazards of Neglecting or Disobeying Śrī
Guru




6) The Hazards of Accepting an Unqualified Guru




Bogus “Gurus— are common but a real Guru is rare

guravo bahavaḥ santi śiṣya-vittāpahārakāḥ

durlabhaḥ sad-gurur devi śiṣya-santāpahārakaḥ

Purāṇa-vākya/GKH 1.48

[Lord Śiva to Pārvatī:] Many “Gurus— take advantage of
their disciples and plunder them. They exploit their
disciples and use them to amass wealth, whereas a
genuine Guru who can remove the material miseries of his
disciples is very rare.



Both the bogus Guru and his disciples go to hell

yo vyaktir nyāya-rahitam anyāyena śṛṇoti yaḥ

tāv ubhau narakaṁ ghoraṁ vrajataḥ kālam akṣayam

HBV 1.101/JD ch. 20/GKH 1.51

One who poses as an ācārya, but speaks against the
conclusions of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam and other scriptures or
performs kīrtana opposed to the proper glorification of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, certainly goes to hell for countless
lifetimes along with his disciples and whoever else
hears such un-bona fide talks and kīrtana.



It is useless to take shelter of a Guru who is not fully
realised

śabda-brahmaṇi niṣṇāto na niṣṇāyāt pare yadi


                           39
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

śramas tasya śrama-phalo hy adhenum iva rakṣataḥ

SB 11.11.18/SBG p. 315

śabda-brahmaṇi—in the Vedic literature; niṣṇātaḥ—expert
through complete study; na niṣṇāyāt—does not absorb the
mind; pare—in the Supreme; yadi—if; śramaḥ—labour; tasya
—his; śrama—of great endeavor; phalaḥ—the fruit; hi—
certainly; adhenum—a cow that gives no milk; iva—like;
rakṣataḥ—of one who is protecting.

Taking shelter of a “Guru— who has great learning of the
Vedic literature but who has not realised para-brahma
(Kṛṣṇa), is like keeping a barren cow who cannot give
milk. It is useless labour and one does not achieve any
real result.



The śāstras enjoin to abandon a bogus Guru

guror apy avaliptasya kāryākāryam ajānataḥ

utpatha-pratipannasya parityāgo vidhīyate

Mahābhārata, Udyoga Parva 179.25/BRSB p. 47/JD ch. 20/
GKH 1.49

api—even; guroḥ—(one who has accepted the duty of) a
Guru; avaliptasya—who is attached to sense gratification
(rather than the practices of bhakti); ajānataḥ—who is
unaware; kārya-akāryam—of what should and should not be
done; utpatha-pratipannasya—who has taken to a sinful
path, deviating from pure bhakti; vidhīyate —should be;
parityāgaḥ—abandoned.

It is one’s duty to give up a Guru who is attached to
sense gratification rather than the practices of bhakti,
who does not know what he should or should not do, and
who deviates from the path of pure bhakti, either
because of bad association or because he is opposed to
Vaiṣṇavas.

[Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s Commentary:] A Guru who is envious
of pure devotees, who blasphemes them, or behaves
maliciously towards them should certainly be abandoned,
remembering the verse “guror api avaliptasya—. Such an
envious Guru lacks the mood and qualities of a Vaiṣṇava
Guru. The śāstras enjoin that one should not accept
initiation from a non-Vaiṣṇava. Knowing these
injunctions of the scriptures, a sincere devotee should
abandon a false Guru who is envious of the pure devotee.
After leaving a false Guru, if a devotee is without a
spiritual guide, his only hope is to seek out a mahā-
bhāgavata Vaiṣṇava and serve him. By constantly
rendering service to such a pure devotee, one will
certainly attain the highest goal of life.” (Bhakti-
Sandarbha 238)

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: However, it is not proper to
give up a Guru whose knowledge is meager, if he is not
inimical to the Vaiṣṇavas, not a Māyāvādī and not
attached to sinful activity. In that case, one should
still respect him as Guru, and with his permission, one

                           40
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

should go to another Vaiṣṇava who is more knowledgeable,
and serve that Vaiṣṇava and take instructions from him.
(JD ch. 20)



A materialistic, professional, or sectarian “Guru— must
be given up

paramārtha-gurvāśrayo vyavahārika-gurvādi parityāgenāpi
kartavyaḥ

Bhakti-Sandarbha, annucheda 210/GKH 1.53

One should not accept a Guru based on hereditary, social
or sectarian considerations. Such a professional or
sectarian “Guru— should be rejected. One must accept a
qualified, genuine Guru who can help one advance towards
the ultimate goal of life, kṛṣṇa-prema.7



One who rejects a false Guru must accept a real Guru

avaiṣṇavopadiṣṭena mantreṇa nirayaṁ vrajet

punaś ca vidhinā samyag grāhayed vaiṣṇavād guroḥ

HBV 4.144/BRSB p. 47/JD ch. 20/GKH 1.54

One goes to hell if he accepts mantra (either harināma
or dīkṣā) from a non-Vaiṣṇava Guru, that is, one who is
associating with women, and who is devoid of kṛṣṇa-
bhakti. Therefore, according to the rules of śāstra, one
must take mantra again from a genuine Vaiṣṇava Guru.



Who is ineligible to be a Guru?

gurur na sa syāt sva-jano na sa syāt

pitā na sa syāj jananī na sā syāt

daivaṁ na tat syān na patiś ca sa syān

na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum

SB 5.5.18/STB p. 19

guruḥ—a spiritual master; na—not; saḥ—he; syāt—should
become; sva-janaḥ—a relative; na—not; saḥ—such a person;
syāt—should become; pitā—a father; na—not; saḥ—he; syāt—
should become; jananī—a mother; na—not; sā—she; syāt—
should become; daivam—the worshipable deity; na—not; tat
—that; syāt—should become; na—not; patiḥ—a husband; ca—
also; saḥ—he; syāt—should become; na—not; mocayet—can
deliver; yaḥ—who; samupeta-mṛtyum—one who is in saṁsāra,
the cycle of birth and death.

That Guru is not a Guru, that father is not a father,
that mother is not a mother, that demigod is not a
demigod and that relative is not a relative who cannot
protect us from the clutches of death, cannot bestow

                           41
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

eternal life upon us and cannot protect us from the
ignorance of māyā, which keeps us engrossed and bound in
this material existence of birth and death.

A Guru should not initiate for prestige and material
gain

na śiṣyān anubadhnīta granthān naivabhyased bahūn

na vyākhyām upayuñjita nārambhān ārabhet kvacit

SB 7.13.8/BRS 1.2.113

na—not; śiṣyān—disciples; anubadhnīta—one should induce
for material benefit; granthān—unnecessary literatures;
na—not; eva—certainly; abhyaset—should try to understand
or cultivate; bahūn—many; na—nor; vyākhyām—discourses;
upayuñjīta—should make as a means of livelihood; na—nor;
ārambhān—unnecessary endeavours; ārabhet—should attempt
to increase; kvacit—at any time.

A sannyāsī (Guru) must never present allurements of
material benefits to attract disciples. He should never
initiate unqualified disciples in order to expand the
number of his followers for prestige and material gain.
He should never unnecessarily read many books, nor
should he lecture on scriptures like the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam as a way of making his livelihood. He must
never attempt to increase material opulence
unnecessarily. He must renounce over-endeavours for
things that are beyond his means or which cannot be
attained even at the expense of considerable time and
energy.



Thus ends 6) The Hazards of Accepting an Unqualified
Guru




7) Prayers to Śrī Guru

Śrī Guru Vandanā

mūkaṁ karoti vācālaṁ paṅguṁ laṅghayate girim

yat-kṛpā tam ahaṁ vande śrī-guruṁ dīna-tāraṇam

Adapted from Bhavārtha Dipikā, Maṅgala Stotram 1

mūkam—a dumb man; karoti—makes; vācālam—an eloquent
speaker; paṅgum—a lame man; langhayate—cause to cross
over; girim—a mountain; yat-kṛpā—whose mercy; tam—unto
Him; aham—I; vande—offer prayers; śrī gurum—Śrī Guru;
dīna—the fallen and destitude; tāraṇam—delivers.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto Śrī Guru, the
deliverer of all fallen souls, whose mercy turns the
dumb into eloquent speakers, and enables the lame to
cross mountains.


                           42
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017



Śrī Guru Praṇāma

namas te gurudevāya sarva-siddhi-pradāyine

sarva-maṅgala-rūpāya sarvānanda-vidhāyine

Śrī Muktā-carita/SGG p. 6

I offer praṇāma unto Śrīla Gurudeva who is the
embodiment of all auspiciousness and who bestows all
spiritual perfection and happiness.

Śrī Guru Vandanā

nāma-śreṣthaṁ manum api śacī-pūtram atra svarūpaṁ

rūpaṁ tasyāgrajam uru-pūriṁ māthurīṁ goṣthavāṭīm

rādhā-kuṇḍaṁ giri-varam aho! rādhikā-mādhavāśāṁ

prāpto yasya prathita-kṛpayā śrī-guruṁ taṁ nato—smi

Śrī Muktā-carita, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī/SGG p. 6

nāma-śreṣtham—the most exalted of names, Śrī-Nāma; manum
—Śrī Gopāla mantra; api—also; śacī-pūtram—the son of
Śacī mātā; atra—in this world; svarūpam—Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara Gosvāmī; rūpam—Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī tasya—his;
agra-jam—elder brother (Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī); uru-purīm
—the vast spiritual stronghold; māthurīm—of Mathurā-
maṇḍala; goṣṭhavāṭīm—which is ornamented by many
dwellings for the cows and cowherds; rādhā-kuṇḍam—the
bathing pond of Śrī Rādhā; giri-varam—the best of hills
Śrī Giri-Govardhana; aho!—exultation; rādhikā-mādhava—
for the service to the feet of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava; āśām—
hope; prāptaḥ—obtained; yasya—whose, prathita-kṛpayā—by
whose far-flung mercy; śrī-gurum—the glorious remover of
my ignorance, Śrī Guru; tam—that; nataḥ—bowed down; asmi
—I am.

I am fully indebted to Śrī Gurudeva. Why? He has given
me so many things: the highest conception of the holy
name of Kṛṣṇa, the highest form of sound which contains
the highest form of thought, aspiration, ideal,
everything. And he has given me the service of our great
savior, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and His dearmost
assistant, Svarūpa Dāmodara. He has brought me in
connection with Śrī Rūpa, who was ordered to distribute
the heart’s innermost dealings, the highest devotional
love, rāgānugā-bhakti. Gurudeva has given me Śrīla
Sanātana Goswāmī, who gives us sambandha-jñāna, a proper
understanding of our relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and he
has given me Mathurā Maṇḍala, which will help me in my
remembrance of Rādhā and Govinda wherever I shall cast
my glance. By his grace Gurudeva has revealed the
superexcellent position of Rādhā-kunda, the favorite
place of Rādhā and Govinda for Their pastimes and this
Girirāja Govardhāna. Lastly, he has given me the hope
that one day I can get the service of Śrī Śrī Rādhikā
and Mādhava. I have been given all these assurances by
my Gurudeva, so I bow my head with all my respects to
his lotus feet.

                            43
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


[The above is an extended, verbatim translation by Śrīla
B.R. Śrīdhara Gosvāmī Mahārajā, who adds:] If we are
conscious of all these spiritual matters, we can think
that we have approached our Gurudeva properly. What is
our Guru? What is his mission? It is filled with all
these things. Devoid of that, what is our self-interest?
(Śrī Guru and His Grace).



Vijñapti

he śrī-guro jñāna-da dīna-bandho svānanda-dātaḥ
karuṇaika-sindho

vṛndāvanāsīna hitāvatāra prasīda rādhā-praṇaya-pracāra

Arcana Paddhati/SGG p. 7

O Gurudeva! You bestow transcendental knowledge, you are
the friend of the fallen, you bestow the spiritual bliss
which is within your heart, you are an ocean of pure
mercy. Although dwelling in Goloka Vṛndāvana, you have
descended for the welfare of fallen souls like myself
and you are preaching the divine love of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s for Kṛṣṇa. Please be merciful unto me.

Thus ends section 7) Prayers to Śrī Guru




8) Dīkṣā — Divine Knowledge




The definition śloka of Dīkṣā (1)

divyaṁ jñānaṁ yato dadyāt kuryāt pāpasya saṅkṣayam

tasmāt dīkṣeti sā proktā deśikais tattva-kovidaiḥ

Viṣṇu-yāmala/HBV 2.9/CC Mad 15.108 pt/Upad 5 pt/BRSB p.
48

divyam—divine; jñānam—knowledge; yataḥ—since; dadyāt—it
can give; kuryāt—can cause; pāpasya—of sin; saṅkṣayam—
utter annihilation; tasmāt—therefore; dīkṣā—dī-kṣā; iti—
as; sā—it; proktā—is described; deśikaiḥ—by guides
(Gurus); tattva-kovidaiḥ—who are learned in the science
of transcendental truths.

That process which bestows transcendental knowledge (dī
- divya-jñāna) and destroys (kṣā) sinful desires for
sense gratification is called dīkṣā by learned
authorities in the absolute truth.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī: The words “divyaṁ jñānaṁ” here
refers to the description of the Lord’s transcendental
form as well as knowledge of one’s relationship with

                              44
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa (given in a seed form within the dīkṣā-mantras).
Chanting the dīkṣā-mantras establishes a relationship
(sambandha) with the Supreme Lord. (Bhakti sandarbha
283)

The definition śloka of Dīkṣā (2)

divyaṁ jñānaṁ hy atra mantre bhagavat-svarūpa-jñānam,

tena bhagavatā sambandha-viśeṣa-jñānañ ca

Bhakti-sandarbha, Anuccheda 283/BRSB p. 47

Divya-jñāna is transcendental knowledge contained within
a mantra which reveals the form and identity of the
Supreme Lord (bhagavat-svarūpa) as well as knowledge of
the sādhaka-jīva’s particular relationship with the
Lord.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura: The relationship
between Bhagavān and the jīva is that of servant and
served. Bhagavān is the served (sevya) and the jīva is
the servant (sevaka)—this is only a general
relationship. In the advanced stage, this same
relationship manifests in one particular form out of the
various moods of dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, or madhurya.
Śrī Gurudeva, knowing the svarūpa-gata-bhāva, or in
other words the natural, inherent disposition of the
sādhaka [the sādhaka’s svarūpa], gives nourishment to
that particular mood within his heart in order to bring
it clearly into view. (BRSB, commentary on the above
śloka)



divya-jñānaṁ kṣapayati iti dīkṣā

(quoted by BVSP, SB lecture, LA 12.12.73)

Dīkṣā means Di, divya-jñānam, transcendental knowledge
(knowledge of one’s svarūpa and one’s iṣṭadeva); kṣā
means to destroy; also īkṣā means darśana, to see, or
kṣapayati, to explain.



The mantra is non-different from Śrī Guru and from Śrī
Hari

yo mantraḥ sa guruḥ sākṣāt yo guruḥ sa hariḥ svayam

gurur yasya bhavet tuṣṭas tasya tuṣṭo hariḥ svayam

Vāmana-kalpa/HBV 4.353/BRSB p. 41/MK ch.3/GKH (P)

The mantra (received from Śrī Guru) is the Guru himself,
and Śrī Guru is directly the Supreme Lord Hari. There is
no difference between Śrī Guru, the mantra given by him,
and Śrī Hari. He with whom Śrī Guru is pleased, also
obtains the pleasure of Śrī Hari Himself.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Śrī Guru’s internal, spiritual
mood of service to Śrī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa is conveyed to
the disciple through the medium of a mantra. Everything

                           45
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

is given in seed form within the mantra. At first the
disciple will not be able to understand, but by
performing sādhana and bhajana under the guidance of Śrī
Gurudeva and by meditating on the mantra given by him,
gradually everything will be revealed. Therefore it is
said here that the mantra is the direct representative
of Śrī Gurudeva. (BRSB, commentary on the above śloka)



By the influence of the mantra, the surrendered disciple
never takes birth again

svayaṁ brahmaṇi nikṣiptān jātān eva hi mantrataḥ

vinītān atha putrādīn saṁskṛtya pratibodhayet

Nārada Pañcarātra/Bharadvāja-saṁhitā 2.34

When the Guru gives the mantra to his disciple according
to the rules and regulations of pāñcarātrika-vidhi,
then, by the influence of that mantra, the disciple
never takes birth again. A humble disciple conducts
himself with great respect for his spiritual master as
if he is a son of the Guru. To such a humble disciple,
who has been purified by the appropriate saṁskāras, the
Guru teaches the meaning of the mantra. This is the way
that spiritual initiation is performed according to the
rules and regulations of scripture.

Through Dīkṣā, Kṛṣṇa transforms the sādhaka’s body into
spiritual substance

prabhu kahe, vaiṣṇava-deha “prākṛta— kabhu naya

“aprākṛta— deha bhaktera “cid-ānanda-maya—



dīkṣā-kāle bhakta kare ātma-samarpaṇa

sei-kāle kṛṣṇa tāre kare ātma-sama



sei deha kare tāra cid-ānanda maya

aprākṛta-dehe tāṅra caraṇa bhajaya

CC Antya 4.192-3/GKH 13.147/Art of Sādhana ch. 7

prabhu kahe—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said; vaiṣṇava deha—
the body of a Vaiṣṇava; prākṛta—material; kabhu naya—is
never; aprākṛta—transcendental; deha—body; bhaktera—of a
devotee; cit-ānanda-maya—full of transcendental bliss;
dīkṣā-kāle—at the time of initiation; bhakta—the
devotee; kare—does; ātma-samarpaṇa—full self-dedication;
sei-kāle—at that time; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; tāre—him; kare—
makes; ātma-sama—the same as Himself; sei deha—that
body; kare—makes; tāra—his; cit-ānanda-maya—full of
transcendental bliss; aprākṛta-dehe—in that
transcendental body; tāṅra—His; caraṇa—feet; bhajaya—
worships.


                           46
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, “The body of a devotee is
never material. It is considered to be transcendental,
full of spiritual bliss. At the time of initiation, when
a sādhaka fully surrenders to Śrī Guru, Kṛṣṇa makes him
like Himself. He transforms the devotee’s body into
spiritual substance; the sādhaka then worships the Lord
in that spiritualized body.”

Śrīla Bhakti Pramoda Purī Mahārāja: When the living
being who has taken to the devotional path first
surrenders himself to the lotus feet of his spiritual
master, then Kṛṣṇa accepts him as one of His very own.
He frees him from the bondage of bodily identity and
gives him an experience of his eternal spiritual nature
(svarūpa). With this divine knowledge, the devotee takes
a spiritual body appropriate for the transcendental
service of the Lord. This is the inner mystery of dīkṣā.

Dīkṣā turns one into a brāhmaṇa as bell metal is turned
into gold

yathā kāñcanatāṁ yāti kāṁsyaṁ rasa-vidhānataḥ

tathā dīkṣā-vidhānena dvijatvaṁ jāyate nṛṇām

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 2.12/BRSB p. 48

Just as bell metal is turned to gold by a particular
alchemical process, a person can attain to the state of
dvi-ja (second, spiritual birth) by the process of
Vaiṣṇava dīkṣā.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura: There are three
kinds of birth: (1) śaukra-janma—seminal birth by mother
and father, (2) sāvitra-janma—a ceremony in which a boy
is initiated into one of the three twice-born classes by
being invested with the sacred thread, and (3) daikṣa-
janma—birth by the process of dīkṣā or spiritual
initiation. Even a śūdra or an untouchable person
(antya-ja) who is born in the lowest family obtains the
saṁskāras for being a dvija upon being initiated in
accordance with the regulations of the Pāñcarātra. (BRSB
p. 48)



Dīkṣā is absolutely necessary

guru-dīkṣā vihinasya na siddhim na sad-gatim

tasmat sarva-prayatnena guruṇā dīkṣitaṁ bhavet

Purāṇa vakya

Without proper dīkṣā from Śrī Guru, no one can attain
perfection or the supreme destination. Therefore, with
utmost care and attention one should accept dīkṣā
initiation from Śrī Guru.



One bereft of Dīkṣā obtains birth in the animal species
of life


                           47
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

adīkṣitasya vāmoru kṛtaṁ sarvaṁ nirarthakam

paśu-yonim-avāpnoti dīkṣā virahitī janaḥ

Skanda Purāṇa/Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 2.6/BRSB p. 49

O Vāmoru! All the auspicious activities of men are
worthless without accepting dīkṣā. A person who is
bereft of dīkṣā obtains birth in the animal species of
life.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī states: “As illustrated by Dhruva’s
history, the acceptance of dīkṣā is absolutely necessary
in order to perform the sādhana and bhajana for
realising Śrī Bhagavān.” [BS 27, Ṭīkā]).



nṛṇāṁ sarveṣām eva dvijatvaṁ "vipratā"

Sanātana Gosvāmī's Dig Darśinī commentary on the above
śloka

The purport is that anyone can become twice-born if he
is properly initiated (that is, by hearing the dīkṣā
mantras directly from a bona fide Guru).




The Dīkṣā mantras are absolutely essential to purify
one’s chanting of Śrī Nāma

mūrkha tumi, tomāra nāhika vedāntādhikāra

kṛṣṇa-mantra japa sadā ei mantra-sāra

CC Ādi 7.72

mūrkha tumi—You are a fool; tomāra—Your; nāhika—there is
not; vedānta—Vedānta philosophy; adhikāra—qualification
(to study); kṛṣṇa-mantra—gopāla-mantra (kāma-bīja); japa
—chant; sadā—always; ei—this; mantra—Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-
mantra; sāra—essence of all Vedic knowledge.

My Guru said, “You are a fool. You are not qualified to
study Vedānta philosophy, and therefore You must chant
the gopāla-mantra followed by the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-
mantra, which is the essence of all mantras and all
śāstras.”



Without dīkṣā, harināma only gives sukṛti to come to Śrī
Guru and receive dīkṣā-mantras

kṛṣṇa-mantra haite habe saṁsāra-mocana

kṛṣṇa-nāma haite pābe kṛṣṇera caraṇa

CC Ādi 7. 73

kṛṣṇa-mantra—(the chanting of the) gopāla-mantra (kliṁ

                           48
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

kṛṣṇaya etc.); haite—from; habe—it will be; saṁsāra—
material existence; mocana—deliverance; kṛṣṇa-nāma—(the
chanting of the) Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra; haite—from;
pābe—one will get; kṛṣṇera—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; caraṇa—lotus
feet.

Simply by chanting the kṛṣṇa-mantra (the gopāla-mantra),
one can obtain freedom from material existence.
Thereafter, simply by chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma, the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, one will get the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and attain kṛṣṇa-prema.8



A dīkṣā mantra received from an unqualified Guru is
useless

sampradāya vihinā ye mantrās te niṣphalāḥ matāḥ

śrī-brahmā-rudra-sanakā vaiṣṇavāḥ kṣiti-pāvanāḥ

Padma Purāṇa/Prameya-ratnavalī 1.5/JD ch. 13 /BPKG p. 62

sampradāya-vihināḥ—without being connected with a bona
fide sampradāya, or the guru-varga (through proper
initiation by a mahā-bhāgavata Guru); ye—which; mantrāḥ—
mantras; te—those; niṣphalāḥ—fruitless, useless; matāḥ—
are considered; śrī-brahmā-rudra-sanakā vaiṣṇavāḥ—the
four Vaiṣṇava Sampradāyas; kṣiti-pāvanāḥ—purify the
earth.

Vaiṣṇava ācāryas in the four authorized disciplic
successions, namely Ramānujācārya in the Śrī-sampradāya,
Śrī Madhvācārya in the Brahma-sampradāya, Viṣṇusvāmī in
the Rudra-sampradāya, and Nimbāditya in the Catuḥsana-
sampradāya, purify the whole universe. Dīkṣā-mantras not
received from a bona fide ācārya in one of these four
Vaīṣṇava sampradāyas are considered to be useless.

gāyantam trāyate tasmāt gāyatrītvam tatah smṛtaṁ

Padma-Purāṇa

That which delivers the chanter from material existence
is known as “gāyatrī.—

The power of a dīkṣā mantra given by Śrī Guru to a
genuine disciple

kibā mantra dila gosāñi kibā tāra bala?

japite japite mantra korila pāgala

CC Ādi 7.81

kibā—what kind of; mantra—mantra; dilā—you have given;
gosāñi—My lord; kibā—what is; tāra—its; bala—strength;
japite—chanting; japite—chanting; mantra—mantra; karila—
has made Me; pāgala—madman.

(Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:) O Gurudeva! What kind of
a mantra have you given Me? What power does it have? By
continuously chanting this mantra I have become
completely mad. Sometimes this mantra makes Me laugh,

                           49
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

sometimes it makes Me cry, dance or roll on the ground.

Thus ends section 8) Dīkṣā — Divine Knowledge




Further qualities of Śrī Guru

Any pure Vaiṣṇava is automatically a Guru; Śāstra
declares that Śrī Guru is the very form and personality
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; Guru has full realisation of his
relationship with Kṛṣṇa; Guru is renounced, not attached
to worldly things; Fixed, unwavering, one-pointed to
kṛṣṇa-bhakti; Obedient; Always speaks the Truth; Pure in
behaviour; Supremely intelligent; Always delights in
performing saṅkīrtana; Engaged in the bhajana or worship
of Śrī Gauracandra; Devoid of pride; Devoid of lust and
anger; Has special, complete devotion to his own Guru;
Always serving Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas; Has conquered
his senses; Master of the five knowledge-acquiring
senses; Will not see or speak unnecessarily; Especially
kind and compassionate; Devoid of false ego; Non-
envious; “Cut out the name of a Guru who is idle— (not
speaking hari-kathā, not preaching: he is not Guru but
goru, a cow); Devoid of material possessiveness, i.e.
“This is mine”, “This is yours”; Immovable, equipoised,
grave; If one inquires from him about tattva, he is
always happy to answer and discuss the topic; Never
engaged in prajalpa; He considers his body the temple of
Kṛṣna and keeps it always neat and clean, and free of
disease; Not proud or puffed up in any way; Never
behaves like a miser (one who withholds bhakti,
harināma, prasāda etc. from others); Never gets angry;
Free from lamentation; Never spends unnecessarily; Never
seeing faults in others; Not speaking bitter words,
always speaks sweetly to all; Never engaged in securing
or accumulating money by cheating, illicit activities;
Devoid of the self-conception (abhimān) that “I am a
great scholar, I already know everything” (thus one is
unable to serve Śrī Guru); Never giving pain or distress
to others for the sake of one’s own service; Eats a
balanced diet (One who eats too much cannot engage in
bhajana); Honors prasāda with the mood of serving it
(prasāda is not to be eaten for enjoyment, exccesive
eating destroys one’s health and bhajana); Accepts and
tolerates the chastisment of his own Guru; One who
cannot bring you to the service of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is
not a Guru; He who can give one devotion is real Guru.
(Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s lecture on Guru Purṇima, 25
July 1991, at Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha, Mathurā).



Thus ends Chapter 1 — Guru-tattva




Chapter 2 — Vaiṣṇava-tattva



                              50
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Oh Vaiṣṇava! Your mercy is the essence of my existence




1. The Qualities and Glories of the Vaiṣṇavas 76

2. Pure Devotees are Very Rare 96

3. The Benefits of Associating with and Serving the
Vaiṣṇavas 100

4. The Hazards of Disrespecting a Vaiṣṇava 102

5. Devotees— so-called Fall-down 104

6. Uttama, Madhyama & Kaniṣṭha - Three Levels of
Devotees 107

7. Glorifiations of the Mahā-bhāgavata, the Topmost
Vaiṣṇava 113

8. Vaiṣṇavas & Brāhmaṇas 118

9. Following in the Footsteps of Vaiṣṇava Saints 122

10. Gradations of Bhaktas & Levels of Pure Bhakti 125



Definition of a Vaiṣṇava

gṛhīta-viṣṇu-dīkṣāko viṣṇu-pūjā-paro naraḥ

vaiṣṇavo “bhihito “bhijñair itaro “smād avaiṣṇavaḥ

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 1.55/JD ch. 8

gṛhīta-viṣṇu—accepted into a Viṣṇu mantra; dīkṣāko—by
initiation; viṣṇu-pūjā-paraḥ—enthusiastically engaged in
and dedicated to the worship of Śrī Viṣṇu; naraḥ—a
person; vaiṣṇavaḥ abhihitaḥ— is called a Vaiṣṇava;
abhijñaiḥ—by the wise; itaraḥ asmād—other than him;
avaiṣṇavaḥ—not a Vaiṣṇava.

Learned scholars have determined that a Vaiṣṇava is one
who is initiated into a Viṣṇu mantra in accordance with
the regulations of śāstra, and dedicated to the worship
of Śrī Viṣṇu. All others are non-Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: A Vaiṣṇava is he in whose heart
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is always present.

Definition of a Sādhaka — the topmost practitioner of
devotional service

utpanna-ratayaḥ samyaṅ nairvighnyam anupāgatāḥ

kṛṣṇa-sākṣāt-kṛtau yogyāḥ sādhakāḥ parikīrtitāḥ

BRS 2.1.276/BRSB p. 22

One in whose heart rati (bhāva) towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa has

                           51
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

already manifested, who has become qualified to perceive
the direct manifestation of the Lord, but who has not
yet obtained complete freedom from all obstacles, is
called a sādhaka-bhakta.



1) The Qualities and Glories of the Vaiṣṇavas



A pure devotee is identical with Kṛṣṇa, who resides in
his heart

īśvara-svarūpa-bhakta tāṅra adhiṣṭhāna

bhaktera hṛdaye kṛṣṇera satata viśrāma

CC Ādi 1.61

īśvara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; svarūpa—
identical with; bhakta—the pure devotee; tāṅra—His;
adhiṣṭhāna—abode; bhaktera—of the devotee; hṛdaye—in the
heart; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; satata—always; viśrāma—the
resting place.

A pure devotee incessantly engaged in the loving service
of Kṛṣṇa is identical with Him, for Kṛṣṇa is always
seated in his heart (“Identical— means one at heart with
Kṛṣṇa or being very near and dear to Him, not merged
into Him or being non-distinct from Him).

Kṛṣṇa is controlled by the love of His bhaktas and sits
only within their hearts

ahaṁ bhakta-parādhīno hy asvatantra iva dvija

sādhubhir grasta-hṛdayo bhaktair bhakta-jana-priyaḥ

SB 9.4.63

[śrī-bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said:] aham—I; bhakta-
parādhīnaḥ—am dependent on the will of My devotees; hi—
indeed; asvatantraḥ—am not independent; iva—exactly like
that; dvija—O brāhmaṇa; sādhubhiḥ—by pure devotees,
completely free from all material desires; grasta-
hṛdayaḥ—My heart is captivated; bhaktaiḥ—because they
are devotees; bhakta-jana-priyaḥ—I am dependent not only
on My devotee but also on My devotee’s devotee (the
devotee’s devotee is extremely dear to Me).

[Śrī Bhagavān said to Durvāsā Muni]: “I am completely
under the control of My devotees. Indeed, I am not at
all independent. Because My devotees are completely
devoid of material desires, I sit only within the cores
of their hearts. What to speak of My devotee, even those
who are devotees of My devotee are very dear to Me.”



Kṛṣṇa says, “Pure devotees are My very heart”

sādhavo hṛdayaṁ mahyaṁ sādhūnāṁ hṛdayaṁ tv aham


                           52
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

mad-anyat te na jānanti nāhaṁ tebhyo manāg api

SB 9.4.68/CC Ādi 1.62

sādhavaḥ—the pure devotees; hṛdayam—in the core of the
heart; mahyam—of Me; sādhūnām—of the pure devotees also;
hṛdayam—in the core of the heart; tu—indeed; aham—I am;
mat-anyat—anything else but me; te—they; na—not; jānanti
—know; na—not; aham—I; tebhyaḥ—than them; manāk api—even
slightly.

The pure devotee is always within the core of My heart,
and I am always in the heart of the pure devotee. My
devotees do not know anything else but Me, and I do not
recognize anyone besides them as mine.



Worship of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees is higher than direct
worship of Kṛṣṇa

ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ

viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param

tasmāt parataraṁ devi

tadīyānāṁ samarcanam

Padma Purāṇa/CC Madhya 11.31

ārādhanānām—of varieties of worship; sarveṣām—all;
viṣṇoḥ—of Lord Viṣṇu; ārādhanam—worship; param—the most
exalted; tasmāt—and above such worship of Lord Viṣṇu;
parataram—of greater value; devi—O goddess; tadīyānām—
devotees in confidential loving relationship with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; samarcanam—perfect worship.

Lord Śiva told the goddess Durgā, “My dear Devī,
although the Vedas mention worship of demigods, the
worship of Lord Viṣṇu is topmost and is ultimately
recommended. However, above the worship of Lord Viṣṇu is
the worship of (or rendering of service to) His
devotees, who are the object of the Lord’s love.”10




The pure devotees are holy places personified

bhavad-vidhā bhāgavatās tīrtha-bhūtāḥ svayaṁ vibho

tīrthī-kurvanti tīrthāni svāntaḥ-sthena gadābhṛtā

SB 1.13.10/CC Ādi 1.63

bhavat—your good self; vidhāḥ—like; bhāgavatāḥ—pure
devotees; tīrtha—the holy places of pilgrimage; bhūtāḥ—
converted into; svayam—personally; vibho—O powerful one;
tīrthī-kurvanti—make into a holy place of pilgrimage;
tīrthāni—the holy places; sva-antaḥ-sthena—having been
situated in the heart; gadā-bhṛtā—who carries a club (
Bhagavān).

                           53
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


[Yudhiṣṭhira to Vidura:] My lord, pure devotees like
your good self are verily holy places personified.
Because you carry Śrī Bhagavān within your heart, you
turn all places into places of pilgrimage.

Sādhus like you purify one instantly by their very sight

na hy am-mayāni tīrthāni na devā mṛc-chilā-mayāḥ

te punaty uru-kālena darśanād eva sādhavaḥ

SB 10.84.11

na—not; hi—indeed; ap—of water; mayāni—composed;
tīrthāni—holy places; na—not; devāḥ—deities; mṛt—of
earth; śilā—and stone; mayāḥ—composed; te—they; punanti—
purify; uru-kālena—after a long time; darśanāt—by being
seen; eva—only; sādhavaḥ—saintly devotees.

Water alone does not make a sacred place holy. Nor is it
earth nor clay that composes the form of the Deity. The
waters of the Ganges, visits to holy places, and the
worship of the Śālagrāma-śilā purify one only after a
long time, but sādhus like you purify one instantly by
their very sight.

All the good qualities of Kṛṣṇa and His devotees
manifest in one who renders unflinching devotional
service; the non-devotee has in fact no good qualities

yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā

sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ

harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā

manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ

SB 5.18.12/BRS 1.1.29/CC Ādi 8.58, Mad 22.76/BTV ch. 3/
BR 4.20

yasya—of whom; asti—there is; bhaktiḥ—pure devotional
service; bhagavati—unto Śrī Bhagavān; akiñcanā—without
material desires; sarvaiḥ—all; guṇaiḥ—with good
qualities; tatra—there; samāsate—live; surāḥ—the
demigods or saintly devotees; harau—unto the Lord;
abhaktasya—of the nondevotee; kutaḥ—where; mahat-guṇāḥ—
the high qualities; manaḥ-rathena—by mental concoction;
asati—to temporary material happiness; dhāvataḥ—running;
bahiḥ—externally.

One who renders pure, unflinching devotional service to
Kṛṣṇa which is free from material attachments, Kṛṣṇa and
all the saintly devotees enter his heart accompanied by
their exalted qualities. However, he who has no devotion
to Śrī Bhagavān, is devoid of good qualities because he
is engaged by mental concoction in the service of māyā,
which is the external feature of the Lord.

Kṛṣṇa’s potency is unlimited and so is the potency of
His pure devotees

kutaḥ punar gṛṇato nāma tasya mahattamaikānta-

                           54
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

parāyaṇasya

yo 'nanta-śaktir bhagavān ananto mahad-guṇatvād yam
anantam āhuḥ

SB 1.18.19

kutaḥ—what to say; punaḥ—again; gṛṇataḥ—one who chants;
nāma—holy name; tasya—His; mahat-tama—great devotees;
ekānta—exclusive; parāyaṇasya—of one who takes shelter
of; yaḥ—He who; ananta—is the unlimited; śaktiḥ—potency;
bhagavān—all-opulent Personality; anantaḥ—immeasurable;
mahat—great; guṇatvāt—on account of such attributes; yam
—whom; anantam—by the name ananta; āhuḥ—is called.

What to speak of Śrī Bhagavān who possesses unlimited
energy and is therefore celebrated by the name of
Ananta, even those who are chanting the holy names of
the Unlimited and are dedicated to serving Him with one
pointed determination, under the direction of the great
saintly devotees, are also known as unlimited on account
of the qualities of those great souls.

One-pointed devotees are fearless

nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati

svargāpavarga-narakeṣv api tulyārtha-darśinaḥ

SB 6.17.28

nārāyaṇa-parāḥ—pure devotees, who are exclusively
dedicated to the service of Nārāyaṇa Bhagavān; sarve—
all; na—not; kutaścana—anywhere; bibhyati—are afraid;
svarga—in the higher planetary systems; apavarga—in
liberation; narakeṣu—or in hell; api—even; tulya artha—
of equal value; darśinaḥ—they see.

Devotees exclusively dedicated to the devotional service
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Nārāyaṇa,
never fear any condition of life. For them the heavenly
planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the
same, for such devotees are completely immersed in the
service of the Lord.

The twenty-six qualities of a Vaiṣṇava

sei saba guṇa haya vaiṣṇava-lakṣaṇ

saba kahā nā yāya, kari dig-daraśana

kṛpālū, akṛta-droha, satya-sāra, sama

nirdoṣa, vadānya, mṛdu, śuci, akiñcana

sarvopakāraka, śānta, kṛṣṇaika-śaraṇa

akāma, anīha, sthira, vijita-ṣaḍ-guṇa

mita-bhuk, apramatta, mānada, amāni

gambhira, karuṇa, maitra, kavi, dakṣa, mauni

CC Madhya 22.77-80

                           55
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


sei saba guṇa—all those transcendental qualities; haya—
are; vaiṣṇava-lakṣaṇa—the symptoms of a Vaiṣṇava; saba—
all; kahā nā yāya—cannot be explained; kari—I shall do;
dik-daraśana—a general review; kṛpālu—merciful; akṛta-
droha—not defiant; satya-sāra—thoroughly truthful; sama—
equal; nirdoṣa—faultless or not fault-finding; vadānya—
magnanimous; mṛdu—mild; śuci—clean; akiñcana—without
material possessions; sarva-upakāraka—working for the
welfare of everyone; śānta—peaceful; kṛṣṇa-eka-śaraṇa—
exclusively surrendered to Kṛṣṇa; akāma—desireless;
anīha—indifferent to material acquisitions; sthira—
fixed; vijita-ṣaṭ-guṇa—completely controlling the six
enemies (lust, anger, greed, etc.); mita-bhuk—eating
only as much as required; apramatta—without inebriation;
māna-da—respectful to all; amānī—devoid of pride,
without false prestige; gambhīra—grave; karuṇa—
compassionate; maitra—a friend to all; kavi—poetic;
dakṣa—expert; maunī—silent (never engaged in prajalpa -
unnecessary talk).

All these transcendental qualities are the
characteristics of pure Vaiṣṇavas. They cannot be fully
explained, but I shall try to point out some of the
important qualities: Devotees are always merciful,
humble, truthful, equal to all, faultless, magnanimous,
mild, and clean. They are without material possessions,
and they perform welfare work for everyone. They are
peaceful, surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, and desireless. They are
indifferent to material acquisitions and are fixed in
devotional service. They completely control the six bad
qualities: lust, anger, greed, pride, illusion, and
envy. They eat only as much as required, and are sober
and grave. They are respectful, compassionate, and
without false prestige. They are friendly, poetic,
expert, and silent (i.e. they do not speak whimsically).




Devotees are always tolerant, forbearing and very
merciful

titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām

ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ sādhavaḥ sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ

SB 3.25.21/CC Madhya 22.81

titikṣavaḥ—very forbearing; kāruṇikāḥ—merciful; suhṛdaḥ—
who are well-wishers; sarva-dehinām—to all living
entities; ajāta-śatravaḥ—without enemies; śāntāḥ—
peaceful; sādhavaḥ—following the injunctions of the
śāstra; sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ—who are decorated with good
character.

Devotees are always tolerant, forbearing and very
merciful. They are the well-wishers of every living
entity. They follow the scriptural injunctions, and
because they have no enemies, they are very peaceful.
These are the decorations of devotees.

mayy ananyena bhāvena bhaktiṁ kurvanti ye dṛḍhām

                             56
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


mat-kṛte tyakta-karmāṇas tyakta-svajana-bāndhavāḥ

SB 3.25.22

mayi—unto Me; ananyena bhāvena—with undeviated mind;
bhaktim—devotional service; kurvanti—perform; ye—those
who; dṛḍhām—staunch; mat-kṛte—for My sake; tyakta—
renounced; karmāṇaḥ—activities; tyakta—renounced; sva-
jana—family relationships; bāndhavāḥ—friendly
acquaintances.

Such a sādhu is engaged in staunch devotional service to
the Lord without deviation. For the sake of the Lord he
renounces all other connections, such as family
relationships and friendly acquaintances within the
world.

The Vaiṣṇavas see with equal vision

vidyā-vinaya-sampanne brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śvapāke ca paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

BG 5.18

vidyā—with education; vinaya—and gentleness; sampanne—
fully equipped; brāhmaṇe—in the brāhmaṇa; gavi—in the
cow; hastini—in the elephant; śuni—in the dog; ca—and;
eva—certainly; śva-pāke—in the dog-eater (the outcaste);
ca—respectively; paṇḍitāḥ—those who are wise; sama-
darśinaḥ—who see with equal vision.

The enlightened devotees, being endowed with humility
and realised knowledge, perceive with equal vision that
the ātma is present within the brāhmaṇa, the cow, the
elephant, the dog and the outcaste.

The qualities of saintly devotees and the benefit of
rendering service to them

mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimuktes

tamo-dvāraṁ yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam

mahāntas te sama-cittāḥ praśāntā

vimanyavaḥ suhṛdaḥ sādhavo ye

SB 5.5.2/CC Madhya 22.82

mahat-sevām—service to the spiritually advanced persons
called mahātmās; dvāram—the way; āhuḥ—it is said;
vimukteḥ—of liberation; tamaḥ-dvāram—the way to the
bondage of ignorance in hellish materialistic life;
yoṣitām—of women; saṅgi—of associates; saṅgam—
association; mahāntaḥ—the pure devotees; te—they; sama-
cittāḥ—who see everyone equally as a spiritual being;
praśāntāḥ—very peaceful; vimanyavaḥ—without anger (one
must distribute bhakti to persons who are hostile
without becoming angry at them); suhṛdaḥ—well-wishers of
everyone; sādhavaḥ—pure, saintly devotees, completely
free of material contamination; ye—they who.


                           57
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

One can attain the path of liberation from material
bondage only by rendering service to highly advanced
spiritual personalities, the mahātmās. For those who are
not interested in such activities, who associate with
people fond of women and sex, the path to hell is wide
open. The mahātmās are equipoised and see everyone
equally as spiritual beings. They are very peaceful,
completely devoid of anger or any material
contamination, and are fully engaged in devotional
service. They are the well-wishers of everyone. Such
saintly persons are known as pure devotees.



The characteristics of a pure devotee

ye vā mayīśe kṛta-sauhṛdārthā janeṣu dehambhara-
vārtikeṣu

gṛheṣu jāyātmaja-rātimatsu na prīti-yuktā yāvad-arthāś
ca loke

SB 5.5.3

ye—those who; vā—or; mayi—unto Me; īśe—the Supreme Lord;
kṛta-sauhṛda-arthāḥ—very eager to develop love (in a
relationship of dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya or mādhurya);
janeṣu—to people; dehambhara-vārtikeṣu—who are
interested only in maintaining the body, not in
spiritual salvation; gṛheṣu—to the home; jāyā—wife;
ātma-ja—children; rātimatsu—consisting of wealth or
friends; na—not; prīti-yuktāḥ—very attached; yāvat-
arthāḥ—who live by collecting only as much as required;
ca—and; loke—in the material world.

Those who are exclusively interested in reviving their
their love of God do not like to do anything that is not
related to Kṛṣṇa. They are not interested in mingling
with those who are busy maintaining their bodies by
eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. They are not
attached to their homes, although they may be
householders. Nor are they attached to wives, children,
friends, or wealth. At the same time, they are not
indifferent to the execution of their duties. Such
persons are interested in collecting only as much as
needed to keep their body and soul together. These are
the characteristics of a pure devotee.



The pure devotee’s mercy is even more powerful than
Kṛṣṇa—s

aho ananta-dāsānāṁ mahattvaṁ dṛṣṭam adya me

kṛtāgaso —pi yad rājan maṅgalāni samīhase

SB 9.4.68

[durvāsāḥ uvāca—Durvāsā Muni said:] aho—alas; ananta-
dāsānām—of the servants of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; mahattvam—greatness; dṛṣṭam—seen; adya—today;
me—by me; kṛta-āgasaḥ api—although I was an offender;
yat—still; rājan—O King; maṅgalāni—good fortune;

                           58
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

samīhase—you are praying for me.

Durvāsā Muni said, “My dear king, today I have
experienced the greatness of a Vaiṣṇava, for although I
have committed a grievous offence by trying to kill you,
you have prayed for my protection and well being.” (“You
cheated me, pretending to be an ordinary person. But now
I realise that the mercy of a pure devotee is even more
powerful than Kṛṣṇa—s.”)



The devotee's mercy is causeless

bhajanti ye yathā devān devā api tathaiva tān

chāyeva karma-sacivāḥ sādhavo dīna-vatsalāḥ

SB 11.2.6

bhajanti—worship; ye—they who; yathā—in which way; devān
—the demigods; devāḥ—the demigods; api—also; tathā eva—
just in that way; tān—them; chāyā—in a shadow; iva—as
if; karma—of material activities and their reactions;
sacivāḥ—the attendants; sādhavaḥ—saintly persons; dīna-
vatsalāḥ—merciful to the fallen.

The rewards the demigods give closely follow one's pious
acts, just as the movements of a shadow correspond
exactly to those of the body. A devotee's mercy,
however, is causeless and does not depend on the
accumulation of piety. Saintly persons are kind and
compassionate to fallen souls without considering their
piety or impiety.



Even māyā-devī has to beg the mercy of a pure devotee to
get prema

māyā-dāsī “prema— māge, ithe ki vismaya?

“sādhu-kṛpā—-”nāma— vinā “prema— nā janmaya

CC Antya 3.266

māyā-dāsī—the external energy is a maidservant; prema
māge—she wants love of Godhead; ithe—in this; ki vismaya
—what is the wonder; sādhu-kṛpā—the mercy of the pure
devotee; nāma—chanting of the holy name; vinā—without;
prema—prema; nā janmaya—is not possible.

What is the wonder if the maidservant of Kṛṣṇa, His
external potency māyā-devī, begs (Śrīla Haridāsa
Ṭhākura) for love of God? Without the mercy of a pure
devotee and without the chanting of the holy name,
kṛṣṇa-prema cannot be attained.



The sādhus are oblivious to material miseries

mad-āśrayāḥ kathā mṛṣṭāḥ śṛṇvanti kathayanti ca


                           59
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

tapanti vividhās tāpā naitān mad-gata-cetasaḥ

SB 3.25.23

mat-āśrayāḥ—about Me; kathāḥ—stories; mṛṣṭāḥ—delightful;
śṛṇvanti—they hear; kathayanti—they chant; ca—and;
tapanti—inflict suffering; vividhāḥ—various; tāpāḥ—the
material miseries; na—do not; etān—unto them; mat-gata—
fixed on Me; cetasaḥ—their thoughts.

Engaged constantly in chanting and hearing about Me, the
sādhus do not suffer from material miseries because they
are always filled with thoughts of My pastimes and
activities.



The Vaiṣṇava is transcendental and free from the laws of
Karma

na karma-bandhanaṁ janma vaiṣṇavānāṁ ca vidyate

viṣṇor anucaratvaṁ hi mokṣam āhur manīṣiṇaḥ

Padma Purāṇa/Hari-Bhakti-Vilāsa 10.113

A Vaiṣṇava does not take birth under the jurisdiction of
karmic law. His birth and disappearance are
transcendental. The wise have declared that the servants
of Viṣṇu are eternally engaged in the liberated service
of the Lord and hence are free from the laws of material
nature.



The Vaiṣṇava never dies

ata eva vaiṣṇavera janma mṛtyu nāi

saṅge āisen, saṅge yāyen tathāi

dharma, karma, janma vaiṣṇavera kabhu nahe

padma-purāṇete ihā vyakta kari' kahe

CB Antya 8.173-4

The Padma Purāṇa says that Vaiṣṇavas do not undergo
birth and death like ordinary people do. They appear and
disappear within this world on their own accord. In this
way, sometimes we get their association and sometimes
their association is withdrawn. The Vaiṣṇavas are not
subject to any worldly considerations of dharma and
karma.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Those who think that I will
soon die and then they can take over and become Guru,
are guru-drohī (offenders and traitors). Śrī Guru never
dies, never, ever. He continues to live in the heart of
those disciples who are chaste and loyal to him. And
what is loyalty? Loyalty is when you act according to
the desire of Śrī Guru, not according to your own
desire. This is the mood of the gopīs. They only want to
please Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and fulfil Their desires. They

                           60
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

have no self-interest whatsoever. Please try to
understand this and take it into your heart. (LA, May
2005)

Harder than a thunderbolt, softer than a rose

vajrād api kaṭhorāṇi mṛdūni kusumād api

lokottarāṇāṁ cetāṁsi ko nu vijñātum īśvaraḥ

CC Mad 7.73

vajrāt api—than a thunderbolt; kaṭhorāṇi—harder; mṛdūni—
softer; kusumāt api—than a flower; loka-uttarāṇām—
persons above the human platform of behavior; cetāṁsi—
the hearts; kaḥ—who; nu—but; vijñātum—to understand;
īśvaraḥ—able.

Who can comprehend the heart of exalted, transcendental
personalities, whose natures are harder than
thunderbolts and more tender than lotus flowers?

The Vaiṣṇava’s activities are transcendental and free
from self-interest

vahni-sūrya-brāhmaṇebhyas tejīyān vaiṣṇavāḥ sadā

na vicāro na bhogaś ca vaiṣṇavānāṁ sva-karmaṇām

Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa, Kṛṣṇa-janma-khaṇḍa, ch. 59

The purifying power of fire,    the sun, and the holy
brāhmaṇas is eclipsed by the    divine power of the
Vaiṣṇavas. The activities of    the Vaiṣṇavas are neither
karmic nor performed for the    sake of materialistic
enjoyment.

Even the learned cannot understand the words and actions
of pure devotees

yāñra citte kṛṣṇa-premā karaye udaya

tāñra vākya, kriyā, mudrā vijñeha nā bujhaya

CC Mad 23.39

yāñra citte—in whose heart; kṛṣṇa-premā—love of Kṛṣṇa;
karaye udaya—awakens; tāñra—his; vākya—words; kriyā—
activities; mudrā—symptoms; vijñeha—even a learned
scholar; nā bujhaya—does not understand.

Even the most learned and intelligent cannot understand
the words, activities and symptoms of the pure devotee
in whose heart kṛṣṇa-prema has awakened.

Editorial note: Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda
often used an abbreviated form of this śloka, vaiṣṇavera
kriyā mudrā vijñeha nā bujhaya.11

Non-devotees cannot perceive the Vaiṣṇava’s
transcendental qualities

dekhiyā nā dekhe yata abhaktera gaṇa


                           61
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

ulūke nā dekhe yena sūryera kiraṇa

CC Ādi 3.86

dekhiyā—seeing; nā dekhe—they do not see; yata—all;
abhaktera—of non-devotees; gaṇa—crowds; ulūke—the owl;
nā dekhe—does not see; yena—just as; sūryera—of the sun;
kiraṇa—rays.

Non-devotees may see the Vaiṣṇava yet cannot perceive
the Vaiṣṇava’s transcendental qualities, just as an owl
cannot see the rays of the sun, even though it has eyes.

Materialistic people cannot understand the activities or
position of a Vaiṣṇava

yata dekha vaiṣṇavera vyavahāra-duhkha

niṣcaya jāniha sei parānanda sukha

viṣaya-madāndha saba kicchui nā jāne

vidyā kūla, dhana-made vaiṣṇava nā cine

CB Madhya 9.240-241

When you see a Vaiṣṇava of the highest order who seems
to be suffering from material misery, you should know
for sure that he is really experiencing the highest
ecstasy. Bewildered by sense enjoyment and puffed up
with pride in their knowledge, education, birth, wealth,
beauty, and so on, ignorant people cannot understand the
activities or position of a Vaiṣṇava. A Vaiṣṇava, on the
other hand, never considers country of birth, level of
education or wealth to be important qualifications, but
distributes the Lord's mercy to everyone, regardless of
their social position or cultural background.

Both read the scriptures day and night but while one
sees darkness the other sees light

yā niśā sarva-bhūtānāṁ tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamī

yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni sā niśā paśyato muneḥ

BG 2.69

yā—what; niśā—is night; sarva—all; bhūtānām—of living
entities; tasyām—in that; jāgarti—is wakeful; saṁyamī—
the self-controlled; yasyām—in which; jāgrati—are awake;
bhūtāni—all beings; sā—that is; niśā—night; paśyataḥ—for
the introspective; muneḥ—sage.

What is night (God consciousness) for all conditioned
souls is the time of awakening (spiritual reality) for
the self-controlled Vaiṣṇava; and the time of awakening
(fruitive activities and sense gratification) for all
conditioned souls is night (the darkness of ignorance)
for the introspective sādhaka.

The pure devotee selflessly preaches out of compassion

mahad-vicalanaṁ nṛṇāṁ gṛhiṇāṁ dīna-cetasām


                           62
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

niḥśreyasāya bhagavan kalpate nānyathā kvacit

SB 10.8.4/CC Mad 8.40

mahat-vicalanam—the wandering of saintly persons; nṛṇām—
of human beings; gṛhiṇām—who are householders; dīna-
cetasām—low-minded; niḥśreyasāya—for the ultimate
benefit; bhagavan—O my Lord; na anyathā—not any other
purpose; kalpate—one imagines; kvacit—at any time.

O Nārada, great saintly persons like you visit the homes
of family men, not to profit from them but simply to
bestow eternal auspiciousness upon them, even though
they are often reluctant to hear anything for their
spiritual benefit, being too materialistic. Otherwise
you have no need to travel from one place to the next.




The Vaiṣṇava goes to people’s houses only to deliver the
fallen

mahānta-svabhāva ei tārite pāmara

nija kārya nāhi tabu yāna tāra ghara

CC Madhya 8.39

mahānta-svabhāva—the nature of saintly persons; ei—this;
tārite—to deliver; pāmara—fallen souls; nija—own; kārya—
business; nāhi—there is not; tabu—still; yāna—goes; tāra
—his; ghara—house.

It is the general practice of saintly persons to deliver
the fallen. Therefore they go to people's houses,
although they have no personal business there.



The Vaiṣṇava travels around the world only to show mercy
to fallen souls

janasya kṛṣṇād vimukhasya daivād adharma-śilasya
suduḥkhitasya

anugrahāyeha caranti nūnaṁ bhūtāni bhavyāni janārdanasya

SB 3.5.3

janasya—of the common man; kṛṣṇāt—from Kṛṣṇa; vimukhasya
—of the one who has turned his face against the Lord;
daivāt—by the influence of external energy; adharma-
śīlasya—of one who is engaged in irreligion; su-
duḥkhitasya—of one who is always unhappy; anugrahāya—due
to being compassionate towards them; iha—in this world;
caranti—wander; nūnam—certainly; bhūtāni—persons;
bhavyāni—greatly munificent souls; janārdanasya—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

My dear Lord, great munificent souls travel on the earth
on behalf of Śrī Kṛṣṇa only to show compassion to the
fallen souls who are averse to the sense of

                           63
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

subordination to the Lord.

The Vaiṣṇava is “para-duḥkha-duḥkhī— and “para-upakarī—

para-duḥkha-duḥkhī kṛpāmbudhiḥ

Vilāpa-kusumāñjali 6 (vairāgya-yug-bhakti-rasaṁ
prayatnair)

para—of others; duḥkha—by the unhappiness; duḥkhī—
unhappy; kṛpā—of mercy; ambudhiḥ—an ocean

The Vaiṣṇava is unhappy only because of the unhappiness
of others. He is never distressed in any condition of
life, but is very much aggrieved by the sufferings of
others, and he is an ocean of mercy.



para-upakari (para-upakara)

CC Antya 16.147/CC Ādi 9.41

para-upakari—the benefactor of all other living
entities. para—others; upakara—benefit; para-upakara—
welfare activity, benefitting or helping others.

The Vaiṣṇava is the benefactor of all other living
entities (because he pulls them away from māya and
bestows the highest benefit in the form of pure bhakti).




I am simply concerned with love for the materialistic
fools and rascals

naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyās

tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ

śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-

māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān

SB 7.9.43

na—not; eva—certainly; udvije—I am disturbed or afraid;
para—O Supreme; duratyaya—insurmountable; vaitaraṇyāḥ—of
the Vaitaraṇī, the ocean of material existence; tvat-
vīrya—of Your Lordship’s glories and activities; gāyana—
from chanting or distributing; mahā-amṛta—in the great
ocean of nectarean spiritual bliss; magna-cittaḥ—whose
consciousness is absorbed; śoce—I am simply lamenting;
tataḥ—from that; vimukha-cetasaḥ—the fools and rascals
who are bereft of Kṛṣṇa consciousness; indriya-artha—in
sense gratification; māyā-sukhāya—for temporary,
illusory happiness; bharam—the false burden or
responsibility (of maintaining one’s family, society and
nation and making elaborate arrangements for that
purpose); udvahataḥ—for elevation; vimūḍhān—although all
of them are nothing but fools and rascals.


                              64
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

O best of the great personalities, I am not at all
afraid of material existence and of Your deluding
potency (māyā), for wherever I stay I am fully absorbed
in thoughts of Your glories and activities. My concern
is only for the fools and rascals who are making
elaborate plans for material happiness and maintaining
their families, societies and countries. I am simply
concerned with love for them.




The glories of the Vaiṣṇavas

sva-dharma-niṣṭhaḥ śata-janmabhiḥ pumān

viriñcatām eti tataḥ paraṁ hi mām

avyākṛtaṁ bhāgavato 'tha vaiṣṇavaṁ

padaṁ yathāhaṁ vibudhāḥ kalātyaye

SB 4.24.29

sva-dharma-niṣṭhaḥ—one who is situated in his own
dharma; śata-janmabhiḥ—for one hundred births; pumān—a
living entity; viriñcatām—the post of Lord Brahmā; eti—
gets; tataḥ—thereafter; param—above; hi—certainly; mām—
attains me; avyākṛtam—without deviation; bhāgavataḥ—unto
Bhagavān; atha—therefore; vaiṣṇavam—a pure devotee of
the Lord; padam—post; yathā—as; aham—I; vibudhāḥ—
demigods; kalā-atyaye—after the annihilation of the
material world.

One who perfectly follows his duty in varṇāśrama-dharma
for one hundred births can attain the position of
Brahmā. One who is more qualified can attain the
position of Śiva. A Vaiṣṇava, however, is immediately
promoted to the spiritual planets far beyond even my
abode. That transcendental position is so difficult to
realise that I, Lord Śiva, and the other demigods can
attain those spiritual planets only after the ultimate
annihilation of the material world.

Even Brahmā and Śiva pray for the qualification to
become “Kṛṣṇa-dāsa—

nayana bhariyā dekha dāsera prabhāva hena dāsya-bhāve
kṛṣṇe kara anurāga

alpa hena nā māniha "kṛṣṇa-dāsa" nāma alpa-bhāgye dāsa
nāhi kare bhagavān

dāsa-nāme brahmā-śiva hariṣa-antara dharaṇī-dharendra
cāhe dāsa adhikāra

CB Madhya 23.463-464, 472

[Lord Caitanya said:] Just see the influence of the
servant of Kṛṣṇa. With such a mentality of service,
cultivate a deep attachment to Kṛṣṇa. If, however, you
are devoid of a service attitude and do not wish to call
yourself “Kṛṣṇa-dāsa—, you will be most unfortunate: the

                            65
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Lord will never accept you as His servant. Brahmā and
Śiva, although masters of the universe, take endless
delight in the name “Kṛṣṇa-dāsa— and pray for the
qualification to become “Kṛṣṇa-dāsa—.

The Vaiṣṇava rejects a high birth if it is devoid of
bhakti

kīṭa janma hau yathā tūyā dāsa

bahir-mukha brahma-janme nāhi āśa

Śaraṇāgati, Bhaktivinode Ṭhākura

kīṭa—worm; janma—birth; hau—let it be; jathā—so long as;
tuyā—Your; dāsa—servant; bahir-mukha—adverse; brahma-
janme—born as Brahmā; nāhi—not; āśa—become.

Let me take birth again even as a worm, as long as I may
remain Your servant. O Kṛṣṇa, I would happily forsake a
birth as Brahmā, if that birth were devoid of Your
service.

The glories of the servants of the of the servants of
the Vaiṣṇavas



maj-janmanaḥ phalam idaṁ madhu-kaiṭabhāre

mat prārthanīya mad-anugraha eṣa eva

tvad bhṛtya-bhṛtya-paricāraka-bhṛtya-bhṛtya

bhṛtyasya-bhṛtyam iti māṁ smara lokanātha

Mukunda-mālā-stotra 25

mat—my; janmanaḥ—of the birth; phalam—the fruit; idam—
this; madhu-kaiṭabha-are—O enemy of Madhu and Kaiṭabha;
mat—by me; prārthanīya—prayed for; mat—to me; anugrahaḥ—
mercy; eṣaḥ—this; eva—certainly; tvat—Your; bhṛtya-
bhṛtya—of the servant’s servant; paricāraka—of the
servant; bhṛtya-bhṛtya-bhṛtyasya—of the servant of the
servant of the servant; bhṛtyaḥ—the servant; iti—so; mām
—me; smara—think of; loka—of the world; nātha—O master.

O Supreme Lord of all, slayer of the demons Madhu and
Kaitabha! Please be merciful to me and grant my prayer
that You may remember me as a servant of Your servant's
servant, a servant of such a servant of Your servant's
servant, a servant of a servant of Your servant's
servant, and a servant of Your servant's servant
servant.

The servant of My servants is My real devotee

ye me bhakta-janāḥ pārtha na me bhaktāś ca te janāḥ

mad-bhaktānāṁ ca ye bhaktās te me bhaktatamā matāḥ

Ādi Purana/CC Mad 11.28/Laghu-bhāg. 2.6/BRSB p. 94

ye—those who; me—My; bhakta-janāḥ—devotees; pārtha—O

                           66
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Pārtha; na—not; me—My; bhaktāḥ—devotees; ca—but; te—
those; janāḥ—persons; mat-bhaktānām—of My devotees; ca—
certainly; ye—those who; bhaktāḥ—devotees; te—such
persons; me—My; bhaktatamāḥ—most advanced devotees;
matāḥ—that is My opinion.

[Lord Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna:] “Those who consider themselves
My direct devotees are actually not My devotees, but
those who see themselves as the devotees of My
associates are factually My devotees.”

The servants of My servants are sure to attain
perfection

siddhir bhavati vā neti saṁśayo “cyuta-sevinām

niḥsaṁśayo “stu tad-bhakta-paricaryā-ratātmanām

Varāha Purāṇa/ Śāṇḍilya-smṛti/CB Antya 3.486/GKH (P)

The servants of the infallible Bhagavān may or may not
attain perfection. There is some doubt. But for the
servants of the Lord’s devotees there is no doubt.

Further glories of Vaiṣṇavas

sādhūnāṁ sama-cittānāṁ sutarāṁ mat-kṛtātmanām

darśanān no bhaved bandhaḥ puṁso 'kṣṇoḥ savitur yathā

SB 10.10.41

sādhūnām—of devotees; sama-cittānām—who are equally
disposed toward everyone; sutarām—excessively,
completely; mat-kṛta-ātmanām—of persons who are fully
surrendered, determined to render service unto Me;
darśanāt—simply by the audience; no bhavet bandhaḥ—
freedom from all material bondage; puṁsaḥ—of a person;
akṣṇoḥ—of the eyes; savituḥ yathā—as by being face to
face with the sun.

When one is face to face with the Sun, there is no
longer darkness for one's eyes. Similarly, when one is
face to face with a sādhu who is fully determined and
surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, one will no longer be subject to material
bondage.



na mayy ekānta-bhaktānāṁ guṇa-doṣodbhavā guṇāḥ

sādhūnāṁ sama-cittānāṁ buddheḥ param upeyuṣām

SB 11.20.36

na—not; mayi—in Me; eka-anta—unalloyed; bhaktānām—of the
devotees; guṇa—recommended as good; doṣa—forbidden as
unfavorable; udbhavāḥ—arising from such things; guṇāḥ—
piety and sin; sādhūnām—the sādhus (who are free from
material hankering); sama-cittānām—who maintain steady
spiritual consciousness in all circumstances; buddheḥ—
that which can be conceived by material intelligence;
param—beyond; upeyuṣām—of those who have achieved.

                           67
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Material piety and sin, which arise from the good and
evil of this world, cannot exist within My unalloyed
devotees, who, being freed from material hankering,
maintain steady spiritual consciousness in all
circumstances.

A pure devotee should be considered dearer than one's
own family

mātā-pitā yuvatayas tanayā vibhūtiḥ

sarvaṁ yad eva niyamena mad-anvayānām

ādyasya naḥ kalu-pater-bakulābhirāmaṁ

śrīmat-tad-aṅghri yugalaṁ praṇamāmi mūrdhnā

Stotra-Ratnam 5, Śrī Yamunācārya

I bow down most respectfully to the blessed lotus feet,
attractive as blossoming bakula flowers, of the
predecessor ācāryas of our devotional family. They are
eternally united to us and all members of our family
with a bond of love and affection, and one should
consider their lotus feet to be everything - one’s
father, mother, sons, wife and wealth.

The Six Gosvāmīs are the very embodiment of the nectar
ocean of divine love

kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī

dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau priya-karau nirmatsarau pūjitau

śrī-caitanya-kṛpā-bharau bhuvi bhuvo bhārāvahantārakau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam, Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya/SGG p.
126

kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; utkīrtana—chanting loudly; gāna—singing;
nartana—dancing; parau—who are absorbed; prema-amṛta—the
nectar of love of God; ambhaḥ-nidhī—like oceans; dhīra-
adhīra-jana—to the gentle and the ruffians; priyau—who
are dear; priya-karau—who are all-pleasing; nirmatsarau—
who are non-envious; pūjitau—who are all-worshipable;
śrī-caitanya—of Śrī Caitanya; kṛpā-bharau—who are
bearing the mercy; bhuvi—in the world; bhuvaḥ—of the
world; bhāra—the burden; avahantārakau—who dispel; vande
—I offer my respectful obeisances; rūpa—unto Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī; sanātanau—unto Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī; raghu-
yugau—unto Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and Śrīla
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī; śrī-jīva—unto Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī; gopālakau—and unto Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.

I worship the Six Gosvāmīs, Śrī Rūpa, Sanātana,
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa, Raghunātha dāsa, Śrī Jīva and Gopāla
Bhaṭṭa, who were always engaged in singing Kṛṣṇa’s name,
beauty, qualities and pastimes, and dancing (in
mādhurya-bhāva, the “sweetness-mood— of His līlās). The
Gosvāmīs are the very embodiment of the nectar ocean of
divine love (premāmṛta-samudra-svarūpa). They are

                           68
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

accepted and respected by learned and ignorant persons
alike, and their activities endear them to all because
they hold no envy towards anyone. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has fully blessed them with His mercy. Thus
they are able to spread the sweet nectar of bhakti,
thereby diminishing the burden of sinful life on the
earth.

Your devotees can always see Your lotus feet

tān vai hy asad-vṛttibhir akṣibhir ye parāhṛtāntar-
manasaḥ pareśa

atho na paśyanty urugāya nūnaṁ ye te pada-nyāsa-vilāsa-
lakṣyāḥ

SB 3.5.45

tān—the lotus feet of the Lord; vai—certainly; hi—for;
asat—materialistic; vṛttibhiḥ—by those who are
influenced by external energy; akṣibhiḥ—by the senses;
ye—those; parāhṛta—missing at a distance; antaḥ-manasaḥ—
of the internal mind; pareśa—O Supreme; atho—therefore;
na—never; paśyanti—can see; urugāya—O Supreme Lord who
are glorified by all saintly persons; nūnam—but; ye—
those who; te—Your; pada-nyāsa—activities; vilāsa—
transcendental pastimes of enjoyment; lakṣyāḥ—those who
see.

O Supreme Lord who are glorified by all saintly persons,
offensive persons whose internal vision has been too
much affected by external materialistic activities
cannot see Your lotus feet, but Your devotees can always
see Your lotus feet, because their only goal is to
behold and serve Your līlā.



Those who take shelter of Śrīmatī Rādhikā are great
souls and are constantly engaged in My bhajana

mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya-manaso jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

BG 9.13

tu—however; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; mahā-ātmānaḥ—the
great souls; āśritāḥ—having taken shelter of; daivīm
prakṛtim—My divine potency (parā-śakti, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā); bhajanti—render service, perform bhajana; mām—
Me; ananya-manasaḥ—with undeviating minds; jñātvā—
knowing Me; ādim—(to be) the origin; bhūta—of all
beings; avyayam—and inexhaustible.

O Pārtha, the really great souls of this world (the
mahātmās), having taken complete shelter of My superior
potency (parā-śakti, Śrīmatī Rādhikā), know that I am
the inexhaustible source of everything. Thus they are
constantly engaged in My bhajana with their minds
exclusively fixed on Me.

Vaiṣṇavas who constantly engage in bhajana are never
separated from Kṛṣṇa

                           69
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ

namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā nitya-yuktā upāsate

BG 9.14

satatam—constantly; kīrtayantaḥ—glorifying; mām—Me;
yatantaḥ—fully endeavoring; ca—also; dṛḍha-vratāḥ—with
determined vows; namasyantaḥ—offering obeisances; ca—
and; mām—before Me; bhaktyā—in devotion; nitya-yuktāḥ—
perpetually engaged, who are always united [with Me];
upāsate—worship Me.

Constantly chanting the glories of My names, qualities,
form and pastimes, endeavouring with determined vows,
and offering praṇāmas with devotion, they engage in My
worship, remaining always united with Me.



Without My saintly devotees I cannot be happy

nāham ātmānam āśāse mad-bhaktaiḥ sādhubhir vinā

śriyam ātyantikīṁ vāpi yeṣāṁ gatir ahaṁ parā

SB 9.4.64/Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛtam 1.3.77

na—not; aham—I; ātmānam—Myself; āśāse—hold in high
regard; mat-bhaktaiḥ—My devotees; sādhubhiḥ—the saintly
persons; vinā—without; śriyam—the goddess Lakṣmī and the
opulence she provides; ātyantikīm—ultimate; vā—or; api—
even; yeṣām—for which (devotees); gatiḥ—the destination;
aham—I; parā—ultimate.

Without saintly devotees for whom I am the one and only
destination, I do not desire to enjoy My transcendental
bliss or My opulent position with Lakṣmī-devī.



Thus ends section 1) The Qualities and Glories of the
Vaiṣṇavas




2) Pure Devotees are Very Rare



Vaiṣṇavas who know Kṛṣṇa in truth are very rare

bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ

BG 7.19

bahūnām—many; janmanām—repeated births and deaths; ante—
after; jñāna-vān—one who is in full knowledge; mām—unto
Me; prapadyate—surrenders; vāsudevaḥ—the Personality of

                           70
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; sarvam—everything; iti—thus; saḥ—that;
mahā-ātmā—great soul; su-durlabhaḥ—very rare to see.

After many births and deaths, he who is actually in
knowledge surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause
of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul (a
mahā-bhagavat pure devotee) is very rare.

Except for the Vaiṣṇavas, no one knows Me in truth

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

BG 7.3

manuṣyāṇām—of men; sahasreṣu—out of many thousands;
kaścit—someone; yatati—endeavors; siddhaye—for
perfection; yatatām—of those so endeavoring; api—indeed;
siddhānām—of those who have achieved perfection; kaścit—
someone; mām—Me; vetti—does know; tattvataḥ—in fact.

Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for
perfection, and of those who have achieved perfection,
hardly one (a Vaiṣṇava) knows Me in truth.

A pure devotee is extremely rare

muktānām api siddhānāṁ nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

sudurlabhaḥ praśāntātmā koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

SB 6.14.5/CC Mad 19.150/JD ch. 7, 17

muktānām—of persons liberated or freed from the bondage
of ignorance; api—even; siddhānām—of persons who have
achieved perfection; nārāyaṇa—Śrī Nārāyaṇa; parāyaṇaḥ—
the pure devotee; su-durlabhaḥ—very rare; praśānta-ātmā—
completely satisfied, desireless; koṭiṣu—among many
millions; api—certainly; mahā-mune—O great sage.

O great sage, out of many millions of people who have
attained liberation and freedom from ignorance, or even
out of many millions of siddhas who have nearly attained
perfection, there is hardly one pure devotee of
Nārāyaṇa. Only such a devotee is actually completely
satisfied and peaceful.

A Vaiṣṇava is the rarely found embodiment of perfection

akṣṇoḥ phalaṁ tvādṛśa-darśanaṁ hi

tanoḥ phalaṁ tvādṛśa-gātra-saṅgaḥ

jihvā-phalaṁ tvādṛśa-kīrtanaṁ hi

su-durlabhā bhāgavatā hi loke

Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 13.2/ CC Mad 20.61

akṣṇoḥ—of the eyes; phalam—the perfect result of the
action; tvādṛśa—a person like you; darśanam—to see; hi—
certainly; tanoḥ—of the body; phalam—the perfection of
activities; tvādṛśa—of a person like you; gātra-saṅgaḥ—

                           71
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

touching the body; jihvā-phalam—the perfection of the
tongue; tvādṛśa—a person like you; kīrtanam—glorifying;
hi—certainly; su-durlabhāḥ—very rare; bhāgavatāḥ—pure
devotees of the Lord; hi—certainly; loke—in this world.

O Vaiṣṇava! To see you is the perfection of the eyes. To
touch your lotus feet is the perfection of the body. To
glorify your divine qualities is the perfection of the
tongue, for it is very rare to find a pure devotee
within this world.



dharmācāri-madhye bahuta “karma-niṣṭha—

koṭi-karma-niṣṭha-madhye eka “jñānī— śreṣṭha

koṭi-jñāni-madhye haya eka-jana “mukta—

koṭi-mukta-madhye “durlabha— eka kṛṣṇa-bhakta

CC Madhya 19.147-148

dharma-ācāri-madhye—among persons who actually follow
the Vedic principles or religious system; bahuta—many of
them; karma-niṣṭha—attracted to fruitive activities;
koṭi-karma-niṣṭha-madhye—among millions of such
performers of fruitive activities according to Vedic
principles; eka—one; jñānī—wise man; śreṣṭha—the chief;
koṭi-jñāni-madhye—out of many millions of such wise men;
haya—there is; eka-jana—one person; mukta—actually
liberated; koṭi-mukta-madhye—out of many millions of
liberated persons; durlabha—very rare; eka—one; kṛṣṇa-
bhakta—pure devotee.

Among the followers of Vedic knowledge, most follow the
process of fruitive activity, endeavouring to avoid
impious activities and perform only pious work. Out of
many such sincere fruitive jīvas, there may be one who
is actually wise (jñāni). Out of many millions of such
wise persons, one may actually become liberated (mukta),
and out of many millions of such liberated persons, a
pure devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa is rarely found.

The Gradation of living beings culminate in the
perfection of being a devotee

rajobhiḥ sama-saṅkhyātāḥ pārthivair iha jantavaḥ

teṣāṁ ye kecanehante śreyo vai manujādayaḥ

prāyo mumukṣavas teṣāṁ kecanaiva dvijottama

mumukṣūṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścin mucyeta sidhyati

muktānām api siddhānāṁ nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

sudurlabhaḥ praśāntātmā koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

SB 6.14.3-5

In this world, there are as many living entities as
there are atoms. Among these living entities, some are
human beings, and among them, few are interested in

                           72
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

following religious principles. Among those who follow
religious principles, only a few desire liberation from
the material world. Among thousands of those who desire
liberation, one may actually achieve it, giving up
material attachments to society, friendship and love,
country, home, wife, and children. And among many
thousands of such liberated persons, one who can
understand the true meaning of liberation is very rare.
Out of millions of perfected and liberated souls, one
may be a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Such devotees, who are fully
peaceful, are extremely rare.

The jīva’s evolution of consciousness: moving and non-
moving living entities, human beings, karmīs, jñānīs,
muktas and finally, Vaiṣṇavas, who are rarely found

tāra madhye 'sthāvara', 'jaṅgama' dui bheda

jaṅgame tiryak-jala-sthalacara-vibheda

tāra madhye manuṣya-jāti ati alpatara

tāra madhye mleccha, pulinda, bauddha, śabara

veda-niṣṭha-madhye ardheka veda 'mukhe' māne

veda-niṣiddha pāpa kare, dharma nāhi gaṇe

dharmācārī-madhye bahuta 'karma-niṣṭha'

koṭi-karma-niṣṭha-madhye eka 'jñānī' śreṣṭha

koṭi-jñāni-madhye haya eka-jana 'mukta'

koṭi-mukta-madhye 'durlabha' eka kṛṣṇa-bhakta

CC Madhya 19.144-148

One can divide the unlimited number of living entities
into two groups: moving and non-moving. Among living
entities that can move are birds, aquatics, and animals.
Although the living entities known as human beings are
very small in quantity, they may still be further
subdivided, for there are many uncultured human beings
like mlecchas, pulindas, and other varieties of
outcasts. Among human beings, those who are followers of
the Vedic principles are considered civilized. Among
these, almost half simply give lip-service to the Vedic
principles while committing all kinds of sinful
activities. Such men do not care for the prohibitions of
scripture. Among the followers of the Vedas most are
following the process of karma, distinguishing between
pious and impious work. Out of many such sincere karmīs,
there may be one jñānī, who is actually wise. Out of
many millions of such jñānis, one may become liberated.
And out of many such liberated persons, a pure devotee
of Kṛṣṇa is very difficult to find.

The five kinds of consciousness, culminating in bhāva-
bhakti

Jaiva Dharma ch. 16 (p. 389 in the 2002 ed.)

The souls imprisoned by māyā in a gross material body

                           73
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

pass through five stages of existence: ācchādita-cetana
(covered consciousness), saṅkucita-cetana (retracted
consciousness), mukulita-cetana (budding consciousness),
vikasita-cetana (blossoming consciousness), and pūrṇa-
vikasita-cetana (fully-blossomed consciousness).

Covered consciousness: Jīvas in the bodies of trees,
grass and stones. Retracted consciousness: Animals,
birds, snakes, fish, etc. Budding consciousness: Immoral
and moral atheists. Blossoming consciousness: Moral
theists and devotees at the stage of sādhana-bhakti.
Fully-blossomed consciousness: Devotees at the stage of
bhāva-bhakti. There are, therefore, five kinds of human
beings: immoral people, atheists who follow moral
principles, theists who follow moral principles,
devotees engaged in regulative devotional service
(sādhana-bhakti), and devotees on the level of
spontaneous devotional service (bhava-bhakti).

Thus ends section 2) Pure Devotees are Very Rare




3) The Benefits of Associating with and Serving the
Vaiṣṇavas

Three powerful substances of the pure devotee

bhakta-pada-dhūli āra bhakta-pada-jala

bhakta-bhukta-avaśeṣa - ei tina mahā-bala

ei tina - sevā haite kṛṣṇa-premā haya

punaḥ punaḥ sarva-śāstre phukāriyā kaya

CC Antya 16.60-61/BRSB p. 68/MS 7 pt/STB p. 27

bhakta-pada-dhūli—the dust of the lotus feet of a
devotee; āra—and; bhakta-pada-jala—the water that washed
the feet of a devotee; bhakta-bhukta-avaśeṣa—and the
remnants of food eaten by a devotee; tina—three; mahā-
bala—very powerful; ei tina-sevā—rendering service to
these three; haite—from; kṛṣṇa-prema—ecstatic love for
Kṛṣṇa; haya—there is; punaḥ punaḥ—again and again;
sarva-śāstre—all the revealed scriptures; phu-kāriyā
kaya—declare loudly.

The dust of the lotus feet of pure devotees, the water
that washes their feet, and their mahā-mahā prasādam
remnants (both hari-kathā and prasādam) — these three
are very powerful. By serving these three, one attains
Kṛṣṇa prema. This has been proclaimed in all the śāstras
again and again.12



The mahā-bhāgavata can make the impossible possible

yan-nāma-śruti-mātreṇa pumān bhavati nirmalaḥ

tasya tīrtha-padaḥ kiṁ vā dāsānām avaśiṣyate

                           74
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


SB 9.5.16

yat-nāma—the holy name; śruti-mātreṇa—simply by hearing;
pumān—a person; bhavati—becomes; nirmalaḥ—purified;
tasya—of Him; tīrtha-padaḥ—the Lord, at whose feet are
the holy places; kim vā—what; dāsānām—for His servants;
avaśiṣyate—nothing is impossible.

If simply by hearing Śrī Kṛṣṇa's holy name one becomes
supremely purified, who can imagine the purifying power
of those who are constantly engaged in service to His
lotus feet? What is impossible for such mahā-bhāgavatas?

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] “We have come to make the
impossible possible” (Turn Hippies into “Happies”,
yavanas and mlecchas into Vaiṣṇavas, conditioned souls
into loving servants of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa). (Italy, July
2004)



The Vaiṣṇavas see Kṛṣṇa’s abode and can reveal it to you

oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayo

divīva cakṣur ātatam tad viprāso vipanyavo

jāgṛvāmsaḥ samindhate viṣṇor yat paramaṁ padam

Ṛg Veda 1.22.20-21/BPKG p. 405, 447, 455

oṁ—invocation; tad—that; viṣṇoḥ—of Lord Viṣṇu; paramam—
the supreme; padam—abode; sadā—always; paśyanti—they
see; sūrayaḥ—the devotees; divi iva—as in the sky;
cakṣuḥ—the eye; ātatam—extends; tad—that; viprāsaḥ—the
brāhmaṇas; vipanyavaḥ—the praiseworthy; jāgṛvāmsaḥ—
spiritually awake; samindhate—they reveal; viṣṇoḥ—of
Viṣṇu; yat—whose; paramam—supreme; padam—abode.

The divine and learned Vaiṣṇavas always have the darśana
of the supreme abode of Viṣṇu by their aprākṛta
(spiritual) vision. Just as the sun’s rays in the sky
are extended to the mundane vision, so in the same way
the pure devotees always see the supreme abode of Lord
Viṣṇu. Because those highly praiseworthy and spiritually
awake devotees are able to see the spiritual world, they
are also able to reveal that supreme abode of Lord Viṣṇu
to others.

Thus ends 3) The Benefits of Associating with and
Serving the Vaiṣṇavas




4) The Hazards of disrespecting a Vaiṣṇava

Six kinds of Vaiṣṇava-aparādha (offences to pure
devotees)

hanti nindati vai dveṣṭi vaiṣṇavān nābhinandati


                           75
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

krudhyate yāti no harṣaṁ darśane patanāni ṣaṭ

HBV 10.312/BRSB p. 68/JD ch. 9

To beat a Vaiṣṇava, to slander him, to bear malice or
envy against him, to fail to welcome or please him, to
become angry with him, and to not feel pleasure upon
seeing him — by these six types of vaiṣṇava-aparādha,
one falls down to a degraded position.

The definition of aparādha

apagata-rādho yasmāt iti aparādhaḥ

Mahājana vākya

apagata—disappear; rādho—affection; yasmāt—on account of
which; iti—thus; aparādhaḥ—is an offence.

Any act or emotion which hinders the flow of love and
affection or any activity which causes Kṛṣṇa to withdraw
his affection and protection (any activity performed
with an envious mood).

The effects of committing offences



āyuḥ śriyaṁ yaśo dharmaṁ lokān āśiṣa eva ca

hanti śreyāṁsi sarvāṇi puṁso mahad-atikramaḥ

SB 10.4.46/CC Madhya 15.270, 25.84

āyuḥ—the duration of life; śriyam—beauty; yaśaḥ—fame;
dharmam—religion; lokān—elevation to higher planets;
āśiṣaḥ—blessings; eva—indeed; ca—also; hanti—destroys;
śreyāṁsi—benedictions; sarvāṇi—all; puṁsaḥ—of a person;
mahat-atikramaḥ—committing offences against great
personalities.

My dear King, when a man commits offences against pure
devotees, the mahā-bhāgavatas, all his hopes or
blessings received for a long duration of life, beauty,
fame and religious life resulting in promotion to higher
planets will be destroyed. Indeed, all auspiciousness
will be destroyed for such an offender.

It is forbidden to judge a Vaiṣṇava from a material
viewpoint

dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca doṣair

na prākṛtatvam iha bhakta-janasya paśyet

gaṅgāmbhasāṁ na khalu budbuda-phena-paṅkair

brahma-dravatvam apagacchati nīra-dharmaiḥ

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 6/BR 2.20

dṛṣṭaiḥ prākṛtatvam—seeing with material vision;
svabhāva-janitaiḥ—due to the defects stemming from his
nature; vapuṣaḥ—of the body; ca—and; doṣaiḥ—due to the

                             76
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

faults; iha—in this world; bhakta-janasya—the pure
devotee; na paśyet—one should not see; gaṅgā-ambhasām—of
the water of the Ganges; na khalu apagacchati—is never
lost; budbuda-phena-paṅkaiḥ—by the presence of bubbles,
foam and mud; brahma-dravatvam— (just as) the nature of
liquified transcendence; nīra-dharmaiḥ—which exist
simply due to the nature of water.

Devotees situated in this material world should not be
viewed with material vision; in other words, one should
not consider them to be ordinary conditioned souls. The
imperfections visible in their natures, such as birth in
a low caste, harshness, lethargy and so forth, and the
imperfections visible in their bodies such as ugly
features, disease, deformities and so forth, are
precisely like the appearance of bubbles, foam and mud
in the Gangā. Despite such apparent pollution in the
water of the Gaṅgā, she retains her nature as liquified
transcendence. Similarly, the self-realised Vaiṣṇavas
always exist on the transcendental plane and one should
not attribute material defects to them.



To view a Vaiṣṇava externally, by birth, is opposed to
bhakti

ye te kule vaiṣṇavera janma kene naya

tathāpi o sarvottama sarva-śāstre kaya

ye pāpiṣtha vaiṣṇavera jāti-buddhi kare

janma janma adhama-yonite dubi' mare

CB Madhya 10.100, 102

All the scriptures agree that a Vaiṣṇava should never be
seen in terms of his birth. A Vaiṣṇava does not actually
take birth. Those sinners who see a devotee interms of
his birth will themselves be born in the wombs of
abominable species life after life.



Thus ends section 4) The Hazards of disrespecting a
Vaiṣṇava

5) Devotees— So-called Fall-down




A devotee who has firm faith, even if accidentally
committing a sin, should be considered a sādhu (for he
will be quickly relieved of his faults by Kṛṣṇa)

api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā śaśvac-chāntiṁ nigacchati


                           77
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

BG 9.30-31/Upad. 6 pt/ JD ch. 6

api—even; cet—if; su-durācāraḥ—one committing the most
abominable sins; bhajate—is engaged in devotional
service; mām—unto Me; ananya-bhāk—without deviation;
sādhuḥ—a saint; eva—certainly; saḥ—he; mantavyaḥ—is to
be considered; samyak—completely; vyavasitaḥ—situated in
determination; hi—certainly; saḥ—he; kṣipram—very soon;
bhavati—becomes; dharma-ātmā—righteous; śaśvat-śāntim—
lasting peace; nigacchati—attains; kaunteya—O son of
Kuntī; pratijānīhi—declare; na—never; me—My; bhaktaḥ—
devotee; praṇaśyati—perishes.

If even the most ill-behaved person engages with
determination in exclusive devotional service unto Me,
he is worthy of being considered a saintly person
(sādhu) due to his intelligence being fixed on Me in
devotion. He quickly becomes purified and attains relief
from the bondage of both sins and pious activities. O
son of Kunti! Attest that My devotee will never fail to
attain perfection.

Kṛṣṇa protects the surrendered from accidental fall-
downs

sva-pāda-mūlam bhajataḥ priyasya

tyaktānya-bhāvasya hariḥ pareśaḥ

vikarma yac cotpatitaṁ kathañcid

dhunoti sarvaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ

SB 11.5.42/CC Madhya 22.144/GKH (P)

sva-pāda-mūlam—the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, the shelter of
the devotees; bhajataḥ—who is engaged in worshiping;
priyasya—who is very dear to Kṛṣṇa; tyakta—given up;
anya-bhāvasya—of any other mood; hariḥ—Śrī Hari; para-
īśaḥ—the Supreme Lord; vikarma—sinful activities; yat—
whatever; ca—and; utpatitam—occurred; kathañcit—somehow;
dhunoti—removes; sarvam—all; hṛdi—in the heart;
sanniviṣṭaḥ—entered.

One who has thus given up all other inclinations and has
taken full shelter at the lotus feet of Śrī Hari, the
Supreme Lord, is very dear to the Lord. Indeed, if such
a surrendered soul accidentally commits some sinful
activity, the Lord, who is seated within everyone’s
heart, immediately takes away the reaction to such sin.

Even if Your devotee accidentally falls down You protect
him

tathā na te mādhava tāvakāḥ kvacid

bhraśyanti mārgāt tvayi baddha-sauhṛdāḥ

tvayābhiguptā vicaranti nirbhayā

vināyakānīkapa-mūrdhasu prabho


                           78
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

SB 10.2.33/JD ch. 17

tathā—like them (the nondevotees); na—not; te—they (the
devotees); mādhava—O Lord, husband of the goddess of
fortune; tāvakāḥ—the followers of the devotional path,
the devotees; kvacit—in any circumstances; bhraśyanti—
fall down; mārgāt—from the path of devotional service;
tvayi—unto You; baddha-sauhṛdāḥ—because of being fully
attached to Your lotus feet; tvayā—by You; abhiguptāḥ—
always protected from all dangers; vicaranti—they move;
nirbhayāḥ—without fear; vināyaka-anīkapa—the enemies who
maintain paraphernalia to oppose the bhakti cult;
mūrdhasu—on their heads; prabho—O Lord.

O Mādhava, Lord of the goddess of fortune, if devotees
completely in love with You sometimes fall from the path
of devotion, they do not fall like non-devotees, for You
still protect them. Thus they fearlessly traverse the
heads of their opponents (both demons and the internal
enemies of lust, anger, etc.) and continue to progress
in devotional service.



Powerful devotees (like Śīva or Brahmā) are not affected
by apparent transgressions

dharma-vyatikramo dṛṣṭa īśvarāṇāṁ ca sāhasam

tejīyasāṁ na doṣāya vahneḥ sarva-bhujo yathā

SB 10.33.29

śrī-śukaḥ uvāca—Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; dharma-
vyatikramaḥ—the transgression of religious or moral
principles; dṛṣṭaḥ—seen; īśvarāṇām—of powerful
controllers; ca—even; sāhasam—due to audacity; tejīyasām
—who are spiritually potent; na—does not; doṣāya—(lead)
to any fault; vahneḥ—of fire; sarva-bhujaḥ—all-
devouring; yathā—as.

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The status of powerful
controllers is not harmed by any apparently audacious
transgression of morality we may see in them, for they
are just like fire, which devours everything fed into it
and remains unpolluted.

For one with firm faith, there is no danger of falling
down, even if he runs with closed eyes (i.e.
accidentally commits a sin)

yān āsthāya naro rājan na pramādyeta karhicit

dhāvan nimīlya vā netre na skhalen na pated iha

SB 11.2.35

yān—which; āsthāya—accepting with firm faith; naraḥ—a
man; rājan—O King; na pramādyeta—is not bewildered;
karhicit—ever; dhāvan—running; nimīlya—closing; vā—or;
netre—his eyes; na skhalet—will not trip; na patet—will
not fall; iha—on this path.

O King, one who accepts this process of bhakti with

                           79
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

strong faith in Guru and Kṛṣṇa, will never blunder on
this path. Even while running with eyes closed, he will
never trip or fall (in other words, even if he
accidentally commits a sin, he will be protected).

For one lacking firm faith, spiritual life is as
dangerous as a razor’s edge

uttiṣṭhata jāgrata prāpya varān nibodhata

kṣurasya dhārā niśitā duratyayā durgaṁ pathas tat kavayo
vadanti

Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.3.14

Arise! Awake ! Take advantage of this rare human form of
life, even if the path of spiritual realisation is
difficult and sharp like a razor’s edge. That is the
opinion of learned transcendentalists. (i.e. Those who
have no paramārthic (transcendental) faith and rely
solely on rules and regulations can easily fall down).

Even if a sādhaka falls down initially, there is no
question of being unsuccessful

tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer

bhajann apakvo —tha patet tato yadi

yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ

ko vārtha āpto —bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ

SB 1.5.17/MK 1.8

tyaktvā—having forsaken; sva-dharmam—one’s own
occupational engagement; caraṇa-ambujam—the lotus feet;
hareḥ—of Hari; bhajan—in the course of devotional
service; apakvaḥ—immature; atha—for the matter of; patet
—falls down; tataḥ—from that place; yadi—if; yatra—
whereupon; kva—what sort of; vā—or; abhadram—
unfavorable; abhūt—shall happen; amuṣya—of him; kim—
what?; kaḥ vā arthaḥ—what benefit; āptaḥ—obtained;
abhajatām—of the non-devotees; sva-dharmataḥ—being
engaged properly in one’s dharma.

One who has forsaken his material occupations to engage
in the devotional service of the Lord may sometimes fall
down while in an immature stage, yet there is no danger
of his being unsuccessful. On the other hand, a non-
devotee, though fully following his dharma, does not
gain anything.

Thus ends section 5) Devotees— So-called Fall-down




6) Three levels of devotees — uttama, madhyama and
kaniṣṭha




                           80
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

Respect offered by the madhyama devotee to the three
kinds of devotees

kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta

dīkṣāsti cet praṇatibhiś ca bhajantam īśam

śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya-

nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 5/BR 2.37/BPKG p. 325

kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; iti—thus (appears); yasya—in whose; giri—
speech; tam—that person (a neophyte devotee); manasā—
within the mind; ādriyeta—one should respect; dīkṣā—
accepted initiation from a qualified Guru; asti—he has;
cet—if; praṇatibhiḥ—by offering obeisances; ca—also;
bhajantam—an intermediate devotee; īśam—unto Bhagavān;
śuśrūṣayā—with all types of service (such as offering
daṇḍavat-praṇāma, making relevant inquiry and rendering
service); bhajana-vijñam—a self-realised, expert mahā-
bhāgavata Vaiṣṇava who performs bhajana of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s eightfold daily pastimes; ananyam—who is an
exclusive devotee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; anya-nindā-ādi-śūnya-
hṛdam—and whose heart, due to his undeviating absorption
in Kṛṣṇa, is free from faults such as the tendency to
criticize others; īpsita-saṅga—the association for which
one hankers; labdhyā—having obtained.

One who takes kṛṣṇa-nāma just once by calling out “O
Kṛṣṇa!” is a neophyte devotee (kaniṣṭha-adhikārī). One
should consider him to be his family member and silently
respect him. One who, fully understanding the principle
of dikṣā, has accepted initiation from a qualified Guru
and performs bhajana of Bhagavān in accordance with the
Vaiṣṇava conventions is an intermediate devotee
(madhyama-adhikārī). One should respect such a devotee
who is endowed with the correct understanding of reality
and illusion by offering praṇāma unto him and so forth.
One who is conversant with the science of bhajana as
described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other Vaiṣṇava
scriptures and who performs exclusive bhajana of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is a mahā-bhāgavata devotee. Due to his
undeviating absorption in Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the pure heart of
such a devotee is free from faults such as the tendency
to criticize others. He is expert in bhajana, which
means that he mentally renders service (mānasa-sevā) to
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes which take place during the
eight segments of the day (aṣṭa-kalīya-līlā). Knowing
him to be a topmost devotee whose heart is established
in the particular mood of service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa for
which one aspires and who is affectionately disposed
towards oneself, one should honour him by offering
daṇḍavat-praṇāma (praṇipāta), making relevant inquiry
(paripraśna) and rendering service (sevā) with great
love.

Devotees may be graded according to faith

śraddhavān jana haya bhakti-adhikārī

“uttama,— “madhyama,— “kaniṣṭha,— śraddhā-anusārī


                           81
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

CC Mad 22.64

śraddhāvān jana—a person with faith; haya—is; bhakti-
adhikārī—eligible for discharging transcendental loving
service to the Lord; uttama—first class; madhyama—
intermediate; kaniṣṭha—the lowest class; śraddhā-anusārī
—according to faith.

A faithful devotee is a truly eligible candidate for the
loving service of the Lord. According to one’s faith,
one is classified as a topmost devotee, an intermediate
devotee, or an inferior devotee.



1) Uttama-adhikārī

sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ

bhūtāni bhagavaty ātmany eṣa bhāgavatottamaḥ

SB 11.2.45/CC Madhya 22.72/JD ch. 7, 8

sarva-bhūteṣu—within all beings; yaḥ—who; paśyet—sees;
bhagavad-bhāvam—mood or bhāva towards Bhagavān; ātmanaḥ—
his own; bhūtāni—and all beings; bhagavati ātmani—within
Bhagavān; eṣaḥ—that person; bhāgavata-uttamaḥ—is the
uttama Bhāgavata.

One who sees his own bhagavad-bhāva, ecstatic mood of
attraction towards Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, in the hearts of all
jīvas (sarva-bhūteṣu) and sees all beings within Śrī
Kṛṣṇacandra is an uttama-bhāgavata. (An uttama Vaiṣṇava
perceives that all living beings love Bhagavān with the
same particular feeling of transcendental love that he
himself cherishes towards his iṣṭa-deva. He also
perceives that Bhagavān feels a reciprocal attitude of
love towards all living beings. An uttama Vaiṣṇava has
no disposition other than this). (Jaiva Dharma)

The mahā-bhāgavata sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere

sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe, nā dekhe tāra mūrti

sarvatra haya nija iṣṭa-deva-sphūrti

CC Mad 8.274

sthāvara-jaṅgama—movable and inert; dekhe—he sees; nā—
not; dekhe—sees; tāra—its; mūrti—form; sarvatra—
everywhere; haya—there is; nija—his own; iṣṭa-deva—
worshipable Lord; sphūrti—manifestation.

The mahā-bhāgavata, the pure devotee, certainly sees
everything mobile and immobile, but he does not exactly
see their forms. Rather, everywhere he immediately sees
manifest the form of His worshipable Lord (iṣṭa-deva).



An uttama Vaiṣṇava sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere and can never
lose Him

yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra sarvaṁ ca mayi paśyati

                           82
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


tasyāhaṁ na praṇaśyāmi sa ca me na praṇaśyati

BG 6.30

yaḥ—whoever; mām—Me; paśyati—sees; sarvatra—everywhere;
sarvam—everything; ca—and; mayi—in Me; paśyati—sees;
tasya—for him; aham—I; na—not; praṇaśyāmi—am lost; saḥ—
he; ca—also; me—to Me; na—nor; praṇaśyati—is lost.

For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in
Me, I am never lost, nor is he ever lost to Me.



The topmost devotee is expert in scripture and has firm
faith

śāstra-yuktye sunipuṇa, dṛḍha-śraddhā yāṅra

“uttama-adhikārī— sei tāraye saṁsāra

CC Mad 22.65

śāstra-yuktye—in argument and logic; su-nipuṇa—very
expert; dṛḍha-śraddhā—firm faith and confidence in
Kṛṣṇa; yāṅra—whose; uttama-adhikārī—the topmost devotee;
sei—he; tāraye saṁsāra—can deliver the whole world.

One who is expert in logic, argument, and the revealed
scriptures and who has firm faith in Kṛṣṇa is classified
as a topmost devotee. He can deliver the whole world.



Serve the lotus feet of a superior Vaiṣṇava who is
always taking pure harināma

kṛṣṇa-nāma nirantara yāñhāra vadane

se vaiṣṇava-śreṣṭha, bhaja tāñhāra caraṇe

CC Madhya 16.72

kṛṣṇa-nāma—the holy name of Kṛṣṇa; nirantara—
incessantly; yāñhāra—whose; vadane—in the mouth; sei—
such a person; vaiṣṇava-śreṣṭha—a first-class Vaiṣṇava;
bhaja—worship; tāñhāra caraṇe—his lotus feet.

One who is always taking pure kṛṣṇa-nāma is a superior
Vaiṣṇava, and your duty is to serve his lotus feet.



2) Madhyama-adhikārī



īsvare tad-adhīneṣu bāliśeṣu dviṣatsu ca

prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ

SB 11.2.46/CC Madhya 22.73/JD ch. 8


                           83
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

madhyamaḥ—a middle-class devotee (is) saḥ—he; yaḥ—who;
karoti—has; prema—love and affection; īsvare—for
Bhagavān and His associates (the uttama devotees);
maitrī—friendship; tad-adhīneṣu—for Bhagavān’s
subordinates (the madhyam devotees); kṛpā—mercy;
bāliśeṣu—towards the innocent; ca—and; upekṣā—neglect;
dviṣatsu—to the envious.

A madhyama-bhāgavata is one who has love for Īśvara and
His pure devotees, is friendly towards His bhaktas,
shows mercy towards those who are innocent in regard to
bhakti, and neglects those who are inimical to Īśvara or
His bhaktas.

sarvato manaso —saṅgam ādau saṅgaṁ ca sādhuṣu

dayāṁ maitrīṁ praśrayaṁ ca bhūteṣv addhā yathocitam

SB 11.3.23

sarvataḥ—everywhere; manasaḥ—of the mind; asaṅgam—
detachment; ādau—in the beginning; saṅgam—association;
ca—and; sādhuṣu—with saintly persons; dayām—mercy;
maitrīm—friendship; praśrayam—reverence; ca—and; bhūteṣu
—for all living beings; addhā—thus; yathā ucitam—as is
suitable.

A sincere disciple should learn to dissociate the mind
from everything material and positively cultivate
association with his spiritual master and other saintly
devotees. He should be merciful to those in an inferior
position to him, cultivate friendship with those on an
equal level and meekly serve those in a higher spiritual
position. Thus he should learn to deal properly with all
living beings.



kṛṣṇa prema, kṛṣṇa bhakte maitrī-ācaraṇa

bāliśete kṛpā, āra dveṣī-upekṣaṇa

karilena madhyama-bhakta śuddha-bhakta hana

kṛṣṇa-nāme adhikāra karena arjjana

Harināma Cintāmaṇi, Chapter 8

One who has love for Kṛṣṇa, who makes friends with the
devotees, who shows mercy to the neophytes and ignorant
people, and who avoids the envious is a madhyama-bhakta
and is considered a pure devotee, a śuddha-bhakta. He is
qualified to chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.



śāstra-yukti nāhi jāne dṛḍha, śraddhāvān

“madhyama-adhikārī— sei mahā-bhāgyavān

CC Madhya 22.67

śāstra-yukti—logical arguments on the basis of the
revealed scripture; nāhi—not; jāne—knows; dṛḍha—firmly;

                           84
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

śraddhāvān—faithful; madhyama-adhikārī—second-class
devotee; sei—he; mahā-bhāgyavān—very fortunate.

One who is not very expert in argument and logic based
on the revealed scriptures but who has firm faith is
considered a second-class devotee. He also must be
considered most fortunate.



One in whose mouth pure nāma appears even once is a
(madhyama) Vaiṣṇava

prabhu kahe, yāñhara mukhe śuni eka-bāra

kṛṣṇa-nāma, sei pūjya, śreṣṭha sabākāra

CC Madhya 15.106

prabhu kahe—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied; yāñhara
mukhe—in whose mouth; śuni—I hear; eka-bāra—once; kṛṣṇa-
nāma—pure kṛṣṇa-nāma; sei pūjya—he is worshipable;
śreṣṭha sabākāra—the best of all human beings.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied: “One in whose mouth the
pure holy name of Kṛṣṇa appears even once, may be
considered a Vaiṣṇava. Such a person is worshipable, and
is the topmost human being.”

3) Kaniṣṭha-adhikārī

arcāyām eva haraye pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate

na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ

SB 11.2.47/CC Madhya 22.74/JD ch 8, 25

prākṛtaḥ—a material; bhaktaḥ—devotee; eva—emphatically;
smṛtaḥ— considered saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; īhate—endeavors;
śraddhayā—with faith; pūjām—offering worship; haraye—
unto Śrī Hari; arcāyām—in the form of His Deity; ca—yet;
na—not; tad-bhakteṣu—not to Śrī Hari’s devotees; anyeṣu
and other beings.

A devotee who faithfully engages in the worship of the
Deity in the temple but does not behave properly toward
other devotees or people in general is called a prākṛta-
bhakta, a materialistic devotee, and is considered to be
in the lowest position.



yāhāra komala śraddhā, se “kaniṣṭha— jana

krame krame teṅho bhakta ha-ibe “uttama—

CC Mad 22.69

yāhāra—whose; komala śraddhā—soft faith; se—such a
person; kaniṣṭha jana—a neophyte devotee; krame krame—by
a gradual progression; teṅho—he; bhakta—devotee; ha-ibe—
will become; uttama—first class.

One whose faith is soft and pliable is called a

                           85
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

neophyte, but by gradually following the process he will
rise to the platform of a first-class devotee.

Thus ends section 6) Three levels of devotees




7) Glorifications of the Mahā-bhāgavata, Topmost
Vaiṣṇava



Further symptoms of an Uttama-adhikāri, Mahā-bhāgavata
Vaiṣṇava

gṛhītvāpīndriyair arthān yo na dveṣṭi na hṛṣyati

viṣṇor māyām idaṁ paśyan sa vai bhāgavatottamaḥ

SB 11.2.48

gṛhītvā—accepting; api—even though; indriyaiḥ—with his
senses; arthān—objects of the senses; yaḥ—who; na dveṣṭi
—does not hate; na hṛṣyati—does not rejoice; viṣṇoḥ—of
the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu; māyām—the illusory potency;
idam—this material universe; paśyan—seeing as; saḥ—he;
vai—indeed; bhāgavata-uttamaḥ—a first-class devotee.

One who is so absorbed in love of God that he sees
everything as the energy of Lord Kṛṣṇa (even while the
senses perceive their objects), and who therefore feels
neither attachment nor hatred towards the things of this
world is indeed the greatest among devotees (bhāgavata-
uttamaḥ).




dehendriya prāṇa-mano-dhiyāṁ yo

janmāpyaya-kṣud-bhaya-tarṣa-kṛcchraiḥ

saṁsāra-dharmair avimuhyamānaḥ

smṛtyā harer bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ

SB 11.2.49

deha—of the body; indriya—senses; prāṇa—life air; manaḥ—
mind; dhiyām—and intelligence; yaḥ—who; janma—by birth;
apyaya—diminution; kṣut—hunger; bhaya—fear; tarṣa—
thirst; kṛcchraiḥ—and the pain of exertion; saṁsāra—of
material life; dharmaiḥ—by the inseparable features;
avimuhyamānaḥ—not bewildered; smṛtyā—because of
remembrance; hareḥ—of Lord Hari; bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ—the
foremost of devotees.

Within the material world, one's body, senses, mind,
life airs, and intelligence are always disturbed by
birth, death, hunger, fear, and thirst. One who is not
bewildered by these miseries of material existence, who

                           86
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

always remembers the lotus feet of Śrī Hari is
considered bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ, a topmost devotee of the
Lord.




na kāma-karma-bījānāṁ yasya cetasi sambhavaḥ

vāsudevaika-nilayaḥ sa vai bhāgavatottamaḥ

SB 11.2.50

na—never; kāma—of lust; karma—of fruitive work; bījānām—
or of material hankerings, which are the seeds of karma;
yasya—of whom; cetasi—in the mind; sambhavaḥ—chance to
arise; vāsudeva-eka-nilayaḥ—one for whom the Supreme
Lord, Vāsudeva, is the only shelter; saḥ—he; vai—indeed;
bhāgavata-ut-tamaḥ—is a first-class devotee (ut-tama -
transcendental to the darkness of ignorance).

One who has taken exclusive shelter of the Supreme Lord
Vāsudeva, and whose heart is freed from the seeds of
lust and karma is considered a first-class devotee.




na yasya janma-karmabhyāṁ na varṇāśrama-jātibhiḥ

sajjate 'sminn ahaṁ-bhāvo dehe vai sa hareḥ priyaḥ

SB 11.2.51

na—there is not; yasya—of whom; janma—by good birth;
karmabhyām—or pious acts; na—not; varṇa-āśrama—by
adherence to rules of occupational or religious duty;
jātibhiḥ—or by belonging to a certain class of society;
sajjate—attaches itself; asmin—in this (body); aham-
bhāvaḥ—egotistic sentiment; dehe—in the body; vai—
indeed; saḥ—he; hareḥ—to Lord Hari; priyaḥ—is dear or
beloved.

One who is free from pride about his good birth, pious
activities, exalted varnāśrama position and other such
bodily designations, and who serves the Lord with
humility, is known as a beloved devotee of the Lord.




na yasya svaḥ para iti vitteṣv ātmani vā bhidā

sarva-bhūta-samaḥ śāntaḥ sa vai bhāgavatottamaḥ

SB 11.2.52

na—there is not; yasya—of whom; svaḥ paraḥ iti—”mine”
and “someone else—s”; vitteṣu—about his property; ātmani
—about his body; vā—or; bhidā—by thinking in terms of
duality; sarva-bhūta—to all living beings; samaḥ—equal;

                           87
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

śāntaḥ—peaceful; saḥ—he; vai—indeed; bhāgavata-uttamaḥ—
the best of devotees.

A mahā-bhāgavata is one who is free from the dualistic
conception of “This is mine and this is for others—
(Rather, he thinks, “Everything is for Kṛṣṇa—). Thus he
sees all living beings with an equal vision and is
therefore completely peaceful.



tri-bhuvana-vibhava-hetave 'py akuṇṭha-

smṛtir ajitātma-surādibhir vimṛgyāt

na calati bhagavat-padāravindāl

lava-nimiṣārdham api yaḥ sa vaiṣṇavāgryaḥ

SB 11.2.53

tri-bhuvana—of the three worlds comprising the material
universe; vibhava-hetave—for the sake of the opulences;
api—even; akuṇṭha-smṛtiḥ—whose remembrance is
undisturbed; ajita-ātma—of whom the unconquerable Lord
is the very soul; sura-ādibhiḥ—by the demigods and
others; vimṛgyāt—which are sought; na calati—he does not
go away; bhagavat—of Bhagavān; pada-aravindāt—from the
lotus feet; lava—a fraction of a second; nimiṣa—in the
blink of an eye; ardham—one half; api—even; yaḥ—who; saḥ
—he; vaiṣṇava-agryaḥ—the foremost of devotees of Lord
Viṣṇu.

The lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, are sought by
demigods such as Brahmā and Śiva, who have accepted Him
as their life and soul. A pure devotee can never forget
Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet or give up their shelter even for a
moment, even in exchange for the three worlds. Such a
devotee is known as a mahā-bhāgavata.




bhagavat uru-vikramāṅghri-śākhā-

nakha-maṇi-candrikayā nirasta-tāpe

hṛdi katham upasīdatāṁ punaḥ sa

prabhavati candra ivodite 'rka-tāpaḥ

SB 11.2.54

bhagavataḥ—of Bhagavān; uru-vikrama—which have performed
great heroic deeds; aṅghri—of the lotus feet; śākhā—of
the toes; nakha—of the nails; maṇi—which are like
jewels; candrikayā—by the moonshine; nirasta-tāpe—when
the pain has been removed; hṛdi—in the heart; katham—how
indeed; upasīdatām—of those who are worshiping; punaḥ—
again; saḥ—that pain; prabhavati—can have its effect;
candre—when the moon; iva—just as; udite—risen; arka—of
the sun; tāpaḥ—the burning heat.


                           88
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

How can the painful fever of material life befall those
who hold the cooling lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa within
their hearts? By the power of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet all the
troubles in the heart of His pure devotee are banished
forever, for His toenails are like gems whose rays
soothe the heart of His devotee and relieve him from all
trouble, just like the rays of the moon cool the earth
from the heat of the summer sun.




visṛjati hṛdayaṁ na yasya sākṣād

dharir avaśābhihito 'py aghaugha-nāśaḥ

praṇaya-rasanayā dhṛtāṅghri-padmaḥ

sa bhavati bhāgavata-pradhāna uktaḥ

SB 11.2.55/CC Madhya 25.128/JD ch. 7

visṛjati—gives up; hṛdayam—the heart; na—not; yasya—
whose; sākṣāt—directly; hariḥ—Śrī Hari, Kṛṣṇa; avaśa-
abhihitaḥ—who is automatically or inattentively
glorified; api—although; agha-ogha-nāśaḥ—who annihilates
all kinds of inauspicious offenses for a devotee;
praṇaya-rasanayā—with the rope of love; dhṛta-aṅghri-
padmaḥ—whose lotus feet are bound; saḥ—such a devotee;
bhavati—is; bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ—the most elevated
devotee; uktaḥ—is said.

When a person calls the names of Śrī Hari in a helpless
mood feeling that he has no other shelter and thereby
binds the Lord’s lotus feet with ropes of love, the Lord
never abandons his heart and while residing there
destroys immense accumulations of sin. In this way that
fortunate person becomes known by saints as a foremost
devotee.

The paramahaṁsa Vaiṣṇava

jñāna-niṣṭho virakto vā mad-bhakto vānapekṣakaḥ

sa liṅgān āśramāṁs tyaktvā cared avidhi-gocaraḥ

SB 11.18.28

jñāna—to philosophical knowledge; niṣṭhaḥ—dedicated;
viraktaḥ—detached from external manifestations; vā—
either; mat-bhaktaḥ—My devotee; vā—or; anapekṣakaḥ—not
desiring even liberation; sa-liṅgān—with their rituals
and external regulations; āśramān—the duties pertaining
to particular āśramas of life; tyaktvā—giving up; caret—
one’s conduct; avidhi-gocaraḥ—beyond dependence on rules
and regulations.

The paramahaṁsa is fixed in transcendental knowledge and
is free from attachment to any sense enjoyment. He does
not hankers for anything, including mokṣa. Such a great
soul has renounced not only the duties of varnāśrama,
but also its external marks including even the dress of
a sannyāsī. Such a great soul has given up all

                           89
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

attachment to mundane conceptions of religion and duty,
beginning with dharma, artha, kāma, and mokṣa, for he
has already surpassed all Vedic injunctions and
prohibitions. He is no longer dependent on the rules and
regulations of śāstra for he is spontaneously attached
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.




A premi bhakta purifies the whole world

vāg gadgadā dravate yasya cittaṁ

rudaty abhīkṣṇaṁ hasati kvacic ca

vilajja udgāyati nṛtyate ca

mad-bhakti-yukto bhuvanaṁ punāti

SB 11.14.24/Upad. 1 pt

vāk—speech; gadgadā—choked up; dravate—melts; yasya—of
whom; cittam—the heart; rudati—cries; abhīkṣṇam—again
and again; hasati—laughs; kvacit—sometimes; ca—also;
vilajjaḥ—without shame; udgāyati—sings out loudly;
nṛtyate—dances; ca—also; mat-bhakti-yuktaḥ—one fixed in
devotional service to Me; bhuvanam—the universe; punāti—
purifies.

My dear Uddhava! My devotee whose voice becomes choked
on account of prema, whose heart softens and begins to
flow with spiritual emotion, who cannot cease from
crying, who sometimes bursts into laughter, sometimes
begins to sing very loudly, abandoning all shyness, and
sometimes dances, is purifying not only himself but the
entire world.



The three grades of pure devotees (mahā-bhāgavata/
siddha-mahāpuruṣa)

atra bhakta-siddhās tri-vidhāḥ: prāpta-bhagavat-pārṣada-
dehā, nirdhūta-kaṣāyā, mūrcchita kaṣāyāś ca, yathā śrī-
nāradādayaḥ, śrī-śukādayaḥ, prāg-janma-gata-nāradādayaś
ca

Bhakti Sandarbha 187/ BRSB p. 34/GKH (P)

The pure devotees of the Lord are of three kinds: 1)
Those who have attained perfected spiritual bodies as
eternal associates of the Lord (bhagavat-pārṣada-deha-
prāpta); 2) Those who, although still in a material
body, have no trace of material desires or impressions
within their hearts (nirdhūta-kaṣāya); and 3) Those in
whose hearts there is still a trace of desires
influenced by the mode of goodness (mūrcchhita-kaṣāya).
Śrī Nārada is an example of the first kind of devotee,
Śrī Śukadeva of the second kind and Śrī Nārada in his
previous birth as the son of a maidservant, of the
third.


                              90
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Thus ends section 7) Glorifications of the Mahā-
bhāgavata




8) Vaiṣṇava and Brāhmaṇa



A Vaiṣṇava's birth, family, social position and nation
are of no importance

viprād dvi-ṣaḍ-guṇa-yutād aravinda-nābha-

pādāravinda-vimukhāt śvapacaṁ variṣṭham

manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitārtha-

prāṇaṁ punāti sa kulaṁ na tu bhūrimānaḥ

SB 7.9.10/CC Mad 20.59, Antya 4.69/JD ch. 3, 6

viprāt—than a brāhmaṇa; dvi-ṣaṭ-guṇa-yutāt—endowed with
the twelve qualities of a brāhmaṇa; aravinda-nābha—Lord
Viṣṇu, who has a lotus growing from His navel; pāda-
aravinda—to the lotus feet of the Lord; vimukhāt—
indifferent to bhakti; śva-pacam—one born in a low
family, or a dog-eater; variṣṭham—more glorious; manye—
I consider; tat-arpita—surrendered unto the lotus feet
of the Lord; manaḥ—his mind; vacana—words; īhita—every
endeavor; artha—wealth; prāṇam—and life; punāti—
purifies; saḥ—he (the devotee); kulam—his family; na—
not; tu—but; bhūrimānaḥ—one who falsely thinks himself
to be in a prestigious position.

A bhakta who has taken birth in a family of dog-eaters,
but who has dedicated his mind, words, activities and
wealth to the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is superior to a
brāhmaṇa endowed with all the twelve brahminical
qualities, but who has no bhakti for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Such a
bhakta, although of lowly birth, can purify himself and
his whole family, whereas the brāhmaṇa who is filled
with pride due to his superior social position cannot
even purify himself.



A caṇḍāla who becomes a devotee is superior to a non-
devotee sannyāsī

śvapaco “pi mahīpāla viṣṇu-bhakto dvijādhikaḥ

viṣṇu-bhakti-vihīno yo yatiś ca śvapacādhikaḥ

Nāradiya Purāṇa/HBV 10.87/Bhakti San. 100/JD ch. 6/BPKG
p. 439/GKH (P)

O king, if a candala (dog-eater) embraces the path of
pure devotion to the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu, he is superior
to a brāhmaṇa. On the other hand, if a sannyāsī is not a
devotee of Lord Viṣṇu then he is more degraded than that
caṇḍāla.

                           91
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017




Even if born as an outcast, a devotee is as worshipable
as Myself

na me “bhaktaś caturvedī mad-bhaktaḥ śvapacaḥ priyaḥ

tasmai deyaṁ tato grāhyaṁ sa ca pūjyo yathā hyaham

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 10.91

A non-devotee brāhmaṇa who knows the four Vedas is not
actually dear to Me. However, a devotee, even if born in
a family of outcastes (caṇḍālas) is certainly very dear
to Me. Everything should be offered to him and whatever
he offers should be accepted. He is as worshipable as
Myself.




One who always keeps Your holy name on his tongue is the
real Āryan

aho bata śva-paco —to garīyān

yaj-jihvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam

tepus tapas te juhuvuḥ sasnur āryā

brahmānūcur nāma gṛṇanti ye te

SB 3.33.7/CC Mad 11.192, 19.72, Antya 16.27/JD ch. 6/
BPKG p. 327, 437/GKH (P)

aho bata—oh, how glorious; śva-pacaḥ—a dog-eater; ataḥ—
hence; garīyān—worshipable; yat—of whom; jihvā-agre—on
the tip of the tongue; vartate—is; nāma—the holy name;
tubhyam—unto You; tepuḥ tapaḥ—practiced austerities; te—
they; juhuvuḥ—executed fire sacrifices; sasnuḥ—took bath
in the sacred rivers; āryāḥ—Āryans; brahma anūcuḥ—
chanted the Vedas; nāma—the holy name; gṛṇanti—accept;
ye—they who; te—Your.

My dear Lord, anyone who always keeps Your holy name on
his tongue is most glorious. Although he may be born in
a family of dog-eaters and therefore, by material
calculations, is the lowest of men, he is glorious
nevertheless. That is the wonderful power of chanting
the holy name of the Lord. One who chants the holy name
is understood to have performed all kinds of
austerities. He has chanted all the Vedas and has
performed all the great sacrifices mentioned in the
Vedas, and has already taken his bath in all the holy
places of pilgrimage. It is he who is factually the
Āryan.




                           92
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Anyone who takes to devotional service is exalted

nīca-jāti nahe kṛṣṇa-bhajane ayogya

sat-kula-vipra nahe bhajanera yogya

yei bhaje sei baḍa, abhakta hīna chāra

kṛṣṇa-bhajane nāhi jāti-kulādi-vicāra

CC Antya 4.66-67

nīca-jāti—a lowborn person; nahe—is not; kṛṣṇa-bhajane—
in discharging devotional service; ayogya—unfit; sat-
kula-vipra—a brāhmaṇa born in a very respectable
aristocratic family; nahe—is not; bhajanera yogya—fit
for bhajana; yei bhaje—anyone who takes to devotional
service; sei—he; baḍa—exalted; abhakta—nondevotee; hīna
chāra—most condemned and abominable; kṛṣṇa-bhajane—in
discharging devotional service; nāhi—there is not; jāti—
caste; kula—family; ādi—and so on; vicāra—consideration
of.

Birth in a low family is no disqualification for the
execution of devotional service. And birth in a family
of brāhmaṇas is no qualification. Anyone who takes to
devotional service is exalted, whereas a non-devotee is
always condemned and abominable. In the discharge of
devotional service to the Lord, there is no
consideration of the status of one’s family lineage or
of socio-cultural background.

Editorial note: Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda
quoted the third line of this śloka in his last
conversation with Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, prior to
entering nitya-līlā (yei bhaje sei baḍa, abhakta hīna
chāra - Anyone who takes to devotional service is
exalted, whereas a non-devotee is always condemned).

Brāhmaṇas devoid of bhakti are lower than caṇḍālās (dog-
eaters)

viṣṇu-bhakti-vihīnā ye caṇḍālāḥ parikīrtitāḥ

caṇḍālā api vai śreṣṭhā hari-bhakti-parāyaṇāḥ

Bṛhan-nāradīya/Nārada Pañcaratra 1.37.12/Bhakti San.
100/BPKG p. 438/GKH (P)

ye—those (brāhmaṇas); viṣṇu-bhakti-vihīnāḥ—bereft of
devotion to Śrī Viṣṇu; caṇḍālāḥ—dog-eaters; parikīrtitāḥ
—are said to be; api—however; caṇḍālā—dog-eaters; vai—
certainly; śreṣṭhāḥ—most exalted; hari-bhakti-parāyaṇāḥ—
who are dedicated to hari-bhakti.

Those brāhmaṇas who are devoid of devotion to Kṛṣṇa are
lower than dog-eaters (caṇḍālās), whereas those born as
caṇḍālās but who are devoted to Kṛṣṇa, are the most
exalted.



The miser and the brāhmaṇa

                             93
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


etad akṣaraṁ gārgy aviditvāsmāl lokāt praiti sa kṛpaṇaḥ

atha ya etad akṣaraṁ gārgi viditvāsmāl lokāt praiti sa
brāhmaṇaḥ

Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 3.9.10

etad—that; akṣaram—spiritual life; gārgi—O Gargi
(daughter of Gargācārya); aviditva—without knowing the
solution to the problem of life; asmāt—from this; lokāt—
material world; praiti—he quits (like cats and dogs);
saḥ—he is; kṛpanaḥ—a miserly man; yaḥ—he who; etad—that;
akṣaram—spiritual life; gārgi—O Gargi; viditva—knowing
the solution to the problem of life; asmāt—from this;
lokāt—material world; praiti—he quits; saḥ—he is;
brāhmaṇaḥ—a brāhmaṇa.

O daughter of Gargācārya, he who leaves this world
without learning about the infallible Supreme is a
kṛpaṇa, or miser. O Gārgi, one who is acquainted with
that infallible truth by which one transcends death is a
brāhmaṇa.

A pure devotee is the best of brāhmaṇas

brāhmaṇānāṁ sahasrebhyaḥ satra-yājī viśiṣyate

satra-yāji-sahasrebhyaḥ sarva-vedānta-pāragaḥ

sarva-vedānta-vit-koṭyā viṣṇu-bhakto viśiṣyate

vaiṣṇavānāṁ sahasrebhyaḥ ekānty eko viśiṣyate

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 10.117/Bhakti-sandarbha 177

Out of many thousands of brāhmaṇas, one who performs
sacrifice (yajña) for Viṣṇu is best. Out of thousands of
such yajñika-brāhmaṇas, one who knows the meaning of
Vedānta is best. But of millions of such Vedāntists, a
devotee of Viṣṇu is best. And out of thousands of Viṣṇu
bhaktas, one who is an unalloyed devotee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the best.

Thus ends section 8) Vaiṣṇava and Brāhmaṇa




9) Following in the Footsteps of Vaiṣṇava Saints



The only real dharma is that established by Vaiṣṇavas
and Vaiṣṇava-śāstra

ei kali-kāle āra nāhi kona dharma

vaiṣṇava, vaiṣṇava-śāstra, ei kahe marma

CC Mad 9.362

ei kali-kāle—in this age of Kali; āra—other; nāhi kona—

                           94
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

there is not any; dharma—religious principle; vaiṣṇava—
devotee; vaiṣṇava-śāstra—devotional literature; ei kahe
marma—this is the purport.

In this age of Kali there are no genuine spiritual
principles other than those established by Vaiṣṇava
devotees and the Vaiṣṇava scriptures. This is the sum
and substance of everything.

The twelve Mahājanas know the real essence of dharma

svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ

prahlādo janako bhīṣmo balir vaiyāsakir vayam

dvādaśaite vijānīmo dharmaṁ bhāgavataṁ bhaṭāḥ

guhyaṁ viśuddhaṁ durbodhaṁ yaṁ jñātvāmṛtam aśnute

SB 6.3.20-21

[Yamarāja said:] svayambhūḥ—Lord Brahmā; nāradaḥ—the
great saint Nārada; śambhuḥ—Lord Śiva; kumāraḥ—the four
Kumāras; kapilaḥ—Lord Kapila; manuḥ—Svāyambhuva Manu;
prahlādaḥ—Prahlāda Mahārāja; janakaḥ—Janaka Mahārāja;
bhīṣmaḥ—Grandfather Bhīṣma; baliḥ—Bali Mahārāja;
vaiyāsakiḥ—Śukadeva; vayam—we; dvādaśa—twelve; ete—
these; vijānīmaḥ—know; dharmam—the essence of one’s
spiritual nature and function; bhāgavatam—(which teaches
a person how) to love Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; bhaṭāḥ—O my dear
servants; guhyam—very confidential; viśuddham—
transcendental, uncontaminated by the material modes;
durbodham—not easily understood; yam—which; jñātvā—
understanding; amṛtam—eternal life; aśnute—he enjoys.

Lord Brahmā, Bhagavān Nārada, Lord Śiva, the four
Kumāras, Lord Kapila [the son of Devahūti], Svāyambhuva
Manu, Prahlāda Mahārāja, Janaka Mahārāja, Grandfather
Bhīṣma, Bali Mahārāja, Śukadeva Gosvāmī and I myself
know sanātana- dharma. My dear servants, this eternal
transcendental principle, which is known as bhāgavata-
dharma, or pure loving devotion unto the Supreme Lord,
is uncontaminated by the material modes of nature. It is
very confidential and difficult for ordinary human
beings to understand, but if by chance one fortunately
understands it, he is immediately liberated, and attains
eternal life.



One should follow the pure path outlined by the
Mahājanas

tarko —pratiṣṭhaḥ śrutayo vibhinnā

nāsāv ṛṣir yasya mataṁ na bhinnam

dharmasya tattvaṁ nihitaṁ guhāyāṁ

mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ

Mahābhārata, Vāna parva 313.117/ CC Mad 17.186, 25.57

tarkaḥ—argument; apratiṣṭhaḥ—not substantial; śrutayaḥ—

                           95
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Vedas; vibhinnāḥ—various conclusions; na—not; asau—that;
ṛṣiḥ—a great sage learned in the Vedas; yasya—whose;
matam—opinion; na—not; bhinnam—separate; tattvam—truth;
dharmasya—of religious principles; nihitam—situated;
guhāyām—hidden in the heart of; mahā-janaḥ—the great
saintly devotees of the past; yena—by which way; gataḥ—
traversed; saḥ—that; panthāḥ—the path.

Dry arguments are inconclusive and the Vedas give
varying, sometimes contradictory, conclusions. One is
not considered a ṛṣi unless one’s philosophical
conception is different from others. Consequently, the
confidential truth of dharma cannot be glinned from the
Vedas or the ṛṣis but lies hidden in the heart of pure
devotees. Therefore one should accept only the pure path
advocated by those pure devotees, the mahājanas.

One should worship and serve the Mahājanas

mārkeṇḍeyo 'mbarīṣaś ca vasur vyāso vibhīṣaṇaḥ

puṇḍarīko baliḥ śambhuḥ prahlādo viduro dhruvaḥ

dālbhyaḥ parāśaro bhīṣmo nāradādyāś ca vaiṣṇavaiḥ

sevyā hariṁ niṣevyāmī no ced āgaḥ paraṁ bhavet

Laghu Bhāgavatāmṛta, Uttara-kāṇḍa 2

Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛṣī, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, Vasudeva, Śrīla
Vyāsadeva, Vibhīṣaṇa, Puṇḍarīka, Bali Mahārāja, Śiva,
Prahlāda Mahārāja, Vidura, Dhruva Mahārāja, Dālbhya,
Parāśara, Bhīṣma, Nārada, and the great sages and
devotees who follow in their footsteps are all great
personalities. One should worship and serve them in
addition to worshiping and serving Lord Hari. One who
neglects to worship the Lord's devotees commits a great
offense.



The nine devotees who attained perfection through
navadhā-bhakti

śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣid abhavad vaiyāsakiḥ kīrtane

prahlādaḥ smaraṇe tad-aṅghri-bhajane lakṣmiḥ pṛthuḥ
pūjane

akrūras tv abhivandane kapi-patir dāsye “tha sakhye
“rjunaḥ

sarvasvātma-nivedane balir abhūt kṛṣṇāptir eṣāṁ parā

Padyāvalī 53/BRS 1.2.265/CC Madhya 22.136

śrī-viṣṇoḥ—of Viṣṇu (Śrī Kṛṣṇa); śravaṇe—in hearing;
parīkṣit—King Parīkṣit, known also as Viṣṇurāta, or one
who is protected by Lord Viṣṇu; abhavat—was; vaiyāsakiḥ—
Śukadeva Gosvāmī; kīrtane—in reciting Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam;
prahlādaḥ—Mahārāja Prahlāda; smaraṇe—in remembering;
tat-aṅghri—of Lord Viṣṇu’s lotus feet; bhajane—in
serving; lakṣmīḥ—the goddess of fortune; pṛthuḥ—Mahārāja
Pṛthu; pūjane—in worshiping the Deity of the Lord;

                           96
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

akrūraḥ—Akrūra; tu—but; abhivandane—in offering prayers;
kapi-patiḥ—Hanumāñjī, or Vajrāgajī; dāsye—in servitude
to Lord Rāmacandra; atha—moreover; sakhye—in friendship;
arjunaḥ—Arjuna; sarvasva-ātma-nivedane—in fully
dedicating oneself; baliḥ—Mahārāja Bali; abhūt—was;
kṛṣṇa-āptiḥ—achieving the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; eṣām—
of all of them; parā—transcendental.

Mahārāja Parīkṣit attained the highest perfection,
shelter at Lord Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, simply by hearing
about Viṣṇu (Śrī Kṛṣṇa). Śukadeva Gosvāmī attained
perfection simply by reciting Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
Prahlāda Mahārāja attained perfection by remembering the
Lord. The goddess of fortune attained perfection by
massaging the transcendental legs of Mahā-Viṣṇu.
Mahārāja Pṛthu attained perfection by worshiping the
Deity, and Akrūra attained perfection by offering
prayers unto the Lord. Vajrāṅgajī [Hanumān] attained
perfection by rendering service to Lord Rāmacandra, and
Arjuna attained perfection simply by being Kṛṣṇa’s
friend. Bali Mahārāja attained perfection by dedicating
everything to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.



Thus ends 9) Following in the Footsteps of Vaiṣṇava
Saints




10) Gradations of Bhaktas/Levels of Pure Bhakti



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Praphupāda: Above Prahlāda,
the Pāṇḍavas are supposedly more advanced. Above the
Pāṇḍavas are the members of the Yadu dynasty, who are
even more advanced. In the Yadu dynasty, Uddhava is the
furthest advanced, and above Uddhava are the damsels of
Vraja-dhāma, the gopīs themselves. (CC Madhya-līlā
8.246, purport)



Sa-kāma bhaktas - Dhruva Mahārāja and Kardama Muni (they
do not come under the strict definition of pure bhakti
because their bhakti is mixed with material desires or
desires for self-gain)




1. Jñānī- (śānta) bhakta



Prahlāda Mahārāja, Bhīṣmadeva, (ātmārāmatā) Śukadeva
Gosvāmī




                           97
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

[Aiśvarya-jñāna, Kṛṣṇa is perfect — no need to serve
Him.]




2. Śuddha-bhakta



Ambarīṣa Mahārāja



[Serving by all nine limbs of bhakti.]




3. Premī-bhakta



Hanumān



[Serves Lord Rāma in Dāsya-rasa.]




4. Prema-para-bhakta



The Pāṇḍavas



[Intimate friends and relatives of Kṛṣṇa.]




5. Premātura-bhakta



Uddhava



[Directly lives with Kṛṣṇa, being his cousin and serving
Him as friend, advisor, and messenger to the gopīs.]




                           98
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

6. The Vrajavāsīs: Cowherd boys (sakhya-rasa), Parents
(vātsalya-rasa), Gopīs (mādhurya-rasa) headed by Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, the topmost “devotee— (eternal consort).



Prahlāda Mahārāja is the best of the devotees

kvāhaṁ rajaḥ-prabhava īśa tamo —dhike —smin

jātaḥ suretara-kule kva tavānukampā

na brahmaṇo na tu bhavasya na vai ramāyā

yan me —rpitaḥ śirasi padma-karaḥ prasādaḥ

SB 7.9.26

kva—where; aham—I (am); rajaḥ-prabhavaḥ—being born in a
body full of passion; īśa—O my Lord; tamaḥ—the mode of
ignorance; adhike—surpassing in; asmin—in this; jātaḥ—
born; sura-itara-kule—in a family of atheists or demons
(who are subordinate to the devotees); kva—where; tava—
Your; anukampā—causeless mercy; na—not; brahmaṇaḥ—of
Lord Brahmā; na—not; tu—but; bhavasya—of Lord Śiva; na—
nor; vai—even; ramāyāḥ—of the goddess of fortune; yat—
which; me—of me; arpitaḥ—offered; śirasi—on the head;
padma-karaḥ—lotus hand; prasādaḥ—the symbol of mercy.

O my Lord, O Supreme, because I was born in a family
full of the hellish material qualities of passion and
ignorance, what is my position? And what is to be said
of Your causeless mercy, which was never offered even to
Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva or the goddess of fortune,
Lakṣmī? You never put Your lotus hand upon their heads,
but You have put it upon mine.

Anyone who follows Śrī Prahlāda’s example will become a
pure devotee

bhavanti puruṣā loke mad-bhaktās tvām anuvratāḥ

bhavān me khalu bhaktānāṁ sarveṣāṁ pratirūpa-dhṛk

SB 7.10.21

bhavanti—become; puruṣāḥ—persons; loke—in this world;
mat-bhaktāḥ—My pure devotees; tvām—you; anuvratāḥ—
following in your footsteps; bhavān—you; me—My; khalu—
indeed; bhaktānām—of all devotees; sarveṣām—in different
mellows; pratirūpa-dhṛk—tangible example.

[Śrī Bhagavān said:] “Those who follow your example will
naturally become My pure devotees. You are the best
example of My devotee, and others should follow in your
footsteps.”

Ambarīṣa Mahārāja is serving Kṛṣṇa with all bodily limbs

sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor

vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane

karau harer mandira-mārjanādiṣu

                           99
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


śrutiṁ cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye (18)



mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane dṛśau

tad-bhṛtya-gātra-sparśe —ṅga-saṅgamam

ghrāṇaṁ ca tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe

śrīmat-tulasyā rasanāṁ tad-arpite (19)



pādau hareḥ kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe

śiro hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane

kāmaṁ ca dāsye na tu kāma-kāmyayā

yathottamaśloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ (20)

SB 9.4.18-20/CC Madhya 22.137-139

saḥ—he (Mahārāja Ambarīṣa); vai—indeed; manaḥ—his mind;
kṛṣṇa-padā-aravindayoḥ—(fixed) upon the two lotus feet
of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vacāṁsi—his words; vaikuṇṭha-guṇa-
anuvarṇane—describing the glories of Kṛṣṇa; karau—his
two hands; hareḥ mandira-mārjana-ādiṣu—in activities
like cleansing the temple of the Supreme Lord, Hari;
śrutim—his ear; cakāra—engaged; acyuta—of Kṛṣṇa, who is
infallible; sat-kathā-udaye—in hearing the
transcendental narrations.

mukunda-liṅga-ālaya-darśane—in seeing the Deity, temples
and holy dhāmas of Mukunda; dṛśau—his two eyes; tat-
bhṛtya—of the servants of Kṛṣṇa; gātra-sparśe—in
touching the bodies; aṅga-saṅgamam—contact of his body;
ghrāṇam ca—and his sense of smell; tat-pāda—of His lotus
feet; saroja—of the lotus flower; saurabhe—in (smelling)
the fragrance; śrīmat-tulasyāḥ—of the tulasī leaves;
rasanām—his tongue; tat-arpite—in the prasāda remnants
of the Lord.

pādau—his two legs; hareḥ—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; kṣetra—holy
places; pada-anusarpaṇe—walking to those places; śiraḥ—
the head; hṛṣīkeśa—of Kṛṣṇa, the master of the senses;
pada-abhivandane—in offering obeisances to the lotus
feet; kāmam ca—and his desires; dāsye—in being engaged
as a servant; na—not; tu—indeed; kāma-kāmyayā—with a
desire for sense gratification; yathā—as; uttamaśloka—
Kṛṣṇa who is praised by sublime ślokas; jana-āśrayā—
taking shelter of pure devotees, or devotees whose
hearts are the abode of pure love for Kṛṣṇa; ratiḥ—deep
love and attachment.

Mahārāja Ambarīṣa always engaged his mind in meditating
upon the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, his words in describing
the glories of the Lord, his hands in cleansing the
Lord’s temple and his ears in hearing the words spoken
by Kṛṣṇa or about Kṛṣṇa. He engaged his eyes in seeing
the Deity of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa’s temples and Kṛṣṇa’s places
like Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, he engaged his sense of

                          100
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

touch in touching the bodies of the Lord’s devotees, he
engaged his sense of smell in smelling the fragrance of
tulasī offered to the Lord and he engaged his tongue in
tasting the Lord’s prasāda. He engaged his legs in
walking to the holy places and temples of the Lord, his
head in bowing down before the Lord and all his desires
in serving the Lord twenty-four hours a day. Indeed,
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa never desired anything for his own
sense gratification. He engaged all his senses and mind
in devotional service. He performed this ninefold
(navadhā) bhakti while taking shelter of the āśraya-
jana, those devotees whose hearts are the abode of rati,
deep love and intense attachment, for uttama-śloka Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

The Pāṇḍavas are superior to Nārada and Prahlāda

na tu prahlādasya gṛhe paraṁ brahma vasati, na ca tad
arśanārthaṁ

munayas tad gṛhān abhiyanti, na ca tasya brahma
mātuleyādi rūpeṇa varttate, na ca svayam eva prasannam,
ato yuyam eva tato 'pyasmatto 'pi bhūri-bhāgā iti bhāvaḥ

Laghu-Bhāgavatāmṛta 5.16, Rūpa Gosvāmī

Śrī Kṛṣṇa did not personally stay in Prahlāda Mahārāja’s
home (although He stayed in the Pāṇḍavas— home). The
great sages did not travel to Prahlāda’s home in order
to see the Supreme Lord (although they did visit the
Pāṇḍavas— home for this purpose). Kṛṣṇa did not become
the intimate relative of Prahlāda Mahārāja (as He became
the maternal cousin of the Pāṇḍavas). Kṛṣṇa also did not
personally express great pleasure in the daily
activities of Prahlāda Mahārāja (as He did with the
Pāṇḍavas). For all these reasons Nārada said that the
Pāṇḍavas were more fortunate than himself (Nārada) or
Prahlāda.

The saintly Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is awarded the title
Hari-dāsa

hari-dāsasya rājarṣeḥ rājasūya-mahodayam

naivātṛpyan praśaṁsantaḥ piban martyo —mṛtaṁ yathā

SB 10.75.27/VG p. 138

hari—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; dāsasya—of the servant; rāja-ṛṣeḥ—of
the saintly King; rājasūya—of the Rājasūya sacrifice;
mahā-udayam—the great celebration; na—not; eva—indeed;
atṛpyan—they became satiated; praśaṁsantaḥ—glorifying;
piban—drinking; martyaḥ—a mortal man; amṛtam—immortal
nectar; yathā—as.

O Parīkṣit Mahārāja! Just as a mortal person continues
to drink nectar without ever becoming satiated, in the
same way all those ṛṣis who are praising the rājasūya
yajña of Śrī Hari’s servant, the saintly Yudhiṣṭhira
Mahārāja, are also never satisfied.

Devarṣi Nārada to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira: How is it that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Controller, has become your
intimate family member?

                          101
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


yūyaṁ nṛ-loke bata bhūri-bhāgā

lokaṁ punānā munayo 'bhiyānti

yeṣāṁ gṛhān āvasatīti sākṣād

gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma manuṣya-liṅgam

Śrī Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛtam 1.5.7/VG p. 139

yūyam—all of you (the Pāṇḍavas); nṛ-loke—within this
material world; bata—however; bhūri-bhāgāḥ—extremely
fortunate; lokam—all the planets; punānāḥ—who can
purify; munayaḥ—great saintly persons; abhiyānti—almost
always come to visit; yeṣām—of whom; gṛhān—the house;
āvasati—resides in; iti—thus; sākṣāt—directly; gūḍham—
very confidential; param brahma—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; manuṣya-liṅgam—appearing just like a human
being.

Mahārāja! In this world you (the Pāṇḍavas) are indeed
the most fortunate, because the supreme controller of
all controllers, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the original cause of all
causes, is your dear worshipable deity, guru, cousin,
brother, messenger, friend, charioteer and servant who
follows your every order. He who is the object of love
for all living entities is Himself bathing the feet of
all the ṛṣis and mahārṣis who have arrived for your
rājasūya-yajñā. That same supreme absolute brahma, whose
darśana is extremely rare, always resides incognito in
your home. Truly, we have not come here to take Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s darśana, but rather to witness the amazing way
you Pāṇḍavas have won over the all-pervading and fully
independent Supreme Absolute Truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. You have
made Him your intimate family member. O Dharmarāja,
eldest son of Pāṇḍu! How is it that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who lives
in everyone’s heart as the witness and supreme
controller, makes Himself at home with you, always
residing in your house? All these great personalities
have come here just to see this.

Some of the Yādavas are superior to the Pāṇḍavas

sadāti-sannikṛṣṭatvān mamatādhikyato hareḥ

pāṇḍavebhyo “pi yādavāḥ kecit śreṣṭhatamā matāḥ

Laghu-Bhāgavatāmṛta 5.18, Rūpa Gosvāmī

sadā—constant; ati-sannikṛṣṭatvān—closeness; mamatā-
adhikyataḥ—because of intimate family relationship;
hareḥ—of Lord Hari; pāṇḍavebhyaḥ—than the Pāṇḍavas; api—
even; yādavāh—members of the Yadu dynasty; kecit—some;
śreṣṭhatamaḥ—more exalted; matāḥ—are considered.

Because of their constant intimate association with
Kṛṣṇa and close family ties with Him, some members of
the Yadu dynasty are more exalted than the Pāṇḍavas.

The second Hari-dāsa is Śrī Uddhava

sarid-vana-giri-droṇīr vīkṣan kusumitān drumān


                          102
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

kṛṣṇaṁ saṁsmārayan reme hari-dāso vrajaukasām

SB 10.47.56/VG p. 139

sarit—the rivers; vana—forests; giri—mountains; droṇīḥ—
and valleys; vīkṣan—seeing; kusumitān—flowering; drumān—
the trees; kṛṣṇam—about Kṛṣṇa; saṁsmārayan—inspiring
remembrance; reme—he took pleasure; hari-dāsaḥ—the
servant of Lord Hari; vraja-okasām—for the residents of
Vraja.

[In order to console His parents as well as the vraja-
ramaṇīs and the other vrajavāsīs, Kṛṣṇa sent His dear
servant Uddhava to live in Vraja for a while] This hari-
dāsa, Uddhava, wandered around Vraja with the
vrajavāsīs, sometimes going to the banks of the Yamunā,
sometimes walking in the forests, sometimes roaming on
Girirāja Govardhana, and sometimes meandering happily
amongst the trees laden with colourful flowers. In each
place He asked the vrajavāsīs about Kṛṣṇa’s līlās there,
thus causing them to be overwhelmed by those pastimes.
How dear is this hari-dāsa Uddhava to Kṛṣṇa!

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself said to Uddhava: You are dearer to Me
than My own self

na tathā me priyatama ātma-yonir na śaṅkaraḥ

na ca saṅkarṣaṇo na śrīr naivātmā ca yathā bhavān

SB 11.14.15/VG p. 140

na—not; tathā—in the same way; me—to Me; priya-tamaḥ—
most dear; ātma-yoniḥ—the self-born Lord Brahmā; na—nor;
saṅkaraḥ—Lord Śiva; na—nor; ca—also; saṅkarṣaṇaḥ—My
direct expansion Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa; na—nor; śrīḥ—the
goddess of fortune; na—nor; eva—certainly; ātmā—My own
self ; ca—also; yathā—as much as; bhavān—you.

My dear Uddhava! You are My very closest friend. No one
is as close to me as you are, not even the self-born
Brahmā, Śaṅkara, My brother Balarāma, or the other half
of My body Lakṣmī. Indeed, not even My own self is as
dear to Me as you are.

Śrī Uddhava is the topmost associate of Kṛṣṇa among the
Yādavas

vṛṣṇīnāṁ pravaro mantrī kṛṣṇasya dayitaḥ sakhā

śiṣyo bṛhaspateḥ sākṣād uddhavo buddhi-sattamaḥ

SB 10.46.1/VG p. 140

[śrī-śukaḥ uvāca—Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:] vṛṣṇīnām—of the
Vṛṣṇis; pravaraḥ—the best; mantrī—adviser; kṛṣṇasya—of
Kṛṣṇa; dayitaḥ—beloved; sakhā—friend; śiṣyaḥ—disciple;
bṛhaspateḥ—of Bṛhaspati; sākṣāt—directly; uddhavaḥ—
Uddhava; buddhi—having intelligence; sat-tamaḥ—of the
highest quality.

O Parīkṣit! The highly intelligent and respected Uddhava
was a prominent member of the Vṛṣṇi (Yadu) dynasty and
the direct disciple of Bṛhaspati. He was Kṛṣṇa’s prime

                          103
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

minister and dear bosom friend. What greater glories
than these can be described about him!



noddhavo 'ṇv api man-nyūno yad guṇair nārditaḥ prabhuḥ

ato mad-vayunaṁ lokaṁ grāhayann iha tiṣṭhatu

SB 3.4.31

na—not; uddhavaḥ—Uddhava; aṇu—slightly; api—also; mat—to
Myself; nyūnaḥ—inferior; yat—because; guṇaiḥ—by the
modes of material nature; na—nor; arditaḥ—affected;
prabhuḥ—master; ataḥ—therefore; mat-vayunam—knowledge of
Me; lokam—the world; grāhayan—just to disseminate; iha—
in this world; tiṣṭhatu—may remain.

Uddhava is not inferior to Me in any way. He is never
affected by the modes of material nature. As such he may
remain in this world to disseminate specific knowledge
about Me.

The gopīs are superior to Uddhava

āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

SB 10.47.31/VG p. 82/ORY p. 113,217/BR 6.24

(see ch. 20, p. 682 for the full śloka)

The gopīs are superior to the Lakṣmīs in Vaikuṇṭha

na tathā me priyatamo brahmā rudraś ca pārthiva

na ca lakṣmir na cātmā ca yathā gopījano mama

Ādi-Purāṇa/Laghu Bhag. 2.35/GKH 3.70

na—not; tathā—in that way; me—to Me; priyatamaḥ—most
dear; brahmā—Brahmā; rudraḥ—Śiva; ca—and; pārthiva—O
king; na—not; ca—and; lakṣmiḥ—Lakṣmi; na—nor; ca—and;
ātmā—My own self; ca—and; yathā—as; gopījanaḥ—the gopīs;
mama—are to Me.

[Kṛṣṇa says:] Not even Brahmā, Śiva, Lakṣmīdevī, or even
My own self is as dear to Me as are the gopīs of
Vṛndāvana.



The gopīs are superior to the Vaikuṇṭha Lakṣmīs and the
Dvārakā queens

īśvarera śakti haya e-tina prakāra

eka lakṣmī-gaṇa, pure mahiṣī-gaṇa āra

vraje gopī-gaṇa āra sabhāte pradhāna

vrajendra-nandana yā—te svayaṁ bhagavān

CC Ādi 1.79-80


                          104
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

īśvarera—of the Supreme Lord; śakti—energy; haya—is; e-
tina—these three; prakāra—kinds; eka—one; lakṣmī-gaṇa—
the goddesses of fortune in Vaikuṇṭha; pure—in Dvārakā;
mahiṣī-gaṇa—the queens; āra—and; vraje—in Vṛndāvana;
gopī-gaṇa—the gopīs; āra—and; sabhāte—among all of them;
pradhāna—the chief; vraja-indra-nandana—Kṛṣṇa, the son
of the King of Vraja; yā—te—because; svayam—Himself;
bhagavān—the primeval Lord.

The energies [consorts] of the Supreme Lord are of three
kinds: the Lakṣmīs in Vaikuṇṭha, the queens in Dvārakā
and the gopīs in Vṛndāvana. The gopīs are the best of
all, for they have the privilege of serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the primeval Lord, the son of the King of Vraja.

Lord Brahmā tells Bhṛgu Muni: I meditated for sixty
thousand years just to understand the footdust of the
gopīs. Still, I could not understand it.

ṣaṣṭi-varṣa-sahasrāṇi mayā taptaṁ tapaḥ purā

nanda-gopa-vraja-strīṇāṁ pāda-reṇūpalabdhaye

Bṛhad-vāmana Purāṇa/CC Madhya 8.246 pt

I underwent meditation and austerities for sixty
thousand years just to understand the dust of the lotus
feet of the gopīs (i.e. their deep moods of love for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa). Still, I could not understand it; to say nothing
of me, even Lord Śiva, Lord Śeṣa and the goddess of
fortune, Lakṣmī-devī, could not understand it.



Thus ends section 10) Gradations of Bhaktas and Chapter
2 — Vaiṣṇava tattva




Chapter 3 — Bhāgavata-tattva - Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam


The Bhāgavatam is the crown jewel of all revealed
scriptures




1. The Glories and Benefits of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 133

2. Śrīmad Bhāgavatam & Vedānta-sūtra 144

3. The Book Bhāgavata & the Person Bhāgavata 147

4. The Bhāgavatam Must Not be Neglected or Heard from a
Non-Vaiṣṇava 150

5. Other Bhāgavatam Topics 154

6. Catuḥ Ślokī Bhāgavatam 158


                          105
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

7. Catuḥ Ślokī Bhagavad-gītā 161




1) The Glories and Benefits of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam



Satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi — Let us meditate on the Absolute
Truth

janmādy asya yato —nvayād itarataś cārtheṣv abhijñaḥ
svarāṭ

tene brahma hṛdā ya ādi-kavaye muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ

tejo-vāri-mṛdāṁ yathā vinimayo yatra tri-sargo —mṛṣā

dhāmnā svena sadā nirasta-kuhakaṁ satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi

SB 1.1.1/CC Madhya 8.266, 20.359, 25.148/Secret Truths
of the Bhāgavtam p. 4

[oṁ—O my Lord; namaḥ—offering my obeisances; bhagavate—
unto the Personality of Godhead; vāsudevāya—unto
Vāsudeva , Śrī Kṛṣṇa] janma-ādi—creation, sustenance and
destruction; asya—of the manifested universes; yataḥ—
from whom; anvayāt—directly; itarataḥ—indirectly; ca—
and; artheṣu—purposes; abhijñaḥ—fully cognizant; sva-rāṭ
—fully independent; tene—imparted; brahma—the Vedic
knowledge; hṛdā—consciousness of the heart; yaḥ—one who;
ādi-kavaye—unto the original created being; muhyanti—are
illusioned; yat—about whom; sūrayaḥ—great sages and
demigods; tejaḥ—fire; vāri—water; mṛdām—earth; yathā—as
much as; vinimayaḥ—action and reaction; yatra—whereupon;
tri-sargaḥ—three modes of creation, creative faculties;
amṛṣā—almost factual; dhāmnā—along with all
transcendental paraphernalia; svena—self-sufficiently;
sadā—always; nirasta—negation by absence; kuhakam—
illusion; satyam-param—the Absolute, Supreme Truth
(refers to Kṛṣṇa or to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa); dhīmahi—I
meditate upon.

O my Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, son of Vasudeva, O all-pervading
Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances
unto You. I meditate upon Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa because He is
the Absolute Truth and the primeval cause of all causes
of the creation, sustenance and destruction of the
manifested universes. He is directly and indirectly
conscious of all manifestations, and He is independent
because there is no other cause beyond Him. It is He
only who first imparted the Vedic knowledge unto the
heart of Brahmājī, the original living being. By Him
even the great sages and demigods are placed into
illusion, as one is bewildered by the illusory
representations of water seen in fire, or land seen on
water. Only because of Him do the material universes,
temporarily manifested by the reactions of the three
modes of nature, appear factual, although they are
unreal. I therefore meditate upon Him, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who is eternally existent in His transcendental abode,
which is forever free from the illusory representations

                          106
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

of the material world. I meditate upon Him for he is the
Absolute Truth.



Bhāgavatam is the best among all revealed scriptures and
it propounds the highest truth - reality distinguished
from illusion for the welfare of all

dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo —tra paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ
satāṁ

vedyaṁ vāstavam atra vastu śivadaṁ tāpa-trayonmūlanam

śrīmad-bhāgavate mahā-muni-kṛte kiṁ vā parair īśvaraḥ

sadyo hṛdy avarudhyate —tra kṛtibhiḥ śuśrūṣubhis tat-
kṣaṇāt

SB 1.1.2/CC Ādi 1.91, Madhya 24.100, 25.149/STB p. 17/
BPKG p. 454

dharmaḥ—religiosity; projjhita—completely rejected;
kaitavaḥ—covered by fruitive intention; atra—herein;
paramaḥ—the highest; nirmatsarāṇām—of the non-envious,
pure-hearted; satām—devotees; vedyam—understandable;
vāstavam—factual; atra—herein; vastu—substance; śivadam—
well-being; tāpa-traya—threefold miseries; unmūlanam—
causing uprooting of; śrīmat—beautiful; bhāgavate—the
Bhāgavata Purāṇa; mahā-muni—the great sage (Vyāsadeva);
kṛte—having compiled; kim—what is; vā—the need; paraiḥ—
others; īśvaraḥ—the Supreme Lord; sadyaḥ—at once; hṛdi—
within the heart; avarudhyate—become compact; atra—
herein; kṛtibhiḥ—by the pious men; śuśrūṣubhiḥ—by
culture; tat-kṣaṇāt—without delay.

Completely rejecting all religious activities which are
materially motivated, this Bhāgavata Purāṇa propounds
the highest truth, which is understandable by those
devotees who are fully pure in heart. The highest truth
is reality distinguished from illusion for the welfare
of all. Such truth uproots the threefold miseries. This
beautiful Bhāgavatam, compiled by the great sage
Vyāsadeva [in his maturity], is sufficient in itself for
God realisation. What is the need of any other
scripture? As soon as one attentively and submissively
hears the message of Bhāgavatam, by this culture of
knowledge the Supreme Lord is established within his
heart.



Śrīmad Bhāgavatam is full of Kṛṣṇa prema

premamaya bhāgavata śrī-kṛṣṇera aṅga

tahate kahena yata gopya kṛṣṇa-raṅga

CB Antya 3.516

Śrīmad Bhāgavatam is full of kṛṣṇa-prema. It is Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s body. Within it Kṛṣṇa’s most confidential
pastimes with the gopīs are described.


                          107
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017



Śrīmad Bhāgavatam delineates sambandha (knowledge of
one’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa), abhidheya (sādhana) and
prayojana (sādhya)

gāyatrīra arthe ei grantha-ārambhana

"satyaṁ param" sambandha, "dhīmahi" sādhane prayojana

CC Madhya 25.147

gāyatrīra arthe—with the meaning of Brahma-gāyatrī; ei—
this; grantha—of the great literature; ārambhana—the
beginning; satyam param—the Supreme Absolute Truth;
sambandha—indicates a relationship; dhīmahi—we meditate
(the end of the gāyatrī- mantra); sādhana-prayojana—the
process of devotional service and the attainment of the
ultimate goal.

At the very beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there is an
explanation of the brahma-gāyatrī-mantra: satyaṁ paraṁ
dhīmahi, "We meditate upon the Absolute Truth." Here
satyaṁ param indicates knowledge of our relationship
with Kṛṣṇa and dhīmahi indicates the execution of
devotional service and the attainment of the ultimate
goal of life (Vraja-prema or rādhā-dāsyam).

Emanating from the lips of Śrī Śukadeva, this fruit has
become supremely relishable

nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalaṁ

śuka-mukhād amṛta-drava-saṁyutam

pibata bhāgavataṁ rasam ālayaṁ

muhur aho rasikā bhuvi bhāvukāḥ

SB 1.1.3/CC Madhya 25.151/STB p. 20

nigama—the Vedic literatures; kalpa-taroḥ—the desire
tree; galitam—fully matured; phalam—fruit; śuka—Śrīla
Śukadeva Gosvāmī; mukhāt—from the lips of; amṛta—nectar;
drava—semi-solid and soft and therefore easy to swallow;
saṁyutam—perfect in all respects; pibata—do relish it;
bhāgavatam—the book instructing us about our eternal
relationship with the Lord; rasam—juice (that which is
relishable); ālayam—until liberation, or even in a
liberated condition; muhuḥ—repeatedly; aho—O; rasikāḥ—
those who are full in the knowledge of mellows; bhuvi—on
the earth; bhāvukāḥ—expert and thoughtful.

O expert and thoughtful men, relish Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
the mature fruit of the desire tree of Vedic
literatures. It emanated from the lips of Śrī Śukadeva
Gosvāmī. Therefore this fruit has become even more
tasteful, although its nectarean juice was already
relishable for all, including liberated souls.



From beginning to end, the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is full of
nectarean Hari-kathā which gives ecstasy to the saintly

                          108
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

devotees

ādi-madhyāvasāneṣu vairāgyākhyāna-saṁyutam

hari-līlā-kathā-vrātā-mṛtānandita-sat-suram

sarva-vedānta-sāraṁ yad brahmātmaikatva-lakṣaṇam

vastv advitīyaṁ tan-niṣṭhaṁ kaivalyaika-prayojanam

SB 12.13.11-12

ādi—in the beginning; madhya—the middle; avasāneṣu—and
the end; vairāgya—concerning renunciation of material
things; ākhyāna—with narrations; saṁyutam—full; hari-
līlā—of the pastimes of Lord Hari; kathā-vrāta—of the
many discussions; amṛta—by the nectar; ānandita—in which
are made ecstatic; sat-suram—the saintly devotees and
demigods; sarva-vedānta—of all the Vedānta; sāram—the
essence; yat—which; brahma—the Absolute Truth; ātma-
ekatva—in terms of nondifference from the spirit soul;
lakṣaṇam—characterized; vastu—the reality; advitīyam—one
without a second; tat-niṣṭham—having that as its prime
subject matter; kaivalya—exclusive devotional service;
eka—the only; prayojanam—ultimate goal.

From beginning to end, the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is full of
narrations that encourage renunciation of material life,
as well as nectarean accounts of Lord Hari’s
transcendental pastimes, which give ecstasy to the
saintly devotees and demigods. This Bhāgavatam is the
essence of all Vedānta philosophy because its subject
matter is the Absolute Truth, which, while nondifferent
from the spirit soul, is the ultimate reality, one
without a second. The goal of this literature is pure
devotional service unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Śrīmad Bhāgavatam is the very form of kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-svarūpa śrī-bhāgavata

tāte veda-śāstra haite parama mahattva

CC Mad 25.150/GKH 2.2

kṛṣṇa-bhakti—of devotional service to Kṛṣṇa; rasa—of the
transcendental mellow; svarūpa—the very form; śrī-
bhāgavata—Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; tāte—therefore; veda-śāstra
—the Vedic literature; haite—than; parama mahattva—has
greater value.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the very form of kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa.
It gives direct information of the mellows derived from
service to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is
superior to all other Vedic literatures.



Śrīmad Bhāgavatam is identical to Kṛṣṇa and each śloka
of the Bhāgavatam has unlimited levels of meanings

kṛṣṇa-tulya bhāgavata — vibhu, sarvāśraya

                          109
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


prati-śloke prati-akṣare nānā artha kaya

CC Mad 24.318

kṛṣṇa-tulya bhāgavata—Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is identical
with Kṛṣṇa; vibhu—the supreme, unlimited, ever-
expanding; sarva-āśraya—the shelter and origin of
everything, that which controls everything; prati-śloke—
in every śloka; prati-akṣare—in every syllable; nānā
artha kaya—there are unlimited imports.

Śrīmad Bhāgavatam is identical to Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme
Lord and shelter of everything. In each and every śloka
of the Bhāgavatam and in each and every syllable, there
are many levels of meanings.

Bhāgavatam is the cream of the Vedas and the very form
of Kṛṣṇa

sabe puruṣārtha 'bhakti' bhāgavate haya

'premarūpa bhāgavata' cārivede kaya

cāri veda-dadhi bhagavata

mathilenn śuke-khāilenu parikṣita

CB Madhya 22.15-l6

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam speaks of the highest goal of life,
devotional service, divine love of Kṛṣṇa. According to
all the Vedas, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the very form of
divine love. The four Vedas are like yogurt, but the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is like butter. The churner of this
butter is Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and the eater of this butter
is Parīkṣit Mahārāja.

The material miseries of the jīvas can be directly
mitigated by the linking process of bhakti and therefore
Vyāsadeva compiled this Bhāgavatam

anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām

SB 1.7.6

anartha—unwanted desires, things which are superfluous;
upaśamam—mitigation; sākṣāt—directly; bhakti-yogam—the
linking process of devotional service; adhokṣaje—unto
the Transcendence; lokasya—of the general mass of men;
ajānataḥ—those who are unaware of; vidvān—the supremely
learned; cakre—compiled; sātvata—in relation with the
Supreme Truth; saṁhitām—Vedic literature.

The material miseries of the living entity, which are
superfluous to him, can be directly mitigated by the
linking process of devotional service. But the mass of
people do not know this, and therefore the learned
Vyāsadeva compiled this Vedic literature, which is in
relation to the Supreme Truth.

Out of causeless mercy upon the conditioned souls,

                            110
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa, in the form of Vedavyāsa, compiled the Bhāgavtam

māyā-mugdha jīvere nāhi svataḥ kṛṣṇa-jñāna

jīvere kṛpāya kailā kṛṣṇa veda purāṇa

CC Madhya 20.122

māyā-mugdha—enchanted by the illusory energy; jīvera—of
the conditioned soul; nāhi—there is not; svataḥ—
automatically; kṛṣṇa-jñāna—knowledge of Kṛṣṇa; jīvere—
unto the conditioned soul; kṛpāya—out of mercy; kailā—
presented; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; veda-purāṇa—the Vedic
literature and the Purāṇas.

The conditioned soul   cannot revive his Kṛṣṇa
consciousness by his   own effort, but out of causeless
mercy, Kṛṣṇa, in the   form of Vedavyāsa, compiled the
Vedic literature and   its supplements, the Purāṇas.



Simply by giving aural reception to the Bhāgavatam,
bhakti sprouts up

yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ śoka-moha-bhayāpahā

SB 1.7.7/BPKG p. 85

yasyām—this Vedic literature; vai—certainly;
śrūyamāṇāyām—simply by giving aural reception; kṛṣṇe—
unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; parama—Supreme; pūruṣe—Enjoyer; bhaktiḥ
—feelings of devotional service; utpadyate—sprout up;
puṁsaḥ—of the living being; śoka—lamentation; moha—
illusion; bhaya—fearfulness; apahā—that which
extinguishes.

Simply by giving aural reception to this Vedic
literature [Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam], the feeling for loving
devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Enjoyer,
sprouts up at once to extinguish the fire of
lamentation, illusion and fearfulness.



This Bhāgavata-Purāṇa is as brilliant as the sun

kṛṣṇe sva-dhāmopagate dharma-jñānādibhiḥ saha

kalau naṣṭa-dṛśām eṣa purāṇārko —dhunoditaḥ

SB 1.3.43

kṛṣṇe—in Kṛṣṇa—s; sva-dhāma—own abode; upagate—having
returned; dharma—religion; jñāna—knowledge; ādibhiḥ—
combined together; saha—along with; kalau—in the Kali-
yuga; naṣṭa-dṛśām—of persons who have lost their sight;
eṣaḥ—all these; purāṇa-arkaḥ—the Purāṇa which is
brilliant like the sun; adhunā—just now; uditaḥ—has
arisen.

This Bhāgavata Purāṇa is as brilliant as the sun, and it

                            111
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

has arisen just after the departure of Lord Kṛṣṇa to His
own abode, accompanied by religion, knowledge, etc.
Persons who have lost their vision due to the dense
darkness of ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light
from it.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the spotless Purāṇa and it is most
dear to the Vaiṣṇavas

śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ purāṇam amalaṁ yad vaiṣṇavānāṁ priyaṁ

yasmin pāramahaṁsyam ekam amalaṁ jñānaṁ paraṁ gīyate

tatra jñāna-virāga-bhakti-sahitaṁ naiṣkarmyam āviskṛtaṁ

tac chṛṇvan su-paṭhan vicāraṇa-paro bhaktyā vimucyen
naraḥ

SB 12.13.18/STB p. 34

śrīmat-bhāgavatam—Śrīmad Bhāgavatam; purāṇam—the Purāṇa;
amalam—perfectly pure; yat—which; vaiṣṇavānām—to the
Vaiṣṇavas; priyam—most dear; yasmin—in which;
pāramahaṁsyam—attainable by the topmost devotees; ekam—
exclusive; amalam—perfectly pure; jñānam—knowledge;
param—supreme; gīyate—is sung; tatra—there; jñāna-
virāga-bhakti-sahitam—together with knowledge,
renunciation and devotion; naiṣkarmyam—freedom from all
material work; āviṣkṛtam—is revealed; tat—that; śṛṇvan—
hearing; su-paṭhan—properly chanting; vicāraṇa-paraḥ—who
is serious about understanding; bhaktyā—with devotion;
vimucyet—becomes totally liberated; naraḥ—a person.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the spotless Purāṇa. It is most
dear to the Vaiṣṇavas because it describes the pure and
supreme knowledge of the paramahaṁsas. This Bhāgavatam
reveals the means for becoming free from all material
bondage, together with the processes of transcendental
knowledge, renunciation and devotion. Anyone who
seriously tries to understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, who
properly hears and chants it with devotion, becomes
completely liberated.



bhāgavata, tulāsī gaṅgāya, bhaktajane

caturdhā vigraha kṛṣṇa ei cāri sane

CB Madhya 22.81

Wherever Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Tulāsī-devī, the Gaṅgā, and
the devotees are found, Kṛṣṇa is always present there.

Bhāgavatam is the literary incarnation of Kṛṣṇa and
bestows the ultimate benefit

idaṁ bhāgavataṁ nāma purāṇaṁ brahma-sammitam

uttama-śloka-caritaṁ cakāra bhagavān ṛṣiḥ

niḥśreyasāya lokasya dhanyaṁ svasty-ayanaṁ mahat

SB 1.3.40

                          112
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


idam—this; bhāgavatam—the book containing the narrations
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His pure devotees, the bhāgavatas; nāma
—of the name; purāṇam—supplementary to the Vedas;
brahma-sammitam—the incarnation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; uttama-
śloka—of the Personality of Godhead who is glorified by
choice ślokas; caritam—activities; cakāra—compiled;
bhagavān—incarnation of the Personality of Godhead; ṛṣiḥ
—Śrī Vyāsadeva; niḥśreyasāya—for the ultimate benefit;
lokasya—of all people; dhanyam—fully successful; svasti-
ayanam—all-blissful; mahat—all-perfect.

This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the literary incarnation of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is glorified by sublime ślokas. It is
compiled by Śrīla Vyāsadeva, the incarnation of God. It
is meant for the ultimate benefit of all people (the
spiritual perfection of pure bhakti, love of God), and
it is all-successful, all-blissful and all-perfect.

Bhāgavatam is not man-made literature but is Self-
manifest and Eternal

ādi-madhya-āntye bhāgavate ei kaya/viṣṇu-bhakti
nityasiddha akṣaya avyaya

bhāgavata-śāstre se bhaktir tattva kahe/teñi bhāgavata-
sama kona śāstra nahe

yena rūpa matsya-kurma-ādi avatāra/āvirbhāva-tirobhāva
āpanei haya

iśvarera tattva yena bujhane na yāya/eimata bhāgavata
sarva-śāste gāya

premamaya bhāgavata kṛṣṇera śrī aṅga/tāhāte kahena yata
gopya kṛṣṇeraṅga

hena bhāgavata kona duṣkṛti paḍiyā/nityānanda nindā kare
tattva nā jāniyā

Caitanya Bhāgavata, Antya 3.506, 3.509-511, 3.513,
3.516, 3.534

In the beginning, middle, and end, the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
speaks only of devotional service to Kṛṣṇa. As such,
this literature is eternally perfect, infallible, and
infinite, because it contains all truths pertaining to
the infinite. Since the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam speaks
exclusively of the truths of pure devotional service, it
is unparalleled among the śāstras. No other scripture
can compare with Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In the same way that
the avatāras of Kṛṣṇa beginning with Matsya and Kūrma
appear and disappear transcendentally, the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is not of mundane origin. It appears and
disappears of its own accord. In the same way in which
the truth about God Himself is inconceivable, the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is beyond all material comprehension.
The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is full of kṛṣṇa-prema. It is a
part of Kṛṣṇa Himself, for it describes Kṛṣṇa's
confidential pastimes. Whoever offends the lotus feet of
Lord Nityānanda is a great sinner. Despite his deep
study and scholarship, such a person will never
understand the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.


                          113
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

The inconceivable nature of the Bhāgavatam

mahācintya bhāgavata sarvaśāstre gāya

ihā nā bujhiye vidyā, tapa, pratiṣṭhāya

bhāgavata bujhi heno yāra ācche jñāna

se nā jāne kabhu bhāgavatera pramāṇa

CB Madhya 22.13-14

According to all the revealed scriptures the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is inconceivable and beyond mundane
understanding. Its meaning cannot be understood by
scholarship or penance. One who is not a devotee of
Kṛṣṇa, no matter how great a scholar he may be, will
never understand Śrīmad Bhāgavatam.

bhāgavate acintya īśvara-buddhi yāṅra

se jānaye bhāgavata-artha bhakti-sāra

CB Madhya 22.25

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam has inconceivable knowledge about the
Supreme Lord. One who knows this, knows that the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam bestows the essence of devotion to Kṛṣṇa.

Hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam puts an end to the cycle of
birth and death

ambarīṣa śuka-proktaṁ nityaṁ bhāgavataṁ śṛṇu

paṭhasva svamukhenāpi yadīcchasi bhāva-kṣayam

GKH (P)

Gautama Ṛṣi to Ambarīṣa Mahārāja: “O Ambarīṣa, if you
wish to put an end to the cycle of birth and death,
listen daily to the Bhāgavata taught by Śuka and recite
it also with your own lips.”

Hearing Bhāgavatam cleanses the heart

praviṣṭaḥ karṇa-randhreṇa svānāṁ bhāva-saroruham

dhunoti śamalaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ salilasya yathā śarat

SB 2.8.5

praviṣṭaḥ—thus being entered; karṇa-randhreṇa—through
the holes of the ears; svānām—according to one’s
respective position; bhāva—constitutional relationship;
saraḥ-ruham—the lotus flower; dhunoti—cleanses; śamalam—
material qualities; kṛṣṇaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa; salilasya—of the
reservoir of waters; yathā—as it were; śarat—the autumn
season.

The sound incarnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa the Supreme Soul
[i.e. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam], enters into the heart of a
self-realised devotee, sits on the lotus flower of his
loving relationship, and thus cleanses the dust of
material association, such as lust, anger and hankering.

                          114
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Thus it acts like autumnal rains upon pools of muddy
water.



Narrations which describe Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes create a
spiritual revolution

tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo

yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api

nāmāny anantasya yaśo —ṅkitāni yat

śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ

SB 1.5.11

tat—that; vāk—vocabulary; visargaḥ—creation; janatā—the
people in general; agha—sins; viplavaḥ—revolutionary;
yasmin—in which; prati-ślokam—each and every verse;
abaddhavati—irregularly composed; api—in spite of;
nāmāni—transcendental names, etc.; anantasya—of the
unlimited Lord; yaśaḥ—glories; aṅkitāni—depicted; yat—
what; śṛṇvanti—do hear; gāyanti—do sing; gṛṇanti—do
accept; sādhavaḥ—the purified men who are honest.

On the other hand, that literature which is full of
descriptions of the transcendental glories of the name,
fame, forms, pastimes, etc., of the unlimited Supreme
Lord is a different creation, full of transcendental
words directed toward bringing about a revolution in the
impious lives of this world’s misdirected civilization.
Such transcendental literatures, even though imperfectly
composed, are heard, sung and accepted by purified men
who are thoroughly honest.




The benefits of hearing and studying Bhāgavatam

vaiṣṇavāni tu śāstrāṇī ye śṛṇvanti paṭhanti ca

dhanyās te mānavā loke tesāṁ kṛṣṇaḥ prasīdati

vaiṣṇavāni tu śāstrāṇī ye “rcayanti gṛhe narāḥ

sarva-pāpa-vinirmuktā bhavanti sura-vanditāḥ

Skānda Purāṇa/BRS 1.2.207-8/BRSB p. 93

The Vaiṣṇava śāstras like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrīmad
Bhagavad-Gītā and so on, propound ananya-bhakti or
exclusive devotion unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Those who keep such
scriptures in their homes and worship them with great
respect are freed from all sins. Even the devatās offer
prayers to such persons. Those who hear these scriptures
from the mouths of pure devotees and who regularly study
them on their own are truly blessed in this world, for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa becomes pleased with them.

Thus ends section 1) The Glories and Benefits of Śrīmad-

                          115
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam




2) Śrīmad Bhāgavatam & Vedānta-śutra

Bhāgavatam is the natural commentary on Vedānta,
Mahābhārāta and Gāyatrī

artho —yaṁ brahma-sūtrāṇāṁ bhāratārtha-vinirṇayaḥ

gāyatrī-bhāṣya-rūpo —sau vedārtha-paribṛṁhitaḥ

Garuda Purana/CC Mad 25.143/BPKG pp. 85, 191

arthaḥ ayam—this is the meaning; brahma-sūtrāṇām—of the
aphorisms of the Vedānta-sūtra; bhārata-artha-vinirṇayaḥ
—the ascertainment of the Mahābhārata; gāyatrī-bhāṣya-
rūpaḥ—the purport of Brahma-gāyatrī; asau—that; veda-
artha-paribṛṁhitaḥ—expanded by the meanings of all the
Vedas;

The meaning of the Vedānta-sūtra is present in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. The full purport of the Mahābhārata is also
there. The commentary of the Brahma-gāyatrī is also
there, fully expanded with all Vedic knowledge. The
Bhāgavatam is the essence and explanation of all the
Vedas.

bhāṣyaṁ brahma-sūtrānām

Tattva Sandarbha 21

bhāṣyam—commentary; brahma-sūtrānām—on the Vedānta-
sūtra.

The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the (actual) commentary on the
Vedānta-sūtra.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the essence of all Vedic literature
and Vedānta philosophy

sarva-vedānta-sāraṁ hi śrīmad-bhāgavatam iṣyate

tad-rasāmṛta-tṛptasyā nānyatra syād ratiḥ kvacit

SB 12.13.15/Mad 25.146/BRSB p. 93/BPKG p. 85

sarva-vedānta-sāram—the best part of all the Vedānta; hi
—certainly; śrīmad-bhāgavatam—the great literature about
Bhagavān; iṣyate—is accepted; tat-rasa-amṛta—by the
transcendental mellow derived from that great
literature; tṛptasya—of one who is satisfied; na—never;
anyatra—anywhere else; syāt—is; ratiḥ—attraction; kvacit
—at any time.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is accepted as the essence of all
Vedic literature and Vedānta philosophy. Whoever tastes
the transcendental mellow (the bhakti-rasa) of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is never attracted to any other literature.

Bhāgavatam is the essence of all the scriptures

                          116
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


sarva-vedetihāsānāṁ sāraṁ sāraṁ samūddhṛtam

CC Madhya 25.145

sarva-veda—of all Vedic literature; itihāsānām—of the
Purāṇas and Itihāsās; sāram sāram—the essence of the
essence; samuddhṛtam—is compiled (in the SB).

The essence of all Vedic literature i.e. the Vedas,
Purāṇas, and Itihāsās, has been compiled in the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.

cāri-veda-upaniṣade yata kichu haya

tāra artha lañā vyāsa karilā sañcaya

CC Mad 25.98

cāri-veda—the four divisions of the Vedas (Sāma, Yajur,
Ṛg and Atharva); upaniṣade—and in the 108 Upaniṣads;
yata—whatever; kichu haya—is there; tāra artha—the
meanings of those Vedic literatures; lañā—taking
together; vyāsa—Vyāsadeva; karilā sañcaya—collected.

Vyāsadeva collected whatever Vedic conclusions were in
the four Vedas and 108 Upaniṣads and placed them in the
aphorisms of the Vedānta-sūtra.

yei sūtre yei ṛk - viṣaya-vacana

bhāgavate sei ṛk śloke nibandhana

CC Mad 25.99

yei sūtre—in the aphorisms of the Vedānta-sūtra; yei—
whatever; ṛk—Vedic mantras; viṣaya-vacana—subject matter
to be explained; bhāgavate—in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; sei ṛk—
those same Vedic mantras; śloke—in eighteen thousand
verses; nibandhana—compiling.

In the Vedānta-sūtra, the purport of all Vedic knowledge
is explained, and in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam the same purport
has been explained in eighteen thousand verses.



ataeva brahma-sūtrera bhāṣya śrī bhāgavata

bhāgavata-śloka, upaniṣat kahe 'eka' mata

CC Madhya 25.100

ataeva—therefore; brahma-sūtrera bhāṣya—the commentary
on the Brahma-sūtra codes; śrī-bhāgavata—Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam; bhāgavata-śloka—the verses in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam; upaniṣat—the explanations in the Upaniṣads;
kahe—state; eka mata—the same version.

Therefore that which is expounded in the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and in the Upaniṣads is the same as that
which is explained in the Vedānta-sūtra.



                          117
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


ataeva bhāgavata sutrera 'artha'-rūpa

nija-kṛta sūtrera nija-'bhāṣya'-svarūpa

CC Madhya 25.142

ataeva—therefore; bhāgavata—Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; sūtrera—
of the Brahma-sūtra; artha—of the meaning; rūpa—the
form; nija-kṛta—made by himself; sūtrera—of the Vedānta-
sūtra; nija-bhāṣya—of his own commentary; svarūpa—the
original form.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam gives the actual meaning of the
Vedānta-sūtras. The author of the sūtras is Vyāsadeva
and he has explained their meaning in the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.



ataeva bhāgavata karaha vicāra

ihā haite pābe sūtra- śrutira artha-sāra

CC Madhya 25.153

ataeva—therefore; bhāgavata—Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; karaha
vicāra—try to understand scrutinizingly; ihā haite—from
this; pābe—you will get; sūtra-śrutira—of the Vedic
philosophy, the Brahma (Vedānta) sūtra; artha-sāra—the
actual meaning.

[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised Prakāśānanda
Sarasvatī:] Study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam meticulously. Then
you will understand the actual meaning of Vedānta-sūtra.

Thus ends section 2) Śrīmad Bhāgavatam & Vedānta-śutra




3) The Book Bhāgavata & The Person Bhāgavata




Two kinds of Bhāgavata, the book and the person



dui sthāne bhāgavata nāma śuni mātra

grantha-bhāgavata, āra kṛṣṇa-kṛpā-pātra

CB Antya 3.532

The name bhāgavata applies to two things: the book
Bhāgavata, and the agent of Kṛṣṇa's mercy, the devotee
bhāgavata.

One should hear the book Bhāgavata from the devotee
Bhāgavata

                          118
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


eka bhāgavata baḍa bhāgavata-śāstra

āra bhāgavata bhakta bhakti-rasa-pātra

CC Ādi 1.99

eka—one; bhāgavata—in relation to the Supreme Lord; baḍa
—great; bhāgavata-śāstra—Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; āra—the
other; bhāgavata—in relation to the Supreme Lord; bhakta
—pure devotee; bhakti-rasa—of the mellows of devotion;
pātra—the recipient.

One of the bhāgavatas is the great scripture, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. The other is the pure devotee bhāgavata, who
is absorbed in bhakti-rasa.



dui bhāgavata dvārā diyā bhakti-rasa

tāohāra hṛdaye tāore preme haya vaśa

CC Ādi 1.100

dui—two; bhāgavata—the bhāgavatas; dvārā—by; diyā—
giving; bhakti-rasa—devotional inspiration; tāṅhāra—of
His devotee; hṛdaye—in the heart; tāṅra—his; preme—by
the love; haya—becomes; vaśa—under control.

Through the actions of these two bhāgavatas the Lord
instills the mellows of bhakti-rasa into the heart of a
sādhaka and thus the Lord comes under the control of His
devotee's love.

vaiśṇava-pāśa bhāgavata kara adhyayana

CC Antya 13.113

vaiṣṇava-pāśa—from a pure Vaiṣṇava; bhāgavata—Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam; kara adhyayana—study.

Study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from a pure Vaiṣṇava who has
realised Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

The Bhāgavatm must be heard from a fully-realised, high-
class Vaiṣṇava

yāha bhāgavata paḍa vaiṣṇavera sthāne

ekānta āśraya kara caitanya-caraṇe

Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara’s diary/CC Antya 5.131/GKH 2.28

yāha—just go; bhāgavata—Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; paḍa—read,
study; vaiṣṇavera sthāne—from a self-realised Vaiṣṇava;
ekānta āśraya kara—fully surrendered; caitanya-caraṇe—at
the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Go and study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the association of a
Vaiṣṇava and take exclusive shelter at the lotus feet of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

[An alternative reading: Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara’s highest

                          119
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

instruction to all the jīvas is:] “If you want to
understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you must approach a
paramahaṁsa Vaiṣṇava who is exclusively surrendered at
the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanyacandra. The sole asset of
such Vaiṣṇavas is the import of the Bhāgavatam as
presented by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.”



One must offer praṇāma to the person Bhāgavata before
reciting the book Bhāgavata

nārāyaṇaṁ namaskṛtya naraṁ caiva narottamam

devīṁ sarasvatīṁ vyāsaṁ tato jayam udīrayet

SB 1.2.4

nārāyaṇam—Śrī Nārāyaṇa; namaḥ-kṛtya—after offering
respectful obeisances; naram ca eva—and Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi;
nara-uttamam—the supermost human being; devīm—the
goddess; sarasvatīm—the goddess of learning; vyāsam—
Vyāsadeva; tataḥ—thereafter; jayam—all that is meant for
conquering; udīrayet—be announced.

Before reciting this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is the
very means of conquest, one should offer respectful
obeisances unto Śrī Nārāyaṇa, unto Nara-nārāyaṇa Ṛṣis,
the supermost human beings, unto mother Sarasvatī, the
goddess of learning, and unto Śrīla Vyāsadeva, the
author.

One must serve both the book Bhāgavata and the person
Bhāgavata

naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

SB 1.2.18/BR 5.2

naṣṭa—destroyed; prāyeṣu—almost to nil; abhadreṣu—all
that is inauspicious; nityam—regularly; bhāgavata—
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, or the pure devotee; sevayā—by
serving; bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead;
uttama—transcendental; śloke—ślokas or prayers; bhaktiḥ—
loving service; bhavati—comes into being; naiṣṭhikī—
irrevocable.

By regular hearing the Bhāgavatam and by rendering
service to the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to
the heart is almost completely destroyed, and loving
service unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is praised with
transcendental ślokas, is established as an irrevocable
fact.

Thus ends section 3) The Book Bhāgavata & the Person
Bhāgavata




4) The Bhāgavatam Must Not be Neglected or Heard from a

                          120
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Non-Vaiṣṇava



Only killers of the self will not hear the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam

nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād

bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-—bhirāmāt

ka uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt

pumān virajyeta vinā paśughnāt

SB 10.1.4/STB pp. 22,37

nivṛtta—being released from; tarṣaiḥ—lust or material
activities; upagīyamānāt— is described or sung; bhava-
auṣadhāt—by the medicine for ending the material
existence; śrotra—the process of aural reception; manaḥ—
the subject matter of thought for the mind; abhirāmāt—by
the pleasing vibrations from such glorification; kaḥ—
who?; uttamaśloka—of Uttamaśloka Śri Kṛṣṇa ; guṇa-
anuvādāt—by describing such activities; pumān—a person;
virajyeta—can keep himself aloof; vinā—except; paśu-
ghnāt—a butcher or one who is killing his own personal
spiritual existence.

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī to Mahārāja Parikṣit:] Glorification
of Uttamaśloka Śrī Kṛṣṇa is performed in the paramparā
system; that is, it is conveyed from spiritual master to
disciple. Such glorification is relished by those no
longer interested in the false, temporary glorification
of this material manifestation. Descriptions of the Lord
are the right medicine for the conditioned soul
undergoing repeated birth and death. Therefore, who will
cease hearing such glorification of the Lord except a
butcher or one who is killing his own self?

kathañcid dhanādika-kāmanayā yadi karmī vaktā

śrotā vā syāt tadā sa virajyed evety āha paśu-ghnād vinā

Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on SB 10.1.4 (nivṛtta-
tarṣair upagīyamānād)

One who is attached to enjoying the fruits of his work
is called a karmī. Whenever such a karmī, influenced by
lusty desires beginning with the desire for material
wealth, hears a lecture on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he will
stop listening and go away, because he perceives such
hearing as a hindrance to his sense gratification. The
Bhāgavatam refers to such persons as "killers of the
self," because they commit spiritual suicide by ignoring
the message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Who but the killer of
the soul or an animal-killer would avoid hearing the
sublime message the Bhāgavatam?



One should not see any difference between Kṛṣṇa, Bhakta
and Bhāgavatam


                             121
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

mui mora bhakta āra grantha-bhāgavate

yāra bheda ācche tāra nāśa bhāla-mate

Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata Madhya 18

Myself, My devotees, and the scripture Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
are non-different. One who sees any difference between
these three will find that all his intelligence has been
destroyed.

Who neglects the Bhāgavatam is punishable in hell

bhāgavata je na māne se yavana sama

tāra śastra ache janme janme prabhu yama

Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata Ādi 2.39

Whoever has no regard for Śrīmad Bhāgavatam is the same
as a yavana, an untouchable heathen. He will be punished
birth after birth by Lord Yamarāja.

One should not hear Bhāgavatam from a non-Vaiṣṇava

avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam

śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyaṁ sarpocchiṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ

Padma Purāṇa/HBV/GKH 2.39

avaiṣṇava—of a non-devotee; mukha-udgīrṇam—coming out of
the mouth; pūtam—the pure; hari—of Hari; kathā-amṛtam—
the nectarean topics; śravaṇam—hearing; na—not; eva—
certainly; kartavyam—to be done; sarpa—of a snake;
ucchiṣṭam—the remnants; yathā—as; payaḥ—milk.

One should not hear anything about Kṛṣṇa from a non-
Vaiṣṇava. Milk touched by the lips of a serpent has
poisonous effects; similarly, talks about Kṛṣṇa given by
a non-Vaiṣṇava are also poisonous.




If one hears the commentary of Śaṅkarācārya, everything
is spoiled

jīvera nistāra lāgi— sūtra kaila vyāsa

māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile haya sarva-nāśa

CC Mad 25.99/GKH 2.14

jīvera—of the living entities; nistāra—deliverance; lāgi
——for the matter of; sūtra—the Vedānta-sūtra; kaila—
made; vyāsa—Śrīla Vyāsadeva; māyāvādi—of the
impersonalists; bhāṣya—commentary; śunile—if hearing;
haya—becomes; sarva-nāśa—all is destroyed.

Śrīla Vyāsadeva presented the Vedānta philosophy for the
deliverance of conditioned souls, but if one hears the
commentary of Śaṅkarācārya, everything is spoiled.

                            122
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017




Talks bereft of Hari-kathā are like a place of
pilgrimage for crows

na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśo

jagat-pavitraṁ pragṛṇīta karhicit

tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham uśanti mānasā

na yatra haṁsā niramanty uśik-kṣayāḥ

SB 1.5.10

na—not; yat—that; vacaḥ—vocabulary; citra-padam—
decorative; hareḥ—of the Lord; yaśaḥ—glories; jagat—
universe; pavitram—sanctified; pragṛṇīta—described;
karhicit—hardly; tat—that; vāyasam—crows; tīrtham—place
of pilgrimage; uśanti—think; mānasāḥ—saintly persons; na
—not; yatra—where; haṁsāḥ—all-perfect beings; niramanti—
take pleasure; uśik-kṣayāḥ—those who reside in the
transcendental abode.

Those words which do not describe the glories and
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who alone can sanctify the
atmosphere of the whole universe, are considered by
saintly persons to be like unto a place of pilgrimage
for crows. Since the all-perfect persons are inhabitants
of the transcendental abode, they do not derive any
pleasure there.



The dry mental speculators cannot have a taste for hari-
kathā

mīmāṁsā-rajasā malīmasa-dṛśāṁ tāvan na dhīr īśvare

garvodarka-kukarkaśa-dhiyāṁ dūre “pi vartā hareḥ

jānanto “pi na jānate śruti-mukhaṁ śrī-raṅgi-saṅgād ṛte

su-svāduṁ pariveśayanty api rasaṁ gurvī na darvī spṛśet

Padyāvalī 57 (Śrī Mādhava Sarasvatī)/MS 5 pt

mīmāṁsā—of the karma-mīmāṁsā philosophy (karma
determines everything, i.e. Viṣṇu is subject to karma);
rajasā—by the dust; malīmasa—dirtied; dṛśām—whose eyes;
tāvat—then; na—not; dhīḥ—the consciousness; īśvare—on
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; garva—of pride;
udarka—the conclusion; ku—bad; tarka—logic; karkaśa—
hard; dhiyām—whose minds; dūre—far away; api—also; vartā
—the topics; hareḥ—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; jānantaḥ—
understanding; api—although; na—do not; jānate—
understand; śruti-mukham—the Vedas; śrī-raṅgi—of Lord
Kṛṣṇa, who enjoys pastimes with the goddess of fortune;
saṅgāt—of the contact; ṛte—bereft; su—very; svādum—
sweet; pariveśayanti—distributing; api—even; rasam—
nectar; gurvī—a great ladle; na—not; darvī—their own
spoon; spṛśet—touches.


                          123
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

They whose eyes are blinded by the dust of the Karma-
mīmāṁsā philosophy cannot fix their hearts on Śrī
Bhagavān. They whose intelligence has become stifled by
fallacious arguments whose ultimate end is but pride,
have no interest in hearing hari-kathā. Even learned
scholars of the Vedas who are devoid of attachment to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, are unable to know the actual conclusion of
the Vedas. They are exactly like long-handled spoons
which serve out delicious food but are unable to taste
it.

Thus ends section 4) The Bhāgavatam Must Not be
Neglected




5) Other Bhāgavatam Topics



The Bhāgavatam teaches transcendental knowledge and
renunciation

kathā imās te kathitā mahīyasāṁ vitāya lokeṣu yaśaḥ
pareyuṣām

vijñāna-vairāgya-vivakṣayā vibho vaco-vibhūtīr na tu
pāramārthyam

SB 12.3.14

kathāḥ—the narrations; imāḥ—these; te—unto you; kathitāḥ
—have been spoken; mahīyasām—of great kings; vitāya—
spreading; lokeṣu—throughout all the worlds; yaśaḥ—their
fame; pareyuṣām—who have departed; vijñāna—
transcendental knowledge; vairāgya—and renunciation;
vivakṣayā—with the desire for teaching; vibho—O mighty
Parīkṣit; vacaḥ—of words; vibhūtīḥ—the decoration; na—
not; tu—but; pārama-arthyam—of the most essential
purport.

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:] O mighty Parīkṣit, within this
world there have been many powerful and great
personalities, who after spreading their fame far and
wide have departed to the next world. I have narrated
their life histories to you in order to instruct in
transcendental knowledge and teach detachment from sense
gratication. These narrations are not only a play of
words. Herein there is some contribution of
transcendental benefit.



The six Gosvāmīs have revealed the essence of the
Bhāgavatam

nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau

lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau tri-bhuvane mānyau śaraṇyākarau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-padāravinda-bhajanānandena mattālikau


                             124
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam, Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya/ SGG p.
126

nānā-śāstra—many scriptures; vicāraṇa—in scrutinizingly
studying; eka-nipuṇau—who are uniquely expert; sat-
dharma—of eternal dharma; saṁsthāpakau—who are the
establishers; lokānām—for all human beings; hita-kāriṇau
—who are the performers of beneficial activities; tri-
bhuvane—throughout the three worlds; mānyau—who are
worthy of honor; śaraṇya-ākarau—who are worth taking
shelter of; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; pada-
aravinda—at the lotus feet; bhajana-ānandena—in the
bliss of worshiping; mattālikau—who are intoxicated with
the mood of the gopīs; vande—I offer my respectful
obeisances; rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-
gopālakau—unto the six Gosvāmīs.

I offer prayers to the Six Gosvāmīs, who are expert in
extracting the essence of all the revealed scriptures
with the aim of establishing the jīva in his eternal
position of performing pure devotion (śuddha-bhakti-
rūpa-parama-dharma). Their activities bring
auspiciousness and supreme benefit to all. Thus, they
are worthy of worship throughout the three worlds. They
are especially affectionate to those who take shelter of
them, and they are so much absorbed in their service to
Śrī Rādhā-Govinda that they have become mad like bees
intoxicated by the honey of Their lotus feet.

The structure of the Bhāgavatam — the ten symptoms of a
Mahā-Purāṇa

atra sargo visargaś ca sthānaṁ poṣaṇam ūtayaḥ

manvantareśānukathā nirodho muktir āśrayaḥ

SB 2.10.1.2/CC Ādi 2.91

śrī śuka uvāca—Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atra—in this
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; sargaḥ—the creation of the
ingredients of the universe; visargaḥ—the creations of
Brahmā; ca—and; sthānam—the maintenance of the creation;
poṣaṇam—the favoring of the Lord’s devotees; ūtayaḥ—
impetuses for activity; manu-antara—prescribed duties
given by the Manus; īśa-anukathāḥ—a description of the
incarnations of the Lord; nirodhaḥ—the winding up of
creation; muktiḥ—liberation; āśrayaḥ—the ultimate
shelter, Bhagavān.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam ten subjects are described: (1)
Sarga: the creation of the ingredients of the cosmos,
(2) Visarga: the creations of Brahmā, (3) Sthāna: the
maintenance of the creation, (4) Poṣaṇa: nourishment,
special favor given to the faithful, (5) Ūti: impetuses
for activity, or saṁskāras; (6) Manvantara: prescribed
duties, or that which explains the essence of the Vedas,
(7) Iśa-anukathā: a description of the pastimes and
incarnations of the Lord; (8) Nirodha: the winding up of
the creation or stopping the cycle of saṁsāra, (9)
Mukti: liberation from gross and subtle material
existence, and (10) Āśraya: the ultimate shelter, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa — who is the primal cause from whom everything

                          125
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

emanates, who exists within everything and who is the
resting place for all. This tenth symptom is the primary
one, the shelter of all the others.




Bhāgavatam is the transcendental bridge for lost souls
(or: The twelve cantos correspond to the twelve
different limbs of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's divine form)

pādau yadīyau prathama-dvitīyau tṛtīya-turyau kathitau
yad-ūrū

nābhis tathā pañcama eva ṣaṣṭhau bhūjāntaraṁ dor-yugalaṁ
tathānyau

kaṇṭhas tu rājan navamo yadīyo mukhāravindaṁ daśamaṁ
praphullam

ekādaśo yasya lalāṭa-paṭṭaṁ śiro'pi tu dvādaśa eva bhāti

tam ādidevaṁ karuṇā-nidhānaṁ tamāla-varṇaṁ su-
hitāvatāram

apāra-saṁsāra samudra-setuṁ bhajāmahe bhāgavata-svarūpam

Padma Purāṇa

I worship the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam which is the auspicious
sound incarnation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the abode of mercy and
the origin of all demigods, whose transcendental form is
black like the tamāla tree. He has appeared in the
beautiful form of this Bhāgavatam just to make a bridge
whereby materially conditioned souls can cross the
otherwise insurmountable ocean of repeated birth and
death. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam has twelve cantos, which
correspond to the twelve different parts of Kṛṣṇa's
divine form. The first two cantos are the lotus feet of
Kṛṣṇa. The third and fourth cantos are His lotus thighs.
The fifth canto is His lotus navel. The sixth canto is
His torso and chest. The seventh and eight cantos are
his lotus arms. The ninth canto is his throat. The tenth
canto is his beautiful lotus face. The eleventh canto is
His forehead, and the twelfth canto is His crown.

Vyāsadeva may or may not know the Bhāgavatam

ahaṁ vedmi śuko vetti vyāso vetti na vetti vā

bhaktyā bhāgavataṁ grāhyaṁ na buddhyā na ca ṭīkayā

CC Mad 24.313/STB p. 33/GKH 2.27

aham—I (Lord Śiva); vedmi—know; śukaḥ—Śukadeva Gosvāmī;
vetti—knows; vyāsaḥ—Vyāsadeva; vetti—knows; na vetti vā—
or may not know; bhaktyā—by devotional service;
bhāgavatam—the Bhāgavata Purāṇa; grāhyam—to be accepted;
na—not; buddhyā—by so-called intelligence or
experimental knowledge; na—nor; ca—also; ṭīkayā—by
imaginary commentary.

[Lord Śiva said:] I know and Śukadeva knows the meaning

                          126
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, whereas Vyāsadeva may or may not
know it. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam can only be known through
bhakti, not by mundane intelligence or by reading many
commentaries. 13



An Ocean in the Palm of One’s Hand - The Bhāgavatam in a
nutshell

jayati jana-nivāso devakī-janma-vādo

yadu-vara-pariṣat svair dorbhir asyann adharmam

sthira-cara-vṛjina-ghnaḥ su-smita-śrī-mukhena

vraja-pura-vanitānāṁ vardhayan kāma-devam

SB 10.90.48/CC Mad 13.79/Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam 2.7.154/VG
p. 107/ORY p. 99

jayati—eternally lives gloriously; jana-nivāsaḥ—He who
lives among human beings like the members of the Yadu
dynasty and is the ultimate resort of all living
entities; devakī-janma-vādaḥ—known as the son of Devakī;
yadu-vara-pariṣat—served by the members of the Yadu
dynasty or the cowherd men of Vṛndāvana; svaiḥ dorbhiḥ—
by His own arms, or by His devotees like Arjuna who are
just like His own arms; asyan—casting out; adharmam—
demons or the impious; sthira-cara-vṛjina-ghnaḥ—the
destroyer of all the ill fortune and sufferings
(especially the pain of separation) of all living
entities, moving and not moving; su-smita—always
smiling; śrī-mukhena—by His beautiful face; vraja-pura-
vanitānām—of the gopīs of Vṛndāvana; vardhayan—
increasing; kāma-devam—the amorous desires.

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is known as jana-nivāsaḥ,
He who lives in the hearts of all living entities
(especially in the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the
hearts of His pure devotees), or He who is their
ultimate resort. He is famous as Devakī-nandana or
Yaśodā-nandana, the son of Devakī and Yaśodā [it is only
vāda, theory, that He has taken birth from the womb of
Devakī]. He is served by the exalted Yadus, who are His
associates. With His mighty arms, the Pāṇḍavas, He kills
the demons and thus destroy irreligion. By His
effulgent, blissful smiling face He dispels the
sufferings of all living entities, both moving and
inert, and increases the kāma (prema) of the gopīs of
Vṛndāvana, as well as the queens of Mathurā and Dvārakā.
May He be all victorious!

Thus ends section 5) Other Bhāgavatam Topics




6) Catuḥ Ślokī Bhāgavatam



The prelude to Catuḥ Ślokī Bhāgavatam: Transcendental

                            127
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

knowledge about Me is scientific and yet full of
mysteries

jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me yad vijñāna-samanvitam

sa-rahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā

SB 2.9.31/CC Ādi 1.51, Madhya 25.105/JD ch. 9

jñānam—knowledge; parama—extremely; guhyam—confidential;
me—of Me; yat—which; vijñāna—realisation; samanvitam—
fully endowed with; sa-rahasyam—along with mystery; tat—
of that; aṅgam—supplementary parts; ca—and; gṛhāṇa—just
try to take up; gaditam—explained; mayā—by Me.

[Lord Kṛṣṇa to Brahmā:] “Please hear attentively what I
shall speak to you, for transcendental knowledge about
Me is not only scientific but also full of mysteries.”

One can know Me only by My causeless mercy

yāvān ahaṁ yathā-bhāvo yad-rūpa-guṇa-karmakaḥ

tathaiva tattva-vijñānam astu te mad-anugrahāt

SB 2.9.32/CC Ādi 1.52

yāvān—as I am in My eternal form; aham—I; yathā—in
whichever manner; bhāvaḥ—transcendental existence; yat—
whatever; rūpa—various forms and colors; guṇa—qualities;
karmakaḥ—activities; tathā eva—exactly so; tattva-
vijñānam—factual realisation; astu—let there be; te—
your; mat—My; anugrahāt—by My causeless mercy.

“Only by My causeless mercy, you will be enlightened in
truth about My personality, manifestations, qualities
and pastimes.”



ei “tina— tattva āmi kahinu tomāre

“jīva— tumi ei tina nāribe jānibāre

CC Madhya 25.106

ei tina tattva—all three of these features of the
Absolute Truth; āmi—I; kahinu—shall speak; tomāre—unto
you; jīva—a living being; tumi—you; ei tina—these three;
nāribe—will not be able; jānibāre—to understand.

“O Brahmā, I shall explain all these truths to you.
Since you are a living being [jīva], without My
explanation you will not be able to understand your
relationship with Me, devotional activity and life’s
ultimate goal”.

The essence of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam - sambandha, abhidheya
and prayojana - is manifest in the catuḥ-ślokī

bhāgavatera sambandha, abhidheya, prayojana

catuḥ-ślokīte prakaṭa tāra kariyāche lakṣaṇa


                          128
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

CC Madhya 25.102

bhāgavatera—of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; sambandha—a personal
relationship with God; abhidheya—activities in that
relationship; prayojana—the ultimate goal of life;
catuḥ-ślokīte—in the four root ślokas of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam; prakaṭa—manifest; tāra—of them; kariyāche—
has done; lakṣaṇa—the specific symptoms.

The essence of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam—our relationship with
the Supreme Lord, our activities in that connection and
the goal of life—is manifest in the four ślokas of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam known as the catuḥ-ślokī. Everything
is explained in those verses.

Catuḥ-ślokī bhāgavatam 1 - “I am the source of
everything”- Sambandha-jñāna - knowledge of our
relationship with Kṛṣṇa

aham evāsam evāgre nānyad yat sad-asat param

paścād ahaṁ yad etac ca yo —vaśiṣyeta so —smy aham

SB 2.9.33/CC Ādi 1.53, Madhya 25.113/BR 2.28

aham—I, the Personality of Godhead; eva—certainly; āsam—
existed; eva—only; agre—before the creation; na—never;
anyat—anything else; yat—all those; sat—the effect; asat
—the cause; param—the supreme; paścāt—at the end; aham—
I, the Personality of Godhead; yat—all these; etat—this
(creation); ca—also; yaḥ—everything; avaśiṣyeta—remains;
saḥ—that; asmi—I am; aham—I, the Personality of Godhead.

Before the creation of this world, only I existed. The
gross and the subtle, up to the indefinable Brahman — in
other words the cause (sat) and the effect (asat) — did
not exist. Nothing other than I existed. What manifested
in the form of creation is also I, and after
annihilation only I will remain.

Catuḥ-ślokī bhāgavatam 2 - The Absolute Truth and māyā,
the deluding potency



ṛte —rthaṁ yat pratīyeta na pratīyeta cātmani

tad vidyād ātmano māyāṁ yathābhāso yathā tamaḥ

SB 2.9.34/CC Ādi 1.54, Madhya 25.119/BR 2.29

ṛte—without; artham—value; yat—that which; pratīyeta—
appears to be; na—not; pratīyeta—appears to be; ca—and;
ātmani—in relation to Me; tat—that; vidyāt—you must
know; ātmanaḥ—My; māyām—deluding potency; yathā—just as;
ābhāsaḥ—the reflection; yathā—as; tamaḥ—the darkness.

The Supreme Absolute Truth (parama-tattva or svarūpa-
tattva) is the only real truth. One should understand
that which is seen to be separate from this truth, or
not existing within it, to be the product of the Supreme
Absolute Truth’s deluding potency (māyā). The following
example demonstrates this. Parama-tattva can be compared
to the sun, which is an object consisting of light. The

                          129
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

sun is experienced in two other forms, namely its
reflection and darkness. Similarly, in regards to the
Absolute Truth, reflection pertains to the living
entities (jīva-śakti) and darkness to the material world
(māyā-śakti).

Catuḥ-ślokī bhāgavatam 3 - Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva,
the prayojana

yathā mahānti bhūtāni bhūteṣūccāvaceṣv anu

praviṣṭāny apraviṣṭāni tathā teṣu na teṣv aham

SB 2.9.35/CC Ādi 1.55, Madhya 25.126/BR 2.30

yathā—just as; mahānti—the universal; bhūtāni—elements;
bhūteṣu ucca-avaceṣu—in the gigantic and minute; anu—
after; praviṣṭāni—entered; apraviṣṭāni—not entered;
tathā—so; teṣu—in them; na—not; teṣu—in them; aham—
Myself.

The five great elements of material creation (earth,
water, etc.) enter into the bodies of all living
entities, high and low, from the demigods to the sub-
human species. But at the same time, these elements
exist independently. Similarly, I have entered into all
living entities as the Supersoul, but at the same time I
am situated independently in My own svarūpa, and I
appear to My surrendered devotees both internally and
externally.

Catuḥ-ślokī bhāgavatam 4 - The process, abhidheya-tattva

etāvad eva jijñāsyaṁ tattva-jijñāsunātmanaḥ

anvaya-vyatirekābhyāṁ yat syāt sarvatra sarvadā

SB 2.9.36/CC Ādi 1.56, Madhya 25.123/BR 2.15

etāvat—up to this; eva—certainly; jijñāsyam—is to be
inquired; tattva—the Absolute Truth; jijñāsunā—by the
student; ātmanaḥ—of the Self; anvaya—directly;
vyatirekābhyām—indirectly; yat—whatever; syāt—it may be;
sarvatra—in all circumstances; sarvadā—at all times.

A person inquisitive about the truth of   the self and the
Superself (ātma-tattva) should inquires   always and
everywhere through both direct (anvaya)   and indirect
(vyatireka) means of deliberation about   that Supreme
Absolute Truth.

7) Catuḥ Ślokī Bhagavad-gītā



I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds

ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

BG 10.8/CC Madhya 24.189/BPKG p. 283

aham—I; sarvasya—of all creation; prabhavaḥ—the source;

                          130
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

mattaḥ—from Me; sarvam—everything; pravartate—emanates;
iti—thus; matvā—having comprehended; bhajante—become
devoted, worship; mām—Me; budhāḥ—the learned; bhāva-
samanvitāḥ—filled with ecstasy.

I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds.
Everything emanates from Me and all are engaged in
activities by Me alone. The wise who perfectly know this
engage in My devotional service and worship Me with all
their hearts.

Bhaktas derive great satisfaction and bliss from always
conversing about Me

mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā bodhayantaḥ parasparam

kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca

BG 10.9/GKH 12.54

mat-cittāḥ—their minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-
prāṇāḥ—their lives devoted to Me; bodhayantaḥ—preaching;
parasparam—among themselves; kathayantaḥ—talking; ca—
also; mām—about Me; nityam—perpetually; tuṣyanti—become
pleased; ca—also; ramanti—enjoy transcendental bliss; ca
—also.

The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their
lives are fully devoted to My service, and they derive
great satisfaction and bliss from always enlightening
one another and conversing about Me.

I reveal Myself to those who always serve Me with love
and dedication

teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ yena mām upayānti te

BG 10.10/CC Ādi 1.49, Madhya 24.173, 24.192

teṣām—unto them; satata-yuktānām—always engaged;
bhajatām—in rendering devotional service; prīti-pūrvakam
—in loving ecstasy; dadāmi—I give; buddhi-yogam—real
intelligence; tam—that; yena—by which; mām—unto Me;
upayānti—come; te—they.

To those who are constantly devoted to serving Me with
love, I give the understanding by which they can come to
Me.

I destroy the darkness of ignorance in their hearts

teṣām evānukampārtham aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ

nāśayāmy ātma-bhāva-stho jñāna-dīpena bhāsvatā

BG 10.11

teṣām—for them; eva—certainly; anukampā-artham—to show
special mercy; aham—I; ajñāna-jam—due to ignorance;
tamaḥ—darkness; nāśayāmi—dispel; ātma-bhāva—within their
hearts; sthaḥ—situated; jñāna—of knowledge; dīpena—with
the lamp; bhāsvatā—glowing.

                          131
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


To show them special mercy, I, dwelling in their hearts,
destroy with the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness
born of ignorance.

Bhagavad-gīta glorified

sarvopaniṣado gāvo dogdhā gopāla-nandanaḥ

pārtho vatsaḥ sudhīr bhoktā dugdhaṁ gītāmṛtaṁ mahat

Gītā-Bhāṣya, Śrī Śaṅkarācārya/Gītā-Mahātmya

All the Upaniṣads are likened to a cow; Lord Kṛṣṇa, the
cowherd son of Nanda Mahārāja, is milking this cow and
feeding Arjuna, who is likened to a calf. Wise men with
purified intelligence relish drinking this supremely
nectarean milk known as the Gīta.

Thus ends section 7) Catuḥ Ślokī Bhagavad-gītā

and Chapter 3 — Bhāgavata-tattva




Chapter 4 — Gaura tattva


śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya, rādhā-kṛṣṇa nahe anya




1. The Identity of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu 163

2. The Reasons for Mahāprabhu’s Appearance 166

3. Gaura-vāṇī - Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s Teachings 172

4. Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself - Śāstric Evidence 176

5. Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are Revealed Through Mahāprabhu 185

6. The Benefits of Devotion to Mahāprabhu 188

7. The Unfortunate are Devoid of Devotion to Mahāprabhu
190

8. The Glories of Gaurāṅga's Devotees 191

9. Prayers in Glorification of Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari
193



1) The Identity of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is non-different from Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa

                           132
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya, rādhā-kṛṣṇa nahe anya

Caitanya Bhāgavata/Śrī Guru-Parampara (6), SGG p. 18

śrī-kṛṣṇa caitanya—Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu; rādhā-
kṛṣṇa—the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; nahe anya—
none other.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is none other than the combined
form of Śrīmatī Rādhīkā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa appears as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
performs Saṅkīrtana to deliver the fallen souls of the
age of Kali

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ (or) bhajāmi kali-pāvanam

SB 11.5.32/CC Ādi 5.32/BPKG p. 253/BR 1.1

kṛṣṇa-varṇam—uttering the syllables kṛṣ-ṇa; tviṣā—with a
luster; akṛṣṇam—not black (golden); sa-aṅga—along with
associates; upa-aṅga—servitors; astra—weapons; pārṣadam—
confidential companions; yajñaiḥ—by sacrifice;
saṅkīrtana-prāyaiḥ—consisting chiefly of congregational
chanting; yajanti—they worship; hi—certainly; su-
medhasaḥ—intelligent persons. [bhajami—I worship; kali-
pāvanam—He who delivers the jīvas of Kali-yuga].

In the age of Kali, Kṛṣṇa appears with a golden
complexion (akṛṣṇa). He is constantly singing the two
syllables kṛ and ṣṇa, and He is accompanied by His
associates, servitors, weapons and confidential
companions. Intelligent people worship Him by performing
saṅkīrtana-yajña. (or) I worship Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva, who
delivers the living entities of Kali-yuga (kali-pāvanam)
through the congregational chanting of the holy names
(śrī-nāma-saṅkīrtana-yajña). He describes the name,
form, qualities and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; He performs
kīrtana of the two syllables kṛ and ṣṇa; His complexion
is fair; He is surrounded by His aṅgas (associates: Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu and Śrī Advaita Prabhu), upāṅgas
(servitors: Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita and other pure devotees) and
pārṣadas (confidential companions like Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara, Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita and
the Six Gosvāmīs); and He is endowed with His weapon
(astra) of harināma, which destroys ignorance.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya is outwardly Gaura, inwardly Kṛṣṇa

antaḥ kṛṣṇaṁ bahir gauraṁ darśitāṅgādi-vaibhavam

kalau saṅkīrtanādyaiḥ sma kṛṣṇa-caitanyam āśritāḥ

Tattva-sandarbha 2/CC Ādi 3.81/BPKG p. 510/BR 1.1 pt

antaḥ—internally; kṛṣṇam—Lord Kṛṣṇa; bahiḥ—externally;
gauram—fair-colored; darśita—displayed; aṅga—limbs; ādi—

                             133
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

beginning with; vaibhavam—expansions; kalau—in the Age
of Kali; saṅkīrtana-ādyaiḥ—by congregational chanting,
etc.; sma—certainly; kṛṣṇa-caitanyam—unto Lord Caitanya
Mahāprabhu; āśritāḥ—sheltered.

I take shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, who is outwardly
gaura, of fair complexion, but is inwardly Kṛṣṇa
Himself. In Kali-yuga He displays His associates,
servitors and confidential companions while performing
saṅkīrtana.

Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari is the svarūpa of Kṛṣṇa
adorned with the bhāva and complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhikā

rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktir asmād

ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau

caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptaṁ

rādhā-bhāva-dyuti-suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa-svarūpam

CC Ādi 1.5 (Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara’s Kaḍacā)/JD ch. 14/
BPKG pp. 505,510/GKH (P)

rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; praṇaya—of
love; vikṛtiḥ—the transformation; hlādinī-śaktiḥ—
pleasure potency; asmāt—from this; eka-ātmānau—both the
same in identity; api—although; bhuvi—on earth; purā—
from beginningless time; deha-bhedam—separate forms;
gatau—obtained; tau—those two; caitanya-ākhyam—known as
Śrī Caitanya; prakaṭam—manifest; adhunā—now; tat-dvayam—
the two of Them; ca—and; aikyam—unity; āptam—obtained;
rādhā—of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; bhāva—mood; dyuti—the
luster; su-valitam—who is adorned with; naumi—I offer my
obeisances; kṛṣṇa-svarūpam—to Him who is identical with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is Kṛṣṇa’s hlādinī-śakti (pleasure
giving potency) and the embodiment of the transformation
of His praṇaya (intimate love). Since They are eka-ātma-
svarūpa (one soul), She is intrinsically non-different
from Kṛṣṇa and one in identity with Him. However, to
enjoy the transcendental pleasure of Their loving
pastimes, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have eternally manifested
Themselves in these two apparently separate forms. Now
these two transcendental identities, sevya and sevaka,
viṣaya-tattva and āśraya-tattva, have manifested in one
svarūpa as Śrī Caitanya tattva. I repeatedly bow down to
Śacīnandana, who is the svarūpa of Kṛṣṇa and who is
adorned with the bhāva and complexion of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva is the Supreme Lord in His supremely
sweet form

saundarye kāma-koṭiḥ sakala-jana samāhlādane candra-
koṭir

vātsalye māṭṛ-koṭis tridaśa-viṭapināṁ koṭir audārya-sāre

gāmbhīrye 'mbodhi-koṭir madhurimaṇi sudhā-kṣīra-
mādhvīka-kotir


                          134
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

gauro devaḥ sa jīyāt praṇaya-rasa-pade darśitāścarya-
koṭiḥ

Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 101, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī

Caitanya Mahāprabhu is lovelier than millions of cupids.
He is mellower than millions of moons, dearer than
millions of mothers, kinder than millions of wish-
fulfilling trees, deeper than millions of oceans, and
sweeter than millions of nectarean drinks. All glories
to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the Supreme Lord, who
displays millions of amazing sentiments of mādhurya-
rasa, the most exalted mellow of prema.

2) The Reasons for Mahāprabhu’s Appearance



The internal and external reasons for Mahāprabhu’s
appearance

prema-rasa-niryāsa karite āsvādana

rāga-mārga bhakti loke karite pracāraṇa

rasika-śekhara kṛṣṇa parama-karuṇa

ei dui hetu haite icchāra udgama

CC Ādi 4.15-16/GV p. 63

prema-rasa—of the mellow of love of God; niryāsa—the
essence; karite—to do; āsvādana—relishing; rāga-mārga—
the path of spontaneous attraction; bhakti—devotional
service; loke—in the world; karite—to do; pracāraṇa—
propagation; rasika-śekhara—the supreme enjoyer of rasa;
kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; parama-karuṇa—the supremely merciful;
ei—these; dui—two; hetu—reasons; haite—from; icchāra—of
desire; udgama—the birth.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s desire to appear was born from two reasons:
He wanted to relish the sweet essence of prema-rasa, and
He wanted to propagate devotional service in the world
on the platform of spontaneous attraction, rāga-bhakti.
Thus He is known as the topmost relisher of rasa and as
supremely merciful.



Internally Gaurasundara relishes the bhāva of Śrī
Rādhikā, externally He bestows nāma-prema

sei rādhāra bhāva lañā caitanyāvatāra

yuga-dharma nāma-prema kaila paracāra

CC Ādi 4.220

sei—that; rādhāra—of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; bhāva—the
emotion; lañā—taking; caitanya—of Lord Caitanya; avatāra
—the incarnation; yuga-dharma—the religion of the age;
nāma-prema—prema bestowed through the holy name; kaila—
did; paracāra—preaching.


                          135
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Internally, Lord Caitanya appeared with the sentiments
of Śrī Rādhā. Externally, He preached the dharma of this
age, the chanting of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, which
bestows pure love of God (kṛṣṇa-prema). 14



The three internal reasons for Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari’s appearance

śrī-rādhāyāḥ praṇaya-mahimā kīdṛśo vānayaivā

svādyo yenādbhuta-madhurimā kīdṛśo vā madīyaḥ

saukhyaṁ cāsyā mad-anubhavataḥ kīdṛśaṁ veti lobhāt

tad-bhāvāḍhyaḥ samajani śacī-garbha-sindhau harīnduḥ

CC Ādi 1.6/GKH (P)

śrī-rādhāyāḥ—of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; praṇaya-mahimā—the
greatness of Her love (Her prema-vaicittya) ; kīdṛśaḥ—of
what kind; vā—or; anayā—by this one (Rādhā); eva—alone;
āsvādyaḥ—to be relished; yena—by that love; adbhuta-
madhurimā—the wonderful sweetness; kīdṛśaḥ—of what kind;
vā—or; madīyaḥ—of Me; saukhyam—the happiness; ca—and;
asyāḥ—of Her; mat-anubhavataḥ—from realisation of My
sweetness; kīdṛśam—of what kind; vā—or; iti—thus; lobhāt
—from the desire; tat—Her; bhāva-āḍhyaḥ—richly endowed
with emotions; samajani—took birth; śacī-garbha—of the
womb of Śrīmatī Śacī-devī; sindhau—in the ocean; hari—
Śrī Hari; induḥ—like the moon.

Desiring to understand the glory of Śrīmatī Rādhīkā’s
love, the wonderful qualities in Him that She alone
relishes through Her love, and the happiness She feels
when She realises the sweetness of His love, the Supreme
Lord Hari, richly endowed with Her emotions, appeared
from the womb of Śrīmatī Śacī-devī, as the moon appeared
from the ocean.

“Sugar cannot taste itself” - Becoming fascinated by His
own beauty, Kṛṣṇa desires to taste it like Rādhikā

aparikalita-pūrvaḥ kaś camatkāra-kārī

sphurati mama garīyān eṣa mādhurya-pūraḥ

ayam aham api hanta prekṣya yaṁ lubdha-cetāḥ

sa-rabhasam upabhoktuṁ kāmaye rādhikeva

CC Ādi 4.146/GV p. 45

aparikalita—not experienced; pūrvaḥ—previously; kaḥ—who;
camatkāra-kārī—causing wonder; sphurati—manifests; mama—
My; garīyān—more great; eṣaḥ—this; mādhurya-pūraḥ—
abundance of sweetness; ayam—this; aham—I; api—even;
hanta—alas; prekṣya—seeing; yam—which; lubdha-cetāḥ—My
mind being bewildered; sa-rabhasam—impetuously;
upabhoktum—to enjoy; kāmaye—desire; rādhikā iva—like
Rādhikā.

Who manifests an abundance of sweetness greater than

                          136
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Mine, which has never been experienced before and which
causes wonder to all? Alas, I Myself, My mind bewildered
upon seeing this beauty, impetuously desire to enjoy it
like Śrī Rādhikā.

Out of greed for the sweet ecstasy of His devotees, the
Lord descended to this world in the form of His own
devotee

sva-dayita-nija-bhāvaṁ yo vibhāvya sva-bhāvāt

su-madhuram avatīrṇo bhakta-rūpeṇa lobhāt

jayati kanaka-dhāmā kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmā

harir iha yati-veśaḥ śrī-śacī-sūnur eṣaḥ

Śrī Bṛhad Bhāgavtāmṛtam 1.1.3

sva—His own; dayita—of the beloved devotees; nija—their;
bhāvam—ecstasy; yaḥ—who; vibhāvya—realising; sva-bhāvāt—
than His own ecstasy; su-madhuram—even sweeter;
avatīrṇaḥ—has descended; bhakta—of His own devotee;
rūpeṇa—in the form; lobhāt—out of greed; jayati—all
glories; kanaka—golden-colored; dhāmā—with an
effulgence; kṛṣṇa-caitanya—Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya; nāmā—with
the name; hariḥ—to Lord Hari; iha—in this world; yati—of
a renunciant; veśaḥ—whose dress; śrī-śacī—of Mother
Śacī; sūnuḥ—the son; eṣaḥ—this.

Realising that the ecstasy of His beloved devotees is
even sweeter than His own, out of greed the Lord
descended to this world in the form of His own devotee.
Dressed as a renunciant, golden in effulgence, He bears
the name Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. All glories to that Lord
Hari, who has appeared as the son of Mother Śacī!

I shall accepts the role of a devotee and teach bhakti
by practicing it Myself

āpani karimu bhakta-bhāva aṅgīkāre

āpani ācari— bhakti śikhāimu sabāre

CC Ādi 3.20

āpani—personally; karimu—I shall make; bhakta-bhāva—the
position of a devotee; aṅgīkāre—acceptance; āpani—
personally; ācari——practicing; bhakti—devotional
service; śikhāimu—I shall teach; sabāre—to all.

I shall accept the role of a devotee, and I shall teach
devotional service by practicing it Myself.

I sometimes accept sannyāsa to induce the fallen souls
to take up bhakti

aham eva kvacid brahman sannyāsāśramam āśritaḥ

hari-bhaktiṁ grāhayāmi kalau pāpa-hatān narān

Upapurāṇas/CC Ādi 3.83

aham—I; eva—certainly; kvacit—somewhere; brahman—O

                          137
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

brāhmaṇa; sannyāsa-āśramam—the renounced order of life;
āśritaḥ—taking recourse to; hari-bhaktim—devotional
service to Śrī Hari; grāhayāmi—I shall give; kalau—in
the Age of Kali; pāpa-hatān—sinful; narān—to men.

(Mahāprabhu quoting a śloka spoken by Kṛṣṇa to
Vyāsadeva:) O learned brāhmaṇa, sometimes I accept the
renounced order of life to induce the fallen people of
the Age of Kali to accept devotional service to the
Lord.

Assuming the mood (bhāva) of a devotee (Rādhikā), He
preached pure bhakti

ei-mata bhakta-bhāva kari— aṅgīkāra

āpani ācari— bhakti karila pracāra

CC Ādi 4.41

ei-mata—like this; bhakta-bhāva—the bhāva of a devotee;
kari——making; aṅgīkāra—acceptance; āpani—Himself; ācari
——practicing; bhakti—devotional service; karila—did;
pracāra—propagation.

In this way, assuming the mood (bhāva) of a devotee
(Śrīmati Rādhikā), He preached devotional service while
practicing it Himself.

rādhikāra bhāva-kānti kari— aṅgīkāra

nija-rasa āsvādite kariyācha avatāra

CC Mad 8.279/BR 1.1 pt

rādhikāra—of Śrīmatī Rādhikā; bhāva-kānti—ecstatic love
and luster; kari——making; aṅgīkāra—acceptance; nija-rasa
—Your own transcendental mellow; āsvādite—to taste;
kariyācha—You have made; avatāra—incarnation.

To taste Your own transcendental mellow You appeared as
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, accepting the sentiment and
luster of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

He wove a garland of the holy name and prema, with which
He garlanded all

sei dvāre ācaṇḍāle kīrtana sañcāre

nāma-prema-mālā gāṅthi— parāila saṁsāra

CC Ādi 4.40

sei dvāre—by that; ā-caṇḍāle—even among the dog-eaters;
kīrtana—the chanting of the holy names; sañcāre—He
infuses; nāma—of the holy names; prema—and of love of
God; mālā—a garland; gāṅthi——stringing together; parāila
—He put it on; saṁsāre—the whole material world.

Thus He spread kīrtana among all people, high and low.
He wove a garland of śrī-nāma and prema, with which He
garlanded all the jīvas of the material world.

Through nāma-saṅkīrtana He distributed the love and

                          138
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

affection of the gopīs

cirād adattaṁ nija-gupta-vittaṁ

sva-prema-nāmāmṛtam aty-udāraḥ

ā-pāmaraṁ yo vitatāra gauraḥ

kṛṣṇo janebhyas tam ahaṁ prapadye

CC Madhya 23.1

cirāt—for a long time; adattam—not given; nija-gupta-
vittam—His own personal confidential property; sva-prema
—of love for Him; nāma—of the holy name; amṛtam—the
ambrosia; ati-udāraḥ—most munificent; ā-pāmaram—even
down to the lowest of men; yaḥ—one who; vitatāra—
distributed; gauraḥ—Śrī Gaurasundara; kṛṣṇaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa
Himself; janebhyaḥ—to the people in general; tam—to Him;
aham—I; prapadye—offer obeisances.

This prema, which is the most secret and hidden asset of
Goloka Vṛndāvana, had never been given before. Now
Kṛṣṇa, in the form of Śrī Gaurāṇga Mahāprabhu,
distributes this prema through the chanting of His holy
names to all people, even to the most fallen. Such a
wonderfully magnificent, merciful and magnanimous
incarnation is Gaura-Kṛṣṇa. I completely surrender unto
Him. (Translation by Śrīla Gaura Govinda Maharaja, The
Embankment of Separation)

Śacīnandana Gaurahari comes to spread the Saṅkīrtana
movement

āra dui janma ei saṅkīrtanārambhe

haiba tomāra putra āmi avilambe

mora arcā-mūrti mātā, tumi se dharaṇī

jihvā-rūpā tumi mātā, nāmera jananī

ei dui janma mora saokīrtanārambhe

dui ṭhañi tora putra rahu avilambe

CB Madhya 27.47

[Caitanya Mahāprabhu told Śacīdevī:] “Birth after birth
you are My mother. Again, in this birth, I have come to
begin the saṅkīrtana movement, and so I have become your
son. My appearance in this world is twofold: I appear as
the arca-mūrtī and as the holy name. In this way I
appear upon the tongue in the form of sound, and as the
deity made from the elements drawn from the earth. In
both these forms I am worshiped, and in these two
features I have appeared in order to spread the
saṅkīrtana movement.”

I shall bring the real treasure of Kṛṣṇa-prema

anera tanaya ane rajata suvarṇa

kaile vinā sa jaya nahe para-dharma

                          139
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


ami ani dibo kṛṣṇa-prema hena dhana

sakala sampada maya kṛṣṇera caraṇa

Caitanya Maṅgala

[Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari told Śacīdevī:] Other
people’s sons bring wealth in the form of silver and
gold for sense gratification, but this wealth is
perishable and cannot bestow the supreme destination. I,
however, shall bring the real wealth of kṛṣṇa-prema. The
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are the actual abode of all
prosperity and auspiciousness.



Śrī Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛtam glorifies Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu

jayati nija-padābja-prema-dānāvatīrṇo

vividha-madhurimābdhiḥ ko —pi kaiśora-gandhiḥ

gata-parama-daśāntaṁ yasya caitanya-rūpād

anubhava-padam āptaṁ prema gopīṣu nityam

Śrī Bṛhad Bhāgavtāmṛtam 1.1.1, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī

jayati—all glorifies; nija—of His own; pada-abja—lotus
feet; prema—ecstatic transcendental love; dāna—for
giving charity; avatīrṇaḥ—to Him who descended; vividha—
of various; madhurima—kinds of sweetness; abdhiḥ—an
ocean; kaḥ api—a certain; kaiśora—of youth; gandhiḥ—who
has the fragrance; gata—who has obtained; parama—of the
topmost; daśā—stage; antam—the extreme; yasya—whose;
caitanya—of Śrī Caitanya; rūpāt—by the form; anubhava—of
transcendental experience; padam—the situation; āptam—
who has obtained; prema—the ecstatic love; gopīṣu—
residing in the gopīs; nityam—eternally.

All glories to that inconceivable Lord who descended to
give in charity the gift of love for His own lotus feet.
He is an ocean filled with many kinds of sweetness, and
He always bears the fragrance of fresh youth. In His
form as Śrī Caitanya He has realised the last extreme of
transcendental experience, the love residing eternally
in the gopīs.

Thus ends section 2) The Reasons for Mahāprabhu’s
Appearance



3) Gaura-vāṇī - Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s teachings



Gaura-vāṇī — Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s teachings in a
nutshell: Pure love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate goal
and the prema of the gopīs is the topmost form of pure
love of God, as stated by the Bhāgavatam


                          140
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma vṛṇdāvanaṁ

ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ pramāṇam amalaṁ premā pum-artho mahān

śrī-caitanya-mahāprabhor matam idaṁ tatrādaro naḥ paraḥ

Caitanya-manjusa, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura/
BPKG pp. 347,400 etc./GV p. 26

ārādhyo—worshipable; bhagavān—the Supreme Lord; vraja-
īśa-tanayaḥ—the son of the Lord of Vṛndāvana, Nanda
Mahārāja; tat-dhāma—His abode; vṛṇdāvanam—Vṛndāvana;
ramyā—pleasing; kācit—which; upāsanā—the process of
worship; vraja-vadhū—of the gopīs of Vraja; vargeṇā—by
the group; yā—and; kalpitā—performed; śrīmad-bhāgavatam—
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam; pramāṇam—the standard authority;
amalam—spotless; premā—pure love of Kṛṣṇa; pum-arthaḥ—
the ultimate goal of life for human beings; mahān—the
great; śrī-caitanya—of Śrī Caitanya; mahāprabhoḥ——mahā—
indicates mahābhāva (i.e. Rādhikā) and “prabhu—
indicates rasarāja mahābhāva (i.e. Kṛṣṇa); matam—the
opinion; idam—this; tatra—that; ādaraḥ—regard; naḥ—of
us; paraḥ—the highest.

Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is our only
worshipful object. In the same way that He is
worshipful, so is His transcendental abode, Śrī
Vṛndāvana Dhāma. The mood in which the young brides of
Vraja (the gopīs, especially Śrīmatī Rādhikā) worship
Him is the highest perfectional form of love of God.
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam alone is the immaculate scriptural
evidence of this (śabda-pramāṇa) and kṛṣṇa-prema is the
supreme objective of life (the fifth and highest goal of
human life - beyond mundane religiosity, economic
develoment, sense gratification and impersonal
liberation). This is the teachings of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu (gaura-vāṇī). We hold this conclusion
(siddhānta) in supreme regard and have no inclination or
respect for any other conclusion or cheating opinions.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains: This is a key śloka
for understanding all tattva-siddhānta in Sambandha,
Abhidheya and Prayojana. It gives knowledge of the
Supreme form of Kṛṣṇa, of the topmost process for
worshiping Him, of the ultimate goal, and of the
ultimate evidence for this (the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam). The
whole philosopy and the speciality of the Rūpānuga line
is contained within this sūtra by Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura: Devotional service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
the mood of the gopīs is the ultimate and sweetest form
of bhakti. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has expanded this
siddhānta in the following śloka:

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura summarizes Gaura-vāṇī in his
Daśa-mūla Śikṣā

āmnāyaḥ prāha tattvaṁ harim iha paramaṁ sarva-śaktiṁ
rasābdhiṁ

tad-bhinnāṁśāṁś ca jīvān prakṛti-kavalitān tad-vimuktāṁś
ca bhāvād


                          141
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

bhedābheda-prakāśaṁ sakalam api hareḥ sādhanaṁ śuddha-
bhaktiṁ

sādhyaṁ tat-prītim evety upadiśati janān gaura-candraḥ
svayaṁ saḥ

Daśa-mūla-tattva, invocation/JD ch. 13/BPKG p. 350/GV p.
40

āmnāya—the Vedas, which are transmitted through aural
reception from Guru to disciple; prāha—proclaim; tattvam
—Absolute Truth; harim—Śrī Hari; iha—here; paramam—the
supreme; sarva-śaktim—the possessor of all potencies;
rasa-abdhim—an ocean of rasa; tad-bhinna-aṁśāḥ—His
separated parts; ca—and; jīvān—jivas; prakṛti—His
illusory potency; kavalitān—swallowed up; tad-vimuktān—
His separated parts; ca—and; bhāvād- by nature; bheda-
abheda—one and different; prakāśam—a manifestation;
sakalam—everything; api—and; hareḥ—of Śrī Hari; sādhanam
—the means for attaiment; śuddha-bhaktim—is the pure
bhakti; sādhyam—the ultimate goal; tat-prītim—is love
for Him; eva iti—certainly thus; upadiśati—instructs;
janān—the people; gaura-candraḥ—the Golden Lord whose
effulgence resembles a moon; svayam—personally; saḥ—He.

1. Pramāṇa: The teachings of the Vedas received through
Guru-paramparā are known as āmnāya. The infallible
evidence of the Vedas, of the smṛti-śāstras headed by
the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, as well as evidence such as
direct sense perception (pradhāna), that concur with the
guidance of the Vedas, are all accepted as pramāṇa
(evidence). This pramāṇa establishes the following
prameyas (fundamental truths):

Sambandha:

2. Parama-tattva — Śrī Hari alone is the Supreme
Absolute Truth.

3. Sarva-śaktimān — He is the possessor of all potencies
(omnipotent).

4. Akhila-rasāmṛta-sindhu — He is the ocean of all
nectarean mellows and divine sweetness.

5. Vibhinnāṁśa-tattva — Both the mukta (liberated) and
baddha (conditioned) jīvas are His eternally separated
parts and parcels.

6. Baddha-jīvas —Conditioned souls are subject to the
control and covering of māyā.

7. Mukta-jīvas — Liberated souls are forever free from
māyā.

8. Acintya-Bhedābheda-tattva — The entire universe,
consisting of the conscious (cit) and unconscious
(acit), is Śrī Hari’s acintya-bhedābheda-prakāśa, that
is to say, it is His manifestation which is
inconceivably both different and non-different from Him.

Abhidheya:

9. Śuddha-bhakti — Pure devotional service is the only

                          142
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

practice (sādhana) to attain spiritual perfection
(sādhya).

Prayojana:

10. Kṛṣṇa-prīti — Transcendental love and affection for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the one and only final object of attainment
(sādhya-vastu).

The Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva has
herein instructed ten distinct tattvas (fundamental
truths) to the faithful jīvas.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “Anyone who does not know these
two ślokas (ārādhyo bhagavān and āmnāyaḥ prāha) is not
really my disciple.” “Śrīla Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura has extracted the essence of the conceptions of
the Śrī Gauḍīya Gosvāmīs and ācāryas, and has given the
teaching of Daśa-mūla-tattva. As if putting the ocean in
a jar, he has filled this Daśa-mūla-tattva with the
transcendental essence of the cream of the Vedas,
Upaniṣads, Vedānta-sūtra, Gītā, Śrīmad Bhāgavatam and
the literature of the Gosvāmīs. Our most worshipful
Śrīla guru-pādapadma used to proclaim this Daśa-mūla-
tattva everywhere he went.” (BPKG p. 349)

Through harināma-saṅkīrtana, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
personally tasted the unnatojjvala-rasa of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā (mādanākhya mahābhāva) and distributed the mood
of service to Her (mañjarī-bhāva)

anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ

Śri Vidagdha-mādhava, Rūpa Gosvāmi/CC Ādi 1.4/JD Intro./
GKH (P)

anarpita—not bestowed; carīm—formerly; cirāt—for a long
time; karuṇayā—by causeless mercy; avatīrṇaḥ—descended;
kalau—in the Age of Kali; samarpayitum—to bestow; unnata
—the most elevated; ujjvala-rasām—mādhurya-rasa (or more
specifically Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mādanākhya mahābhāva);
sva-bhakti—of Her own service (rādhā-dāsyam in mañjarī-
bhāva); śriyam—the beauty of Śrī Rādhīkā’s bhāvas
(moods); hariḥ—Śrī Hari; puraṭa—than gold; sundara—more
beautiful; dyuti—of splendor; kadamba—with a multitude;
sandīpitaḥ—lighted up; sadā—always; hṛdaya-kandare—in
the core of the heart; sphuratu—let Him be manifest; vaḥ
—your; śacī-nandanaḥ—the son of mother Śacī.

May the Supreme Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacī-devī, be brilliantly situated in the innermost core
of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of molten
gold, He has appeared in the Age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation has ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant mellow of
devotional service, mādhurya-rasa (as mañjarī-bhāva),
service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā as Her confidential
maidservants.

                          143
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has
come to give unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-sriyam. There
is a special emphasis on the final words, sva-bhakti-
sriyam. Sva means own. Whose own? Srimati Radhika’s own.
Radhika is the personification of bhakti. Sri Krsna
wanted to taste the essence of supreme devotion to
Himself, which is Radhika’s love. He also wanted to
distribute sva-bhakti-sriyam to the qualified living
entities. Bhakti refers to Radhika’s bhakti, and sriya
means beauty. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to give to
the fortunate living entities the beauty of Srimati
Radhika’s unnatojjvala-rasa. That “beauty— is called
mañjarī-bhāva, the mood of Her dear maidservants.

Imagine a creeper surrounding a tree on which there are
delicious golden-reddish mangos, and cuckoos eating
these mangos and singing sweetly. On that creeper there
are so many green leaves, flowers here and there on each
branch, and mañjarīs (buds). If the air touches and
plays with the creeper, all the leaves become happy and
begin to dance, and the mañjarīs also dance with
happiness. This is the beauty of the creeper. If that
creeper has no leaves, no flowers and no mañjarīs, it
has no beauty. The air will not play with its branches,
for it will have no taste to play. The splendor of the
creeper manifests when it plays with the air, its leaves
going here and there and always dancing.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted to give the beauty of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s unnatojjvala-rasa. The creeper
represents Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the beauty of Her love is
Her sakhīs (gopīs (nāyakās) and mañjarīs). With the
assistance of these sakhīs She can manifest more
attractiveness and express more varieties of bhāva.

I have come here to inspire and to help you all. I
request you to place all these teachings in your heart
and try to follow them. (Murwillumbah, Australia, Feb.
1997)



Editorial note: Another integral part of Gaura-vāṇī is
the Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam prayers. See Chapter 18 - Nāma-
tattva, section 2, and the book “Gaura-vāṇī Pracāriṇe—.



Thus ends section 3) Gaura-vāṇī

4) Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself - Śāstric Evidence



Śrīmad Bhāgavatam glorifies Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu as
Kṛṣṇa Himself

dhyeyaṁ sadā paribhava-ghnam abhīṣṭa-dohaṁ

tīrthāspadaṁ śiva-viriñci-nutaṁ śaraṇyam

bhṛtyārti-haṁ praṇata-pāla bhavābdhi-potaṁ


                          144
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

vande mahā-puruṣa te caraṇāravindam

SB 11.5.33/HBV 8.342/PJ 2.30/GKH (P)

dhyeyam—fit to be meditated upon; sadā—always;
paribhava-ghnam—which destroy the humiliation of
material existence; abhīṣṭa-doham — which amply reward
the true desire of the soul; tīrtha-āspadam—the abode of
the holy places and saints; śiva-viriñci-nutam—which are
praised by Śiva and Brahmā; śaraṇyam—most worthy of
taking shelter of; ārti-ham—which relieve the distress;
bhṛtya—of Your servants; praṇata-pāla—O protector of all
who bow to you; potam—the suitable boat (for); bhava-
abdhi—the ocean of birth and death; vande—I offer
homage; mahā-puruṣa—O Lord Mahāprabhu; te—to Your;
caraṇa-aravindam—lotus feet.

O guardian of the surrendered, great personality (the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, who enacts His
divine pastimes as a pure devotee). You alone are the
reality to be constantly meditated upon by the pure
souls, destroyer of the soul’s illusion, the divine
wish-fulfilling tree, the refuge of all devotees,
worshipable by Śiva and Viriñci (Sadāśiva in the form of
Śrī Advaita Ācārya, and Brahmā in the form of Hāridāsa
Ṭhākura). You are the shelter of all, dispeller of Your
devotee’s sufferings which originate in offences to the
holy name. and only boat for crossing the ocean of this
material world of suffering. I worship Your holy lotus
feet.

tyaktvā su-dustyaja-surepsita-rājya-lakṣmīṁ

dharmiṣṭha ārya-vacasā yad agād araṇyam

māyā-mṛgaṁ dayitayepsitam anvadhāvad

vande mahā-puruṣa te caraṇāravindam

SB 11.5.34/HBV 8.343/GKH (P)

tyaktvā—abandoning; su-dustyaja—most difficult to give
up; sura-īpsita—anxiously desired by the demigods;
rājya-lakṣmīm—the opulence of the goddess of fortune;
dharmiṣṭhaḥ—most perfectly fixed in religiousness; yat—
because; ārya-vacasā—of a brāhmaṇa’s curse to be
deprived of family happiness; agāt—He went; araṇyam—to
the forest of material existence; māyā-mṛgam—the
conditioned soul, who is always searching out illusory
enjoyment; dayitayā—out of mercy; īpsitam—His desired
object; anvadhāvat—running after; vande—I offer my
homage; mahā-puruṣa—O Lord Mahāprabhu; te—to Your;
caraṇa-aravindam—lotus feet.

O Mahā-puruṣa, I worship Your lotus feet. You gave up
the association of the goddess of fortune and all her
opulence, which is most difficult to renounce and is
hankered after by even the great demigods. Being the
most faithful follower of the path of religion, You thus
left for the forest in obedience to a brāhmaṇa’s curse.
Out of sheer mercifulness You chased after the fallen
conditioned souls, who are always in pursuit of the
false enjoyment of illusion, and at the same time
engaged in searching out Your own desired object, Lord

                          145
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Śyāmasundara.

O Mahāprabhu, in the age of Kalī, You do not assert
Yourself as the Supreme Lord

itthaṁ nṛ-tiryag-ṛṣi-deva-jhaṣāvatārair

lokān vibhāvayasi haṁsi jagat-pratīpān

dharmaṁ mahā-puruṣa pāsi yugānuvṛttaṁ

channaḥ kalau yad abhavas tri-yugo 'tha sa tvam

SB 7.9.38/BR 1.1 pt

ittham—in this way; nṛ—like a human being (such as Lord
Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāmacandra); tiryak—like animals (such as
Varāhadeva); ṛṣi—as a great saint (Paraśurāma); deva—as
demigods; jhaṣa—as an aquatic (such as Matsya and
Kūrma); avatāraiḥ—by such different incarnations; lokān—
all the different planetary systems; vibhāvayasi—You
protect; haṁsi—You kill; jagat-pratīpān—enemies of this
world; dharmam—the principles of religion; mahā-puruṣa—O
Mahāprabhu; pāsi—You protect; yuga-anuvṛttam—according
to the different millenniums; channaḥ—covered; kalau—in
the age of Kali; yat—since; abhavaḥ—have been (and will
be in the future); tri-yugaḥ—named Triyuga; atha—
therefore; saḥ—the same personality; tvam—You.

[Prahlāda Mahārāja said:] “O Kṛṣṇa, in this way You
appear in various incarnations: as a human being, an
animal, a great saint, a demigod, a fish, or a tortoise,
thus maintaining the entire creation in different
planetary systems and slaying the enemies of universal
peace. In this way, according to the age, You protect
the principles of religion, but, O Mahāprabhu, in the
age of Kalī, You do not assert Yourself as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Because Your incarnation is
hidden in the age of Kalī You are known as Triyuga, or
the Lord who manifests His supremacy in only three
ages.”



Evidence from the Upaniṣads for Śrī Caitanya

mahān prabhur vai puruṣaḥ sattvasyeṣa pravarttakaḥ

surnimalām imaṁ śāntīm īśāno jyotir avyayaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.12

The Personality of Godhead, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, is
brilliantly effulgent and imperishable like molten gold.
He is the Supreme Controller. He controls the mode of
goodness and through saṅkīrtana bestows spiritual
intelligence on the living beings. In the guise of a
sannyāsī, He is the source of spiritual purity and of
liberation. He is therefore known as "Mahāprabhu".



yadā paśyaḥ paśyate rukma-varṇaṁ kartāram īśaṁ puruṣaṁ
brahma-yonim

                             146
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


tadā vidyān puṇya-pāpe vidhūya nirañjanaḥ paramaṁ sāmyam
upaiti

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.3

When one realises the golden form of Lord Gaurāṅga, who
is the ultimate actor and the source of the Supreme
Brahman, he attains the highest knowledge. He becomes
cleansed of both pious and impious activities, becomes
free from worldly bondage, and enters the divine abode
of the Lord.



Evidence from Mahābhārāta for Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu

suvarṇa-varṇo hemāṅgo varāṅgaś candanāṅgadī

sannyāsa-kṛc chamaḥ śānto niṣṭhā-śānti-parāyaṇaḥ

Mahābhārata/CC Ādi 3.49/BR 1.1 pt

suvarṇa—of gold; varṇaḥ—having the color; hema-aṅgaḥ—
whose body was like molten gold; vara-aṅgaḥ—having a
most beautiful body; candana-aṅgadī—whose body was
smeared with sandalwood; sannyāsa-kṛt—practicing the
renounced order of life; śamaḥ—equipoised; śāntaḥ—
peaceful; niṣṭhā—fixed (in His mission of nāma-
saṅkīrtana); śānti—and of peace; parāyaṇaḥ—the highest
resort.

Kṛṣṇa first appears as a gṛhastha with a golden
complexion. His limbs are the color of molten gold, His
body is extremely beautiful, He is decorated with
sandalwood pulp and continuously chants “Kṛṣṇa”. Then He
accepts sannyāsa and is always equipoised. He is firmly
fixed (in His mission of propagating harināma-
saṅkīrtana) and He defeats the impersonalist
philosophers, who are opposed to bhakti. He is thus the
highest abode of peace and devotion.



I accept sannyāsa to induce the fallen souls to take up
bhakti

aham eva kvacid brahman sannyāsāśramam āśritaḥ

hari-bhaktiṁ grāhayāmi kalau pāpa-hatān narān

Upapurāṇas/CC Ādi 3.83

aham—I; eva—certainly; kvacit—somewhere; brahman—O
brāhmaṇa; sannyāsa-āśramam; —the renounced order of
life; āśritaḥ—taking recourse to; hari-bhaktim—
devotional service to Śrī Hari; grāhayāmi—I shall give;
kalau—in the Age of Kali; pāpa-hatān—sinful; narān—to
men.

(Mahāprabhu quoting a śloka spoken by Kṛṣṇa to
Vyāsadeva:) O learned brāhmaṇa, sometimes I accept the
renounced order of life to induce the fallen people of
the Age of Kali to accept devotional service to the

                          147
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Lord.

aham eva dvija-śreṣṭha nityaṁ pracchana-vigrahaḥ

bhagavad-bhakta-rūpena lokān rakṣāmi sarvadā

Ādi Purāṇa

O best of the brāhmaṇas, My disguised form is eternal.
In this way, with My own form hidden from ordinary sight
I take the form of a devotee and appear among the people
in general in order to establish and protect religious
principles.

kali-yuge līlāvatāra nā kare bhagavān

ataeva “tri-yuga— kari— kahi tāra nāma

pratiyuge karena kṛṣṇa yuga-avatāra

tarka-niṣṭha hṛdaya tomāra nāhika vicāra

CC Madhya-līlā 6.99—100/BR1.1 pt

kali-yuge—in this Age of Kali; līlā-avatāra—a pastime
incarnation; nā—not; kare—does; bhagavān—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; ataeva—therefore; tri-yuga—
Triyuga (manifested in three yugas); kari——accepting;
kahi—I say; tāra nāma—His holy name; prati-yuge—in every
age or millennium; karena—makes; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; yuga-
avatāra—incarnation for the age; tarka-niṣṭha—hardened
by argument; hṛdaya—heart; tomāra—your; nāhika—there is
not; vicāra—consideration.

[Gopīnātha Ācārya to Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya:] In Kali-
yuga there is no līlā-avatāra of Śrī Bhagavān; therefore
His name is Tri-yuga. But certainly there is an
incarnation in each yuga, and such an incarnation is
called a yuga-avatāra. Your heart has become hardened by
logic and arguments and thus you cannot consider these
facts.

At the time of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name-giving ceremony, Śrī
Gargācārya said:

āsan varṇās trayo hy asya gṛhṇato —nuyugaṁ tanuḥ

śuklo raktas tathā pīta idānīṁ kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ

SB 10.8.13/BR 1.1 pt

āsan—were assumed; varṇāḥ trayaḥ—three colors; hi—
indeed; asya—of your son Kṛṣṇa; gṛhṇataḥ—accepting;
anuyugam tanūḥ—transcendental bodies according to the
different yugas; śuklaḥ—sometimes white; raktaḥ—
sometimes red; tathā—as well as; pītaḥ—sometimes yellow;
idānīm kṛṣṇatām gataḥ—at the present moment He has
assumed a blackish colour.

Your son Kṛṣṇa appears in every yuga as an avatāra.
Previously He assumed three different colors — white,
red and yellow — and now He has appeared in a blackish
color.


                          148
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017



śukla-rakta-kṛṣṇa-pīta krame cāri varṇa

cāri varṇa dhari' kṛṣṇa karena yuga-dharma

CC Madhya 20.330

śukla—white; rakta—red; kṛṣṇa—black; pīta—yellow; krame—
one after another; cāri varṇa—four colors; cāri varṇa
dhari——accepting these four colors; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
karena yuga-dharma—manifests His pastimes in different
millenniums.

In the Satya, Treta, Dvāpara, and Kalī yugas, Kṛṣṇa
accepts four different colors: white, red, black, and
yellow respectively. These are the colors of the
different incarnations in different millenniums.

Evidence from the Gīta

yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

BG 4.7/GKH (P)

yadā yadā—whenever and wherever; hi—certainly; dharmasya
—of religion; glāniḥ—discrepancies; bhavati—become
manifested; bhārata—O descendant of Bharata;
abhyutthānam—predominance; adharmasya—of irreligion;
tadā—at that time; ātmānam—self; sṛjāmi—manifest; aham—
I.

Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious
practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant
rise of irreligion—at that time I descend Myself.

paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya sambhavāmi yuge yuge

BG 4.8/GKH (P)/BR 1.1 pt

paritrāṇāya—for the deliverance; sādhūnām—of the
devotees; vināśāya—for the annihilation; ca—and;
duṣkṛtām—of the miscreants; dharma—the eternal essence
of one’s spiritual nature and service; saṁsthāpana-
arthāya—to re-establish; sambhavāmi—I do appear; yuge—
millennium; yuge—after millennium.

To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants,
as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I
Myself appear, millennium after millennium.

māyāpure bhaviṣyāmi śacī-sutaḥ

Āgama-śāstras/BR 1.1 pt

In the future, the son of Śacī will appear in Māyāpura.

śutiyā ācchinu kṣīra-sāgara-bhitare

mora nidra bhāṅga haila nāḍāra huṅkāre

                           149
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


CB Madhya 22.16

[While sitting on the altar of Viṣṇu in the house of
Śrīvāsa, Lord Caitanya said:] Lying within the ocean of
milk, My transcendental slumber broke, as I awoke to
hear the loud cries of My devotees, thus I have come.

Śrī Gaurāṅga is the source of all avatāras

sei kṛṣṇa avatārī vrajendra-kumāra āpane caitanya-rūpe
kaila avatāra

ataeva caitanya gosañi paratattva-sīmā tāṅre kṣīroda-
śāyī kahi, ki tāṅra mahimā

sei ta' bhaktera vākya nahe vyabhicārī sakala sambhave
taṅte, yāte avatārī

avatārīra dehe saba avatārera sthiti keno kona-mate
kahe, yemana yāra mati

CC Ādi 2.109-112/BPKG p. 511

That same Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is the fountainhead of all
avatāras is the son of the king of Vrāja. He has
descended personally [as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu].
Therefore Lord Caitanya is the Supreme Absolute Truth.
To call Him Kṣīrodakaṣāyī Viṣṇu does not add to His
glory, but such words from the lips of a sincere devotee
cannot be false. All possibilities abide in Him because
He is the avatārī, primeval Lord. All other avatāras are
situated in the original body of the avatārī. Thus
according to one's inclination one may address Him as
any one of the avatāras.

bhāgavata, bhārata-śāstra, āgama, purāṇa caitanya-kṛṣṇa-
avatāre prakaṭa pramāṇa

pratyakṣe dekhaha nānā prakaṭa prabhāva alaukika karma,
alaukika anubhāva

dekhiyā nā dekhe yata abhaktera gaṇa ulūke nā dekhe yena
sūryera kiraṇa

CC Ādi 3.84-86

bhāgavata—Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; bhārata-śāstra—Mahābhārata;
āgama—Vedic literatures; purāṇa—the Purāṇas; caitanya—as
Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu; kṛṣṇa—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; avatāre—in
the incarnation; prakaṭa—displayed; pramāṇa—evidence;
pratyakṣe—directly; dekhaha—just see; nānā—various;
prakaṭa—manifested; prabhāva—influence; alaukika—
uncommon; karma—activities; alaukika—uncommon; anubhāva—
manifestation of bhāva; dekhiyā—seeing; nā dekhe—they do
not see; yata—all; abhaktera—of nondevotees; gaṇa—
crowds; ulūke—the owl; nā dekhe—does not see; yena—just
as; sūryera—of the sun; kiraṇa—rays.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Mahābhārāta, the Purāṇas, and other
Vedic literature all give evidence to prove that Lord
Caitanya is the avatāra of Kṛṣṇa. Also, one can directly
see Lord Caitanya's manifest influence in His uncommon
activities and uncommon manifestation of bhāva, but

                          150
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

faithless unbelievers do not see what is clearly
evident, just as owls do not see the rays of the sun.

sakala vaiṣṇava, śuna kari— eka-mana

caitanya-kṛṣṇera śāstra-mata-nirūpaṇa

kṛṣṇa, guru, bhakta, śakti, avatāra, prakāśa

kṛṣṇa ei chaya-rūpe karena vilāsa

CC Ādi 1.31-32

sakala—all; vaiṣṇava—O devotees of the Lord; śuna—please
hear; kari——making; eka-mana—rapt attention; caitanya—
Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
śāstra—scriptural reference; mata—according to; nirūpaṇa
—conclusion; kṛṣṇa—the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; guru—the
spiritual masters; bhakta—the devotees; śakti—the
potencies; avatāra—the incarnations; prakāśa—plenary
portions; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; ei chaya-rūpe—in these six
features; karena vilāsa—enjoys.

I request all my Vaiṣṇava readers to read and hear with
rapt attention this narration of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya as
inculcated in the revealed scriptures. Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoys
by manifesting Himself as the spiritual masters, the
devotees, the diverse potencies, the incarnations and
the plenary portions. They are all six in one.

golokaṁ ca parityajya lokānāṁ trāṇa-kāraṇāt

kalau gaurāṅga-rūpeṇa līlā-lāvaṇya-vigrahaḥ

Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa/GKH (P)

For the purpose of delivering the people of Kali-yuga, I
shall abandon Goloka, appear in the sublime form of Śrī
Gaurāṅga, and perform enchanting pastimes.

yo reme saha-vallavī ramayate vṛndāvane 'har-niśaṁ

yaḥ kaṁsaṁ nija-ghāna kaurava-raṇe yaḥ pāṇḍavānāṁ sakhā

so'yaṁ vaiṣṇava-daṇḍa-maṇḍita-bhujaḥ sannyāsa-veśaḥ
svayaṁ

niḥsandeham upāgataḥ kṣiti-tale caitanya-rūpaḥ prabhuḥ

Garuḍa Purāṇa/GKH (P)

The Supreme Lord displayed the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra.
Thus, He performed many pastimes such as the rāsa-līlā
with the gopīs in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Moreover, He
killed Kaṁsa. He became a friend of the Pāṇḍavas in the
Kurukṣetra war. Thus, He came to be known as Pārtha-
sārathī. Doubtlessly the Supreme Lord, who can make even
the impossible possible, will assume sannyāsa dress, the
Vaiṣṇava daṇḍa will decorate His hand, and He will
appear on the earth in the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya.

vaivasvatāntare brahman gaṅgā-tīre su-puṇya-de

hari-nāma tadā dattvā cāṇḍālān haḍikāṁs tathā

                            151
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


brāhmaṇān kṣatriyān vaiśyān śataṣo 'tha sahasraśaḥ

uddhariṣyāmy ahaṁ tatra tapta-svarṇa-kalevarah

sannyāsaś ca kariṣyāmi kāñcana-grāmam āsthitaḥ

Urdhvāmnāya Saṁhitā/GKH (P)

Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa Himself said, “O brāhmaṇa, I shall appear
in the Vaivasvata- man-vantara, on the shore of the holy
Gaṅgā river. I shall accept the complexion of molten
gold. Distributing the holy name of Lord Hari to persons
from the families of dogeaters and sweepers, and shall
deliver countless brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, and vaiśyas. I
shall accept sannyāsa in Kāñcana-grāma.”




Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the Jagad-guru

caudda bhuvanera guru caitanya-gosāñi

tāṅra guru anya, ei kona śāstre nāi

CC Ādi 12.16

caudda—fourteen; bhuvanera—planetary systems; guru—
master; caitanya-gosāñi—Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu;
tāṅra guru—His spiritual master; anya—someone else; ei—
this; kona—any; śāstre—in scripture; nāi—there is no
mention.

(Advaita Ācārya heard this statement from His five-year-
old son Acyutānanda:) “Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the
jagad-guru, the spiritual master of the fourteen worlds.
But you say that someone else is His spiritual master.
This is not supported by any revealed scripture.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya is the Supreme Absolute Truth

yad advaitaṁ brahmopaniṣadi tad apy asya tanu-bhā

ya ātmāntaryāmī puruṣa iti so —syāṁśa-vibhavaḥ

ṣaḍ-aiśvaryaiḥ pūrṇo ya iha bhagavān sa svayam ayaṁ

na caitanyāt krṣṇāj jagati para-tattvaṁ param iha

CC Ādi 1.3

yat—that which; advaitam—nondual; brahma—the impersonal
Brahman; upaniṣadi—in the Upaniṣads; tat—that; api—
certainly; asya—His; tanu-bhā—the effulgence of His
transcendental body; yaḥ—who; ātmā—the Supersoul; antaḥ-
yāmī—indwelling Lord; puruṣaḥ—supreme enjoyer; iti—thus;
saḥ—He; asya—His; aṁśa-vibhavaḥ—plenary expansion; ṣaṭ-
aiśvaryaiḥ—with all six opulences; pūrṇaḥ—full; yaḥ—who;
iha—here; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
saḥ—He; svayam—Himself; ayam—this; na—not; caitanyāt—
than Lord Caitanya; kṛṣṇāt—than Lord Kṛṣṇa; jagati—in
the world; para—higher; tattvam—truth; param—another;

                          152
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

iha—here.

What the Upaniṣads describe as the impersonal Brahman is
but the effulgence of His body, and the Lord known as
the Supersoul is but His localized plenary portion. Lord
Caitanya is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa
Himself, full with six opulences. He is the Absolute
Truth, and no other truth is greater than or equal to
Him.



Thus ends section 4) Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself



5) Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are Revealed Through Mahāprabhu



One who worships Mahāprabhu automatically worships Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa

ārādhitaṁ nava-vanaṁ vraja-kānanaṁ te

nārādhitaṁ nava-vanaṁ vraja eva dūre

ārādhito dvija-suto vraja-nāgaras te

nārādhito dvija-suto na taveha kṛṣṇaḥ

Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, Navadvīpa Śataka 78

ārādhitam—worshiped; nava-vanaṁ—Navadvīpa; vraja-kānanam
—the forest of Vraja; te—by you; na—not; ārādhitam—
worshiped; nava-vanam—Navadvīpa; vrajaḥ—Vraja; eva—
indeed; dūre—far away; ārādhitaḥ—worshiped; dvija-sutāḥ—
the brāhmaṇa’s son (Lord Caitanya); vraja-nāgaraḥ—the
hero of Vraja (Kṛṣṇa); te—by you; na—not; ārādhitaḥ—
worshiped; dvija-sutaḥ—Lord Caitanya; na—not; tava—by
you; iha—here; kṛṣṇaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

If you worship Navadvīpa, then you also worship the
forest of Vraja. If you don—t worship Navadvīpa, then
the forest of Vraja is far away. If you worship Lord
Caitanya, then you also worship Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in
Vraja. If you don—t worship Lord Caitanya, then you
cannot worship Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.



Pure devotion to Gaurāṅga bestows the nectar of devotion
to Śrī Rādhā

yathā yathā gaura-padāravinde

vindeta bhaktiṁ kṛta-puṇya-rāśiḥ

tathā tathotsarpati hṛdy akasmād

rādhā-padāmbhoja-sudhāmbu-rāśiḥ

Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 88, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī/
Sermons, vol. 1

                          153
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


kṛta-puṇya-rāśiḥ—having performed vast numbers of pious
deeds; yathā yathā—to the extent; vindeta—a person
attains; bhaktim—devotion; pada-aravinde—to the lotus
feet; gaura—of the golden Lord; tathā tathā—to the same
extent; sudhā-ambu-rāśiḥ—the ocean of nectar; rādhā-
padāmbhoja—of the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā; akasmād—
causelessly; utsarpati—gradually arises; hṛdi—in one’s
heart.

As a pious soul fortunately attains pure devotion to
Gaurāṅga and becomes absorbed in rendering service to
His lotus feet, the nectar ocean of devotional ecstasy
flowing from the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā gradually
arises without any material cause and floods his heart .

Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja: (a)”As much as
we devote ourselves to the lotus feet of Śrī Gaurāṅga,
we will automatically achieve the nectarean service of
Śrīmatī Rādhārānī in Vṛndāvana. Do not hesitate to give
everything to Caitanyadeva, for He will not keep any for
Himself. He will offer it all at the lotus feet of Śrī
Rādhā.” (b) “Strictly stick to Gaura-līlā, Mahāprabhu,
and you will automatically find within your heart that
Rādhā-rasa-sudhā is flowing. Don—t attempt directly to
have it. It will come automatically, spontaneously. Not
intellectually you shall approach that, for that will
give you a bad prejudice. Not only that, but it will be
harmful prejudice and you will have to expend more
energy to do away with that layer of misunderstanding.
So our Śrīla Prabhupāda did not allow these things.”

In his Prārthanā, Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura sings:

gaura-prema rasārṇave se taraṇge yebā ḍūbe

se rādhā-mādhava-antaraṅga

BRSB p. 125/SGG p. 45

Gaura-prema is an ocean of rasa. Those who submerge
themselves in the waves of the ocean of Gaura-prema,
become confidential associates of Rādhā-Mādhava in
Vraja.



Rāgānuga sādhakas should taste Kṛṣṇa līlā through the
medium of Gaura līlā

kṛṣṇa-līlā amṛta-sāra, tāra śata śata dhāra,

daśa-dike vahe yāhā haite

se caitanya-līlā haya, sarovara akṣaya,

mano-haṁsa carāha— tāhāte

CC Mad 25.271/BRSB p. 125

kṛṣṇa-līlā amṛta-sāra—the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa are the
essence of all eternal bliss; tāra śata śata dhāra—the
flow of that eternal bliss is running in hundreds of
branches; daśa-dike—in all the ten directions; vahe—

                             154
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

flows; yāhā haite—from which; se—those; caitanya-līlā—
pastimes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; haya—are; sarovara
akṣaya—a transcendental eternal lake; manaḥ-haṁsa—my
mind, which is like a swan; carāha——please wander;
tāhāte—in that lake.

The pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are the essence of all
transcendental nectar. These nectarean pastimes flow in
hundreds and hundreds of streams, inundating the ten
directions. The pastimes of Śrī Caitanya are an
imperishable reservoir of nectar, saturated with the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa. O swanlike mind, please wander on
this transcendental lake.

nānā-bhāvera bhakta-jana, haṁsa-cakravāka-gaṇa,

yāte sabe— karena vihāra

kṛṣṇa-keli sumṛṇāla, yāhā pāi sarva-kāla,

bhakta-haṁsa karaye āhāra

CC Mad 25.274/BRSB p. 125

nānā-bhāvera bhakta-jana—devotees relishing
relationships with Kṛṣṇa in different ecstasies; haṁsa-
cakravāka-gaṇa—compared to swans and cakravāka birds;
yāte—in that place; sabe——all; karena vihāra—enjoy life;
kṛṣṇa-keli—the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa; su-mṛṇāla—sweet buds;
yāhā pāi—which one can get; sarva-kāla—eternally;
bhakta-haṁsa—the devotees, who are just like swans;
karaye—do; āhāra—eating.

The devotees who have a relationship with Kṛṣṇa are like
the swans and cakravāka birds who play in the lake of
lotus flowers. The buds of those lotus flowers are the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, and they are edibles for the swanlike
devotees. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is always engaged in His
transcendental pastimes; therefore the devotees,
following in the footsteps of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
can always eat those lotus buds.



Śrī Caitanya-Mahāprabhu uncovered deep spiritual secrets

premā nāmādbhutārthaḥ śravaṇa-patha-gataḥ kasya nāmnāṁ
mahimnaḥ

ko vettā kasya vṛndāvana-vipina-mahā-mādhurīṣu praveśaḥ

ko vā jānāti rādhāṁ parama-rasa-camatkāra-mādhurya-sīmām

ekaś caitanya-candraḥ parama-karuṇayā sarvam āviścakāra

Śrī Caitanya-candrāmṛta 130/BPKG p. 367

Oh, in the pathway of whose ears did the exalted glories
of śrī-nāma entered, revealing the wonderful meaning of
śrī-nāma to be prema? Who entered within the great
sweetnesses of Śrī Vṛndāvana? Who indeed, knew Śrī Rādhā
to be the pinnacle of the supremely astonishing
mādhurya-rasa? Only one, the supremely merciful Śrī
Caitanyacandra has uncovered all these truths out of

                            155
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

compassion for the jīvas.

Yadi Gaurāṅga Nahita, Śrī Narahari dāsa

yadi gaurāṅga nahita, tabe ki haita, kemane dharita de?

rādhāra mahimā, prema-rasa-sīmā, jagate jānāta ke (1)

If Śrīman Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu had not appeared, then
what would have become of us? How could we have
tolerated living? In this universe who would have ever
come to know the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the
topmost limit of prema-rasa?

madhura vṛndā-vipina-mādhurī-praveśa cāturī sāra

varaja-yuvati-bhāvera bhakati, śakati haita kā—ra (2)

If Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had not come, who could have
had the intelligence to join the sweet mādhurya-rasa of
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s līlās in Vṛndāvana? Who else could
have given the power to enter the vraja-ramaṇīs— loving
mood of sevā to yugala-kiśora, the Divine Couple?

Thus ends 5) Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are Revealed Through
Mahāprabhu



6) The Benefits of Devotion to Mahāprabhu



Remembering Śrī Caitnaya-Mahāprabhu makes everything
easy

kathañcana smṛte yasmin duṣkaraṁ sukaraṁ bhavet

vismṛte viparītaṁ syāt śrī-caitanyaṁ namāmi tam

CC Ādi 14.1

kathañcana—somehow or other; smṛte—by remembering;
yasmin—whom; duṣkaram—difficult things; sukaram—easy;
bhavet—become; vismṛte—by forgetting Him; viparītam—just
the opposite; syāt—become; śrī-caitanyam—Lord Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu; namāmi—I offer my respectful
obeisances; tam—unto Him.

Somehow or other, simply by remembering Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, things that are difficult to do become easy.
But if one does not remember Him, easy things become
very difficult. To this Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu I offer
my obeisances.

By Mahāprabhu’s mercy one can cross the ocean of many
useless theories

śrī-caitanya-prabhuṁ vande bālo —pi yad-anugrahāt

taren nānā-mata-grāha-vyāptaṁ siddhānta-sāgaram

CC Ādi 2.1


                            156
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

śrī-caitanya-prabhum—to Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu;
vande—I offer obeisances; bālaḥ—an ignorant child; api—
even; yat—of whom; anugrahāt—by the mercy; taret—may
cross over; nānā—various; mata—of theories; grāha—the
crocodiles; vyāptam—filled with; siddhānta—of
conclusions; sāgaram—the ocean.

I offer my obeisances to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, by
whose mercy even an ignorant child can swim across the
ocean of conclusive truths, which is full of the
crocodiles of various useless theories.

The cuckoo-like devotees and the camel-like non-devotees

hṛdaye dharaye ye caitanya-nityānanda

e-saba siddhānte sei pāibe ānanda.

e saba siddhānta haya āmrera pallava

bhakta-gaṇa-kokilera sarvadā vallabha.

abhakta-uṣṭrera ithe nā haya praveśa

tabe citte haya mora ānanda-viśeṣa

CC Ādi 4.233-235

hṛdaye—in the heart; dharaye—captures; ye—anyone who;
caitanya—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; nityānanda—and Lord
Nityānanda; e-saba—all these; siddhānte—by
transcendental conclusions; sei—that man; pāibe—will
get; ānanda—bliss; e—these; saba—all; siddhānta—
transcendental conclusions; haya—are; āmrera—of mango;
pallava—twigs; bhakta-gaṇa—the devotees; kokilera—to
those who are just like cuckoo birds; sarvadā—always;
vallabha—pleasing; abhakta—nondevotee; uṣṭrera—of a
camel; ithe—in this; nā—not; haya—is there; praveśa—
entrance; tabe—then; citte—in my heart; haya—there is;
mora—my; ānanda-viśeṣa—special jubilation.

[Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī states:] Anyone who has
captured Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Nityānanda Prabhu
within his heart becomes blissful by hearing all these
transcendental conclusions. These conclusions are like
the newly grown twigs of a mango tree in that they are
always pleasing to the devotees, who in this way
resemble cuckoos. The camel-like non-devotees, however,
cannot enter into these topics, and therefore there is
special jubilation within my heart.

I bestow prema-bhakti upon whoever chants My names

kṛṣṇaś caitanya-gaurāṅgau gaura-candraḥ śacī-sutaḥ

prabhu-gaurau gaura-harir nāmāni bhakti-dāni me

Ananta-Saṁhitā/Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Bhagavatā (Hindi)

kṛṣṇa—the all-attractive person; caitanya—the embodiment
of transcendental consciousness; gaurāṅga—Golden-limbed,
Govinda who has accepted the golden form of Rādhā;
gaura-candra—the golden moon; śacī-suta—the son of Śacī-
devī; prabhu—the master; gaura—the reservoir of golden

                          157
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

effulgence; gaura-hari—the golden lord; nāmāni—names;
bhakti-dāni—bestow prema-bhakti; me—Mine.

I bestow prema-bhakti upon whoever chants My names such
as Kṛsṇa, Caitanya, Gaurāṅga, Gaura-candra, Śacī-suta,
Prabhu, Gaura, and Gaura-hari.

Thus ends section 6) The Benefits of Devotion to
Mahāprabhu

7) The Unfortunate are Devoid of Devotion to Mahāprabhu



The misfortune of those who cannot taste the nectar of
Śrī Gaura's kīrtana

kriyāsaktān dhig dhig vikaṭa-tapaso dhik ca yāminaḥ

dhig astu brahmāhaṁ vadana-pariphullān jaḍa-matīn

kim etān śocāmo viṣaya-rasa-mattān nara-paśūn

na keṣāñcil leśo'py ahaha milito gaura-madhunaḥ

Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 32, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī

Condemned are those who are fond of the Vedic fruitive
rituals! Condemned are those self-controlled persons who
are fond of severe austerities! Condemned are those
persons with material conceptions who nevertheless take
pleasure in declaring “I am Brahman!' How much more
shall I lament for these karmīs, jñānīs, and tapasvīs,
who are absorbed in sense gratification and are just
like two-legged animals. Alas! They were not fortunate
enough to have tasted even a drop of the nectar of Lord
Gaura's kīrtana.” (or) “Woe to the smārta brāhmaṇas, who
blindly follow the Vedic rituals! To hell with those who
unnecessarily practice harsh austerities. Woe to those
who try to control the mind and senses by following the
eightfold yoga system. Woe to those who artificially
practice brahmacarya and imagine that they have become
liberated simply by saying aham brahmāsmi, "I am God".
Woe to those whose voices are filled with the flowery
words of dry speculation. They are intoxicated by the
taste of mundane pleasure. Why should we lament for
these animals in the guise of men? We lament because,
alas, they have not tasted even a tiny drop of the
nectar from the lotus feet of Śrī Gaurāṅga.

Without devotion to Gaurāṅga, one's knowledge of the
scriptures is totally useless

acaitanyam idaṁ viśvaṁ yadi caitanyam īśvaram

na viduḥ sarva-śāstra-jñā hy api bhrāmyanti te janāḥ

Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 37, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī

Great scholars of the scriptures who do not accept Lord
Gaurāṅga as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are
forced to wander aimlessly throughout this universe of
dead matter. Their so-called knowledge of the scriptures
will be useless to them. Birth after birth, they will

                          158
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

wander from one planet to the next propelled by their
pious and impious acts.

Thus ends 7) The Unfortunate are Devoid of Devotion to
Mahāprbhu

8) The glories of Gaurāṅga's devotees



ācārya dharmaṁ paricarya viṣṇuṁ vicārya tīrthāni vicārya
vedān

vinā na gaura-priya-pāda-sevāṁ vedādi-duṣprāpya-padaṁ
vidanti

Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 22/Śrī Navadvīpa-ṣataka 90

ācarya—having performed; dharmam—religious duties;
paricaryav—worshiping; viṣṇum—Viṣṇu; vicarya—done;
tīrthāni—pilgrimages; vicarya—done; vedān—Vedic study;
vinā—without; na—not; gaura—to Lord Gaura; priya—dear;
pāda —feet; dhāma—in the abode; vāsam—residence; veda—
the Vedas; ādi—beginning with; duṣprāpya—difficult to
attain; padam—abode; vidanti—find.

Those who perform the duties of varṇāśrama-dharma,
worship Lord Viṣṇu, and visit many holy places, yet
neglect the service of the lotus feet of Śrī Gaurāṅga’s
dear associates, are never able to understand the
pastimes of Rādhā-Govinda in Their confidential abode of
Vṛndāvana.

Without the mercy of Gaurāṅga's devotee everything is
futile

tāvad brahma-kathā vimukti-padavī tāvan na tiktī-bhavet

tāvac cāpi viśṛṅkhalatvam ayate no loka-veda-sthitiḥ

tāvac chāstra-vidāṁ mithaḥ kalakalo nānā-bahir-vartmasu

śrī-caitanya-padāmbuja-priyajano yāvan na dṛg-gocaraḥ

Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 19, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī

As long as one has not seen a pure devotee of Śrī
Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, he will be engaged in tasting
bitter talks about the impersonal path of liberation. As
long as one has not seen a devotee of Lord Gaurāṅga, he
will be bound by social and Vedic convention, blindly
following formalistic traditions without understanding
their purpose. As long as one never sees one of the
beelike devotees addicted to drinking the nectar from
the lotus feet of Śrī Gaurāṅga, he will be forced to
walk in endless circles on the labyrinthine paths of dry
Vedic scholarship, wasting valuable time in useless
discussions on futile religious practices.

The six Gosvāmīs help us to enter the ocean of Śrī
Gaurāṅga’s divine bliss

śrī-gaurāṅga-guṇānuvarṇana-vidhau śraddhā-samṛddhy-
anvitau

                          159
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


pāpottāpa-nikṛntanau tanu-bhṛtāṁ govinda-gānāmṛtaiḥ

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaika-nipuṇau kaivalya-nistārakau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam, Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya/SGG p.
126

śrī-gaurāṅga—of Lord Caitanya; guṇa—the qualities;
anuvarṇana—of narrating; vidhau—in the process; śraddhā—
of faith; samṛddhi—with an abundance; anvitau—who are
endowed with; pāpa-uttāpa—the distress of sinful
reactions; nikṛntanau—who remove; tanu-bhṛtām—of the
embodied souls; govinda—about Lord Govinda; gāna-amṛtaiḥ
—by the nectarean songs; ānanda-ambudhi—the ocean of
transcendental bliss; vardhana—increasing; eka-nipuṇau—
uniquely expert; kaivalya-nistārakau—who are the saviors
from impersonal liberation; vande—I offer my respectful
obeisances; rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-
gopālakau—unto the six Gosvāmīs.

I offer praṇāma to the Six Gosvāmīs, who have so much
deep faith and love for Śrī Gaurāṅga. They are always
glorifying Mahāprabhu’s and Govinda’s qualities in songs
which create a cooling rainshower for the conditioned
jīvas burning up in miseries and sinful activities. Then
the purified jīvas can enter the ever-increasing ocean
of divine bliss (ānanda-ambudhi). As the jīvas
experience this bliss, the whole world becomes
auspicious. They rescue the jīvas from impersonal
liberation by pouring upon them the nectar of bhakti-
rasa.

Gaurāṅga is not the enjoyer of the rasa dance

ei mata cāpalya karena sabā sane sabe strī-mātra nā
dekhena dṛṣṭi-kāṇe

"strī" hena nā prabhu ei avatāre śravaṇe o nā karilā
vidita saṁsāre

ata eva yata mahā-mahima sakale "gaurāṅga nāgara" hena
stava nāhi bale

Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata 15.28-31

The Lord was apt to indulge in indiscriminate, merciful
behavior towards all, except that He never looked at a
woman, even by a sidelong glance. It is known to all the
world that He did not even allow the name of a woman to
enter His ear. Those who are His real devotees,
therefore, never address Śrī Gaurāṅga as "Gaurāṅga-
nāgarī," or the enjoyer of women. Although all forms of
praise are applicable to the Lord, the wise sing only
what is pleasing to His particular nature in this
incarnation.

Thus ends section 8) The glories of Gaurāṅga's devotees




                          160
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


9) Prayers in Glorification of Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari



Without Your mercy, what shall I do to save myself?

kālaḥ kalir balina indriya-vairi-vargāḥ

śrī bhakti-mārga iha kaṅṭaka-koṭi-ruddhaḥ

hā hā kva yāmi vikalaḥ kim ahaṁ karomi

caitanyacandra yadi nādya kṛpāṁ karoṣi

Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 125, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī

Now it is the age of Kali. My enemies, the senses, are
very strong. The beautiful path of bhakti is spiked with
countless thorns (like karma, jñāna, and unrestricted
sense enjoyment). My spirit is weak. My senses are
powerful and agitated. O what shall I do? Where shall I
go? O Lord Caitanya-candra, if you do not grant me Your
mercy, what shall I do to save myself?



The supreme solace of Śrī Caitanya’s name

hā hanta citta-bhuvi me paramoṣarāyāṁ

sad-bhakti-kalpa-latikāṅkuritā kathaṁ syāt

hṛdy ekam eva paramāśvasanīyam asti

caitanya-nāma kalayan na kadāpi śocyaḥ

Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 53, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī/PJ
5.19

hā—Oh!; hanta—Oh!; citta—of the heart; bhuvi—in the
land; me—my; parama—great; uṣarāyām—in the salty desert;
sad—transcendental; bhakti—of devotional service; kalpa—
desire; latikā—creeper; aṅkuritā—sprouted; katham—how?;
syāt—will be; hṛdi—in the heart; ekam—one; eva—indeed;
param—great; āśvasanīyam—comforting hope; asti—is;
caitanya—of Lord Caitanya; nāma—in the name; kalayan—
chanting, calling in a melodious voice; na—not; kadā api
—ever; śocyaḥ—lamentable.

Alas, alas! How will the charming wish-fulfilling
creeper of pure devotion ever sprout from the
desparately barren desert of my consciousness? Despite
my predicament, just one great hope awakens in my heart:
by chanting the name of Śrī Caitanyadeva, nothing can
remain to be lamented for by anyone at any time.



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu! Let there be an awakening of
Your auspicious mercy

heloddhūnita-khedayā viśadayā pronmīlad-āmodayā


                          161
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

śāmyac-chāstra-vivādayā rasa-dayā cittārpitonmādayā

śaśvad-bhakti-vinodayā sa-madayā mādhurya-maryādayā

śrī-caitanya dayā-nidhe tava dayā bhūyād amandodayā

Śrī Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka 8.10/CC Madhya 10.119

helā—very easily; uddhūnita—driven away; khedayā—
lamentation; viśadayā—which purifies everything;
pronmīlat—awakening; āmodayā—transcendental bliss;
śāmyat—mitigating; śāstra—of revealed scriptures;
vivādayā—disagreements; rasa-dayā—distributing all
transcendental mellows; citta—in the heart; arpita—
fixed; unmādayā—jubilation; śaśvat—always; bhakti—
devotional service; vinodayā—stimulating; sa-madayā—full
of ecstasy; mādhurya—of conjugal love; maryādayā—the
limit; śrī-caitanya—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; dayā-nidhe—
ocean of mercy; tava—Your; dayā—mercy; bhūyāt—let it be;
amanda—of nobel qualities; udayā—in which there is
awakening.

O ocean of mercy, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu! Let there be
an awakening of Your novel and enlivening mercy, which
easily drives away all kinds of material lamentation by
making everything pure and blissful. Indeed, Your mercy
awakens transcendental bliss and covers all material
pleasures. By Your auspicious mercy, quarrels and
disagreements arising among different scriptures are
vanquished. Your auspicious mercy pours forth
transcendental mellows and thus causes the heart to
jubilate. Your mercy, which is full of joy, always
stimulates devotional service and glorifies conjugal
love of God. May transcendental bliss be awakened within
my heart by Your causeless mercy.

Other than Lord Gaura, who will be my friend in this
world?

duṣkarma-koṭi-niratasya duranta-ghora-

durvāsanā-nigaḍa-śṛṅkhalitasya gāḍham

kliśyan mateḥ kumati-koṭi-kadarthitasya

gauraṁ vinādya mama ko bhaviteha bandhuḥ

Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 51, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī

duṣkarma—wicked deed; koṭi—millions; niratasya—intent;
duranta—endless and impassable; ghora—horrible;
durvāsanā—wicked thoughts and desires; nigaḍa-
śṛṅkhalitasya—chained; gāḍham—tightly; kliśyat—
suffering; mateḥ—of the mind; kumati—of wicked-minded
materialists; koṭi—by millions; kadarthitasya—misled;
gauram—the sacred place of Gauḍa-maṇḍala; vinā—except
for; adya—today; mama—of me; ko—who?; bhavitā—is; iha—
here; bandhuḥ—the friend.

I have committed millions of sinful activities while
wandering the path of karma. I am tightly bound by the
shackles of uncontrollable material desires. My
intelligence is afflicted by the misguidance of the
karmīs, jñānīs, and unrestricted sense enjoyers. In such

                          162
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

a situation, who, other than Lord Gaura, will be my
friend?

Gaura-līlā is like thick condensed milk, Kṛṣṇa-līlā is
like camphor; combined, they become supremely relishable

caitanya-līlā amṛta-pūra, kṛṣṇa-līlā sukarpūra,

duhe mili— haya sumādhurya

sādhu-guru-prasāde, tāhā yei āsvāde,

sei jāne mādhurya-prācurya

CC Madhya 25.277

caitanya-līlā amṛta-pūra—the pastimes of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu are full of nectar, like thick condensed
milk; kṛṣṇa-līlā su-karpūra—the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa
are exactly like camphor; duhe mili——the two meeting;
haya—become; su-mādhurya—very, very palatable; sādhu-
guru-prasāde—by the mercy of saintly persons and Śrī
Guru; tāhā—that; yei—anyone who; āsvāde—relishes this
palatable nectar; sei jāne—he can understand; mādhurya-
prācurya—the intense sweetness of mādhurya-rasa.

The pastimes of Śrī Caitanya are the abode of nectarean
love of God. They are like thick condensed milk. The
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are like camphor. When these are
combined they become very relishable. By the mercy of
sādhu and Śrī Guru one can relish and understand that
transcendental sweetness (mādhurya-rasa) unlimitedly.



vande śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanyaṁ bhaktānugraha-kātaram

yena kenāpi santuṣṭaṁ bhakta-dattena śraddhayā

CC Antya 10.1

vande—I offer my respectful obeisances; śrī-kṛṣṇa-
caitanyam—to Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; bhakta—to His
devotees; anugraha-kātaram—eager to show mercy; yena
kena-api—by anything; santuṣṭam—pleased; bhakta—by His
devotees; dattena—offered; śraddhayā—with faith and
love.

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is always pleased to accept
anything given with faith and love by His devotees and
is always ready to bestow mercy upon them.

Vijñapti

saṁsāra-duḥkha-jaladhau patitasya kāma-

krodhādi-nakra-makaraiḥ kavalī-kṛtasya

durvāsanā-nigaḍitasya nirāśrayasya

caitanya-candra mama dehi padāvalambam

Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 54, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī

                             163
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


saṁsāra—of repeated birth and death; duḥkha—of the
sufferings; jaladhau—in the ocean; patitasya—fallen;
kāma—lust; krodha—and anger; ādi—beginning; nakra—
crocodiles; makaraiḥ—and sharks; kavalī—a mouthful;
kṛtasya—being made; durvāsanā—by wicked desires;
nigaḍitasya—chained; nirāśrayasya—without any shelter;
caitanya-candra—of the moon-like Śrī Caitanya; mama—to
me; dehi—please give; padā—of Your feet; avalambam—the
shelter.

O Caitanyacandra, I have fallen into an ocean of misery
where I have been made a mouthful for the crocodiles and
sharks of lust, anger, and so forth. Kindly give this
destitute person, chained to wicked desires, the shelter
of Your lotus feet.

O Caitanya-candra, make this unfortunate person drink
the nectar emanating from Your feet

caitanya-candra mama hṛt-kumudaṁ vikāśya

hṛdyaṁ vidhehi nija-cintana-bhṛṅga-raṅgaiḥ

kiñcāparādha-timiraṁ niviḍaṁ vidhūya

pādāmṛtaṁ sadaya pāyaya durgataṁ me

Śrī Stavāvalī, Abhīṣṭa-sūcanam 11, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī

caitanya-candra—O moon of Lord Caitanya; mama—of me; hṛt
—of the heart; kumudam—the lotus; vikāśya—causing to
blossom; hṛdyam—charming; vidhehi—please place; nija—
own; cintana—thoughts; bhṛṅga—of the bumblebee; raṅgaiḥ—
with the delight; kiñca—furthermore; aparādha—of
offenses; timiram—the darkness; niviḍam—thick; vidhūya—
cleansing away; pāda—of the feet; amṛtam—the nectar; sa—
with; dayā—kindness; pāyaya—please cause to drink;
durgatam—impious; me—me.

O Caitanya-candra, Please make the charming lotus flower
of my heart bloom by delightful bee-like thoughts of
Yourself, thus cleansing away the dense darkness of my
offences, mercifully make this unfortunate person drink
the nectar emanating from Your feet.

O my merciful Lord, may the nectarean Gaṅges waters of
Your transcendental activities flow on the surface of my
desert-like tongue

kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-kalā-pāthojani-bhrājitā

sad-bhaktāvali-haṁsa-cakra-madhupa-śreṇī-vihārāspadam

karṇānandi-kalā-dhvanir vahatu me jihvā-maru-prāṅgaṇe

śrī-caitanya dayā-nidhe tava lasal-līlā-sudhā-svardhunī

CC Ādi 2.2

śrī-caitanya—O Lord Caitanya; dayā-nidhe—ocean of mercy;
vahatu—let it flow; svardhunī—the Gangā; tava—of Your;
lasat—shining; līlā-sudhā—of the nectar of the pastimes;

                          164
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

prāṅgaṇe—in the courtyard; maru—of my desertlike; jihvā—
tongue; bhrājitā—(that river) is beautified; pāthaḥ-jani
—by the lotuses; utkīrtana—of the loud chanting; kṛṣṇa—
of the holy names of Lord Kṛṣṇa; gāna—singing; nartana—
dancing; kalā—and other fine arts; vihāra—(these lotuses
are) pleasurable; āspadam—abodes; sat-bhakta—for pure
devotees; āvali—(who are like) rows; haṁsa—of swans;
cakra—cakravāka birds; śreṇī—(and) swarms; madhu-pa—of
bumble bees; kala—(this river—s) melodious; dhvaniḥ—
sound; ānandi—engladdens; me—my; karṇa—ears.

O my merciful Lord Caitanya, may the nectarean Ganges
waters of Your transcendental activities flow on the
surface of my desert-like tongue. Beautifying these
waters are the lotus flowers of singing, dancing and
loud chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s holy name, which are the
pleasure abodes of unalloyed devotees. These devotees
are compared to swans, ducks and bees. The river’s
flowing produces a melodious sound that gladdens my
ears.

vande śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanyaṁ kṛṣṇa-bhāvāmṛtaṁ hi yaḥ

āsvādyāsvādayan bhaktān prema-dīkṣām aśikṣayat

CC Antya 16.1

vande—I offer my respectful obeisances; śrī-kṛṣṇa-
caitanyam—unto Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; kṛṣṇa-
bhāva-amṛtam—the nectar of ecstatic love of Kṛṣṇa; hi—
certainly; yaḥ—He who; āsvādya—having tasted; āsvādayan—
causes to taste; bhaktān—the devotees; prema—in love of
Kṛṣṇa; dīkṣām—initiation; aśikṣayat—instructed.

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, who personally tasted the nectar of ecstatic
love for Kṛṣṇa and then instructed His devotees how to
taste it. Thus He instructed them about the process to
attian ecstatic love of Kṛṣṇa and initiated them into
the path of prema.



An uncontrollable cloud bank of exquisitely sweet nectar

hṛd-vapre nava-bhakti-śasya-vitateh sanjīvanī svāgamā-

rambhe kāma-tāparttu-dāha-damanā viśvāpagollāsinī

durān me maru-śakhino 'pi sarasī-bhāvāya bhuyāt prabhu-

śrī-caitanya-kṛpa-niraṅkuśa-mahā-mādhurya-kādambinī



Śrī Mādhurya-Kādambinī 1.1 (Maṅgalācaraṇa), Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

hṛd-vapre—in the field of my heart; nava-bhakti-śasya—of
the grains of ninefold bhakti; vitateḥ—the production;
saṅjīvanī—enlivening; sva āgama—of the personal
appearance; ārambhe—at the beginning; kāma—of lust;
tāpa-ṛtu—the hot season; dāha—the fire; damanī—
extinguishing; viśva-apaga-ullāsinī—delighting all;

                          165
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

durāt—from afar; me—of me; maru-śakhinaḥ—of a desert
plant; api—although; sarasī-bhāvāya—for being a pond;
bhuyāt—may it be; prabhu-śri-caitanya-kṛpā—of Śrī
Caitanya’s mercy; niraṅkuśa—unrestrained; mahā-mādhurya
—of great sweetness; kādambinī—the cloudbank.

The mercy of Śrī Caitanyadeva is an uncontrollable cloud
bank of exquisitely sweet nectar whose sudden appearance
fully enlivens the grains of nine-fold bhakti in the
field of the heart, thus extinguishing the burning
summer heat of lust and bestowing rapture on all living
beings trapped in the forceful current of saṁsāra. From
far off, may those clouds of the Lord's mercy cast their
shower of love and create a pond to give satisfaction
and pleasure even to this worthless soul, a parched tree
in the desert.

Śrī Caitanya-candra Praṇāma

ānanda-līlā-maya-vigrahāya

hemābha-divyac-chavi-sundarāya

tasmai mahā-prema-rasa-pradāya

caitanya-candrāya namo namas te

Arcana dīpikā/BTV Maṅgalācarana

ānanda-līlā-maya—is imbued with blissful pastimes;
vigrahāya—unto He whose form; hemābha—who has a golden
complexion; divyat—divine; chavi-sundarāya—to Him who is
sublimely beautiful; tasmai—unto Him; mahā-prema-rasa—
unlimited nectar in prema-rasa; pradāya—who bestows;
caitanya-candrāya—unto Śrī Caitanya-candra; namaḥ namaḥ—
repeated obeisances; te— unto You.

I offer obeisances unto Śrī Caitanya-candra, whose form
is the embodiment of blissful, transcendental pastimes,
whose golden complexion is divinely beautiful, and who
bestows unlimited nectar in prema-rasa.

Mahāprabhu descended to teach the supreme bhakti, laced
with renunciation

vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yoga-

śikṣārtham ekaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-śarīra-dhārī

kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye

Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka 6.74/CC Madhya 6.254

vairāgya—detachment from everything that does not help
develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness; vidyā—knowledge; nija—own;
bhakti-yoga—devotional service; śikṣā-artham—just to
instruct; ekaḥ—the single person; puruṣaḥ—the Supreme
Person; purāṇaḥ—primeval or eternal; śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya—
of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu; śarīra-dhārī—
accepting the body; kṛpā-ambudhiḥ—the ocean of
transcendental mercy; yaḥ—who; tam—unto Him; aham—I;
prapadye—surrender.

                             166
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Let me take shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who has descended in the form of
Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu to teach us real knowledge, His
devotional service and detachment from whatever does not
foster Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He has descended because He
is an ocean of transcendental mercy. Let me surrender
unto His lotus feet.

Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari as Rādhā-ramaṇa Rāma,
nourishes His pure devotees, drives away impersonalism,
and removes all sahajīyā deviations

vraja-rasa-bhāvana, duṣṭamata-śātana, kapaṭi-vighātana
kāma

śuddha bhakta-pālana, śuṣka-jñāna-tāḍana, chala-bhakti-
dūṣaṇa rāma

Kali-Kukkura Kadana 5, BVT/SGG p. 47

He is absorbed in vraja-rasa. As the transcendental
Kāmadeva, He chastises the evil-minded and destroys
deceit. As Rādhā-ramaṇa Rāma, He nourishes His pure
devotees, drives away dry impersonalism, and removes all
imitations of bhakti.

Caitanya-candra Vandanā

jaya navadvīpa-nava-pradīpa prabhāvaḥ pāṣaṇḍa-gajaika-
siṁhaḥ

sva-nāma-saṅkhyā-japa-sūtra-dhārī caitanya-candro
bhagavān murāriḥ

CB Mad 5.1/GKH (P)

All glories to Caitanya-candra, who is none other than
Bhagavān Murāri. He is the bright new lamp of Navadvīpa,
who is like an unparalleled lion in subduing the
atheistic elephants, and He holds a knotted string for
counting His own names.

Worship Gaurāṅga! Speak about Gaurāṅga! Take my
Gaurāṅga’s name with full devotion!

uttama adhama kichu na bāchila yāciyā dilaka kola

kahe premānanda emana gaurāṅga hṛdaye dhariyā bola

bhaja gaurāṅga kaha gaurāṅga laha gaurāṅgera nāma re

ye jana gaurāṅga bhaje sei haya amare prāṅa he

Bhaja Gaurāṅga, Premānanda Das

Never discriminating who is a fit candidate, elevated or
degraded, the son of Mother Śacī magnanimously accepts
one and all on His lap in a loving embrace, crying,
“Come to My fold, come to My fold!” The poet Premānanda
Das begs you all to constantly chant the sweet names of
Kṛṣṇa while holding tightly to that son of Mother Śacī
in the innermost core of your heart. [Śrīman Nityānanda
Prabhu mercifully calls out:] "Worship Gaurāṅga! speak

                          167
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

about Gaurāṅga! Take my Gaurāṅga’s name with full
devotion! Whoever worships my beloved Gaurāṅga I
consider to be my life and soul."

The last two lines of the above śloka are often chanted
in kīrtana

bhaja gaurāṅga kaha gaurāṅga laha gaurāṅgera nāma re

ye jana gaurāṅga bhaje sei haya amare prāṅa he

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda: Nityānanda Prabhu
is guru-tattva, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu is sevya-tattva.
The Guru is teaching, Nityānanda Prabhu is teaching how
to worship Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Thus ends 9) Prayers in Glorification of Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari



and Chapter 4 — Gaura-tattva




Chapter 5 — Nityānanda, Advaita, Gadādhara and Śiva
tattvas




1. Nityānanda-tattva 203

2. Advaita-tattva 215

3. Gadādhara-tattva 219

4. Śiva-tattva 220



1) Nityānanda-tattva

Nityānanda is intoxicated by ecstatic love and is an
incarnation of mercy



Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu praṇāma (1)

nityānanda namas tubhyaṁ premānanda-pradāyine

kalau kalmaṣa-nāśāya jāhnavā-pataye namaḥ

Śrī Stava-kalpa-druma/SGG p. 9

nityānanda—O personification of perpetual bliss; namaḥ—
obeisances; tubhyam—to You; prema-ānanda-pradāyine—unto
the bestower of loving ecstacies; kalau—in the age of
Kali; kalmaṣa-nāśāya—unto the destroyer of
contamination; jāhnavā-pataye—to the Lord of Jahnavā
Devī; na-maḥ—obeisances (na—not; ma—me: negation of “I

                           168
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

and mine—).

I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu who bestows
the bliss of divine love, who eliminates the
contamination of the age of Kali, and who is the master
of Jāhnavā-devī.

Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu praṇāma (2)

saṅkarṣaṇaḥ kāraṇa-toya-śāyī garbhoda-śāyī ca payobdhi-
śāyī

śeṣaś ca yasyāṁśa-kalāḥ sa nityānandākhya-rāmaḥ śaraṇaṁ
mamāstu

Svarūpa Dāmodara’s Diary/CC Ādi 1.7

saṅkarṣaṇaḥ—Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa in the spiritual sky;
kāraṇa-toya-śāyī—Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who lies in the
Causal Ocean; garbha-uda-śāyī—Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who
lies in the Garbhodaka Ocean of the universe; ca—and;
payaḥ-abdhi-śāyī—Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who lies in the
ocean of milk; śeṣaḥ—Śeṣa Nāga, the couch of Viṣṇu; ca—
and; yasya—whose; aṁśa—plenary portions; kalāḥ—and parts
of the plenary portions; saḥ—He; nityānanda-ākhya—known
as Lord Nityānanda; rāmaḥ—Lord Balarāma; śaraṇam—
shelter; mama—my; astu—let there be.

Saṅkarṣaṇa, Śeṣa Nāga and the Viṣṇus who lie on the
Kāraṇa, Garbha, and Kṣīra Oceans, are the plenary
portions and portions of the plenary portions of Śrī
Nityānanda Rāma. May He give me shelter.

The five manifestations of Śrī Caitanya, beginning with
Nityānanda

vande gurūn īśa-bhaktān īśam īśāvatārakān

tat-prakāśāṁś ca tac-chaktīḥ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-saṁjñakam

CC Ādi 1.1

vande—I offer respectful obeisances; gurūn—unto the
spiritual masters; īśa-bhaktān—unto the devotees of the
Supreme Lord; īśam—unto the Supreme Lord; īśa-avatārakān
—unto the incarnations of the Supreme Lord; tat—of the
Lord; prakāśān—unto the manifestations; ca—and; tat—of
the Lord; śaktīḥ—unto the potencies; kṛṣṇa-caitanya—Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Caitanya; saṁjñakam—named.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the spiritual
masters, the devotees of the Lord, the Lord’s
incarnations, His plenary portions, His energies and the
primeval Lord Himself, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya.

Nityānanda is the foremost devotee of Lord Caitanya

caitanyera ādi-bhakta nityānanda-rāya

caitanyera yaśo vaise yāñhāra jihvāya

ahar niśa caitanyera kathā prabhu kaya

tāñ—re bhajile se caitanye bhakti haya

                          169
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


CB Ādi 9.217-218

Lord Caitanya’s first and foremost devotee is Nityānanda
Rāya. The glories of Lord Caitanya are always on his
tongue. Day and night Lord Nityānanda speaks only of
Lord Caitanya. Whoever worships Him is a real devotee of
Śrī Caitanya.

Nityānanda is the gateway through which all service to
Lord Caitanya must pass

nityānanda avadhūta sabāte āgala

caitanyera dāsya-preme ha-ilā pāgala

CC Ādi 6.48

nityānanda avadhūta—the mendicant Lord Nityānanda;
sabāte—among all; āgala—foremost; caitanyera dāsya-preme
—of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu associates who serve Him in
dāsya-prema; ha-ilā pāgala—became mad.

Nityānanda, the wandering mendicant, is the foremost of
all the servants of Lord Caitanya. He is like the
gateway through which all service to Lord Caitanya must
pass. He became mad in the ecstasy of service to Lord
Caitanya.

Nityānanda is intoxicated by prema and is an incarnation
of mercy

preme matta nityānanda kṛpā-avatāra

uttama, adhama, kichu nā kare vicāra

ye āge paḍaye, tāre karaye nistāra

ataeva nistārilā mo-hena durācāra

CC Ādi 5.208-9

preme—in ecstatic love; matta—mad; nityānanda—Lord
Nityānanda; kṛpā—merciful; avatāra—incarnation; uttama—
good; adhama—bad; kichu—any; nā—not; kare—makes; vicāra—
consideration; ye—whoever; āge—in front; paḍaye—falls
down; tāre—unto him; karaye—does; nistāra—deliverance;
ataeva—therefore; nistārilā—delivered; mo—as me; hena—
such; durācāra—sinful and fallen person.

Nityānanda is intoxicated by ecstatic love and is an
incarnation of mercy, He makes no distinction between
the exalted and the fallen. He delivers all those who
fall down before Him. Therefore He has delivered such a
sinful and fallen person as me.

The mercy of Nityānanda

yatheṣṭaṁ re bhrātaḥ! kuru hari-hari-dhvānam aniśaṁ

tato vaḥ saṁsārāmbudhi-taraṇa-dāyo mayi laget

idaṁ bāhu-sphoṭair aṭati raṭayan yaḥ pratigṛhaṁ


                          170
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

bhaje nityānandaṁ bhajana-taru-kandaṁ niravadhi

Śrī Nityānandāṣṭakam 5, SGG p. 129/GKH (P)

I perpetually worship Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, the root of
the kṛṣṇa-bhakti tree, who wandering with outspread
arms, approached the door of every home, and with
upraised arms called out, “O Brother! Continuously chant
śrī-harināma to your hearts’s content. If you do so, I
will take the responsibility to deliver you from the
ocean of material existence.”

Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu roamed the country for two
purposes

prema-pracāraṇa āra pāṣaṇḍa-dalana

dui-kārye avadhūta karena bhramaṇa

CC Antya 3.149

prema-pracāraṇa—preaching the path of prema-bhakti; āra—
and; pāṣaṇḍa-dalana—subduing atheistic men; dui-kārye—
with two kinds of activities; avadhūta—the great devotee
and mendicant; karena—does; bhramaṇa—wandering.

For two purposes—to spread the path of bhakti and to
defeat and subdue the atheists—Lord Nityānanda, the most
dedicated devotee of the Lord, wandered throughout the
country.

Without Nitai’s mercy no one can attain Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa

heno nitāi bine bhāi, rādhā-kṛṣṇa pāite nāi (1)

nitāiyer karuṇā ha—be, vraje-rādhā-kṛṣṇa pābe,

dhara nitāi-caraṇa du “khāni (3)

Śrī Nityānanda Niṣṭhā, Prārthanā, Śrīla Narottama Dāsa
Ṭhākura/SGG p. 37

heno—such; nitāi—Nitāi; bine—without; bhāi—brother;
rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; pāite nāi—are not attained;
nitāiyer—Nitāi—s; karuṇā—mercy; ha—be—will be; vraje—in
Braja; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Rādhā-Kṛṇa; pābe—will be attained;
dharo—hold; nitāi-caraṇa—Nitāi’s lotus feet; du—two;
“khāni—the.

O brother! No one can attain Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa without Lord
Nityānanda. By the mercy of Nityānanda prabhu, however,
one can attain the service of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana.
Therefore, take shelter of the holy feet of Lord
Nityānanda.

Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda Praṇāma

ājānu-lambita-bhujau kanakāvadātau

saṅkīrtanaika-pitarau kamalāyatākṣau

viśvambharau dvija-barau yuga-dharma-pālau

vande jagat-priya-karau karuṇāvatārau

                          171
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Ādi khanda 1.1

ājānu-lambita-bhujau—those two Lords whose long arms
extend to Their knees; kanaka-avadātau—exuding a
resplendent golden luster; saṅkīrtana-eka-pitarau—the
sole fathers of the saṅkīrtana movement; kamala-āyata-
akṣau— eyes wide-spread like lotus petals; viśvambarau—
maintainers of the cosmic creation; dvija-barau—best of
the brāhmaṇas; yuga-dharma-pālau—protectors of the yuga
dharma, śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana; vande—I offer my
obeisances; jagat-priya-karau—the benefactors of the
entire universe; karuṇa-avatārau—the most munificent
incarnations of Godhead.

I worship the incarnations of mercy, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, whose arms extend
to Their knees, whose luster is an enchantingly
resplendent gold, who inaugurated the saṅkīrtana
movement, whose eyes are wide-spread like lotus petals,
who nourish the entire universe, who glorify the
brāhmaṇa dynasties, who protect the yuga-dharma, and who
bestow the highest auspiciousness upon the residents of
the material world.

The glories of Gaura-Nitāi

vande śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nityānandau sahoditau

gauḍodaye puṣpavantau citrau śandau tamo-nudau

CC Ādi 1.2/GKH (P)

vande—I offer respectful obeisances; śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya—
to Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya; nityānandau—and to Lord
Nityānanda; saha-uditau—simultaneously arisen; gauḍa-
udaye—on the eastern horizon of Gauḍa; puṣpavantau—the
sun and moon together; citrau—wonderful; śam-dau—
bestowing benediction; tamaḥ-nudau—dissipating darkness.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya
and Lord Nityānanda, who are like the sun and moon. They
have arisen simultaneously on the horizon of Gauḍa
(Bengal) to dissipate the darkness of ignorance and thus
wonderfully bestow benediction upon all.

Gaura and Nitāi are Inseparable

dui bhāi eka-tanu samāna-prakāśa

nityānanda nā māne, tomāra habe sarva-nāśa

ekete viśvāsa, anye nā kara sammāna

“ardha-kukkuṭī-nyāya” tomāra pramāṇa

CC Ādi 5.175-176

dui bhāi—two brothers; eka-tanu—one body; samāna-prakāśa
—equal manifestation; nityānanda—Lord Nityānanda; nā
māne—you do not accept; tomāra—your; habe—that will be;
sarva-nāśa—downfall; ekete viśvāsa—faith in one; anye—in
the other; nā—not; kara—do; sammāna—respect; ardha-
kukkuṭī-nyāya—the logic of accepting half of a hen;

                             172
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

tomāra—your; pramāṇa—evidence.

These two brothers (Gaura and Nitāi) are like one body;
they are identical manifestations. If you do not believe
in Lord Nityānanda, you will fall down. If you have
faith in one, but disrespect the other, your logic is
like the logic of accepting half a hen.

kiṁvā, doṅhā nā māniñā hao ta— pāṣaṇḍa

eke māni— āre nā māni, ei-mata bhaṇḍa

CC Ādi 5.17

kiṁvā—otherwise; doṅhā—both of Them; nā—not; māniñā—
accepting; hao—you become; ta——certainly; pāṣaṇḍa—
atheist; eke—one of Them; māni——accepting; āre—the
other; nā māni—not accepting; ei-mata—this kind of
faith; bhaṇḍa—hypocrisy.

It would be better to be an atheist by slighting both
brothers than a hypocrite by believing in one and
slighting the other.

śrī-caitanya-nityānanda-advaita-mahattva

tāṅra bhakta-bhakti-nāma-prema-rasa-tattva

bhinna bhinna likhiyāchi kariyā vicāra

śunile jānibe saba vastu-tattva-sāra

CC Ādi 1.108-109

śrī-caitanya—of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu; nityānanda—of
Lord Nityānanda; advaita—of Śrī Advaita; mahattva—
greatness; tāṅra—Their; bhakta—devotees; bhakti—
devotion; nāma—names; prema—ecstatic transcendental
love; rasa—mellows of love; tattva—real nature; bhinna
bhinna—different; likhiyāchi—I wrote; kariyā—doing;
vicāra—consideration; śunile—on hearing; jānibe—will
know; saba—all; vastu-tattva-sāra—the essence of the
Absolute Truth.

If one hears thoughtfully about the glories of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and Śrī
Advaita Prabhu—and the siddhāntic conclusions concerning
Their devotees, devotional service and the holy name,
along with the mellows of Their loving exchanges—one
will learn the essence of the Absolute Truth. Therefore
I have described these specific truths in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta.

Gaura-Nitāi are non-different from Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma

śrī-caitanya - sei kṛṣṇa, nityānanda - rāma

nityānanda pūrṇa kare caitanyera kāma

CC Ādi 5.157/GKH (P)

śrī-caitanya—Lord Śrī Caitanya; sei kṛṣṇa—that original
Kṛṣṇa; nityānanda—Lord Nityānanda; rāma—Balarāma;
nityānanda—Lord Nityānanda; pūrṇa kare—fulfills;

                          173
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

caitanyera kāma—all the desires of Lord Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.

Lord Caitanya is the same Lord Kṛṣṇa, and Lord
Nityānanda is Lord Balarāma. Lord Nityānanda fulfills
all of Lord Caitanya’s desires.

vrajendra-nandana jei, śacī-suta haila sei, balarāma
haila nitāi

Hari Hari Bipale Janama, NDT/BPKG p. 511/SGG p. 95

Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa has come as Śacī-suta Gaurahari
and Balarāma has come as Nitāi.

sarva-avatārī kṛṣṇa svayaṁ bhagavān

tāṅhāra dvitīya deha śrī-balarāma

eka-i svarūpa doṅhe, bhinna-mātra kāya

ādya kāya-vyūha, kṛṣṇa-līlāra sahāya

CC Ādi 5.4-5

sarva-avatārī—the source of all incarnations; kṛṣṇa—Lord
Kṛṣṇa; svayam—personally; bhagavān—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tāṅhāra—His; dvitīya—second;
deha—expansion of the body; śrī-balarāma—Lord Balarāma;
eka-i—one; svarūpa—identity; doṅhe—both of Them; bhinna-
mātra kāya—only two different bodies; ādya—original;
kāya-vyūha—quadruple expansions; kṛṣṇa-līlāra—in the
pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sahāya—assistance.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the
fountainhead of all incarnations. Lord Balarāma is His
second body. They are one and the same identity. They
differ only in form. Lord Balarāma is the first bodily
expansion of Kṛṣṇa, and He assists in Lord Kṛṣṇa’s
transcendental pastimes.

vaibhava-prakāśa kṛṣṇera - śrī-balarāma

varṇa-mātra-bheda, saba - kṛṣṇera samāna

CC Mad 20.174

vaibhava-prakāśa—manifestation of the vaibhava feature;
kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; śrī-balarāma—Śrī Balarāma; varṇa-
mātra—color only; bheda—difference; saba—everything;
kṛṣṇera samāna—equal to Kṛṣṇa.

The first manifestation of the vaibhava feature of Kṛṣṇa
is Śrī Balarāmajī. Śrī Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa have different
bodily colors, but otherwise Śrī Balarāma is equal to
Kṛṣṇa in all respects.

Lord Kṛṣṇa glorifies Balarāma, who is non-different from
Himself

gopyo —ntareṇa bhujayor api yat-spṛhā śrīḥ

SB 10.15.8


                          174
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

gopyaḥ—the gopīs; antareṇa—in between; bhujayoḥ—Your two
arms; api—indeed; yat—for which; spṛhā—maintains the
desire; śrīḥ—the goddess of fortune.

You have embraced the gopīs between Your two arms—a
favor hankered after by the goddess of fortune herself.

yāṅra rāse deve āsi' puṣpa-vṛṣṭi kare

deve jāne—bheda nāhi kṛṣṇa-haladhare

CB Ādi 1.30

The demigods came and showered flowers on His rāsa-līlā,
because they know there is no difference between Kṛṣṇa
and Balarāma.

Balarāma is the original Saṅkarṣaṇa

śri-balarāma gosāñi mūla-saṅkarṣaṇa

pañca-rūpa dhari' karena kṛṣṇera sevana

āpane karena kṛṣṇa-līlāra sahāya

sṛṣṭi-līlā-karya kare dhari' cāri kāya

CC Ādi 5.8-9

śrī-balarāma—Balarāma; gosāñi—the Lord; mūla-saṅkarṣaṇa—
the original Saṅkarṣaṇa; pañca-rūpa dhari——accepting
five bodies; karena—does; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sevana—
service; āpane—personally; karena—performs; kṛṣṇa-līlāra
sahāya—assistance in the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sṛṣṭi-
līlā—of the pastimes of creation; kārya—the work; kare—
does; dhari——accepting; cāri kāya—four bodies.

Lord Balarāma is the original Saṅkarṣaṇa. He assumes
five other forms to serve Lord Kṛṣṇa. He helps in the
pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and He does the work of creation
in four other forms.

māyātīte vyāpi-vaikuṇṭha-loke

pūrṇaiśvarye śrī-catur-vyūha-madhye

rūpaṁ yasyodbhāti saṅkarṣaṇākhyaṁ

taṁ śrī-nityānanda-rāmaṁ prapadye

CC Ādi 1.8

māyā-atīte—beyond the material creation; vyāpi—all-
expanding; vaikuṇṭha-loke—in Vaikuṇṭhaloka, the
spiritual world; pūrṇa-aiśvarye—endowed with full
opulence; śrī-catuḥ-vyūha-madhye—in the quadruple
expansions (Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and
Aniruddha); rūpam—form; yasya—whose; udbhāti—appears;
saṅkarṣaṇa-ākhyam—known as Saṅkarṣaṇa; tam—to Him; śrī-
nityānanda-rāmam—to Lord Balarāma in the form of Lord
Nityānanda; prapadye—I surrender.

I surrender unto the lotus feet of Śrī Nityānanda Rāma,
who is known as Saṅkarṣaṇa in the midst of the catur-

                          175
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

vyūha. He has full opulences and resides in
Vaikuṇṭhaloka far beyond the material creation.

māyā-bhartājāṇḍa-saṅghāśrayāṅgaḥ

śete sākṣāt kāraṇāmbhodhi-madhye

yasyaikāṁśaḥ śrī-pumān ādi-devas

taṁ śrī-nityānanda-rāmaṁ prapadye

CC Ādi 1.9

māyā-bhartā—the master of māyā; aja-aṇḍa-saṅgha—of the
multitude of universes; āśraya—the shelter; aṅgaḥ—whose
body; śete—He lies; sākṣāt—directly; kāraṇa-ambhodhi-
madhye—in the midst of the Causal Ocean; yasya—whose;
eka-aṁśaḥ—one portion; śrī-pumān—the Supreme Person;
ādi-devaḥ—the original puruṣa incarnation; tam—to Him;
śrī-nityānanda-rāmam—to Lord Balarāma in the form of
Lord Nityānanda; prapadye—I surrender.

I offer my full obeisances unto the feet of Śrī
Nityānanda Rāma, whose partial representation called
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, lying on the Kāraṇa ocean, is the
original Puruṣa, the master of the deluding potency māyā
and the shelter of all the universes.

yasyāṁśāṁśaḥ śrīla-garbhoda-śāyī

yan-nābhy-abjaṁ loka-saṅghāta-nālam

loka-sraṣṭuḥ sūtikā-dhāma dhātus

taṁ śrī-nityānanda-rāmaṁ prapadye

CC Ādi 1.10

yasya—whose; aṁśa-aṁśaḥ—portion of a plenary portion;
śrīla-garbha-uda-śāyī—Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu; yat—of whom;
nābhi-abjam—the navel lotus; loka-saṅghāta—of the
multitude of planets; nālam—having a stem that is the
resting place; loka-sraṣṭuḥ—of Lord Brahmā, the creator
of the planets; sūtikā-dhāma—the birthplace; dhātuḥ—of
the creator; tam—to Him; śrī-nityānanda-rāmam—to Lord
Balarāma in the form of Lord Nityānanda; prapadye—I
surrender.

I offer my full obeisances unto the feet of Śrī
Nityānanda Rāma, a partial part of whom is Garbhodakṣāyī
Viṣṇu. From the navel of Garbhodakṣāyī Viṣṇu sprouts the
lotus stem that is the birthplace of Brahmā, the
engineer of the Universe. The stem of that lotus is the
resting place of the multitude of planets.

yasyāṁśāṁśāṁśaḥ parātmākhilānāṁ

poṣṭā viṣṇur bhāti dugdhabdhi-śāyī

kṣauṇī-bhartā yat-kalā so 'py anantas

taṁ śrī-nityānanda-rāmaṁ prapadye

CC Ādi 1.11

                          176
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


yasya—whose; aṁśa-aṁśa-aṁśaḥ—a portion of a portion of a
plenary portion; para-ātmā—the Supersoul; akhilānām—of
all living entities; poṣṭā—the maintainer; viṣṇuḥ—Viṣṇu;
bhāti—appears; dugdha-abdhi-śāyī—Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu;
kṣauṇī-bhartā—upholder of the earth; yat—whose; kalā—
portion of a portion; saḥ—He; api—certainly; anantaḥ—
Śeṣa Nāga; tam—to Him; śrī-nityānanda-rāmam—to Lord
Balarāma in the form of Lord Nityānanda; prapadye—I
surrender.

I offer my full obeisances unto the feet of Śrī
Nityānanda Rāma, whose secondary part is the Viṣṇu lying
in the ocean of milk. That Kṣīrodakaṣāyī Viṣṇu is the
Supersoul of all living entities and the maintainer of
all the universe. Śeṣa Nāga is His further sub-part.

jagat mātāya nitāi premera mālasaṭe

palāya durdānta kalī paḍiyā vibhrāṭe

ki sukhe bhāsila jīva gauracañdera naṭe

dekhiyā śuniyā pāṣaṇḍīra buk phāṭe

Gītāvalī, Nagara-kīrtana 8

[All glories to Nityānanda Prabhu!] Maddened by ecstatic
love of God, he overwhelmed the universe with ecstasy.
He slapped his hands together like a warrior who is
about to attack, and upon seeing this, the wicked Kalī
fled in terror, fearing for his life. All souls were
drowned in happiness because of the dancing of Śrī
Gaurāṅga [and Nityānanda]. Seeing such dancing, or even
hearing of it, melts the hearts even of great atheists.

jaya jaya nityānanda, nityānanda-rāma

yāñhāra kṛpāte pāinu vṛndāvana-dhāma

jaya jaya nityānanda, jaya kṛpā-māya

yāñha haite pāinu rūpa-sanātanāśraya

yāñha haite pāinu raghunātha-mahāśaya

yāñha haite pāinu śrī-svarūpa-āśraya

sanātana-kṛpāya pāinu bhaktira siddhānta

śrī-rūpa-kṛpāya pāinu bhakti-rasa-prānta

jaya jaya nityānanda-caraṇāravinda

yāñhā haite pāinu śrī-rādhā-govinda

CC Ādi. 5.200-204

All glory, all glory to Lord Nityānanda Balarāma, by
whose mercy I have attained shelter in the
transcendental abode of Vṛndāvana. All glory, all glory
to the merciful Lord Nityānanda, by whose mercy I have
attained shelter of Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana. By His mercy,
I have attained the shelter of the great Śrī Raghunātha

                             177
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

dāsa Gosvāmī, and by His mercy I have found the refuge
of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara. By the mercy of Sanātana
Gosvāmī I have learned the final conclusions of
devotional service, and by the grace of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
I have tasted the highest nectar of devotional service.
All glory, all glory to the lotus feet of Lord
Nityānanda, by whose mercy I have attained Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda.

Nityānanda is the savior of the most fallen

jagāi mādhāi haite muñi se pāpiṣṭha/purīṣera kīṭa haite
muñi se laghiṣṭha

mora nāma śune yei tāra puṇya kṣaya/mora nāma laya yei
tāra pāpa haya

emana nirghṛṇa more kebā kṛpā kare/eka nityānanda vinu
jagat bhitare

preme matta nityānanda kṛpā-avatāra/uttama, adhama,
kichu nā kare vicāra

ye āge paḍaye, tāre karaye nistāra/ataeva nistārilā mo-
hena durācāra

CC Ādi 5.205-209

I am more sinful than Jagāi and Mādhāi and even lower
than the worms in stool. Anyone who hears my name loses
the results of his pious activities. Whoever utters my
name becomes sinful. Who in this world but Nityānanda
could show His mercy to such an abominable person as me?
Because He is intoxicated by ecstatic love and is an
incarnation of mercy, He does not distinguish between
the good and the bad. He delivers all those who fall
down before Him. Therefore He has delivered such a
sinful and fallen person as me.

One gets freedom from anarthas and the desire for bhakti
by the mercy of Nitāi

saṁsārera pāra haiyā bhaktira sāgare

ye ḍūbibe se bhajuka nitāi-cāndere

CB Ādi 17.152

Just worship Lord Nitāi-cānda. He who does so will bathe
in the ocean of bhakti and traverse the ocean of
repeated birth and death.

Lord Nityānanda and one’s Guru are non-different

āmāra prabhura prabhu śrī-gaurasundara

e baḍa bharasā citte dhari nirantara

CB Ādi 17.153/GKH 1.60

My master is Nityānanda; His Lord is Gaurasundara. By
the mercy of Lord Nityānanda one gets the mercy of
Gaurasundara. I hold this powerful desire incessantly in
my heart. (Nityānanda is therefore the original Guru. As

                          178
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

such the Guru is the representative of Lord Nityānanda.
These two are nondifferent).

Nityānanda and Advaita are the two main branches of the
Caitanya tree

advaita ācārya, nityānanda, dui aṅga

duijanā laña prabhura yata kichu raṅga

CC Ādi 5.146

advaita ācārya—Śrī Advaita Ācārya; nityānanda—Lord
Nityānanda; dui aṅga—two limbs of the Lord; dui-jana
lañā—taking the two of Them; prabhura—of Lord Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu; yata—all; kichu—some; raṅga—playful
activities.

Nityānanda Prabhu and Advaita Ācārya are the two
expansions of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu who assist His
transcendental pleasure-pastimes.

Advaita and Nityānanda serve the lotus feet of Lord
Caitanya

eka mahāprabhu, āra prabhu duijana

dui prabhu sebe mahāprabhura caraṇa

CC Ādi 7.14

eka mahāprabhu—one Mahāprabhu, or the supreme
predominator; āra prabhu duijana—and the other two
(Nityānanda and Advaita) are two Prabhus (masters); dui
prabhu—the two Prabhus; sebe—serve; mahāprabhura—of the
supreme Prabhu; caraṇa—the lotus feet.

There is one mahāprabhu and two prabhus. The two Prabhus
serve the lotus feet of Mahāprabhu.



Thus ends the section Nityānanda-tattva



2) Advaita-tattva

Who is Lord Advaita Ācārya

mahā-viṣṇur jagat-kartā māyayā yaḥ sṛjaty adaḥ

tasyāvatāra evāyam advaitācārya īśvaraḥ

advaitaṁ hariṇādvaitād ācāryaṁ bhakti-śaṁsanāt

bhaktāvatāram īśaṁ tam advaitācāryam āśraye

CC Ādi 1.12-13

mahā-viṣṇuḥ—Mahā-Viṣṇu, the resting place of the
efficient cause; jagat-kartā—the creator of the cosmic
world; māyayā—by the illusory energy; yaḥ—who; sṛjati—
creates; adaḥ—that universe; tasya—His; avatāraḥ—

                             179
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

incarnation; eva—certainly; ayam—this; advaita-ācāryaḥ—
Advaita Ācārya; īśvaraḥ—the Supreme Lord, the resting
place of the material cause; advaitam—known as Advaita;
hariṇā—with Lord Hari; a-dvaitāt—from being
nondifferent; ācāryam—known as Ācārya; bhakti-śaṁsanāt—
from the propagation of devotional service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
bhakta-avatāram—the incarnation as a devotee; īśam—to
the Supreme Lord; tam—to Him; advaita-ācāryam—to Advaita
Ācārya; āśraye—I surrender.

Mahā-Viṣṇu is the master of the universe, which he
creates through his power of Māyā. Advaita Ācārya is the
incarnation of this form of the Supreme Lord. He is
known as Advaita because he is non-different from Hari.
He is known as Ācārya because he propagates devotional
service. He is the Lord and the incarnation of the
Lord’s devotee. Therefore I take shelter of Him.

sei navadvīpe vaise vaiṣṇavāgragaṇya

“advaita ācārya— nāma, sarva-loke dhanya

jñāna-bhakti-vairāgyera guru mukhyatara

kṛṣṇa-bhakti vākhānite ye hena śaṅkara

CB Ādi 2.78-9

Residing in Navadvīpa at that time was Śrī Advaita
Ācārya, the topmost Vaiṣṇava, who is glorified
throughout the world. Śrī Advaita Ācārya was the chief
amongst the Gurus in knowledge, devotion and
renunciation. He was as expert as Lord Śiva in
explaining the devotional service of Lord Kṛṣṇa with
knowledge and renunciation.

The meaning of the name Advaita

mahā-viṣṇura aṁśa advaita guṇa-dhāma

īśvare abheda, teñi “advaita— pūrṇa nāma

CC Ādi 6.26

mahā-viṣṇura—of Lord Mahā-Viṣṇu; aṁśa—part; advaita—
Advaita Ācārya; guṇa-dhāma—reservoir of all attributes;
īśvare—from the Lord; abheda—nondifferent; teñi—
therefore; advaita—nondifferent; pūrṇa nāma—full name.

Śrī Advaita, who is the reservoir of virtues, is the
main limb of Mahā-Viṣṇu. His full name is therefore
Advaita, for He is identical in all respects with the
Lord.

Advaita Ācārya is a preacher of Kṛṣṇa-bhakti

jīva nistārila kṛṣṇa-bhakti kari— dāna

gītā-bhāgavate kaila bhaktira vyākhyāna

CC Ādi 6.28

jīva—the living entities; nistārila—delivered; kṛṣṇa-
bhakti—devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa; kari——making;

                          180
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

dāna—gift; gītā-bhāgavate—in the Bhagavad-gītā and
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; kaila—performed; bhaktira vyākhyāna—
explanation of devotional service.

He delivered all living beings by offering the gift of
kṛṣṇa-bhakti. He explained Bhagavad-Gītā and Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam in the light of devotional service.

He is Mahāviṣṇu and a devotee of Lord Caitanya

advaita-ācārya-gosāñi sākṣāt īśvara

prabhu guru kari— māne, tiṅho ta— kiṅkara

CC Ādi 5.147

advaita-ācārya—Advaita Ācārya; gosāñi—the Lord; sākṣāt
īśvara—directly the preme Personality of Godhead; prabhu
—Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; guru kari— māne—accepts
Him as His teacher; tiṅho ta— kiṅkara—but He is the
servant.

Lord Advaita Ācārya is directly the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Although Lord Caitanya accepts Him as His
preceptor, Advaita Ācārya is a servant of the Lord.

Advaita is Sadāśiva

bhaktāvatāra ācāryo “dvaita yaḥ śrī-sadāśivaḥ

Gaura-Gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā, 11

He who was Śrī Sadāśiva is the bhakta-avatāra, Śrī
Advaita Prabhu (Sadāśiva is Gopīśvara Mahādeva, the mūla
Śiva-tattva).

Śrī Kṛṣṇa sells Himself to a devotee who offers Him
merely a tulasī leaf and some water

tulasī-dala-mātreṇa jalasya culukena vā

vikrīṇīte svam ātmānaṁ bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalaḥ

Gautamīya-tantra/HBV 11.261/CC Ādi 3.104/BRSB p.64/KGH
(P)

tulasī—of tulasī; dala—a leaf; mātreṇa—by only; jalasya—
of water; culukena—by a palmful; vā—and; vikrīṇīte—
sells; svam—His own; ātmānam—self; bhaktebhyaḥ—unto the
devotees; bhakta-vatsalaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is
affectionate to His devotees.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is very affectionate toward His devotees,
sells Himself to a devotee who offers Him merely a
tulasī leaf and a palmful of water.

Śrī Advaita Ācārya attracted the Lord by pleasing Him
with tulasi and water

ei ślokārtha ācārya karena vicāraṇa

kṛṣṇake tulasī-jala deya yei jana

tāra ṛṇa śodhite kṛṣṇa karena cintana

                             181
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


“jala-tulasīra sama kichu ghare nāhi dhana—

CC Ādi 3.105-6

ei—this; śloka—of the verse; artha—the meaning; ācārya—
Advaita Ācārya; karena—does; vicāraṇa—considering;
kṛṣṇake—to Lord Kṛṣṇa; tulasī-jala—tulasī and water;
deya—gives; yei jana—that person who; tāra—to Him; ṛṇa—
the debt; śodhite—to pay; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; karena—does;
cintana—thinking; jala-tulasīra sama—equal to water and
tulasī; kichu—any; ghare—in the house; nāhi—there is
not; dhana—wealth.

Advaita Ācārya considered the meaning of that śloka in
this way: “Not finding any way to repay the debt He owes
to one who offers Him a tulasī leaf and water, Lord
Kṛṣṇa thinks, “There is no wealth in My possession that
is equal to a tulasī leaf and water.”

Thus the Lord, the protector of religion, appears by the
desire of His devotee

tabe ātmā veci— kare kṛṣṇera śodhana

eta bhāvi— ācārya karena ārādhana

gaṅgā-jala, tulasī-mañjarī anukṣaṇa

kṛṣṇa-pāda-padma bhāvi— kare samarpaṇa

kṛṣṇera āhvāna kare kariyā huṅkāra

e-mate kṛṣṇere karāila avatāra

caitanyera avatāre ei mukhya hetu

bhaktera icchāya avatare dharma-setu

CC Ādi 3.107-10

Thus the Lord liquidates the debt by offering Himself to
the devotee.” Considering it in this way, the Ācārya
began worshiping the Lord. Thinking of the lotus feet of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, He constantly offered tulasī-mañjarīs and
water from the Gaṅgā. He appealed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa with loud
calls and thus made it possible for Kṛṣṇa to appear.
Therefore the principal reason for Śrī Caitanya’s
descent is this appeal by Advaita Ācārya. The Lord, the
protector of religion, appears by the desire of His
devotee.

je ānila prema-dhana karuṇā pracura

hena prabhu kothā— gelā ācārya ṭhākura

Je Ānila Prema-dhana, Śrīla Narttama dāsa Ṭhākura/SGG
p.32

Who, out of His vast compassion, brought Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu with His treasure of divine love to this
world by calling Him with love and affection? Where has
that Advaita Ācārya Ṭhākura gone? [Advaita Ācārya was
shouting so loudly that Nārāyaṇa’s throne was shaking!]

                          182
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Thus end the section Advaita-tattva




3) Gadādhara-tattva



śrī-rādhā-prema-rūpā yā purā vṛndāvandeśvarī

sā śrī-gadādharo gaura-vallabhaḥ paṇḍitākhyakaḥ

nirṇītaḥ śrī-svarūpair yo vraja-lakṣmītayā yathā

purā vṛndāvane lakṣmīḥ śyāmasundara-vallabhā

sādyo gaura-prema-lakṣmīḥ śrī-gadādhara-paṇḍitaḥ

Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā 147-149

The incarnation of love who previously was the queen of
Vrindavan, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, is now the beloved of Gaura
named Śrīla Gadādhara Paṇḍita. Svarūpa Dāmodara himself
indicated that Śrī Gadādhara was Vraja’s goddess of
fortune, the Lakṣmī who was previously the beloved of
Śyāmasundara in Vṛndāvana. She has now become the object
of love for Gaura and is known as Śrīla Gadādhara
Paṇḍita.

gadādhara-paṇḍitādi - prabhura nija-śakti

tāṅ—-sabāra caraṇe mora sahasra praṇati

CC Ādī 1.41

gadādhara-paṇḍita-ādi—headed by Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita;
prabhura—of the Supreme Lord; nija-śakti—internal
potencies; tāṅ—-sabāra—of all of them; caraṇe—unto the
lotus feet; mora—my; sahasra—thousands; praṇati—
respectful obeisances.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the internal
potencies of the Lord, of whom Śrī Gadādhara Prabhu is
the foremost.

jaya nityānanda gadādharera jīvana

jaya jaya advaitādi-bhaktera śaraṇa

CB Ādi 2.2

All glories to the life and soul of Nityānanda and
Gadādhara! All glories to the shelter of the devotees
headed by Advaita Prabhu!



sva-bhakti-yoga-lāsinaṁ sadā vraje vihāriṇaṁ

hari-priyā-gaṇāgra-gaṁ śacī-suta-priyeśvaram


                          183
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

sa-rādha-kṛṣṇa-sevana prakāśakaṁ mahāśayaṁ

bhajāmy ahaṁ gadādharaṁ su paṇḍitaṁ guruṁ prabhum

Śrī Gadādharāṣṭakam 1, Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī

That personality who eternally wanders in Vraja while
playfully performing Her own loving devotional service
(Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who takes the form of Śrī Gadādhara in
Gaura līlā), is the chief among the beloved damsels of
Śrī Hari. As the foremost of the intimate associates of
the son of Śacī (Gadādhara), he reveals the process of
service to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I worship that
magnanimous, exalted Paṇḍita and Guru, Śrī Gadādhara
Prabhu.



Thus ends section 3) Gadādhara-tattva



4) Śiva tattva



Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva praṇāma

vṛndāvanavani-pate! jaya soma soma-maule

sanaka-sanandana-sanātana-nāradeḍya

gopīśvara! vraja-vilāsi-yugāṅghri-padme

prema prayaccha nirupādhi namo namas te

Saṅkalpa-Kalpadruma 103, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura/
BMP p.422

vṛndāvana—of Vṛndāvana; avani—of the land; pate—O Lord;
jaya—all glories to you; sa-uma—O husband of Parvati;
soma—who carries the moon; maule—on his head; sanaka-
sanandana-sanātana—by the ancient sages who eternally
stay in the form of young boys; nārada—and by Nārada
Muni; īḍya—worshipped; gopīśvara—O Gopīśvara; vraja—in
Vraja; vilāsa—who perform pastimes; yuga—of the Divine
Couple; aṅghri—feet; padma—for the lotus flower; prema—
pure transcendental love; prayaccha—please grant;
nirupadhi—free from material designations; namah namaḥ—I
offer my respectful obeisances; te—unto you.

O gatekeeper of Vṛndāvana! O Soma, all glories to you! O
you whose forehead is decorated with the moon, and who
is worshipable for the sages headed by Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanātana and Nārada! O Gopīśvara! Desiring
that you bestow upon me prema for the lotus feet of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava who perform joyous pastimes in Vraja-
dhāma, I offer praṇāmas unto you time and again.

Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva fulfills the gopīs— desires

mudā gopendrasyātmaja-bhuja-pariṣvaṅga-nīdhaye

sphurad gopī-vṛndair yam iha bhāgavantaṁ praṇayībhiḥ

                          184
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


bhajadbhis tair bhaktyā svam abhilāsitaṁ prāptum acirād

yamī-tīre gopīśvaram anudinaṁ taṁ kila bhaje

Śrī Vraja-vilāsa-stava 87/BMP p. 422

To obtain the jewel of being embraced by the arms of
Brajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, the gopīs, who possess
firm, loving, intimate attachment for Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
joyfully worshipped Sadāśiva with great devotion and had
all their internal desires fulfilled without delay.
Daily I worship that Gopīśvara Mahādeva who resides on
the bank of the Yamunā.

Lord Brahmā glorifies Śiva

kṣīraṁ yathā dadhi-vikāra-viśeṣa-yogāt

sañjāyate na hi tataḥ pṛthag asti hetoḥ

yaḥ śambhutām api tathā samupaiti kāryād

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Śrī Brahma-Saṁhitā 45

aham bhajāmi—I perform bhajana; tam—of that; ādi-puruṣam
govindam—original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda; yaḥ—who;
upaiti—takes on; śambhutām—the state of Śambhu; kāryāt—
on account of performing a special duty; yathā tathā—in
the same way that; kṣīram—milk; sañjāyate—becomes; dadhi
—yogurt; vikāra-viśeṣa-yogāt—through contact with a
transforming agent; asti—is; hi—certainly; na—not;
pṛthak—different; tataḥ—than; hetoḥ—its cause (milk).

Śrī Govindadeva assumes the condition of being Śambhu
for the sake of performing a specific function, just as
milk is transformed into yogurt by contact with a
particular transforming agent, although yogurt is not
independent of milk which is its cause. I engage in the
bhajana of that original personality, Śrī Govinda.

śivaḥ śakti-yutaḥ śaśvat tri-liṅgo guṇa-saṁvṛtaḥ

vaikārikas taijasaś ca tāmasaś cety ahaṁ tridhā

SB 10.88.3

[śrī-śukaḥ uvāca—Śrī Śuka said:] śivaḥ—Lord Śiva; śakti—
with his energy, material nature; yutaḥ—united; śaśvat—
always; tri—three; liṅgaḥ—whose manifest features; guṇa—
by the modes; saṁvṛtaḥ—prayed to; vaikārikaḥ—false ego
in the mode of goodness; taijasaḥ—false ego in the mode
of passion; ca—and; tāmasaḥ—false ego in mode of
ignorance; ca—and; iti—thus; aham—the principle of
material ego; tridhā—threefold.

[Śrī Śukadeva said:] Lord Śiva is always united with
Śakti, his personal energy the material nature. Since
his Śakti is the energy through which the creation
maintenance and destruction of the material world takes
place, he is known as Tri-liṅga. Manifesting himself in
three features in response to the entreaties of nature’s

                             185
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

three modes, he thus embodies the threefold principle of
material ego in goodness, passion and ignorance.

harir hi nirguṇaḥ sākṣāt puruṣaḥ prakṛteḥ paraḥ

śiva-śakti-yutaḥ śaśvat tri-liṅgo guṇa-samvṛtaḥ

SB 10.88.5/CC Mad 20.313/BS 45 pt

hariḥ—the Supreme Lord Hari; hi—indeed; nirguṇaḥ—
untouched by the material modes; sākṣāt—absolutely;
puruṣaḥ—the Personality of Godhead; prakṛteḥ—to material
nature; paraḥ—transcendental; śiva—the auspicious one;
śakti—potency; yutaḥ—possessed of; śaśvat—original; tri-
liṅgo—the trident carrier; guṇa— modes of nature;
samvṛtaḥ—encompassed by.

Śrī Hari, who is transcendental to His inferior material
energy and free from mundane qualities, is directly the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. However, Śiva is
simultaneously possessed of three types of false ego,
namely goodness, passion and ignorance, and he is always
connected with the deluding potency, māyā. (Therefore, a
jīva can become transcendental to the material modes
only by the performance of śrī hari-bhajana - not by the
worship of Lord Śiva).



The Bhāgavatam extols Lord Śiva as the greatest of
Vaiṣṇavas

nimna-gānāṁ yathā gaṅgā devānām acyuto yathā

vaiṣṇavānāṁ yathā śambhuḥ purāṇānām idaṁ tathā

SB 12.13.16/BPKG Biog. pp. 86,120

nimna-gānām—of rivers flowing down to the sea; yathā—as;
gaṅgā—the Ganges; devānām—of all deities; acyutaḥ—the
infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead; yathā—as;
vaiṣṇavānām—of devotees of Lord Viṣṇu; yathā—as; śambhuḥ
—Śiva; purāṇānām—of Purāṇas; idam—this; tathā—similarly.

Just as the Gaṅgā is the greatest of all rivers, Lord
Acyuta the supreme among deities and Lord Śambhu [Śiva]
the greatest of Vaiṣṇavas, so Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the
greatest of all Purāṇas.

Thus ends Chapter 5 — Nityānanda, Advaita, Gadādhara,
and Śiva tattvas




Chapter 6 — Kṛṣṇa-tattva


Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the supreme, most
complete form of God




                           186
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017



1. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Svayaṁ Bhagavān 225

2. The Brahman Feature of Kṛṣṇa 236

3. The Paramātma Feature of Kṛṣṇa 239

4. Kṛṣṇa is Acintya - Inconceivable 240

5. Four Prayers Describing the Beauty of Śrī Kṛṣṇa 244

6. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Mercy 247

7. Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa 250

8. Kṛṣṇa is Controlled by the Prema of the Vrajavāsīs
253

9. Prayers in Glorification of Śrī Kṛṣṇa 255

10. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s 64 Qualities 261



1) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Svayaṁ Bhagavān - Śāstric evidence



Only Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Svayaṁ Bhagavān - Parama-tattva (the
Supreme Truth)

ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

SB 1.3.28/CC Ādi 2.67,5.79, Mad 9.143,20.156/JD ch. 13/
STB p. 52/BPKG p. 355

ete—all these; ca—and; aṁśa—plenary portions; kalāḥ—
portions of the plenary portions; puṁsaḥ—of the Supreme
Person; kṛṣṇaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tu—but; bhagavān—(is) the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; svayam—himself, in
person.

All avatāras beginning with Rāma and Nṛsiṁha are the
parts, and parts of the parts, of the Supreme Person
Bhagavān. However, only Śrī Kṛsṇa is the original Svayaṁ
Bhagavān.

Svayaṁ Bhagavān is Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
lover of Śrī Rādhā

haris tv ekaṁ tattvaṁ vidhi-śiva-sureśa-praṇamitaḥ

yad evedaṁ brahma prakṛti-rahitaṁ tat tv anumahaḥ

parātmā tasyāṁśo jagad-aṇu-gato viśva-janakaḥ

sa vai rādhā-kānto nava-jalada-kāntiś cid-udayaḥ

Daśa-mūla-tattva, 2/JD ch. 13

hariḥ—Lord Hari; tu—and; ekam—only; tattvam—truth; vidhi
—by Lord Brahmā; śiva—by Lord Śiva; sura-īśa—by Lord
Indra, the king of the demigods; praṇamitaḥ—offered

                           187
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

obeisances; yat—who; eva—certainly; idam—this; brahma—
supreme brahman; prakṛti—of material nature; rahitam—
devoid; tat—that; tv—but; anumahaḥ—the splendor; para-
ātmā—the supersoul; tasya—of Him; aṁśaḥ—a part; jagat—to
the universe; aṇugataḥ—gone; viśva—of the universe;
janakaḥ—the father; saḥ—He; vai—certainly; rādhā—of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā; kāntaḥ—the lover; nava—fresh; jalada—of
a raincloud; kāntiḥ—splendor; cid-udayaḥ—a spiritual
manifestation.

Indeed Śrī Hari, to whom Brahmā, Śiva, Indra and other
demigods continuously offer praṇāma, is the only Supreme
Absolute Truth. Nirviśeṣa-brahma (Brahman) that is
devoid of śakti is Śrī Hari’s bodily effulgence. Mahā-
Viṣṇu, who has created the universe and who has entered
into it as the indwelling Supersoul of all (Paramātmā),
is simply His partial manifestation. That Śrī Hari
alone, the very form of transcendental reality (cit-
svarūpa), whose complexion is the colour of a freshly
formed thunder cloud, is Śrī Rādhā-kāntha (the lover of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā).



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the origin of all and the primary cause of
all causes

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

BS 5.1/CC Ādi 2.107, Madhya 8.137,20.154,21.35/STB pp.
51,84/BPKG pp. 215,230 etc.

paramaḥ īśvaraḥ—the Supreme Controller, that is to say
the controller of all other controllers, and the
original source of all incarnations; kṛṣṇaḥ—Vrajendra-
nandana Kṛṣṇa (is);sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ—His form is
endowed with the three potencies of eternal existence,
knowledge and bliss (sandhinī, saṁvit and hlādinī);
anādiḥ—without a beginning; ādiḥ—the original form of
all else; govindaḥ—(He is) known as Govinda, meaning He
to whom service should be rendered through the senses,
and He is the presiding deity of the practical process
of devotional service (abhidheya-tattva); sarva-kāraṇa-
kāraṇam—the primary cause of all causes, or the original
form.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, is the embodiment of eternity,
knowledge and bliss. He is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the controller of all lesser controllers, and
the source of all incarnations. He has no beginning or
origin, though He is the source of everything and the
primary cause of all causes.



Kṛṣṇa the Absolute Truth is one - yet He manifests in
three different ways

vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate


                          188
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

SB 1.2.11/CC Ādi 2.11, 2.63/BPKG p. 348,353 etc./JD ch.
4

vadanti—they say; tat—that; tattva-vidaḥ—the learned
souls; tattvam—the Absolute Truth; yat—which; jñānam—
knowledge; advayam—nondual; brahma iti—known as Brahman;
paramātmā iti—known as Paramātmā; bhagavān iti—known as
Bhagavān; śabdyate—it is so declared.

Great seers of the truth, who understand the nature of
the Absolute Truth, describe that non-dual truth in
three ways as impersonal Brahman, localized Paramātmā
and svayam Bhagavān, the Personality of Godhead.



The one Absolute Truth manifests Himself in three
features

advaya-jñāna tattva-vastu kṛṣṇera svarūpa

brahma, ātmā, bhagavān - tina tāṅra rūpa

CC Adi 2.65

advaya-jñāna—knowledge without duality (absolute
knowledge); tattva-vastu—the Absolute Truth; kṛṣṇera—of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sva-rūpa—own nature; brahma—Brahman; ātmā—
Paramātmā; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tina—three; tāṅra—of Him; rūpa—forms.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself is the one undivided Absolute Truth
and the ultimate reality. He manifests Himself in three
features—as Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān.




The definition of Bhagavān

aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ

jñāna-vairāgyayoś caiva ṣaṇṇāṁ bhagam itīṅganā

Viṣnu Purana 6.5.47/JD ch. 13, p. 310/BB 2.4.186/BPKG p.
409

aiśvaryasya—of opulence or wealth; samagrasya—in full;
vīryasya—of strength or potency; yaśasaḥ—of fame; śriyaḥ
—of beauty; jñāna—of knowledge; vairāgyayoḥ—and of
renunciation; ca—and; eva—certainly; ṣaṇṇām—of the six;
bhaga—opulence (or prema); iti—thus; iṅgaṇā—the
division.

Bhagavān is defined as He who possesses all opulences in
full: complete beauty, fame, wealth, strength, knowledge
and renunciation — all these qualities are manifested in
Bhagavān to the fullest, unlimited extent.15



The one Absolute Truth displays many expansions and
potencies for His līlā

                             189
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


advaya-jñāna-tattva kṛṣṇa svayaṁ bhagavān

'svarūpa-śakti' rūpe tāṅra haya avasthāna

CC Madhya 22.7

advaya-jñāna—of nondual knowledge; tattva—the principle;
kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; svayam bhagavān—Himself the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; svarūpa—personal expansions;
śakti—of potencies; rūpe—in the form; tāṅra—His; haya—
there is; avasthāna—existence.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the non-dual Absolute Truth, the original
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Through His svarūpa-
śakti (Śrīmatī Rādhikā), the potency manifested from His
own form, He facilitates the manifold expansions of His
divine pastimes.



The Vedas, Upaniṣads and Purāṇas prove that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
Svayam Bhagavān

śyāmāc chabalaṁ prapadye śabalāc chyāmaṁ prapadye

Chāndogya Up. 8.13.1/JD ch. 10,13/BPKG p. 355

By rendering service to Śyāma, one attains His
transcendental abode, which is full of spiritual bliss
and astonishing, variegated līlās; Through rendering
service to that variegated abode, one attains
Śyāmasundara Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (“abode— may also refer to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā)




apaśyaṁ gopām anipadyamānamā ca parā ca pathibhiś
carantam sa sadhrīcīḥ; sa viṣūcīr vasāna āvarīvartti
bhuvaneśv antaḥ

Ṛg Veda 1.22.164.31/GKH 7.45/BPKG p. 354,356,517

I beheld a boy who appears in the dynasty of cowherds
and who is infallible and indestructible. He moves
mysteriously, sometimes coming very near and sometimes
going far away. He is attired in fine silks of riotous
hues. In this way He repeatedly exhibits His manifest
and unmanifest pastimes.

Nothing is superior to Kṛṣṇa, everything and everybody
is dependent on Him like pearls on a thread

mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya

mayi sarvam idaṁ protaṁ sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva

BG 7.7/JD ch. 13/BPKG pp. 215,355,456

dhanañjaya—O winner of wealth, Arjuna; na asti—there
does not exist; kiñcit—anything; anyat—else; parataram—
greater; mattaḥ—than Me; sarvam—all; idam—this universe;

                          190
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

protam— is dependent; mayi—on Me; iva—as; maṇi-gaṇāḥ—
jewels; sūtre—(strung) on a thread.

O Arjuna! There is nothing superior to Me. Everything is
dependent on Me, resting upon Me as pearls are strung on
a thread.

Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme master — all others are His
servants

ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya

yāre yaiche nācāya, se taiche kare nṛtya

CC Adi 5.142

ekale—alone; īśvara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; āra—others; saba—all; bhṛtya—servants; yāre
—unto whom; yaiche—as; nācāya—He causes to dance; se—He;
taiche—in that way; kare nṛtya—dances.

Lord Kṛṣṇa alone is the supreme controller, and all
others are His servants. They dance as He makes them do
so.




Some accept Him whereas others do not, yet everyone is
His servant

keha māne, kehā nā māne, saba taṅra dāsa

ye nā māne, tāra haya sei pāpe nāśa

CC Ādi 6.85

keha māne—someone accepts; keha nā māne—someone does not
accept; saba tāṅra dāsa—all His servants; ye nā māne—one
who does not accept; tāra—of him; haya—there is; sei—
that; pāpe—in sinful activity; nāśa—annihilation.

Some accept Him whereas others do not, yet everyone is
His servant. One who does not accept Him will be ruined
by his sinful activities.

eko vaśī sarva-gaḥ kṛṣṇa īḍya

Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad 1.21/BPKG p. 355

ekaḥ—one; vaśī—self-controlled or supreme controller;
sarva-gaḥ— all-pervading; kṛṣṇaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; īḍyaḥ—
supremely worshipable.

The one controller of all, the all-pervading,
unparallelled Para-brahman Kṛṣṇa, is the supreme
worshipable object for the demigods, humans and all
living beings. (Only the one all-pervading supreme
controller Śrī Kṛṣṇa should be worshipped).

Kṛṣṇa is the Soul of all souls

kṛṣṇam enam avehi tvam ātmānam akhilātmanām

                          191
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


SB 10.14.55/BPKG p. 357

kṛṣṇam—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; enam—this; avehi—just try to
understand; tvam—you; ātmānam—the Soul; akhila-ātmanām—
of all living entities.

O King! Know that Kṛṣṇa is the ātmā of all ātmās (the
Supreme Soul of all souls).

Kṛṣṇa is source of all Avatāras

rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan

nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu

kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā 5.39/CC Ādi 5.155/VG p. 58/KGH (P)

rāmādi-mūrtiṣu—in the forms of Śrī Rāmacandra etc; kalā-
niyamena—through His forms of expanded plenary portions
(svāṁśa-kalā); tiṣṭhan—remaining; nānā-avatāram—many
descents; akarot—He performed; bhuvaneṣu—within the many
material universes; kintu—however; kṛṣṇaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
svayam—He Himself personally; samabhavat—has descended;
paramaḥ pumān—is the Supreme Person; yaḥ—who; govindam
ādi-puruṣam—original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda; tam—of
that; aham bhajāmi—I perform bhajana.

I worship the original Personality, Śrī Govinda, who
manifests Himself in the material world as Śrī
Rāmacandra and many other incarnations who are His
plenary portions and sub-portions, and who personally
appears in the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa is the source of the Puruṣa-avatāras who are the
origin of the material creation

viṣṇos tu trīṇi rūpāṇi puruṣākhyāny atho viduḥ

ekaṁ tu mahataḥ sraṣṭṛ dvitīyaṁ tv aṇḍa-saṁsthitam

tṛtīyaṁ sarva-bhūta-sthaṁ tāni jñātvā vimucyate

Sātvata-tantra/CC Ādi 5.77, Madhya 20.251

viṣṇoḥ—of Lord Viṣṇu; tu—certainly; trīṇi—three; rūpāṇi—
forms; puruṣa-ākhyāni—celebrated as the puruṣa; atho—
how; viduḥ—they know; ekam—one of them; tu—but; mahataḥ
sraṣṭṛ—the creator of the total material energy;
dvitīyam—the second; tu—but; aṇḍa-saṁsthitam—situated
within the universe; tṛtīyam—the third; sarva-bhūta-
stham—within the hearts of all living entities; tāni—
these three; jñātvā—knowing; vimucyate—one becomes
liberated.

For material creation, Lord Kṛṣṇa’s plenary expansion
assumes three Viṣṇus. The first one, Mahā-Viṣṇu, creates
the total material energy, known as the mahat-tattva.
The second, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, enters into all the
universes to create diversities in each of them. The

                          192
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

third, Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, is diffused as the all-
pervading Supersoul in all the universes and is known as
Paramātmā. He is present even within the atoms. Anyone
who knows these three becomes liberated from material
entanglement (from the clutches of māyā).

All incarnations are included in Kṛṣṇa, the Avatārī
(source of all incarnations)

pūrṇa bhagavān avatare yei kāle

āra saba avatāra tāṅte āsi— mile

CC Ādi 4.10

pūrṇa—full; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
avatare—incarnates; yei—that; kāle—at the time; āra—
other; saba—all; avatāra—incarnations; tāṅte—in Him; āsi
——coming; mile—meet.

When the complete Supreme Personality of Godhead
descends, all other incarnations of the Lord meet
together within Him.

Viṣṇu is but an expansion of an expansion of an
incarnation of Kṛṣṇa

nārāyaṇa, catur-vyūha, matsyādy-avatāra

yuga-manvantarāvatāra, yata āche āra

sabe āsi— kṛṣṇa-aṅge haya avatīrṇa

aiche avatāre kṛṣṇa bhagavān pūrṇa

CC Ādi 4.11-12

nārāyaṇa—Lord Nārāyaṇa; catuḥ-vyūha—the four expansions;
matsya-ādi—beginning with Matsya; avatāra—the
incarnations; yuga-manv-antara-avatāra—the yuga and
manv-antara incarnations; yata—as many as; āche—there
are; āra—other; sabe—all; āsi——coming; kṛṣṇa-aṅge—in the
body of Lord Kṛṣṇa; haya—are; avatīrṇa—incarnated; aiche
—in this way; avatare—incarnates; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pūrṇa—full.

Lord Nārāyaṇa, the four primary expansions [Vāsudeva,
Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha], Matsya and the
other līlā incarnations, the yuga-avatāras, the puruṣa-
avatāras, the manv-antara incarnations and as many other
incarnations as there are - all descend in the body of
Lord Kṛṣṇa. In this way the complete Supreme Godhead,
Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, appears.

It is not Śrī Kṛṣṇa who kills the demons but His Vīṣṇu
expansion who is present within Him

ataeva viṣṇu takhana kṛṣṇera śarīre

viṣṇu-dvāre kare kṛṣṇa asura-saṁhāre

CC Ādi 4.13

ataeva—therefore; viṣṇu—Lord Viṣṇu; takhana—at that

                          193
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

time; kṛṣṇera—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; śarīre—in the body; viṣṇu-
dvāre—by Lord Viṣṇu; kare—does; kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; asura-
saṁhāre—killing the demons.

At that time, therefore, Lord Viṣṇu is present in the
body of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa kills the demons
through Him.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the supreme enjoyer, controller and well-
wisher of everyone

bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati

BG 5.29

bhoktāram—the enjoyer; yajña—of sacrifices; tapasām—and
penances and austerities; sarva-loka—of all planets and
the demigods thereof; mahā-īśvaram—the Supreme Lord; su-
hṛdam—the well-wisher; sarva—of all; bhūtānām—the living
entities; jñātvā—thus knowing; mām—Me; śāntim—relief
from material pangs; ṛcchati—one achieves.

A person in full consciousness of Me, knowing Me to be
the ultimate enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities,
the Supreme Lord and controller of all controllers, and
the well-wisher of all living entities, attains peace
from all material miseries.

[Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda called this śloka
“The peace formula” quoting it numerous times, and Śrīla
B. R. Śridhara Mahārāja gave an extended translation:]
"Your anxiety will subside when you come to understand
that everything is in My hands and that I am not your
enemy, rather I am your friend. I have a friendly
relationship with you all. I am all-in-all, but I am
your well-wisher and friend. When you come to realise
this you will be in real peace, otherwise you will
always have worry without end." (Sermons, vol. 3)

Kṛṣṇa is the only enjoyer and master of all sacrifices

ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca

na tu mām abhijānanti tattvenātaś cyavanti te

BG 9.24

aham—I; hi—surely; sarva—of all; yajñānām—sacrifices;
bhoktā—the enjoyer; ca—and; prabhuḥ—the Lord; eva—also;
ca—and; na—not; tu—but; mām—Me; abhijānanti—they know;
tattvena—in reality; ataḥ—therefore; cyavanti—fall down;
te—they.

I am the only enjoyer and master of all sacrifices.
Therefore, those who do not recognize My true
transcendental nature fall down.

Kṛṣṇa is everyone’s maintainer and provider

nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān

                          194
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13/BPKG p. 406/JD ch. 1,12,18,

nityaḥ—the singular eternal; nityānām—of the plural
eternals; cetanaḥ—the singular conscious being;
cetanānām—of the plural conscious beings; ekaḥ—that one;
bahūnām—of the many; yaḥ—He who; vidadhati—supplies;
kāmān—all desires or necessities of life.

He is the chief eternal Being among all eternal beings,
and the Supreme conscious Being among all conscious
beings. That one Supreme fulfills the desires of all the
others and provides them with everything they need.

“Nārāyaṇa” means the shelter of all Jīvas

nāra - śabde kahe sarva jīvera nicaya “ayana—-śabdete
kahe tāhāra āśraya

CC Ādi 2.38

nāra-śabde—by the word nāra; kahe—one means; sarva
jīvera—of all living entities; nicaya—the assemblage;
ayana-śabdete—by the word ayana; kahe—one means; tāhāra—
of them; āśraya—the refuge.

The word “nāra— refers to the aggregate of all the
living beings and the word “ayana— refers to the refuge
of them all. Thus the name “Nārāyaṇa— means he who gives
shelter to all jīvas in this shelter-less world (or he
who is the most compassionate).

Kṛṣṇa is the subject, the object and the ultimate goal
of the Vedas

mukhya-gauṇa-vṛtti, kiṁvā anvaya-vyatireke

vedera pratijñā kevala kahaye kṛṣṇake

CC Madhya 20.146

mukhya—chief; gauṇa—secondary; vṛtti—meaning; kiṁvā—or;
anvaya-vyatireke—directly or indirectly; vedera pratijñā
—ultimate declaration of the Vedas; kevala—only; kahaye—
speaks; kṛṣṇake—about Kṛṣṇa.

Whether one analyses the Veda according to its primary
or secondary meanings, by positive or negative analysis,
it will still be established that the Veda solely speaks
about Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa is the source of all knowledge and the only
subject of spiritual knowledge

sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanañ ca

vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham

BG 15.15


                          195
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

sarvasya—of all living beings; ca—and; aham—I; hṛdi—in
the heart; sanniviṣṭaḥ—situated; mattaḥ—from Me; smṛtiḥ—
remembrance; jñānam—knowledge; apohanam—forgetfulness;
ca—and; vedaiḥ—by the Vedas; ca—also; sarvaiḥ—all; aham—
I am; eva—certainly; vedyaḥ—knowable; vedānta-kṛt—the
compiler of the Vedānta; veda-vit—the knower of the
Vedas; eva—certainly; ca—and; aham—I.

I am seated in everyone’s heart, and from Me come
remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the
Vedas, I am to be known. Indeed, I am the compiler of
Vedānta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.



The following line from the above śloka is often quoted
on its own

vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

BG 15.15

“I am the only subject to be known in all the Vedas.”
(BPKG p. 356)



Kṛṣṇa’s opulence

raso —ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ

praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu śabdaḥ khe pauruṣaṁ nṛṣu

BG 7.8

rasaḥ—taste; aham—I; apsu—in water; kaunteya—O son of
Kuntī; prabhā—the light; asmi—I am; śaśi-sūryayoḥ—of the
moon and the sun; praṇavaḥ—the three letters a-u-m;
sarva—in all; vedeṣu—the Vedas; śabdaḥ—sound vibration;
khe—in the ether; pauruṣam—ability, manhood; nṛṣu—in
men.

O son of Kuntī, I am the taste of water (or the
embodiment of rasa), the light of the sun and the moon,
the syllable oṁ in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound in
ether and ability in man.



Thus ends section 1) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Svayaṁ Bhagavān




2) The Brahman Feature of Kṛṣṇa

Kṛṣṇa is the source of the impersonal Brahman

brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham amṛtasyāvyayasya ca

śāśvatasya ca dharmasya sukhasyaikāntikasya ca

BG 14.27/BPKG pp. 27, 357,450

                          196
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


brahmaṇaḥ—of the impersonal brahmajyoti; hi—certainly;
pratiṣṭhā—the basis; aham—I am; amṛtasya—of the
immortal; avyayasya—of the imperishable; ca—also;
śāśvatasya—of the eternal; ca—and; dharmasya—of the
constitutional position; sukhasya—of happiness;
aikāntikasya—ultimate; ca—also.

I alone am the basis of that nirviśeṣa-brahma and the
sole basis of everlasting immortality, eternal dharma
and the transcendental bliss of prema arising from
aikāntika-bhakti.

Kṛṣṇa’s effulgence is the source of Brahman

yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā 40/CC Ādi 2.14, Madhya 20.160/BPKG p.
27

yasya prabhā—whose effulgence; prabhavataḥ —emanating
from His effulgent form, which is replete with all
potencies; jagad-aṇḍa-koṭikoṭiṣu—within the millions and
millions of universes; aśeṣa-vasudhā-ādi-vibhūti-bhinnam
—and which is distinct from the unlimited opulences of
the planets such as the Earth; tat brahma—is that divine
light (Brahman); niṣkalam—which is free from all
inebriety; anantam—without limitation; aśeṣa-bhūtam—and
in complete existence (the Brahman that the Upaniṣads
describe as impersonal and without qualities (nirviśeṣa)
is constitutionally situated upon the spiritual form of
Śrī Govinda, which has all transcendental qualities (sa-
viśeṣa)); ādi-puruṣam govindam—the original Supreme
Person, Śrī Govinda; tam—of that; aham bhajāmi—I perform
bhajana.

I worship the original Personality, Śrī Govinda. The
nondifferentiated, impersonal Brahman described by the
Upaniṣads has originated from the radiance of His limbs.
That effulgence is distinct from the majestic opulence
of billions of worlds such as the Earth planet which
comprise the mundane realm, and is perceived as the
indivisible, unlimited, endless principle of truth.

The sādhaka considers Brahman realisation an obstacle to
bhakti

hiraṇmayena pātreṇa satyasyāpihitaṁ mukham

tat tvaṁ pūṣann apāvṛṇu satya-dharmāya dṛṣṭaye

Śrī Īśopaniṣad 15

hiraṇmayena—by a golden effulgence; pātreṇa—by a
dazzling covering; satyasya—of the Supreme Truth;
apihitam—covered; mukham—the face; tat—that covering;
tvam—Yourself; pūṣan—O sustainer; apāvṛṇu—kindly remove;
satya—pure; dharmāya—unto the devotee; dṛṣṭaye—for

                          197
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

exhibiting.

O my Lord, sustainer of all that lives, Your real face
is covered by Your dazzling effulgence. Kindly remove
that covering and exhibit Yourself to Your pure devotee.

brahma aṅga-kānti tāñra, nirviśeṣa prakāśe

sūrya yena carma-cakṣe jyotirmaya bhāse

CC Madhya 20.159

brahma—the impersonal Brahman effulgence; aṅga-kānti—the
bodily rays; tāñra—of Him; nirviśeṣa—without varieties;
prakāśe—manifestation; sūrya yena—exactly like the sun;
carma-cakṣe—with our ordinary material eyes; jyotiḥ-maya
—simply effulgent; bhāse—appears.

The manifestation of the impersonal Brahman effulgence,
which is without variety, is the rays of Kṛṣṇa's
personal bodily effulgence. It is exactly like the sun:
When the sun is seen by ordinary eyes, it appears to
only consist of effulgence. Similarly, when we view
divinity through ordinary eyes, we are unable to
penetrate its effulgence to see the beautiful form of
Kṛṣṇa within. Rather we are blinded by the powerful rays
of the impersonal Brahman.

Nirviśeṣa simply means Kṛṣṇa has no material qualities

sarvaiśvarya-paripūrṇa svayaṁ bhagavān

tāṅre nirākāra kari— karaha vyākhyāna

“nirviśeṣa— tāṅre kahe yei śruti-gaṇa

“prākṛta— niṣedhi kare “aprākṛta— sthāpana

CC Madhya 6.140-141

sarva-aiśvarya-paripūrṇa—full with all opulences; svayam
—personally; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tāṅre—Him; nirākāra—impersonal; kari——making;
karaha—you make; vyākhyāna—explanation; nirviśeṣa—
impersonal; tāṅre—Him; kahe—say; yei—whatever; śruti-
gaṇa—the Vedas; prākṛta—mundane; niṣedhi—forbidding;
kare—does; aprākṛta—transcendental; sthāpana—
confirmation.

The Supreme Lord Himself is complete in all divine
majesty, but you describe him as formless. Those
scriptures which say that He is impersonal are simply
condemning a material understanding of His form and
attributes and go on to say that His form and attributes
are transcendental and free of mundane characteristics.

yā yā śrutir jalpati nirviśeṣaṁ sā sābhidhatte sa-
viśeṣam eva

vicāra-yoge sati hanta tāsāṁ prāyo balīyaḥ sa-viśeṣam
eva

Hāyaśīrṣa-pañcarātra/Chaitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka, 6.67/
BTV p. 8

                          198
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Those Upanishads which describe the Absolute Truth as
formless and impersonal go on to prove in the end that
He is a person. Upon close analysis, it can be seen that
though both the personal and impersonal descriptions of
the Supreme are valid, the personal conception
ultimately predominates in these scriptures.

tāṅre 'nirviśeṣa' kahi, cic-chakti nā māni

ardha-svarūpa nā mānile pūrṇatā haya hāni

CC Ādi 7.140

tāṅre—unto Him; nirviśeṣa—impersonal; kahi—we say; cit-
śakti—spiritual energy; nā—do not; māni—accept; ardha—
half; svarūpa—form; nā—not; mānile—accepting; pūrṇatā—
fullness; haya—becomes; hāni—defective.

When one speaks of the Supreme as impersonal, one denies
His spiritual potencies. Logically, if you accept only
half the truth, you cannot understand the whole.

Thus ends section 2) The Brahman Feature of Kṛṣṇa




3) The Paramātmā Feature of Kṛṣṇa



kecit sva-dehāntar-hṛdayāvakāśe prādeśa-mātraṁ puruṣaṁ
vasantam

catur-bhujaṁ kañja-rathāṅga-śaṅkha-gadā-dharaṁ dhāraṇayā
smaranti

SB 2.2.8

kecit—others; sva-deha-antaḥ—within the body; hṛdaya-
avakāśe—in the region of the heart; prādeśa-mātram—
measuring only eight inches; puruṣam—the Personality of
Godhead; vasantam—residing; catuḥ-bhujam—with four
hands; kañja—lotus; ratha-aṅga—wheel, Cakra; śaṅkha—
conchshell; gadā-dharam—and with a club in the hand;
dhāraṇayā—conceiving in that way; smaranti—do meditate
upon Him.

Others conceive of the Personality of Godhead residing
within the body in the region of the heart and measuring
only eight inches, with four hands carrying a lotus, a
Cakra, a conch-shell and a club respectively.

ananta sphaṭike yaiche eka sūrya bhāse

taiche jīve govindera aṁśa prakāśe

CC Ādi 2.19

ananta—unlimited; sphaṭike—in crystals; yaiche—just as;
eka—one; sūrya—sun; bhāse—appears; taiche—just so; jīve—
in the living entity; govindera—of Govinda; aṁśa—

                          199
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

portion; prakāśe—manifests.

As the one sun appears reflected in countless jewels, so
Govinda manifests Himself through His plenary portion of
Paramātmā in the hearts of all living beings.

Brahman and Paramātmā are but partial aspects of
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇāṁṣaḥ paramātmā vai brahma taj-jyotir eva ca

paravyomādhipas tasyaiśvarya-mūrtir na saṁśayaḥ

Daśa-mūla tattva, ch. 3

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only Lord. Paramātmā is His part and
Brahman His effulgence. Śrī Nārāyaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha is the
majestic (aiśvarya) manifestation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The Veda
and other scriptures clearly show this, clearing all
doubt.

Thus ends section 3) The Paramātmā Feature of Kṛṣṇa



4) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Acintya - Inconceivable

Although existing within and without everything, You are
invisible

namasye puruṣaṁ tvādyam īśvaraṁ prakṛteḥ param

alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām antar bahir avasthitam

SB 1.8.18

[kuntī uvāca—Śrīmatī Kuntī said:] namasye—let me bow
down; puruṣam—the Supreme Person; tvā—You; ādyam—the
original; īśvaram—the controller; prakṛteḥ—of the
material world; param—beyond; alakṣyam—the invisible;
sarva—all; bhūtānām—of living beings; antaḥ—within;
bahiḥ—without; avasthitam—existing.

[Śrīmatī Kuntī devī   said:] O Kṛṣṇa, I offer my
obeisances unto You   because You are the original
Personality and are   unaffected by the qualities of the
material world. You   are existing both within and without
everything, yet You   are invisible to all.

You are covered by the curtain of Your deluding potency
māyā

māyā-javanikācchannam ajñādhokṣajam avyayam

na lakṣyase mūḍha-dṛśā naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā

SB 1.8.19

māyā—deluding potency; javanikā—curtain; ācchannam—
covered by; ajñā—ignorant; adhokṣajam—beyond the range
of material conception (transcendental); avyayam—
irreproachable; na—not; lakṣyase—observed; mūḍha-dṛśā—by
the foolish observer; naṭaḥ—a dancing actor; nāṭya-
dharaḥ—dressed as a player; yathā—as.

                            200
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Being beyond the range of the limited sense perception
of the ignorant materialist, You are the eternal
unchanging Personality who plays Your sweet pastimes
behind the curtain created by Your deluding potency. You
are invisible to the foolish observer, exactly as an
actor dressed as a player is not recognized.

Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form

avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto mama bhūta-maheśvaram

BG 9.11

avajānanti—deride; mām—Me; mūḍhāḥ—foolish men; mānuṣīm—
in a human form; tanum—a body; āśritam—assuming; param—
transcendental; bhāvam—nature; ajānantaḥ—not knowing;
mama—My; bhūta—of everything that be; mahā-īśvaram—the
supreme proprietor.

Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They
do not know My transcendental nature as the Supreme Lord
of all that be.

I do not manifest My personal form to the foolish and
unintelligent

nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ

mūḍho —yaṁ nābhijānāti loko mām ajam avyayam

BG 7.25

na—nor; aham—I; prakāśaḥ—manifest; sarvasya—to everyone;
yoga-māyā—by internal potency; samāvṛtaḥ—covered; mūḍhaḥ
—foolish; ayam—these; na—not; abhijānāti—can understand;
lokaḥ—persons; mām—Me; ajam—unborn; avyayam—
inexhaustible.

I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent.
For them I am covered by My internal potency, and
therefore they do not know that I am unborn and
infallible.

Although Kṛṣṇa is One, He inspires the jīvas with
various conceptions of Himself

tam imam aham ajaṁ śarīra-bhājāṁ

hṛdi hṛdi dhiṣṭhitam ātma-kalpitānām

pratidṛśam iva naikadhārkam ekaṁ

samadhi-gato 'smi vidhūta-bheda-mohaḥ

tam—that Personality of Godhead; imam—now present before
me; aham—I; ajam—the unborn; śarīra-bhājām—of the
conditioned soul; hṛdi hṛdi—in the heart of hearts;
dhiṣṭhitam—situated; ātma—the Supreme soul; kalpitānām—
of the conceptions; pratidṛśam—in every direction; iva—
like; na ekadhā—not one; arkam—the sun; ekam—one only;
samadhi-gataḥ asmi—I have undergone trance in

                          201
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

meditation; vidhūta—being freed from; bheda-mohaḥ—the
misconception of duality.

Now I am entering into the stage of trance and in this
stage my mind is being completely cleansed of all
duality. Now I am realising that it is You, Kṛṣṇa, who
is actually in the heart of every living being. You are
inside and outside of everything and everyone, and
although You are One, it is You who inspires them with
their various conceptions of You, just as the sun,
although one, may be perceived differently by different
people.




Kṛṣṇa’s body is not material but transcendental

ajo “pi sann avyayātmā bhūtānām īśvaro “pi san

prakṛtiṁ svām adhiṣṭhāya sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā

SBG 4.6

ajaḥ—unborn; api—although; san—being so; avyaya—(and
having) an imperishable; ātmā—body; bhūtānām—of all
beings; īśvaraḥ—the Supreme Lord; api—although; san—
being so; prakṛtim—in the transcendental form; svām—My
original; adhiṣṭhāya—being so situated; sambhavāmi—I do
manifest; ātma-māyayā—by My internal potency (Yogamāyā).

Although I am unborn, imperishable and the controller of
all living entities, I appear by My Yogamāyā potency in
My original sac-cid-ānanda-svarūpa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of all kinds of threes

svayan tv asāmyātiśayas try-adhīsaḥ

svārājya-lakṣmy-āpta-samasta-kāmaḥ

baliṁ haradbhiś cira-loka-pālaiḥ

kirīṭa-koṭy-eḍita-pāda-pīṭhaḥ

SB 3.2.21

svayam—Himself; tu—but; asāmya—unique; atiśayaḥ—greater;
tri-adhīśaḥ—Lord of the three; svārājya—independent
supremacy; lakṣmī—fortune; āpta—possessing; samasta-
kāmaḥ—all desires; balim—worshiping paraphernalia;
haradbhiḥ—offered by; cira-loka-pālaiḥ—by the presiding
deities of all planets; kirīṭa-koṭi—millions of helmets;
eḍita-pāda-pīṭhaḥ—feet honored by prayers.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of all kinds of threes and is
independently supreme, possessing all kinds of opulence.
He is worshiped by the presiding deities of all the
worlds, who offer Him the paraphernalia of worship by
touching their millions of helmets to His feet.

Kṛṣṇa’s birth and activities are transcendental


                          202
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

janma karma ca me divyam evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so —rjuna

BG 4.9

janma—birth; karma—work; ca—also; me—of Mine; divyam—
transcendental; evam—like this; yaḥ—anyone who; vetti—
knows; tattvataḥ—in reality; tyaktvā—leaving aside;
deham—this body; punaḥ—again; janma—birth; na—never; eti
—does attain; mām—unto Me; eti—does attain; saḥ—he;
arjuna—O Arjuna.

One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance
and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his
birth again in this material world, but attains My
eternal abode, O Arjuna.

Although evrything emanates from Him, Kṛṣṇa remains
perfectly complete

oṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate

pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate

Śrī Īśopaniṣad, Invocation

oṁ—the Complete Whole; pūrṇam—perfectly complete; adaḥ—
that; pūrṇam—perfectly complete; idam—this phenomenal
world; pūrṇāt—from the all-perfect; pūrṇam—complete
unit; udacyate—is produced; pūrṇasya—of the Complete
Whole; pūrṇam—completely, all; ādāya—having been taken
away; pūrṇam—the complete balance; eva—even; avaśiṣyate—
is remaining.

The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete, and
because He is completely perfect, all emanations from
Him, such as this phenomenal world, are perfectly
equipped as complete wholes. Whatever is produced of the
Complete Whole is also complete in itself. Because He is
the Complete Whole, even though so many complete units
emanate from Him, He remains perfectly complete.

Thus ends section 4) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Acintya -
Inconceivable




5) Four Famous Prayers Describing the Beauty of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa



Seeing Kṛṣṇa through the eyes of bhāva, the gopīs
describe His beauty:

barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ

bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām

randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopa-vṛndair


                             203
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ

SB 10.21.5(Veṇu-gīta)/CB Madhya 4.8/Śrī Bhajana-rahasya
6.16/GKH (P)

barha—a peacock feather; āpīḍam—wearing a head
decoration; naṭa-vara—skillful dancer (or expert in
loving affairs); vapuḥ—the transcendental body; karṇayoḥ
—on the ears; karṇikāram—yellow kanera flower; bibhrat—
wearing; vāsaḥ—garments; kanaka—like gold; kapiśam—
yellowish; vaijayantīm—named Vaijayantī (a garland made
with five kinds of forest flowers, extending down to the
knees); ca—and; mālām—the garland; randhrān—the holes;
veṇoḥ—of the flute; adhara—of His lips; sudhayā—with the
nectar; āpūrayan—filling up; gopa-vṛndaiḥ—with the
cowherd boys; vṛndā-araṇyam—the forest of Vṛndāvana
(presided over by Vṛndā-devī); sva-pada—marked by the
signs of His lotus feet, such as the conch and cakra;
ramaṇam—enchanting; prāviśat—He entered; gīta—singing;
kīrtiḥ—His glories.

Śyāmasundara is entering the forest of Vṛndāvana
accompanied by His cowherd boyfriends. He wears a
peacock feather in His turban, a yellow karṇikāra flower
on His ears, a yellow garment as brilliant as gold, and
a heart-stealing multicoloured garland strung with five
kinds of fragrant forest flowers. Thus He displays His
form as the greatest of dancers and the topmost expert
in amorous love. The nectar of His lips flows through
the holes of the flute and thus the glorious vibrations
of His flute-song echo throughout the forest groves.
Singing His glories, the cowherd boys follow from
behind. In this way, Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, which is more
charming than Vaikuṇṭha, becomes delighted by the touch
of His lotus feet.

The Dvija-patnīs of Mathurā describe Kṛṣṇa’s beauty as
follows:

śyāmaṁ hiraṇya-paridhiṁ vanamālya-barha-

dhātu-pravāla-naṭa-veṣam anuvratāṁse

vinyasta-hastam itareṇa dhunānam abjaṁ

karṇotpalālaka-kapola-mukhābja-hāsam

SB 10.23.22/CB Madhya 1.299/VG 5 pt/BMP p. 374/BR 6.15/
GKH (P)

śyāmam—dark blue in complexion; hiraṇya—golden; paridhim
—whose garment; vana-mālya—with a forest garland; barha—
peacock feather; dhātu—colored minerals; pravāla—and
sprigs of buds; naṭa—like a dancer upon the stage; veṣam
—dressed; anuvrata—of a friend; aṁse—upon the shoulder;
vinyasta—placed; hastam—His hand; itareṇa—with the
other; dhunānam—twirling; abjam—a lotus; karṇa—upon His
ears; utpala—lilies; alaka-kapola—with hair extending
over His cheeks; mukha-abja—upon His lotuslike face;
hāsam—having a smile.

Kṛṣṇa's complexion is a blackish-blue hue like a water-
laden raincloud, and His splendid cloth, appears like a
flash of lightning. Cresting His head is a peacock

                          204
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

feather, and each limb of His body is decorated with
exquisite patterns of paint made from coloured forest
minerals. Sprigs of new leaves and blossoms adorn His
body, and upon His neck an enchanting forest-flower
garland of five colours hangs down to His knees. Attired
in this way like a dramatic dancer, He rests one hand on
His friend’s shoulder, and with the other twirls a
pastime lotus [as if to twist our hearts]. Lilies grace
His ears, curly locks of hair splash against His cheeks,
and His lotus face blossoms with a gentle smile.

After the brahmā-vimohana-lilā, Brahmā offered this
prayer to Kṛṣṇa:

naumīḍya te —bhra-vapuṣe taḍid-ambarāya

guñjāvataṁsa-paripiccha-lasan-mukhāya

vanya-sraje kavala-vetra-viṣāṇa-veṇu-

lakṣma-śriye mṛdu-pade paśupāṅgajāya

SB 10.14.1/CB Mad 2.271/VG 5 pt/BMP p. 324/GKH (P)

śrī-brahmā uvāca—Lord Brahmā said; naumi—I offer praise;
īḍya—O most worshipable one, my Iṣṭadeva; te—unto You;
abhra—like a dark cloud; vapuṣe—whose body; taḍit—like
lightning; ambarāya—whose garment; guñjā—made of small
guñjā berries [guñjā berries indicate Rādhikā]; avataṁsa
—with ornaments (for the ears); paripiccha—and peacock
feathers; lasat—resplendent; mukhāya—whose face; vanya-
sraje—wearing garlands of forest flowers; kavala—a
morsel of food; vetra—a stick; viṣāṇa—a buffalo-horn
bugle; veṇu—and a flute; lakṣma—characterized by; śriye—
whose beauty; mṛdu—soft; pade—whose feet; paśu-pa—of the
cowherd; aṅga-jāya—unto the son.

O Lord, You are fit to receive the worship of the entire
universe. O son of the king of cowherds, Your
transcendental body is dark blue like a new cloud, Your
garment is brilliant like lightning, and the beauty of
Your face is enhanced by Your guñja earrings and the
peacock feather on Your head. Wearing garlands of
various forest flowers and leaves, and equipped with a
herding stick, a buffalo horn, a flute, and a morsel of
grain mixed with yogurt in Your hand, You are most
attractive. Your lotus feet are very soft. I offer my
prayers unto You.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “These are three extraordinary
descriptions of Kṛṣṇa’s form and beauty, but if we
compare them from a neutral point of view, it becomes
evident that the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s beauty as
manifested in the heart of the gopīs is the topmost.
Brahmā’s prayer is at the bottom, the wives of the
brāhmaṇas (dvija-patnīs) is in the middle, and the
topmost is the description of Kṛṣṇa by the gopīs. We are
following the gopīs, not Brahmā or the dvija-patnīs.”
(VG 5, pt).



Kṛṣṇa’s beauty is the sweetest when He is together with
the Gopīs, appearing as the Cupid of all Cupids

                          205
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


tāsām āvirabhūc chauriḥ

smayamāna-mukhāmbujaḥ

pītāmbara-dharaḥ sragvī

sākṣān manmatha-manmathaḥ

SB 10.32.2/CC Ādi 5.214, Madhya 8.81, 8.140/BR 7.17

tāsām—before them; āvirabhūt—He appeared; śauriḥ—Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; smayamāna—smiling; mukha—His face; ambujaḥ—lotus-
like; pīta—yellow; ambara—a garment; dharaḥ—wearing;
srak-vī—wearing a flower garland; sākṣāt—directly; man-
matha—of Cupid (who bewilders the mind); man—of the
mind; mathaḥ—the bewilderer.

Just then, Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared in the midst of the gopīs.
His lotus face blossomed with a mild, gentle smile.
Hanging from His neck was a garland of forest flowers,
and He wore a golden-yellow garment (pītāmbara). What
was the nature of His beauty? That beauty bewilders and
captures the mind of Kāmadeva (Cupid), who himself
bewilders and captures the minds of everyone.

Thus ends section 5) Four Famous Prayers




6) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Mercy

Kṛṣṇa can only be known by His mercy

īśvarera kṛpā-leśa haya ta— yāhāre

sei ta— īśvara-tattva jānibāre pāre

CC Madhya 6.83

īśvarera—of the Personality of Godhead; kṛpā-leśa—a
little mercy; haya—there is; ta——certainly; yāhāre—upon
whom; sei ta——he certainly; īśvara-tattva—the Absolute
Truth; jānibāre—to know; pāre—is able.

The Ācārya continued, “If one receives but a tiny bit of
the Lord’s favor by dint of devotional service, he can
understand the nature of the Supreme Controller”

Kṛṣṇa awards a divine destination even to His enemies

aho bakī yaṁ stana-kāla-kūṭaṁ

jighāṁsayāpāyayad apy asādhvī

lebhe gatiṁ dhātry-ucitāṁ tato —nyaṁ

kaṁ vā dayāluṁ śaraṇaṁ vrajema

SB 3.2.23/CB Mad 7.76/CC Madhya 22.98/PJ 5.9/STB p. 39

aho—how wonderful; bakī—Pūtanā, the sister of Bakāsura;

                            206
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

yam—whom; stana—on the two breasts; kāla-kūṭam—the
deadly poison; jighāṁsayā—with a desire to kill;
apāyayat—forced to drink; api—although; asādhvī—very
impure or dangerously inimical to Kṛṣṇa; lebhe—achieved;
gatim—the destination; dhātrī—for a nurse; ucitām—
suitable; tataḥ—than Him; anyam—other; kam—to whom; vā—
or; dayālum—merciful; śaraṇam—shelter; vrajema—I shall
take.

How astonishing! When Pūtana, the wicked sister of
Bakāsura, tried to kill child Kṛṣṇa by offering Him
deadly poison on her breast, He bestowed upon her the
position of His nursemaid. Could I ever have as merciful
a shelter as that of Lord Kṛṣṇa? 16



athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva
hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno na cānya eko “pi ciraṁ
vicinvan

SB 10.14.29/CC Madhya 6.84/JD ch. 14

atha—therefore; api—indeed; te—Your; deva—my Lord; pada-
ambuja-dvaya—of the two lotus feet; prasāda—of the
mercy; leśa—by only a trace; anugṛhītaḥ—favored; eva—
certainly; hi—indeed; jānāti—one knows; tattvam—the
truth; bhagavat—of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; mahimnaḥ—of the
greatness; na—never; ca—and; anyaḥ—another; ekaḥ—one;
api—although; ciram—for a long period; vicinvan—
speculating.

[Lord Brahmā said:] “My Lord, if one is favored by even
a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus feet, he can
understand the greatness of Your personality. But those
who speculate are unable to know you, even though they
study the Vedas for many years.”



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s waves of mercy give hope to this hopeless
wretch

pracīnānāṁ bhajanam atulaṁ duṣkaraṁ śṛṇvato me

nairāśyena jvalati hṛdayaṁ bhakti-leśālasasya

viśva-drīcīm agha-hara tavākarṇya kāruṇya-vīcīm

āśā-bindūkṣitam idam upety antare hanta śaityam

Tri-bhaṅgī-pañcakam (supl. 2), Stava-mālā, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī/MS 9 pt/PJ 5.18

pracīnānām— of the great devotees in ancient times;
bhajanam— devotional service; atulam—incomparable;
duṣkaram—difficult to perform; śṛṇvataḥ—hearing; me—of
me; nairāśyśena—with despair; jvalati—burns; hṛdayam—the
heart; bhakti—of devotion; leśa—a small portion;
alasasya—weak and indolent; viśva-drīcīm—from Brahma
down to the most insignificant creature; aghahara—O
killer of Aghasura; tava—of You; akarṇya—hearing;

                          207
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

karuṇya—of mercy; vīcīm—waves; āśā—of hope; bindu—by a
drop; ukṣitam—sprinkled; idam—this; upeti—attains;
antare—within; hanta—indeed; śaityam—coolness.

O slayer of Aghāsura (or the destroyer of sins)! When I
hear of the extremely rigorous sādhana and bhajana
undertaken by great souls like Śrī Śuka and Mahārāja
Ambarīṣa in former times, my heart which is devoid of
any trace of bhakti becomes stricken with remorse and
hopelessness because such difficult sādhana and bhajana
will never be possible for me. Thus I feel that I will
never be able to obtain Your lotus feet. But when I see
the waves of mercy You have diffused everywhere from
Brahmā down to the most heinous sinners, my heart
becomes pacified again and instilled with a ray of hope.



When Kṛṣṇa especially favours someone He takes away
everything material

yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ

tato —dhanaṁ tyajanty asya svajanā duḥkha-duḥkhitam

SB 10.88.8

[śrī-bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said]; yasya—whom; aham
—I; anugṛhṇāmi—favor; hariṣye—I will take away; tat—his;
dhanam—wealth; śanaiḥ—gradually; tataḥ—then; adhanam—
poor; tyajanti—abandon; asya—his; sva-janāḥ—relatives
and friends; duḥkha-duḥkhitam—who suffers one distress
after another.

[Śrī Kṛṣṇa told Indradeva:] If I especially favour
someone, I gradually deprive him of his wealth. Then the
relatives and friends abandon that poverty-stricken
devotee who is deeply affected by distress.

Queen Kuntī-devī prays for calamities, seeing it as
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy

vipadaḥ santu tāḥ śaśvat tatra tatra jagad-guro

bhavato darśanaṁ yat syād apunar bhava-darśanam

SB 1.8.25

vipadaḥ—calamities; santu—let there be; tāḥ—all; śaśvat—
forever; tatra—there; tatra—and there; jagat-guro—O Lord
of the universe; bhavataḥ—Your; darśanam—meeting; yat—
that which; syāt—is; apunaḥ—not again; bhava-darśanam—
seeing repetition of birth and death.

[Queen Kuntī prayed to Kṛṣṇa:] “I wish that all those
calamities would happen again and again so that we could
see You again and again, for seeing You means that we
will no longer see repeated births and deaths.”



mūkaṁ karoti vācālaṁ paṅguṁ laṅghayate girim

yat-kṛpā tam ahaṁ vande paramānanda-mādhavam

                          208
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Gītā Dhyānaṁ 8, Śaṅkarācārya/Bhāvārtha-dīpikā, Maṅgala
Stot. 1/BB 2.2.93/CC Madhya 17.80

mūkam—a person who cannot speak; karoti—makes; vācālam—
an eloquent speaker; paṅgum—a person who cannot even
walk; laṅghayate—causes to cross over; girim—the
mountain; yat-kṛpā—whose mercy; tam—unto Him; aham—I;
vande—offer obeisances; parama-ānanda—supremely,
transcendentally blissful; mādhavam—Śrī Mādhava (Kṛṣṇa,
the lover of Śrīmatī Rādhikā).

Śrī Mādhava is the personification of supreme
transcendental bliss. I offer my respectful obeisances
unto Him, who turns the dumb into eloquent speakers and
enables the lame to cross mountains. Such is the mercy
of the Lord.

Thus ends section 6) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Mercy



7) Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa



The Absolute Truth is Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇera svarūpa-vicāra śuna, sanātana

advaya-jñāna-tattva, vraje vrajendra-nandana

CC Mad 20.152/BPKG p. 24

kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; svarūpa-vicāra—consideration of
the eternal form; śuna—please hear; sanātana—My dear
Sanātana; advaya-jñāna-tattva—the Absolute Truth without
duality; vraje—in Vṛndāvana; vrajendra-nandana—the son
of Nanda Mahārāja.

“O Sanātana, please hear about the eternal form of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. He is the Absolute Truth, devoid of duality, and
He is present in Vṛndāvana as the son of Nanda
Mahārāja.”

Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī kṛṣṇa is the reservoir of all rasa

svayaṁ bhagavān kṛṣṇa - sarvāṁśī, sarvāśraya

viśuddha-nirmala-prema, sarva-rasamaya

CC Mad 15.139

svayaṁ bhagavān kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; sarva-aṁśī—the source of all
others; sarva-āśraya—the reservoir of all energies;
viśuddha—transcendental; nirmala—free from all material
contamination; prema—ecstatic transcendental love;
sarva-rasa-maya—the reservoir of all rasa.

“Kṛṣṇa the Supreme Personality of Godhead (svayaṁ
bhagavān), is the origin of all incarnations and the
source of everything. He is pure transcendental love
itself, and He is the reservoir of all rasa.”

                           209
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇa the Absolute Truth, the possessor of all
potencies, is also an ocean of rasa

āmnāyaḥ prāha tattvaṁ harim iha paramaṁ sarva-śaktiṁ
rasābdhiṁ

Daśa mūla, Invocation (see ch. 4 for the full śloka)

āmnāyaḥ—the Vedas; prāha—proclaim; tattvam—Absolute
Truth; harim—Śrī Hari; iha—here; paramaṁ—the Supreme;
sarva-śaktim—the possessor of all potencies; rasābdhim—
an ocean of rasa.

The Vedas proclaim that Śrī Hari (Kṛṣṇa) alone is the
Supreme Absolute Truth. He is the possessor of all
potencies and He is the ocean of nectarean rasa (the
mellows of love).

Kṛṣṇa’s human-like form is the supreme transcendental
form

kṛṣṇera yat eka khelā, sarvottama nara-līlā,

nara-vapu tāhāra svarūpa

gopa-veśa, veṇu-kara, nava-kiśora, naṭa-vara,

nara-līlāra haya anurūpa

CC Mad 21.101/BPKG p. 154

kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; yat eka—all; khelā—pastimes;
sarva-uttama—the most attractive of all; nara-līlā—the
pastimes as a human being; nara-vapu—a body just like
that of a human being; tāhāra—of that; svarūpa—the real
form; gopa-veśa—the dress of a cowherd boy; veṇu-kara—
with a flute in the hands; nava-kiśora—newly youthful;
naṭa-vara—an expert dancer; nara-līlāra—for exhibiting
the pastimes as a human being; haya—is; anurūpa—
suitable.

Lord Kṛṣṇa has many pastimes, of which His pastimes as a
human being are the best. His form as a human being is
the supreme transcendental form. In this form He is a
cowherd boy. He carries a flute in His hand, and His
youth is ever-new. He is also an expert dancer. All this
is just suitable for His pastimes as a human being.

Kṛṣṇa never leaves Vṛndāvana

vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya naiva gacchāmy ahaṁ kvacit

nivasāmy anayā sārdhaṁ aham atraiva sarvadā

Śrī Sanatkumāra saṁhita, Pañcarātra

vṛndāvanam—Vṛndāvana; parityajya—leaving; na—not; eva—
indeed; gacchāmi—go; aham—I; kvacit—anyplace; nivasāmi—I
stay; anayā—Her; sārdham—with; aham—I; atra—here; eva—
indeed; sarvadā—always.

I never take even a single step out of Vṛndāvana.
Accompanied by Śrī Rādhā, I stay here eternally.

                            210
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


vṛndāvanam parityajya padam ekam na gacchati

Mahājana vākya

Kṛṣṇa never takes a step out of Vṛndāvana.



Editorial note: Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā is pūrṇa - full,
complete. In Mathurā He is pūrṇottara - fuller, more
complete. But in Vṛndāvana He is pūrṇottama - fullest,
the most complete.

The original form of Kṛṣṇa is Vrajendra-nandana holding
a flute in two hands

kṛṣṇo —nyo yadu-sambhūto

yaḥ pūrṇaḥ so —sty ataḥ paraḥ (or:) yas tu gopendra-
nandanaḥ

vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya

sa kvacin naiva gacchati

Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta 1.5.461/ CC Antya 1.67/VG p. 57

kṛṣṇaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa; anyaḥ—another (Lord Vāsudeva); yadu-
sambhūtaḥ—born in the Yadu dynasty; yaḥ—who; pūrṇaḥ—the
full Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; saḥ—He; asti
—is; ataḥ—than Him (Vāsudeva); paraḥ—different;
vṛndāvanam—the place Vṛndāvana; parityajya—giving up;
saḥ—He; kvacit—at any time; na eva gacchati—does not go.

The Kṛṣṇa known as Yadu-kumāra is Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa. He is
different from the Kṛṣṇa who is the son of Nanda
Mahārāja. Yadu-kumāra Kṛṣṇa manifests His pastimes in
the cities of Mathurā and Dvārakā, but Kṛṣṇa the son of
Nanda Mahārāja never at any time leaves Vṛndāvana.



Kṛṣṇa is always accompanied by Śrīmatī Rādhikā

dvi-bhujaḥ sarvadā so 'tra na kādacit catur-bhūjaḥ

gopyaikayā yutas tatra parikrīḍati nityadā

Laghu-Bhāgavatāmṛta, Pūrva-khaṇḍa 165

That original form of Kṛṣṇa always manifests two arms.
He never manifests four arms; He is always at the right
hand side of the foremost gopī, Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Thus ends section 7) Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa




8) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Controlled by the Prema of the
Vrajavāsis


                           211
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017



How fortunate are the Vrajavāsīs, the Absolute Truth has
become their friend

aho bhāgyam aho bhāgyaṁ nanda-gopa-vrajaukasām

yan-mitraṁ paramānandaṁ pūrṇaṁ brahma sanātanam

SB 10.14.32/CC Mad 6.149/BPKG pp. 123, 215,509

aho—what great; bhāgyam—fortune; aho—what great; bhāgyam
—fortune; nanda—of Mahārāja Nanda; gopa—of the other
cowherd men; vraja-okasām—of the inhabitants of
Vrajabhūmi; yat—of whom; mitram—the friend; parama-
ānandam—the supreme bliss; pūrṇam—complete; brahma—the
Absolute Truth; sanātanam—eternal.

“How greatly fortunate are Nanda Mahārāja, the cowherd
men and all the other inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi! There
is no limit to their good fortune, because the Absolute
Truth, the source of transcendental bliss, the eternal
Supreme Brahman, has become their friend.”

The fortune of Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā

nandaḥ kim akarod brahman śreya evaṁ mahodayam

yaśodā ca mahā-bhāgā papau yasyāḥ stanaṁ hariḥ

SB 10.8.46/CC Mad 8.77

śrī-rājā uvāca—Mahārāja Parīkṣit further inquired (from
Śukadeva Gosvāmī); nandaḥ—Mahārāja Nanda; kim—what;
akarot—performed; brahman—O learned brāhmaṇa; śreyaḥ—
auspicious activities, like performing penances and
austerities; evam—as exhibited by him; mahā-udayam—from
which they achieved the greatest perfection; yaśodā—
mother Yaśodā; ca—also; mahā-bhāgā—most fortunate; papau
—drank; yasyāḥ—of whom; stanam—the breast milk; hariḥ—
Śrī Hari.

[Having heard of the great fortune of mother Yaśodā,
Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī:] O
learned brāhmaṇa, mother Yaśodā’s breast milk was sucked
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What past
auspicious activities did she and Nanda Mahārāja perform
to achieve such perfection in ecstatic love?




The Supreme Īśvara, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is controlled by the love
of His mother

namāmīśvaraṁ sac-cid-ānanda-rūpaṁ

lasat-kuṇḍalaṁ gokule bhrājamānam

yaśodā-bhiyolūkhalād dhāvamānaṁ

parāmṛṣtam atyantato-drutya gopyā


                          212
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam 1/STB p. 84/SGG p. 142

namāmi—I bow down; īśvaram—to the Supreme Lord; sac-cid-
ānanda-rūpam— Who is the embodiment of eternity,
knowledge and bliss; lasat-kundalam—with swinging
earrings; gokule—in Gokula; bhrājamānam—Who shines;
yaśodā-bhiyā—in fear of Yaśodā; ulūkhalād—from the
mortar; dhāvamānam—running away; para-amṛṣṭam—was caught
from behind; atyantataḥ-drutya—running faster; gopyā—by
the gopī (Mother Yaśoda).

I worship the Supreme Īśvara, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose form is
sac-cid-ānanda, whose shark-shaped earrings swing and
play upon His cheeks, who shines in the transcendental
dhāma of Gokula, who, due to breaking the yogurt pot, is
very fearful of Mother Yaśodā and jumping down from the
wooden grinding mortar quickly runs away, being chased
by mother Yaśodā, who hastily runs after Him, and is
ultimately caught and bound.

Let me worship Nanda Bābā, in whose courtyard Parama
Brahma is crawling

śrutim apare smṛtim itare bhāratam anye bhajantu bhava-
bhītāḥ

aham iha nandaṁ vande yasyālinde paraṁ brahma

CC Madhya 19.96/Padyāvalī 126/BMP p. 247

śrutim—Vedic literature; apare—someone; smṛtim—corollary
to the Vedic literature; itare—others; bhāratam—the
Mahābhārata; anye—still others; bhajantu—let them
worship; bhava-bhītāḥ—those who are afraid of material
existence; aham—I; iha—here; nandam—Mahārāja Nanda;
vande—worship; yasya—whose; alinde—in the courtyard;
param brahma—the Supreme Brahman, Absolute Truth.

[Raghupati Upādhyāya recited:] “Those who are afraid of
material existence worship the Vedic literature. Some
worship the śrutis and smṛtis, and others worship the
Mahābhārata. Let them do so. As far as I am concerned, I
will always worship Kṛṣṇa’s father, Nanda Bābā, in whose
courtyard Parama Brahma, the Absolute Truth, is crawling
here and there on His knees.”

Thus ends 8) Kṛṣṇa is Controlled by the Love of the
Vrajavāsis

9) Prayers in Glorification of Śrī Kṛṣṇa

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu glorified Kṛṣṇa at the Ratha-
Yātrā in Puri

namo brahmaṇya-devāya

go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca

jagad-dhitāya kṛṣṇāya

govindāya namo namaḥ

Viṣṇu Purāṇa 1.19.65/CC Mad 13.77


                          213
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

namaḥ—all obeisances; brahmaṇya-devāya—to the Lord
worshipable by persons in brahminical culture; go-
brāhmaṇa—for cows and brāhmaṇas; hitāya—beneficial; ca—
also; jagat-hitāya—to benefactor of the whole world;
kṛṣṇāya—unto Kṛṣṇa; govindāya—unto Govinda; namaḥ namaḥ—
repeated obeisances.

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Kṛṣṇa,
who is the worshipable Deity for all persons inclined to
spiritual development, who is the well-wisher of the
cows and brāhmaṇas, who is the benefactor of all the
living beings of the world and is thus known known as
Govinda.



Those who continuously hear and glorify Your activities
will see Your lotus feet

śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanty abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

smaranti nandanti tavehitaṁ janāḥ

ta eva paśyanty acireṇa tāvakaṁ

bhava-pravāhoparamaṁ padāmbujam

SB 1.8.36

śṛṇvanti—hear; gāyanti—chant; gṛṇanti—take; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ—
continuously; smaranti—remember; nandanti—take pleasure;
tava—Your; īhitam—activities; janāḥ—people in general;
te—they; eva—certainly; paśyanti—can see; acireṇa—very
soon; tāvakam—Your; bhava-pravāha—the current of
rebirth; uparamam—cessation; pada-ambujam—lotus feet.

O Kṛṣṇa, those who continuously hear, chant and repeat
Your transcendental activities, or take pleasure in
others— doing so, certainly see Your lotus feet, which
alone can stop the repetition of birth and death.



Vraja-vipina-candraṁ smara: Remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the moon
of the forest of Vraja

nava-jaladhara-varṇaṁ campakodbhāsi-karṇaṁ

vikasita-nalināsyaṁ visphuran-manda-hāsyam

kanaka-ruci-dukūlaṁ cāru-barhāvacūlaṁ

kamapi nikhila-sāraṁ naumi gopī-kumāram

Mukunda-muktāvalī 1, Śrī Stava-mālā, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī/
MS 9 pt

nava—new; jaladhara—cloud; varṇam—color; campaka—campaka
flower; udbhāsi—shining; karṇam—ear; vikasita—
blossoming; nalina—lotus; asyam—face; visphuran—
manifesting; manda—gentle; hāsyam—smile; kanaka—gold;
ruci—splendor; dukūlam—garments; cāru—beautiful; barha—
peacock feather; avacūlam—crown; kam api—someone;
nikhila—of all; sāram—the best; naumi—I praise; gopī—of

                          214
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

the gopī; kumāram—the son.

I worship a gopī’s darling son whose complexion is like
that of a fresh raincloud, whose attractive ears are
decorated with campaka flowers, upon whose blossoming
lotus face a mild smile shines, who wears a yellow
garment which resembles the lustre of molten gold, whose
head is adorned with a crown of beautiful peacock
feathers, and who is the quintessence of the three
worlds.

Who is an ocean of elegance suitable for the enactment
of amorous pastimes

mukha-jita-śarad-induḥ keli-lāvaṇya-sindhuḥ

kara-vinihita-kandur ballavī-prāṇabandhuḥ

vapu-rūpa-sṛta-reṇuḥ kakṣa-nikṣipta-veṇur

vacana-vaśaga-dhenuḥ pātu māṁ nanda-sūnuḥ

Mukunda-muktāvalī 2, Śrī Stava-mālā, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī/MS
9 pt

mukha—by the face; jita—defeated; śarat—autumn; induḥ—
moon; keli—pastimes; lavaṇya—handsomeness; sindhuḥ—
ocean; kara—in His hand; vinihita—placed; kanduḥ—a toy
ball; ballavī—of the gopis; prāṇa—the life; bandhuḥ—
friend; vapuḥ—body; upasṛta—placed; reṇuḥ—dust; kakṣa—on
His side; nikṣipta—placed; veṇuḥ—flute; vacana—by His
words; vaśa-ga—controlled; dhenuḥ—the cows; pātu—may
protect; mām—me; nanda—of Nanda; sunuḥ—the son.

May I be protected by that Śrī Nanda-nandana whose face
defeats the effulgence of the autumn moon, who is an
ocean of elegance suitable for the enactment of playful
amorous pastimes, who holds a ball (of flowers) in His
hand, who is the life and soul of the vraja-ramaṇīs,
whose body is beautified by the dust raised from the
hooves of the cows, whose flute is tucked in His belt,
and who directs the cows by His melodious voice.

Kṛṣṇa is the ornament of the gopīs— heart

śravasoḥ kuvalayam akṣṇor añjanam

uraso mahendra-maṇi-dāma

vṛndāvana-ramaṇīnāṁ maṇḍanam

akhilaṁ harir jayati

CC Antya 16.74 (spoken by Kavi-karṇapūra at the age of
seven, by Mahāprabhu’s mercy)

śravasoḥ—of the two ears; kuvalayam—blue lotus flowers;
akṣṇoḥ—of the two eyes; añjanam—ointment; urasaḥ—of the
chest; mahendra-maṇi-dāma—a necklace of indranīla gems;
vṛndāvana-ramaṇīnām—of the gopīs of Vraja; maṇḍanam—
ornament; akhilam—all; hariḥ jayati—all glories to Hari,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is just like a bluish lotus flower for the

                             215
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

ears; He is ointment for the eyes, a necklace of
indranīla gems for the chest, and the ornament of the
gopīs— heart. Let that Śrī Hari, Kṛṣṇa, be glorified.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dhyāna

barhāpīḍābhirāmaṁ mṛga-mada-tilakaṁ kuṇḍalākrānta-gaṇḍaṁ

kañjākṣaṁ kambu-kaṇṭhaṁ smita-subhaga-mukhaṁ svādhare
nyasta-veṇum

śyāmaṁ śāntaṁ tri-bhaṅgaṁ ravi-kara-vasanaṁ bhūṣitaṁ
vaijayantyā

vande vṛndāvana-sthaṁ yuvati-śata-vṛṭaṁ brahma gopāla-
veśam

Śrī Stava-kalpa-druma/SGG p. 9

I worship that Parabrahma — whose crown is decorated
with a peacock feather, whose large forehead is marked
with tilaka of musk, whose shark-shaped earrings swing
around His neck, whose eyes resemble lotus flowers,
whose neck has three lines like a conchshell, whose
lotus face is graced with a gentle smile, who holds a
flute to His bimba fruit-like lips, whose bodily
complexion is like that of a fresh monsoon cloud, who is
supremely peaceful, who stands in a delightful three-
fold bending posture, whose yellow cloth is resplendent
like the rays of the sun, who is adorned with a victory
flower garland, who is surrounded on all sides by
hundreds of gopīs, and who resides in Śrī Dhāma-
Vṛndāvana in the guise a cowherd.

He is surrounded by countless cowherd maidens - the
gopīs

kasturī-tilakaṁ lalāṭa-paṭale vakṣaḥ-sthale kaustubhaṁ

nāsāgre vara-mauktikaṁ kara-tale veṇuḥ kare kaṅkaṇam

sarvāṅge hari-candanaṁ sulalitaṁ kaṇṭhe ca muktāvalī

gopa-strī-pariveṣṭito vijayate gopāla-cūḍāmaṇiḥ

Śrī Gopāla Sahasra nāma 28/SGG p. 9

His forehead is decorated with musk tilaka, upon His
chest rests the Kaustubha jewel, an exquisite pearl
adorns the tip of His nose, His lotus hand holds the
flute, bracelets adorn His wrists, His entire form is
anointed with candana, a necklace of pearls graces His
very charming neck, and He is surrounded by cowherd
maidens — all glories unto He who is the crest jewel of
cowherd boys!

Tri-bhaṅga-lalitam

vaṁśī-nyastāsya-candraṁ smita-yutam atulaṁ pīta-vastraṁ
vareṇyaṁ

kañjākṣaṁ sarva-dakṣaṁ nava-ghana-sadṛśaṁ barha-cūḍaṁ
śaraṇyam


                          216
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

trai-bhaṅgair bhaṅgimāṅgaṁ vraja-yuvati-yutaṁ dhvasta-
keśyādi-śūraṁ

vande śrī-nanda-sūnuṁ madhura-rasa-tanuṁ dhurya-
mādhurya-pūram

Śrī Stava-kalpa-druma/SGG p. 10

I worship Śrī Nanda-nandana, who holds a flute to His
lips, whose gentle smile exudes an incomparable
brilliance, who is attired in excellent yellow cloth,
whose eyes are like lotuses, who is expert in all the
arts, whose bodily complexion is like that of a fresh
monsoon cloud, whose head is adorned with a peacock-
feather crown, who is the shelter for those who are
surrendered to Him, who stands in a delightful three-
fold bending posture, who is surrounded by the youthful
maidens of Vraja, who subdues demons such as Keśī, who
is the abode of infinite sweetness and the very
embodiment of mādhurya-rasa.

He whose handsome form the gopīs worship with sidelong
glances

phullendīvara-kāntim indu-vadanaṁ barhāvataṁsa-priyaṁ

śrī-vatsāṇkam udāra-kaustubha-dharaṁ pītāmbaraṁ sundaram

gopīnāṁ nayanotpalārcita-tanuṁ go-gopa-saṅghāvṛtaṁ

govindaṁ kala-veṇu-vādana-paraṁ divyāṅga-bhūṣaṁ bhaje

Padyāvalī 46 (Śrī Śāradākāra)/BMP p. 289/SGG p. 10

phulla—blossoming; indīvara—of a blue lotus flower;
kāntim—the splendor; indu—moon; vadanam—whose face;
barha—peacock feather; avataṁsa—crown; priyam—fond;
śrīvatsa—of Śrīvatsa; aṅkam—with mark; udāra—large;
kaustubha—Kaustubha gem; dharam—wearing; pīta—yellow;
ambaram—with garments; sundaram—handsome; gopīnām—of the
gopīs; nayana—of the eyes; utpala—with the lotus
flowers; arcita—worshiped; tanum—whose transcendental
form; go—of surabhi cows; gopa—and the cowherds; saṅgha—
with the hosts; āvṛtam—surrounded; govindam—Kṛṣṇa; kala—
sweet; veṇu—of the flute; vādana—of music; param—
absorbed; divya—glittering; aṅga—of the body; bhūṣam—
with ornaments; bhaje—I worship.

I worship Govinda, whose complexion is the colour of a
blossoming blue lotus flower, whose face is like the
moon, who is fond of wearing a peacock feather in His
crown, whose chest bears the mark of Śrīvatsa and is
adorned with the Kaustubha gem, who is attired in
beautiful yellow garments, whose sublime form the gopīs
worship with sidelong glances, who is surrounded by
multitudes of cows and gopas, who is absorbed in playing
sweet melodies on the flute, and whose body is decorated
with divine ornaments.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Praṇāma

namo nalina-netrāya veṇu-vādya-vinodinī

rādhādhara-sudhā-pāna-śāline vana-māline

                          217
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Padyāvalī 2/SGG p. 10

namaḥ—obeisances; nalina—lotus flowers; netrāya—eyes;
veṇu—flute; vādya—music; vinodinī—pastimes; rādhā—of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; adhara—of the lips; sudhā—nectar;
pāna—drinking; śāline—expert; vana-māline—wearing a
garland of forest flowers.

To Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose eyes are beautiful as lotus flowers,
who delights in playing the flute, who drinks the nectar
of Śrī Rādhā’s lips, and who is garlanded with forest
flowers, I offer respectful obeisances.

kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya haraye paramātmane

praṇata-kleśa-nāśāya govindāya namo namaḥ

Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.73.16/SGG p. 10

kṛṣṇāya—to Kṛṣṇa; vāsudevāya—the son of Vasudeva; haraye
—the Supreme Lord, Hari; parama-ātmane—the Supersoul;
praṇata—of those who have surrendered; kleśa—of the
distress; nāśāya—to the destroyer; govindāya—to Govinda
(He who delights the cows, senses and Vrajavāsīs); namaḥ
namaḥ—repeated obeisances.

Time and again I offer praṇāmas unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
appears to be the son of Vasudeva, who is Hari the thief
of illusion, who is the ultimate Person, who removes the
material distress of souls surrendered to Him, and who
gives pleasure to the cows, the senses and the residents
of Vraja, the gopas and gopīs.

kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya devakī-nandanāya ca

nanda-gopa-kumārāya govindāya namo namaḥ

SB 1.8.21/Garga-saṁhitā 6.1.1

kṛṣṇāya—the the all-attractive; vāsudevāya—to the son of
Vasudeva; devakī-nandanāya—unto the son of Devakī; ca—
and; nanda-gopa—of Nanda and the cowherd men; kumārāya—
unto their son; govindāya—unto Śrī Govinda, who enlivens
the cows and the senses; namaḥ—obeisances; namaḥ—
obeisances.

Let me therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto the
Lord, who has become the son of Vasudeva, the pleasure
of Devakī, the boy of Nanda and the other cowherd men of
Vṛndāvana, and the enlivener of the cows and the senses.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Vandanā

rādhikā-vadana-candra-cakoraḥ sarva-ballava-vadhū-dhṛti-
cauraḥ

carcarī caturatāñcita-cārī cāruto jayati kuñja-bihārī

Śrī Kuñja Bihāri-aṣṭakam (2), Stavamāla, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī

rādhikā—of Rādhā; vadana—of the face; candra—the moon;
cakoraḥ—the cakora bird; sarva—all; ballava-vadhū—the

                          218
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

gopīs; dhṛti—the peacefulness; cauraḥ—stealing; carcarī—
the rhythm known as such; caturatāñcita—with skill; cārī
—doing; cārutaḥ—expertly.

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,   who enjoys transcendental
pastimes in the Vṛndāvana   forest. He is the cakora bird
that drinks the moonlight   of Śrī Rādhikā’s face. He
steals away the composure   of all the gopīs. Skillfully
clapping His hands in the   carcarī rhythm, He dances
gracefully.

Thus ends section 9) Prayers in Glorification of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa




10) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Sixty-four Qualities

ayaṁ netā su-ramyāṅgaḥ sarva-sal-lakṣaṇānvitaḥ

ruciras tejasā yukto balīyān vayasānvitaḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 2.1.23—29/CC Madhya 23.70-88/
Jaiva-Dharma ch. 13 p. 320-323

ayam—this (Śrī Kṛṣṇa); netā—supreme hero; su-ramya-aṅgaḥ
—having the most beautiful transcendental body; sarva-
sat-lakṣaṇa—all-auspicious characteristics; anvitaḥ—
endowed with; ruciraḥ—beautiful, radiant complexion;
tejasā—with all power; yuktaḥ—possessed of; balīyān—very
strong; vayasa-anvitaḥ—eternally youthful.

These are the qualities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the supreme hero.
He is: 1) endowed with delightfully charming bodily
limbs; 2) endowed with all auspicious characteristics;
3) beautiful; 4) radiant; 5) strong; 6) eternally
youthful.

vividhādbhuta-bhāṣā-vit satya-vākyaḥ priyaṁ-vadaḥ

vāvadūkaḥ su-pāṇḍityo buddhimān pratibhānvitaḥ

vividha—various; adbhuta—wonderful; bhāṣā-vit—knower of
languages; satya-vākyaḥ—whose words are truthful;
priyam-vadaḥ—who speaks very pleasingly; vāvadūkaḥ—
eloquent; su-pāṇḍityaḥ—very learned; buddhi-mān—very
wise; pratibhā-anvitaḥ—genius.

7) conversant with many kinds of astonishing languages;
8) truthful; 9) a pleasing speaker; 10) eloquent; 11)
learned; 12) intelligent, wise; 13) resourceful, genius.

vidagdhaś caturo dakṣaḥ kṛta-jñaḥ su-dṛḍha-vrataḥ

deśa-kāla-supātra-jñaḥ śāstra-cakṣuḥ śucir vaśī

vidagdhaḥ—expert in relishing rasa; caturaḥ—clever;
dakṣaḥ—expert; kṛta-jñaḥ—grateful; su-dṛḍha-vrataḥ—
firmly determined; deśa—of country; kāla—time; su-pātra—
of fitness; jñaḥ—a knower; śāstra-cakṣuḥ—expert in the
authoritative scriptures; śuciḥ—pure, clean and neat;
vaśī—self-controlled.

                            219
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


14) expert in relishing mellows; 15) clever; 16) expert;
17) grateful; 18) firmly determined; 19) an astute judge
of time, place and circumstance; 20) a seer through the
eyes of śāstra; 21) pure; 22) self-controlled.

sthiro dāntaḥ kṣamā-śīlo gambhīro dhṛtimān samaḥ

vadānyo dhārmikaḥ śūraḥ karuṇo mānya-māna-kṛt

sthiraḥ—steady; dāntaḥ—having controlled senses; kṣamā-
śīlaḥ—forgiving; gambhīraḥ—grave; dhṛti-mān—calm, never
bereft of intelligence; samaḥ—equipoised; vadānyaḥ—
magnanimous; dhārmikaḥ—virtuous; śūraḥ—chivalrous;
karuṇaḥ—kind, merciful; mānya-māna-kṛt—respectful to
others.

23) steadfast; 24) forebearing; 25) forgiving; 26)
inscrutable; 27) sober; 28) equipoised; 29) munificent;
30) virtuous; 31) chivalrous; 32) compassionate; 33)
respectful to others.

dakṣiṇo vinayī hrīmān śaraṇāgata-pālakaḥ

sukhī bhakta-suhṛt prema- vaśyaḥ sarva-śubhaṅ-karaḥ

dakṣiṇaḥ—simple and liberal; vinayī—modest; hrī-mān—
bashful when glorified; śaraṇa-āgata-pālakaḥ—protector
of the surrendered souls; sukhī—always happy; bhakta-
suhṛt—well-wisher of the devotees; prema-vaśyaḥ—
submissive to love; sarva-śubham-karaḥ—bestowing
auspiciousness upon all.

34) amiable; (35) modest; 36) shy; 37) the protector of
surrendered souls; 38) happy; 39) the well-wisher of His
bhaktas; 40) controlled by prema; 41) the benefactor of
all.

pratāpī kīrtimān rakta-lokaḥ sādhu-samāśrayaḥ

nārī-gaṇa-manohārī sarvārādhyaḥ samṛddhimān

pratāpī—very influential, or chastiser of enemies;
kīrti-mān—famous for good works; rakta-lokaḥ—who is the
object of love and attachment for all; sādhu-samāśrayaḥ—
the shelter of saintly persons; nārī-gaṇa—to women;
manaḥ-hārī—enchanting, captivating; sarva-ārādhyaḥ—
worshipable by everyone; samṛddhi-mān—all opulent.

42) the chastiser of His enemies; 43) famous; 44)
beloved by all; 45) partial to the side of the sādhus;
46) the enchanter of women’s minds; 47) all-worshipable;
48) all-opulent.

varīyān īśvaraś ceti guṇās tasyānukīrtitāḥ

samudrā iva pañcāśad durvigāhā harer amī

varīyān—the best; īśvaraḥ—the supreme controller; ca—
and; iti—thus; guṇāḥ—the transcendental qualities; tasya
—of Him; anukīrtitāḥ—described; samudrāḥ—oceans; iva—
like; pañcāśat—fifty; durvigāhāḥ—difficult to fully
comprehend; hareḥ—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
amī—all these.

                          220
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


49) superior to all; and 50) the supreme controller.
These fifty qualities are present in Bhagavān Śrī Hari
to an unlimited degree like the unfathomable ocean.

jīveṣv ete vasanto —pi bindu-bindutayā kvacit

paripūrṇatayā bhānti tatraiva puruṣottame

jīveṣu—in the living entities; ete—these; vasantaḥ—are
residing; api—though; bindu-bindutayā—with a very minute
quantity; kvacit—sometimes; paripūrṇatayā—with fullness;
bhānti—are manifested; tatra—in Him; eva—certainly;
puruṣa-uttame—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

These fifty qualities are present to a minute degree in
the jīvas, whereas they are fully present in Puruṣottama
Bhagavān.

(Another five of Kṛṣṇa’s qualities are partially present
in Brahmā, Śiva and other devatās, but not in ordinary
jīvas:)

sadā svarūpa-samprāptaḥ sarva-jño nitya-nūtanaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-sāndrāṅgaḥ sarva-siddhi-niṣevitaḥ

sadā—always; svarūpa-samprāptaḥ—situated in one’s
eternal spiritual form; sarva-jñaḥ—omniscient; nitya-
nūtanaḥ—ever fresh; sat-cit-ānanda-sāndra-aṅgaḥ—the
concentrated form of eternity, knowledge and bliss;
sarva-siddhi-niṣevitaḥ—attended by all mystic
perfections.

51) He is always situated in His svarūpa; 52) He is
omniscient; 53) He is ever-fresh and new; 54) He is the
concentrated form of existence, knowledge and bliss; and
55) He is served by all mystic opulences.

athocyante guṇāḥ pañca ye lakṣmīśādi-vartinaḥ

avicintya-mahā-śaktiḥ koṭi-brahmāṇḍa-vigrahaḥ

avatārāvalī-bījaṁ hatāri-gati-dāyakaḥ

ātmārāma-gaṇākarṣīty amī kṛṣṇe kilādbhutāḥ

atha—now; ucyante—are said; guṇāḥ—qualities; pañca—five;
ye—which; lakṣmī-īśa—in the proprietor of the goddess of
fortune; ādi—etc.; vartinaḥ—possesses; avicintya—
inconceivable; mahā-śaktiḥ—supreme energy; koṭi-
brahmāṇḍa—consisting of innumerable universes; vigrahaḥ—
having a spiritual body; avatāra—of incarnations; āvalī—
of groups; bījam—the source; hata-ari—to enemies killed
by Him; gati-dāyakaḥ—giving liberation; ātmārāma-gaṇa—of
those fully satisfied in themselves; ākarṣī—attracting;
iti—thus; amī—these; kṛṣṇe—in Kṛṣṇa; kila—certainly;
adbhutāḥ—very wonderful.

Lakṣmīpati Nārāyaṇa has an additional five qualities:
56) He possesses inconceivable potencies; 57)
innumerable universes are situated within His body; 58)
He is the original cause or seed of all avatāras; 59) He
awards gati (a higher destination) to those whom He

                          221
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

kills; and 60) He can attract even those who are
ātmārāma (satisfied within the self).

(These additional five qualities are not present in
Brahmā or Śiva, but they are

wonderfully present in Śrī Kṛṣṇa in their most complete
form. Besides these sixty qualities, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself
has four extra qualities, namely:)

sarvādbhuta-camatkāra- līlā-kallola-vāridhiḥ

atulya-madhura-prema- maṇḍita-priya-maṇḍalaḥ

tri-jagan-mānasākarṣi- muralī-kala-kūjitaḥ

asamānordhva-rūpa-śrī- vismāpita-carācaraḥ

sarva-adbhuta-camatkāra—bringing wonder to all; līlā—of
pastimes; kallola—full of waves; vāridhiḥ—an ocean;
atulya-madhura-prema—with incomparable conjugal love;
maṇḍita—decorated; priya-maṇḍalaḥ—surrounded by His
beloveds; tri-jagat—of the three worlds; mānasa-ākarṣi—
attracting the minds; muralī—by the flute; kala-kūjitaḥ—
melodious vibration; asamāna-ūrdhva—unequaled and
unsurpassed; rūpa—by beauty; śrī—and opulence;
vismāpita-cara-acaraḥ—astonishing to both moving and
nonmoving living entities.

61) He is like a vast ocean teeming with waves of the
most astonishing and wonderful līlās; 62) He is adorned
with incomparable mādhurya-prema, and thus is
auspiciousness personified for His beloved bhaktas, who
also have unparalleled prema for Him; 63) He attracts
the three worlds with the marvelous vibration of His
muralī flute; and 64) the resplendent rūpa (beauty) of
His transcendental form is unparalleled, charming and
astonishing to all moving and non-moving entities in the
three worlds.

līlā premṇā priyādhikyaṁ mādhuryaṁ veṇu-rūpayoḥ

ity asādhāraṇaṁ proktaṁ govindasya catuṣṭayam

evaṁ guṇāś catur-bhedāś catuḥ-ṣaṣṭir udāhṛtāḥ

līlā—pastimes; premṇā—with transcendental love; priya-
ādhikyam—an abundance of highly elevated devotees;
mādhuryam—sweetness; veṇu-rūpayoḥ—of the flute and the
beauty of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form; iti—thus; asādhāraṇam—
uncommon; proktam—said; govindasya—of Lord Kṛṣṇa;
catuṣṭayam—four special features; evam—thus; guṇāḥ—
transcendental qualities; catuḥ-bhedāḥ—having four
divisions; catuḥ-ṣaṣṭiḥ—sixty-four; udāhṛtāḥ— thus
declared.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sixty-four qualities and symptoms have thus
been described, including līlā-mādhurī, prema-mādhurī,
veṇu-mādhurī and rūpa-mādhurī. These are four
extraordinary qualities that He alone possesses (and are
present only in His form of Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa in
Vraja).

Thus ends Chapter 6 - Kṛṣṇa-tattva

                          222
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017




Chapter 7 — Śakti-tattva


Kṛṣṇa performs everything by His unlimited Potencies




1. Kṛṣṇa’s Three Main Potencies - Cit-śakti, Māyā-śakti
& Jīva-śakti 265

2. Cit-śakti - The Internal, Spiritual Potency 269

3. Māyā-śakti - The External, Deluding Potency 272

4. Jīva-śakti - The Marginal, Taṭasthā Potency 275

5. Kṛṣṇa’s Internal Potency is Threefold: Hlādinī,
Sandhinī & Samvit 276

6. Kṛṣṇa (Śaktiman) and Rādhā (Śakti) are non-different
278

7. Māyā (Durgā) is but the Shadow of Kṛṣṇa’s Svarūpa-
śakti (Śrī Rādhā) 279

8. Paurṇamāsī Yogamāyā - The Pastime Potency of Kṛṣṇa
280




1) Kṛṣṇa’s Three Main Potencies - Cit-śakti, Māyā-śakti
& Jīva-śakti



Daśa-mūla-tattva describes the potencies of the lord

parākhyāyāḥ śakter apṛthag api sa sve mahimani

sthito jīvākhyāṁ svām acid-abhihitāṁ tāṁ tri-padikām

sva-tantrecchaḥ śaktiṁ sakala-viṣaye preraṇa-paro

vikārādyaiḥ śūnyaḥ parama-puruṣo “yaṁ vijayate

Daśa mūla tattva 3/JD ch. 14

api—although; apṛthak— non-different; parākhyāyāḥ— from
His transcendental potency; tām svām—His own; tri-
padikam—three-fold; śaktim—potency; (the other two
aspects being) jīva-ākhyam—that known as jīva (the
multiple vibhinnāṁśa parts); abhihitam acit—and that
known as inanimate; saḥ—that; parama-puruṣaḥ—supreme
person; sthitaḥ—is situated; sve—in His; mahimani—glory;
svatantra-icchaḥ—fully independent in His desires;

                           223
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

śūnyaḥ—free; vikāra-ādyaiḥ—from all external
transformations; ayam—He (is); preraṇa-paraḥ—the supreme
instigator and ultimate source of inspiration; sakala-
viṣaye—in all realms and dimensions of action; asau
vijayate—may He be especially glorious.

Although Śrī Bhagavān is non-different from His
inconceivable transcendental potency (parā-śakti), He
has His own independent nature and desires. His parā-
śakti consists of three aspects: cit-śakti (spiritual
potency), jīva-śakti (marginal potency), and māyā-śakti
(external potency) and He always inspires them to engage
in their respective functions. That parā-tattva (Supreme
Absolute Truth), even while performing all these
activities, still remains immutable and is eternally
situated in the fully transcendental svarūpa of His own
glory.



Kṛṣṇa’s parā-śakti is one but appears in multifarious
forms

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇañ ca vidyāte

na tat samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyāte

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca

Śvetāṣvatara Upaniṣad 6.8/CC Madhya 13.65 pt/BPKG p.
28,360,406,509/JD ch. 14, 18

na—no; tasya—He has; kāryam—duty to perform; kāraṇam—nor
does He have any necessity, nor material senses, nor
does anyone or anything dictate His actions; ca—also; na
vidyate—there does not exist; tat-samaḥ—anyone equal to
Him; ca—or; abhyadhikaḥ—superior to Him; ca—also;
dṛśyāte—it is seen; parā—supreme; asya—His; śaktiḥ—
potency; vividhā—expands in multifarious ways; eva—
certainly; śrūyate—it is heard in the Vedīc literatures
that; svābhāvikī—spontaneously providing (Him); jñāna—
knowledge; bala—strength; kriyā—activities; ca—also.

The Supreme Lord has nothing to do, and no one is found
to be equal to or greater than Him, His parā-śakti
(supreme potency) expands in multifarious ways by which
everything is done naturally and spontaneously,
providing Him full knowledge, power and pastimes.

The following line from the above śloka is often quoted
separately

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

Śvetāṣvatara Upaniṣad 6.8

Bhagavān’s divine śakti is full of variety; parā-śakti
is perceivable in multifarious forms.

Kṛṣṇa’s potency is unlimited (and so is the potency of
His pure devotees)


                            224
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

kutaḥ punar gṛṇato nāma tasya

mahattamaikānta-parāyaṇasya

yo 'nanta-śaktir bhagavān ananto

mahad-guṇatvād yam anantam āhuḥ

SB 1.18.19

kutaḥ—what to say; punaḥ—again; gṛṇataḥ—one who chants;
nāma—holy name; tasya—His; mahat-tama—great devotees;
ekānta—exclusive; parāyaṇasya—of one who takes shelter
of; yaḥ—He who; ananta—is the unlimited; śaktiḥ—potency;
bhagavān—all-opulent Personality; anantaḥ—immeasurable;
mahat—great; guṇatvāt—on account of such attributes; yam
—whom; anantam—by the name ananta; āhuḥ—is called.

What to speak of Śrī Bhagavān who possesses unlimited
energy and is therefore celebrated by the name of
Ananta, even those who are chanting the holy names of
the Unlimited and are dedicated to serving Him with one
pointed determination, under the direction of the great
saintly devotees, are also known as unlimited on account
of the qualities of those great souls.

Kṛṣṇa is equipped with inconceivable potency

aghaṭana-ghaṭana-patīyasī śakti

BR 1.1 pt/Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam ch. 1

The potency that makes the inconceivable conceivable and
the impossible possible.

Kṛṣṇa is one but His śaktis are all-pervading, unlimited
and manifest everywhere

eka-sthāne sthitasyāgner jyotsnā vistāriṇī yathā

parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis sarvedam akhilaṁ jagat

Viṣṇu Purāṇa

Just as fire, though situated in one place, is
distributing its energies of heat and light far and
wide, similarly, whatever we are experiencing within our
views in this material world, is simply a manifestation
of the unlimited energies of the Supreme Lord.

Kṛṣṇa’s three energetic transformations

kṛṣṇera svābhāvika tina-śakti-pariṇati

cic-chakti, jīva-śakti, āra māyā-śakti

CC Madhya 20.111

kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; svābhāvika—natural; tina—three;
śakti—of energies; pariṇati—transformations; cit-śakti—
spiritual potency; jīva-śakti—spiritual sparks, living
entities; āra—and; māyā-śakti—deluding potency.

Lord Kṛṣṇa naturally has three energetic transformations

                          225
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

and these are known as the spiritual potency, the living
entity potency, and the deluding potency (māyā).

Three varieties of the Lord's potency

viṣṇu-śaktir parā proktā kṣetra-jñākhyā tathā parā

avidyā-karma-saṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate

Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.7.61/CC Ādi 7.119, Madhya 6.154/BPKG p.
28,361

viṣṇu-śaktiḥ—the potency of Lord Viṣṇu; parā—spiritual;
proktā—it is said; kṣetrajña-ākhyā—the potency known as
kṣetra-jña; tathā—as well as; parā—spiritual,
transcendental; avidyā—ignorance; karma—fruitive
activities; saṁjñā—known as; anyā—other; tṛtīyā—third;
śaktiḥ—potency; iṣyate—known thus.

Viṣṇu-śakti is parā or transcendental potency. Kṣetrajñā
(the living entity) is also known as parā,
transcendental. The third energy is material. This
energy facilitates the activities of the conditioned
living beings in fruitive work and involves them in
avidyā or ignorance of their constitional nature as
eternal servants of Kṛṣṇa. Viṣṇu’s parā-śakti is called
cit-śakti, kṣetrajñā is called jīva-śakti, and avidyā is
called māyā-śakti.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: The function of cit-śakti is
to manifest the spiritual world. The function of māyā-
śakti is to manifest the material universe. The function
of jīva-śakti is to manifest the many individual spirit
souls. By Kṛṣṇa’s desire His śaktis manifest everything.
(JD ch. 14) Other terms used for the three respective
śaktis: Kṛṣṇa’s internal spiritual potency is known as
cit or antaraṅga or svarūpa-śakti or parā-śakti (Śrī
Rādhā). His external, deluding potency is known as māyā
or avidyā or bahiraṅgā-śakti (Māyā-devī or Durga-devī),
and His marginal potency is known as taṭastha-śakti or
kṣetrajñā or jīva-śakti (the conditioned living beings).



2) Cit-śakti - The Internal, Spiritual Potency




Kṛṣṇa has three main potencies but His internal potency
is superior to the other two

kṛṣṇera ananta-śakti, tāte tina pradhāna

'cic-chakti', 'māyā-śakti', 'jiva-śakti'-nāma

'antaraṅgā', 'bahiraṅgā', 'taṭasthā' kahi yāre

antaraṅgā 'svarūpa-śakti' sabāra upare

CC Madhya 8.151-152

kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; ananta-śakti—unlimited potencies;

                          226
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

tāte—in that; tina—three; pradhāna—chief; cit-śakti—
spiritual potency; māyā-śakti—material potency; jīva-
śakti—marginal potency, or living entities; nāma—named;
antaraṅgā—internal; bahiraṅgā—external; taṭa-sthā—
marginal; kahi—we say; yāre—to whom; antaraṅgā—the
internal potency; svarūpa-śakti—the personal energy;
sabāra upare—above all.

Kṛṣṇa has unlimited potencies. They are divided into
three main parts, the spiritual energy, the material
energy, and the marginal energy, which is the living
entities. All potencies are part of either the internal,
or external, or marginal energies. However, the internal
energy is the Lord's personal energy and is superior to
the other two.



cic-chakti, svarūpa-śakti, antaraṅgā nāma

tāhāra vaibhava ananta vaikuṇṭhādi dhāma

CC Ādi 2.101

cit-śakti—spiritual energy; svarūpa-śakti—personal
energy; antaḥ-aṅgā—internal; nāma—named; tāhāra—of that;
vaibhava—manifestations; ananta—unlimited; vaikuṇṭha-ādi
—Vaikuṇṭha, etc.; dhāma—abodes.

The cit-śakti, which is also called svarūpa-śakti or
antaraṅga-śakti, displays many varied manifestations. It
sustains the kingdom of God and its paraphernalia.

Those who develop spiritual vision can see Kṛṣṇa’s
divine power

te dhyāna-yogānugatā apaśyan devātma-śaktiṁ sva-guṇair
nigūḍhām

yaḥ kāraṇāni nikhilāni tāni, kālātma-yuktāny
adhitiṣṭhaty ekaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 1.3

Those who meditate on the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through their spiritual vision can see His confidential,
divine power (cit-śakti). The Supreme Lord alone is the
energetic source of all energies. His divine power is
the immediate cause of the unlimited universes. Thus the
Lord Himself is alone the instrumental cause (nimitta)
of manifesting the living beings, the material universes
of time and space, and all that reposes within them.
(KGH)

An alternative translation: One Supremely Energetic
Personality is present within the time factor and the
jīvas, and is the sum total cause of this material
universe, which is regulated by His own desire. The
Brahman realised souls meditate on the energy that is
generated by the Energetic's own will, possessing His
selfsame qualities and influence. They perceive this
energy as the cause of this material cosmos. (BTV ch. 4)

Kṛṣṇa is all-knowing, He knows the purpose of creation

                            227
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

and is the master of all three potencies

sa viṣva-kṛd viśva-vid ātma-yoniḥ

jñah kāla-kālo guṇī sarva-vid yaḥ

pradhāna-kṣetrajña-patir guṇeśaḥ

saṁsāra-mokṣa-sthiti-bandha-hetuḥ

Śvetāśvatara 6.16

The Supreme Lord is the ultimate creator of the
universe. He knows the purpose of the universe. He is
the Supersoul, the Lord in the heart of every living
being. He is all-knowing, and is the greatest
philosopher. He knows past, present, and future. He has
all excellencies and good qualities. He is the master of
the material energy (pradhāna), the living beings (jīva-
śakti, kṣetrajña) and the internal, spiritual energy
known as cit-śakti. He alone is the cause of liberation
from the cycle of repeated birth and death (saṁsāra) and
the bondage of ignorance.

Evidence from Bhagavad Gīta for cit-śakti

ajo “pi sann avyayātmā bhūtānām īśvaro “pi san

prakṛtiṁ svām adhiṣṭhāya sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā

SBG 4.6

ajaḥ—unborn; api—although; san—being so; avyaya—(and
having) an imperishable; ātmā—body; bhūtānām—of all
beings; īśvaraḥ—the Supreme Lord; api—although; san—
being so; prakṛtim—in the transcendental form; svām—My
original; adhiṣṭhāya—being so situated; sambhavāmi—I do
manifest; ātma-māyayā—by My internal potency (Yogamāyā).

Although I am unborn, imperishable and the controller of
all living entities, I appear by My Yogamāyā potency in
My original sac-cid-ānanda-svarūpa.

Willing, knowledge, and activity - three aspects of
Kṛṣṇa’s internal potency

ananta-śakti-madhye kṛṣṇera tina śakti pradhāna/'icchā-
śakti', 'jñāna-śakti', 'kriyā-śakti' nāma

icchā-śakti-pradhāna kṛṣṇa icchāya sarva-kartā/jñāna-
śakti-pradhāna vāsudeva adhiṣṭhātā

icchā-jñāna-kriyā vinā nā haya sṛjana/tinera tina-śakti
meli' prapañca-racana

kriyā-śakti-pradhāna saṅkarṣaṇa balarāma/prākṛtāprakṛta-
sṛṣṭi karena nirmāṇa

ahaṇkārera adhiṣṭhātā kṛṣṇera icchāya/goloka, vaikuṇṭha
sṛje cic-chakti-dvārāya

yadyapi asṛjya nitya cic-chakti-vilāsa/tathāpi
saṅkarṣaṇa-icchāya tāhāra prakāśa


                          228
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

CC Madhya 20.252-257

Kṛṣṇa has unlimited potencies, out of which three are
chief, will-power, the power of knowledge, and the
creative energy. He is the predominator of the willing
energy, for by His supreme will everything comes into
existence. In willing, there is a need for knowledge,
and that knowledge is expressed through Vāsudeva. There
is no possibility of creation without thinking, feeling,
willing, knowledge, and activity. The combination of
supreme will, knowledge, and action brings about the
cosmic manifestation. Lord Saṅkarśaṇa is Lord Balarāma.
Being the predominator of the creative energy, He
creates both the material and spiritual worlds. That
original Saṅkarśaṇa is the cause of both the material
and spiritual creation. He is the predominating Deity of
egotism, and by the will of Kṛṣṇa and the power of the
spiritual energy, He creates the spiritual world, which
consists of Goloka Vṛndāvana and Vaikuṇṭha. Although
there is no question of creation as far as the spiritual
world is concerned, the spiritual world is nonetheless
manifest by the supreme will of Saṅkarśaṇa. The
spiritual world is the abode of the pastimes of the
eternal spiritual energy.

Thus ends section 2) Cit-śakti




3) Māyā-śakti - The External, Deluding Potency



The eightfold material elements of māyā

bhūmir āpo —nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

BG 7.4/JD ch. 9,15

bhūmiḥ—earth; āpaḥ—water; analaḥ—fire; vāyuḥ—air; kham—
ether; manaḥ—mind; buddhiḥ—intelligence; eva—certainly;
ca—and; ahaṅkāraḥ—false ego; iti—thus; iyam—all these;
me—My; bhinnā—separated; prakṛtiḥ—energies; aṣṭadhā—
eightfold.

Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and
false ego—all together these eight elements constitute
My separated material energies.

Evidence from Śruti for māyā-śakti

ajām ekaṁ lohita-śukla-kṛṣṇāṁ bahvīḥ prajāḥ sṛjamānāṁ
sarūpāḥ

ajo hy eko juṣamāṇo 'nuśete jahāty enāṁ bhukta-bhogām
ajo 'nyaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 4.5

Material nature consists of three modes goodness,

                            229
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

passion, and ignorance and is the mother of the
innumerable living beings within the universe. It is
brought into existence and supported by the one unborn
Lord, who is full in self-knowledge. That unborn Lord,
however, does not consort with His material energy. He
independently enjoys the pleasure of His transcendental
pastimes. But the living entity desires to enjoy her and
thus becomes bound.



Evidence from Smṛti for māyā-śakti

prakṛtiṁ svām avaṣṭabhya visṛjāmi punaḥ punaḥ

bhūta-grāmam imaṁ kṛtsnam avaśaṁ prakṛter vaśāt

BG 9.8

prakṛtim—the material nature; svām—of My personal Self;
avaṣṭabhya—entering into; visṛjāmi—I create; punaḥ punaḥ
—again and again; bhūta-grāmam—all the cosmic
manifestations; imam—these; kṛtsnam—in total; avaśam—
automatically; prakṛteḥ—of the force of nature; vaśāt—
under obligation.

This whole cosmic order is under Me. By My will it is
automatically manifested again and again, and by My will
it is annihilated.

Lord Brahmā describes Kṛṣṇa’s māyā-śakti

māyā hi yasya jagad-aṇḍa-śatāni sūte

traiguṇya-tad-viṣaya-veda-vitāyamānā

sattvāvalambi-para-sattva-viśuddha-sattvaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Brahma Saṁhitā 41

māyā—deluding potency; hi—indeed (it is He); yasya—
whose; jagad-aṇḍa—of egg-like universes; śatāni—to
hundreds; sūte—gives birth; traiguṇya—the three binding
modes: goodness, passion and ignorance; tad-viṣaya—
topics related to Govinda; veda-vitāyamānā—and who
expands throughout the Vedas; sattva-avalambi—the
material mode of goodness, which is mixed with passion
and ignorance, is dependent; para-sattva—and upon whose
supreme existence; viśuddha-sattvam—whose pure existence
is free from any mixture of passion or ignorance; ādi-
puruṣam govindam—original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
tam—of that; aham bhajāmi—I perform bhajana.

Māyā consists of the three material qualities of
goodness, passion and ignorance, and is Bhagavān’s
inferior energy. She propagates the Vedic knowledge that
pertains to the material universe. I worship the
original Personality Śrī Govinda, who is the shelter of
that māyā, though His own existence is the embodiment of
pure goodness untinged by passion and ignorance.



                          230
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya jagad viparivartate

BG 9.10/BPKG p. 406/JD ch. 13

mayā—by Me; adhyakṣeṇa—by superintendence; prakṛtiḥ—
material nature; sūyate—manifests; sa—both; cara-acaram—
the moving and the nonmoving; hetunā—for the reason;
anena—this; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; jagat—the cosmic
manifestation; viparivartate—is working.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “My prakṛti (māyā śakti) is the creator
of this world of moving and non-moving entities. Under
its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated
again and again.”



Māyā, My deluding potency, is that reflection which
appears in darkness

ṛte 'rthaṁ yat pratīyeta & na pratīyeta cātmani (SB
2.9.34,37 - see ch. 3)



māyā-śakti, bahiraṅgā, jagat-kāraṇa

tāhāra vaibhava ananta brahmāṇḍera gaṇa

CC Ādi 2.102

māyā-śakti—the illusory energy; bahiḥ-aṅgā—external;
jagat-kāraṇa—the cause of the universe; tāhāra—of that;
vaibhava—manifestations; ananta—unlimited; brahma-aṇḍera
—of universes; gaṇa—multitudes.

The external energy, called māyā-śakti, is the cause of
innumerable universes with varied material potencies.

Māyā is ashamed of her position

vilajjamānayā yasya sthātum īkṣā-pathe 'muyā

vimohitā vikatthante mamāham iti durdhiyaḥ

SB 2.5.13

vilajjamānayā—by one who is ashamed; yasya—whose;
sthātum—to stay; īkṣā-pathe—in front; amuyā—by the
deluding potency; vimohitāḥ—those who are bewildered;
vikatthante—talk nonsense; mama—it is mine; aham—I am
everything; iti—thus boasting; durdhiyaḥ—thus ill
conceived.

The deluding potency of the Lord cannot take precedence,
being ashamed of her position, but those who are
bewildered by her, always talk nonsense, being absorbed
in the bodily misconceptions of "It is I" and "It is
mine."

Surrender to Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only way to overcome māyā

                          231
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te

BG 7.14/CC Madhya 22.23, 24.138/PJ 9.11

daivī—transcendental; hi—certainly; eṣā—this; guṇa-mayī—
consisting of the three modes of material nature; mama—
My; māyā—energy; duratyayā—very difficult to overcome;
mām—unto Me; eva—certainly; ye—those who; prapadyante—
surrender; māyām etām—this illusory energy; taranti—
overcome; te—they.

This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three
modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But
those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross
beyond it.

Thus ends section 3) Māyā-śakti

4) Jīva-śakti - The Marginal Potency



The jīva is a superior potency to māyā

apareyam itas tv anyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

BG 7.5/CC Ādi 7.118/JD ch. 9,15/BPKG p. 361/GKH (P)

aparā—inferior energy; iyam—this material world; itaḥ—
beyond this; tu—but; anyām—another; prakṛtim—energy;
viddhi—you must know; me—of Me; parām—which is superior
energy; jīva-bhūtām—they are the living entities; mahā-
bāho—O mighty-armed one; yayā—by which; idam—this
material world; dhāryate—is being conducted; jagat—
universe.

O Mahā-bāho, you should know that My external energy,
which consists of eight divisions, is inferior. There is
another potency of Mine known as the jīva-svarūpa, which
is superior and which accepts this material world for
the purpose of enjoying the fruits of karma.

jīva-śakti taṭasthākhya, nāhi yāra anta

mukhya tina śakti, tāra vibheda ananta

CC Ādi 2.103

jīva-śakti—the energy of the living entity; taṭa-stha-
ākhya—known as marginal; nāhi—there is not; yāra—of
which; anta—end; mukhya—principal; tina—three; śakti—
energies; tāra—of them; vibheda—varieties; ananta—
unlimited.

The marginal potency, which is between cit-śakti and
māyā-śakti, consists of innumerable living beings
(jīvas). These are the three principal energies, which
have unlimited categories and subdivisions.


                          232
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

See chapter 8 for a detailed coverage of Jīva-śakti

Thus ends section 4) Jīva-śakti




5) Kṛṣṇa’s Internal potency is threefold: Hlādinī,
Sandhinī & Samvit



Kṛṣṇa’s Svarūpa-śakti (internal potency) has three
different forms

sac-cid-ānanda-maya kṛṣṇera svarūpa

ataeva svarūpa-śakti haya tina rūpa

CC Mad 8.154

sat-cit-ānanda-maya—eternal bliss and knowledge; kṛṣṇera
—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; svarūpa—the real transcendental form;
ataeva—therefore; svarūpa-śakti—His spiritual personal
potency; haya—is; tina rūpa—three forms.

The original form of Lord Kṛṣṇa is sac-cid-ānanda — the
transcendental form of eternity, bliss and knowledge;
therefore His svarūpa-śakti or personal potency, the
internal potency, has three different forms.

ānandāṁśe “hlādinī—, sad-aṁśe “sandhinī—

cid-aṁśe “samvit—, yāre jñāna kari— māni

CC Mad 6.159, Mad 8.155

ānanda-aṁśe—in the part of bliss; hlādinī—the pleasure
potency; sat-aṁśe—in the part of eternity; sandhinī—the
sandhinī potency; cit-aṁśe—in the part of knowledge;
samvit—the samvit potency; yāre—which; jñāna—as
knowledge; kari māni—we accept.

The three portions of the spiritual potency are called
hlādinī [the bliss portion], sandhinī [the eternity or
existential portion] and samvit [the knowledge portion].
We accept knowledge of these as full knowledge of the
Supreme Lord.

Hlādinī Sandhinī and Samvit are three attributes of
Kṛṣṇa’s internal potency

hlādinī sandhinī samvit tvayy ekā sarva-saṁsthitau

hlāda-tāpa-karī miśrā tvayi no guṇa-varjite

Viṣṇu Purāṇa 1.12.69/CC Ādi 4.63, Mad 6.157, 8.156

hlādinī—pleasure potency; sandhinī—existence potency;
samvit—knowledge potency; tvayi—in You; ekā—one; sarva-
saṁsthitau—who are the basis of all things; hlāda—
pleasure; tāpa—and misery; karī—causing; miśrā—a mixture
of the two; tvayi—in You; na u—not indeed; guṇa-varjite—

                          233
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

free of influence of the three modes.

O Lord, You are the support of everything. The three
attributes, hlādinī, sandhinī and samvit exist in You as
one spiritual energy. But the material modes, which
cause happiness, misery and mixtures of the two, do not
exist in You, for You have no material qualities.

Through His Hlādinī pleasure potency, Kṛṣṇa tastes all
spiritual pleasure

kṛṣṇake āhlāde, tā—te nāma - hlādinī

sei śakti-dvāre sukha āsvāde āpani

CC Mad 8.157

kṛṣṇake—unto Kṛṣṇa; āhlāde—gives pleasure; tā—te—
therefore; nāma—the name; hlādinī—pleasure-giving
potency; sei śakti—that potency; dvāre—by means of;
sukha—happiness; āsvāde—tastes; āpani—Lord Kṛṣṇa
personally.

The potency called hlādinī gives Kṛṣṇa transcendental
pleasure. Through this pleasure potency, Kṛṣṇa
personally tastes all kinds of spiritual pleasure.

Thus ends section 5) Kṛṣṇa’s Internal potency is
threefold




6) Kṛṣṇa (śaktimān) and Rādhā (śakti) are non-different



śakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ

Vedānta-sūtra/Nyāya-śāstra/JD ch. 9, 14/BPKG pp. 28,209
etc.

There is no difference between the energetic and energy,
the potent and the potency, the powerful and the power,
śaktimān Śrī Kṛṣṇa and śakti Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are inherently non-different, yet They
manifest in two forms just to taste the rasa of Their
loving pastimes. They are one soul in two bodies

rādhā pūrṇa-śakti, kṛṣṇa pūrṇa-śaktimān

dui vastu bheda nāi, śāstra-paramāṇa

mṛgamada, tāra gandha - yaiche aviccheda

agni, jvālāte - yaiche kabhu nāhi bheda

rādhā-kṛṣṇa aiche sadā eka-i svarūpa

līlā-rasa āsvādite dhare dui-rūpa

CC Ādi 4.96-98/BPKG p. 358

                             234
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; pūrṇa-śakti—the complete
energy; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; pūrṇa-śaktimān—the complete
possessor of energy; dui—two; vastu—things; bheda—
difference; nāi—there is not; śāstra-paramāṇa—the
evidence of revealed scripture; mṛga-mada—musk; tāra—of
that; gandha—fragrance; yaiche—just as; aviccheda—
inseparable; agni—the fire; jvālāte—temperature; yaiche—
just as; kabhu—any; nāhi—there is not; bheda—difference;
rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; aiche—in this way; sadā—
always; eka-i—one; svarūpa—nature; līlā-rasa—the mellows
of a pastime; āsvādite—to taste; dhare—manifest; dui-
rūpa—two forms.

Śrī Rādhā is the full power, and Lord Kṛṣṇa is the
possessor of full power. The two are not different, as
evidenced by the revealed scriptures. They are indeed
the same, just as musk and its scent are inseparable, or
as fire and its heat are nondifferent. Thus Śrī Rādhā
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are one, yet They have taken two forms to
enjoy the mellows of pastimes (such as the rāsa-līlā,
and their eternal daily loving pastimes). 17

Thus ends section 6) Kṛṣṇa (śaktimān) and Rādhā (śakti)




7) Durga-devī is but an expansion of Śrī Rādhā




Mahā-māyā (Durgā) is but the shadow of Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa-
śakti

sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā

chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā

icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Brahma Saṁhitā 44

aham bhajāmi—I render service; tam—to that; govindam
ādi-puruṣam—Śrī Govinda, the primeval Personality of
Godhead; yasya—whose; śaktiḥ—potency; durgā—Durgā devī;
iva chāyā—who is like a shadow (of His cit-śakti);
bibharti—nurtures; bhuvanāni—all the planetary systems;
ca—and; api ceṣṭate—she also acts (thus); yasya icchā-
anurūpam—in accordance with His will; ekā—she alone;
sādhana—executes; sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya—the duties of
creation, sustenance and dissolution.

The shadow of the svarūpa-śakti or cit-śakti is that
mahā-śakti who creates, maintains and annihilates the
material universe. She is worshiped throughout the world
as Durgā. I render service to the ādi-puruṣa, Śrī
Govinda, in accordance with whose desire Durgā conducts
her every endeavor.

                          235
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


yan-nāmnā nāmni durgāhaṁ guṇair guṇavatī hy aham

yad-vaibhavān mahā-lakṣmī rādhā nityā parādvayā

Sammohaninī-tantra/BS p. 48

The name Durgā, by which I am known, is Her name. The
qualities for which I am famous are Her qualities. The
majesty with which I am resplendent is Her majesty. That
Mahā-Lakṣmī, Śrī Rādhā, is non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
She is His dearmost sweetheart and the crest-jewel of
His beloveds.



tava vakṣasi rādhāhaṁ rāse vṛndāvana-vane

Nārada-pañcarātrika/JD ch. 9

In the forest known as Vṛndāvana, I (Durgā) am Your
internal śakti, Śrī Rādhikā, who adorns Your chest in
the rāsa dance.

Thus ends section 7) Durga-devī



8) Paurṇamāsī Yogamāyā - the Pastimes Potency of Kṛṣṇa




Śrī Paurṇamāsī-devī (Yoga-māyā) Praṇāma

rādheśa-keli-prabhutā-vinoda-vinyāsa-vijñāṁ vraja-
vanditānghriṁ

kṛpālutādyākhila-viśva-vandyāṁ śrī-paurṇamāsīṁ śirasā
namāmi

Śrī Stava-kalpa-druma/SGG p. 13

Bowing my head I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Paurṇamāsī-devī,
who is very expert in arranging the various elevated
pleasure-pastimes of the master of Śrīmatī Rādhikā;
whose lotus feet are worshipped by all the Vrajavāsīs;
and who, due to being endowed with all transcendental
qualities, especially compassion, is worshipable for
everyone in the entire universe.

The Gopī girls worshipped Kātyāyanī Devī (Yogamāyā) to
get Kṛṣṇa as their husband

kātyāyani mahā-māye mahā-yoginy adhīśvari

nanda-gopa-sutaṁ devi (upa)patiṁ me kuru te namaḥ

[iti mantraṁ japantyās tāḥ pūjāṁ cakruḥ kumārikāḥ]

SB 10.22.4/BMP p. 408/GKH (P)

kātyāyanī—O goddess Kātyāyanī; mahā-māye—O great

                          236
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

potency; mahā-yogini—O possessor of great mystic power;
adhīśvari—O mighty controller; nanda-gopa-sutam—the son
of Mahārāja Nanda; devi—O goddess; patim—the husband
(or, upapati—lover); me—my; kuru—please make; te—unto
you; namaḥ—my obeisances; iti—with these words; mantram—
the hymn; japantyāḥ—chanting; tāḥ—they; pūjām—worship;
cakruḥ—performed; kumārikāḥ—the unmarried girls.

[Each of the young unmarried girls performed her worship
while chanting the following mantra:] “O goddess
Kātyāyanī, O great potency of the Lord, O possessor of
great mystic power and mighty controller of all, please
make the son of Nanda Mahārāja my husband (or lover). I
offer my obeisances unto you.”

Praying to Yogamāyā to lift the curtain of illusion

kuladevī yogamāyā more kṛpā kari—

āvaraṇa sambaribe kabe viśvadarī

Āmāra Samāna Hīna, BVT (KSH p. 18)

Oh Yogamāyā! When will you show mercy to me by lifting
up the curtain of illusion with which you cover the
universe in your external form of Mahāmāyā? You are
known as Kula-devī, the traditional worshipable Goddess
of all the Vaiṣṇava lines.

No one can understand how Your spiritual potency
Yogamāyā acts

ko vetti bhūman bhagavān parātman

yogeśvarotīr bhavatas tri-lokyām

kva vā kathaṁ vā kati vā kadeti

vistārayan krīḍasi yoga-māyām

SB 10.14.21/KGH (P)

kaḥ—who; vetti—knows; bhūman—O supreme great one;
bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; para-ātman—O
Supreme Soul; yoga-īśvara—O master of mystic power; ūtīḥ
—the pastimes; bhavataḥ—of Your Lordship; tri-lokyām—in
the three worlds; kva—where; vā—or; katham—how; vā—or;
kati—how many; vā—or; kadā—when; iti—thus; vistārayan—
expanding; krīḍasi—You play; yoga-māyām—Your spiritual
energy.

O supreme great one! O Supreme Personality of Godhead! O
Supersoul, master of all mystic power! Your pastimes are
taking place continuously in these three worlds, but who
can estimate where, how and when You are employing Your
spiritual energy Yogamāyā and performing these
innumerable pastimes? No one can understand the mystery
of how Your spiritual energy acts.

Kṛṣṇa engaged His Yogamāyā potency to arrange the rāsa
dance

bhagavān api tā rātṛīḥ śāradotphulla-mallikāḥ


                          237
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

vīkṣya rantuṁ manaś cakre yoga-māyām upāśritaḥ

SB 10.29.1/STB p. 59/GKH (P)

bhagavān—Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—
although; tāḥ—those; rātrīḥ—nights; śārada—of autumn:
utphulla—blossoming; mallikāḥ—the jasmine flowers;
vīkṣya—seeing: rantum—to enjoy love; manaḥ cakre—He made
up His mind; yogamāyām—His spiritual potency that makes
the impossible possible; upāśritaḥ—resorting to.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full in
all opulences, yet upon seeing those autumn nights
scented with blossoming jasmine flowers, He turned His
mind toward loving affairs. To fulfill His purposes He
employed His internal potency, Yogamāyā.

Thus ends section 8) Paurṇamāsī Yogamāyā

and Chapter 7 — Śakti-tattva




Chapter 8 — Jīva-tattva


jīvera “svarūpa— haya—kṛṣṇera “nitya-dāsa—




1. The Jīva is an Eternal Servant of Kṛṣṇa 283

2. Two Kinds of Jīvas: Liberated & Conditioned 287

3. The Eternally Liberated Jīvas 288

4. The Conditioned Jīvas 289

5. The Jīva & Paramātmā 294

6. The Jīvas are Dependent on and Distinct from Kṛṣṇa
296

7. The Jīva Never Falls from the Spiritual World 298

8. The Jīva is Eternal and Spiritual 300

9. The Jīva’s Svarūpa 304




1) The Jīva is an Eternal Servant of Kṛṣṇa



The jīva’s svarūpa (spiritual form) is eternal

jīvera “svarūpa— haya - kṛṣṇera “nitya-dāsa—

                            238
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


kṛṣṇera “taṭasthā śakti— “bhedābheda-prakāśa—

CC Mad 20.108/BPKG p. 28, 289, 370/JD Intro. & ch. 1

jīvera—of the living entity; svarūpa—the constitutional
position, eternal form; haya—is; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa;
nitya-dāsa—eternal servant; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa;
taṭasthā—marginal; śakti—potency; bheda-abheda—one and
different; prakāśa—manifestation;

The jīva’s constitutional nature is to be an eternal
servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The jīva is the marginal potency
of Kṛṣṇa and a manifestation simultaneously one with and
different from the Lord.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “From this śloka it seems
evident that the quality of being the servant of Kṛṣṇa
is eternally latent in the very constitution of the
jīva. Consequently, his service, his name, his form and
so on must be present in some form or other in his
constitutional nature, which is now covered by māyā.”
(BPKG Biography p. 289)

The Definition of a Jīva

cit-kaṇa - jīva, kṛṣṇa - cinmaya bhāskara

nitya kṛṣṇe dekhi - kṛṣṇe karena ādara

Prema-vivarta 6.1/JD ch. 7

The jīva is an infinitesimal particle of spiritual
consciousness, like an atomic particle of light
emanating from the sun. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the complete
spiritual consciousness, the transcendental sun. When
the jīvas focus their attention on Kṛṣṇa, they go to
Him.

The Definition of a Conditioned Jīva

yat taṭastham tu cid-rūpaṁ svasaṁvedāt tu vinirgatam

rañjitaṁ guṇa-rāgeṇa sa jīva iti kathyate

Śrī Nārada Pañcarātra/BS p. 129

yat—what; taṭa-sthaṁ—marginal; tu—indeed; cid-rūpam—
spiritual in nature; sva-samvedāt—from self-awareness;
vinirgatam—gone away; rañjitam—becoming affected; guṇa—
by the influence of the modes; rāgeṇa—by desire; saḥ—he;
jīva—the individual spirit soul; iti—thus; kathyate—is
said; iti—thus; ādau—beginning.

That entity who is constituted of the marginal potency,
who is spiritual by nature, who departs from the self-
cognizant saṁvit energy, and thus becomes affected by
the influence of māyā’s three modes of material nature,
is called the living entity (jīva).

All jīvas are eternally My parts and parcels

mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ


                             239
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

BG 15.7/BPKG pp. 29,123,368

mama—My; eva—certainly; aṁśaḥ—fragmental particle; jīva-
loke—in the world of conditional life; jīva-bhūtaḥ—the
conditioned living entity; sanātanaḥ—eternal; manaḥ—with
the mind; ṣaṣṭhāni—the six; indriyāṇi—senses; prakṛti—in
material nature; sthāni—situated; karṣati—is struggling
hard.

O Arjuna! I am sarveśvara (the Lord of all). All jīvas
are My parts and they are all eternal. Due to being
conditioned and opposed to Me, they are struggling
intensely with the mind and the senses in this material
world.



The jīvas are simultaneously different and non-different
from Kṛṣṇa

sphuliṅgāḥ ṛddhāgner iva cid-aṇavo jīva-nicayāḥ

hareḥ sūryasyaivāpṛthag api tu tad-bheda-viṣayāḥ

vaśe māyā yasya prakṛti-patir eveśvara iha

sa jīvo mukto “pi prakṛti-vaśa-yogyaḥ sva-guṇataḥ

Daśa-mūla-tattva, 5/JD ch. 15

iva—just like; sphuliṅgāḥ—sparks; ṛddha-agneḥ—of a
blazing fire; jīva-nicayāḥ—multitudes of living
entities; iva—(are) just like; cit-aṇavaḥ—spiritual
atoms; sūryasya—of the spirit sun; hareḥ—of Lord Hari;
api—although; apṛthak—not different (from Him in
quality); tat-bheda-viṣayāḥ—(they are) different from
Him (in quantity); eva—certainly; iha—here; saḥ—he;
īśvaraḥ—the Supreme Lord; prakṛti-patiḥ—(is)the master
of His energies; yasya—whose; māyā—illusory potency;
vaśe—(is) within His control; api—even; muktaḥ—
liberated; jīvaḥ—the living entity; yogyaḥ—amenable;
vaśa—under the control; prakṛti—of material nature; sva—
own; guṇataḥ—because of his (constutional) nature.

Just as many tiny sparks burst out from a blazing fire,
so the innumerable jīvas are like atomic, spiritual
particles in the rays of the spiritual sun, Śrī Hari.
Though these jīvas are non-different from Śrī Hari, they
are also eternally different from Him. The eternal
difference between the jīva and Īśvara is that Īśvara is
the Lord and master of māyā-śakti, whereas even the
liberated jīva can fall under the control of māyā, due
to his constitutional nature.

By their original nature the jīvas are eternal servants
of Kṛṣṇa but being averse to Him, they get covered by
māyā and are thrown into material bondage

svarūpārthair hīnān nija-sukha-parān kṛṣṇa-vimukhān

harer māyā-daṇḍyān guṇa-nigaḍa-jālaiḥ kalayati


                          240
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

tathā sthūlair liṅgair dvi-vidhāvaraṇaiḥ kleśa-nikarair

mahā-karmālānair nayati patitān svarga-nirayau

Daśa mūla tattva, 6/JD ch. 16

sva-rūpa—of spiritual identity; arthaiḥ—of those things
beneficial; hīnān—devoid; nija—of their own selves (due
to material misidentification); sukha—happiness; parān—
taking as all-important; kṛṣṇa—to Kṛṣṇa; vimukhān—
averse; hareḥ—of Lord Hari; māyā—the illusory energy;
daṇḍyān—punishing; guṇa—of the three modes of material
nature; nigaḍa—of shackles; jālaiḥ—with networks;
kalayati—holds; tathā—in the same way; sthūlaiḥ—with
gross elements; liṅgaiḥ—with subtle elements; dvi-vidha—
two kinds; ;āvaraṇaiḥ—of coverings; kleśa—of distress;
nikaraiḥ—with multitudes; mahā—great; karma—of fruitive
activites; ālānaiḥ—with chains; nayati—leads; patitān—
fallen conditioned souls; svarga—to the heavenly
planets; nirayau—and the hellish planets.

By his original nature the jīva is an eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa. His svarūpa-dharma is service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Bhagavān’s deluding potency (māyā) punishes those jīvas
who are bereft of that svarūpa-dharma. These jīvas are
averse to Kṛṣṇa and are concerned with their own
happiness. She binds them with the ropes of the three
modes of material nature — sattva, rajaḥ and tamaḥ,
covers their svarūpa (spiritual body) with gross and
subtle bodies, and throws them into the miserable
bondage of karma, thus repeatedly causing them to
experience happiness and distress in heaven and hell. 18



The Jīva is a separated infinitesimal particle
(vibhināṁśa) of the Lord

svāṁśa-vibhinnāṁśa-rūpe haiyā vistāra

ananta vaikuṇṭha-brahmāṇḍe karena vihāra

svāṁśa-vistāra catur-vyūha, avatāra-gaṇa

vibhinnāṁśa jīva tāṅra śaktite gaṇana

CC Madhya 22.8-9

sva-aṁśa—of personal expansions; vibhinna-aṁśa—of
separated expansions; rūpe—in the forms; haiyā—becoming;
vistāra—expanded; ananta—unlimited; vaikuṇṭha—in the
spiritual planets known as Vaikuṇṭhas; brahmāṇḍe—in the
material universes; karena vihāra—performs His pastimes;
sva-aṁśa-vistāra—the expansion of His personal forms;
catur-vyūha—His quadruple form; avatāra-gaṇa—the
incarnations; vibhinna-aṁśa—His separated forms; jīva—
the living entities; tāṅra—His; śaktite—in the category
of potency; gaṇana—calculating.

Kṛṣṇa expands Himself in many forms. Some of them are
personal expansions, and some are separate expansions.
Through them He performs pastimes in both the spiritual
and the material worlds. The spiritual worlds are the
Vaikuṇṭha planets, and the material universes are the

                          241
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

brahmāṇḍas, gigantic globes governed by Lord Brahmā.
Expansions of His personal self - like the quadruple
manifestations of Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and
Vāsudeva - descend as incarnations from Vaikuṇṭha to
this material world. The separated expansions are the
living entities. Although they are expansions of Kṛṣṇa,
they are counted among His different potencies.

2) Two Kinds of Jīvas: Liberated and Conditioned




sei vibhinnāṁśa jīva-dui ta— prakāra

eka-”nitya-mukta—, eka-”nitya-saṁsāra—

CC Mad 22.10/GKH (P)

sei vibhinna-aṁśa—that separated part and parcel of
Kṛṣṇa; jīva—the living entity; dui ta— prakāra—two
categories; eka—one; nitya-mukta—eternally liberated;
eka—one; nitya-saṁsāra—perpetually conditioned.

The jīvas are divided into two categories. One is
situated in eternal freedom in the spiritual world, the
other is situated in material bondage within the saṁsāra
cycle of birth and death.

Jīva Gosvāmī defines further

tad evam anantā eva jīvākhyās taṭasthāḥ śaktayaḥ tatra
tāsāṁ varga-dvayam eko vargo— nādita eva bhagavad-
unmukhaḥ anyas tv anādita eva bhagavat-parāṅmukhaḥ
svabhāvatas tadīya-jñāna-bhāvāt tadīya-jñānābhāvāt ca

Paramātma Sandarbha 47/GKH (P)

The number of jīvas is unlimited. They are divided into
two classes. One class is favorable to the Lord from a
time without beginning. The other class is averse to the
Lord from a time without beginning. The first class is
favorable to the Lord because of knowledge of
relationship with the Lord. The second class is averse
to the Lord because of lack of that knowledge.

tatra prathamo “ntaraṇgā-śakti-vilāsānugṛhīto nitya-
bhagavat-parikara-rūpo garuḍādikaḥ

Paramātma Sandarbha 47/GKH (P)

The favorable jīvas are all recipients of the mercy of
the pastimes enacted by the Lord’s internal energy. They
are the eternal associates of the Lord, such as Garuḍā.

aparas tu tat-parāṅmukhatva-doṣeṇa labdha-chidrayā
māyayā paribhūtaḥ saṁsārī

Paramātma Sandarbha 47/GKH (P)

The second class of jīvas is devoid of the help of the
internal energy because they are averse to the Lord.
Because of this lack, they are overwhelmed by māyā and

                          242
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

take repeated birth in the material world.

3) The Eternally Liberated Jīvas



The distinct position of the eternally liberated souls

nitya-mukta nitya kṛṣṇa-caraṇe unmukha

kṛṣṇa-pāriṣada nāma, bhuñje sevā-sukha

CC Mad 22.11/GKH (P)

nitya-mukta—eternally liberated; nitya—always; kṛṣṇa-
caraṇe—the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa; unmukha—turned
toward; kṛṣṇa-pāriṣada—associates of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāma—
known as; bhuñje—enjoy; sevā-sukha—the happiness of
service;

The eternally liberated are always awake to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, and they render favourable service to the
feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa. They are considered eternal
associates of Kṛṣṇa, and are eternally enjoying the
transcendental bliss of serving Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

pārṣada-tanūnām akarmārabdhatvaṁ nityatvaṁ śuddhatvaṁ ca

Bhāvārtha-dīpikā (SB 1.6.21), Śrīdhāra Svāmī

The eternal associates of the Lord are free from karma.
They are eternally pure, transcendental, and free from
all material qualities.

muktā api līlayā vigrahaṁ kṛtvā bhagavantaṁ bhajante

Bhāvārtha-dīpikā (SB 10.87.21), Śrīdhāra Svāmī

Liberated souls have divine forms with which they
worship the Supreme Lord by taking part in His
transcendental pastimes.

Thus ends section 3) The Eternally Liberated Jīvas




4) The Conditioned Jīvas



The unfortunate position of the jīvas who are averse to
Kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa bhuli— sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha

CC Mad 20.117/ JD ch. 1

kṛṣṇa bhuli——neglecting or committing the mistake of
indifference towards Kṛṣṇa; sei jīva—that living entity;
anādi—from time immemorial; bahir-mukha—attracted by the

                           243
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

external feature; ataeva—therefore; māyā—illusory
energy; tāre—to him; deya—gives; saṁsāra-duḥkha—miseries
of material existence.

The jīva who is averse to Kṛṣṇa has been preoccupied
with the external potency since time without beginning.
Consequently, Kṛṣṇa’s deluding potency (māyā) gives him
misery in the form of material existence.

Being indifferent to his position as Kṛṣṇa dāsa, the
jīva is chained by māyā

kṛṣṇa-nitya-dāsa, jīva tāhā bhuli' gela

ei doṣe māyā tāra galāya bāndhila

CC Madhya 22.24

kṛṣṇa-nitya-dāsa—eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa; jīva—the
living entity; tāhā—that; bhuli——becoming averse, making
a mistake; gela—went; ei doṣe—for this fault; māyā—the
material energy; tāra—his; galāya—on the neck; bāndhila—
has bound.

Because of aversion or indifference to his eternal
position as the servant of Kṛṣṇa, māyā chains the jīva
by the neck.

Becoming averse to Krsna, the jīva is victimized by the
deluding potency māyā

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha haiyā bhoga-vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

Prema-vivarta 6.2/JD ch. 7

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha—turning away from Kṛṣṇa; haiyā—
becoming; bhoga—sense gratification; vāñchā kare—
desiring ; nikaṭa-stha—standing nearby; māyā—the
illusory energy of the Lord; tāre— him; jāpaṭiyā dhare—
slaps.

When a living entity wants to enjoy material sense
gratification, becoming averse to Kṛṣṇa, he is
immediately victimized by the material energy (māyā) who
is standing nearby.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda: “A living entity
is not forced to come into the material world. He makes
his own choice.” (SB 4.25.25 purport)

The jīvas, although spiritual, are subject to
bewilderment by māyā

viṣṇu-śaktiḥ parā proktā kṣetra-jṇākhyā tathā parā

avidyā-karma-saṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate

Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.7.61/CC Ādi 7.119, Madhya 6.154/BPKG p.
28,361

viṣṇu-śaktiḥ—the potency of Lord Viṣṇu; parā—spiritual;
proktā—it is said; kṣetrajṇa-ākhyā—the potency known as

                             244
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

kṣetrajṇa, the jīva; tathā—as well as; parā—spiritual;
avidyā—ignorance; karma—fruitive activities; saṁjñā—
known as; anyā—other; tṛtīyā—third; śaktiḥ—potency;
iṣyate—known thus.

The potency of Lord Viṣṇu is summarized in three
categories: namely, the spiritual potency, the living
entities, and the inert or ignorant gross and subtle
material elements (māyā). The spiritual potency is full
of knowledge; the living entities, although belonging to
the spiritual potency, are subject to bewilderment by
the third energy (māyā), which is full of ignorance, and
which is always visible in fruitive activities.

The jīva tries to satisfy his lusty desires for sense
gratification, and thus māyā keeps him tightly within
her embrace

piśācī pāile yena mati-chhanna haya

māyā-grasta jīvera haya se bhāva udaya

"āmi nitya kṛṣṇa-dāsa" ei kathā bhule

māyāra naphara haiyā cira-dina bule

kabhu rājā, kabhu prajā, kabhu vipra, śūdra

kabhu sukhī, kabhu duḥkhī, kabhu kīṭa, kṣudra

kabhu svarge, kabhu martye, narake vā kabhu

kabhu deva, kabhu daitya kabhu dāsa prabhu

Prema-vivarta 6.3-6/JD ch. 7

Being averse to the service of the Supreme Lord, the
living entity tries to satisfy his lusty desires for
sense gratification, and thus the witch of the deluding
potency (māyā) keeps him tightly within her embrace. The
living entity, captured by māyā, becomes just like a
person haunted by a ghost. "I am the eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa" - forgetting this, he becomes the slave of māyā
and forever wanders through a succession of lives.
Sometimes he is a king, sometimes a subject. Now a
brāhmaṇa, now a śūdra. Now an insignificant ant.
Sometimes happy, sometimes sad. Now he goes to heaven,
now to hell. Sometimes he is a god, sometimes a devil,
now a servant, now a lord.

The jīva’s condition is exactly like that of a criminal
who is being punished

kabhu svarge uṭhāya, kabhu narake ḍubāya

daṇḍya-jane rājā yena nadīte cubāya

CC Mad 20.118

kabhu—sometimes; svarge—to higher planetary systems;
uṭhāya—he rises; kabhu—sometimes; narake—in hellish
conditions of life; ḍubāya—he is drowned; daṇḍya-jane—a
criminal; rājā—a king; yena—as; nadīte—in the river;
cubāya—dunks.

                          245
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


In the material condition, the living entity is
sometimes raised to higher planetary systems and
material prosperity and sometimes drowned in a hellish
situation. His state is exactly like that of a criminal
who is punished by being raised and again lowered into a
pond on a dunking stool.

When the jīva misuses his independence, he becomes
averse to Kṛṣṇa

nitya-baddha kṛṣṇa haite nitya-bahirmukha

nitya-saṁsāra, bhuñje narakādi duḥkha

CC Mad 22.12/BPKG p. 375

nitya-baddha—perpetually conditioned; kṛṣṇa haite—from
Kṛṣṇa; nitya—eternally; bahir-mukha—averse; nitya-
saṁsāra—perpetually conditioned in the material world;
bhuñje—experience; naraka-ādi duḥkha—the tribulations of
hellish conditions of life.

Due to being averse to Kṛṣṇa from time immemorial, the
jīva becomes known as nitya-baddha - eternally
conditioned. He then rotates in the eternal cycle of
birth and death (saṁsāra) and experiences varieties of
distress headed by hell.

sthūla-liṅgābhimāna-janita-saṁsāra-kleśāś ca

Śrī Amnaya Sutra 38/GKH (P)

sthūla—the gross material body; liṅga—the subtle
material body; abhimāna—identification; janita—created;
saṁsāra—in the world of birth and death; kleśāḥ—
troubles; ca—also.

Because he takes the gross and subtle material bodies to
be himself, the soul suffers miseries within the world
of birth and death.

Being averse to Kṛṣṇa, the witch māyā binds the jīva
with the coverings of the gross and subtle bodies and
inflicts punishment on him

sei doṣe māyā-piśācī daṇḍa kare tāre

ādhyātmikādi tāpa-traya tāre jāri— māre

CC Mad 22.13

sei doṣe—because of this fault; māyā-piśācī—the witch
known as the external energy; daṇḍa kare—gives
punishment; tāre—unto him; ādhyātmika-ādi—beginning with
those pertaining to the body and mind; tāpa-traya—the
threefold miseries; tāre—him; jāri——burning; māre—gives
pain;

Because of the jīva’s fault of being averse to Kṛṣṇa,
the witch māyā binds him with the coverings of the gross
and subtle bodies and inflicts punishment by burning him
with the threefold kleśa (miseries) of ādhyātmika,
ādhidaivika and ādhibhautika.

                           246
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Under the spell of māyā the jīva thinks himself a
product of material nature

yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam

paro 'pi manute 'narthaṁ tat-kṛtaṁ cābhipadyate

SB 1.7.5

yayā—by whom; sammohitaḥ—illusioned; jīvaḥ—the living
entities; ātmānam—self; tri-guṇa-ātmakam—conditioned by
the three modes of nature, or a product of matter; paraḥ
—transcendental; api—in spite of; manute—takes it for
granted; anartham—unwanted things; tat—by that; kṛtam ca
—reaction; abhipadyate—undergoes thereof.

Due to the deluding potency māyā, the living entity,
although transcendental to the three modes of nature,
thinks himself a product of material nature; thus he
suffers the reactions of material miseries.

Being bewildered by māyā, the jīva thinks himself to be
God

pareśa-vaimukhyāt teṣām avidyābhiniveśaḥ

Śrī Āmnāya Sūtra 35/GKH (P)

pareśa—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vaimukhyāt
—because of aversion or indifference; teṣām—of them;
avidyā—ignorance; abhiniveśaḥ—absorption.

Because of indifference to the Supreme Lord the baddha-
jīva becomes covered by avidyā in the form of the
conception that he is also īśvara.

sva-svarūpa-bhramaḥ

Śrī Āmnāya Sūtra 36/GKH (P)

sva—own; svarūpa—identity; bhramaḥ—mistake, illusion,
bewilderment.

The baddha-jīva is bewildered about his own identity.

viṣama-kāma-karma-bandhaḥ

Śrī Āmnāya Sūtra 37/GKH (P)

viṣama—turbulent; kāma—of material desires; karma—
actions; bandhaḥ—bondage.

Because of svarūpa-bhrama (illusion about one’s eternal
spiritual form), the baddha-jīva, being controlled by
lust, suffers in bondage created by the turbulent nature
of fruitive activities.

māyāṁ tu prakṛtiṁ vidyān māyinaṁ tu maheśvaram

tasyāvayava-bhūtais tu vyāptaṁ sarvam idaṁ jagat

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 4.9-10/JD ch. 15/GKH (P)


                            247
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

One should understand that material nature is māyā, the
deluding energy, and that the Supreme Lord the
controller of māyā, pervades the entire creation in His
universal form.

However, the jīva is a superior potency to māyā

apareyam itas tv anyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

BG 7.5/CC Ādi 7.118/JD ch. 9,15/BPKG p. 361/GKH (P)

aparā—inferior energy; iyam—this material world; itaḥ—
beyond this; tu—but; anyām—another; prakṛtim—energy;
viddhi—you must know; me—of Me; parām—which is superior
energy; jīva-bhūtām—they are the living entities; mahā-
bāho—O mighty-armed one; yayā—by which; idam—this
material world; dhāryate—is being conducted; jagat—
universe.

O Mahā-bāho, you should know that My external energy,
which consists of eight divisions, is inferior. There is
another potency of Mine known as the jīva-svarūpa, which
is superior and which accepts this material world for
the purpose of enjoying the fruits of karma.

Thus ends section 4) The Conditioned Jīvas




5) The Jīva and Paramātmā



The jīva is a particle of the rays of Paramātmā

yathāgneḥ kṣudrā visphuliṅgā vyuccaranty evam evāsmād
ātmānaḥ sarve prāṇāḥ sarve lokāḥ sarve devāḥ sarvāṇi
bhūtāni vyuccaranti

Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.1.20/BPKG p. 370/JD ch. 15

yathā—as; kṣudra—tiny; visphuliṅga—sparks; vyuccaranti—
are manifested; agneḥ—from fire; evam—similarly; sarve
prāṇāḥ—all living beings; sarve lokāḥ—all planets; sarve
devāḥ—all the demigods; sarvāṇi bhūtāni—all the elements
of the cosmos; eva vyuccaranti—are certainly manifested;
asmād ātmānaḥ—from that Soul.

As innumerable sparks emanate from a fire, similarly all
the jīvas with their individual characteristics are
manifested from the Paramātmā (Mahā-Viṣṇu), along with
the demigods, planets, animate and inanimate beings.

The jīva is a particle of the rays of the Kṛṣṇa sun

sūryāṁśa-kiraṇa, yaiche agni-jvālā-caya

svābhāvika kṛṣṇera tina-prakāra “śakti— haya

CC Mad 20.109/BPKG p. 371

                            248
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


sūrya-aṁśa—part and parcel of the sun; kiraṇa—a ray of
sunshine; yaiche—as; agni-jvālā-caya—molecular particle
of fire; svābhāvika—naturally; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa;
tina-prakāra—three varieties; śakti—energies; haya—there
are.

Kṛṣṇa is compared to the sun and the jīva is like an
aṁśa, an atomic particle in His rays. Kṛṣṇa has three
kinds of energies.

The jīva is like a spark of the Kṛṣṇa fire

īśvarera tattva yena jvalita jvalana

jīvera svarūpa yaiche sphuliṅgera kaṇa

CC Ādi 7.116

īśvarera tattva—the truth of the Supreme Lod; yena—is
like; jvalita—blazing; jvalana—fire; jīvera—of the
living entities; svarūpa—identity, spiritual form;
yaiche—is like; sphuliṅgera—of the spark; kaṇa—particle.

The Lord is like a great blazing fire, and the living
entities are like small sparks of that fire.

The jīva and Paramātmā are distinct; they reside like
two birds in the heart

dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyāḥ samānaṁ vṛkṣaṁ pariṣasvajāte

tayor anyaḥ pippalaṁ svādv atty anaśnann anyo —
bhicākaśīti

Śvetāsvatara Upaniṣad 4.6/Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.1.1/JD
ch.16/BPKG p. 406

dvā—two; suparṇā—birds; sayujā—together; sakhāyāḥ—
friends; sa-mānam—along with love; vṛkṣam—tree;
pariṣasvajāte—sitting; tayor—both; anyaḥ—one; pippalam—
the berries of the tree, the fruit; svādu—tasting; atti—
eats; anaśnann—not eating; anyaḥ—another; abhicākaśi—
looking at; iti—thus.

Paramātma and the jīvātma reside like two birds on the
branch of a pīpala tree, which represents the gross and
subtle bodies. The jīva is tasting the fruits of the
tree according to his fruitive activities whereas
Paramātmā does not taste the fruits but is situated as
the witness. (or:) The Supreme Lord is the friend of the
living being, and is so kind upon him that He always
accompanies the soul. In the same way that two birds
occupy the same branch of a tree, the Lord sits in the
heart of every living being ready to bestow
auspiciousness upon the soul. In this way the Lord acts
as the in-dwelling witness, even while the soul pursues
the fruits of karma and experiences happiness and
distress.



samāne vṛkṣe puruṣo nimagno hy 'nīśayā śocati muhyamānaḥ


                          249
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

juṣṭam yadā paśyaty anyam īśam asya mahimānam iti vīta-
śokaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 4.7

Although the two birds are in the same tree, the
enjoying bird is full of anxiety and morose; but if
somehow he turns to his friend, the Lord, and becomes
aware of His glories, at once he is freed from all
anxiety.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī states that the jīvas are expansions
of Paramātmā

paramātma-vaibhava-gaṇane ca taṭastha-śakti-rūpāṇāṁ

Bhakti-sandarbha 1, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī

The jīvas are tatastha-śakti and they expand from
Paramātmā (Mahā-Viṣṇu who lies in the Viraja river/
Causal ocean, the borderline between the spiritual and
material worlds).

Editorial note: See also SB 11.22.34

Thus ends section 5) The Jīva and Paramātmā

6) The Jīvas are Dependent on and Distinct from Kṛṣṇa



The jīvas are completely dependent on God

nityo 'nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām eko bahūnāṁ yo
vidadhāti kāmān

tam ātma-sthaṁ ye' nupaśyanti dhīrās teṣaṁ śāntiḥ
śāśvatī netareṣām

Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13

nityaḥ—the singular eternal; nityānām—of the plural
eternals; cetanaḥ—the singular conscious being;
cetanānām—of the plural conscious beings; ekaḥ—that one;
bahūnām—of the many; yaḥ—He who; vidadhāti—supplies;
kāmān—all sesires or necessities of life; tam—Him; ātma-
stham—situated within oneself; ye—who; anupaśyanti—sees
after the guidance of Guru, sādhu and śāstra; dhīrāḥ—
contemplative persons; teṣām—for them; śāntiḥ—peace;
śāśvatī—perpetual; na—not; itareṣām—for others.

Among innumerable eternal, conscious beings, there is
one Supreme Being, who fulfills the desired necessities
of the many. Only those contemplative persons, who
perceive that Supreme Lord within their hearts, through
the transcendental directions of guru-paramparā, can
attain perpetual peace.

ekasmād īśvarān nityāc cetanāt tādṛśā mithaḥ

bhidyante na bahavo jīvās tena bhedaḥ sanātanaḥ

Prameya-ratnāvalī 4.5


                            250
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

The above verse explains that the many eternal and
conscious jīvas are manifest from one eternal conscious
Supreme Lord and thus they are mutually distinct.
Therefore the jīvas are existent separately from Īśvara
from time immemorial. This is the siddhānta,
philosophical conclusion.

The Jīva is a particle of Kṛṣṇa, having emanated from
Him

vastuno'ṁśo jīvo vastunaḥ śaktir māyā

vastunaḥ kāryaṁ jagac ca tat sarvaṁ vastveva

Bhāvārtha-dīpikā 1.1.2

The Supreme Lord is the only factual substance (vastu)
of all reality; a particle of that substance is the
jīva; the energy of that substance is māyā and a
function of that substance is this material world. Thus,
since He is the nondual source of all subsidiary
phenomena, Śrī Bhagavān is clearly established as the
one nondual or absolute factual reality.

sthūlāni sukṣmāṇi bahūni caiva rūpāṇi dehī sva-guṇair
vṛṇoti

kriyā-guṇair ātma-guṇaiś ca teṣāṁ saṁyoga-hetur aparo
“pi dṛṣṭaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 5.22/GKH (P)

sthulāni—gross; sukṣmāni—and subtle; bahūni—many; ca—
also; eva—certainly; rūpāni—forms; dehī—the embodied
spirit soul; sva-guṇaiḥ—by his qualities; vṛnoti—
accepts; kriyā-guṇaiḥ— by the results of his actions;
ātma-guṇaiḥ—by his thoughts and conceptions of life; ca—
also; teṣām—of them; samyoga-hetuḥ—the reasons; aparaḥ—
not the Supreme; api—even; dṛṣṭaḥ—is observed.

Due to his personal qualities, due to the karmic
activities performed within the endless cycle of birth
and death (saṁsāra-cakra), and due to the innate
qualities of the all jīvātmās, the embodied jīva accepts
many kinds of gross and subtle bodies in all forms of
life and repeatedly becomes covered by these qualities.
Thus it is seen that he is different from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

One who equates the jīva with the Supreme Lord is a
foolish atheist

aparimitā dhruvās tanu-bhṛto yadi sarva-gatās

tarhi na śāsyateti niyamo dhruva netarathā

ajani ca yan-mayaṁ tad avimucya niyantṛ bhavet

samam anujānatāṁ yad amataṁ mata-duṣṭatayā

SB 10.87.30/CC Madhya 19.143

aparimitāḥ—countless; dhruvāḥ—permanent; tanu-bhṛtaḥ—the
embodied living entities; yadi—if; sarva-gatāḥ—

                          251
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

omnipresent; tarhi—then; na—not; śāsyatā—sovereignty;
iti—such; niyamaḥ—rule; dhruva—O unchanging one; na—not;
itarathā—otherwise; ajani—was generated; ca—and; yat-
mayam—from whose substance; tat—from that; avimucya—not
separating itself; niyantṛ—regulator; bhavet—must be;
samam—equally present; anujānatām—of those who
supposedly know; yat—which; amatam—misunderstood; mata—
of what is known; duṣṭatayā—because of the imperfection.

[The personified Vedas said:] “O Lord who possesses an
original self-manifest form! If the countless living
entities were all-pervading and possessed forms that
never changed, You could not possibly be their absolute
controller, O immutable one. But since they are Your
localized expansions and their forms are subject to
change, You do control them. Indeed, that which supplies
the ingredients for the generation of something is
necessarily its controller because a product never
exists apart from its ingredient cause. It is simply
illusion for someone to think that he knows the Supreme
Lord, who is equally present in each of His expansions,
since whatever knowledge one gains by material means
must be imperfect.

Any fool who equates the jīva with Kṛṣṇa is an offender
punishable by Yamarāja

yei mūḍha kahe, jīva īśvara haya 'sama'

seita 'pāṣāṇḍi' haya, daṇḍe tāre yama

CC Madhya 18.115

yei mūḍha—any foolish person who; kahe—says; jīva—the
living entity; īśvara—the supreme controller; haya—are;
sama—equal; seita—he; pāṣaṇḍī haya—is a first-class
atheist or offender; daṇḍe—punishes; tāre—him; yama—
Yamarāja.

Any fool who says that the Supreme Lord and the jīva are
the same is an an offender and an atheist. He is
punished by the Lord of death, Yamarāja.

Thus ends section 6) The Jīvas are Dependent on Kṛṣṇa




7) The Jīva Never Falls From the Spiritual World



yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama

BG 15.6

yat—where; gatvā—going; na—never; nivartante—they come
back; tat dhāma—that abode; paramam—supreme; mama—My.

Those who reach My supreme abode never return to this
material world.

After attaining Me, those great souls never return to

                          252
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

this world

mām upetya punar janma duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

BG 8.15

mām—Me; upetya—achieving; punaḥ—again; janma—birth;
duḥkha-ālayam—place of miseries; aśāśvatam—temporary; na
—never; āpnuvanti—attain; mahātmānaḥ—the great souls;
saṁsiddhim—perfection; paramām—ultimate; gatāḥ—having
achieved.

After attaining Me, those great souls who have achieved
the ultimate spiritual perfection, never return to this
world which is temporary and full of miseries.

One who attains My abode, never takes birth again

ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino —rjuna

mām upetya tu kaunteya punar janma na vidyate

BG 8.16

ā-brahma-bhuvanāt—from the Brahmaloka planet down; lokāḥ
—the planetary systems; punaḥ—again; āvartinaḥ—
returning; arjuna—O Arjuna; mām—unto Me; upetya—
arriving; tu—but; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; punaḥ janma—
rebirth; na—never; vidyate—takes place.

From the highest planet in the material world down to
the lowest, all are places of misery wherein repeated
birth and death take place. But one who attains to My
abode, O son of Kuntī, never takes birth again.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda: “As it is stated
in the Bhagavad Gīta, a person going to that spiritual
sky never returns to this material world of death and
suffering.” (Kṛṣṇa Book, ch. 28); “The conclusion is
that no one falls from the spiritual world, or Vaikuṇṭha
planet, for it is the eternal abode.” (SB 3.16.26
purport)

Editorial note: Not less than five ślokas of the
Bhagavad Gīta state that the jīva who attains spiritual
perfection never returns to this material world: 4.9 —
“One who knows me in truth, never takes birth again”.
15.6 — “Those who reach My abode never return to this
material world”. 8.15 — “After attaining Me, the great
souls never return to this temporary world”. 8.16 — “But
one who attains My abode never takes birth again”. 8.21
— “That place from which, having attained it, one never
returns — that is My supreme abode”.

Thus ends section 7) The Jīva Never Falls From the
Spiritual World




8) The spiritual, Eternal Nature of the Jīva

                          253
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017




The jīva is a spiritual substance (aprākṛta vastu)

bālāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca

bhāgo jīvaḥ sa vijñeyaḥ sa cānantyāya kalpate

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 5.9/BPKG p. 372

bāla-agra—the tip of a hair; śata-bhāgasya—of one
hundredth; śata-dhā—into one hundred parts; kalpitasya—
divided; ca—and; bhāgaḥ—minute portion; jīvaḥ—the living
entity; saḥ—that; vijñeyaḥ—to be understood; saḥ—that;
ca—and; anantyāya—unlimited; kalpate—considered.

If one divides the tip of a hair into one hundred parts
and subdivides one part into one hundred parts, that is
understood as the dimension of the jīva. Although he is
so subtle, the jīva is a spiritual substance (aprākṛta
vastu) and he is suitable for ānantya -dharma (anta
means “end— or “to be free from death—, and ānantya
means that endless state wherein limitations have no
existence, i.e. mokṣa, liberation).

Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you,
nor anyone else

na tv evāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥ

na caiva na bhaviṣyāmaḥ sarve vayam ataḥ param

BG 2.12

na—never; tu—but; eva—certainly; aham—I; jātu—at any
time; na—did not; āsam—exist; na—not; tvam—you; na—not;
ime—all these; jana-adhipāḥ—kings; na—never; ca—also;
eva—certainly; na—not; bhaviṣyāmaḥ—shall exist; sarve
vayam—all of us; ataḥ param—hereafter.

Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you,
nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us
ever cease to be, rather we shall continue to exist
forever.

You are not this temporary, ever-changing body

dehino “smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati

BG 2.13

dehinaḥ—of the embodied; asmin—in this; yathā—as; dehe—
in the body; kaumāram—boyhood; yauvanam—youth; jarā—old
age; tathā—similarly; dehāntara—transference of the
body; prāptiḥ—achievement; dhīraḥ—the sober; tatra—
thereupon; na—never; muhyati—deluded.

As the embodied soul continually passes, in his body,
from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul similarly
passes into another body at death. The self-realised
soul is not bewildered by such a change.

                          254
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017




The jīva is different from his material body

yathānalo dāruṣu bhinna īyate yathānilo deha-gataḥ
pṛthak sthitaḥ

yathā nabhaḥ sarva-gataṁ na sajjate tathā pumān sarva-
guṇāśrayaḥ paraḥ

SB 7.2.43

yathā—just as; analaḥ—the fire; dāruṣu—in wood; bhinnaḥ—
separate; īyate—is perceived; yathā—just as; anilaḥ—the
air; deha-gataḥ—within the body; pṛthak—separate;
sthitaḥ—situated; yathā—just as; nabhaḥ—the sky; sarva-
gatam—all-pervading; na—not; sajjate—mix; tathā—
similarly; pumān—the living entity; sarva-guṇa-āśrayaḥ—
although now the shelter of the modes of material
nature; paraḥ—transcendental to material contamination.

As fire, although situated in wood, can be understood to
be different from the wood, as air, although situated
within the mouth and nostrils, is understood to be
separate, and as the sky, although all-pervading, never
mixes with anything, so the jīva, although now encaged
within the material body, of which it is the source, is
separate from it.



There is no birth nor death for the spirit soul

na jāyate mriyate vā kadācin nāyaṁ bhūtvā bhavitā vā na
bhūyaḥ

ajo nityaḥ śāśvato —yaṁ purāṇo na hanyate hanyamāne
śarīre

BG 2.20

na—never; jāyate—takes birth; mriyate—dies; vā—either;
kadācit—at any time (past, present or future); na—never;
ayam—this; bhūtvā—having come into being; bhavitā—will
come to be; vā—or; na—not; bhūyaḥ—or is again coming to
be; ajaḥ—unborn; nityaḥ—eternal; śāśvataḥ—permanent;
ayam—this; purāṇaḥ—the oldest; na—never; hanyate—is
killed; hanyamāne—being killed; śarīre—the body.

The soul    has neither birth nor death at any time. He has
not come    into being, does not come into being, and will
not come    into being. He is unborn, eternal, ever-
existing    and primeval. He is not slain when the body is
slain.



The jīva cannot be extinguished

nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ

na cainaṁ kledayanty āpo na śoṣayati mārutaḥ


                             255
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

BG 2.23

na—never; enam—this soul; chindanti—can cut to pieces;
śastrāṇi—weapons; na—never; enam—this soul; dahati—
burns; pāvakaḥ—fire; na—never; ca—also; enam—this soul;
kledayanti—moistens; āpaḥ—water; na—never; śoṣayati—
dries; mārutaḥ—wind.

The soul can never be cut to pieces by any weapon, nor
burned by fire, nor moistened by water, nor withered by
the wind.

The jīvātmā is changeless and immortal

acchedyo —yam adāhyo —yam akledyo —śoṣya eva ca

nityaḥ sarva-gataḥ sthāṇur acalo —yaṁ sanātanaḥ

BG 2.24/BPKG p. 124

a-cchedyaḥ—unbreakable; ayam—this soul; a-dāhyaḥ—cannot
be burned; ayam—this soul; a-kledyaḥ—insoluble; a-śoṣyaḥ
—cannot be dried; eva—certainly; ca—and; nityaḥ—
everlasting; sarva-gataḥ—all-pervading; sthāṇuḥ—
unchangeable; a-calaḥ—immovable; ayam—this soul;
sanātanaḥ—eternally the same.

The jīvātma cannot be cut by any weapon, burnt by fire,
moistened by water or dried by air. He is nitya
(eternal), all-pervasive, unchanging, steadfast and
sanātana (ever-existing).

The qualities of the soul are described in the Upaniṣads

eṣa ātmāpahata-pāpmā vijaro vimṛtyur viśoko

vijighatso —pipāsaḥ satya-kāmaḥ satya-saṅkalpaḥ

Chāndogya Up 8.7.1/Navadvipa-dhāma Māhātmya 1.5/GG 1.18
pt

eṣaḥ—this; ātmā—soul; apahata-pāpmā—free of sin; vi-
jaraḥ—free from old age; vi-mṛtyuḥ—free from death; vi-
śokaḥ—free from lamentation; vi-jighatsaḥ—free from
hunger; a-pipāsaḥ—free from thirst; satya-kāmaḥ—with
spiritual desires; satya-sankalpaḥ—his desires become
actualized.

By his eternal spiritual nature the jīva is free from
the bondage of actions; free from old age, death,
lamentation, bewilderment, hunger and thirst. His only
desire is to serve the Supreme Absolute Truth and all
his spiritual desires become realised.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: These qualities are concealed
as long as one is fallen in material existence, yet they
manifest when Bhagavān bestows his mercy. Therefore
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has been addressed as bhava-khaṇḍana
— “He who demolishes one’s entanglement in material
existence.”

Only by attaining Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet can one be freed
from material bondage


                          256
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

jñātvā devaṁ sarva-pāśāpahāniḥ

kṣīṇaiḥ kleśair janma-mṛtyu-prahāṇiḥ

tasyābhidhyānāt tṛtīyaṁ deha-bhede

viśveśvaryaṁ kevalam āpta-kāmaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 1.11

By understanding the truth of Parameśvara, the Supreme
Lord, one can become free from the bonds of material
life and from the repetition of birth and death. After
being thus liberated from the gross and subtle material
bodies, through gradually performing bhagavad-dhyāna
that is to say kṛṣṇa-anuśīlanam, the jīva attains the
transcendentally pure form (svarūpa) of an associate of
the Lord possessed of all opulence. Thus all His desires
become fulfilled.

Thus ends section 8) The spiritual, Eternal Nature of
the Jīva




9) The Jīva’s Svarūpa




bhakta-deha pāile haya guṇera smaraṇa

guṇākṛṣṭa hañā kare nirmala bhajana

CC Mad 24.111

bhakta-deha—the body of a devotee; pāile—when one gets;
haya—there is; guṇera smaraṇa—remembrance of the
transcendental qualities; guṇa-ākṛṣṭa hañā—being
attracted by the transcendental qualities; kare—
performs; nirmala bhajana—pure bhajana.

Only when one gets a devotee’s spiritual body (siddha-
deha), can he do pure bhajana and remember the
transcendental qualities and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Being spontaneously attracted by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s qualities
and pastimes, one becomes a pure devotee engaged in His
eternal service in the nitya-līlā. 19

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: We should note that the
descriptions of siddha-deha that śāstra and the
mahājanas have given are for sādhakas on a particular
level (those who have reached the stage of ruci).
Wherever siddha-deha has been mentioned, it has been in
the context of rāgānugā bhakti. Specifically, such
instructions are intended for those very fortunate
sādhakas in whose hearts lobha (divine greed), a genuine
eagerness to attain rāgātmikā-bhakti, has arisen due to
saṁskāras (spiritual impressions) from this life and
previous lives. It is one thing to understand the
excellence of a particular rasa by the discrimination

                             257
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

given in śāstra. It is another matter altogether to have
lobha for that rasa. When someone has lobha in a
particular rasa, then the symptoms of lobha will also be
evident in that sādhaka. When lobha arises, rāgānugā
bhakti sādhana begins from the stage of ruci. (PP p. 88)

The hazards of contemplating one’s svarūpa without
sufficient qualifications

adhikāra nā labhiyā siddha-deha-bhāve

viparyaya buddhi janme śaktira abhāve

Bhajana-rahasya 1.10, Bengali

adhikara nā—without proper qualification; labhiyā—
attaining; siddha-deha—spiritual body; bhāve—while
meditating; viparyaya—perverted, reversed; buddhi—
intelligence; janme—born; śaktira abhāve—having
insufficient power.

The intelligence of those who try to contemplate their
siddha-deha prematurely, without sufficient
qualification, becomes bewildered due to their lack of
spiritual strength (bhoga-vṛtti will come and their
entire bhajana will be ruined).

Śrīla Bhakti Pramoda Purī Mahārāja: What we must try to
understand here is the following: If one thinks on that
basis (CC Ādi 3.15, see 11.44) that the various
regulative principles of the vidhi-mārga can be
dispensed with before acquiring a readiness for the
manifestation of rāgānuga-bhakti, such a person will
become a religious hypocrite, a pretender and a prākṛta-
sahajiyā. As the undesirable elements of one’s character
(anarthas) are destroyed, spontaneous affection
automatically awakens. On the other hand, if one does
not rid himself of these undesirable elements, the
discussion of subjects for which he is not qualified
will in all likelihood have disastrous consequences.
(Art of Sādhana ch. 1)



One should follow (ānugatya) - not imitate (anukaraṇa).
Those who imitate will be destroyed

naitat samācarej jātu manasāpi hy anīśvaraḥ

vinaśyaty ācaran mauḍhyād yathā “rudro —bdhi-jaṁ viṣam

SB 10.33.36/Veṇu-gīta Introduction

na—not; etat—this; samācaret—should perform; jātu—ever;
manasā—with the mind; api—even; hi—certainly; anīśvaraḥ—
one who is not a controller; vinaśyati—he is destroyed;
ācaran—acting; mauḍhyāt—out of foolishness; yathā—as; a-
rudraḥ—one who is not Lord Rudra; abdhi-jam—generated
from the ocean; viṣam—poison.

Those who are not īśvaras, who are powerless and
helplessly controlled by the laws of karma, should never
imitate the Lord’s pastimes even within their minds.
Like a person who foolishly imitates Lord Śiva by

                          258
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

drinking poison (as Śiva drank the terrible hālahala
poison generated from the churning of the ocean), they
will certainly be destroyed.



The jīva has His own innate svarūpa

sampadyāvirbhāvaḥ svena-śabdāt

Vedānta-Sūtra 4.4.1

sampadya—of he who has attained perfection; āvirbhāvaḥ—
manifestation; śabdāt-svena—by the word “own”.

“In the stage of perfection, the form which manifests is
his own— (This is a Vedānta-Sūtra commentary on a
Chāndogya Upaniṣad śloka which states that every jīva
has his own (svena) innate svarūpa). [“Just so this
blessed soul, rising up from the [material] body and
approaching the supreme light with his own form achieves
(the Absolute).—] (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 8.12.2)

Spiritual substance can never be comprehended by the
mundane senses

aprākṛta vastu nahe prākṛta-gocara

veda-purāṇete ei kahe nirantara

CC Mad 9.194

aprākṛta—spiritual; vastu—substance; nahe—not; prākṛta—
of matter; gocara—within the jurisdiction; veda-purāṇete
—the Vedas and the Purāṇas; ei—this; kahe—say; nirantara
—always.

The Vedas and Purāṇas always assert that spiritual
substance can never be comprehended by the mundane
senses.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: Kṛṣṇa is the supreme object,
and His svarūpa can only be known through the all-
enlightening propensity of svarūpa-śakti, and not by the
mental faculty of the marginal jīvas. When the svarūpa-
śakti manifests Herself within the heart of the jīva [at
the stage of bhāva] by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa or of His pure
devotee, then the cognitive faculty (saṁvit-vṛtti) of
the svarūpa-śakti begins to act within the heart. When
that happens, knowledge of the spiritual realm (cid-
jagat) is revealed. (JD ch. 22)



A thunderbolt on the heads of the sahajiyās (cheap
imitationists)

ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

Padma-Purāṇa/ BRS 1.2.234/CC Mad 17.136/BR 2.32/BPKG p.
242, 330


                          259
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

ataḥ—therefore; śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-ādi—Lord Kṛṣṇa’s name,
form, qualities, pastimes and so on; na—not; bhavet—can
be; grāhyam—perceived; indriyaiḥ—by the blunt material
senses; sevā-unmukhe—to one favourably engaged in His
service; hi—certainly; jihvā-ādau—beginning with the
tongue; svayam—personally; eva—certainly; sphurati—
become manifest; adaḥ—that (Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, and so
on).

The nāma-rūpa-guṇa-līlā of Śrī Kṛṣṇa can never be
perceived by the material senses of the conditioned
soul. Only for one whose mind and senses have been
purified by chanting and serving under the guidance of
Śrī Guru will Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, qualities and pastimes
become manifest. Śrī harināma will manifest on the
tongue of such a sevonmukha-sādhaka naturally by itself.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “This śloka is like a
thunderbolt on the heads of the sahajiyās.” This was one
of Śrīla Trivikrāma Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s favourite ślokas
and it is said that he could give it 64 different
explanations.

Bhakti is not the activity of one’s body, senses or mind
but an activity of the soul

nijendriya-manaḥ-kāya-ceṣṭā-rūpāṁ na viddhi tām

nitya-satya-ghanānanda-rūpā sā hi guṇātigā

Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam 2.3.133

nija—own; indriya—senses; manaḥ—mind; kāya—body; ceṣṭa—
activities; rūpam—form; na—not; vidhi—know; tam—that;
nitya—eternal; satya—reality; ghana—intense; ānanda—of
bliss; rūpa—form; sa—that; hi—indeed; guṇa—the modes of
nature; atigā—beyond.

You should know that bhakti is not the activity of your
senses, mind and body. Bhakti is completely
transcendental, full of bliss and certainly beyond the
modes of nature.20

An alternative translation: The activities of bhakti
beginning with śravaṇa, kīrtana, smaraṇa, vandana etc.
are not performed by the body. You should know bhakti to
be eternal, constituted of śuddha-sattva, imbued with
intense bliss and fully transcendental to the binding
influence of the three modes of nature.



One must transcend anartha-nivṛtti and attain at least
the stage of niṣṭhā, if not ruci, before spontaneous
attachment can begin to manifest



vidhi-mārga-rata-jane svādhīnatā ratna-dāne

rāga-mārge karān praveśa

rāga-vaśavartī haiyā pārakīya bhāvāśraye


                           260
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

labhe jīva kṛṣṇa-premāveśa

kṛṣṇa-nāma dhare kata bala, BVT/BPKG p. 472/PP p. 84

To the person fixed in the regulative principles
(niṣṭhā), the Holy Name gives the jewel of independence,
placing him on the path of spontaneous devotion
(rāgānuga bhakti). That person, overcome by spontaneous
attachment to the Lord, takes shelter of the parakīyā
mood and goes on to become absorbed in love for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.




Smaraṇa will naturally follow Kīrtana, only then will
one’s svarūpa manifest

kīrtana-prabhāve, smaraṇa haibe,

se kāle bhajana-nirjana sambhava

Duṣṭa Mana! — Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda

kīrtana-prabhāve—by the power of the chanting; smaraṇa—
remembering the Lord’s pastimes; haibe—will be; se kāle—
at that time; bhajana-nirjana—solitary bhajana; sambhava
—possible.

The transcendental power of congregational chanting
automatically awakens remembrance of the Lord and His
divine pastimes in relation to one’s own eternal
spiritual form. Only at that time does it become
possible to go off to a solitary place and engage in the
confidential worship of Their Lordships (aṣṭa-kālīya-
līlā-smaraṇa).

Śrīla Gaurakiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja: “Sit near me and
chant the names of Śrī Hari in a loud voice. By
artificially engaging in the rememberance of pastimes
(aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā-smaraṇa), the ghost of anarthas and
the evil spirit of māyā shall seize your neck with great
force.” (Gauḍīya, Vol. 14, p. 218)

Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa Bābajī Mahārāja: “Artificial
remembrance is not the way of rūpānugas, the followers
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Spontaneous remembrance by means
of śrī-nāma-kīrtana is the only aim of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas.” (Gauḍīya, Year 17, p. 505)

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda: “Our (Śrī
Gauḍiyā Maṭha) siddha-praṇālī is “tṛnād api sunīcena -
kīrtaniyaḥ sadā hariḥ—”

Editorial note: Other relevant ślokas are, ādau śraddhā
tataḥ sādhu-saṅga; kona bhāgye kona jīvera; kṛti-sādhyā
bhavet sādhya-bhāvaÖ.nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya;
raghunāthera pada-padme (CC Ādi 4.40); ceto-darpaṇa-
mārjanam; and yathottaram asau svāda. References: BPKG’s
Biography pp. 469-480; Prabandha Pañcakam (Five
Essential Essays), chapter 4 - “Bābājī Veśa & Siddha-
praṇālī— (for Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s exquisitely eye-
opening exposition of this issue); Śrīla Bhaktivinoda

                             261
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Ṭhākura’s commentary on ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam in Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka 1 pt.; and the “Guru Tattva— paper “Śrī
Gurudeva and the Svarūpa of the Jīva”.

Thus ends section 9) The Jīva’s Svarūpa



and Chapter 8 — Jīva-tattva




Chapter 9 — Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva


Everything is inconceivably one with and different from
Kṛṣṇa




Śrī-Daśa-Mūla-Tattva States:

hareḥ śakteḥ sarvaṁ cid-acid akhilaṁ syāt pariṇatiḥ

vivartaṁ no satyaṁ śrutim iti viruddhaṁ kali-malam

harer bhedābheda-śruti-vihita-tattvaṁ suvimalaṁ

tataḥ premnaḥ siddhir bhavati nitarāṁ nitya-viṣaye

Śrī-Daśa-Mūla-Tattva 8/JD ch. 18

sarvam—everything; cit-acit—spiritual and material; syāt
—should be (understood to be); pariṇatiḥ—the
transformation; śakteḥ—of the energy; hareḥ—of Lord
Hari; vīvartam—the impersonalist philosophy of illusion;
na—not; tu—indeed; satyam—true; malam—a contamination;
kali—of the age of Kali; viruddham—contradicting; śrutim
—the Vedas; suvimalam—very pure; tattvam—truth; vihita—
established; śruti—in the Vedas; iti—that; akhilam—
everything; abhedau— (simultaneously) one; bheda—and
different; hareḥ—from Lord Hari; tataḥ—therefore;
siddhiḥ—the perfection; premṇaḥ—of spiritual love;
bhavati—may be; nitarām—eternally; nitya-viṣaye—when one
accepts this eternal and all encompassing principle.

The entire spiritual and material creation is a
transformation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s śakti. The impersonal
philosophy of illusion (vivarta-vāda) is not true. It is
an impurity produced by Kali-yuga, and is contrary to
the teachings of the Vedas. The Vedas support acintya-
bhedābheda-tattva (inconceivable oneness and difference)
as the pure absolute doctrine, and one can attain
perfect love for Kṛṣṇa when he accepts this principle.

The Supreme Absolute Truth is One — “ekam eva paramaṁ
tattvaṁ— - yet He is endowed with inconceivable potency,
manifested in four ways

ekam eva paramaṁ tattvaṁ svabhāvika-acintya-śaktyā

                          262
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


sarvadaiva svarūpa-tad-rūpa-vaibhava-jīva-pradhāna-
rūpeṇa

caturddhāvatiṣṭhate, sūryāntara-maṇḍala-sthita-teja iva

maṇḍala-tad-bahirgata-tad-raśmi-tat-praticchavi-rūpeṇa

Bhāgavat-sandarbha 16/BPKG p. 366/JD ch. 18

The Absolute Truth is one. His unique characteristic is
that He is endowed with inconceivable potency through
which He is always manifested in four ways: (1) svarūpa
(His original form), (2) tad-rūpa-vaibhava (His personal
splendor, including His eternal abode and eternal
associates, expansions and avatāras), (3) jīvas (the
individual souls), and (4) pradhāna (the material
energy). These four features are likened to the interior
of the sun planet, the surface of the sun, the sun-rays
emanating from this surface, and a remotely situated
reflection, respectively.



ekam eva paramaṁ tattvaṁ — The Supreme Truth is one.

Bhagavat Sand. 16/JD Ch.18

advaya-jñāna-para-tattva — The Supreme Truth is
undivided knowledge.

Bhagavat Sand. 16/JD Ch.18

ekam evādvitīyam — The Absolute Truth is indeed one
without a second.

Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.2.1/JD ch. 18/BPKG pp. 104,121 etc.

neha nānāsti kiñcana

Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.4.19

Other than the one non-dual Absolute Truth, advaya-
brahma, there is no existence of any separate forms.

sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma

Chāndogya Upaniṣad 3.14.1/MS p. 17/JD ch. 18/BPKG p. 410

sarvam—everything; khalu—indeed; idam—this; brahma—the
Supreme Spirit (Brahman).

This entire creation is the form of the Absolute.
Everything, both matter and spirit, is non-different
from the Supreme Brahman.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains: Therefore the
Absolute Truth is simultaneously saviśeṣa (full of
spiritual qualities) and nirviśeṣa (devoid of material
qualities). However, the saviśeṣa feature is superior
(“Śrī-Śikṣāṣṭaka— 1.5 pt).

There is no “sva-gata-bheda— - difference between the
bodily parts of Kṛṣṇa

                             263
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti

paśyanti pānti kalayanti ciraṁ jaganti

ānanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā 5.32

aṅgāni—limbs; yasya—whose; sakala-indriya—of all His
organs; vṛttimanti—possess the functions; paśyanti—
behold; pānti—maintain; kalayanti—manifest; ciram—
eternally; jaganti—the universes; ānanda—bliss; cinmaya—
imbued with spirit; sat—substantiality; ujjvala—full of
dazzling splendor; vigrahasya—whose form (is); tam
govindam—of Him Govinda; ādi-puruṣam—the original
person; aham bhajāmi—I engage in the bhajana.

I engage in the bhajana of Śrī Govinda, the primeval
Lord. His transcendental form is full of bliss, truth,
substantiality and is thus full of the most dazzling
splendor. Each of the limbs of that transcendental
figure possesses in Himself, the full-fledged functions
of all the organs, and eternally sees, maintains and
manifests the infinite universes, both spiritual and
mundane.

No “sva-jātīya-bheda— - difference between Kṛṣṇa and His
plenary expansions

dīpārcir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya

dīpāyate vivṛta-hetu-samāna-dharmā

yas tādṛg eva hi ca viṣṇutayā vibhāti

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā 5.46

(just like) dīpa-arciḥ—the flame of a lamp; eva hi—in
exactly; daśa-antaram—ten other lamps; abhyupetya—
expands; dīpāyate—lighting; vivṛta-hetu—as their
expanded cause; samāna-dharmā—equally powerful; yaḥ—who;
tādṛk—same way; eva hi—certainly; ca—also; viṣṇutayā—by
His expansion as Lord Viṣṇu; vibhāti—He illuminates; tam
govindam—Him, the charmer of cows and milkmaids; ādi-
puruṣam—the original person; aham bhajāmi—I engage in
the devotional service of.

When the flame of one candle is expanded to another
candle and placed in a different position, it burns
separately, and its illumination is as powerful as the
original candle—s. Similarly, the Supreme Lord, Govinda,
expands Himself in different forms as Viṣṇu, who is
equally luminous, powerful and opulent. Let me worship
that Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda.

There is no “vijātīya-bheda— - difference between Kṛṣṇa
and His Śaktis, Kṛṣṇa and His energetic expansions, the
jīvas and māyā


                          264
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

śakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ

Vedānta-sūtra/Nyāya-śāstra/JD ch. 9,14/BPKG pp. 28, 209

The potencies and the master of potencies are not
different. There is no difference between the Energetic
and His energies. In other words, there is no difference
between Kṛṣṇa and His energetic expansions, the jīvas
and māyā.21

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī: Bhagavān is free from the three
kinds of difference known as svagata-bheda, svajātīya-
bheda, and vijātīya-bheda. A difference between an
object and its parts is called sva-gata-bheda. A
difference between objects of the same class is called
sva-jātīya-bheda. A difference between objects of
different classes is called vi-jātīya-bheda. (Tattva-
Sandarbha 51)




There is no “vijātīya-bheda— (2) - All the universes are
situated within Bhagavān and Bhagavān is also fully
present in every atom of all the universes

eko —py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Śrī Brahma-Saṁhitā 5.35

ekaḥ—in a single tattva; api—although; asau asti—He
exists; racayitum—in creating; jagad-aṇḍa—of universes;
koṭim—the tens of milllions; yat-śaktiḥ—by His self-
sufficient potency; jagad-aṇḍa—of universes; cayā—within
the host; yad-antaḥ—through His entrance; aṇḍa—
(simultaneously) in each universe; antara-stha—and
within; paramāṇu—of parama-aṇus (atoms); cayā—each of
the host; antara-stha—He becomes situated; ādi-puruṣam
govindam—primeval Person, Śrī Govinda; tam—to that; aham
bhajāmi—I render devotional service.

Śakti (potency) and śaktimān (potent) are one
undifferentiated principle. The śakti by which billions
of universes are created is situated inseparably within
Bhagavān. All the universes are situated within Bhagavān
and Bhagavān is also fully present in every atom of all
the universes by the influence of His acintya-śakti. I
render devotional service to that ādi-puruṣa, Śrī
Govinda.



Everything is controlled and owned by the Kṛṣṇa



iśāvāsyam idam sarvaṁ yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat

                           265
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Īśopaniṣad 1/SB 8.1.10/JD Ch. 6

īśa—by the Lord; āvāsyam—controlled; idam—this; sarvam—
all; yat kiñca—whatever; jagatyām—within the universe;
jagat—all that is animate or inanimate.

Everything animate or inanimate that is within the
universe is controlled and owned by the Lord.



Kṛṣṇa is equipped with inconceivable potency (acintya-
śakti)

aghaṭana-ghaṭana-patīyasī śakti

BR 1.1 pt/Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam ch. 1

The potency that makes the inconceivable conceivable and
the impossible possible.

Kṛṣṇa is simultaneously the doer and the non-doer

kartum akartum anyathā kartuṁ - saḥ iśvaraḥ

Paramātma-Sandarbha 93

kartum—to do; akartum—not to do; anyathā—otherwise;
kartum—to do; saḥ—He; iśvaraḥ—the Supreme.

He who has the power to do anything, to undo anything,
or to change anything into anything else is Iśvara.
Although He is the doer, He is nonetheless the non-doer.



Kṛṣṇa is everyone’s maintainer, shelter and origin

yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante yena jātāni jīvanti

yat prayanty abhisaṁviśanti tad vijijñāsasva tad brahma

Taittirīya Up. 3.1.1/Paramātma Sand. 55/JD ch.15,18/BPKG
p.282/KGH (P)

yataḥ—from whom; vai—indeed; imāni—these; bhūtāni—
beings; jāyante—are born; yena—by whom; jātāni—born;
jīvanti—live; yat—what; prayanti—go; abhāsaṁviśanti—
enter; tat—that; vijijñāsasva—you should try to know;
tat—that; brahma—the Supreme.

One should enquire about that Brahman from whom all
living entities are born, by whom their existence is
maintained and into whom they all ultimately enter.

Kṛṣṇa is everyone’s maintainer and provider

nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān

Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13/BPKG p. 406/JD ch. 1,12,18,


                          266
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

nityaḥ—the singular eternal; nityānām—of the plural
eternals; cetanaḥ—the singular conscious being;
cetanānām—of the plural conscious beings; ekaḥ—that one;
bahūnām—of the many; yaḥ—He who; vidadhāti—supplies;
kāmān—all desires or necessities of life.

He is the chief eternal Being among all eternal beings,
and the Supreme conscious Being among all conscious
beings. That one Supreme fulfills the desires of all the
others and provides them with everything they need.



Kṛṣṇa is one, yet becomes many by His inconceivable
desire

eko bahu syām / ekaṁ bahu syām

Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.2.3/Taittirīya Upanishad/BG 9.7 pt/
CC Madhy 20.173 pt/BS 35 pt

eko/ekam—one; bahu—many; syām—I will become.

Śrī Bhagavān desired: Although I am one, I shall become
many. (Kṛṣṇa is One and upon His desire becomes many.
Yet becoming many, still remains One).

tad aikṣata bahu syām

tat—(by) that; aikṣata—glance; bahu—many; syām—I will
become.

By that glance He becomes many.

so —kāmayata bahu syāṁ prajāyeya

Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.2.4/SB 10.87.31 pt

He desired, —Let Me become many by expanding into
progeny.—



eko 'pi san bahudhā yo 'vabhāti

Vedānta-sūtra 1.2.32 pt (Balādeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa)

Although He is one, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
manifests as many.



Infinity minus infinity equals infinity

oṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate

pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate

Śrī Īśopaniṣad, Invocation

oṁ—the Complete Whole; pūrṇam—perfectly complete; adaḥ—
that; pūrṇam—perfectly complete; idam—this phenomenal
world; pūrṇāt—from the all-perfect; pūrṇam—complete
unit; udacyate—is produced; pūrṇasya—of the Complete

                             267
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

Whole; pūrṇam—completely, all; ādāya—having been taken
away; pūrṇam—the complete balance; eva—even; avaśiṣyate—
is remaining.

The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete, and
because He is completely perfect, all emanations from
Him, such as this phenomenal world, are perfectly
equipped as complete wholes. Whatever is produced of the
Complete Whole is also complete in itself. Because He is
the Complete Whole, even though so many complete units
emanate from Him, He remains perfectly complete.

All beings are in Me, but I am not in them

mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ jagad avyakta-mūrtinā

mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ

BG 9.4

mayā—by Me; tatam—pervaded; idam—this; sarvam—all; jagat
—cosmic manifestation; avyakta-mūrtinā—by the
unmanifested form; mat-sthāni—in Me; sarva-bhūtāni—all
living entities; na—not; ca—also; aham—I; teṣu—in them;
avasthitaḥ—situated.

By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is
pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in them.



na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni paśya me yogam aiśvaram

bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ

BG 9.5

na—never; ca—also; mat-sthāni—situated in Me; bhūtāni—
all creation; paśya—just see; me—My; yogam aiśvaram—
inconceivable mystic power; bhūta-bhṛt—the maintainer of
all living entities; na—never; ca—also; bhūta-sthaḥ—in
the cosmic manifestation; mama—My; ātmā—Self; bhūta-
bhāvanaḥ—the source of all manifestations.

And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me.
Behold My mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer
of all living entities and although I am everywhere, I
am not a part of this cosmic manifestation, for My Self
is the very source of creation.

Vikāra (vastu-pariṇāma-vāda) and Vivarta-vāda

sa-tattvato' nyathā-buddhir vikāra ity udāhṛitaḥ

atattvato' nyathā prathā vivarta ity udāhṛtaḥ

Sadānanda Yogindra, Vedānta-sāra 59/JD ch. 18

The word vikāra (transformation or modification) means
that something appears to be what it is factually not.
When a real substance takes another form it is called
vikāra. An example of this is the transformation of milk
into yogurt. When something is mistaken for something
else it is called vivarta, or illusion, as when a rope

                          268
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

is taken to be a snake.22

You work, though You are inactive; You take birth,
though You are unborn

janma karma ca viśvātmann ajasyākartur ātmanaḥ

tiryaṅ-nṝṣiṣu yādaḥsu tad atyanta-viḍambanam

SB 1.8.30

janma—birth; karma—activity; ca—and; viśva-ātman—O soul
of the universe; ajasya—of the unborn; akartuḥ—of the
inactive; ātmanaḥ—of the vital energy; tiryak—animal; nṛ
—human being; ṛṣiṣu—in the sages; yādaḥsu—in the
aquatics; tat—that; atyanta—veritable; viḍambanam—
bewildering.

[Queen Kuntī said:] “Of course it is bewildering, O soul
of the universe, that You work, though You are inactive,
and that You take birth, though You are the vital force
and the unborn. You Yourself descend amongst animals,
men, sages and aquatics. Verily, this is bewildering.”

As Bala-Gopāla You were afraid, though fear personified
is afraid of You

gopy ādade tvayi kṛtāgasi dāma tāvad

yā te daśāśru-kalilāñjana-sambhramākṣam

vaktraṁ ninīya bhaya-bhāvanayā sthitasya

sā māṁ vimohayati bhīr api yad bibheti

SB 1.8.31

gopī—the cowherd lady (Yaśodā); ādade—took up; tvayi—on
Your; kṛtā-gasi—who performed naughty deeds (by breaking
the butter pot); dāma—rope; tāvat—at that time; yā—that
which; te—Your; daśā—situation; aśru-kalila—overflooded
with tears; añjana—ointment; sambhrama—perturbed; akṣam—
eyes; vaktram—face; ninīya—downwards; bhaya-bhāvanayā—by
thoughts of fear; sthitasya—of the situation; sā—that;
mām—me; vimohayati—bewilders; bhīḥ api—even fear
personified; yat—whom; bibheti—is afraid.

[Queen Kuntī said:] “My dear Kṛṣṇa, Yaśodā took up a
rope to bind You when You committed an offense, and Your
perturbed eyes overflowed with tears, which washed the
mascara from Your eyes. And You were afraid, though fear
personified is afraid of You. This sight is bewildering
to me.”

The Śruti on the subject of Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva

eko vaśī sarvabhūtāntarātmā

ekaṁ rūpaṁ bahudhā yaḥ karoti

tam ātmasthaṁ ye' nupaśyanti dhīras

teṣāṁ sukhaṁ śāśvataṁ netareṣām


                            269
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.12

Although His form is one, the Supersoul, who is the
indwelling witness and controller of all living beings,
is manifest in innumerable ways. The wise who can see
that Supreme Soul within his heart becomes peaceful and
enjoys transcendental bliss.



Śrīmad Bhāgavatam on Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva

ṛte 'rthaṁ yat pratīyeta - SB 2.9.34 (see ch. 3)

yathā mahānti bhūtāni - SB 2.9.35 (see ch. 3)



yatra yena yato yasya yasmai yad yad yathā yadā

syād idaṁ bhagavān sākṣāt pradhāna-puruṣeśvaraḥ

SB 10.85.4

yatra—in which; yena—by which; yataḥ—from which; yasya—
of which; yasmai—unto which; yat yat—whatever; yathā—
however; yadā—whenever; syāt—comes into existence; idam—
this (creation); bhagavān—the Supreme Lord; sākṣāt—in
His personal presence; pradhāna-puruṣa—of nature and its
creator (Mahā-Viṣṇu); īśvaraḥ—the predominator.

You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who manifest
as the Lord of both nature and the creator of nature
[Mahā-Viṣṇu]. Everything that comes into existence,
however and whenever it does so, is created within You,
by You, from You, for You and in relation to You.



Transcendental science cannot be understood by material
intelligence

aprākṛta vastu nahe prākṛta-gocara

veda-purāṇete ei kahe nirantara

CC Madhya 9.194

aprākṛta—spiritual; vastu—substance; nahe—not; prākṛta—
of matter; gocara—within the jurisdiction; veda-purāṇete
—the Vedas and the Purāṇas; ei—this; kahe—say; nirantara
—always.

Spiritual substance is never within the jurisdiction of
the material conception. This is always the verdict of
the Vedas and Purāṇas. (or:) The Vedas and Purāṇas
repeatedly warn against considering divine or non-
material substance as under the influence of material
nature.

Mundane arguments cannot touch transcendental subject
matters

acintyāḥ khalu ye bhāva na tāṁs tarkeṇa yojayet

                          270
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


prakṛtibhyaḥ paraṁ yac ca tad acintyasya lakṣaṇam

Mahābhārata (Bhīṣma-parva 5.22)/JD ch. 13 p. 308/BPKG p.
446

acintyāḥ—inconceivable; khalu—certainly; ye—those;
bhāvāḥ—subject matters; na—not; tān—them; tarkeṇa—by
argument; yojayet—one may understand; prakṛtibhyaḥ—to
material nature; param—transcendental; yat—that which;
ca—and; tat—that; acintyasya—of the inconceivable;
lakṣaṇam—a symptom.

Anything transcendental to material nature is called
inconceivable, whereas arguments are all mundane. Since
mundane arguments cannot touch transcendental subject
matters, one should not try to understand transcendental
subjects through mundane arguments.

tarkāpratiṣṭhānāt

Vedānta-sūtra 2.1.11

The Absolute Truth can never be established through
argument or logic.

anumāna pramāṇa nahe īśvara-tattva-jñāne

kṛpā vinā īṣvarere keha nāhi jāne

CC Madhya 6.82

anumāna pramāṇa—evidence by hypothesis; nahe—there is
not; īśvara-tattva-jñāne—in understanding the Absolute
Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛpā vinā—
without His mercy; īśvarere—the Supreme Lord; keha—
anyone; nāhi—not; jāne—knows.

Gopīnātha Ācārya continued, “One can understand the
Supreme Lord only by His mercy, not by guesswork or
hypothesis.”

pāṇḍityādye īśvara-tattva-jñāna kabhu nahe'

CC Madhya 6.87

tomāra—your; nāhika—there is not; doṣa—fault; śāstre—the
scriptures; ei—this; kahe—mention; pāṇḍitya-ādye—simply
by scholarship, etc.; īśvara-tattva-jñāna—knowledge of
the truth of Īśvara; kabhu—ever; nahe—there is not.

“It is not your fault; it is the verdict of the
scriptures. You cannot understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead simply by scholarship.”

tvāṁ śīla-rūpa-caritaiḥ parama-prakṛṣṭa

sattvena sāttvikatayā prabalaiś ca śāstraiḥ

prakhyāta-daiva-paramārtha-vidāṁ mataiś ca

naivāsura-prakṛtayaḥ prabhavanti boddhum

Stotra-Ratnam 15, Yamunācārya

                          271
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


O Lord. Those who are demoniac are unable to understand
You by following good behaviour, culture of the mode of
goodness, activities in mode of goodness, by logic,
scripture, or even by the opinion of the famous scholars
who know the essence of the Absolute.



ullaṅghita-trividha-sīma-samātiśāyi

sambhāvanaṁ tava parivraḍim-asvabhāvam

māyā-balena bhavatā 'pi niguhyamānaṁ

paśyanti kecidaniśaṁ tvad-ananya-bhāvāḥ

Stotra-ratnam 13, Yamunācārya

All material objects are bound by three limitations:
time, space and thought, but Your unfathomable nature is
beyond time, space and mental powers and there is
nothing equal or superior to it. Although You conceal
Your inconceivable nature by Your Yogamāyā potency,
still, your unalloyed devotees are always able to
perceive Your līlā.

Thus ends Chapter 9 — Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva




Chapter 10 — Varṇāśrama-dharma-tattva


Varṇas are based on qualities and conduct, not on birth



The arrangement of society in varṇas is based on the
different qualities of people, rather than on their
family lineage or birth

cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣtaṁ guṇa-karma vibhāgaśaḥ

tasya kartāram api māṁ viddhy akartāram avyayam

BG 4.13/BPKG pp. 41,323,439

cātuḥ-varṇyam—the four divisions of human society; mayā—
by Me; sṛṣṭam—created; guṇa—of quality; karma—and work;
vibhāgaśaḥ—in terms of division; tasya—of that; kartāram
—the father; api—although; mām—Me; viddhi—you may know;
akartāram—as the nondoer; avyayam—unchangeable.

The four divisions of human society were created by Me,
in terms of their respective qualities and
characteristic work (not in terms of birth or family
lineage). And although I am the creator of this system,
you should know that I am yet the nondoer, being
unchangeable.

In Kali-yuga everyone is born a śūdrā

                          272
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


kalau śūdrā sambhavāḥ

Skanda-Purāṇa

kalau—in the age of Kali; śūdrāḥ—the śūdrā class;
sambhavāḥ—everyone is born.

In Kali-yuga (the present age) there are no brāhmaṇas by
birth — everyone is more or less a śūdrā (unqualified)
by birth.

Divine Varṇāśrama

varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

Viṣṇu-Purāṇa 3.8.9/CC Mad 8.58/JD ch. 7

varṇa-āśrama-ācāravatā—by behaving according to the
system of four divisions of social order and four
divisions of spiritual life; puruṣeṇa—by a man; paraḥ—
the supreme; pumān—person; viṣṇuḥ—Lord Viṣṇu; ārādhyate—
is worshiped; panthā—way; na—not; anyat—another; tat-
toṣa-kāraṇam—cause of satisfying the Lord.

The Supreme Person, Lord Viṣṇu, is worshiped by the
proper execution of prescribed duties in the system of
varṇa and āśrama. There is no other way to satisfy the
Lord. One must be situated in the institution of
varṇāśrama dharma.

The highest perfection is to please Śrī Hari and daivi-
varṇāśrama establishes the flatform for that goal

ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

SB 1.2.13

ataḥ—so; pumbhiḥ—by the human being; dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ—O
best among the twiceborn; varṇa-āśrama—the institution
of four castes and four orders of life; vibhāgaśaḥ—by
the division of; svanuṣṭhitasya—of one’s own prescribed
duties; dharmasya—occupational; saṁsiddhiḥ—the highest
perfection; hari—Śrī Hari; toṣaṇam—pleasing.

O best among the twice-born, it is therefore concluded
that the highest perfection one can achieve by
discharging the duties prescribed for one’s own
occupation according to caste divisions and orders of
life is to please Śrī Hari.

Vaiṣṇava versus Smārta conceptions: A person of low
birth should be accepted as a brāhmaṇa and Guru if he
manifests the qualities of Śrī Guru

yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam

yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta tat tenaiva vinirdiśet

SB 7.11.35/BPKG pp. 41, 323

                          273
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


yasya—of whom; yat—which; lakṣaṇam—symptom; proktam—
described (above); puṁsaḥ—of a person; varṇa-
abhivyañjakam—indicating the classification of varṇas:
(brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra); yat—if; anyatra—
elsewhere; api—also; dṛśyeta—is seen; tat—that; tena—by
that symptom; eva—certainly; vinirdiśet—one should
designate.

If one shows the symptoms of being a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya,
vaiśya or śūdra, as described above, even if he has
appeared in a different class, he should be accepted
according to those symptoms. In other words, if a person
is born in a śūdra family but has all the qualities of a
Guru, he should be accepted not only as a brāhmaṇa but
as a bona fide Guru as well whereas a born brāhmaṇa with
qualities of a śūdra should accepted as a śūdra.

Only when one actually realises Brahma, the Supreme
Spirit, one becomes a brāhmaṇa

janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ saṁskarād bhaved dvijaḥ

veda-pāṭhād bhaved vipro brahma jānātīti brāhmanaḥ

Smṛti-Vākya/Harmonist 15 p. 59

janmanā—by birth; jāyate—one is born; śūdraḥ—a śūdra;
saṁskarāt—by the process of reformatory ceremonies such
as initiation by a spiritual master; bhavet—one may
become; dvijaḥ—twice-born; veda-pāṭhāt—through study of
the Vedas; bhaved—one can become; vipraḥ—inspired
within; brahma—the Supreme Spirit; jānāti—knows; iti—
thus; brāhmanaḥ—a brāhmaṇa.

By birth everyone is a śūdra; by undergoing the
purificatory saṁskāras under the direction of a bona
fide spiritual master, one becomes dvija, twice-born.
One who through study of the Vedas is inspired within
his heart becomes a vipra, and when one actually
realises Brahma, the Supreme Spirit, one becomes a
brāhmaṇa.

A brāhmaṇa is not a brāhmaṇa if he does not worship the
complete Brahman, Śrī Kṛṣṇa

kulācāra-vihīno—pi dṛḍha-bhaktir jitendriyaḥ

praśastaṁ sarva-lokānāṁ na tv aṣṭādaśa-vidyakaḥ

bhakti-hīno dvijaḥ śāntaḥ saj-jāti-dharmikas tathā

Skanda-Purāṇa/Bhakti-Sandarbha 100

A person who, although not born in an aristocratic
family and unaware of the niceties of refined conduct,
controls his senses and engages in unwavering devotional
service to the Supreme Lord, is famous and glorious
among men. However, a peaceful, nobly born brāhmaṇa,
religious and learned in the eighteen sciences who does
not serve the Lord, is not glorious at all.




                          274
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Whatever varṇa one is born into, he is most exalted if
he performs bhakti

brāhmaṇaḥ kṣatriyo vaiśyaḥ śūdro yad ivetaraḥ

viṣṇu-bhakti-samāyukto jñeyaḥ sarvottamottamaḥ

Bhakti-Sandarbha 100

In the Kāśī-khaṇḍa it is said: “Whether a brāhmaṇa,
kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, or whatever, a person is most
exalted if he engages in devotional service to Lord
Viṣṇu.”

Even if born a caṇḍāla, one is superior to a brāhmaṇa
devoid of bhakti

caṇḍālo —pi dvija-śreṣṭho hari-bhakti-parāyaṇaḥ

hari-bhakti-vihīnaś ca dvijo —pi śvapacādhamaḥ

Caitanya-Maṅgala (?)/Saṁskāra Dīpikā 14

caṇḍāla—one born as a dog-eater; api—although; dvija-
śreṣṭha—the best of the twice-born (or muni-śreṣṭha—the
best of sages); hari-bhakti-parāyaṇaḥ—absorbed in
devotion to Śrī Hari; hari-bhakti-vihīnaḥ—one devoid of
devotional service to Śrī Hari; ca—and; dvijaḥ—twice-
born; api—although; śvapaca-adhamaḥ—lower than a
dogeater;.

Even if one is born in the family of a caṇḍāla, if one
engages in the devotional service of the Lord, he
becomes the best of brāhmaṇas. But a brāhmaṇa who is
devoid of devotional service is on the level of the
lowest dog-eater.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda: “Whoever
understands Brahman is called a brāhmaṇa, and when a
brāhmaṇa engages in devotional service, he is called a
Vaiṣṇava. By accepting dīkṣā from a bone fide Guru, one
automatically becomes a brāhmaṇa.”

Even those of the lowest birth can be purified by sādhu-
saṅga

kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā

ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ

ye —nye ca pāpā yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ

śudhyanti tasmai prabha-viṣṇave namaḥ

SB 2.4.18/CC Madhya 24.179

kirāta—a province of old Bhārata; hūṇa—part of Germany
and Russia; āndhra—a province of southern India; pulinda
—the Greeks; pulkaśāḥ—another province; ābhīra—part of
old Sind; śumbhāḥ—another province; yavanāḥ—the Turks;
khasa-ādayaḥ—the Mongolian province; ye—even those; anye
—others; ca—also; pāpāḥ—addicted to sinful acts; yat—
whose; apāśraya-āśrayāḥ—having taken shelter of the
devotees of the Lord; śudhyanti—at once purified; tasmai

                             275
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

—unto Him; prabha-viṣṇave—unto the powerful Viṣṇu; namaḥ
—my respectful obeisances.

Kirāta, Hūṇa, Āndhra, Pulinda, Pulkaśa, Ābhīra, Śumbha,
Yavana, members of the Khasa races and even others
addicted to sinful acts can be purified by taking
shelter of the devotees of the Lord, due to His being
the supreme power. I offer my respectful obeisances unto
Him.

māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye —pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te —pi yānti parāṁ gatim

BG 9.32

mām—of Me; hi—certainly; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā;
vyapāśritya—particularly taking shelter; ye—those who;
api—also; syuḥ—are; pāpa-yonayaḥ—born of a sinful
family; striyaḥ—women; vaiśyāḥ—mercantile people; tathā—
also; śūdrāḥ—lower-class men; te api—even they; yānti—
go; parām—to the supreme; gatim—destination.

O Pārtha (Arjuna), anyone who takes shelter of Me, even
the low-born, as well as women, merchants, śūdras, or
whoever, will certainly attain the supreme destination.

Following the Varṇāśrama system is useless without a
taste for Hari-kathā

yaśaḥ śriyām eva pariśramaḥ paro

varṇāśramācāra-tapaḥ-śrutādiṣu

avismṛtiḥ śrīdhara-pāda-padmayor

guṇānuvāda-śravaṇādarādibhiḥ

SB 12.12.54

yaśaḥ—in fame; śrīyām—and opulence; eva—only; pariśramaḥ
—the labour; paraḥ—great; varṇa-āśrama-ācāra—by one’s
execution of duties in the varṇāśrama system; tapaḥ—
austerities; śruta—hearing of sacred scripture; ādiṣu—
and so on; avismṛtiḥ—without forgetting; śrīdhara—of the
maintainer of the goddess of fortune; pāda-padmayoḥ—of
the lotus feet; guṇa-anuvāda—of the chanting of the
qualities; śravaṇa—by hearing; ādara—respecting; ādibhiḥ
—and so on.

The great endeavor one undergoes in executing the
ordinary social and religious duties of the varṇāśrama
system, in performing austerities, and in hearing from
the Vedas culminates only in the achievement of mundane
fame and opulence. But by respecting and attentively
hearing the recitation of the transcendental qualities
of the Supreme Lord, the husband of the goddess of
fortune, one can unfailingly remember His lotus feet.

Without bhakti, one’s position in varṇāśrama is useless

ya eṣāṁ puruṣaṁ sākṣād ātma-prabhavam īśvaram

na bhajanty avajānanti sthānād bhraṣṭāḥ patanty adhaḥ

                          276
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


SB 11.5.3/CC Madhya 22.28, 22.112, 24.142

ye—anyone who; eṣām—of those divisions of social and
spiritual orders; puruṣam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sākṣāt—directly; ātma-prabhavam—the source of
everyone; īśvaram—the supreme controller; na—not;
bhajanti—worship; avajānanti—or who neglect; sthānāt—
from their proper place; bhraṣṭāḥ—being fallen; patanti—
fall; adhaḥ—downward into hellish conditions.

If one simply maintains an official position in the four
varṇas and āśramas but does not worship the Supreme
Lord, he falls down from his puffed-up position into a
hellish condition.

Without taking shelter of Me, the followers of
varṇāśrama waste their lives

yadi māṁ prāptum icchanti prāpnuvanty eva nānyathā

kalau kaluṣa-cittānāṁ vṛthāyuḥ-prabhṛtīni ca

bhavanti varṇāśramiṇāṁ na tu mac-charaṇārthinām

Bhakti-Sandarbha 99

In Brahman-vaivarta Purāṇa Lord Viṣṇu tells Lord Śiva:
“If the living entities desire to attain Me they should
take shelter of Me. Their hearts polluted by Kali-yuga,
the followers of varṇāśrama waste their lives and
everything they possess. This is not true for they who
take shelter of Me. They do not waste their lives.”

Brahmacārīs must be under the guidance of Guru and
dedicate everything to him

brahmacārī guru-kule vasan dānto guror hitam

ācaran dāsavan nīco gurau sudṛḍha-sauhṛdaḥ

SB 7.12.1

[śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca—Śrī Nārada Muni said]; brahmacārī—
one who practices realization of brahma; guru-kule—at
the āśrama of the Guru; vasan—residing; dāntaḥ—who is
sense-controlled; guroḥ hitam—only for the benefit of
the Guru (not for one’s personal benefit); ācaran—
acting; dāsa-vat—like a humble servant; nīcaḥ—
submissive, obedient; gurau—unto the spiritual master;
su-dṛḍha—firmly; sauhṛdaḥ—with friendship and affection.

Nārada Muni said, A student should practice completely
controlling his senses. He should be submissive and
should have an attitude of firm friendship and affection
for the spiritual master. With an unwavering vow, the
brahmacārī should live at the Guru-kula, only for the
benefit of the Guru.

aśvamedhaṁ gavālambhaṁ sannyāsaṁ pala-paitṛkam

devareṇa sutotpattiṁ kalau pañca vivarjayet

Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa (Kṛṣṇa-janma-khaṇḍa 185.180)/ CC

                          277
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

Ādi 17.164

aśva-medham—a sacrifice offering a horse; gava-ālambham—
a sacrifice of cows; sannyāsam—the renounced order of
life; pala-paitṛkam—an offering of oblations of flesh to
the forefathers; devareṇa—by a husband’s brother; suta-
utpattim—begetting children; kalau—in the Age of Kali;
pañca—five; vivarjayet—one must give up.

In this Age of Kali, five acts are forbidden: the
offering of a horse in sacrifice, the offering of a cow
in sacrifice, the acceptance of the order of sannyāsa,
the offering of oblations of flesh to the forefathers,
and a man’s begetting children in his brother’s wife.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains: This refers to karma-
sannyāsa and jñāna-sannyāsa (ekadaṇḍi), not to bhakti-
(tridaṇḍi-)sannyāsa, otherwise Mahāprabhua and His
associates would not have taken sannyāsa. Tridaṇḍī
refers to the three eternals, bhakti, bhakta and
Bhagavān. (See “Five Essential Essays— (Prabhanda
Pañcakam) for an extended discussion of this point).

One who gives up sannyāsa and falls into household life
is a vāntāśī

yaḥ pravrajya gṛhāt pūrvaṁ tri-vargāvapanāt punaḥ

yadi seveta tān bhikṣuḥ sa vai vāntāśy apatrapaḥ

SB 7.15.36

yaḥ—one who; pravrajya—being finished for good and
leaving for the forest (being situated in transcendental
bliss); gṛhāt—from home; pūrvam—at first; tri-varga—the
three principles of dharma, artha and kāma; āvapanāt—
from the field in which they are sown; punaḥ—again; yadi
—if; seveta—should accept; tān—materialistic activities;
bhikṣuḥ—a person who has accepted the sannyāsa order;
saḥ—that person; vai—indeed; vānta-āśī—one who eats his
own vomit; apatrapaḥ—without shame.

One who accepts the sannyāsa order gives up the three
principles of materialistic activities in which one
indulges in the field of household life—namely dharma
(religion), artha (economic gain) and kāma (sense
gratification). One who first accepts sannyāsa but then
returns to such materialistic activities is to be called
a vāntāśī, or one who eats his own vomit. He is indeed a
shameless person.

See Gauḍīya Kaṇṭhahāra for an extensive view of
Varṇāśrama-dharma-tattva




Thus ends Chapter 10 — Varṇāśrama-dharma-tattva

and the first division - Sambandha-tattva




                          278
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017



2nd Division: Abhidheya-tattva



The process of attaining the supreme goal



Śrī Guru-Sevā and Śrī Nāma-Saṅkīrtana will Bestow Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Caraṇa




Abhidheya means the natural meaning, what flows
naturally from the Vedas. Vedas explain what we must do.
That is abhidheya. The natural implication of the śruti
has been extended to us by Kṛṣṇa, “Do this and come to
Me.” That is abhidheya (SSM). The word abhidheya comes
from the verbal root abhidhā, which means “to set forth
or explain,” and the word abhidheya literally means
“that which is worthy of explanation.” The means by
which kṛṣṇa-prema can be achieved is the fundamental
truth (tattva) that is most worthy of explanation. The
process by which the ultimate goal is achieved, is the
practice of sādhana-bhakti (JD). Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
explains that while the mercy of Guru and Kṛṣṇa is
essential, it is equally essential for one to practice
the process, sādhana-bhakti. Practice leads to
perfection. One may get sambandha and prayojana by
mercy, but without one’s own endeavour, one will not
qualify to receive the mercy. By trying one’s best to
serve Śrī Guru and Vaiṣṇavas, their hearts will melt and
they will bestow their mercy. Therefore abhidheya, or
practice, is the link between sambandha and prayojana.
Furthermore, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains, “One must
follow a clearly defined sequence (as given by śāstra,
previous ācāryas and Śrī Guru). It is quite impossible
for those who transgress this sequence to enter the
realm of bhakti” (PP). And, “The jīva’s only goal is to
worship Śrī Gaurasundara, who is resplendenet with the
lustre and sentiment of Śrī Rādhā. The worship and
service of Śrī Guarasundara are performed only through
nāma-saṅkīrtana. By this process, which is the most
powerful of the nine kinds of bhakti, all the limbs of
bhakti are practiced.” (BR 1.1, pt)




Chapter 11 — Abhidheya-tattva


The Superiority and Independence of Bhakti

(Over Karma, Jñāna and Yoga)



1. Human Life is Meant for the Spiritual Perfection of

                          279
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

Bhakti 336

2. Karma, Jñāna & Yoga - Steps to Bhakti 341

3. Karma -Fruitive Activities 345

4. Jñāna - Impersonal Knowledge 349

5. Aṣṭāṅga Yoga - Mystic Powers 353

6. Bhukti, Mukti & Siddhis are Obstacles for Bhakti 354

7. Real Knowledge Leads to Kṛṣṇa-bhakti 356

8. Bhakti is Superior to and Independent of Karma and
Jñāna 359

Introduction:

1) Karma refers to fruitive or reward-seeking
activities. The karmis— goal is svarga, the heavenly
planets, or material prosperity and sense gratification
(regulated by scriptural injunctions). Below the karmīs
are the viṣayīs, the unrestricted sense enjoyers
(immoral atheists) who are considered no better than
animals by Vedic standards.

2) Jñāna refers to impersonal knowledge, the conception
of God as impersonal Brahman. The jñānīs— goal is
impersonal liberation or Brahman realisation, merging
into the brahmajyoti, the effulgence emanating from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa (nirvāṇa).

3) Yoga refers to mystic yoga or aṣṭāṅga-yoga, the
cultivation of mystic powers. The yogīs— goal is
Paramātma realisation and they end up attaining
impersonal liberation (mokṣa) similar to the jñānīs.

Karmīs and viṣayīs are on the level of exploitation.
Jñānīs and yogīs are on the level of renunciation (the
negation of material existence). Neither is really
spiritual because they are self-serving. However, there
is a third, superior option, the level of dedication, of
loving devotional service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is bhakti.
The bhaktas— goal is love of God. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti, which is
the ultimate goal of human life, is independent of the
other paths while all other paths depend on bhakti for
attaining their respective goals (See Diagram 1 in the
Appendix).



1) Human Life is Meant for the Spiritual Perfection of
Bhakti

This rare human body, although temporary, affords the
opportunity for the ultimate good fortune - cultivation
of Kṛṣṇa-bhakti

labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte

mānuṣyam artha-dam anityam apīha dhīraḥ

tūrṇaṁ yateta na pated anu-mṛtyu yāvan

                          280
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


niḥśreyasāya viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt

SB 11.9.29/BPKG pp. 57,198

labdhvā—having obtained; su-durlabham—that which is very
difficult to obtain; idam—this; bahu—many; sambhava—
births; ante—after; mānuṣyam—human form of life; artha-
dam—which awards great value; anityam—not eternal; api—
although; iha—in this material world; dhīraḥ—one who has
sober intelligence; tūrṇam—immediately, without wasting
a single moment; yateta—should endeavor; na—not; patet—
has fallen; anu-mṛtyu—always subject to death; yāvat—as
long as; niḥśreyasāya—for ultimate perfection; viṣayaḥ—
sense gratification; khalu—always; sarvataḥ—in all
conditions; syāt—is possible.

This human birth is very rare, because it is only
attained after many lifetimes. Although temporary, it
can give the highest benefit and be a springboard
leading to spiritual perfection. After all, sense
gratification is available even in the most abominable
species, whereas spiritual perfection is possible only
for a human being. Therefore, an intelligent person
should immediately, without wasting a single moment,
begin to endeavour with one-pointed dedication to
achieve the ultimate good fortune, before death comes.
And what is this ultimate good fortune? Cultivation of
kṛṣṇa-bhakti. (One cannot obtain this ultimate
perfection without sādhu-saṅga, which is difficult to
obtain in any species other than the human form).

This human birth is very rare, therefore take the
association of sādhus and cross over this ocean of birth
and death.

bhajahū re māna, śrī nanda-nandana, abhaya-caraṇāravinda
re

durlabha mānava-janama sat-saṅge, taraha e bhāva-sindhu
re

e dhana, yauvana, putra, parijana, ithe ki āche paratīti
re

kamala-dala-jala, jīvana talamala, bajahū hari-pada niti
re

Bhajahū Re Māna, Śrīla Govinda dāsa Kavirāja/SGG p. 87

O mind, serve the lotus feet of Śrī Nanda-nandana, which
bring fearlessness. This human birth is very rare. Take
the association of sādhus and cross over this ocean of
birth and death. Wealth, youth, sons and relatives -
what real happiness do they hold? This life is
flickering like a drop of water on a lotus leaf and
there is no gaurantee when it will end. Therefore,
always serve the lotus feet of Śrī Hari.



The human body is very rare, therefore one should
practice bhakti from an early age


                             281
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha

durlabhaṁ mānuṣaṁ janma tad apy adhruvam arthadam

SB 7.6.1

śrī-prahrādaḥ uvāca—Prahlāda Mahārāja said; kaumāraḥ—in
the tender age of childhood; ācaret—one should practice;
prājñaḥ—one who is intelligent; dharmān—dharmic duties;
bhāgavatān—which are devotional service unto Śrī
Bhagavān; iha—in this life; durlabham—very rarely
obtained; mānuṣam—human; janma—birth; tat—that; api—
even; adhruvam—impermanent, temporary; artha-dam—that
which awards great benefit.

Śrī Prahlāda said: One who is sufficiently intelligent
should use the human form of body from the very
beginning of life—in other words, from the tender age of
childhood—to practice the activities of devotional
service, giving up all other engagements. The human body
is most rarely achieved, and although temporary like
other bodies, it is meaningful and beneficial because in
human life one can perform devotional service. Even a
slight amount of sincere devotional service can give one
complete perfection.



A moment lost cannot be regained for all the money in
the world

āyuṣaḥ kṣaṇa eko —pi na labhya svarṇa-koṭibhiḥ

na cen nirarthakaṁ nītiḥ kā ca hānis tato —dhikā

Nīti Śāstra

āyuṣaḥ—of life; kṣanaḥ—a moment; ekaḥ—one; api—even; na—
not; labhyaḥ—obtainable; svarṇa-koṭibhiḥ—for millions of
gold coins; na cet—if not; nirarthakam—useless; nītiḥ—
behavior; kā—what; ca—and; hāniḥ—loss; tataḥ—than that;
adhikā—greater.

Even one moment of life wasted in idle pursuits cannot
be regained with all the wealth in the world. Therefore,
what greater loss is there than time spent uselessly?



Human life without Dharma is no better than animal life

āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca sāmānyam etat paśubhir
narāṇām

dharmo hi teṣām adhiko viśeṣo dharmeṇa hīnāḥ paśubhiḥ
samānāḥ

Hitopadeśa 25/Jaiva-Dharma, Introduction

āhāra—eating; nidrā—sleeping; bhaya—fearing; maithunam
ca—and sex life; sāmānyam—in common; etat—this group of
activities; paśubhiḥ—with the animals; narāṇām—of the
men; dharmaḥ—the essence of one’s spiritual nature and
function; hi—indeed; teṣām—of them; adhikaḥ—the better

                          282
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

thing; viśeṣaḥ—the special property; dharmeṇa—spiritual
life; hīnāḥ—without; paśubhiḥ—with the animals; samānāḥ—
on the same platform.

Animals are similar to human beings in the matters of
eating, sleeping, mating and defending. Yet the ability
to practice spiritual life is unique to human beings,
thus without dharma they are nothing but animals.



Preyaḥ (temporary enjoyment) versus Śreyaḥ (eternal
benefit)

śreyaś ca preyaś ca manuṣyameta-stau samparītya
vivinakti dhīraḥ

śreyo hi dhīro' bhipreyaso vṛṇīte preyo mando yogakṣemād
vṛṇīte

Kaṭha Upaniṣad. 1.2.2

Every soul has the option of accepting either the path
of spiritual realisation (śreyaḥ) or the path of sense
gratification (preyaḥ). The wise, after carefully
weighing these two, accept the path of spiritual well-
being, whereas deluded conditioned souls prefer the path
of sense enjoyment.

Pravṛtti-mārga (attachment) versus Nivṛtti-mārga
(detachment)



pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nivṛttis tu mahā-phalā

Manu-saṁhitā 5.56/Jaiva-Dharma ch. 10

pravṛttiḥ—activities of attachment; eṣā—this; bhūtānām—
conditioned living beings in the material world;
nivṛttiḥ—activities of detachment; tu—but; mahā-phalā—
the greatest fruit.

Everyone in material life is attracted to furthering the
way of attachment (pravṛtti-marga), but the greatest
treasure is to be gained by following the path of
detachment (nivṛtti-marga).



Nivṛtti-mārga - decreasing the propensity to enjoy

sei śāstre kahe, pravṛtti-nivṛtti-mārga-bheda

nivṛtti-mārge jīva-mātra-vadhera niṣedha

CC Ādi 17.256

sei śāstre—in your scripture (the Koran); kahe—it is
ordered; pravṛtti—of attachment; nivṛtti—of detachment;
mārga—paths; bheda—difference; nivṛtti—of detachment;
mārge—on the path; jīva-mātra—of any living entity;
vadhera—of killing; niṣedha—prohibition.


                          283
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

According to your scripture (the Koran), there are two
ways of advancement—through increasing the propensity to
enjoy, and through decreasing the propensity to enjoy.
On the path of decreasing attachment (nivṛtti-mārga),
the killing of animals is prohibited.

Unless one gives up the four sinful activities,
spiritual perfection is not possible

na māṁsa-bhakṣaṇe doṣo na madye na ca maithune

pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nivṛttis tu mahā-phalā

Manu-saṁhitā 5.56

It may be considered that meat-eating, intoxication and
sex indulgence are natural propensities of the
conditioned souls, and therefore such persons should not
be condemned for these activities. But unless one gives
up such sinful activities, there is no possibility of
achieving the actual perfection of life.



What is the most wonderful thing in this world?

ahany ahani bhūtāni gacchantīha yamālayam

śeṣāḥ sthāvaram icchanti kim āścaryam ataḥ param

Mahābhārata, Vana-parva 313.116

ahani ahani—day after day; bhūtāni—many living entities;
gacchanti—go; iha—in this world; yamālayam—to the abode
of Death; śeṣāḥ—those who are remaining; sthāvaram—a
permanent situation; icchanti—aspire for; kim—what;
āścaryam—wonderful; ataḥ param—more than this.

[King Yudiṣṭhira’s answer to Yamarāja’s question:] Every
day, hundreds and millions of living entities go to the
kingdom of death. Still, those who are remaining aspire
for a permanent situation and think that death will
never come to them. What could be more wonderful than
this?

aihiṣṭaṁ yat tat punar-janma-jayāya?

Rāmayana (Viśvamitra Muni enquires from King Daśaratha)

aihiṣṭam—desired; yat—which; tat—that; punaḥ—again;
janma—birth; jayāya—conquering.

Is everything going well in your endeavor to conquer the
repetition of birth and death?

Austerities are useless if not connected with Kṛṣṇa-
bhakti

ārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim

nārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim

antar bahir yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim


                          284
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

nāntar bahir yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim

Nārada Pañcarātra/CB 1.2.70/Caitanya Maṅagla 2.3/
Mukunda-māla-stotra 21 pt

ārādhitaḥ—worshiped; yadi—if; hariḥ—Kṛṣṇa; tapasā—by
austerities; tataḥ—then; kim—what is the use?; na—not;
ārādhitaḥ—worshiped; yadi—if; hariḥ—Śrī Hari, Kṛṣṇa;
tapasā—by austerities; tataḥ—then; kim—what is the use?;
antar—within; bahir—outside; yadi—if; haris—Śrī Hari;
tapasā—by austerities; tataḥ—then; kim—what is the use?
nāntar—neither within; bahir—nor without; yadi—if; haris
—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tapasā—by austerities; tataḥ—then; kim—what
is the use?

If one is worshiping Śrī Kṛṣṇa properly, what is the use
of severe penances? And if one is not properly
worshiping Śrī Kṛṣṇa, what is the use of severe
penances? If Śrī Kṛṣṇa is realised within and without
everything that exists, what is the use of severe
penances? And if Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not seen within and
without everything, then what is the use of severe
penances?

To be fixed in that for which one is qualified is real
piety

sve sve 'dhikāre yā niṣṭhā sa guṇaḥ parikīrtitaḥ

viparyayas tu doṣaḥ syād ubhayor eṣa niścayaḥ

SB 11.21.2

sve sve—each in his own; adhikāre—position; yā—such;
niṣṭhā—steadiness; saḥ—this; guṇaḥ—piety; parikīrtitaḥ—
is declared to be; viparyayaḥ—the opposite; tu—indeed;
doṣaḥ—impiety; syāt—is; ubhayoḥ—of the two; eṣaḥ—this;
niścayaḥ—the definite conclusion.

Being fixed in the position for which one is qualified
is virtuous while accepting a position for which one is
unqualified - is irresponsible and considered impious.
(or) The ṛṣis have definitely ascertained that
steadiness in one’s own position is declared to be
actual piety, whereas deviation from one’s position is
considered impiety. In this way the two are definitely
ascertained.

Better to do one’s duty imperfectly than to adopt
another’s dharma

śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ para-dharmāt sv-anuṣṭhitāt

sva-dharme nidhanaṁ śreyaḥ para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ

BG 3.35

śreyān—far better; sva-dharmaḥ—one’s prescribed duties;
viguṇaḥ—even faulty; para-dharmāt—than duties mentioned
for others; su-anuṣṭhitāt—perfectly done; sva-dharme—in
one’s prescribed duties; nidhanam—destruction; śreyaḥ—
better; para-dharmaḥ—duties prescribed for others;
bhaya-āvahaḥ—dangerous.


                          285
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

It is better to do one's duty poorly than to do
another's duty perfectly. It is better to die doing
one's duties than to leave them and follow another's
dharma, for to follow another's dharma is dangerous.

Thus ends section 1) Human Life is Meant for Bhakti




2) Karma, Jñāna & Yoga - Steps to Bhakti




Three different paths for spiritual elevation: Karma,
Jñāna & Bhakti

yogās trayo mayā proktā nṝṇāṁ śreyo-vidhitsayā

jñānaṁ karma ca bhaktiś ca nopāyo 'nyo 'sti kutracit

SB 11.20.6

[śrī-bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said:] yogāḥ—processes;
trayaḥ—three; mayā—by Me; proktāḥ—described; nṝṇam—of
human beings; śreyaḥ—perfection; vidhitsayā—desiring to
bestow; jñānam—the path of speculative knowledge; karma—
the path of fruitive actions; ca—also; bhaktiḥ—the path
of devotion; ca—also; na—no; upāyaḥ—means; anyaḥ—other;
asti—exists; kutracit—whatsoever.

The Supreme Lord said: My dear Uddhava, because I desire
that human beings may achieve perfection, I have
presented three paths of advancement—the path of
fruitive action (karma), the path of impersonal
knowledge (jñāna) and the path of devotion (bhakti).
Besides these three there is absolutely no other means
of elevation.



Different paths for different adhikāras

nirviṇṇānāṁ jñāna-yogo nyāsinām iha karmasu

teṣv anirviṇṇa-cittānāṁ karma-yogas tu kāminām

SB 11.20.7

nirviṇṇānām—for those who are disgusted; jñāna-yogaḥ—the
path of speculative knowledge; nyāsinām—for those who
are renounced; iha—in this world; karmasu—in ordinary
material activities; teṣu—in those activities; anirviṇṇa
—not disgusted; cittānām—for those with such
consciousness; karma-yogaḥ—the path of karma-yoga; tu—
indeed; kāminām—for those who still desire material
happiness.

Out of these three paths, those who are disgusted with
fruitive work and desire to renounce material life are
qualified for jñāna-yoga. Those who are still charmed by

                          286
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

fruitive work, having many desires yet to fulfill, are
qualified for karma-yoga.



As long as one is not satiated by fruitive activity he
should follow karma-kāṇḍa

tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā śraddhā yāvan na jāyate

SB 11.20.9/CC Madhya 22.61/JD ch. 10

tāvat—up to that time; karmāṇi—fruitive activities;
kurvīta—one should execute; na nirvidyeta—is not
satiated; yāvatā—as long as; mat-kathā—of narrations
about Me; śravaṇa-ādau—in śravaṇam, kīrtanam and so on;
vā—or; śraddhā—faith; yāvat—as long as; na—not; jāyate—
is awakened.

Until a person has not developed indifference to
fruitive activity and material enjoyment, and has not
awakened his faith in hearing and discussing My kathā,
he should follow the regulative principles on the path
karma outlined by the Vedas.

Those who have faith in Hari-kathā are qualified for
bhakti

yadṛcchayā mat-kathādau jāta-śraddhas tu yaḥ pumān

na nirviṇṇo nāti-sakto bhakti-yogo 'sya siddhi-daḥ

SB 11.20.8/CC Madhya 22.50

yadṛcchayā—somehow or other by good fortune; mat-kathā-
ādau—in the narrations and glorification of My pastimes;
jāta—awakened; śraddhaḥ—faith; tu—indeed; yaḥ—one who;
pumān—a person; na—not; nirviṇṇaḥ—disgusted; na—not;
ati-saktaḥ—very attached; bhakti-yogaḥ—the path of
loving devotion; asya—his; siddhi-daḥ—will award
perfection.

If, by good fortune, one has developed faith in hearing
the discussions of My tattva and līlā and is not
excessively attached to or disgusted by worldly things,
bhakti-yoga will award him perfection.



karmākarma vikarmeti veda-vādo na laukikaḥ

vedasya ceśvarātmatvāt tatra muhyanti surayaḥ

SB 11.3.43

[śrī-āvirhotraḥ uvāca—the sage Āvirhotra said:] karma—
the execution of duties prescribed by scripture; akarma—
failure to perform such duties; vikarma—engagement in
forbidden activities; iti—thus; veda-vādaḥ—subject
matter understood through the Vedas; na—not; laukikaḥ—
mundane; vedasya—of the vedas; ca—and; īśvara-ātmatvāt—
because of coming from the Personality of Godhead

                             287
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

Himself; tatra—in this matter; muhyanti—become confused;
sūrayaḥ—(even) great scholarly authorities.

The classifications of karma (duties enjoined by the
Vedas) akarma (neglecting such prescribed duties) and
vikarma (engaging in forbidden activities) are defined
in the Vedas, which are of transcendental origin.
Therefore, because the Vedas emanate from God, even
though sages and demigods are bewildered in trying to
understand them, they are conclusive.



parokṣa-vādo vedo 'yaṁ bālānām anuśāsanam

karma-mokṣāya karmāṇi vidhatte hy agadaṁ yathā

SB 11.3.44

parokṣa-vādaḥ—indirect statements, i.e. describing
something as something else in order to disguise its
real nature; vedaḥ—Vedas; ayam—these; bālānām—of
childlike persons; anuśāsanam—guidance; karma-mokṣāya—
for liberation from material activities; karmāṇi—
material activities; vidhatte—prescribe; hi—indeed;
agadam—a medicine; yathā—just as.

Childish and foolish people are attached to
materialistic, fruitive activities, although the actual
goal of life is to become free from such activities.
Therefore, the Vedic injunctions indirectly lead one to
the path of ultimate liberation (bhakti) by first
prescribing fruitive religious activities (karma), just
as a father promises his child candy so that the child
will take his bitter medicine.

nācared yas tu vedoktaṁ svayam ajño 'jitendriyaḥ

vikarmaṇā hy adharmeṇa mṛtyor mṛtyum upaiti saḥ

SB 11.3.45

na ācaret—does not perform; yaḥ—who; tu—but; veda-uktam—
what is prescribed in the Vedas; svayam—himself; ajñaḥ—
ignorant; ajita-indriyaḥ—not capable of controlling his
senses; vikarmaṇā—by forbidden conduct; hi—indeed;
adharmeṇa—by his sinful activities; mṛtyoḥ mṛtyum—death
after death; upaiti—achieves; saḥ—he.

One should not prematurely give up Vedic injunctions,
thinking them external to the process of liberation.
Rather, if an ignorant person who cannot control his
senses, ignores the Vedic injunctions, he will
inevitably engage in irreligious and impious activities,
and thus will suffer repeated birth and death.

vedoktam eva kurvāṇo niḥsaṅgo 'rpitam īśvare

naiṣkarmyaṁ labhate siddhiṁ rocanārthā phala-śrutiḥ

SB 11.3.46

veda-uktam—the regulated activities described by the
Vedas; eva—certainly; kurvāṇaḥ—performing; nihsaṅgaḥ—

                          288
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

without attachment; arpitam—offered; īśvare—to the
Supreme Lord; naiṣkarmyam—of liberation from material
work and its reactions; labhate—one achieves; siddhim—
the perfection; rocana-arthā—for the purpose of giving
encouragement; phala-śrutiḥ—the promises of material
results given in the Vedic scriptures.

One who performs actions sanctioned by the Vedas,
without attachment, and who dedicates his work to the
Supreme Lord is freed from the reactions of karma. The
promise of the fruits of karma mentioned in the Vedas is
only meant to encourage the foolish to engage in karma-
yoga. [For all the above-reasons, the Vedas sometimes
encourage the path of karma, to gradually bring the
foolish souls to the platform of freedom from karma and
full engagement in bhakti ].

The ladder to perfection: karma - dharma - vairāgya -
bhakti

neha yat karma dharmāya na virāgāya kalpate

na tīrtha-pada-sevāyai jīvann api mṛto hi saḥ

SB 3.23.56

na—not; iha—here; yat—which; karma—work; dharmāya—for
perfection of religious life; na—not; virāgāya—for
detachment; kalpate—leads; na—not; tīrtha-pada—of the
Lord’s lotus feet; sevāyai—to devotional service; jīvan—
living; api—although; mṛtaḥ—dead; hi—indeed; saḥ—he.

Anyone whose work and activities (karma) do not elevate
him to religious life (dharma), whose religious life
does not lead to renunciation (vairāgya) and whose
renunciation does not lead to devotional service
(bhakti) to the Supreme Lord is counted among the living
dead.

Thus ends section 2) Karma, Jñāna & Yoga - Steps to
Bhakti



3) Karma - Fruitive Activities



The fruits of karma are temporary

iṣṭveha devatā yajñaiḥ svar-lokaṁ yāti yājñikaḥ

bhuñjīta deva-vat tatra bhogān divyān nijārjitān

SB 11.10.23

iṣṭvā—having worshiped; iha—in this world; devatāḥ—the
demigods; yajñaiḥ—with sacrifices; svaḥ-lokam—to the
heavenly planets; yāti—goes; yājñikaḥ—the performer of
sacrifice; bhuñjīta—he may enjoy; deva-vat—like a god;
tatra—therein; bhogān—pleasures; divyān—celestial; nija—
by himself; arjitān—achieved.

[The Lord said:] If one performs sacrifice, or karma-

                          289
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

yoga according to varṇāśrāma-dharma, his fruits will be
temporary. By satisfying the gods through sacrifice, he
gets good karma and goes to the heavenly planets where
he enjoys as if he were a god. He thus enjoys the
results of his good karma for a brief time in the
heavenly planets.

When the karmī’s accumulated piety is exhausted, he
falls down from heaven

tāvat sa modate svarge yāvat puṇyaṁ samāpyate

kṣīṇa-puṇyaḥ pataty arvāg anicchan kāla-cālitaḥ

SB 11.10.26

tāvat—that long; saḥ—he; modate—enjoys life; svarge—in
the heavenly planets; yāvat—until; puṇyam—his pious
results; samāpyate—are used up; kṣīṇa—exhausted; puṇyaḥ—
his piety; patati—he falls; arvāk—down from heaven;
anicchan—not desiring to fall; kāla—by time; cālitaḥ—
pushed down.

As long as the piety accumulated from good karma is
plentiful, he enjoys opulent pleasures in the heavenly
planets. When the accumulated piety of his good karma is
exhausted his time of enjoyment is finished, and he
again falls down from heaven.



Karma-yoga does not give freedom from the cycle of birth
and death

te taṁ bhuktvā svarga-lokaṁ viśālaṁ

kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti

evaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannā

gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante

BG 9.21

te—they; tam—that; bhuktvā—enjoying; svarga-lokam—
heaven; viśālam—vast; kṣīṇe—being exhausted; puṇye—the
results of their pious activities; martya-lokam—to the
mortal earth; viśanti—fall down; evam—thus; trayī—of the
three Vedas; dharmam—doctrines; anuprapannāḥ—following;
gata-āgatam—death and birth; kāma-kāmāḥ—desiring sense
enjoyments; labhante—attain.

When they have thus enjoyed heavenly sense pleasure,
they again return to this mortal world. Thus, those who
are filled with desires and follow the Vedas to attain
material enjoyment achieve only flickering pleasure.
They are then cast down to suffer repeated birth and
death.

Dharma is meant for elevation to bhakti, not for sense
gratification

dharmasya hy āpavargyasya nārtho 'rthāyopakalpate


                          290
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

nārthasya dharmaikāntasya kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ

SB 1.2.9

dharmasya—occupational engagement; hi—certainly;
āpavargyasya—ultimate liberation; na—not; arthaḥ—end;
arthāya—for material gain; upakalpate—is meant for; na—
neither; arthasya—of material gain; dharma-eka-antasya—
for one who is engaged in the ultimate dharma; kāmaḥ—
sense gratification; lābhāya—attainment of; hi—exactly;
smṛtaḥ—is described by the great sages.

All dharmas are certainly meant for ultimate liberation.
They should never be performed for material gain.
Further, according to sages, one engaged in the ultimate
dharma (bhakti-yoga) should never use material gain to
cultivate sense gratification.

Life's desires should never be aimed at sensual
enjoyment but at the Absolute Truth

kāmasya nendriya-prītir lābho jīveta yāvatā

jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ

SB 1.2.10

kāmasya—of desires; na—not; indriya—senses; prītiḥ—
satisfaction; lābhaḥ—gain; jīveta—self-preservation;
yāvatā—so much so; jīvasya—of the living being; tattva—
the Absolute Truth; jijñāsā—inquiries; na—not; arthaḥ—
end; yaḥ ca iha—whatsoever else; karmabhiḥ—by
occupational activities.

Life's desires should never be aimed at sensual
enjoyment. One should not wish for anything more than
what is needed for self-preservation, because the real
purpose of human life is to inquire after the Absolute
Truth. Nothing else should be the goal of one's works.

Attaining the eligibilty for bhakti

dāna-vrata-tapo-homa japa-svādhyāya-saṁyamaiḥ

śreyobhir vividhaiś cānyaiḥ kṛṣṇe bhaktir hi sādhyate

SB 10.47.24/MK 1.6

dāna—by charity; vrata—strict vows; tapaḥ—austerities;
homa—fire sacrifices; japa—private chanting of mantras;
svādhyāya—study of Vedic texts; saṁyamaiḥ—and regulative
principles; śreyobhiḥ—by auspicious practices; vividhaiḥ
—various; ca—also; anyaiḥ—others; kṛṣṇe—to Lord Kṛṣṇa;
bhaktiḥ—devotional service; hi—indeed; sādhyate—is
realised.

Eligibility for devotional service unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
attained by charity, strict vows, austerities and fire
sacrifices, by japa, study of Vedic texts, observance of
regulative principles and, indeed, by the performance of
many other auspicious practices.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartīpāda explains: However, such
pious acts can only lead to bhakti if they are connected

                          291
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

to bhakti or performed as limbs of sādhana-bhakti
(bhakty-unmukhī sukṛti). That is, real charity means to
give charity to Śrī Guru and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, real vrata means
to fast on Ekadāśī, real tapas is to renounce sense
pleasure in order to please Kṛṣṇa, etc.

Without worshiping Kṛṣṇa, demigod worship goes against
śāstric injunction

ye “py anya-devatā-bhaktā yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

te “pi mām eva kaunteya yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam

BG 9.23/BPKG p. 455

ye—those who; api—also; anya—of other; devatā—gods;
bhaktāḥ—devotees; yajante—worship; śraddhayā anvitāḥ—
with faith; te—they; api—also; mām—Me; eva—only;
kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; yajanti—they worship; avidhi-
pūrvakam—against śāstric injunction.

Those who faithfully dedicate themselves to the worship
of demigods worship Me indirectly, but their worship is
done without the sanction of śāstra.

The Vaiṣṇava Guru never encourages the path of karma

svayaṁ niḥśreyasaṁ vidvān na vakty ajñāya karma hi

na rāti rogiṇo 'pathyaṁ vāñchato 'pi bhiṣaktamaḥ

SB 6.9.50

svayam—personally; niḥśreyasam—the supreme goal of life,
namely Kṛṣṇa-prema; vidvān—a learned man; na—not; vakti—
teaches; ajñāya—unto a foolish person not conversant
with the ultimate goal of life; karma—fruitive
activities; hi—indeed; na—not; rāti—administers; rogiṇaḥ
—unto the patient; apathyam—something unconsumable;
vāñchataḥ—desiring; api—although; bhiṣak-tamaḥ—an
experienced physician.

A person learned in the science of bhakti, will never
instruct a foolish person to engage in fruitive
activities for material enjoyment, not to speak of
helping him in such activities, just as an experienced
doctor never encourages a patient to eat food injurious
to his health, even if the patient desires it.

The path of karma is condemned in the Vedas

plavā hy ete adṛḍhā yajña-rūpā aṣṭādaśoktam avaraṁ yeṣu
karma

etac chreyo ye' bhinandanti mūḍhā jarā-mṛtyuṁ te punar
evāpi yanti

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.7

Even the best kinds of karmic sacrifice carefully
performed with eighteen priests are unreliable boats for
crossing the ocean of material existence. Those deluded
souls who praise such sacrifice, thinking that it leads
to the highest spiritual gain, are fools who suffer

                          292
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

again and again the miseries of birth, death, old age,
and disease.

The Vedas condemn the path of sense gratification

avidyāyām antare vartamānāḥ svayaṁ dhīraḥ paṇḍitam
manyamānāḥ

jaṅghanyamānāḥ pariyanti mūḍhā andhenaiva nīyamānā
yathāndhāḥ

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.8

Ignorant fools who dwell in the vile stool-ditch of
sense gratification taste this degrading illusion, yet
they consider themselves to be learned and wise. They
certainly lead other fools into darkness, just as blind
men lead other blind men into a ditch.

The attached karmīs cannot distiguish reality from
illusion

avidyāyāṁ bahudhā vartamānā vayaṁ kṛtārthā ity-
abhimanyanti bālāḥ

yat karmiṇo na pravedayanti rāgāt tenāturāḥ kṣīṇa-lokāś-
cyavante

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.9

Though dwelling in the darkness of ignorance, such
foolish persons think, "We have attained the goal"! Thus
attached to the fruits of their karma they are unable to
develop detachment and distinguish between reality and
illusion. After exhuasting the fruits of their pious
deeds they fall down to repeated birth and death.

Thus ends section 3) Karma - Fruitive Activities

4) Jñāna - Impersonal Knowledge



Those whose goal is impersonal Brahman liberation are
bound to fall down because of neglecting Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
feet

ye “nye “ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho “nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

SB 10.2.32/CC Madhya 22.30/JD ch. 7,15,17/BTV ch. 3/BPKG
p. 519

ye anye—those others; aravinda-akṣa—O lotus-eyed one;
vimukta-māninaḥ—falsely considering themselves liberated
from material bondage; tvayi—towards You; asta-bhāvāt—on
account of their mood being displaced; aviśuddha-
buddhayaḥ—their intelligence being impure; āruhya—even
though achieving; kṛcchreṇa—by undergoing severe

                          293
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

austerities; param padam—the highest position (according
to their conception); tataḥ—from that position; patanti—
they fall; adhaḥ—down (back into material existence);
anādṛta—because of neglecting devotion to; yuṣmat—Your;
aṅghrayaḥ—lotus feet.

[Someone may say that aside from the Vaiṣṇavas, who
always seek shelter at the Lord’s lotus feet, there are
those who are not Vaiṣṇavas but have accepted a
different process for attaining salvation. What happens
to them? In answer to this question, Lord Brahmā
states:] “O lotus-eyed Lord, although nondevotees who
accept severe austerities and penances to achieve the
highest position may think themselves liberated, their
intelligence is impure. Although they may rise to the
level of impersonal Brahman realisation, they fall down
from their position because they neglect to worship Your
lotus feet.”



Progress is difficult for those attached to the
impersonal feature of God

kleśo —dhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām

avyaktā hi gatir duḥkhaṁ dehavadbhir avāpyate

BG 12.5

kleśaḥ—trouble; adhikataraḥ—very much; teṣām—of them;
avyakta—to the unmanifested; āsakta—attached; cetasām—of
those whose minds; avyaktā—the unmanifested; hi—
certainly; gatiḥ—the goal; duḥkham—with trouble; deha-
vadbhiḥ—by the embodied; avāpyate—is achieved.

For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested,
impersonal feature of the Supreme, advancement is very
troublesome. To make progress in that discipline is
always difficult for those who are embodied.

The scriptures condemn the path of speculative knowledge
(jñāna). Therefore, one must abandon the desire for
knowledge and replace it with bhakti

jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva

jīvanti san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām

sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo —jita jito —py asi tais tri-lokyām

SB 10.14.3/CC Mad 8.67/VG p. 83

jñāne—for knowledge; prayāsam—the endeavor; udapāsya—
giving up, discarding resolutely; namantaḥ—offering
obeisances; eva—simply; jīvanti—live; sat-mukharitām—
chanted by the pure devotees; bhavadīya-vārtām—topics
related to You; sthāne—in their material position;
sthitāḥ—remaining; śruti-gatām—received by hearing; tanu
—with their body; vāk—words; manobhiḥ—and mind; ye—who;
prāyaśaḥ—for the most part; ajita—O unconquerable one;
jitaḥ—conquered; api—nevertheless; asi—You become; taiḥ—

                          294
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

by them; tri-lokyām—within the three worlds.

[Brahmā prayed:] “Those who, even while remaining
situated in their established social positions, throw
away the process of speculative knowledge and with their
body, words and mind offer all respects to descriptions
of Your personality and activities, dedicating their
lives to these narrations, which are vibrated by You
personally and by Your pure devotees, certainly conquer
Your Lordship, although You are otherwise unconquerable
by anyone within the three worlds.”23 (BVSP)

(An alternative translation:) “Hatefully giving up all
intellectual attempts to understand the Supreme Truth,
those who want to realise You should completely
surrender unto You. They should hear from self-realised
devotees about Your holy name and transcendental
pastimes. Whatever situation they may find themselves
in, they should progress by fully dedicating their mind,
body, and words to You. In this way the infinite, who is
never conquered by anyone, becomes conquered through
love.” (SSM)

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s commentary: “Knowledge of bhagavat-
tattva obstructs the natural prema of Vraja which has
not even a scent of reverence based on social
conventions and restrictions. Śrī Hari can never be
conquered by anyone, but that same Hari is conquered by
those who, raher than making an independent endeavour to
achieve tattva-jñāna, simply hear Bhagavān’s līlā-kathā
from the mouths of rasika, tattva-jñā pure devotees.
Such persons bind Him by the ropes of their love.”
(cited in Veṇu-Gīta, p. 83)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam condemns the path of speculative
knowledge (jñāna) and states that only bhakti is the
cause of ultimate auspiciousness

śreyaḥ-sṛtiṁ bhaktim udasya te vibho

kliśyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye

teṣām asau kleśala eva śiṣyate

nānyad yathā sthūla-tuṣāvaghātinām

SB 10.14.4/CC Madhya 22.22, 24.140/BR 1.15/MK 1.7/BPKG
p. 519

śreyaḥ—of supreme benefit; sṛtim—the path; bhaktim—
devotional service; udasya—rejecting; te—they; vibho—O
almighty Lord; kliśyanti—struggle; ye—who; kevala—
exclusive; bodha—of knowledge; labdhaye—for the
achievement; teṣām—for them; asau—this; kleśalaḥ—
miseries; eva—merely; śiṣyate—remains; na—nothing; anyat
—other; yathā—just as; sthūla-tuṣa—empty husks;
avaghātinām—for those who are beating.

O Lord, devotional service unto You awards the supreme
auspiciousness. Those who give up this path only to
cultivate jñāna [speculative knowledge] will simply
undergo hard work, suffer pain and achieve misery, just

                          295
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

as the only gain of a person who beats empty husks is
hard work, not rice.

Karma and Jñāna (impersonalism) are both condemned in
the Upaniṣads

andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti ye 'vidyām upāsate

tato bhuya iva te tamo ya u vidyāyāṁ ratāḥ

Īśopaniṣad 9

andham—gross ignorance; tamaḥ—darkness; praviśanti—enter
into; ye—those who; avidyām—nescience; upāsate—worship;
tataḥ—than that; bhūyaḥ—still more; iva—like; te—they;
tamaḥ—darkness; ye—those who; u—also; vidyāyām—in the
culture of knowledge; ratāḥ—engaged.

Those who engage in the culture of ignorance [and so
perform karma-kāṇḍa, demigod worship, to attain their
desired material objectives] shall enter into dark
regions of ignorance. Worse still are those engaged in
the culture of so-called knowledge (impersonal jñāna).
They enter into a realm of even greater darkness.

Jñāna and Karma devoid of bhakti are not beneficial

naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitaṁ

na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam

kutaḥ punaḥ śaśvad abhadram īśvare

na cārpitaṁ karma yad apy akāraṇam

SB 1.5.12/CC Madhya 22.19/BR 1.14

naiṣkarmyam—self-realisation, being freed from the
reactions of fruitive work; api—in spite of; acyuta—the
infallible Lord; bhāva—conception; varjitam—devoid of;
na—does not; śobhate—look well; jñānam—transcendental
knowledge; alam—by and by; nirañjanam—free from
designations; kutaḥ—where is; punaḥ—again; śaśvat—
always; abhadram—uncongenial; īśvare—unto the Lord; na—
not; ca—and; arpitam—offered; karma—fruitive work; yat
api—what is; akāraṇam—not fruitive.

Even pure knowledge (jñāna), which is the direct sādhana
to obtain liberation, has no beauty if it is devoid of
bhakti to Bhagavān. How then can selfless action
(niṣkāma-karma), which is not offered to Bhagavān, and
fruitive action (kāmya-karma), which is always
inauspicious both in its practice stage and at
perfection, be beautiful or beneficial?

Those who desire mukti will be forced to accept the
bodies of trees

mukti, bhukti vāñche yei, kāhāṅ duṅhāra gati?

sthāvara-deha, deva-deha yaiche avasthiti

CC 8.257


                          296
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

mukti—liberation; bhukti—sense enjoyment; vāñche—
desires; yei—one who; kāhāṅ—where; duṅhāra—of both of
them; gati—the destination; sthāvara-deha—the body of a
tree; deva-deha—the body of a demigod; yaiche—just as;
avasthiti—situated.

“And what is the destination of those who desire
liberation and those who desire sense gratification?”
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked. Rāmānanda Rāya replied,
“Those who attempt to merge into the existence of the
Supreme Lord will have to accept bodies like those of
trees. And those who are overly inclined towards sense
gratification will attain the bodies of demigods.”

Thus ends section 4) Jñāna - Impersonal Knowledge

5) Aṣṭāṅga-yoga - Mystic Powers



The eightfold yoga system does not give satisfaction to
the soul

yamādibhir yoga-pathaiḥ kāma-lobha-hato muhuḥ

mukunda-sevayā yadvat tathātmāddhā na śāmyati

SB 1.6.35

yama-ādibhiḥ—by the process of practicing self-
restraint; yoga-pathaiḥ—by the path of yoga; kāma—
desires for sense satisfaction; lobha—greed for
satisfaction of the senses; hataḥ—curbed; muhuḥ—always;
mukunda—Kṛṣṇa, who awards freedom; sevayā—by the service
of; yadvat—as it is; tathā—like that; ātmā—the soul;
addhā—for all practical purposes; na—does not; śāmyati—
be satisfied.

It is true that by practicing restraint of the senses by
the yoga system one can get relief from the disturbances
of desire and lust, but this is not sufficient to give
real satisfaction to the soul, for such satisfaction is
derived from devotional service to the Mukunda.

It is impossible to control one’s mind through prāṇāyāma

yuñjānānām abhaktānāṁ prāṇāyāmādibhir manaḥ

akṣīṇa-vāsanaṁ rājan dṛśyate punar utthitam

SB 10.51.60

yuñjānānām—who are engaging themselves; abhaktānām—of
nondevotees; prāṇāyāma—with prāṇāyāma (yogic breath
control); ādibhiḥ—and other practices; manaḥ—the minds;
akṣīṇa—not eliminated; vāsanam—the last traces of whose
material desire; rājan—O King (Mucukunda); dṛśyate—is
seen; punaḥ—again; utthitam—waking (to thoughts of sense
gratification).

The minds of nondevotees who engage in such practices as
prāṇāyama are not fully cleansed of material desires.
Thus, O King, material desires are again seen to arise
in their minds.

                          297
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


prāyaśaḥ puṇḍarīkākṣa yuñjanto yogino manaḥ

viṣīdanty asamādhānān mano-nigraha-karśitāḥ

SB 11.29.2

prāyaśaḥ—for the most part; puṇḍarīka-akṣa—O lotus-eyed
Lord; yuñjantaḥ—who engage; yoginaḥ—yogīs; manaḥ—the
mind; viṣīdanti—become frustrated; asamādhānāt—because
of inability to attain trance; manaḥ-nigraha—by the
attempt to subdue the mind; karśitāḥ—weary.

O lotus-eyed Lord, those yogīs who try to control their
minds are frustrated in their attempts to attain
samādhī, and soon tire of their efforts at mind control.

Kṛṣṇa tells Uddhava that yoga and prāṇāyāma are a waste
of time

antarāyān vadanty etā yuñjato yogam uttamam

mayā sampadyamānasya kāla-kṣapaṇa-hetavaḥ

SB 11.15.33

antarāyān—impediments; vadanti—they say; etāḥ—these
mystic perfections; yuñjataḥ—of one engaging in; yogam—
connection with the Absolute; uttamam—the supreme stage;
mayā—with Me; sampadyamānasya—of one who is becoming
completely opulent; kāla—of time; kṣapaṇa—of the
interruption, waste; hetavaḥ—causes.

Learned experts in devotional service conclude that the
mystic perfections of yoga which I have mentioned, are
actually impediments and are a waste of time for one who
is practicing the supreme yoga, by which one achieves
all perfection in life directly from Me.

Thus ends section 5) Aṣṭāṅga-yoga - Mystic Powers




6) Bhukti (karma) Mukti (jñāna) and Siddhis (yogic
perfections) are obstacles for Bhakti



The two witches of the desire for material enjoyment and
liberation

bhukti-mukti-spṛhā yāvat piśācī hṛdi vartate

tāvad bhakti-sukhasyātra katham abhyudayo bhavet

BRS 1.2.22 /CC Mad 19.176/MS 4.2

bhukti—material enjoyment; mukti—liberation from
material existence; spṛhā—desires for; yāvat—as long as;
piśācī—the witches; hṛdi—within the heart; vartate—
remain; tāvat—that long; bhakti—of devotional service;
sukhasya—of the happiness; atra—here; katham—how;

                          298
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

abhyudayaḥ—awakening; bhavet—can there be.

As long as the two witches of desire for material
enjoyment and liberation remain within the heart of the
sādhaka, how can the happiness of viśuddha-bhakti be
awakened there?



Bhukti and Mukti are just like clouds which cover the
sun of Bhakti

bhukti mukti, je gati, tāhe nā koriho rati

meghera chāyāya, juḍāna jemana, kaha nā se kaun gati

E Mana! “Harinām— Koro Sāra 3/KSH A23

[O mind!] Do not develop attachment for a life aimed at
sense gratification or impersonal liberation. You should
realise both are just like clouds which cover the sun of
bhakti. Being insubstantial like a shadow, you should
realise they are not our desired objective.

Karmīs, jñānis and yogīs cannot be happy, only the
bhaktas attain blissful peace

kṛṣṇa-bhakta niṣkāma ataeva “śānta—

bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kāmī sakali “aśānta—

CC Mad 19.149

kṛṣṇa-bhakta—a devotee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; niṣkāma—actually
desireless; ataeva—therefore; śānta—peaceful; bhukti—of
material enjoyment; mukti—of liberation from material
activities; siddhi—of mystic perfections through aṣṭāṅa-
yoga; kāmī—those who are desirous; sakali—all of them;
aśānta—not peaceful.

Because a devotee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is desireless (desiring
only to please Kṛṣṇa), he is peaceful. Karmīs (fruitive
persons) desiring bhukti (material enjoyment), jñānīs
(philosophical speculators) desiring muktī (liberation),
and yogīs desiring siddhi (mystic perfections) are all
lusty and thus cannot be peaceful.

Karma and Jñāna are like two pots of poison

karma-kāṇḍa jñāna-kāṇḍa kevala viṣera bhāṇḍa

Śrī Prema-bhakti-candrika (8.8)/BPKG p. 264

Both karma-kāṇḍa (fruitive activities with a desire for
svarga) and jñāna-kāṇḍa (speculative knowledge with a
desire for impersonal liberation) are like pots of
poison. (Knowing these two to be opposed to bhakti,
sincere devotees of Bhagavān abandon them like poison).

Śuddha-bhakti can never arise in an impure heart
contaminated with bhukti and mukti

śrī kṛṣṇa-caraṇāmbhoja-sevā-nirvṛta-cetasām


                          299
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

eṣāṁ mokṣāya bhaktānāṁ na kadācit spṛhā bhavet

BRS 1.2.25/MS 4.2

Devotees whose minds are immersed in the happiness of
service to the lotus feet of Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa
never have any desire for bhukti or mukti.

Thus ends 6) Bhukti Mukti and Siddhis are Obstacles for
Bhakti




7) Real knowledge is that which leads to Kṛṣṇa-bhakti



Real knowledge is that which helps one become absorbed
in Kṛṣṇa

sā vidyā tan-matir yayā

SB 4.29.49/BR 1.21

sā—that; vidyā—education; tat—of the Lord; matiḥ—
consciousness; yayā—by which.

Real knowledge is that which helps one to direct his
consciousness towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or by which one
develops attraction for Śrī Kṛṣṇa..

This knowledge is the king of education, the most
confidential and purest

rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ pavitram idam uttamam

pratyakṣāvagamaṁ dharmyaṁ su-sukhaṁ kartum avyayam

BG 9.2

rāja-vidyā—the king of education; rāja-guhyam—the king
of confidential knowledge; pavitram—the purest; idam—
this; uttamam—transcendental; pratyakṣa—directly
experienced; avagamam—understood; dharmyam—nourishing
sad-dharma; susukham—very happy; kartum—to execute;
avyayam—everlasting.

This knowledge is the king of education, the most secret
of all secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and because
it gives direct perception of the self by realisation,
it is the perfection of dharma. It is everlasting, and
it is joyfully performed.

(In this connection see the śloka: jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ
me (ch. 3)

Except for Kṛṣṇa-bhakti, no other knowledge is important

prabhu kahe — kon vidyā vidyā-madhye sāra?

rāya kahe — kṛṣṇa bhakti vinā vidyā nāhi āra


                          300
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

CC Mad 8.245

prabhu kahe—the Lord inquired; kon—what; vidyā—
knowledge; vidyā-madhye—in the midst of knowledge; sāra—
the essence; rāya kahe—Rāmānanda Rāya answered; kṛṣṇa-
bhakti—devotional service to Kṛṣṇa; vinā—except; vidyā—
education; nāhi—there is not; āra—any other.

“Which is the most important of all fields of
knowledge?” Rāya Rāmānanda replied, “Except for kṛṣṇa-
bhakti, no other knowledge is important.”



Material knowledge is born from māyā (the deluding
potency) and is an obstacle for those on the path of
bhakti

jaḍā-vidyā jata māyāra vaibhava tomāra bhajane bādhā

moha janamiyā anitya saṁsāre jīvake karaye gādhā

BVT, cited in BPKG p. 341

The knowledge of this material world is knowledge born
of Your deluding potency (māyā). It creates obstacles in
devotional service and makes an ass of the eternal jīva
by increasing his infatuation with this temporary world.



Kṛṣṇa cannot be known by mental speculation

athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva
hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno na cānya eko “pi ciraṁ
vicinvan

SB 10.14.29/JD ch. 14

atha—therefore; api—indeed; te—Your; deva—my Lord; pada-
ambuja-dvaya—of the two lotus feet; prasāda—of the
mercy; leśa—by only a trace; anugṛhītaḥ—favored; eva—
certainly; hi—indeed; jānāti—one knows; tattvam—the
truth; bhagavat—of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; mahimnaḥ—of the
greatness; na—never; ca—and; anyaḥ—another; ekaḥ—one;
api—although; ciram—for a long period; vicinvan—
speculating.

[Lord Brahmā said:] My Lord, if one is favored by even a
slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus feet, he can
understand the greatness of Your personality. But those
who speculate are unable to know you, even though they
study the Vedas for many years.24




Kṛṣṇa can only be known by His mercy

īśvarera kṛpā-leśa haya ta— yāhāre sei ta— īśvara-tattva
jānibāre pāre

                            301
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


CC Madhya 6.83

īśvarera—of the Personality of Godhead; kṛpā-leśa—a
little mercy; haya—there is; ta——certainly; yāhāre—upon
whom; sei ta——he certainly; īśvara-tattva—Kṛṣṇa-tattva,
the truth of Kṛṣṇa; jānibāre—to know; pāre—is able.

[Gopīnātha Ācārya continued:] “If one receives but a
tiny bit of the Lord’s mercy by dint of devotional
service, he can understand kṛṣṇa-tattva, the truth about
Kṛṣṇa.” (“However, you Sarvabhuma, have not received
such mercy and therefore, despite your vast learning,
you cannot understand that Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa
Himself.”)

Even the topmost sages and rulers of the universe cannot
easily understand Kṛṣṇa

adyāpi vācas-patayas tapo-vidyā-samādhibhiḥ

paśyanto 'pi na paśyanti paśyantaṁ parameśvaram

SB 4.29.44

adya api—up to date; vācaḥ-patayaḥ—masters of speaking;
tapaḥ—austerities; vidyā—knowledge; samādhibhiḥ—and by
meditation; paśyantaḥ—observing; api—although; na
paśyanti—do not see; paśyantam—the one who sees
everything; parama-īśvaram—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

[The most powerful Lord Brahmā, the father of all
progenitors; Lord Śiva; Manu, Dakṣa and other rulers of
humankind, the four saintly Brahmācaris headed by Sanaka
and Sanatana, the great sages Marici, Atri, Aṅgirā,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bhṛgu, Vasiṣṭhaḥ, and my humble
self (Nārada) are all stalwart brāhmaṇas] All of us can
speak authoritatively on Vedic literature. We are very
powerful because of austerities, meditation and
education. Nonetheless, even after searching for the
Supreme Lord, who sees everything, we cannot always see
Him or understand Him.



Thus ends 7) Real knowledge is that which leads to
Kṛṣṇa-bhakti




8) Bhakti is Superior to and Independent of Karma and
Jñāna



Bhakti is the only cause of bhakti

bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyā

SB 11.3.31/MK ch. 1


                            302
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

Only bhakti causes bhakti. Sādhana-bhakti (the process
of bhakti for accomplishing perfection) results in
sādhya-bhakti (accomplished or perfected bhakti, better
known as bhāva-bhakti). From bhāva-bhakti, prema-bhakti
is born, which is the crown jewel of all human ideals
(puruṣārtha-mauli).

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura: Like Śrī Kṛṣṇa, His
non-different internal potency Bhakti-devī is self-
manifesting and indpendent of any material cause.

Kṛṣṇa cannot be attained by any path other than Bhakti

yaṁ na yogena sāṅkhyena dāna-vrata-tapo-—dhvaraiḥ

vyākhyā-svādhyāya-sannyāsaiḥ prāpnuyād yatnavān api

SB 11.12.9/MK 1.5

yam—whom; na—not; yogena—by the mystic yoga systems;
sāṅkhyena—by philosophical speculation; dāna—by charity;
vrata—vows; tapaḥ—austerities; adhvaraiḥ—or Vedic
ritualistic sacrifices; vyākhyā—by explaining Vedic
knowledge to others; svādhyāya—personal study of the
Veda; sannyāsaiḥ—or by taking the renounced order of
life; prāpnuyāt—can one obtain; yatna-vān—with great
endeavor; api—even.

Even though one engages with great endeavor in the
mystic yoga system, philosophical speculation, charity,
vows, penances, ritualistic sacrifices, teaching of
Vedic mantras to others, personal study of the Vedas, or
the renounced order of life, still one cannot achieve
Me.

Bhāgavatam says that except for bhakti, all other paths
are simply a waste of time

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ śrama eva hi kevalam

SB 1.2.8

dharmaḥ—occupation; sva-nuṣṭhitaḥ—executed in terms of
one’s own position; puṁsām—of humankind; viṣvaksena—the
Personality of Godhead (plenary portion); kathāsu—in the
narrations of; yaḥ—what is; na—not; utpādayet—does
produce; yadi—if; ratim—attraction; śramaḥ—useless
labor; eva—only; hi—certainly; kevalam—entirely.

Any spiritual practices and occupational duties that do
not inspire attraction for harī-kathā, the narrations of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, are only a waste of time.

pureha bhūman bahavo —pi yoginas

tvad-arpitehā nija-karma-labdhayā

vibudhya bhaktyaiva kathopanītayā

prapedire —ñjo —cyuta te gatiṁ parām

SB 10.14.5/MK 1.9

                          303
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


purā—previously; iha—in this world; bhūman—O almighty
Lord; bahavaḥ—many; api—indeed; yoginaḥ—followers of the
path of yoga; tvat—unto You; arpita—having offered; īhāḥ
—all their endeavors; nija-karma—by their prescribed
duties; labdhayā—which is achieved; vibudhya—coming to
understand; bhaktyā—by devotional service; eva—indeed;
kathā-upanītayā—cultivated through hearing and chanting
topics about You; prapedire—they achieved by surrender;
añjaḥ—easily; acyuta—O infallible one; te—Your; gatim—
destination; parām—supreme.

O almighty Lord, in the past many yogīs in this world
achieved the platform of devotional service by offering
all their endeavours unto You and faithfully carrying
out their prescribed duties. Through such devotional
service, perfected by the processes of hearing and
chanting about You, they came to understand You, O
infallible one, and could easily surrender to You and
achieve Your supreme abode.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura: The above ślokas
confirm that the paths of jñāna, karma and yoga are
completey dependent on bhakti to achieve their results.
The path of bhakti, however, is never dependent even in
the slightest way on karma, jñāna, or yoga to achieve
its result, prema.

Jñāna and Vairāgya are not the means of achieving bhakti

tasmān mad-bhakti-yuktasya yogino vai mad-ātmanaḥ

na jñānaṁ na ca vairāgyaṁ prāyaḥ śreyo bhaved iha

SB 11.20.31/MK 1.10

tasmāt—therefore; mat-bhakti-yuktasya—of one who is
engaged in My loving service; yoginaḥ—of a devotee; vai—
certainly; mat-ātmanaḥ—whose mind is fixed in Me; na—
not; jñānam—the cultivation of knowledge; na—nor; ca—
also; vairāgyam—the cultivation of renunciation; prāyaḥ—
generally; śreyaḥ—the means of achieving perfection;
bhavet—may be; iha—in this world.

Therefore, for a devotee engaged in My loving service,
with mind fixed on Me, the cultivation of knowledge and
renunciation is generally not the means of achieving the
ultimate perfection.



Jñāna and Vairāgya are not intrinsic limbs of devotional
service

jñāna-vairāgyādi bhaktira kabhu nahe “aṅga—

ahiṁsā-yama-niyamādi bule kṛṣṇa-bhakta-saṅga

CC Mad 22.145

jñāna—the path of knowledge; vairāgya-ādi—the path of
renunciation and so on; bhaktira—of devotional service;
kabhu—at any time; nahe—not; aṅga—a part; ahiṁsā—
nonviolence; yama—controlling the senses and the mind;

                          304
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

niyama-ādi—restrictions and so on; bule—roam; kṛṣṇa-
bhakta-saṅga—in s;adhu-saṅga.

The path of speculative knowledge (jñāna) and
renunciation (vairāgya) are not intrinsic limbs of
devotional service. However, good qualities such as
nonviolence and control of the mind and senses
automatically accompany a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

ājñāyaivaṁ guṇān doṣān mayādiṣṭān api svakān

dharmān santyajya yaḥ sarvān māṁ bhajet sa ca sattamaḥ

SB 11.11.32/CC Madhya 8.35/MK 1.11

ājñāya—knowing perfectly; evam—thus; guṇān—qualities;
doṣān—faults; mayā—by Me; ādiṣṭān—instructed; api—
although; svakān—own; dharmān—occupational duties;
santyajya—giving up; yaḥ—anyone who; sarvān—all; mām—
unto Me; bhajet—may render service; saḥ—he; ca—and; sat-
tamaḥ—a first-class person.

[Rāmānanda Rāya continued:] “Occupational duties are
described in the religious scriptures. If one analyzes
them, he can fully understand their qualities and faults
and then give them up completely to render service unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a person is
considered a first-class human being.”

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura: These and so many
other ślokas prove the complete independence of bhakti.
What more can be said? Bhakti is essential to give
results in the practice of karma, jñāna, and yoga, but
bhakti itself is not even the least contingent on these
practices for its own result.

The results of any other processes are automatically
attained by bhakti

yat karmabhir yat tapasā jñāna-vairāgyataś ca yat

yogena dāna-dharmeṇa śreyobhir itarair api

sarvaṁ mad-bhakti-yogena mad-bhakto labhate —ñjasā

svargāpavargaṁ mad-dhāma kathañcid yadi vāñchati

SB 11.20.32-33/ JD ch. 6/MK 1.13-14

yat—that which is obtained; karmabhiḥ—by fruitive
activities; yat—that which; tapasā—by penance; jñāna—by
cultivation of knowledge; vairāgyataḥ—by detachment; ca—
also; yat—that which is achieved; yogena—by the mystic
yoga system; dāna—by charity; dharmeṇa—by religious
duties; śreyobhiḥ—by processes for making life
auspicious; itaraiḥ—by others; api—indeed; sarvam—all;
mat-bhakti-yogena—by loving service unto Me; mat-bhaktaḥ
—My devotee; labhate—achieves; añjasā—easily; svarga—
promotion to heaven; apavargam—liberation from all
misery; mat-dhāma—residence in My abode; kathañcit—
somehow or other; yadi—if; vañchati—he desires.

Whatever results are obtained with great difficulty
through karma (fruitive activities), tapas

                          305
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

(austerities), jñāna (speculative knowledge), vairāgya
(renunciation), practice of (aṣṭaṅga) yoga, charity,
religious observances, and all other types of sādhana,
are easily obtained by My devotees through the power of
bhakti-yoga. Although My bhaktas are free from self-
interest, they could easily obtain elevation to the
celestial planets, liberation, or residence in
Vaikuṇṭha, if they at all desired such things.

Four in one: dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa are
automatically attained by steady devotion

bhaktis tvayi sthiratarā bhagavan yadi syād

daivena naḥ phalati divya-kiśora-mūrtiḥ

muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjaliḥ sevate —smān

dharmārtha-kāma-gatayaḥ samaya-pratīkṣāḥ

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 107/BR 6.11/PJ 3.19

bhaktiḥ—devotional service; tvayi—unto You; sthiratarā—
very steady; bhagavan—O Lord; yadi—if; syāt—it may be;
daivena—as destiny; naḥ—unto us; phalati—bears the
fruit; divya—transendental; kiśora—mūrtiḥ—the youthful
form of Kṛṣṇa; muktiḥ—liberation; svayam—personally;
mukulita-añjaliḥ—standing with folded hands; sevate—
renders service; asmān—unto us; dharma—religiosity;
artha—economic development; kāma—sense gratification;
gatayaḥ—the final goals; samaya—nearby; pratīkṣāḥ—
expecting.

O Supreme Lord, if our devotion for You were more
steadfast, Your adolescent form would naturally arise
within our hearts. Then there would not be the slightest
necessity to pray for the triple pursuits of
religiosity, gain, and sensual desire [dharma, artha,
kāma], and their negation in the form of liberation
[mukti]) because mukti will personally attend us (as a
side effect of devotion, in the form of deliverance from
ignorance), her hands cupped in prayer (like a
preordained maidservant); and the fruits of bhukti
(transitory pleasure culminating in attainment of
heaven) will eagerly await their orders (from us, should
any necessity arise for them in the service of Your
lotus feet).

Devoid of bhakti, karma, jñāna and yoga are fruitless;
Devoid of bhakti, all good qualities are merely
ornaments on a dead body

bhagavad-bhakti-hīnasya jātiḥ śāstraṁ japas tapaḥ

aprāṇasyeva dehasya maṇḍanaṁ loka-rañjanam

Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 3.12/CC Mad 19.75/MK 1.14/BPKG p.
438

bhagavat-bhakti-hīnasya—of a person devoid of devotional
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; jātiḥ—birth in a high caste;
śāstram—knowledge in the revealed scriptures; japaḥ—
pronunciation of mantras; tapaḥ—austerities and
penances; aprāṇasya—which is dead; iva—like; dehasya—of

                          306
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

a body; maṇḍanam—decoration; loka—to the whims of people
in general; rañjanam—simply pleasing.

Without devotion to the Lord, good birth, knowledge of
scripture, chanting mantras and performing austerities
are like decorating a dead body to please the common
people.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura: Thus without
bhakti, all these endeavours are fruitless. As the body
depends on the presence of the soul, the very life of
jñāna, karma, and yoga depends upon the supremely
exalted Bhakti-devī.

Karma, jñāna, and yoga depend on purity of time, place,
paraphernalia, performer and performance whereas bhakti
is independent of such things

na deśa-niyamas tatra na kāla-niyamas tathā

nocchiṣṭādau niṣedhaś ca śrī-harer nāmni lubdhakaḥ

Viṣṇu-dharma/CC Madhya 6.226/MK 1.15

na—no; deśa—of place; niyamaḥ—restriction; tatra—there;
na—no; kāla—of object; niyamaḥ—restriction; tathā—so; na
—no; ucchiṣṭa ādau—remnants etc.; niṣedhāḥ—prohibitions;
ca—also; śrī harer—Śrī Hari; nāmni—names; lubdhakaḥ—
greed.

O hunter, there are no restrictions of place or time,
nor any injunction forbidding the acceptance of prasādam
remnants, etc., when one has become greedy to chant the
name of Śrī Hari. (or) O hunter! There are no rules
governing the time or place where one may chant the holy
name of the Lord. Nor is it necessary for one to be in a
state of ritual purity. One can chant even if one’s
hands or mouth are unwashed after eating, sleeping, or
going to the toilet. Greed is the only requirement.




Bhakti is famous for being completely independent

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛgu-vara nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma

Padma Purāṇa/Skanda Purana/Padyāvalī 26/HBV 11.451

sakṛt--once; api--even; parigītam--chanted; śraddhayā--
with faith; helayā--with contempt; vā--or; bhṛgu-vara--O
best of the Bhṛgus; nara-mātram--a person; tārayet--
delivers; kṛṣṇa--of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāma--the name.

If one chants the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, even once,
either with faith, or even in the spirit of mocking Him,
the holy name will deliver the chanter from the bondage
of material existance.

By comparison, in karma-yoga even the slightest fault is
a great obstacle

                          307
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


mantro hinah sva-rato varṇato va mithah prayukto na tam
artham

aha yathendra satruh svarato'paradhat sa vag vajro
yajamanam hinasti

Paniniya Śikṣā 52/MK 1.16

If a mantra is either intoned or pronounced incorrectly,
not only will the mantra not have effect, but it may be
harmful. As when Tvaṣṭā wanted to create the enemy of
Indra and by a slight mispronunciation of the words
indra-śatru in the yajña those words worked as a
thunderbolt for Vṛtrāsura who was killed by Indra.

Bhakti-yoga will destroy one’s impurities even if one is
afflicted by lust, because Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-kathā is the
remedy to conquer this disease of the heart

vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ

śraddhānvito —nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ

bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ

hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.39/CC Antya 5.48/STB p. 34/
Prabandha Pañcakam p. 100

vikrīḍitam—the playful pastimes (rāsa dance); vraja-
vadhūbhiḥ—with the damsels of Vraja, the gopīs; idam—
this; ca—and; viṣṇoḥ—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; śraddhā-anvitaḥ—with
transcendental faith; anuśṛṇuyāt—continually hears in
the paramparā system; atha—also; varṇayet—describes; yaḥ
—one who; bhaktim—devotional service; parām—
transcendental; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; pratilabhya—attaining; kāmam—lusty material
desires; hṛt-rogam—the disease of the heart; āśu—very
soon; apahinoti—gives up; acireṇa—without delay; dhīraḥ—
one who is thoughtful.

A sober person who in the beginning faithfully and
continuously hears from his Guru the narrations of Lord
Kṛṣṇa’s unprecedented rāsa dance with the young gopīs of
Vraja, and later describes those pastimes, very soon
attains parā-bhakti or prema-bhakti for the Supreme
Lord, and thus becomes competent to quickly dispel the
heart disease of lust.

Furthermore, even if impurities such as lust may
sometimes appear in the devotee, śāstra declares that he
will not be defeated by sense gratification

bādhyamāno —pi mad-bhakto viṣayair ajitendriyaḥ

prāyaḥ pragalbhayā bhaktyā viṣayair nābhibhūyate

SB 11.14.18/MK 1.20

bādhyamānaḥ—being harassed; api—even though; mat-bhaktaḥ
—My devotee; viṣayaiḥ—by the sense objects; ajita—
without having conquered; indriyaḥ—the senses; prāyaḥ—

                            308
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

generally; pragalbhayā—effective and strong; bhaktyā—by
devotion; viṣayaiḥ—by sense gratification; na—not;
abhibhūyate—is defeated.

My dear Uddhava, if My devotee has not fully conquered
his senses, he may be harassed by material desires, but
because of his unflinching devotion for Me, he will not
be defeated by sense gratification.

Śāstra declares the superexcellence of bhakti over the
final goal of jñāna - impersonal liberation

muktiṁ dadāti karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam

SB 5.6.18

muktim—liberation; dadāti—gives; karhicit—at any time;
sma—indeed; na—not; bhakti-yogam—loving devotional
service.

Kṛṣṇa easily awards liberation but rarely awards bhakti.

ko vai na seveta vinā naretaram

MK 1.24

Who, except an animal, would not serve the Lord of the
heart?



muktānām api siddhānāṁ nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

sudurlabhaḥ praśāntātmā koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

SB 6.14.5/CC Mad 19.150/JD ch. 7, 17

muktānām—of persons liberated or freed from the bondage
of ignorance; api—even; siddhānām—of jñānīs who have
achieved perfection; nārāyaṇa—Śrī Nārāyaṇa; parāyaṇaḥ—
the pure devotee; su-durlabhaḥ—very rare; praśānta-ātmā—
completely satisfied, desireless; koṭiṣu—among many
millions; api—certainly; mahā-mune—O great sage.

O great sage, among many millions of liberated persons
and perfect jñānis, a pure devotee is extremely rare.

Taste is the key for understanding bhakti-tattva, not
book knowledge or logic

svalpāpi rūcir eva syād bhakti-tattvāvabodhikā

yuktis tu kevalā naiva yad asyā apratiṣṭhatā

BRS 1.1.45/JD ch. 13 p. 309

eva—certainly; api—even; sv-alpā—a very slight; rūciḥ—
taste; syāt—can cause; avabodhikā—an awakening; bhakti-
tattva—for the science of devotion; tu—however; kevalā—
only; yuktiḥ—logic; eva—is certainly; na—not;
apratiṣṭhatā—a sound foundation; yad—which; asyāḥ—for
the realisation of bhakti.

One can cpmprehend bhakti-tattva when one has gained

                          309
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

even a little taste for śāstras that establish bhakti-
tattva, such as Śrīmad Bhāgavatam. However, one cannot
understand this bhakti-tattva by dry logic alone,
because logic has no basis (when it comes to
transcendental reality), and arguments are always
inconclusive.

Bhajana means sevā, the mood of being a servant

bhaj ity eṣa vai dhātuḥ sevāyāṁ parikīrtitaḥ

tasmāt sevā budhaiḥ proktā bhakti-sādhana-bhūyasī

Garuḍā-Purāṇa (Pūrva khaṇḍa 231.3)/JD Glossary/BTV p. 6

vai—indeed eṣaḥ—this; dhātuḥ bhaj—the verbal root bhaj,
meaning to devote oneself; parikīrtitaḥ—is declared; iti
—thus; sevāyām—in the sense of service; tasmāt—
therefore; sevā—service; proktā—is taught; budhaiḥ—by
the wise; bhūyasī—for the expansion; bhakti-sādhana—of
one’s practice of devotional service.

The verbal root bhaj is used specifically in the sense
of sevā, or service. Therefore, when sādhana is
performed with the consciousness or mood of being a
servant, it is called bhakti. For this reason the wise
declare that sevā promotes the execution of bhakti.

Only those who worship Me will come to Me

yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā yānti mad-yājino “pi mām

BG 9.25/Arcana-dīpikā p. 117

yānti—go; deva-vratāḥ—worshipers of demigods; devān—to
the demigods; pitṝn—to the ancestors; yānti—go; pitṛ-
vratāḥ—worshipers of ancestors; bhūtāni—to the ghosts
and spirits; yānti—go; bhūta-ījyāḥ—worshipers of ghosts
and spirits; yānti—go; mat—My; yājinaḥ—devotees; api—
but; mām—unto Me.

Those who worship the demigods go to the planets of the
demigods; those who worship the ancestors go to the
ancestors; those who worship ghosts and spirits take
birth among such beings and only those who worship Me
will live with Me.

Only those who practice bhakti-yoga attain My
transcendental abode

yogasya tapasaś caiva nyāsasya gatayo —malāḥ

mahar janas tapaḥ satyaṁ bhakti-yogasya mad-gatiḥ

SB 11.24.14

yogasya—of mystic yoga; tapasaḥ—of great austerity; ca—
and; eva—certainly; nyāsasya—of the renounced order of
life; gatayaḥ—the destinations; amalāḥ—spotless; mahaḥ—
Mahar; janaḥ—Janas; tapaḥ—Tapas; satyam—Satya; bhakti-
yogasya—of devotional service; mat—My; gatiḥ—abode,
destination.

                          310
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


Those who practice mystic yoga, who perform great
austerities and accept sannyāsa, may attain the sinless
realms of Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapaloka, and Satyaloka,
but those who practice bhakti-yoga, devotional service
unto Me, attain My transcendental abode.



Who is a real yogī and sannyāsī?

anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ kāryaṁ karma karoti yaḥ

sa sannyāsī ca yogī ca na niragnir na cākriyaḥ

BG 6.1

[śrī-bhagavān uvāca—the Lord said:] anāśritaḥ—without
taking shelter; karma-phalam—of the result of work;
kāryam—obligatory; karma—work; karoti—performs; yaḥ—one
who; saḥ—he; sannyāsī—in the renounced order; ca—also;
yogī—mystic; ca—also; na—not; niḥ—without; agniḥ—fire;
na—nor; ca—also; akriyaḥ—without duty.

One who is unattached to the fruits of his work yet does
his duty is a true sannyāsī and a yogī, not he who
lights no fire of sacrifice or performs no work.

One who worships Kṛṣṇa without material desires is a
real yogī and sannyāsī

niṣkāma haiyā kare ye kṛṣṇa-bhajana

tāhāre se bali "yogī" sannyāsa-lakṣaṇa

viṣṇu-kriyā nā karile parānna khāile

kicchu nahe, sākṣātei ei vede bale

CB Antya 3.41-42

One who worships Kṛṣṇa without fruitive, material
desires is a real yogī and has the symptoms of a
sannyāsī. Those who do not perform service for Viṣṇu but
eat from others are useless parasites. That is the
verdict of the Vedas.

The bhakti-yogī is greater than the karmī, jñānī and
tapasvī

tapasvibhyo 'dhiko yogī jñānibhyo 'pi mato 'dhikaḥ

karmibhyaś cādhiko yogī tasmād yogī bhavārjuna

BG 6.46

tapasvibhyaḥ—than the ascetics; adhikaḥ—greater; yogī—
the yogī; jñānibhyaḥ—than the wise; api—also; mataḥ—
considered; adhikaḥ—greater; karmibhyaḥ—than the
fruitive workers; ca—also; adhikaḥ—greater; yogī—the
yogī; tasmāt—therefore; yogī—a transcendentalist; bhava—
just become; arjuna—O Arjuna.

A (bhakti) yogī is greater than a tapasvī (ascetic), a

                          311
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

jñānī, or a karmī. Therefore, O Arjuna, always be a
(bhakti) yogī.

Of all yogīs, the bhakta is the best

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

BG 6.47/ JD ch. 6, 12/BPKG p. 457

yoginām—of yogīs; api—also; sarveṣām—all types of; mat-
gatena—abiding in Me, always thinking of Me; antaḥ-
ātmanā—within himself; śraddhāvān—in full faith; bhajate
—renders transcendental loving service; yaḥ—one who; mām
—to Me; saḥ—he; me—by Me; yuktatamaḥ—the most intimately
connectd; mataḥ—is considered.

Of all yogīs, the one with great faith who always abides
in Me, thinks of Me within himself, and renders
transcendental loving service to Me—he is the most
intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of
all. That is My opinion.

Even the Ātmārāmas (self-satisfied liberated souls) are
attracted by pure bhakti

ātmārāmāś ca munayo nirgranthā apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim ittham-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ

SB 1.7.10/CC Madhya 6.186, 17.140, 24.5, 25.159/BPKG p.
520

sūtaḥ uvāca—Sūta Gosvāmī said; ātmārāmāḥ—those who take
pleasure in ātmā (spirit soul); ca—also; munayaḥ—sages;
nirgranthāḥ—freed from all bondage; api—in spite of;
urukrame—unto Kṛṣṇa who peforms great pastimes; kurvanti
—do; ahaitukīm—unalloyed; bhaktim—devotional service;
ittham-bhūta—such wonderful; guṇaḥ—qualities; hariḥ—of
the Lord.

All kinds of ātmārāmas [those who take pleasure in ātmā,
or spirit self], though freed from all kinds of material
bondage, become attracted to render unalloyed devotional
service unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa who possesses such wonderful
transcendental qualities that He attracts everyone,
including such great liberated souls.

Prema-bhakti forcefully attracts even great liberated
souls like Śukadeva Gosvāmī

pariniṣṭhito 'pi nairguṇya uttama-śloka-līlayā

gṛhīta-cetā rājarṣe ākhyānaṁ yad adhītavān

SB 2.1.9/BPKG pp. 490,520

pariniṣṭhitaḥ—fully realized; api—in spite of; nairguṇye
—in transcendence; uttama—transcendental; śloka—verses;
līlayā—by the pastimes; gṛhīta—being attracted; cetāḥ—
attention; rājarṣe—O saintly King; ākhyānam—delineation;
yat—that; adhītavān—I have studied.


                            312
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

[Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:] O saintly King, I was
firmly situated in transcendence, worshipping the
formless Brahman, yet I was still attracted by
narrations of the pastimes of the Lord, who is described
by transcendental ślokas.

Śukadeva Gosvāmī became attracted by the nectarean
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa

sva-sukha-nibhṛta-cetās tad-vyudastānya-bhāvo

—py ajita-rucira-līlākṛṣṭa-sāras tadīyam

vyatanuta kṛpayā yas tattva-dīpaṁ purāṇaṁ

tam akhila-vṛjina-ghnaṁ vyāsa-sūnuṁ nato —smi

SB 12.12.69

sva-sukha—in the happiness of the self; nibhṛta—
solitary; cetāḥ—whose consciousness; tat—because of
that; vyudasta—given up; anya-bhāvaḥ—any other type of
consciousness; api—although; ajita—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
unconquerable Lord; rucira—pleasing; līlā—by the
pastimes; ākṛṣṭa—attracted; sāraḥ—whose heart; tadīyam—
consisting of the activities of the Lord; vyatanuta—
spread, manifested; kṛpayā—mercifully; yaḥ—who; tattva-
dīpam—the bright light of the Absolute Truth; purāṇam—
the Purāṇa (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam); tam—unto Him; akhila-
vṛjina-ghnam—defeating everything inauspicious; vyāsa-
sūnum—son of Vyāsadeva; nataḥ asmi—I offer my
obeisances.

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual
master, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Vyāsadeva who
defeats all inauspicious things within this universe.
Although at first he was absorbed in the happiness of
Brahman and was living in a secluded place, giving up
all other types of consciousness, he became attracted by
the pleasing, most melodious pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He
therefore mercifully spoke this supreme Purāṇa, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, which is the bright light of the Absolute
Truth and which describes the activities of the Lord.

Editorial note: The two mantras by which Śrīla Vyāsadeva
attracted Śukadeva Gosvāmī to come and hear Bhāgavatam
are barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa vara vapuḥ (SB 10.21.5/ch. 6) and
aho bakī yaṁ stana-kāla-kūṭaṁ (SB 3.2.23/ch. 6)

One who becomes spiritually enlightened does not make
distinctions between enemies, friends and himself

sa yadānuvrataḥ puṁsāṁ paśu-buddhir vibhidyate

anya eṣa tathānyo —ham iti bheda-gatāsatī

SB 7.5.12

yadā—when; asatī—the impure; paśu-buddhiḥ—animalistic
conception of life; bheda-gatā—having a separatistic
concept; eṣaḥ—this (person); anyaḥ—(is) different; tathā
—and; aham—I; anyaḥ—different; iti—thus; puṁsām—of the
conditioned souls; vibhidyate—is destroyed; saḥ—he;
anuvrataḥ—(becomes) a devotee.

                          313
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


When Śrī Kṛṣṇa is pleased with the living entity because
of his devotional service, one becomes truly enlightened
and does not make distinctions between enemies, friends
and himself. Intelligently, he then thinks, “Every one
of us is an eternal servant of God, and therefore we are
not different from one another.” (Therefore one should
treat all others with nothing less than love and
affection)

Bhakti yoga is the supreme dharma

etāvān eva loke —smin puṁsāṁ dharmaḥ paraḥ smṛtaḥ

bhakti-yogo bhagavati tan-nāma-grahaṇādibhiḥ

SB 6.3.22/BR 1.37/GKH (P)

etāvān—this much; eva—indeed; loke asmin—in this
material world; puṁsām—of human beings; dharmaḥ—the
essence of one’s spiritual nature and function; paraḥ—
transcendental; smṛtaḥ—recognized; bhakti-yogaḥ—bhakti-
yoga, or devotional service; bhagavati—to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tat
—His; nāma—of the holy name; grahaṇa-ādibhiḥ—beginning
with chanting.

Only loving devotional service to Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
performed through nāma-saṅkīrtana, is called bhakti-
yoga. This alone is the supreme dharma for all human
beings.

I was looking for a piece of broken glass but found
instead a most valuable jewel

sthānābhilāṣī tapasi sthito —haṁ

tvāṁ prāptavān deva-munīndra-guhyam

kācaṁ vicinvann api divya-ratnaṁ

svāmin kṛtārtho —smi varaṁ na yāce

Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 7.28/CC Mad 22.42, 24.219

sthāna-abhilāṣī—desiring a very high position in the
material world; tapasi—in severe austerities and
penances; sthitaḥ—situated; aham—I; tvām—You; prāptavān—
have obtained; deva-muni-indra-guhyam—difficult to
achieve even for great demigods, saintly persons and
kings; kācam—a piece of glass; vicinvan—searching for;
api—although; divya-ratnam—a transcendental gem; svāmin—
O my Lord; kṛta-arthaḥ asmi—I am fully satisfied; varam—
any benediction; na yāce—I do not beg.

[Dhruva Mahārāja said:] “O my Lord, because I was
seeking an opulent material position, I was performing
severe types of penance and austerity. Since I have
obtained You, who are very difficult for the great
demigods, saintly persons and kings to attain, I am
regretting that I was searching after a piece of broken
glass; however, now that I have attained the most
valuable transcendental gem, Your personal darśana, I am
completely satisfied and I do not wish to ask any
benediction from You.”

                            314
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Because he was performing
bhajana with a material desire (for a kingdom), Dhruva
Mahārāja had to accept the rulership of the Earth for 36
thousand years before he could attain Bhagavān’s
personal association again. Therefore, beware! Don—t
harbour any material desires. They will leave an
impression upon your mind. Then Bhagavān will fulfill
that desire first, and how much of your time will be
lost is not certain. (Śrī Hari-kathāmṛtam 1)



By worshipping Kṛṣṇa, the root of all dharma, everyone
will become blissful

dharma-mūlaṁ hi bhagavān sarva-vedamayo hariḥ

smṛtaṁ ca tad-vidāṁ rājan yena cātmā prasīdati

SB 7.11.7

dharma-mūlam—the root of religious principles; hi—
indeed; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sarva-veda-mayaḥ—the essence of all Vedic knowledge;
hariḥ—the Supreme Being; smṛtam ca—and the scriptures;
tat-vidām—of those who know the Supreme Lord; rājan—O
King; yena—by which (religious principle); ca—also; ātmā
—the soul, mind, body and everything; prasīdati—become
fully satisfied.

The Supreme Being, the Personality of Godhead, is the
essence of all Vedic knowledge, the root of all dharma,
and the object of meditation for the great authorities
who know the truth about the Supreme Lord and whose
words become part of the scriptures. This is evidence
(pramāṇa), O King Yudhiṣṭhira, and by accepting this
principle everyone will attain the highest sitisfaction
of the soul, mind and body.

Pure devotion is the only means to attain the treasure
of Kṛṣṇa-prema

bāpera dhana āche - jñāne dhana nāhi pāya tabe sarvajña
kahe tāre prāptira upāya

'paścime' khudibe, tāhā 'yakṣa' eka haya se vighna
karibe, dhane hāta nā paḍaya

'uttare' khudile āche kṛṣṇa 'ajagare' dhana nāhi pābe,
khudite gilibe sabāre

pūrva-dike tāte māṭī alpa khudite dhanera jhāri paḍibeka
tomāra hātete

aiche śāstra kahe, karma, jñāna, yoga tyaji' 'bhaktye'
kṛṣṇa vaśa haya, bhaktye tāore bhaji

ataeva 'bhakti' kṛṣṇa-prāptyera upāya 'abhidheya' bali'
tāre sarva-śāstre gāya

dhana pāile yaiche sukha-bhoga phala pāya sukha-bhoga
haite duḥkha āpani palāya


                          315
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

taiche bhakti-phale kṛṣṇe prema upajaya preme kṛṣṇāsvāda
haile bhava nāśa pāya

dāridrya-nāśa, bhava-kṣaya, premera 'phala' naya prema-
sukha-bhoga mukhya prayojana haya

CC Madhya 20.131-136, 139-142

Although being assured of his father's treasure, the
poor man could not acquire this treasure by such
knowledge alone. The astrologer had to tell him,
therefore, the means whereby he could actually find the
treasure. The astrologer said, "The treasure is in this
place, but if you dig on the southern side, the wasps
and drones will rise, and you will not get your
treasure. If you dig on the western side, a ghost will
create such a disturbance that your hands will not even
touch the treasure. If you dig on the northern side, a
big black snake will devour you. If, however, you dig up
a small quantity of dirt on the eastern side, you will
immediately touch the pot of treasure. Revealed
scriptures conclude that one should give up fruitive
activity, speculative knowledge, and the mystic yoga
system. Instead one should take to devotional service,
by which Kṛṣṇa can be fully satisfied. The conclusion is
that devotional service is the only means to approach
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This system is therefore called abhidheya.
This is the verdict of all revealed scriptures. When one
is actually rich he naturally enjoys all kinds of
happiness. When one is actually in a happy mood, all
distressful conditions go away by themselves. No
extraneous endeavor is needed. Similarly, as a result of
bhakti, one's dormant love for Kṛṣṇa awakens. Then one
can relish the association of Lord Kṛṣṇa and
consequently material existence, the repetition of birth
and death, comes to an end. The goal of kṛṣṇa-bhakti is
not to become materially rich or free from material
bondage. The real goal (prayojana) is to be situated in
devotional service and thus enjoy the bliss of kṛṣṇa-
prema.

Thus ends 8) Bhakti is Superior to Karma and Jñāna

and Chapter 11 — Abhidheya-tattva




Chapter 12 — Overcoming Impediments to Bhakti




1. Lust is the Real Enemy 375

2. The Hazards of Associating with Women 383

(or, more generally, with the opposite sex)

3. Self-Realisation or Sense Gratification? 390

4. Intimate Association with Women is Prohibited 395


                          316
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

5. Essential Prayers for Protection 397

6. Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva Prayers 403



1) Lust is the Real Enemy



Give up your lusty material desires and aspire only for
unalloyed devotion

na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ

kavitāṁ vā jagad-īśa kāmaye

mama janmani janmanīśvare

bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi

Śikṣāṣṭaka 4/CC Antya 20.29

na—not; dhanam—riches; na—not; janam—followers; na—not;
sundarīm—a very beautiful woman; kavitām—fruitive
activities or liberation described in flowery language;
vā—or; jagat-īśa—O Lord of the universe; kāmaye—I
desire; mama—My; janmani—in birth; janmani—after birth;
īśvare—unto the Supreme Lord; bhavatāt—let there be;
bhaktiḥ—devotional service; ahaitukī—causeless, with no
motives; tvayi—unto You.

O Jagadīśa, I do not desire wealth, followers such as
beautiful wife, sons, friends and relatives, nor
liberation or mundane knowledge expressed in poetic
language. My only desire, O Lord of my life, is to have
unmotivated devotional service unto Your lotus feet
birth after birth.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Give     up all worldly sense
gratification. Don—t pray for     a good wife, a good
family, salvation or anything     else; only pray for
causeless bhakti - service to     the love that is in the
heart of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. (GV     p. 34)

The difference between lust and love (kāma and prema)

ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā - tāre bali “kāma—

kṛṣṇendriya-prīti-icchā dhare “prema— nāma

CC Adi 4.165/BR 8.9 pt

ātma-indriya-prīti—for the pleasure of one’s own senses;
vāñchā—desires; tāre—to that; bali—I say; kāma—lust;
kṛṣṇa-indriya-prīti—for the pleasure of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s
senses; icchā—desire; dhare—holds; prema—love; nāma—the
name.

The desire to gratify one’s own senses is kāma (lust),
but the desire to please the senses of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
prema (pure love of God). [Briefly, lust is “for me” -
love is “for Śrī Kṛṣṇa”].


                            317
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura [Kṛṣṇa is saying:] “Those
jīvas who do not serve Me by correctly using their free
will, have to accept kāma, an enjoying mood, which is
the perverted form of the jīvas— pure love for Me,
prema.” (BTV)

Lust is the real enemy of the conditioned souls

kāma eṣa krodha eṣa rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ

mahāśano mahā-pāpmā viddhy enam iha vairiṇam

BG 3.37

[śri-bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said:] kāmaḥ—lust; eṣaḥ
—this; krodhaḥ—anger; eṣaḥ—this; rajaḥ-guṇa—the mode of
passion; samudbhavaḥ—born of; mahā-aśanaḥ—all-devouring;
mahā-pāpmā—greatly sinful; viddhi—know; enam—this; iha—
in the material world; vairiṇam—greatest enemy.

[Śrī Bhagavān said:] It is lust only, Arjuna, born of
contact with the material mode of passion and later
transformed into anger, which is the all-devouring and
immensely sinful enemy within this world.

Kāma (lust) is the root cause of suffering and it burns
like fire

āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena jñānino nitya-vairiṇā

kāma-rūpeṇa kaunteya duṣpūreṇānalena ca

BG 3.39

āvṛtam—covered; jñānam—spiritual knowledge; etena—by
this; jñāninaḥ—of the knower; nitya-vairiṇā—by the
eternal enemy; kāma-rūpeṇa—in the form of lust; kaunteya
—O son of Kuntī; duṣpūreṇa—never to be satisfied;
analena—by the fire; ca—also.

Thus the wise living entity’s spiritual knowledge
becomes covered by his eternal enemy in the form of
lust, which is never satiated and which burns like fire.

Kāma can never be satiated

kāmānalaṁ madhu-lavaiḥ śamayan durāpaiḥ

SB 7.9.25/SBG 3.39 pt

kāma-analam—the blazing fire of lusty desires; madhu-
lavaiḥ—with drops of honey (happiness); śamayan—
controlling; durāpaiḥ—very difficult to do.

Kāma can never be satisfied by enjoying the sense
objects. It is like a fire which cannot be extinguished
by drops of honey in the form of momentary satisfaction.

The sequence of falling down

dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ saṅgas teṣūpajāyate

saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ kāmāt krodho —bhijāyate


                             318
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

BG 2.62/MS 5 pt

dhyāyataḥ—while contemplating; viṣayān—sense objects;
puṁsaḥ—of a person; saṅgaḥ—attachment; teṣu—in the sense
objects; upajāyate—develops; saṅgāt—from attachment;
sañjāyate—develops; kāmaḥ—desire; kāmāt—from desire;
krodhaḥ—anger; abhijāyate—becomes manifest.

While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person
develops attachment for them, and from such attachment
lust develops, and from lust anger arises.

krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥ

smṛti-bhraṁśād buddhi-nāśo buddhi-nāśāt praṇaśyati

BG 2.63/MS 5 pt

krodhāt—from anger; bhavati—takes place; sammohaḥ—
perfect illusion; sammohāt—from illusion; smṛti—of
memory; vibhramaḥ—bewilderment; smṛti-bhraṁśāt—after
bewilderment of memory; buddhi-nāśaḥ—loss of
intelligence; buddhi-nāśāt—and from loss of
intelligence; praṇaśyati—one falls down.

From anger, complete delusion arises, and from delusion
bewilderment of memory. When memory is bewildered,
intelligence is lost, and when intelligence is lost one
falls down again into the stool-ditch of sense
gratification.

Editorial note: In this connection see SB 11.21.19-21
(Uddhava-gīta)

na jātu kāmaḥ kāmānām upabhogena śāṁyati

haviṣā kṛṣṇa-vartmeva bhūya evābhivardhate

SB 9.19.14/SBG 3.37 pt

na—not; jātu—at any time; kāmaḥ—lusty desires; kāmānām—
of persons who are very lusty; upabhogena—by enjoyment
of lusty desires; śāṁyati—can be pacified; haviṣā—by
supplying ghee; kṛṣṇa-vartmā—fire; iva—like; bhūyaḥ—
again and again; eva—indeed; abhivardhate—increases more
and more.

Fire is not satiated by sprinkling it with ghee, rather,
it increases. Similarly, by enjoying sense objects, the
thirst for sense enjoyment increases more and more. It
does not become pacified.



yat pṛthivyāṁ vrīhi-yavam hiraṇyaṁ paśavaḥ striyaḥ

na duhyanti manaḥ-prītiṁ puṁsaḥ kāma-hatasya te

SB 9.19.13/ SBG 3.37 pt

yat—what; pṛthivyām—within this world; vrīhi—food
grains, rice; yavam—barley; hiraṇyam—gold; paśavaḥ—
animals; striyaḥ—wives or other women; na duhyanti—do
not give; manaḥ-prītim—satisfaction of the mind; puṁsaḥ—

                          319
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

to a person; kāma-hatasya—because of being victimized by
lusty desires; te—they.

All the food grains, gold, animals, and women on earth
cannot satisfy the kāma of a lusty man.



The example of Saubhari Muni

evaṁ gṛheṣv abhirato viṣayān vividhaiḥ sukhaiḥ

sevamāno na cātuṣyad ājya-stokair ivānalaḥ

SB 9.6.48/SBG 3.39 pt

evam—in this way; gṛheṣu—in household affairs; abhirataḥ
—being always engaged; viṣayān—material paraphernalia;
vividhaiḥ—with varieties of; sukhaiḥ—happiness;
sevamānaḥ—enjoying; na—not; ca—also; atuṣyat—satisfied
him; ājya-stokaiḥ—by drops of fat; iva—like; analaḥ—a
fire.

The sage Saubhari Muni was not able to attain peace by
profusely enjoying sense objects, just as fire is not
extinguished when drops of ghee are poured into it.



The example of king Yayātī

na tṛpyaty ātma-bhūḥ kāmo vahnir āhutibhir yathā

SB 11.26.14/SBG 3.39 pt

na tṛpyati—never became satisfied; ātma-bhūḥ—born from
the mind; kāmaḥ—the lust; vahniḥ—fire; āhutibhiḥ—by
oblations; yathā—just as.

My lusty desires kept rising again and again within my
heart and were never satisfied, just like a fire that
can never be extinguished by the oblations of ghee
poured into its flames.



The example of Ajāmila

stambhayann ātmanātmānaṁ yāvat sattvaṁ yathā-śrutam

na śaśāka samādhātuṁ mano madana-vepitam

SB 6.1.62/SBG 3.33 pt

stambhayan—trying to control; ātmanā—by the
intelligence; ātmānam—the mind; yāvat sattvam—as far as
possible for him; yathā-śrutam—by remembering the
instruction (of celibacy, brahmacarya, not even to see a
woman); na—not; śaśāka—was able; samādhātum—to restrain;
manaḥ—the mind; madana-vepitam — agitated by Cupid or
lusty desire.

After seeing the prostitute, the mind of Ajāmila became
agitated. He tried hard to control his mind by fortitude

                             320
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

and śāstric knowledge but, being agitated by Cupid, he
was unable to do so.



The attraction between male and female is the basic
principle of material existence, and this misconception
shackles the jīva to material illusions

puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ

tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ

ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair

janasya moho —yam ahaṁ mameti

SB 5.5.8

puṁsaḥ—of a male; striyāḥ—of a female; mithunī-bhāvam—
attraction for sexual life; etam—this; tayoḥ—of both of
them; mithaḥ—between one another; hṛdaya-granthim—the
knot of the hearts; āhuḥ—they call; ataḥ—thereafter;
gṛha—by home; kṣetra—field; suta—children; āpta—
relatives; vittaiḥ—and by wealth; janasya—of the living
being; mohaḥ—illusion; ayam—this; aham—I; mama—mine; iti
—thus.

The attraction between male and female is the basic
principle of material existence. On the basis of this
illusory attraction, which ties together the hearts of
the male and female, one becomes attracted to his body,
home, property, children, relatives and wealth. In this
way one increases life’s illusions and develops the
false mentality of “I and mine.”



Tolerate the sex urge and avoid so much suffering

yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tucchaṁ

kaṇḍūyanena karayor iva duḥkha-duḥkham

tṛpyanti neha kṛpaṇā bahu-duḥkha-bhājaḥ

kaṇḍūtivan manasijaṁ viṣaheta dhīraḥ

SB 7.9.45

yat—which (is meant for material sense gratification);
maithuna-ādi—sex and anything related to sex life;
gṛhamedhi-sukham—material happiness based on attachment
to family, society, friendship, etc.; hi—indeed; tuccham
—insignificant; kaṇḍūyanena—by the rubbing; karayoḥ—of
the two hands; iva—like; duḥkha-duḥkham—misery which
causes more misery (which inevitably follows any attempt
at sense gratification); tṛpyanti—they become satisfied;
na—never; iha—in this world; kṛpaṇāḥ—foolish persons;
bahu-duḥkha-bhājaḥ—subjected to many types of material
unhappiness; kaṇḍūti-vat—just like the itching; manasi-
jam—which is simply a mental concoction; viṣaheta—one
should tolerate (the itching sex urge); dhīraḥ—(he can
become) a sober, thoughtful person.

                          321
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Sex life is compared to the rubbing of two hands to
relieve an itch. Gṛhamedhīs, so-called gṛhasthas
(householders) who have no spiritual knowledge, think
that this itching is the greatest platform of happiness,
although actually it is a source of distress. The
kṛpaṇas, the fools who are just the opposite of
Vaiṣṇavas, are not satisfied by repeated sensual
enjoyment. Those who are dhīra, however, who are sober
and who tolerate this itching, are not subjected to this
suffering of the fools.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda: Materialists think
that sexual indulgence is the greatest happiness in this
material world, and therefore they make elaborate plans
to satisfy their senses, especially the genitals. This
is generally found everywhere, and specifically found in
the Western world, where there are regular arrangements
to satisfy sex life in different ways. Actually,
however, this has not made anyone happy. Even the
hippies, who have given up all the materialistic
comforts of their fathers and grandfathers, cannot give
up the sensational happiness of sex life. Such persons
are described here as kṛpaṇas, misers. The human form of
life is a great asset, for in this life one can fulfill
the goal of existence. Unfortunately, however, because
of a lack of education and culture, people are
victimized by the false happiness of sex life. Prahlāda
Mahārāja therefore advises one not to be misled by this
civilization of sense gratification, and especially not
by sex life. Rather, one should be sober, avoid sense
gratification and be Kṛṣṇa conscious. (SB 7.9.45 pt)



One should not work hard simply for sense gratification
which is available even for stool-eating dogs and hogs

nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke

kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye

tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena sattvaṁ

śuddhyed yasmād brahma-saukhyaṁ tv anantam

SB 5.5.1

[ṛṣabhaḥ uvāca—Lord Ṛṣabhadeva said]; na—not; ayam—this;
dehaḥ—body; deha-bhājām—of all living entities who have
accepted material bodies; nṛ-loke—in human society;
kaṣṭān—troublesome; kāmān—sense gratification; arhate—
deserves; viṭ-bhujām—of stool-eaters; ye—which; tapaḥ—
austerities and penances; divyam—divine; putrakāḥ—My
dear sons; yena—by which; sattvam—the heart; śuddhyet—
becomes purified; yasmāt—from which; brahma-saukhyam—
spiritual happiness; tu—certainly; anantam—unending.

Lord Ṛṣabhadeva told His sons: My dear boys, of all the
living entities who have accepted material bodies in
this world, one who has been awarded this human form
should not work hard day and night simply for sense
gratification, which is available even for dogs and hogs
that eat stool. One should engage in penance and

                          322
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

austerity to attain the divine position of devotional
service. By such activity, one’s heart is purified, and
when one attains this position, he attains eternal,
blissful life, which is transcendental to material
happiness and which continues forever.



The endeavor for sense gratification is a useless waste
of time

yadā na paśyaty ayathā guṇehāṁ

svārthe pramattaḥ sahasā vipaścit

gata-smṛtir vindati tatra tāpān

āsādya maithunyam agāram ajñaḥ

SB 5.5.7

yadā—when; na—not; paśyati—sees; ayathā—unnecessary;
guṇa-īhām—endeavor to satisfy the senses; sva-arthe—in
self-interest; pramattaḥ—mad; sahasā—very soon; vipaścit
—even one advanced in knowledge; gata-smṛtiḥ—being
forgetful; vindati—gets; tatra—there; tāpān—material
miseries; āsādya—getting; maithunyam—based on sexual
intercourse; agāram—a home; ajñaḥ—being foolish.

Even though one may be very learned and wise, he is mad
if he does not understand that the endeavor for sense
gratification is a useless waste of time. Being
forgetful of his own interest, he tries to be happy in
the material world, centering his interests on his
homelife, which is based on sexual intercourse and which
brings him all kinds of material miseries. In this way
one is no better than a foolish animal.



An honest confession to Gopīnātha

gopīnātha, āmi to— kāmera dāsa

viṣaya-vāsanā, jāgiche hṛdaye, phāṅdiche karama phāṅse
(2)

gopīnātha, kabe vā jāgiba āmi

kāma-rūpa ari, dūre teyāgibo, hṛdaye sphuribe tumi (3)

Gopīnātha, song 2, Kalyana-kalpataru/ SGG p. 89

gopīnātha—O Gopīnātha; āmi—I; to——indeed; kāmera—of
lust; dāsa—the servant; biṣaya—material; bāsanā—desires;
jāgiche—awaken; hṛdaye—in the heart; phāndiche—caught;
karama—of karma; phāṅse—in the noose; gopīnātha—O
Gopīnātha; kabe—when?; bā—or; jāgiba—will awaken; āmi—I;
kāma-rūpa—in the form of lust; ari—the enemy; dūre—far
away; teyāgibo—I will abandon; hṛdaye—in the heart;
sphuribe—manifest; tumi—You.

O Gopīnātha, I am the faithful servant of lust. So many
desires for mundane sense enjoyment are dawning within

                          323
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

my heart, and I am being choked by the noose of fruitive
actions and reactions. O Gopīnātha, when will I wake up
and cast far away my enemy in the form of lust? I will
only be able to do so if You will kindly manifest
Yourself in my heart.



2) The Hazards of Associating with Women

(or more generally - with the opposite sex)



Woman is compared to fire, and man is compared to a
butter pot

nanv agniḥ pramadā nāma ghṛta-kumbha-samaḥ pumān

sutām api raho jahyād anyadā yāvad-artha-kṛt

SB 7.12.9

nanu—certainly; agniḥ—the fire; pramadā—the woman (one
who bewilders the mind of man); nāma—indeed; ghṛta-
kumbha—a pot of butter; samaḥ—like; pumān—a man; sutām
api—even one’s daughter; rahaḥ—in a secluded place;
jahyāt—one must not associate with; anyadā—with other
women also; yāvat—as much as; artha-kṛt—required.

Woman is compared to fire, and man is compared to a
butter pot. Therefore a man should avoid associating
even with his own daughter in a secluded place.
Similarly, he should also avoid association with other
women. One should associate with women only for
important business and not otherwise.

Woman is the representation of māyā

yopayāti śanair māyā yoṣid deva-vinirmitā

tām īkṣetātmano mṛtyuṁ tṛṇaiḥ kūpam ivāvṛtam

SB 3.31.40

yā—she who; upayāti—approaches; śanaiḥ—slowly; māyā—
representation of māyā; yoṣit—woman; deva—by the Lord;
vinirmitā—created; tām—her; īkṣeta—one must regard;
ātmanaḥ—of the soul; mṛtyum—death; tṛṇaiḥ—with grass;
kūpam—a well; iva—like; āvṛtam—covered.

The woman, created by the Lord, is the representation of
māyā, and one who associates with her (by accepting
services and so forth) must certainly know that this is
the way of death, just like a blind well covered with
grass.

Associating improperly with women propels one into the
dark well of material life

dṛṣṭvā striyaṁ deva-māyāṁ tad-bhāvair ajitendriyaḥ

pralobhitaḥ pataty andhe tamasy agnau pataṅga-vat


                          324
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

SB 11.8.7

dṛṣṭvā—seeing; striyam—a woman; deva-māyām—whose form is
created by the illusory energy of the Lord; tat-bhāvaiḥ—
by the alluring seductive activities of the woman; ajita
—one who has not controlled; indriyaḥ—his senses;
pralobhitaḥ—enticed; patati—falls down; andhe—into the
blindness of ignorance; tamasi—into the darkness of
hell; agnau—in the fire; pataṅga-vat—just like the moth.

One who has failed to control his senses immediately
feels attraction upon seeing a woman’s form, which is
created by the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord.
Indeed, when the woman speaks with enticing words,
smiles coquettishly and moves her body sensuously, his
mind is immediately captured, and thus he falls blindly
into the darkness of material existence, just as the
moth attracted by the bright fire rushes blindly into
its flames.



Māyā beckons “Come on!” “Enjoy!” - and the fools rush in

yoṣid-dhiraṇyābharaṇāmbarādi-

dravyeṣu māyā-raciteṣu mūḍhaḥ

pralobhitātmā hy upabhoga-buddhyā

pataṅga-van naśyati naṣṭa-dṛṣṭiḥ

SB 11.8.8

yoṣit—of women; hiraṇya—golden; ābharaṇa—ornaments;
ambara—clothing; ādi—and so on; dravyeṣu—upon seeing
such things; māyā—by the illusory energy of the Lord;
raciteṣu—manufactured; mūḍhaḥ—a fool with no
discrimination; pralobhita—aroused by lusty desires;
ātmā—such a person; hi—certainly; upabhoga—for sense
gratification; buddhyā—with the desire; pataṅga-vat—like
the moth; naśyati—is destroyed; naṣṭa—is ruined; dṛṣṭiḥ—
whose intelligence.

A foolish person with no intelligent discrimination is
immediately aroused at the sight of a lusty woman
beautifully decorated with golden ornaments, fine
clothing and other cosmetic features. Being eager for
sense gratification, such a fool loses all intelligence
and is destroyed just like the moth who rushes into the
blazing fire.

Money, women and prestige are the greatest obstacles to
bhakti

kanaka-kāminī, pratiṣṭhā-bāghinī,

chāḍiyāche jāre, sei to— vaiṣṇava

Vaiṣṇava Ke? Who is a Real Vaiṣṇava? Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda

kanaka-kāminī—enjoyment of wealth and women; pratiṣṭhā-
bāghinī—the tigress of worldly reputation; chāḍiyāche—

                          325
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

has given up; jāre—who; sei—he; to——certainly; vaiṣṇava—
a devotee.

One is truly a Vaiṣṇava who has given up the habit of
falling victim to the ferocious tigress of wealth,
beauty, and fame. Such a soul is factually detached from
material life, and is known as a pure devotee. [Money,
illicit association with women, and prestige — are like
a tigress and will devour your soul.]

Strī — one who expands the field of material activities.

Yoṣit — one whose very presence evokes the desire for
sense gratification.

Pramadā — one who bewilders the minds of men; the
personified form of inattentiveness.



One loses all good qualities by associating with worldly
people and women

satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā maunaṁ buddhiḥ śrīr hrīr yaśaḥ kṣamā

śamo damo bhagaś ceti yat-saṅgād yāti saṅkṣayam

SB 3.31.33/CC Madhya 22.88

satyam—truthfulness; śaucam—cleanliness; dayā—mercy;
maunam—gravity; buddhiḥ—intelligence; śrīḥ—prosperity;
hrīḥ—shyness; yaśaḥ—fame; kṣamā—forgiveness; śamaḥ—
control of the mind; damaḥ—control of the senses; bhagaḥ
—fortune; ca—and; iti—thus; yat-saṅgāt—from association
with whom; yāti saṅkṣayam—are destroyed.

By associating with worldly people, one becomes devoid
of truthfulness, cleanliness, mercy, gravity, spiritual
intelligence, shyness, austerity, fame, forgiveness,
control of the mind, control of the senses, fortune and
all such opportunities.



Materialistic men are mere dancing dogs in the hands of
women

teṣv aśānteṣu mūḍheṣu khaṇḍitātmasv asādhuṣu

saṅgaṁ na kuryāc chocyeṣu yoṣit-krīḍā-mṛgeṣu ca

SB 3.31.34/CC Madhya 22.89/JD ch. 9

teṣu—with those; aśānteṣu—agitated; mūḍheṣu—fools;
khaṇḍita-ātmasu—bereft of self-realisation; asādhuṣu—
wicked; saṅgam—association; na—not; kuryāt—one should
make; śocyeṣu—pitiable; yoṣit—of women; krīḍā-mṛgeṣu—
dancing dogs; ca—and.

One should never associate with foolish, agitated,
materialistic men who are bereft of self-realisation and
who are like dancing dogs in the hands of women.

No greater suffering and bondage than that arising from

                             326
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

attachment to women

na tathāsya bhavet kleśo bandhaś cānya-prasaṅgataḥ

yoṣit-saṅgād yathā puṁso yathā tat-saṅgi-saṅgataḥ

SB 11.14.30, 3.31.35/CC Madhya 22.90

na—not; tathā—like that; asya—of him; bhavet—could be;
kleśaḥ—suffering; bandhaḥ—bondage; ca—and; anya-
prasaṅgataḥ—from any other attachment; yoṣit—of women;
saṅgāt—from attachment; yathā—just as; puṁsaḥ—of a man;
yathā—similarly; tat—to women; saṅgi—of those attached;
saṅgataḥ—from the association.

Of all kinds of suffering and bondage arising from
various attachments, none is greater than the suffering
and bondage arising from attachment to women and
intimate contact with those attached to women.



Illicit association with women opens wide the door to
hell

saṅgaṁ na kuryāt pramadāsu jātu

yogasya pāraṁ param ārurukṣuḥ

mat-sevayā pratilabdhātma-lābho

vadanti yā niraya-dvāram asya

SB 3.31.39/Upadeśāmṛta 2, pt

saṅgam—association; na—not; kuryāt—one should make;
pramadāsu—with women; jātu—ever; yogasya—of yoga; pāram—
culmination; param—topmost; ārurukṣuḥ—one who aspires to
reach; mat-sevayā—by rendering service unto Me;
pratilabdha—obtained; ātma-lābhaḥ—self-realisation;
vadanti—they say; yāḥ—which women; niraya—to hell;
dvāram—the gateway; asya—of the advancing devotee.

One who desires attainment of self-realisation through
engagement in My service and the ultimate perfection of
bhakti-yoga, should never indulge in association with
women at any time. The saints declare that such
association creates a doorway to hell for the sādhaka.

One who is driven by the senses, especially by the
tongue and genitals, must accept the position of a
household dog to satisfy his senses

santuṣṭaḥ kena vā rājan na vartetāpi vāriṇā

aupasthya-jaihvya-kārpaṇyād gṛha-pālāyate janaḥ

SB 7.15.18

santuṣṭaḥ—a person who is always self-satisfied; kena—
why; vā—or; rājan—O King; na—not; varteta—should live
(happily); api—even; vāriṇā—by drinking water; aupasthya
—due to the genitals; jaihvya—and the tongue; kārpaṇyāt—
because of a wretched or miserly condition; gṛha-

                          327
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

pālāyate—he becomes exactly like a household dog; janaḥ—
such a person.

My dear King, a self-satisfied person can be happy even
with only drinking water. However, one who is driven by
the senses, especially by the tongue and genitals, must
accept the position of a household dog to satisfy his
senses.

A woman who fails to relish Your lotus feet accepts
instead a living corpse

tvak-śmaśru-roma-nakha-keśa-pinaddham antar

māṁsāsthi-rakta-kṛmi-viṭ-kapha-pitta-vātam

jīvac-chavaṁ bhajati kānta-matir vimūḍhā

yā te padābja-makarandam ajighratī strī

SB 10.60.45

tvak—with skin; śmaśru—whiskers; roma—bodily hair; nakha
—nails; keśa—and hair on the head; pinaddham—covered;
antaḥ—inside; māṁsa—flesh; asthi—bones; rakta—blood;
kṛmi—worms; viṭ—stool; kapha—mucus; pitta—bile; vātam—
and air; jīvat—living; śavam—a corpse; bhajati—worships;
kānta—as husband or lover; matiḥ—whose idea; vimūḍhā—
totally bewildered; yā—who; te—Your; pada-abja—of the
lotus feet; makarandam—the honey; ajighratī—not
smelling; strī—woman.

[Rukmiṇī Devī said:] “A woman who fails to relish the
fragrance of the honey of Your lotus feet becomes
totally befooled, and thus she accepts as her husband or
lover a living corpse covered with skin, whiskers,
nails, head-hair and body-hair and filled with flesh,
bones, blood, parasites, stool, mucus, bile and air.”

A jīva who is attached to a woman in this life, will be
endowed with the form of a woman in his next life

yāṁ manyate patiṁ mohān man-māyām ṛṣabhāyatīm

strītvaṁ strī-saṅgataḥ prāpto vittāpatya-gṛha-pradam

SB 3.31.41

yām—which; manyate—she thinks; patim—her husband; mohāt—
due to illusion; mat-māyām—My māyā; ṛṣabha—in the form
of a man; āyatīm—coming; strītvam—the state of being a
woman; strī-saṅgataḥ—from attachment to a woman; prāptaḥ
—obtained; vitta—wealth; apatya—progeny; gṛha—house;
pradam—bestowing.

A living entity who, as a result of attachment to a
woman in his previous life, has been endowed with the
form of a woman, foolishly looks upon māyā in the form
of a man, her husband, as the bestower of wealth,
progeny, house and other material assets.

A woman, therefore, should consider her husband, her
house and her children to be the arrangement of māyā for
her death

                          328
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


tām ātmano vijānīyāt paty-apatya-gṛhātmakam

daivopasāditaṁ mṛtyuṁ mṛgayor gāyanaṁ yathā

SB 3.31.42

tām—the Lord’s māyā; ātmanaḥ—of herself; vijānīyāt—she
should know; pati—husband; apatya—children; gṛha—house;
ātmakam—consisting of; daiva—by the authority of the
Lord; upasāditam—brought about; mṛtyum—death; mṛgayoḥ—of
the hunter; gāyanam—the singing; yathā—as.

A woman, therefore, should consider her husband, her
house and her children to be the arrangement of the
deluding potency of the Lord for her death, just as the
sweet singing of the hunter is death for the deer.

Accepting the roles of male and female does not result
in happiness

karmāṇy ārabhamāṇānāṁ duḥkha-hatyai sukhāya ca

paśyet pāka-viparyāsaṁ mithunī-cāriṇāṁ nṛṇām

SB 11.3.18/STB p. 99

[śrī-prabuddhaḥ uvāca—Śrī Prabuddha said:] karmāṇi—
fruitive activities; ārabhamāṇānām—making endeavors in;
duḥkha-hatyai—for the elimination of distress; sukhāya
ca—and for gaining happiness; paśyet—one should see;
pāka—of the result; viparyāsam—contrary outcome;
mithunī-cāriṇām—who are coupled as men and women; nṛṇām—
of such persons.

[Śrī Prabuddha said: ] Accepting the roles of male and
female in human society, the conditioned souls unite in
sexual relationships. Thus they constantly make material
endeavors to eliminate their unhappiness and unlimitedly
increase their pleasure. But one should see that they
inevitably achieve exactly the opposite result. In other
words, their happiness inevitably vanishes, and as they
grow older their material discomfort just increases.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda: “Without the mercy
of a pure devotee it is exceedingly difficult to free
oneself from the bodily concept of life, which is the
illusory basis of sexual attraction.”



Wealth is a perpetual source of distress

nityārtidena vittena durlabhenātma-mṛtyunā

gṛhāpatyāpta-paśubhiḥ kā prītiḥ sādhitaiś calaiḥ

SB 11.3.19

nitya—constantly; ārti-dena—giving pain; vittena—with
wealth; durlabhena—hard to acquire; ātma-mṛtyunā—death
for the self; gṛha—with one’s home; apatya—children;
āpta—relatives; paśubhiḥ—and domestic animals; kā—what;
prītiḥ—happiness; sādhitaiḥ—which are gained (by that

                          329
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

wealth); calaiḥ—unsteady.

Wealth is a perpetual source of distress, it is most
difficult to acquire, and it is virtual death for the
soul. What satisfaction does one actually gain from his
wealth? Similarly, how can one gain ultimate or
permanent happiness from one’s so-called home, children,
relatives and domestic animals, which are all maintained
by one’s hard-earned money?



Sages condemn the associaion of women, yet glorify
Balarāma’s rasa dance

ye strī-saṅga muni-gaṇe karena nindana

tāṅrā-o rāmera rāse karena stavana

CB Ādi 1.29

ye—they who; strī-sanga—female association; muni-gaṇe—
sages; karena—they do nindana—condemn; tāṅrā—they; o—
yet; rāmera—Śrī Balarāmajī; rāse—(associating with the
gopīs) in the rāsa dance; karena—they do; stavana—praise
and glorify.

Sages condemn the associaion of women, yet they glorify
Lord Balarāma’s association with the gopīs in the rāsa
dance.

Editorial note: The reader is referred to the twelve-
page long purport of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda to this śloka in Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata,
whereby he cites extensively many Bhāgvatam ślokas
pertaining to this topic.



3) Sense Gratification or Self-Realisation?



Six impediments which destroy bhakti

atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ

jana-saṅgaś ca laulyaṁ ca ṣaḍbhir bhaktir vinaśyati

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 2

ati-āhāraḥ—overeating or accumulating more than
necessary; prayāsaḥ—endeavours opposed to bhakti; ca—
and; prajalpaḥ—idle talk; niyamāgrahaḥ—improper
compliance with the rules and regulations; jana-saṅgaḥ—
association with worldly-minded persons; ca—and; laulyam
—ardent longing or greed, the restlessness of the mind
to adopt worthless opinions; ca—and; ṣaḍbhiḥ—by these
six; bhaktiḥ—devotional service; vinaśyati—is destroyed.

Bhakti is destroyed by the following six kinds   of
faults: (1) eating too much or collecting more   than
necessary, (2) endeavours which are opposed to   bhakti,
(3) useless mundane talk, (4) failure to adopt   essential

                            330
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

regulations or fanatical adherence to regulations, (5)
associating with persons who are opposed to bhakti, and
(6) greed or the restlessness of the mind to adopt
worthless opinions.

Those who are too attached to sense enjoyment cannot
take up bhakti

bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ tayāpahṛta-cetasām

vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ samādhau na vidhīyate

BG 2.44

bhoga—material enjoyment; aiśvarya—opulence; prasaktānām
—those who are so attached; tayā—by such things;
apahṛta-cetasām—bewildered in mind; vyavasāyātmikā—fixed
determination; buddhiḥ—devotional service of the Lord;
samādhau—in the controlled mind; na—never; vidhīyate—
does take place.

In the minds of those who are too attached to sense
enjoyment and material opulence, and who are bewildered
by such things, the resolute determination of devotional
service to the Supreme Lord does not take place.

It is impossible for those intoxicated with opulence and
beauty to appraoch You

janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir edhamāna-madaḥ pumān

naivārhaty abhidhātuṁ vai tvām akiñcana-gocaram

SB 1.8.26

janma—birth; aiśvarya—opulence; śruta—education; śrībhiḥ
—by the possession of beauty; edhamāna—progressively
increasing; madaḥ—intoxication; pumān—the human being;
na—never; eva—ever; arhati—deserves; abhidhātum—to
address in feeling; vai—certainly; tvām—You; akiñcana-
gocaram—one who is easily approached by the materially
exhausted man.

My Lord, Your Lordship can easily be approached, but
only by those who are materially exhausted. One who is
on the path of material progress, trying to improve
himself with respectable parentage, great opulence, high
education and bodily beauty, cannot address You with
sincere feeling.



ajāmile nistārilā ye-kṛṣṇera nāme

dhana-kula-vidyā-made tāhā nāhi jāne

Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Madhya 1.164

The holy names of Kṛṣṇa delivered Ajāmila, yet those who
are intoxicated by wealth, good birth, and education do
not know Him.

Persons prone to carnal pleasure and overeating can
never attain bhakti

                          331
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


jihvāra lālase yei iti-uti dhāya

śiśnodara-parāyaṇa kṛṣṇa nāhi pāya

CC Antya 6.227

jihvāra—of the tongue; lālase—because of greed; yei—
anyone who; iti-uti—here and there; dhāya—goes; śiśna—
genitals; udara—belly; parāyaṇa—devoted to; kṛṣṇa—Lord
Kṛṣṇa; nāhi pāya—does not get.

One who runs here and there trying to satisfy the greed
of his tongue and is dedicated to serving his belly and
genitals, cannot attain kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

Food cooked by nondevotees should be strictly avoided

viṣayīra anna khāile malina haya mana

malina mana haile nahe kṛṣṇera smaraṇa

CC Antya 6.278/Upa 4, pt/BPKG pp. 288, 340/BR p. 89

viṣayīra—of materialistic persons; anna—food; khāile—if
one eats; malina—contaminated; haya mana—the mind
becomes; malina—contaminated; mana haile—when the mind
becomes; nahe—is not; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; smaraṇa—
remembrance.

When one eats food offered by sexually inclined or
worldly people, one’s mind becomes contaminated, and in
that state one is unable to remember Kṛṣṇa.

Controlling the Tongue is the key to controlling the
senses

tāvaj jitendriyo na syād vijitānyendriyaḥ pumān

na jayed rasanaṁ yāvaj jitaṁ sarvaṁ jite rase

SB 11.8.21

tāvat—still; jita-indriyaḥ—one who has conquered the
senses; na—not; syāt—can be; vijita-anya-indriyaḥ—one
who has conquered all of the other senses; pumān—a human
being; na jayet—cannot conquer; rasanam—the tongue;
yāvat—as long as; jitam—conquered; sarvam—everything;
jite—when conquered; rase—the tongue.

Although one may conquer all of the other senses, as
long as the tongue is not conquered it cannot be said
that one has controlled his senses. However, if one is
able to control the tongue, then one is understood to be
in full control of all the senses.

One should be detached from the internal wives

jihvaikato —mum apakarṣati karhi tarṣā

śiśno —nyatas tvag udaraṁ śravaṇaṁ kutaścit

ghrāṇo —nyataś capala-dṛk kva ca karma-śaktir


                          332
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

bahvyaḥ sapatnya iva geha-patiṁ lunanti

SB 11.9.27

jihvā—the tongue; ekataḥ—on one side; amum—the body or
the conditioned soul who identifies with the body;
apakarṣati—drags away; karhi—sometimes; tarṣā—thirst;
śiśnaḥ—the genitals; anyataḥ—on another side; tvak—the
sense of touch; udaram—the belly; śravaṇam—the ears;
kutaścit—from somewhere else; ghrāṇaḥ—the sense of
smell; anyataḥ—from another side; capala-dṛk—the fickle
eyes; kva ca—somewhere else; karma-śaktiḥ—the other
active organs and limbs of the body; bahvyaḥ—many; sa-
patnyaḥ—co-wives; iva—like; geha-patim—the head of the
household; lunanti—they pull in many directions.

A man who has many wives is constantly harassed by them.
He is responsible for their maintenance, and thus all
the ladies constantly pull him in different directions,
each struggling for her self-interest. Similarly, the
material senses harass the conditioned soul, pulling him
in many different directions at once. On one side the
tongue is pulling him to arrange tasty food; then thirst
drags him to get a suitable drink. Simultaneously the
sex organs clamor for satisfaction, and the sense of
touch demands soft, sensuous objects. The belly harasses
him until it is filled, the ears demand to hear pleasing
sounds, the sense of smell hankers for pleasant aromas,
and the fickle eyes clamor for pleasing sights. Thus the
senses, organs and limbs, all desiring satisfaction,
pull the living entity in many directions.

The conditioned soul is always inclined to sex, meat-
eating and intoxication but the revealed scriptures
never actually encourage such activities

loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantor na hi tatra
codanā

vyavasthitis teṣu vivāha-yajña surā-grahair āsu nivṛttir
iṣṭā

SB 11.5.11

loke—in the material world; vyavāya—sex indulgence;
āmiṣa—of meat; madya—of liquor; sevāḥ—the taking; nityāḥ
—always found; hi—indeed; jantoḥ—in the conditioned
living being; na—not; hi—indeed; tatra—in regard to
them; codanā—encouragement; vyavasthitiḥ—the prescribed
arrangement; teṣu—in these; vivāha—in sacred marriage;
yajña—the offering of sacrifice; surā-grahaiḥ—by the
acceptance of ritual cups of wine; āsu—of these;
nivṛttiḥ—cessation; iṣṭā—is the desired end.

In this material world the conditioned soul is always
inclined to sex, meat-eating and intoxication.
Therefore, although religious scriptures never actually
encourage such activities, there are scriptural
injunctions which provide facility for for sex through
sacred marriage, for meat-eating through sacrificial
offerings and for intoxication through the acceptance of
ritual cups of wine, the ultimate purpose of such
rituals is the renunciation of these (spiritually
unfavourable) practices.

                          333
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Give up the hellish blind well of family life and go to
Vṛndāvana

tat sādhu manye —sura-varya dehināṁ

sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt

hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta

SB 7.5.5

[śrī-prahlādaḥ uvāca—Prahlāda Mahārāja replied:] tat—
that; sādhu—very good, or the best part of life; manye—I
think; asura-varya—O best of the demons; dehinām—of
persons who have accepted the material body; sadā—
always; samudvigna—full of anxieties; dhiyām—whose
intelligence; asat-grahāt—because of accepting the
temporary as real; hitvā—giving up; ātma-pātam—the
downfall of the jīva; gṛham—household life, or the
bodily concept of life; andha-kūpam—which is nothing but
a blind well (where one hopes to find water
(satisfaction) but only finds misery); vanam—to the
forest (for sādhu-saṅga); gataḥ—going; yat—which; harim—
Śrī Hari; āśrayeta—one should take shelter of.

[Prahlāda Mahārāja replied to his father:] O best of the
asuras, King of the demons, any person who has accepted
the temporary as real is certainly embarrassed by
anxiety because of having fallen in the dark well of
family life (or the bodily concept of life) where there
is no water [rasa] but only suffering. One should give
up this position and go to the forest to take shelter of
Śrī Hari. (More specifically, one should go to
Vṛndāvana, where only pure, spontaneous bhakti prevails,
and through sādhu-saṅga, take shelter of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa).

Die to live! Die to sense gratification - Live for soul-
satisfaction

Ākṣepa (Regret), Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura/SGG p. 86

gorā pāhu nā bhajiyā mainu

prema-ratana-dhana helāya hārāinu (1)

adhane yatana kari— dhana teyāginu

āpana karama-doṣe āpani ḍubinū (2)

sat-saṅga chāḍi— kainu asate vilāsa

te-kāraṅe lāgila je karama-bandha phāsa (3)

viṣaya viṣama viṣa satata khāinu

gaura-kīrtana-rase magana nā hainu (4)

kena vā āchaye prāṅa ki sukha pāiyā

narottama dāsa kena nā gela mariyā (5)

                             334
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Alas! Failing to worship Śrī Gaurasundara, I have
neglected that most precious treasure of prema and have
thus lost it. I have devoted myself to worthless
trifles, throwing away my real wealth and am drowning in
my own misdeeds. Forsaking the association of sādhus for
temporary enjoyment with non-devotees, I am caught in
the snare of my own karmic follies. I constantly drank
the deadly poison of sense objects rather than becoming
absorbed in the nectar of singing the glories of Śrī
Gaurasundara. “For what type of pleasure do I maintain
my life?” Narottama dāsa laments, “Why do I not simply
die?”



4) Intimate Association with Women is forbidden



Association with women is forbidden for those in the
renounced order

strīṇāṁ nirīkṣaṇa-sparśa-saṁlāpa-kṣvelanādikam

prāṇino mithunī-bhūtān agṛhastho —gratas tyajet

SB 11.17.33

strīṇām—in relation to women; nirīkṣaṇa—glancing; sparśa
—touching; saṁlāpa—conversing; kṣvelana—joking or
sporting; ādikam—and so on; prāṇinaḥ—living entities;
mithunī-bhūtān—persons who engage in sex; agṛha-sthaḥ—a
sannyāsī, vānaprastha or brahmacārī; agrataḥ—first of
all; tyajet—should give up.

The most important principle for those who are not
married—sannyāsīs, vānaprasthas and brahmacārīs—is to
never associate with women by glancing, touching,
conversing, joking or sporting. Neither should they
associate with men who engage in sexual activities.

One should not sit alone with a woman

mātrā svasrā duhitrā vā nāviviktāsano bhavet

balavān indriya-grāmo vidvāṁsam api karṣati

SB 9.19.17/Manu-saṁhitā 2.215/CC Antya 2.119

mātrā—with one’s mother; svasrā—with one’s sister;
duhitrā—with ones own daughter; vā—either; na—not;
avivikta-āsanaḥ—seated alone; bhavet—one should be;
balavān—very strong; indriya-grāmaḥ—the group of senses;
vidvāṁsam—the very learned and advanced person; api—
even; karṣati—agitates.

One should not allow oneself to sit alone even with
one’s own mother, sister or daughter, for the senses are
so strong that even though one is very advanced in
knowledge, he may be attracted by sex.

Even a wooden statue of a woman can attract the mind


                          335
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

durvāra indriya kare viṣaya-grahaṇa

dāravī prakṛti hare muner api mana

CC Antya 2.118

durvāra—uncontrollable; indriya—the senses; kare—do;
viṣaya-grahaṇa—accepting sense objects; dāravī prakṛti—a
wooden statue of a woman; hare—attracts; munerapi—even
of a great sage; mana—the mind.

So strongly do the senses adhere to the objects of their
enjoyment that indeed a wooden statue of a woman
attracts the mind of even a great saintly person.

Sex life is worse than poison for one seriously engaged
in bhajana

niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya

pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya

sandarśanaṁ viṣayiṇām atha yoṣitāṁ ca

hā hanta hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato —py asādhu

Śrī Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka 8.23/CC Mad 11.8

niṣkiñcanasya—of a person who has completely detached
himself from material enjoyment; bhagavat—Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
bhajana—in serving; unmukhasya—who is eager to be
engaged; pāram—to the other side; param—distant;
jigamiṣoḥ—who is desiring to go; bhava-sāgarasya—of the
ocean of material existence; sandarśanam—gazing at the
full body; viṣayiṇām—of persons engaged in sense
enjoyment; atha—as well as; yoṣitām—of women; ca—also;
hā—alas; hanta hanta—expression of great lamentation;
viṣa-bhakṣaṇataḥ—than the act of drinking poison; api—
even; asādhu—more abominable.

Alas, for a person who is seriously desiring to cross
the material ocean and engage in the transcendental
loving service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa without material motives,
seeing a materialist engaged in sense gratification or
gazing at a woman who is similarly inclined is more
abominable than drinking poison willingly.

A renunciat should not associate with a woman even in
dreams

vairāgī, bhāī grāmya-kathā nā śunibe kāne

grāmya-vārtā nā kahibe jabe milibe āne

svapne o nā kara bhāī strī-sambhāṣaṇa

gṛhe strī chāḍiyā bhāi āsiyācha vana

yadi cāha praṇaya rākhite gaurāṅgera sane

choṭa haridāsera kathā thāke jena mane

bhāla nā khāibe āra bhāla nā paribe


                          336
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

hṛdayete rādhā-kṛṣṇa sarvadā sevibe

Prema-vivarta 7.3.1-4/Upad 1 pt/JD ch. 25

O Vaiṣṇava mendicant, O brother, whomever you should
meet, do not hear from him nor speak with him about
mundane subjects. Do not speak intimately with a woman
even in your dreams. O brother! You have given up your
wife and household and have retired to the forest. Now,
if you wish to develop love for the lotus feet of Śrī
Śacīnandana Gaurahari, then you should always remember
the example of Choṭa Haridāsa. If you desire bhagavat-
bhakti, then you should not eat delicious food nor dress
yourself very luxuriously. In this way you should always
serve Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa within your heart.

5) Essential Prayers for Protection



Praying to be protected from lusty desires

sanat-kumāro —vatu kāmadevād

SB 6.8.17

sanat-kumāraḥ—the great brahmacārī named Sanat-kumāra;
avatu—may he protect; kāma-devāt—from the hands of Cupid
or lusty desire.

May Sanat-Kumāra protect me from lusty desires and save
me from the strong urge of sex. [expanded translation by
Śrīla Gaura Govinda Mahārāja:] As I begin some
auspicious activity, O Sanat-Kumāra, topmost brahmacārī,
please protect me from these lusty desires. You have
conquered lust, therefore please shower your mercy and
blessings upon me. Then I will be able to conquer this
most formidable enemy in the form of lust and remain
brahmacārī).

O my Lord, there is no limit to the unwanted orders of
my lusty desires; now, however, I refuse to obey these
thieves and I surrender myself at Your feet

kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā pālitā durṇideśās

teṣāṁ jātā mayi na karuṇā na trapā nopaśāntiḥ

utsṛjyaitān atha yadu-pate sāmprataṁ labdha-buddhis

tvām āyātaḥ śaraṇam abhayaṁ māṁ niyuṅkṣvātma-dāsye

CC Mad 22.16/BRS 3.2.35

kāma-ādīnām—of my masters such as lust, anger, greed,
illusion and envy; kati—how many; na—not; katidhā—in how
many ways; pālitāḥ—obeyed; duḥ-nideśāḥ—undesirable
orders; teṣām—of them; jātā—generated; mayi—unto me; na—
not; karuṇā—mercy; na—not; trapā—shame; na—not;
upaśāntiḥ—desire to cease; utsṛjya—giving up; etān—all
these; atha—herewith; yadu-pate—O best of the Yadu
dynasty; sāmpratam—now; labdha-buddhiḥ—having awakened
intelligence; tvām—You; āyātaḥ—approached; śaraṇam—who
are the shelter; abhayam—fearless; mām—me; niyuṅkṣva—

                          337
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

please engage; ātma-dāsye—in Your personal service.

O my Lord, there is no limit to the unwanted dictates of
my lusty desires. Although I have rendered these desires
so much service, they have not shown any mercy to me. I
have not been ashamed to serve them, nor have I even
desired to give them up. O my Lord, O head of the Yadu
dynasty, recently, however, my transcendental
intelligence has been awakened (and due to this, I now
refuse to obey the unwanted orders of these desires). I
have now come to You to surrender myself at Your
fearless lotus feet. Kindly engage me in Your personal
service.



The thought of sex-life causes Yāmunācārya to spit in
disgust

yadāvadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravinde

nava-nava-rasa-dhāmany udyata rantum āsīt

tadāvadhi bata nāri-saṅgame smaryamāne

bhavati mukha-vikāraḥ suṣṭu niṣṭhīvanaṁ ca

Yamunā-stotram

yadā-avadhi—ever since; mama—my; cetaḥ—mind; kṛṣṇa-pada-
āravinde—at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa; nava-nava—newer and
newer; rasa-dhāmani—the glories of transcendental taste;
udyata—has arisen; rantum—to enjoy; āsīt—was; tadā-
avadhi—since then; bata—ah!; nārī-saṅgame—the
association of women for sense gratification; smaryamāne
—being remembered; bhavati—it becomes; mukha-vikāraḥ—
lips or face contorted in disgust; suṣṭu—exceedingly;
niṣṭhīvanam—in the act of spitting; ca—and.

Since my mind have become attracted by the
transcendental loving service and beauty of   Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, relishing ever new pleasure in Their   rasa,
whenever there is attraction for a woman or   a memory of
sex-life, I at once spit at the thought and   my lips curl
in disgust.



Remaining undisturbed by the incessant flow of desires,
one can attain peace

āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ samudram āpaḥ praviśanti
yadvat

tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve sa śāntim āpnoti na
kāma-kāmī

BG 2.70

āpūryamāṇam—always being filled; acala-pratiṣṭham—
steadily situated; samudram—the ocean; āpaḥ—waters;
praviśanti—enter; yadvat—as; tadvat—so; kāmāḥ—desires;
yam—unto whom; praviśanti—enter; sarve—all; saḥ—that
person; śāntim—peace; āpnoti—achieves; na—not; kāma-kāmī

                          338
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

—one who desires to fulfill desires.

A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of
desires—that enter like rivers into the ocean, which is
ever being filled but is always still—can alone achieve
peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such
desires.



Steady the mind by bhakti and thus conquer the
insatiable enemy of lust

vihāya kāmān yaḥ sarvān pumāṁś carati niḥspṛhaḥ

nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ sa śāntim adhigacchati

BG 2.71

vihāya—giving up; kāmān—material desires for sense
gratification; yaḥ—who; sarvān—all; pumān—a person;
carati—lives; niḥspṛhaḥ—desireless; nirmamaḥ—without a
sense of proprietorship; nirahaṅkāraḥ—without false ego;
saḥ—he; śāntim—perfect peace; adhigacchati—attains.

A person who has given up all desires for sense
gratification, who lives free from desires, who has
given up all sense of proprietorship and is devoid of
false ego—he alone can attain real peace.



One should see one’s real self-interest in all
circumstances and be detached

jāyāpatya-gṛha-kṣetra-svajana-draviṇādiṣu

udāsīnaḥ samaṁ paśyan sarveṣv artham ivātmanaḥ

SB 11.10.7

jāyā—to wife; apatya—children; gṛha—home; kṣetra—land;
svajana—relatives and friends; draviṇa—bank account;
ādiṣu—and so on; udāsīnaḥ—remaining indifferent; samam—
equally; paśyan—seeing; sarveṣu—in all of these; artham—
purpose; iva—like; ātmanaḥ—of oneself.

One should see one’s real self-interest in life in all
circumstances and should therefore remain detached from
wife, children, home, land, relatives, friends, wealth
and so on.



How can Kāmadeva be stopped?

kāśāyān na ca bhojanādi-niyamān no vā vane vāsato

vyākhyānād athavā muni-vrata-bharāc cittodbhavaḥ kṣīyate

kintu sphīta-kalinda-śaila-tanayā-tīreṣu vikrīḍato

govindasya padāravinda-bhajanārambhasya leśād api


                          339
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

Padyāvalī 11 — author unknown

kāśāyāt—from the saffron color; na—not; ca—and; bhojana—
of eating; ādi—etc.; niyamāt—from restraint; na—not; vā—
or; vane—in the forest; vāsataḥ—from the residence;
vyākhyānāt—from explanation of the scriptures; athavā—
or; muni-vrata—from the vow of silence; bharāt—great;
citta-udbhavaḥ—cupid; kṣīyate—becomes weakened; kintu—
but; sphīta—broad; kalinda—of Mount Kalinda; śaila—
mountain; tanayā—of the daughter (the Yamunā River);
tīreṣu—on the baṅks; vikrīḍataḥ—playing; govindasya—of
Lord Govinda; pada—feet; aravinda—lotus flowers; bhajana
—of the devotional service; ārambhasya—of the beginning;
leśāt—from a little particle; api—even.

Not by wearing saffron cloth, not by restricting food
and other sense-activities, not by living in the forest,
not by discussing philosophy, and not by observing a vow
of silence, but only by the slightest commencement of
devotional service to the lotus feet of Lord Govinda,
who enjoys pastimes on the Yamunā’s wide banks, is the
influence of Kāmadeva checked.



Bhakti burns sins to ashes

yathāgniḥ su-samṛddhārciḥ karoty edhāṁsi bhasmasāt

tathā mad-viṣayā bhaktir uddhavaināṁsi kṛtsnaśaḥ

SB 11.14.19

yathā—just as; agniḥ—fire; su-samṛddha—blazing; arciḥ—
whose flames; karoti—turns; edhāṁsi—firewood; bhasma-sāt
—into ashes; tathā—similarly; mat-viṣayā—with Me as the
object; bhaktiḥ—devotion; uddhava—O Uddhava; enāṁsi—
sins; kṛtsnaśaḥ—completely.

My dear Uddhava, just as a blazing fire turns firewood
into ashes, similarly, devotion unto Me completely burns
to ashes sins committed by My devotees.



O my dear mind! Abandon prajalpa, give up mukti, even
give up the desire for Vaikuṇṭha; only worship Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja

asad-vārtā-veṣyā visṛja mati-sarvasva-haraṇīḥ

kathā mukti-vyāghryā na śṛṇu kila sarvātma-gilaṇīḥ

api tyaktvā lakṣmī-pati-ratim ito vyoma-nayanīṁ

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇau sva-rati-maṇi-dau tvaṁ bhaja manaḥ

Manaḥ-śikṣā 4

asat-vārtā-veṣyā—the prostitute of contemptible mundane
talk; visṛja—abandon; mati—of pure intelligence;
sarvasva—the treasure; haraṇīḥ—plundering; kathā—talk;
mukti—of impersonal liberation; vyāghryā—the tigress; na
—don—t; śṛṇu—hear; kila—unequivocally; sarva-ātma-

                             340
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

gilaṇīḥ—devouring your very soul; api—also; tyaktvā—
reject; lakṣmī-pati—Lord Nārāyaṇa, the husband of
Lakṣmi; ratim—attachment; itaḥ—leading to; vyoma-nayanīm
—Vaikuṇṭha; vraje—in Vraja; rādhā-kṛṣṇau—Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa; sva-rati—love for Them; maṇi—the jewel; dau—
bestowing; tvam—you; bhaja—worship; manaḥ—O mind.

O my dear brother mind! Please abandon altogether the
prostitute of contemptible mundane talk, which plunders
the entire treasure of pure wisdom. You must
unequivocally give up hearing all talk of liberation
which, like a tigress, devours your very soul.
Furthermore, please abandon even the attachment to
Lakṣmīpati Śrī Nārāyaṇa, which leads to Vaikuṇṭha. You
should only live in Vraja and worship Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa,
who bestow upon devotees the precious jewel of Their
rati.



O mind! Cry out to the Vaiṣṇavas for help when attacked
by lust and anger

asac-ceṣṭā-kaṣṭa-prada-vikaṭa-pāśālibhir iha

prakāmaṁ kāmādi-prakaṭa-pathapāti-vyatikaraiḥ

gale baddhvā hanye “ham iti bakā-bhid vartmapa-gaṇe

kuru tvam phutkārān avati sa yathā tvam mana itaḥ

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā 5

asat—wicked; ceṣṭā—deeds; kaṣṭa-prada—tormenting;
vikaṭa-pāśālibhiḥ—with the dreadful ropes; iha— in this
material existence; prakāmam— licentiously; kāmādi— of
lust, anger and so on; prakaṭa-pathapāti-vyatikaraiḥ—by
the assembled aggressors on the open road; gale—the
neck; baddhvā—binding; hanye—are killing; aham— me; iti—
[speaking] thus; bakābhid—the killer of Baka; vartmapa-
gaṇe—to the Vaiṣṇavas, our guru-varga; kuru—loudly; tvam
—you; phutkārān—call out; avati—[will] protect; saḥ—
those devotees; yathā—as a result; tvam—you; manaḥ—O
mind; itaḥ— from their hands.

Lust, anger and so on are a band of dacoits who assail
me suddenly on the open road of material life. They
willfully bind my neck with their dreadful ropes of
wicked deeds are thus slaying me. O mind, cry out loudly
to the powerful and merciful Vaiṣṇavas [guru-varga] who
are the protectors of the path of bhakti leading to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the killer of Bakāsura. Hearing your piteous cry,
they will surely protect you from such aggressors.

Give up bathing in the donkey urine of deceit and
hypocricy

are cetaḥ prodyat-kapaṭa-kuṭi-nāṭi-bhara-khara-

kṣaran mūtre snātvā dahasi katham ātmānam api mām

sadā tvaṁ gāndharvā-giridhara-pada-prema-vilasat-

sudhāmbhodhau snātvā svam api nitarāṁ māṁ ca sukhaya

                          341
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā 6/BR 2.22

are—Oh; cetaḥ—mind; prodyat—of flourishing; kapaṭa—
deceit; kuṭi-nāṭi—and hypocrisy; bhara—great; khara—
donkey; kṣarat—trickling; mūtre—urine; snātvā—bathing;
dahasi—you burn; katham—why?; ātmānam—yourself; api—
also; mām—me; sadā—always; tvam—you; gāndharvā-giridhara
—of Śrī Rādhā-Giridhari; pada—of the feet; prema—
ecstatic transcendental love; vilasat—arising; sudhā-
ambhodhau—in the ocean of nectar; snātvā—bathing; svam—
yourself; api—also; nitarām—thoroughly; mām—me; ca—and;
sukhaya—delighting.

(In spite of having subdued the enemies of lust and
anger, one may not have conquered the great enemy of
deceit. This śloka instructs us how to gain victory over
this powerful enemy:) “O wicked mind! Although you adopt
the path of sādhana, you imagine yourself purified by
bathing in the trickling urine of the great donkey of
full blown deceit and hypocrisy. By doing so, you are
burning yourself and scorching me, a tiny jīva,
simultaneously. Stop this! Delight yourself and me by
eternally bathing in the nectarine ocean of pure love
for the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-Yugala.”



Lust, anger, greed and hypocricy are weak enemies
compared to pratiṣṭhā, the desire for prestige which is
the root cause of all anarthas

pratiṣṭhāśā dhṛṣṭā śvapaca-ramaṇī me hṛdi naṭet

kathaṁ sādhuḥ-premā spṛśati śucir etan nanu manaḥ

sadā tvaṁ sevasva prabhu-dayita-sāmantam atulaṁ

yathā tāṁ niṣkāśya tvaritam iha taṁ veśayati saḥ

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā 7/BR 2.21

pratiṣṭhā—for prestige; aśā—the desire; dhṛṣṭā—an
audacious; śvapaca-ramaṇī—outcaste or dog-eating woman;
me—in my; hṛdi—heart; naṭet—if she dances; katham—(then)
how; sādhuḥ-premā—pure love; spṛśati—can touch; śuciḥ—
pure; etat—that heart; nanu—isn—t it so?; manaḥ—O mind;
sadā—always; tvam—you; sevasva—should serve; prabhu—of
Prabhu Śrī Kṛṣṇa; dayita—beloved; sāmantam—commanders
(of the army); atulam—peerless; yathā—so that; tām—that
(dog—eater); niṣkāśya—expelling; tvaritam—quickly; iha—
in this heart; tam—that (divine love); veśayati—cause to
enter; saḥ—that.

(Why is it that deceit still lingers in the heart in
spite of one’s having given up all material sense-
enjoyment? This śloka has been composed in order to
answer this question:) O mind! How can pure divine love
appear in my heart as long as the shameless dog-eating
outcaste woman of the desire for prestige is audaciously
dancing there? Therefore, always remember and serve the
incomparably powerful commanders of the army of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the beloved devotees of the Lord. They will at
once banish this outcaste woman and initiate the flow of

                            342
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

immaculate vraja-prema in your heart.



Praying to the Six Gosvāmīs

ei chaya gosāira kari caraṇa vandana

jāhā haite vighna-nāśa abhīṣṭa-pūraṇa

Nāma-Saṅkīrtana 5, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura/SGG p.
101

By the causeless mercy of the Six Gosvāmīs, the
obstacles to devotion can be removed and my desired Śrī
Yugala-sevā can be attained. Thus all my innermost
heart-desires will be fulfilled.



6) Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva Prayers



Śrī Nṛsiṁha Vandanā

śrī-nṛsiṁha, jaya nṛsiṁha, jaya jaya nṛsiṁha

prahlādeśa jaya padmā-mukha-padma-bhṛṅga

CC Madhya 8.5

śrī-nṛsiṁha—Lord Nṛsiṁha with Lakṣmī; jaya nṛsiṁha—all
glories to Lord Nṛsiṁha; jaya jaya—again and again
glories; nṛsiṁha—to Nṛsiṁhadeva; prahlāda-īśa—to the
Lord of Prahlāda Mahārāja; jaya—all glories; padmā—of
the goddess of fortune; mukha-padma—of the lotuslike
face; bhṛṅga—the bee.

All glories to Nṛsiṁhadeva! All glories to Nṛsiṁhadeva,
who is the Lord of Prahlāda Mahārāja and, like a
honeybee, is always engaged in beholding the lotus-like
face of the goddess of fortune.

vāg-īśā yasya vadane lakṣmīr yasya ca vakṣasi

yasyāste hṛdaye saṁvit taṁ nṛsiṁham ahaṁ bhaje

Śrīla Śrīdhara Swāmī, commentary on SB 10.87.1/CC Madhya
8.5 pt

In His mouth the goddess Śuddha-Sarasvatī is always
present, on His chest Lakṣmī-devī always sports, and
within His heart transcendental knowledge is situated— I
worship that Nṛsiṁhadeva.



prahlāda-hṛdayāhlādaṁ bhaktāvidyā-vidāraṇam

śarad-indu-ruciṁ vande pārīndra-vadanaṁ harim

Śrīla Śrīdhara Swāmī, commentary on SB 1.1.1


                             343
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Let me offer my obeisances unto Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, who is
always enlightening Prahlāda Mahārāja within his heart
and who always kills the nescience that attacks the
devotees. His effulgence is like the śarat moonshine,
and His face is like that of a lion. Let me offer my
obeisances unto Him again and again.

Śrī Nṛsiṁha-Praṇāma

namas te narasiṁhāya prahlādāhlāda-dāyine

hiraṇyakaśipor vakṣaḥ śilā-ṭaṅka nakhālaye (1)

Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa/CC Antya 16.52

namaḥ—obeisances; te—unto You; nara-siṁhāya—unto Lord
Narasiṁha; prahlāda—(to) Prahlāda Mahārāja; āhlāda—(of)
joy; dāyine—the giver; hiraṇya-kaśipoḥ—of Hiraṇyakaśipu;
vakṣaḥ—chest; śilā—(on) the stonelike; ṭaṅka—chisels;
nakha-ālaye—whose nails.

I offer praṇāma unto Narasiṁha Bhagavān, who gives joy
to Prahlāda Mahārāja and whose nails are like chisels on
the stone-like chest of the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu.

ito nṛsiṁhaḥ parato nṛsiṁho yato yato yāmi tato nṛsiṁhaḥ

bahir nṛsiṁho hṛdaye nṛsiṁho nṛsiṁham ādiṁ śaraṇaṁ
prapadye (2)

itaḥ—from here; nṛsiṁhaḥ—Lord Nṛsiṁha; parataḥ—there;
nṛsiṁhaḥ—Lord Nṛsiṁha; yataḥ yataḥ—wherever; yāmi—I go;
tataḥ—there; nṛsiṁhaḥ—Lord Nṛsiṁha; bahiḥ—externally;
nṛsiṁhaḥ—Lord Nṛsiṁha; hṛdaye—in the heart; nṛsiṁhaḥ—
Lord Nṛsiṁha; nṛsiṁham—to Lord Nṛsiṁha; ādim—the origin;
śaraṇam—the supreme refuge; prapadye—I surrender.

Nṛsiṁhadeva is here and also there. Wherever I go
Nṛsiṁhadeva is there. He is in the heart and is outside
as well. I surrender unto Nṛsiṁhadeva, the origin of
everything and the supreme refuge.



A Prayer to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva by Jayadeva Gosvāmī

tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-śṛṅgaṁ

dalita-hiraṇyakaśipu-tanu-bhṛṅgam

keśava dhṛta-narahari-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare

Śrī Daśāvatāra-stotram, GG/SGG p. 138

O Keśava! O You who assume the form of half-man, half-
lion! O Jagadiśa! O You who remove Your devotees—
suffering! All glories to You, because with one of the
wonderful petal-like nails of Your beautiful lotus hands
You rip asunder the bee-like body of Hiraṇyakaśipu. It
is astonishing that ordinarily it is the bee which rips
the petals of the lotus, but here the petal rips apart
the bee.

O my Lord! May there be no material desires within the

                          344
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

core of my heart

yadi dāsyasi me kāmān varāṁs tvaṁ varadarṣabha

kāmānāṁ hṛdy asaṁrohaṁ bhavatas tu vṛṇe varam

SB 7.10.7

yadi—if; dāsyasi—want to give; me—me; kāmān—anything
desirable; varān—as Your benediction; tvam—You; varada-
ṛṣabha—O Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can give
any benediction; kāmānām—of all desires for material
happiness; hṛdi—within the core of my heart; asaṁroham—
no growth; bhavataḥ—from You; tu—then; vṛṇe—I pray for;
varam—such a benediction.

[Prahlāda Mahārāja to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva:] O my Lord, best
of the givers of benediction, if You at all want to
bestow a desirable benediction upon me, then I pray from
Your Lordship that within the core of my heart there be
no material desires.

ugro —py anugra evāyaṁ sva-bhaktānāṁ nṛ-keśarī

keśarīva sva-potānām anyeṣāṁ ugra-vikramaḥ

CC Mad 8.6/ Śrīdhara Svāmī’s commentary on Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 7.9.1

ugraḥ—ferocious; api—although; anugraḥ—not ferocious;
eva—certainly; ayam—this; sva-bhaktānām—to His pure
devotees; nṛ-keśarī—having the body of a human being and
a lion; keśarī iva—like a lioness; sva-potānām—to her
young cubs; anyeṣām—to others; ugra—ferocious; vikramaḥ—
whose strength.

Although very ferocious, the lioness is very kind to her
cubs. Similarly, although very ferocious to non-devotees
like Hiraṇyakaśipu, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is very, very soft
and kind to devotees like Prahlāda Mahārāja.




Śrī Nṛsiṁha-kavaca-stotram (Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa)



nṛsiṁha-kavacaṁ vakṣye / prahlādenoditaṁ purā

sarva-rakṣa-karaṁ punyaṁ / sarvopadrava-nāśanam (1)

I shall now recite the Nṛsiṁha-kavaca, spoken in ancient
times by Prahlāda Mahārāja. It is most purifying to the
heart, vanquishes all kinds of impediments, and provides
one all protection.

sarva-sampat-karaṁ caiva / svarga-mokṣa-pradāyakam

dhyātvā nṛsiṁhaṁ deveśaṁ / hema-siṁhāsana-sthitam (2)

It can bestows upon one all opulence and award elevation
to the heavenly planets or liberation. One should

                          345
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

meditate on Śrī Nṛsiṁha, Lord of the thirty-three
million demigods, seated upon a golden throne.

vivṛtāsyaṁ tri-nayanaṁ / śarad-indu-sama-prabham

lakṣmyāliṅgita-vāmāṅgam / vibhūtibhir upāśritam (3)

His mouth is wide open, He has three eyes, and He is as
radiant as the autumn moon. He is embraced by Lakṣmīdevī
on his left side, and His form is the shelter of all
opulences, both material and spiritual.

catur-bhujaṁ komalāṅgaṁ / svarṇa-kuṇḍala-śobhitam

saroja-śobhitoraskaṁ / ratna-keyūra-mudritam (4)

The Lord has four arms, and His limbs are very soft. He
is decorated with golden earrings. His chest is
resplendent like the lotus flower, and His arms are
decorated with jewel-studded bangles.

tapta-kāñcana-sankāśaṁ / pīta-nirmala-vāsasam

indrādi-sura-mauliṣṭhaḥ / sphuran māṇikya-dīptibhiḥ (5)

He is dressed in a spotless yellow garment, which
exactly resembles molten gold. He is the original cause
of existence, beyond the mundane sphere, for the great
demigods headed by Indra. He appears bedecked with
rubies which are blazingly effulgent.

virājita-pada-dvandvaṁ / śaṅkha-cakrādi-hetibhiḥ

garutmatā ca vinayāt / stūyamānaṁ mudānvitam (6)

His two feet are very attractive, and He is armed with
various weapons such as the conch, disc, etc. Garuḍa
joyfully offers prayers with great reverence.

sva-hṛt-kamala-samvāsaṁ / kṛtvā tu kavacaṁ pathet

nṛsiṁho me śiraḥ pātu / loka-rakṣārtha-sambhavaḥ (7)

Having seated Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva upon the lotus of one’s
heart, one should recite the following mantra: May Lord
Nṛsiṁha, who protects all the planetary systems, protect
my head.

sarvago —pi stambha-vāsaḥ / phalaṁ me rakṣatu dhvanim

nṛsiṁho me dṛśau pātu / soma-sūryāgni-locanaḥ (8)

Although the Lord is all-pervading, He hid Himself
within a pillar. May He protect my speech and the
results of my activities. May Lord Nṛsiṁha, whose eyes
are the sun, and fire, protect my eyes.

smṛtaṁ me pātu nṛhariḥ / muni-vārya-stuti-priyaḥ

nāsaṁ me siṁha-nāśas tu / mukhaṁ lakṣmī-mukha-priyaḥ (9)

May Lord Nṛhari, who is pleased by the prayers offered
by the best of sages, protect my memory. May He who has
the nose of a lion protect my nose, and may He whose

                          346
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

face is very dear to the chief goddess of fortune
protect my mouth.

sarva-vidyādhipaḥ pātu / nṛsiṁho rasanaṁ mama

vaktraṁ pātv indu-vadanaṁ / sadā prahlāda-vanditaḥ (10)

May Lord Nṛsiṁha, who is the knower of all sciences,
protect my sense of taste. May He whose face is
beautiful as the full moon and who is offered prayers by
Prahlāda Mahārāja protect my face.

nṛsiṁhah pātu me kaṇṭhaṁ / skandhau bhū-bhṛd ananta-kṛt

divyāstra-śobhita-bhujaḥ / nṛsiṁhaḥ pātu me bhujau (11)

May Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva protect my throat. May He who
sustains the earth and is the performer of unlimitedly
wonderful activities protect my shoulders. May He whose
arms are resplendent with transcendental weapons protect
my arms.

karau me deva-varado / nṛsiṁhaḥ pātu sarvataḥ

hṛdayaṁ yogi-sādhyaś ca / nivāsaṁ pātu me hariḥ (12)

May the Lord, who bestows benedictions upon the
demigods, protect my hands, and may He protect me from
all sides. May Lord Hari who is achieved by the perfect
yogīs protect my heart and protect my dwelling place.

madhyaṁ pātu hiraṇyākṣa- / vakṣaḥ-kukṣi-vidāraṇaḥ

nābhiṁ me pātu nṛhariḥ / sva-nābhi-brahma-saṁstutaḥ (13)

May He who ripped apart the chest and abdomen of the
great demon Hiraṇyākṣa protect my waist, and may Lord
Nṛhari protect my navel. He is offered prayers by Lord
Brahmā, who has sprung from his own navel.

brahmāṇḍa-koṭayaḥ kaṭyāṁ / yasyāsau pātu me kaṭim

guhyaṁ me pātu guhyānāṁ / mantrānāṁ guhya-rūpa-dṛk (14)

May He on whose hips rest all the universes protect my
hips. May the Lord protect my private parts. He is the
knower of all mantras and all mysteries, but He Himself
is not visible.

ūrū manobhavaḥ pātu / jānunī nara-rūpa-dṛk

jaṅghe pātu dharā-bhara- / hartā yo —sau nṛ-keśarī (15)

May He who is the original Cupid protect my thighs. May
He who exhibits a human-like form protect my knees. May
the remover of the burden of the earth, who appears in a
form which is half-man and half-lion, protect my calves.

sura-rājya-pradaḥ pātu / pādau me nṛharīśvaraḥ

sahasra-śīrṣā-puruṣaḥ / pātu me sarvaśas tanum (16)

May the bestower of heavenly opulence protect my feet.
He is the Supreme Controller in the form of a man and

                          347
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

lion combined. May the thousand-headed Supreme Enjoyer
protect my body from all sides and in all respects.



manograḥ pūrvataḥ pātu / mahā-vīrāgrajo —gnitaḥ

mahā-viṣṇur dakṣiṇe tu / mahā-jvalas tu nairṛtaḥ (17)

May that most ferocious personality protect me from the
east. May He who is superior to the greatest heroes
protect me from the southeast, which is presided over by
Agni. May the Supreme Viṣṇu protect me from the south,
and may that person of blazing luster protect me from
the southwest.

paścime pātu sarveśo / diśi me sarvato-mukhaḥ

nṛsiṁhaḥ pātu vāyavyāṁ / saumyāṁ bhūṣaṇa-vigrahaḥ (18)

May the Lord of everything protect me from the west. His
faces are everywhere, so please may He protect me from
this direction. May Lord Nṛsiṁha protect me from the
northwest, which is predominated by Vāyu, and may He
whose form is in itself the supreme ornament protect me
from the north, where Soma resides.

īśānyāṁ pātu bhadro me / sarva-maṅgala-dāyakaḥ

saṁsāra-bhayataḥ pātu / mṛtyor mṛtyur nṛ-keśarī (19)

May the all-auspicious Lord, who Himself bestows all-
auspiciousness, protect from the northeast, the
direction of the sun-god, and may He who is death
personified protect me from fear of death and rotation
in this material world.

idaṁ nṛsiṁha-kavacaṁ / prahlāda-mukha-maṇḍitam

bhaktimān yaḥ pathen nityaṁ / sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate
(20)

This Nṛsiṁha-kavaca has been ornamented by issuing from
the mouth of Prahlāda Mahārāja. If a person chants this
with devotion, he becomes freed from all sins.

putravān dhanavān loke / dīrghāyur upajāyate

yaṁ yaṁ kāmayate kāmaṁ / taṁ taṁ prāpnoty asaṁśayam(21)

One can have wealth, many sons, and a long life.
Whatever one desires in this world one can attain
without doubt.

sarvatra jayam āpnoti / sarvatra vijayī bhavet

bhūmy antarīkṣa-divyānāṁ / grahānāṁ vinivāraṇam (22)

He who desires victory becomes victorious, and
conquerors all directions. He wards off the inauspicious
influences of all planets, heavenly, earthly, and lower.

vṛścikoraga-sambhūta- / viṣāpaharaṇaṁ param


                          348
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

brahma-rākṣasa-yakṣāṇāṁ / dūrotsāraṇa-kāraṇam (23)

This is the supreme remedy for the poisonous effects of
serpents and scorpions, and Brahma-rākṣasa ghosts and
Yakṣas are driven away.

bhuje vā tala-pātre vā / kavacaṁ likhitaṁ śubham

kara-mūle dhṛtaṁ yena / sidhyeyuḥ karma-siddhayaḥ (24)

One may write this most auspicious prayer on his arm, or
inscribe it on a palm-leaf and attach it to his wrist,
and all his activities will become perfect.

devāsura-manuṣyeṣu / svaṁ svam eva jayaṁ labhet

eka-sandhyaṁ tri-sandhyaṁ vā / yaḥ paṭhen niyato naraḥ
(25)

One who regularly chants this prayer, whether once or
thrice (daily), he becomes victorious whether among
demigods, demons, or human beings.

sarva-maṅgala-maṅgalyaṁ / bhuktiṁ muktiṁ ca vindati

dvā-triṁśati-sahasrāṇi / pathet śuddhātmanāṁ nṛṇām (26)

One who with purified heart recites this prayer 32,000
times attains the most auspicious of all auspicious
things, and material enjoyment and liberation are
already understood to be available to such a person.

kavacasyāsya mantrasya / mantra-siddhiḥ prajāyate

anena mantra-rājena / kṛtvā bhasmābhir mantrānām (27)

This Kavaca-mantra is the king of all mantras. One
attains by it what would be attained by anointing
oneself with ashes and chanting all other mantras.

tilakaṁ vinyased yas tu / tasya graha-bhayaṁ haret

tri-vāraṁ japamānas tu / dattaṁ vāryābhimantrya ca (28)

Having marked ones body with tilaka, taking acamana with
water, and reciting this mantra three times, one will
find that the fear of all inauspicious planets is
removed.

prasayed yo naro mantraṁ / nṛsiṁha-dhyānam ācaret

tasya rogaḥ praṇaśyanti / ye ca syuḥ kukṣi-sambhavāḥ
(29)

One who recites this mantra, meditating upon Lord
Nṛsiṁhadeva, has all of his diseases cured, including
those of the abdomen.

garjantaṁ gārjayantaṁ nija-bhuja-patalaṁ sphoṭayantaṁ
hatantaṁ

rūpyantaṁ tāpayantaṁ divi bhuvi diti-jaṁ kṣepayantam
kṣipantam


                          349
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

krandantaṁ roṣayantaṁ diśi diśi satataṁ saṁharantaṁ
bharantaṁ

vīkṣantaṁ pūrṇayantaṁ kara-nikara-śatair divya-siṁhaṁ
namāmi (30)

Lord Nṛsiṁha roars loudly and causes others to roar.
With His arms He tears the demons asunder and kills them
in this way. He is always seeking out and tormenting the
demoniac descendants of Diti, both on this earth planet
and in the higher planets, and He throws them down and
scatters them. He cries with great anger as He destroys
the demons in all directions, yet with His unlimited
hands He sustains, protects, and nourishes the cosmic
manifestation. I offer my respectful obeisances to the
Lord, who has assumed the form of a transcendental lion
with hundreds of arms.

iti śrī-brahmāṇḍa-purāṇe prahlādoktaṁ

śrī-nṛsiṁha-kavacaṁ sampūrṇam.

Thus ends the Nṛsiṁha-kavaca as described by Prahlāda
Mahārāja in the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa.



Thus ends Chapter 12 - Overcoming impediments




Chapter 13 — Śraddhā, Śaranāgati, Humility




1. Śraddhā — The Eligibility for Bhakti 413

2. Śaraṇāgati — The Gateway for Pure Bhakti 416

3. Humility - The Foundation of Bhakti and the Key to
Prema 424

1) Śraddhā — The eligibility for bhakti

śraddhā — śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya

kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

CC Mad 22.62/BRSB p. 33

śraddhā-śabde—by the word śraddhā; viśvāsa—confidence;
kahe—is said; sudṛḍha—firm; niścaya—certainty; kṛṣṇe—
unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhakti—devotional service; kaile—by
executing; sarva-karma—all activities; kṛta—completed;
haya—are.

Śraddhā means firm confidence that through performing
the limbs of bhakti in a mood of loving service to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, all other activities are automatically performed,
all desires fulfilled and all necessities attained.


                          350
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017



sā ca śaraṇāpatti — lakṣaṇa

Āmnāya-sūtra 58/JD ch.6

sā—that; ca—and; śaraṇāpatti—attainment of Śaraṇāgati;
lakṣaṇa—characteristic.

Śraddhā is characterized by its external symptom known
as śaraṇāgati, surrender to Śrī Hari.



In the Rūpānuga Gauḍīya line the meaning of śraddhā is
given as follows:

śraddhā tv anyopāya — varjaṁ bhakty-unmukhī citta-vṛtti-
viśeṣaḥ

Āmnāya-sūtra 57/BRSB p. 33/JD ch. 6

śraddhā—faith; tu—indeed; viśeṣaḥ—(is) the specific;
citta-vṛtti—propensity of the heart; bhakti-unmukhī—
favorable to bhakti; anya-upāya-varjam—free from
dependence on any other means.

Śraddhā is the special propensity of the heart that
strives towards bhakti alone. It is totally devoid of
karma and jñāna, and desires nothing other than to give
pleasure to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (The internal symptom of faith is
kṛṣṇa-seva-vasana - the desire to serve Kṛṣṇa
favourably)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “Śraddhā is the absence of
doubt; it is an atomic particle of prema; the first ray
of prema”. “The secret of the qualification to enter
bhajana is hidden in the first yāma of Śrī Bhajana-
rahasya, niśānta-bhajana. This secret is śraddhā —
faith.” (BR 1.6, pt)

Śrīla BR Śrīdhara Mahārāja: “Śraddhā is the halo of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.”

Laukika (worldly) śraddhā is the faith that by
performing bhakti, one will get some personal, material
benefits. When these expectations are not fulfilled, one
commonly loses faith in bhakti.

Pāramārthika (transcendental) śraddhā is firm faith in
that “I will perform bhakti regardless of external
circumstances, because bhakti is the ultimate perfection
of the soul while the external material circumstances
are all temporary and illusory and never give real
happiness or eternal spiritual benefit (and therefore
have nothing real to offer me).”




The development of Bhakti that begins with Śraddhā

jāta-śraddho mat-kathāsu nirviṇṇaḥ sarva-karmasu

                          351
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


veda duḥkhātmakān kāmān parityāge —py anīśvaraḥ

tato bhajeta māṁ prītaḥ śraddhālur dṛḍha-niścayaḥ

juṣamāṇaś ca tān kāmān duḥkhodarkāṁś ca garhayan

SB 11.20.27-28/BR 2.34/ JD ch. 6/ PJ 9.46

jāta—one who has awakened; śraddhaḥ—faith; mat-kathāsu—
in the descriptions of My glories; nirviṇṇaḥ—disgusted;
sarva—with all; karmasu—activities; veda—he knows;
duḥkha—misery; ātmakān—constituted of; kāmān—all types
of sense gratification; parityāge—in the process of
renouncing; api—although; anīśvaraḥ—unable; tataḥ—due to
such faith; bhajeta—he should worship; mām—Me; prītaḥ—
remaining happy; śraddhāluḥ—being faithful; dṛḍha-
niścayaḥ—resolute conviction; juṣamāṇaḥ—engaging in; ca—
also; tān—that; kāmān—sense gratification; duḥkha—
misery; udarkān—leading to; ca—also; garhayan—repenting
of.

If a person whose faith in hearing narrations of Me has
been awakened, is unable to give up sense enjoyment and
the desire for it, even though he knows it gives misery,
he should, with a sincere heart, condemn his inability
to give it up; all the while, he should continue
worshipping Me [doing bhajana] with firm faith,
conviction and love.

When the sādhaka constantly worships Me with loving
devotion I come and sit in his heart

proktena bhakti-yogena bhajato māsakṛn muneḥ

kāmā hṛdayyā naśyanti sarve mayi hṛdi sthite

SB 11.20.29/JD ch. 6 /PJ 9.46

proktena—which has been described; bhakti-yogena—by
devotional service; bhajataḥ—who is worshiping; mā—Me;
asakṛt—constantly; muneḥ—of the sage; kāmāḥ—material
desires; hṛdayyāḥ—of the heart; naśyanti—are destroyed;
sarve—all of them; mayi—in Me; hṛdi—when the heart;
sthite—is firmly situated.

When the sādhaka constantly worships Me by the method of
bhakti-yoga that I have described, I come and sit in his
heart. As soon as I am established there, all material
desires and saṁskāras (impressions), on which the
material desires are based, are destroyed.



By bringing Me - the Soul of all souls - into one’s
heart, the hard knot in the heart will be torn asunder
and the flow of one’s innate tendency for divine love
will inundate one’s entire being

bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ

kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi mayi dṛṣte “khilātmani

SB 11.20.30 (SB 1.2.21)/JD ch. 6/PJ 9.46

                          352
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


bhidyate—pierced; hṛdaya—heart; granthiḥ—knots;
chidyante—cut to pieces; sarva—all; saṁśayāḥ—misgivings;
kṣīyante—terminated; ca—and; asya—his; karmāṇi—chain of
fruitive actions; mayi—when I; dṛṣṭe—am seen; akhila-
ātmani—as the Paramātma in everyone’s heart.

When the sādhaka directly sees Me as Paramātma situated
in the heart of all living entities, the knot of the
false ego in his heart is pierced, all his doubts are
cut to pieces, and his desires for fruitive activities
are completely eradicated. (or) By bringing Me - the
Soul of all souls - into one’s heart, no evil can remain
there. Swiftly is the hard knot of mundane ego severed,
all doubts are slashed, and all mundane action is
exhausted for that earnestly aspiring devotee.

Śrīla BR Śrīdhara Mahāraja: Our inner aspiration for
rasa, ecstasy, is buried within our hearts which are
tied down and sealed. But hearing and chanting the
glories of Kṛṣṇa breaks the seal on the heart and allows
it to awaken and open to receive Kṛṣṇa, the reservoir of
pleasure, ecstasy Himself. Here, Srimad-Bhāgavatam is
saying: "There is a knot within our hearts, but by
bringing Me - the Soul of all souls - into one’s heart
through Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the flow of our innate
tendency for divine love (svarūpa-śakti) will inundate
the whole heart. When the knot of the heart is torn
apart, then, as the sleeping soul awakens, the Goloka
conception within will emerge and inundate our entire
being."




2) Śaraṇāgati — the gateway for pure bhakti



The definition of Śaraṇāgati

ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ prātikūlyasya varjanam

rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā

ātma-nikṣepa-kārpaṇye ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ

HBV 11.676/CC Mad 22.100/JD ch. 6/Bhakti-sandarbha A 236
/Upad. 9 pt/ BRSB p. 92/BR 3.2

ānukūlyasya—of the favorable; saṅkalpaḥ—acceptance;
prātikūlyasya—of the unfavourable; varjanam—devoid of;
rakṣiṣyati—He will protect; iti—thus; viśvāsaḥ—
conviction; goptṛtve—in being the guardian; varaṇam—
acceptance; tathā—as well as; ātma-nikṣepa—full self-
surrender; kārpaṇye—and humility; ṣaṭ-vidhā—sixfold;
śaraṇa-āgatiḥ—process of surrender.

There are six symptoms of self-surrender (śaraṇāgati).
The first two are ānukūlyasya saṅkalpa and prātikūlyasya
varjanam: “I will only do that which is favorable for
unalloyed bhakti, and I will reject all that is
unfavourable.” This is called saṅkalpa or pratijñā, a

                          353
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

solemn vow. The third symptom is rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso,
faith in Bhagavān as one’s protector: “Bhagavān is my
only protector. I can derive absolutely no benefit from
jñāna, yoga, and other such practices.” This is an
expression of trust (viśvāsa). The fourth symptom is
goptṛtve varaṇam, deliberate acceptance of Bhagavān as
one’s maintainer: “I cannot obtain anything, or even
maintain myself, by my own endeavour. I will serve
Bhagavān as far as I am able, and He will take care of
me.” This is what is meant by dependence (nirabharatā).
The fifth symptom is ātma-nikṣepa, absence of
independent mood. “Who am I? I am His. My duty is to
fulfill His desire.” This is submission of the self
(ātma-nivedana). The sixth symptom is kārpaṇye,
meekness: “I am wretched, insignificant, and spiritually
destitute.” This is what is meant by humility (kārpanya
or dainya).



The only way to gain relief from all adversities, the
only way to find the hidden treasure, is to abandon all
considerations of religiosity or irreligiosity and
surrender unto the lotus feet of the Absolute, Reality
the Beautiful Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, the divine son of King
Nanda:

sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

BG 18.66/CC Madhya 8.63, 22.94/JD ch. 6,17/PJ 9.31/BPKG
p. 458

sarva-dharmān—all varieties of religion; parityajya—
abandoning; mām—unto Me; ekam—only; śaraṇam—for
surrender; vraja—go; aham—I; tvām—you; sarva—all;
pāpebhyaḥ—from sinful reactions; mokṣayiṣyāmi—will
deliver; mā—do not; śucaḥ—worry.

Abandon all varieties of religion or spiritual paths and
just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all
sinful reactions. Do not worry or lament.

[An expanded translation:] “To impart knowledge of My
all-comprehensive aspect, Brahman, as well as knowledge
of My all-pervading aspect, Paramātma, whatever
teachings I have given, based in general on the duties
of varṇāśrama (the socio-religious ranks of life), the
duty of the mendicant, selflessness, internal and
external sense control, meditation, subservience to the
dominion of the Almighty — now I ask you to summarily
dismiss every one of those paths and surrender unto Me,
the Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān. Then I shall
deliver you from all the sins (karmic reactions) of this
worldly sojourn, as well as any sin incurred by giving
up the aforementioned duties or religiosities. There
will be no cause for you to lament that your life’s
mission is unfulfilled.” (Śrīla B.R. Śrīdhara Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, PJ)



What fool would take shelter of anyone but You who is

                          354
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

the true friend?

kaḥ paṇḍitas tvad aparaṁ śaraṇaṁ samīyād

bhakta-priyād ṛta-giraḥ suhṛdaḥ kṛta-jñāt

sarvān dadāti suhṛdo bhajato —bhikāmān

ātmānam apy upacayāpacayau na yasya

SB 10.48.26/CC Madhya 22.96/PJ 6.4

kaḥ—what; paṇḍitaḥ—scholar; tvat— than You; aparam—
other; śaraṇam—for shelter; samīyāt—would go; bhakta—to
Your devotees; priyāt—affectionate; ṛta—always true;
giraḥ—whose words; suhṛdaḥ—the well-wisher; kṛta-jñāt—
grateful; sarvān—all; dadāti—You give; suhṛdaḥ—to Your
well-wishing devotees; bhajataḥ—who are engaged in
worshiping You; abhikāmān—desires; ātmānam—Yourself; api
—even; upacaya—increase; apacayau—or diminution; na—
never; yasya—whose.

What learned person would approach anyone but You for
shelter, when You are the affectionate, grateful and
truthful well-wisher of Your devotees? To those who
worship You in sincere friendship You reward everything
they desire, even Your own self, yet You never increase
or diminish.



Without Śaraṇāgati there can be no auspiciousness

tāvad bhayaṁ draviṇa-deha-suhṛn-nimittaṁ

śokaḥ spṛhā paribhavo vipulaś ca lobhaḥ

tāvan mamety asad-avagraha ārti-mūlaṁ

yāvan na te —ṅghrim abhayaṁ pravṛṇīta lokaḥ

SB 3.9.6/BR 4.2/PJ 2.21

tāvat—until then; bhayam—fear; draviṇa—wealth; deha—
body; suhṛt—relatives; nimittam—for the matter of; śokaḥ
—lamentation; spṛhā—desire; paribhavaḥ—paraphernalia;
vipulaḥ—very great; ca—also; lobhaḥ—avarice; tāvat—up to
that time; mama—mine; iti—thus; asat—perishable;
avagrahaḥ—undertaking; ārti-mūlam—full of anxieties;
yāvat—as long as; na—do not; te—Your; aṅghrim abhayam—
safe lotus feet; pravṛṇīta—take shelter; lokaḥ—the
people of the world.

Dear Lord, unless the people take the safe shelter of
Your lotus feet, they will experience the ultimate
origin of all suffering which is accepting the false
concept that the jīva is a proprietor of the persons and
paraphernalia in his charge. Until then, fear will
remain, caused by attachment to wealth, one’s body and
well-wishers, lamentation, hankering, and greed.

Now I am a soul surrendered unto You; please instruct me

kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥ

                          355
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


pṛcchāmi tvāṁ dharma-sammūḍha-cetāḥ

yac chreyaḥ syān niścitaṁ brūhi tan me

śiṣyas te —haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

BG 2.7

kārpaṇya—of miserliness; doṣa—by the weakness; upahata—
being afflicted; sva-bhāvaḥ—characteristics; pṛcchāmi—I
am asking; tvām—unto You; dharma—religion; sammūḍha—
bewildered; cetāḥ—in heart; yat—what; śreyaḥ—all-good;
syāt—may be; niścitam—with certainty; brūhi—tell; tat—
that; me—unto me; śiṣyaḥ—disciple; te—Your; aham—I am;
śādhi—just instruct; mām—me; tvām—unto You; prapannam—
surrendered.

Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all
composure because of miserly weakness. In this condition
I am asking You to tell me with certainty what is best
for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered
unto You; please instruct me.



Only those surrendered unto Me can become free from māyā

daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te

BG 7.14/CC Madhya 22.23, 24.138/PJ 9.11

daivī—transcendental; hi—certainly; eṣā—this; guṇa-mayī—
consisting of the three modes of material nature; mama—
My; māyā—energy; duratyayā—very difficult to overcome;
mām—unto Me; eva—certainly; ye—those who; prapadyante—
surrender; māyām etām—this illusory energy; taranti—
overcome; te—they.

This divine energy of Mine (māyā), consisting of the
three modes of material nature, is difficult to
overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can
easily cross beyond it.



Who but the surrendered devotees of Kṛṣṇa can transcend
māyā?

yeṣāṁ sa eṣa bhagavān dayayed anantaḥ

sarvātmanāśrita-pado yadi nirvyalīkam

te dustarām atitaranti ca deva-māyāṁ

naiṣāṁ mamāham iti dhīḥ śva-śṛgāla-bhakṣye

SB 2.7.42/CC Madhya 6.235/PJ 2.19

yeṣām—for those; saḥ—He; eṣaḥ—this; bhagavān—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; dayayet—may show mercy; anantaḥ—
the unlimited; sarva-ātmanā—fully, without reservation;

                          356
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

āśrita-padaḥ—those who have taken shelter of the Lord;
yadi—if; nirvyalīkam—without duplicity; te—such persons;
dustarām—insurmountable; atitaranti—surpass; ca—also;
deva-māyām—the Lord’s deluding potency; na—not; eṣām—
this; mama aham—”my” and “I”; iti—such; dhīḥ—
intelligence; śva-śṛgāla-bhakṣye—in the body, which is
food for dogs and jackals.

Anyone who is specifically favoured by the Supreme Lord,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, due to unalloyed surrender unto the service
of the Lord, can transcend the insurmountable ocean of
material illusion. But those who are attached to this
body, which is meant to be eaten at the end by dogs and
jackals, cannot do so.

Embracing the Lord as on’s maintainer and gaurdian

ananyāś cintayanto māṁ ye janāḥ paryupāsate

teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham

BG 9.22/BPKG p. 87

ananyāḥ—having no other object; cintayantaḥ—
concentrating; mām—on Me; ye—those who; janāḥ—persons;
paryupāsate—properly worship; teṣām—of them; nitya—
always; abhiyuktānām—fixed in devotion; yoga—
requirements; kṣemam—protection; vahāmi—carry; aham—I.

But those who always worship Me with exclusive devotion,
meditating on My transcendental form—to them I carry
what they lack, and I preserve what they have.

The holy feet of Kṛṣṇa are the only shelter for persons
tormented by the miseries of material existence

bhava-jaladhi-gatānāṁ dvandva-vātāhatānāṁ

suta-duhitṛ-kalatra-trāṇa-bhārārditānām

viṣama-viṣaya-toye majjatām aplavānāṁ

bhavati śaraṇam eko viṣṇu-poto narāṇām

Mukunda-mālā-stotra 11, Śrī Kulaśekhar Alvara/PJ 5.6

bhava—of material existence; jaladhi—in the ocean;
gatānām—who are present; dvandva—of material dualities;
vāta—by the wind; āhatānām—struck; suta—sons; duhitṛ—
daughters; kalatra—and wives; trāṇa—of protecting; bhāra
—by the burden; arditānām—distressed; viṣama—perilous;
viṣaya—of sense gratification; toye—in the water;
majjatām—drowning; aplavānām—having no vessel to carry
them away; bhavati—is; śaraṇam—the shelter; ekaḥ—only;
viṣṇu-potaḥ—the boat that is Lord Viṣṇu; narāṇām—for
people in general.

For those persons who, bereft of a vessel, have fallen
into the ocean of mundane existence; who are being
lashed by the hurricane of duality based on mundane
attraction and aversion; who are crushed by the burden
of protecting wife, family and so on; who are drowning
in the ghastly whirlpool of sensual pleasures—the only
shelter is the lifeboat of the lotus feet of Śrī Viṣṇu.

                          357
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017




Genuine self-dedication is deep attachment to one’s
Master, considering reward and punishment equally

viracaya mayi daṇḍaṁ dīna-bandho dayāṁ vā

gatir iha na bhavattaḥ kācid anyā mamāsti

nipatatu śata-koṭir nirbharam vā navāmbhas

tad api kila payodaḥ stūyate cātakena

Tri-bhaṅgī-pañcakam (supl. 1), Stava-mālā, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī/MS 9 pt/PJ 7.21

viracaya—please do; mayi—to me; daṇḍam—punishment; dīna-
bandho—friend of the wretched and destitute; dayām—
mercy; vā—or; gatiḥ—goal; iha—here; na—not; bhavattaḥ—
than You; kācit—anything; anyā—else; mama—of me; asti—
is; nipatatu—may fall; śata-koṭiḥ—thunderbolt; nirbharam
—intense; vā—or; navāmbhaḥ—fresh water; tad api—
nevertheless; kila—indeed; payodaḥ—the cloud; stūyate—is
prayed to; cātakena—by a cataka bird.

O Dīnabandho! Whether the clouds pour down a shower of
water upon the thirsting cātaka birds or hurl lightning
bolts at them, the cātaka birds never tire of
propitiating the clouds, for they have no other
recourse. Similarly, whether You are merciful to me or
punish me, I have no support in this world other than
You. You may do as You like.



The unprecedented fruit of surrender (1)

vināśya sarva-duḥkhāni, nija-mādhurya-varṣaṇām

karoti bhagavān bhakte, śaraṇāgata-pālakaḥ

Śrī Prapanna-Jīvanāmṛtaṁ 1.47, Śrīla B.R. Śrīdhara
Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Being most affectionate toward His surrendered souls,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa totally dispels their unhappiness, graciously
filling their hearts with His sweet absolute presence.

Editorial note: Please refer to Śrīla Bhakti-rakṣaka
Śrīdhara Mahārāja’s “Prapanna-Jīvanāmṛtaṁ— for an
extensive and compelling compilation of ślokas regarding
the subject of Śaraṇāgati and Humility.

The unprecedented fruit of surrender (2)

śaraṇa lañā kare kṛṣṇe ātma-samarpaṇa

kṛṣṇa tāre kare tat-kāle ātma-sama

CC Madhya 22.102/CB Ādi 4.120

śaraṇa lañā—taking shelter; kare—does; kṛṣṇe—unto Kṛṣṇa;
ātma-samarpaṇa—fully surrendering; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa;

                          358
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

tāre—him; kare—makes; tat-kāle—immediately; ātma-sama—
one of His confidential associates.

When a devotee fully surrenders to Kṛṣṇa, offering his
very self, at that time Kṛṣṇa accepts him to be as good
as Himself (That is, the Lord accepts Him as one of his
own personal associates).

Krishna Himself promised His dear associate, Uddhava,
that one who surrenders fully will attain immortality
and prema in Kṛṣṇa’s association

martyo yadā tyakta-samasta-karmā

niveditātmā vicikīrṣito me

tadāmṛtatvaṁ pratipadyamāno

mayātma-bhūyāya ca kalpate vai

SB 11.29.34/CC Madhya 22.103, Antya 4.193/PJ 9.52

martyaḥ—a mortal; yadā—when; tyakta—having given up;
samasta—all; karmā—his fruitive activities; nivedita-
ātmā—having offered his very self; vicikīrṣitaḥ—desirous
of doing something special; me—for Me; tadā—at that
time; amṛtatvam—immortality; pratipadyamānaḥ—in the
process of attaining; mayā—with Me; ātma-bhūyāya—for
equal opulence; ca—also; kalpate—he becomes qualified;
vai—indeed.

When the living entity who is subjected to birth and
death gives up all his material acivities and completely
surrenders himself to Me, dedicating his life to the
execution of My order and following My instructions, he
attains immortality by My grace, becoming equal to
Myself in spiritual quality and eligible to enjoy the
divine rapture of life (prema) in the spiritual world in
My association.



The “Crying School” śloka

bhakti-yoga bhakti-yoga bhakti-yoga dhana

bhakti ei kṛṣṇa namera smaraṇa krandana

Mahājana Padyāvāli

bhakti yoga—loving devotional service; dhana—treasure ;
bhakti—devotion; ei—this ; kṛṣṇa namera—Kṛṣṇa’s name;
smaraṇa—remembering; krandana—crying.

If you want to attain the treasure of bhakti-yoga you
have to remember Kṛṣṇa’s name and bitterly weep from the
depths of your soul for His mercy.26



Cry out: “O Kṛṣṇa! I am Yours—

kṛṣṇa, tomāra haṅa - yadi bale eka-bāra


                             359
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

māyā-bandha haite kṛṣṇa tāre kare pāra

CC Mad 22. 33/BPKG p. 378

kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa!; tomāra haṅa—I am Yours; yadi—if; bale—
someone says; eka-bāra—once; māyā-bandha haite—from the
bondage of conditioned life; kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tāre—him;
kare pāra—releases.

If any jīva, feeling extreme anguish, prays to Kṛṣṇa
from the core of his heart and calls out, “O Kṛṣṇa! I am
Yours— — then Kṛṣṇa gives him sādhu-saṅga and thus
allows him to cross over the impediments arranged by
māyā.



If you surrender completely, your prayers will be heard
directly by Kṛṣṇa

ṣaḍ-aṅga śaraṇāgati haibe jāhāra

tāhāra prārthanā śune śrī-nanda-kumāra

Ṣaḍ-Aṅga-Śaraṇāgati (5), Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura/SGG
p.81

The prayers of one who submits unconditionally to the
sixfold surrender are heard by Śrī Nanda-kumāra.

“O noble soul! Please throw out everything you have
learned and just surrender at Śrī Gaurāṅga’s lotus
feet!”

dante nidhāya tṛṇakaṁ padayor nipatya

kṛtvā ca kāku-śatam etad ahaṁ bravīmi

he sādhavaḥ sakalam eva vihāya dūrād

gaurāṅga-candra-caraṇe kurutānurāgam

Śrī Caitanya-candāmṛta 120

Taking a straw in my teeth I fall at your feet hundreds
of times and implore you with sweet words, saying, "O
noble souls! Please throw far away all you have learned
and cultivate constant and ever-fresh attachment
(anurāga) to the lotus feet of the moonlike Śrī
Gaurāṅga.”



3) Humility - The Foundation of Bhakti and the Key to
Prema



More humble than a blade of grass, more tolerant than a
tree

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā māna-dena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

                             360
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Śikṣāṣṭaka 3/CC Ādi 17.31/JD ch. 3, 8, 25/BR 3.1

hariḥ—Śrī Hari’s names; kīrtanīyaḥ—should be chanted;
sadā—always; sunīcena—by being humbler; api—even; tṛṇāt—
than the grass; sahiṣṇunā—by being more tolerant; api—
even; taroḥ—than a tree; amāninā—by being prideless;
māna-dena—by giving respect (to others according to
their respective positions).

Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass which is trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless, and offering respect to all others according
to their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.

The Premī bhakta is naturally endowed with deep humility

premera svabhāva yāhāṅ premera sambandha

sei māne, “kṛṣṇe mora nāhi prema-gandha—

CC Antya 20.28

premera svabhāva—the nature of love of Godhead; yāhāṅ—
where; premera sambandha—a relationship of love of
Godhead; sei māne—he recognizes; kṛṣṇe—unto Lord Kṛṣṇa;
mora—my; nāhi—there is not; prema-gandha—even a scent of
love of God.

Wherever there is a relationship of love of God, its
natural symptom is that the devotee does not think
himself a devotee. Instead, he always thinks that he has
not even a trace of love for Kṛṣṇa (This is Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s commentary on the “tṛṇād api— śloka).

Caitanyadeva Himself has manifested unprecedented
humility

na prema-gandho —sti darāpi me harau

krandāmi saubhāgya-bharaṁ prakāśitum

vaṁśī-vilāsy-ānana-lokanaṁ vinā

bibharmi yat prāṇa-pataṅgakān vṛthā

CC Mad 2.45/PJ 8.31

na—never; prema-gandhaḥ—a scent of love of Godhead; asti
—there is; darā api—even in a slight proportion; me—My;
harau—for Śrī Hari; krandāmi—I cry; saubhāgya-bharam—the
extent of My fortune; prakāśitum—to exhibit; vaṁśī-
vilāsi—of the great flute-player; ānana—at the face;
lokanam—looking; vinā—without; bibharmi—I carry; yat—
because; prāṇa-pataṅgakān—My insectlike life; vṛthā—with
no purpose.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, “My dear friends, I have
not the slightest tinge of love of Godhead within My
heart. When you see Me crying in separation, I am just
falsely exhibiting a demonstration of My great fortune.
Indeed, not beholding the beautiful face of that expert

                          361
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

flute-player Kṛṣṇa, I continue to live My life like an
insect, without purpose.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Humility is the foundation of
bhakti, and it is by humility that bhakti increases.
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī defines humility as follows:
“When a person has all good qualities but feelings arise
in his heart of being unqualified, wretched and
inferior, this is called humility. In other words,
humility is the utmost anxiety to attain Bhagavān. A
person with humility is without false ego even though he
possesses all good qualities.” Only humility can attract
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, and genuine humility only appears when
prema is fully ripe. (BR 8.4 pt)

Consider me to be just like a speck of dust at Your
lotus feet

ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 5/CC Antya 20.32/BR 5.1

ayi—O My Lord; nanda-tanuja—the son of Nanda Mahārāja,
Kṛṣṇa; kiṅkaram—the servant; patitam—fallen; mām—Me;
viṣame—horrible; bhava-ambudhau—in the ocean of
nescience; kṛpayā—by causeless mercy; tava—Your; pāda-
paṅkaja—lotus feet; sthita—situated at; dhūli-sadṛśam—
like a particle of dust; vicintaya—kindly consider.

O Nanda-nandana, somehow I have fallen into this fearful
ocean of material existence. Please bestow Your mercy
upon this eternal servant of Yours. Consider me to be
just like a speck of dust at Your lotus feet and always
accept me as Your purchased servant.

prema-dhana vinā vyartha daridra jīvana

“dāsa— kari— vetana more deha prema-dhana

CC Antya 20.33

prema-dhana—the wealth of ecstatic love; vinā—without;
vyartha—useless; daridra jīvana—life of poverty; dāsa
kari——accepting as Your eternal servant; vetana—salary;
more—unto Me; deha—give; prema-dhana—the treasure of
prema.

Without the wealth of kṛṣṇa-prema, my life is useless,
an ocean of unmitigated poverty. Therefore, accepting me
as Your servant, give Me the treasure of kṛṣṇa-prema.




Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja’s humility

jagāi mādhāi haite muñi se pāpiṣṭha

                            362
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


purīṣera kīṭa haite muñi se laghiṣṭha

emana nirghṛṇā more kebā kṛpā kare

eka nityānanda vinā jagata bhitare

CC Ādi 5.205-206/BR 3.9 pt

jagāi mādhāi—the two brothers Jagāi and Mādhāi; haite—
than; muñi—I; se—that; pāpiṣṭha—more sinful; purīṣera—in
stool; kīṭa—the worms; haite—than; muñi—I am; se—that;
laghiṣṭha—lower; emana—such; nirghṛṇa—abominable; more—
unto me; kebā—who; kṛpā—mercy; kare—shows; eka—one;
nityānanda—Lord Nityānanda; vinu—but; jagat—world;
bhitare—within.

I am more sinful than Jagāi and Mādhāi and even lower
than a worm in stool. Who in this world but Nityānanda
could show His mercy to such an abominable person as me?



bhakta-gaṇa, śuna mora dainya-vacana

tomā-sabāra pada-dhūli, aṅge vibhūṣaṇa kari—

CC Ādi 5.207

bhakta-gaṇa—O devotees; śuna—please hear; mora—my;
dainya-vacana—humble submission; tomā-sabāra—of all of
you; pada-dhūli—the dust of the feet; aṅge—on my body;
vibhūṣaṇa kari——taking as ornaments;

With all humility, I submit myself to the lotus feet of
all of you devotees, taking the dust from your feet as
my bodily ornaments.

Sanātana Gosvāmī expresses his humility

nīca jāti, nīca-saṅgī, patita adhama

kuviṣaya-kūpe paḍi— goṅāinu janama!

CC Mad 20.99

nīca jāti—born of a low family; nīca-saṅgī—associated
with low men; patita—fallen; adhama—the lowest; ku-
viṣaya-kūpe—in a well of material enjoyment; paḍi——
having fallen down; goṅāinu—I have passed; janama—my
life.

Sanātana Gosvāmī said, “I was born in a low family, and
my associates are all low-class men. I myself am fallen
and am the lowest of men. Indeed, I have passed my whole
life fallen in the well of sinful materialism.”

One endowed with good qualities is naturally humble

namranti phalinaḥ vṛkṣāḥ namranti guṇino janāḥ

śuṣkañ ca kāṣṭāñ ca bhagnate na ca namrate

Śrī Caitanya Maṅgala

                             363
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Just as the branches of a fruit-laden tree bend down, a
person endowed with good qualities is naturally humble.
Dry wood, on the other hand, may break but never bends.



Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s humility

hṛdi yasya preraṇayā pravartito —haṁ varāka-rūpo —pi

tasya hareḥ pada-kamalaṁ vande caitanya-devasya

BRS 1.1.2/CC Madhya 19.134, Antya 1.212

hṛdi—within the heart; yasya—of whom (Śrī Kṛṣṇa);
preraṇayā—by the inspiration; pravartitaḥ—engaged; aham—
I; varāka—lowly and insignificant; rūpaḥ—Rūpa Gosvāmī;
api—although; tasya—of Him; hareḥ—of Hari, who steals
away his devotee’s heart with His sweet words ; pada-
kamalam—to the lotus feet; vande—let me offer my
prayers; caitanya-devasya—of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Although I am the lowest of men and have no knowledge,
Śrī Hari, who steals away His devotees— hearts with his
sweet words, has mercifully bestowed upon me the
inspiration to write transcendental literature about
devotional service. Therefore I offer my obeisances at
the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who has given
me the chance to write these books.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains: Śuddha Sarasvatī could not
tolerate to hear Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī described as varāka
- lowly and insignificant. Therefore she turned it into
a glorification: If the word varāka is broken into two,
then vara (bara) means śreṣṭha - the best, topmost,
supreme object; ka means kayate, śabdayate - described,
expressed. Thereby the meaning changes into, “That
person, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who can give the supreme
object (Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa) in the form of transcendental
words, is the greatest.” (BRS 1.1.1 pt)



Only those bewildered by the false ego think they are
the doers

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate

BG 3.27

prakṛteḥ—of material nature; kriyamāṇāni—being done;
guṇaiḥ—by the modes; karmāṇi—activities; sarvaśaḥ—all
kinds of; ahaṅkāra-vimūḍha—bewildered by false ego; ātmā
—the spirit soul; kartā—doer; aham—I; iti—thus; manyate—
he thinks.

The jīva bewildered by the influence of false ego thinks
himself to be the doer of activities that are in
actuality carried out by the three modes of material
nature.


                          364
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017



Offering obeisances counteracts the false ego of
thinking oneself to be the doer

ahaṅkṛtir ma-kāraḥ syān na-kāras tan-niṣedhakaḥ

tasmāt tu namasā kṣetri- svātantryaṁ pratiṣidhyate

bhagavat-paratantro “sau tad-āyatātma-jīvanaḥ

tasmāt sva-sāmarthya-vidhiṁ tyajet sarvam aśeṣataḥ

Padma Purāṇa /Prapanna Jīvanāmṛtaṁ 2.3

The syllable ma means “self-asserting ego— (the
misconception of considering oneself to be the doer);
the syllable na indicates its negation. Thus the act of
offering obeisances (namaḥ) nullifies the offerer’s
independence and counteracts the false ego. The soul is
naturally subordinate to Bhagavān, his intrinsic nature
and innate function is to render loving devotional
service to the Supreme Lord. Therefore, all actions
performed thinking, “I am the doer—, should be utterly
abandoned.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “”Namaḥ— means giving up all
kinds of mundane, worldly relations and offering our
everything unto the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Srila Bhakti Pramoda Purī Goswāmī: “O master, destroy
all vestige of material ego that pollutes me, and give
me a place at your lotus feet, making me the servant of
your servants”; this is the meaning of the word “namaḥ—.



dṛṣta nahe dṛśya, haya sevākara kārya

Mahājana-vākya/Harmonist 2002, p. 25

dṛṣta—being seen, being the observed; nahe—not; dṛśya—
seeing, being the observer; haya—is; sevākara—of the
servant; kārya—attitude.

The attitude of a servant, being the seen not the seer;
being the observed, not the observer. [Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura: A bhakta should not
try to see Kṛṣṇa but serve in such a way that Kṛṣṇa’s
heart will melt and He will desire to see him].

dṛṣṭa nahe draṣṭā

The jīva is the observed, not the observer (the real
observer is Bhagavān); the jīva cannot see, he can only
be seen (by Kṛṣṇa). Darśana means to be seen by Him.



Humility is described in the Mukunda-mālā stotram

kṛṣṇa tvadīya-pada-paṅkaja-pañjarāntam

adyaiva me viśatu mānasa-rāja-haṁsaḥ

                          365
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


prāṇa-prayāṇa-samaye kapha-vāta-pittaiḥ

kaṇṭhāvarodhana-vidhau smaraṇaṁ kutas te

Mukunda-mālā 33/BR 3.7

kṛṣṇa—O Lord Kṛṣṇa; tvadīya—of Your; pada—feet; paṅkaja—
lotus flower; pañjara—the network; antam—of the tips;
adya—this very day; eva—certainly; me—of my; viśatu—
should enter; mānasa—mind; rāja—the royal; haṁsa—swan;
prāṇa-prayāṇa—of death; samaye—at the time; kapha-vāta-
pittaiḥ—by mucus, air and bile; kaṇṭha-avarodhana-vidhau
—when the throat is choked; smaraṇam—remembrance; kutaḥ—
how?; te—Your.

O Kṛṣṇa, my request is that the swan of my mind be
caught this very day in the network of the lotus flowers
of Your feet and dwell there in the ocean of rasa. At
the time of death the throat will be choked up with
mucus, air and bile. Under such conditions, how will it
be possible to remember Your name?



Without humility, one cannot cross over this material
existence

amaryādaḥ kṣudraś cala-matir asūyā-prasava-bhūḥ

kṛta-ghno durmānī smara-para-vaśo rakṣaṇa-paraḥ

nṛśaṁsaḥ pāpiṣṭhaḥ katham aham ito duḥkha-jaladher

apārād uttīrṇas tava paricareyaṁ caraṇayoḥ

Śrī Yamunācārya/BR 3.14/ Prapanna Jīvanāmṛtaṁ 8.13

I am disrespectful, vile, fickle-minded, full of envy,
ungrateful, dependent on others, cruel and most sinful.
In this condition, how can I cross this impassable ocean
of material existence and render service to Your lotus
feet?



Yamunācārya expresses his humility

aparādha-sahasra-bhājanaṁ patitaṁ bhīma-bhavārṇavodare

agatiṁ śaraṇāgataṁ hare kṛpayā kevalam ātmasāt-kuru

Yāmuna-stotra/BR 3.12

aparādha-sahasra—of thousnds of offenses; bhājanam—(who
am) the abode; patitam—fallen; bhīma—of the terrible;
bhava—of repeated birth and death; arṇava—ocean; udare—
in the belly; agatim—I who have no goal of life; śaraṇa-
āgatam—who have come to take shelter; hare—O Śrī Hari;
kṛpayā—being merciful; kevalam—exclusively; ātmasāt—your
own; kuru—make.

O Hari, I am an offender, guilty of thousands of
offences and therefore punishable. I am drowning in this

                          366
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

fearsome ocean of material existence. Lost, I take
shelter of Your lotus feet; please make me Your own.
(You have promised that You will definitely deliver
anyone who has taken shelter of You. Please therefore
deliver me also).



If I take birth again, let it be in the home of a
devotee

tava dāsya-sukhaika-saṅgināṁ bhavaneṣv astv api kīṭa-
janma me

itarāvasatheṣu mā sma bhūd api janma catur-mukhātmanā

Yāmuna-stotra/BR 3.15

O Bhagavān, if I take birth again due to my past
activities, or by Your desire, please let it be in the
home of a devotee, even if that birth is in the body of
an insect. I have no desire to take birth in a household
devoid of devotion to You, even if it has the opulence
of Brahmā. O Puruṣottama, this is my earnest prayer unto
You.



When shall I feel joyfull to have such a fitting master
as You?

bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ

praśānta-niḥśeṣa-mano-rathāntaraḥ

kadāham aikāntika-nitya-kiṅkaraḥ

praharṣayiṣyāmi sanātha-jīvitam

Stotra-ratna 43, Yāmunācārya

bhavantam—You; eva—certainly; anucaran—serving;
nirantaraḥ—always; praśānta—pacified; niḥśeṣa—all;
manaḥ-ratha—desires; antaraḥ—other; kadā—when; aham—I;
aikāntika—exclusive; nitya—eternal; kiṅkaraḥ—servant;
praharṣayiṣyāmi—I shall become joyful; sa-nātha—with a
fitting master; jīvitam—living.

By serving You constantly, one is freed from all
material desires and is completely pacified. When shall
I engage as Your permanent eternal servant and always
feel joyful to have such a fitting master?



Sincere humility is shown in Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta

nibaddha-mūrdhāñjalir eṣa yāce

nīrandhra-dainyonnati-mukta-kaṇṭham

dayā-nidhe deva bhavat-kaṭākṣa-

dākṣiṇya-leśena sakṛn niṣiñca

                          367
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 30/BR 3.17

nibaddha—fixed; mūrdha—on the head; añjaliḥ—folded
palms; eṣa—this one; yāce—I prays; nīrandhra—gapless
(constant); dainya—pitiable misery (i.e., pain of
separation from Kṛṣṇa); unnati—increasing; mukta—opened;
kaṇṭhaḥ—throat; dayā—of mercy; nidhe—Ocean; deva—O Lord;
bhavad—Your; katākṣa—sidelong glance; dākṣinya—kindness;
leśena—a drop; sakṛt—once; niṣiñca—anoint.

O Deva! O Ocean of Mercy! With folded hands raised to my
head and with an open throat I humbly offer this
incessant prayer to You: please, just once, shower me
with even a slight grace of Your merciful sidelong
glance.



The opposite side of humility is pride

īśvaro —ham ahaṁ bhogī

siddho —haṁ balavān sukhī

BG 16.14

īśvaraḥ—the lord and controller; aham—I am; aham—I am;
bhogī—the enjoyer; siddhaḥ—perfect; aham—I am; balavān—
powerful; sukhī—happy

I am the controller and the lord of everything I survey.
I am the enjoyer. I am perfect, powerful and happy.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains: Pride, or pratiṣṭha-
āśa (the desire for prestige), is the root cause of all
anarthas. If one thinks one is better than others (“I am
a better devotee”), humility gives way to pride and
envy, and Bhakti-devī flees far away from one’s heart.
One should dig deeply into one’s heart and if one finds
any trace of pride, or desire for respect, one should
uproot it completely and throw it far, far away.

Thus ends Chapter 13 - Śraddhā, Śaranāgati, Humility




Chapter 14 - Sādhu-saṅga




1. The Glories of Sādhu-saṅga 435

2. The Benefits of Sādhu-saṅga 442

3. How to Associate with a Sādhu 449

4. Rejecting Unfavourable Association 451

5. Further Glorification of Sādhu-saṅga 454


                             368
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017



1) The Glories of Sādhu-saṅga

The definition of Sādhu-saṅga

Who is a sādhu (a saintly, pure devotee)?

sādhanoti sādhayati ca kṛṣṇa-prema iti sādhu

sādhanoti—one who performs sādhana-bhajana; sādhayati—
who inspires others to practice; ca—and; kṛṣṇa-prema—
(attain) pure love of God; iti—he is; sādhu—a saintly,
pure devotee.

One who knows the sādhyā (goal) and sādhana (process)
and therefore can guide others in performing sādhana to
attain the sādhyā of kṛṣṇa-prema, is a sādhu. 26

What is Saṅga (association with a sādhu)?

samyak rūpeṇa anugamanam

sam—completely; samyak-rūpeṇa—with complete sambandha
and surrender; anugamanam— following strictly in the
footsteps.

To follow the sādhu completely, externally and
internally, by activities and by mood, is real saṅga,
association with a sādhu.

Even a moment’s association with a sādhu can award all
perfection

sādhu-saṅga sādhu-saṅga sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya

CC Mad 22.54/BPKG p. 378/STB p. 29

sādhu-saṅga sādhu-saṅga—repeated association with pure
devotees; sarva-śāstre—all the revealed scriptures; kaya
—say; lava-mātra—even for a moment; sādhu-saṅge—in
association with a pure devotee; sarva-siddhi—complete
spiritual perfection; haya—there is.

The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that through
even a moment’s association with a sādhu, a pure
devotee, one can attain (ultimately) complete spiritual
perfection.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: The whole point of śāstra is to
come to sādhu-saṅga, or more specifically guru-saṅga.
Kṛṣṇa-bhakti cannot be attained without this. Sādhu-
saṅga is the last limit of bhajana. One should cultivate
the mood that, “If I don—t hear hari-kathā in sādhu-
saṅga, my heart will dry up, my life will be
intolerable.” (Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam lecture, 09.09.91,
Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha)



Sādhu-saṅga is the birth-place of bhakti


                           369
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-janma-mūla haya “sādhu-saṅga—

kṛṣṇa-prema janme, teṅho punaḥ mukhya aṅga

CC Mad 22.83/BRSB p. 34

kṛṣṇa-bhakti—of devotional service; janma-mūla—the root
cause; haya—is; sādhu-saṅga—association with advanced
devotees; kṛṣṇa-prema—of ecstatic transcendental love of
Kṛṣṇa; janme—upon the awakening; teṅho—that (same
association with saintly devotees); punaḥ—again; mukhya
aṅga—the chief principle.

The root cause of kṛṣṇa-bhakti is sādhu-saṅga. Even when
one’s dormant kṛṣṇa- prema awakens, sādhu-saṅga is still
the most important principle for one’s spiritual life.

Association will gradually lead from sādhana through
bhāva into prema

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

SB 3.25.25/CC Ādi 1.60, Madhya 22.86/BRS 1.3.12/BRSB p.
36/JD ch.6, 8, 17/BPKG p. 380

satām—of pure devotees; prasaṅgāt—through the
association; mama—My; vīrya—of the gloriously wonderful
activities; saṁvidaḥ—by discussion; bhavanti—become; hṛt
—for the heart; karṇa—for the ear; rasa-ayanāḥ—nectarean
elixir; kathāḥ—narrations; tat—of that; joṣaṇāt—by
cultivation; āśu—quickly; apavarga—liberation from
material bondage; vartmani—on the path; śraddhā—
transcendental faith (here indicating sādhana-bhakti);
ratiḥ—the stage of bhāva; bhaktiḥ—pure devotion, prema;
anukramiṣyati—will follow in order.

In the association of pure devotees, the recitation and
discussions of My glorious activities and pastimes
become a rejuvenating elixir for both the heart and the
ears. By the regular hearing and contemplation of such
topics one quickly becomes liberated and free from
ignorance. He then progressively attains śraddhā
(sādhana-bhakti), rati (bhāva bhakti) and bhakti (prema-
bhakti) unto Me.



Even a moment’s association with a pure devotee is
incomparable

tulayāma lavenāpi na svargaṁ nāpunar-bhavam

bhagavat-saṅgi-saṅgasya martyānāṁ kim utāśiṣaḥ

SB 1.18.13/SB 4.30.34/CC Mad 22.55/BRS1.2.228/PJ 3.10

tulayāma—we compare; lavena—by a moment; api—even; na—
never; svargam—heavenly planets; na—nor; apunaḥ bhavam—

                          370
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

liberation from matter; bhagavat-saṅgi—devotee of the
Lord; saṅgasya—of the association; martyānām—those who
are meant for death; kim—what is there; uta—to speak of;
āśiṣaḥ—benediction.

Elevation to the heavenly planets and liberation from
material existence cannot be compared to even a moment's
association with a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. What then can
be said of material benedictions, which are for those
who are destined to die?



Mahat-saṅga is extremely miraculous and beyond logic

mahat-saṅgama-māhātmyam evaitat paramādbhutam

kṛtārtho yena vipro “sau “sadyo “bhūt tat-svarūpavat

Bṛhad Bhagavātāmṛta 2.7.14/Venu Gīta 17, purport

mahat—of the great souls; saṅgama—of the association;
māhātmyam—the glory; eva—indeed; etat—this;
paramādbhutam—very wonderful; kṛta-ārthaḥ—successful;
yena—by which; vipraḥ—brāhmaṇa; asau—the; sadyaḥ—at
once; abhūt—became; tat-svarūpavat—in his original form.

The glory of mahat-saṅga, the association of a mahā-
bhāgavata, is extremely miraculous. By the effect of
such saṅga, the brāhmaṇa Janaśarma immediately became
perfect like his gurudeva Śrī Svarūpa (Gopa Kumāra).



Sādhu-saṅga is the most valuable treasure for any jīva

ata ātyantikaṁ kṣemaṁ pṛcchāmo bhavato —naghāḥ

saṁsāre —smin kṣaṇārdho —pi sat-saṅgaḥ śevadhir nṛṇām

SB 11.2.30/JD ch. 7

ataḥ—therefore; ātyantikam—supreme; kṣemam—good;
pṛcchāmaḥ—I am asking; bhavataḥ—from you; anaghāḥ—O
sinless ones; saṁsāre—in the cycle of birth and death;
asmin—this; kṣaṇa-ardhaḥ—lasting only half of one
moment; api—even; sat-saṅgaḥ—the association of a pure
devotee of the Lord; śevadhiḥ—a great treasure; nṛṇām—
for human beings.

Therefore, O completely sinless ones, I ask you to
kindly tell me what is the supreme good and the ultimate
benefit, for even half a moment’s association with pure
devotees in this world of birth and death, is the most
valuable treasure for any human being.



The Śrutis identify the worship of pure devotees and
sādhu-saṅga as the only means to attain divine opulence

tasmād ātma-jñaṁ hy arcayed bhūti-kāmaḥ

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.1.10

                          371
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


A person wishing to attain divine opulence should
worship one who is ātma-jña, self-realised. That is, he
should worship a pure devotee of Śrī Hari.

The footdust of the pure devotee is the only means to
attain kṛṣṇa-bhakti

naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ

spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ

mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-—bhiṣekaṁ

niṣkiñcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat

SB 7.5.32/CC Mad 22.53/JD ch. 17

eṣām—for such (materialists); tāvat—until; na—(there is)
not; arthaḥ—the motivation; yat—by which; apagamaḥ—
(there may be) the disappearance; anartha—of unwanted
material desires and misconceptions; na vṛṇīta—(and) not
accept; abhiṣekam—a holy bath; pāda-rajaḥ—in the dust of
the feet; mahīyasām—of great souls; niṣkiñcanānām—who
are unattached to this material world; yāvat—for that
long; matiḥ—(their) consciousness; spṛśati—can not
touch; urukrama-aṅghrim—the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is famous for performing uncommon activities.

Persons who are absorbed in bodily identification, who
fail to understand the necessity to free themselves from
materialistic habits, and who do not smear themselves
with the holy footdust of great devotees who are fully
detached from mundane sense objects, for such persons
there is no possibility that their consciousness can
touch the glories of Śrī Urukrama-Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.



Smearing oneself with the footdust of a pure devotee is
the only way to attain Bhagavān

rahūgaṇaitat tapasā na yāti

na cejyayā nirvapaṇād gṛhād vā

na cchandasā naiva jalāgni-sūryair

vinā mahat-pāda-rajo-—bhiṣekam

SB 5.12.12/CC Mad 22.52

rahūgaṇa—O King Rahūgaṇa; etat—this (knowledge); na yāti
—does not become revealed; tapasā—by severe austerities;
na—nor by; ca—also; ijyayā—by a great arrangement for
worshiping the Deity; na—nor; nirvapaṇāt—by finishing
all material duties and accepting sannyāsa; vā—or; gṛhāt
—by ideal householder life; na eva—nor indeed; chandasā—
by observing celibacy or studying Vedic literature;
jala-agni-sūryaiḥ—by severe austerities such as keeping
oneself in water, in a burning fire or in the scorching
sun; vinā—without; abhiṣekam—smearing all over the body;
pāda-rajaḥ—the dust of the lotus feet; mahat—of the
great devotees.

                          372
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


O Rahūgaṇa, Bhagavān cannot be known by austerities, or
by worship, or by giving up one’s home, nor indeed by
living in one’s home. He cannot be known by reciting the
Vedas nor by worshiping the demigods. As long as one
does not smear oneself with the footdust of the mahat,
great saintly devotees, one cannot achieve any result
from all these other activities.

śuddha-bhakata-caraṇa-reṇu, bhajana-anukūla

bhakata-sevā, parama-siddhi, prema-latikāra mūla

Śuddha Bhakata, BVT, Śaraṇāgati (SGG p. 100)

reṇu—the dust; caraṇa—of the feet; śuddha-bhakata—of
pure devotees; anukūla—[is] favourable; bhajana—[for]
spiritual practice; bhakata-sevā—serving the devotees;
parama-siddhi—[is] the highest perfection; mūla—[and]
the root; laṭikāra— [of] the creeper; prema—[of] divine
love.

The dust of the pure devotee’s lotus feet has the most
positive effect on one’s devotion for the Lord. Service
to the pure devotee is the highest perfection and the
root of the creeper of prema — divine love.

vaiṣṇava-caraṇa-jala, prema-bhakti dite bala, āra keha
nahe balavanta

vaiṣṇava-caraṇa-reṇu, mastake bhūṣaṇa vinu, āra nāhi
bhūṣaṇera anta

Ṭhākura Vaiṣṇava-Pada, BVT (SGG p. 30)

The water that has washed the feet of a Vaiṣṇava gives
divine strength to attain prema-bhakti. Nothing is more
powerful than this. The footdust of the Vaiṣṇavas upon
my head is the only decoration needed at the time of
death.

By the mercy of sādhu-saṅga and Kṛṣṇa one attains pure
bhakti

sādhu-saṅga-kṛpā kimvā kṛṣṇera kṛpāya

kāmādi “duḥsaṅga— chāḍi— śuddha-bhakti pāya

CC Madhya 24.97

sādhu-saṅga-kṛpā—by the merciful association of Śrī Guru
and Vaiṣṇavas; kimvā—or; kṛṣṇera kṛpāya—by the mercy of
Kṛṣṇa; kāma-ādi—material desires and so on; duḥsaṅga—
bad, unfavourable association; chāḍi——giving up; śuddha-
bhakti pāya—one obtains the platform of pure devotional
service.

One is elevated to the platform of bhakti by the mercy
of sādhu-saṅga (Śrī Guru and Vaiṣṇavas), and by the
special mercy of Kṛṣṇa. By their mercy one gives up all
material desires and all unfavourable association and is
thus elevated to the platform of pure bhakti.



                          373
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇa says, “Worshiping My devotees is superior to
worshiping Me directly”

mad-bhakta-pūjābhyadhikā mayi sañjāyate bhaktiḥ

SB 11.19.21

mat—My; bhakta—of the devotees; pūjā—worship; abhyadhikā
—better; mayi—to Me; sañjāyate—arises; bhaktiḥ—loving
devotion;

[O sinless Uddhava,] Worshipping my devotees is better
than worshipping Me. For by this devotion to Me
naturally arises.



Śrīla Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura rephrased the above line as
follows:

mad-bhakta-pūjābhyadhikā sarva-bhuteṣu man-matiḥ

CB Ādi 1.9

mat—My; bhakta—of the devotees; pūjā—worship; abhyadhikā
—better; sarva-bhūteṣu—within all living beings; man-
matiḥ—consciousness of Me.

The worship of My devotees is better than direct worship
of Me. One should also remember that I am present within
the hearts of all living beings.



Above the worship of Kṛṣṇa is service to His devotees

ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param

tasmāt parataraṁ devi tadīyānāṁ samarcanam

Padma-Puraṇa/CC Mad 11.31/MS p. 84/GKH (P)

ārādhanānām—of varieties of worship; sarveṣām—of all;
viṣṇoh—of Lord Viṣṇu; ārādhanam—worship; param—the most
exalted; tasmāt—and above such worship of Lord Viṣṇu;
parataram—of greater value; devi—O goddess; tadīyānām—of
persons who are dear to Lord Viṣṇu; samarcanam—complete
worship.

[Lord Śiva told Pārvatī:] “My dear Devī, although the
Vedas recommend worship of demigods, among all forms of
worship the worship of Lord Viṣṇu is topmost. Still more
exalted than the worship of Śrī Viṣṇu is the rendering
of service to tadīya (persons, places and things which
have a relation with tat — Śrī Kṛṣṇa) such as Śrī Guru
and Vaiṣṇavas, Śrī Govardhana, Śrī Tulasī, Śrī-Bhāgavata
(śāstra), Śrī-Dhāma, Śrī-Viṣṇu-mandira (temple) and all
that is dear to Him.” (The topmost tadīya and the
dearest to Kṛṣṇa is Śrīmatī Rādhikā)



One should desire only two things: sādhu-saṅga and

                          374
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-nāma

sādhu-saṅge kṛṣṇa-nāma ei mātra cāi

saṁsāra jinite āra kauna vastu nāi

Prema-vivarta/JD ch. 7

Besides sādhu-saṅga and kṛṣṇa-nāma — nothing else is
essential in this world. My sole desire, therefore, is
to chant śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma in the association of sādhus.
There is no other auspicious practice whereby one can
become free from the cycle of saṁsāra, the repetition of
birth and death.



Attaining one’s real father and mother

janame janame sabe pitāmātā pāya

kṛṣṇe guru jadi mile bhaje hari ei

janame janame—birth after birth; sabe—everybody; pitā—
father; mātā—and mother; pāya—gets; kṛṣṇe—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
guru—spiritual master; jadi—if; mile—come in contact
with; bhaje—worships, do bhajana; hari—Śrī Hari; ei—this
(prema becomes possible).

Birth after birth one receives a mother and father, but
if by Kṛṣṇa's mercy one comes in contact with a sad-
guru, he can do bhajana to Śrī Hari (and attain kṛṣṇa-
prema).

2) The Benefits of Sādhu-saṅga



When the time for a jīva’s release from saṁsāra
approaches, the jīva attains sadhu-saṅga

bhavāpavargo bhramato yadā bhavej

janasya tarhy acyuta sat-samāgamaḥ

sat-saṅgamo yarhi tadaiva sad-gatau

parāvareśe tvayi jāyate ratiḥ

SB 10.51.53/CC Madhya 22.46/JD ch. 6,8/BPKG p. 380

bhava—material existence; apavargaḥ—cessation of,
liberation from; bhramataḥ—while wandering; yadā—when;
bhavet—it may occur; janasya—for a person; acyuta—O
infallible Lord; tarhi—at that time; sat—of saintly
devotees; samāgamaḥ—the association; sat-saṅgamaḥ—
saintly association; yarhi—when; tadā—then; eva—only;
sat—of the saintly; gatau—who is the goal; para-avara—of
superior and inferior energies; īśe—for the Supreme
Lord; tvayi—Yourself; jāyate—is born; ratiḥ—devotion.

He Acyuta! O Infallible one! The jīva has been wandering
in the cycle of birth and death since time without
beginning. When the time for his release from this

                          375
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

saṁsāra cycle approaches, he attains sat-saṅga, the
association of a sādhu. From that moment he becomes
firmly attached to You, who are the controller of both
spiritiual and material energies, and the supreme
objective for the sādhus.



The Jīva’s release from māyā

yadā bhrāmaṁ bhrāmaṁ hari-rasa-galad-vaiṣṇava-janaṁ

kadācit sampaśyan tad-anugamane syād ruci-yutaḥ

tadā kṛṣṇāvṛttyā tyajati śanakair māyika-daśāṁ

svarūpaṁ bibhrāṇo vimala-rasa-bhogaṁ sa kurute

Daśa-mūla-tattva 7/Gītāvalī 8.82/JD ch. 23

yadā—when; bhrāmam—wandering; bhrāmam—and wandering;
kadācit—sometime; sampaśyan—seeing; vaiṣṇava-janam—a
pure devotee of the Lord; galat—whose heart is melting;
hari-rasa—by tasting the mellows of Śrī Hari; tat-
anugamane—while following him; syāt—it may be; ruci-
yutaḥ—one is devlops attraction to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tadā—then;
kṛṣṇa-āvṛtya—by taking shelter of Kṛṣṇa; tyajatī—he
abandons; śanakaiḥ—gradually; māyika-daśām—the state
which dominated by illusion; saḥ—he; bibhrāṇaḥ—takes up;
svarūpam—his original spiritual form; kurute—he
experiences; vimala—pure; rasa—mellows of devotional
service; bhogam—enjoyment.

When, in the course of wandering amongst the higher and
lower species in the material world, a jīva is able to
behold a Vaiṣṇava absorbed in the flowing rasa of śrī-
hari-bhakti, taste arises in his heart for following the
Vaiṣṇava way of life. By chanting śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma, he
gradually becomes free from his conditioning. Gradually
he then gains his intrinsic, cinmaya-svarūpa
(transcendental form), and becomes qualified to taste
the pure and spiritual rasa of direct service to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: There is a sign that a person,
by good fortune (sukṛti), will soon be released from
material existence. This is that he keeps the company of
sādhus, and as a result awakens his loving attachment to
the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. That is why the
descriptions of the glories of sādhu-saṅga abound in the
śāstras. The śāstras state that it is not at all easy to
obtain a moment’s association with a sādhu.



saṁsāra bhramite kona bhāgye keha tare

nadīra pravāhe yena kāṣṭha lāge tīre

kona bhāgye kāro saṁsāra kṣayonmukha haya

sādhu-saṅge tabe kṛṣṇe rati upajaya.

CC Mad 22.43-4

                          376
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


saṁsāra bhramite—wandering throughout saṁsāra; kona
bhāgye—by some good fortune; keha tare—someone crosses
the ocean of nescience; nadīra pravāhe—in the flow of
the river; yena—just as; kāṣṭha—wood; lāge—sticks; tīre—
on the bank; kona bhāgye—by fortune; kāro—of someone;
saṁsāra—conditioned life; kṣaya-unmukha—tending towards
destruction; haya—is; sādhu-saṅge—by association with
devotees; tabe—then; kṛṣṇe—to Lord Kṛṣṇa; rati—
attraction; upajaya—awakens.

When the jīva becomes averse to Kṛṣṇa, he is swept away
in the current of birth and death in material existence.
He wanders aimlessly throughout the 8,400,000 species of
life, being burnt by the threefold miseries. It is
extremely difficult to attain deliverance from this
current of saṁsāra. However, just as a piece of wood
flowing in the forceful current of a river may by
fortune be washed up on the bank, similarly, a jīva may
by extremely good fortune attain the shelter of sādhu-
saṅga, gain release from the current of material
existence, and again become established in his own
constitutional position as the servant of Kṛṣṇa.

Cry out: “O Kṛṣṇa! I am Yours— and Kṛṣṇa will surely
send you Śrī Guru

kṛṣṇa, tomāra haṅa - yadi bale eka-bāra

māyā-bandha haite kṛṣṇa tāre kare pāra

CC Mad 22. 33/BPKG p. 378

kṛṣṇa—O my Lord Kṛṣṇa; tomāra haṅa—I am Yours; yadi—if;
bale—someone says; eka-bāra—once; māyā-bandha haite—from
the bondage of conditioned life; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; tāre—
him; kare pāra—releases.

If any jīva, feeling extreme anguish, prays to Kṛṣṇa
from the core of his heart and calls out, “O Kṛṣṇa! I am
Yours— — then Kṛṣṇa gives him sādhu-saṅga and thus
allows him to become free from material bondage.



bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyā

Mādhurya-Kādambinī ch. 1 (SB 11.3.31)

Bhakti arises from bhakti (not from any other cause).
From the heart of a pure devotee, a living sad-guru, it
is inspired into the heart of a surrendered sādhaka.

Bhakti is awakened by Sādhu-saṅga; Sādhu-saṅga is
attained by special sukṛti - unknowingly associating
with and serving sādhus

bhaktis tu bhagavad-bhakta-saṅgena parijāyate

sat-saṅgaḥ prāpyate puṁbhiḥ sukṛtaiḥ pūrva-sañcitaiḥ

Bṛhan-Nāradīya-Purāṇa 4.33/HBV 10.279/JD ch. 3,6/BPKG p.
379/BRSB p. 32


                            377
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

bhakti—devotional service; tu—indeed; bhagavat-bhakta—
devotees of Bhagavan; saṅgena—by association; parijāyate
—awakened; sat-saṅgaḥ—sādhu-sanga; prāpyate— attained;
puṁbhiḥ—by persons; sukṛtaiḥ—through transcendental
pious activities; pūrva-sañcitaiḥ—by previous
accumulation over many lifetimes.

Bhakti is awakened when one associates with bhaktas of
Śrī Bhagavān. Association with śuddha-bhaktas is
attained only by the accumulation of transcendental
pious activities (bhakty-unmukhī sukṛti, unknowingly
associating with and rendering service to sādhus)
performed over many lifetimes.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: The potency or śakti of pure
devotion (śuddha-sattva) is a blend of hlādinī (Kṛṣṇa's
pleasure-giving potency) and samvit (Kṛṣṇa's knowledge-
giving potency). Bhakti reposes in the heart of the
mahā-bhāgavata pure devotee and uses him as a vehicle
for further movement. When a jīva becomes free from envy
and inclined to devotional service, the bhakti potency
(śuddha-sattva) is transferred from the pure devotee's
heart into that jīva's heart, whereupon it takes shelter
of his soul and ultimately awards him perfection. This
is a great mystery. (Harināma-cintāmaṇi ch. 4, footnote
1)



By sukṛti one attains faith in bhakti and by bhakti
prema is awakened

yadṛcchayā mat-kathādau jāta-śraddhas tu yaḥ pumān

na nirviṇṇo nāti-sakto bhakti-yogo —sya siddhi-daḥ

SB 11.20.8/BRS 1.2.15/CC Madhya 22.50/Bhakti-sandarbha
171/MK ch. 1

yadṛcchayā—somehow or other by unknowing association
with a sādhu; mat-kathā-ādau—in the narrations of My
glories; jāta—awakened; śraddhaḥ—faith; tu—indeed; yaḥ—
one who; pumān—a person; na—not; nirviṇṇaḥ—disgusted; na
—not; ati-saktaḥ—very attached; bhakti-yogaḥ—the path of
loving devotion; asya—his; siddhi-daḥ—will award
perfection.

By virtue of sukṛti attained in their previous births,
those who are neither repelled nor overly attached
materially, and in whom śraddhā is awakened towards My
līlā-kathā are eligible to take up bhakti. Bhakti-devī
then confers perfection upon them.



Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s comment on the word “yadṛcchayā—
used above

kenāpi parama-svatantra-bhagavad-bhakta-saṅga-tat-kṛpā-
jāta-parama-maṅgalodayena

It is by the association of the Lord’s supremely
independent devotees and as a consequence of the mercy
obtained from them that one obtains the great fortune

                          378
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

(saubhāgya) of the eligibility for bhakti. [bhakti comes
from bhakti, from one who has bhakti, not from any
mundane pious acts, only from bhakty-unmukhī sukṛtī]

By sukṛti the jīva obtains the mercy of Kṛṣṇa or His
pure devotee

samāne vṛkṣe puruṣo nimagno “nīśāya śocati muhyamānaḥ

juṣṭaṁ yadā paśyati anyam īśam asya mahimānam iti vīta-
śokaḥ

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (3.1.2), Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.7) /
JD ch. 6, 17

samāne—on the same; vrkṣe—tree; puruṣaḥ—the conditioned
living entity; nimagnaḥ—drowned; anīśayā—by the illusory
potency; śocati—laments; muhyamānaḥ—bewildered; juṣṭam—
blissful; yadā—when; paśyati—sees; anyam—the other; īśam
—the Supreme Lord; asya—of Him; mahimānam—the glories;
eti—thus (he becomes); vita-śokaḥ—free from lamentation.

The jīva and the indwelling Paramātmā both reside in the
same tree, namely the material body. The jīva is
attached to material sense enjoyment and is therefore
sunk in the bodily conception of life. Bewildered by
māyā, he cannot find any means of deliverance, and thus
he laments. However, by the influence of (bhakty-
unmukhī) sukṛti acquired over many lifetimes, he can
obtain the mercy of Īśvara (the Lord) or His pure
devotees. At that time, he will see in his heart that
there is a second individual within the tree of his
body. This is Īśvara, who is served eternally by His
unalloyed bhaktas. When the jīva witnesses the uncommon
glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he becomes free from all
lamentation.



Those who have no pious credit cannot attain the
association of a sādhu

durāpā hy alpa-tapasaḥ sevā vaikuṇṭha-vartmasu

yatropagīyate nityaṁ deva-devo janārdanaḥ

SB 3.7.20

durāpā—rarely obtainable; hi—certainly; alpa-tapasaḥ—of
one whose austerity is meager; sevā—service; vaikuṇṭha—
the transcendental kingdom of God; vartmasu—on the path
of; yatra—wherein; upagīyate—is glorified; nityam—
always; deva—of the demigods; devaḥ—the Lord; jana-
ardanaḥ—the controller of the living entities.

Persons whose austerity is meager can hardly obtain the
service of the pure devotees who are progressing on the
path to the kingdom of Godhead, Vaikuṇṭha. Pure devotees
engage one hundred percent in glorifying the Supreme
Lord, who is the Lord of the demigods and the controller
of all living entities.




                          379
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Those lacking sukṛti will have no faith in mahā-
prasādam, Śrī Govinda, the holy name, or the Vaiṣṇavas

mahā-prasāde govinde nāma-brahmaṇi vaiṣṇave

svalpa-puṇyavatāṁ rājan viśvāso naiva jayate

Skanda-Purāṇa/JD Ch. 6/CC Antya 16.96 pt

Those who do not possess sufficient pious credit
(sukṛti) will not have faith in mahā-prasādam, in Śrī
Govinda, in the Holy Name, or in the Vaiṣṇavas.

By associating with sādhus, one’s love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
awakened

sādhu-saṅge kṛṣṇa-bhaktye śraddhā yadi haya

bhakti-phala “prema— haya, saṁsāra yāya kṣaya

CC Madhya 22.49/BRSB p. 35

sādhu-saṅge—by the association of devotees; kṛṣṇa-
bhaktye—in discharging devotional service to Kṛṣṇa;
śraddhā—faith; yadi—if; haya—there is; bhakti-phala—the
result of devotional service to Kṛṣṇa; prema—ecstatic
transcendental love of God; haya—awakens; saṁsāra—the
conditioned life in material existence; yāya kṣaya—
becomes vanquished.

When a sādhaka-bhakta obtains (paramārthika) faith in
the association of rasika Vaiṣṇavas (who are more
advanced than himself), he very quickly obtains prema-
bhakti and his material entanglement is easily
dissipated.

Anyone can attain perfection simply by associating with
exalted devotees

tasmān naro —saṅga-susaṅga-jāta-

jñānāsinehaiva vivṛkṇa-mohaḥ

hariṁ tad-īhā-kathana-śrutābhyāṁ

labdha-smṛtir yāty atipāram adhvanaḥ

SB 5.12.16

tasmāt—for this reason; naraḥ—every person; asaṅga—by
detachment from the association of worldly people; su-
saṅga—by the association of devotees; jāta—produced;
jñāna-asinā—by the sword of knowledge; iha—in this
material world; eva—even; vivṛkṇa-mohaḥ—whose illusion
is completely cut to pieces; harim—the Supreme Lord or
His representative, Śrī Guru; tad-īhā—of His activities;
kathana-śrutābhyām—by the two processes of hearing and
chanting; labdha-smṛtiḥ—the lost consciousness is
regained; yāti—achieves; atipāram—the ultimate end;
adhvanaḥ—of the path to spiritual perfection, kṛṣṇa-
bhakti.

A man’s worldly illusion is destroyed by the sword of
knowledge. This sword is attained through association

                             380
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

with very exalted sādhus while simultaneously giving up
the association of materialists. Then through the
practices of hearing and reciting the pastimes of Śrī
Hari he attains remembrance of His eternal relationship
with Him and reaches to the highest limit of the
spiritual path.

One’s heart is like a crystal and takes on the qualities
of those he associates with

yasya yat-saṅgatiḥ puṁso maṇivat syāt sa tad-guṇaḥ

sva-kula-rddhyai tato dhīmān sva-yūthān eva saṁśrayet

Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 8.51/ BRS 1.2.229/BRSB p. 98/MS 5
pt/BR 2.41

maṇivat—as a jewel; yat-saṅgatiḥ—on account of whatever
association; yasya—whose; puṁsaḥ—of a person; saḥ—a
person; syāt—may; tad-guṇaḥ—its qualities; sva-kula-
ṛddhyai—for the wellbeing of one’s family; tataḥ—then;
dhīmān—a thoughtful person; sva-yūthān—own family
lineage; eva—certainly; saṁśrayet—should take shelter.

As the qualities of a nearby object are reflected in a
crystal, one similarly takes on the qualities of a
person with whom he associates. Therefore, a wise person
should take shelter of those sādhus who are more
advanced, affectionate, and have the same mood for which
one aspires.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: The purport of this verse is
that the contamination of the heart cannot be eradicated
by jñāna, vairāgya, yoga or tapasyā. It is only by the
influence of association with Vaiṣṇavas who are free
from all pride and upon receiving their mercy that the
heart very easily becomes cleansed of all misgivings
(anarthas).



Bhakti is obtained only by the mercy of the mahat

mahat-kṛpā vinā kona karme “bhakti— naya

kṛṣṇa-bhakti dūre rahu, saṁsāra nahe kṣaya

CC Mad 22.51/BRSB p. 35

mahat-kṛpā—the mercy of great (pure) devotees; vina—
without; kona karme—in any activity; bhakti naya—there
is no bhakti; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—loving devotional service to
Kṛṣṇa; dūre rahu—leaving aside; saṁsāra—material bondage
or the endless cycle of birth and death; nahe—there is
not; kṣaya—destruction.

Without the mercy of a high-class devotee, one’s
activities cannot become endowed with bhakti. To say
nothing of kṛṣṇa-bhakti, one cannot even obtain freedom
from material attachments and repeated birth and death.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: The purport is that even
anarthas cannot be cleared without the mercy of Śrī
Guru, what to speak of attaining guru-niṣṭha, ruci,

                          381
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

āsakti or bhāva.



Thus ends section 2) The Benefits of Sādhu-saṅga



3) How to associate with a Sādhu

How to associate with a pure devotee (the six kinds of
loving exchanges)

dadāti pratigṛṇāti guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati

bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ prīti-lakṣaṇam

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 4/BR 2.18/STB p. 4

dadāti—offering pure devotees objects in accordance with
their requirements; pratigṛhnāti— accepting remnant
items given by pure devotees; guhyam ākhyāti—revealing
to devotees one’s confidential realisations concerning
bhajana; pṛcchati—inquiring from devotees about their
confidential realisations; bhuṅkte—eating with great
love the prasāda remnants given by devotees; ca—and;
bhojayate—lovingly serving prasāda to devotees; ca—and;
ṣaḍ-vidham eva—are specifically of these six kinds;
prīti-lakṣaṇam—the symptoms of loving association with
pure devotees.

Offering pure devotees items in accordance with their
requirements, accepting remnant items given by pure
devotees, revealing to pure devotees one’s confidential
realisations concerning bhajana, inquiring from more
advanced devotees about their confidential realisations,
eating with great love the prasāda remnants tasted by
śuddha-bhaktas and lovingly feeding them prasādam —
these are the six symptoms of loving association with
pure devotees.



One should seek association with rasika, sajātīyāśaya
and snigdha sādhus

śrīmad-bhāgavatārthānām āsvādo rasikaiḥ saha

sajātīyāśaye snigdhe sādhau saṅgaḥ svato vare

CC Mad 22.131/STB, Preface/GKH (P)

śrīmad-bhāgavata—of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; arthānām—of
the meanings; āsvādaḥ—relishing; rasikaiḥ saha—with
rasika devotees; sa-jātīya—similar; āśaye—endowed with a
desire or mood; snigdhe—advanced in devotional
affection; sādhau—with a devotee; saṅgaḥ—association;
svataḥ—for one’s self; vare—better.

One should taste the meaning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the
association of rasika Vaiṣṇavas. One should associate
with rasika devotees who are more advanced than oneself,
who are endowed with a similar type of mood (sajātīya
aśaye) and who are affectionate toward oneself

                          382
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

(snigdha).



Association is the cause of both bondage and liberation

saṅgo yaḥ saṁsṛter hetur asatsu vihito —dhiyā

sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto niḥsaṅgatvāya kalpate

SB 3.25.55/Upad 2 pt/JD ch. 17

saṅgaḥ—association; yaḥ—which; vihitaḥ—done; adhiyā—
through ignorance; asatsu—amongst those engaged in sense
gratification; hetuḥ—(is) the cause; saṁsṛteḥ—of the
cycle of birth and death; eva—certainly; saḥ—the same
thing; kṛtaḥ—performed; sādhuṣu—amongst saintly persons;
kalpate—leads niḥsaṅgatvāya—to liberation.

O deva! Association is the cause of both material
bondage and liberation from material existence. When due
to ignorance one keeps association with worldly-minded
persons who are averted to the path of bhakti, this
association brings about one’s material entanglement.
When, however, one keeps company with pure devotees of
the Lord, that association liberates one from material
existence and causes one to obtain the lotus feet of the
Lord.



Material attachments must be replaced with attachment
for Śrī Guru

prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam ātmanaḥ kavayo viduḥ

sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam

SB 3.25.20

prasaṅgam—attachment; ajaram—strong; pāśam—entanglement;
ātmanaḥ—of the soul; kavayaḥ—learned men; viduḥ—know;
saḥ eva—that same; sādhuṣu—to the saintly devotees;
kṛtaḥ—applied; mokṣa-dvāram—the door of liberation;
apāvṛtam—opened.

Every learned transcendentalist knows very well that
attachment for the material, bodily concept of life is
the greatest entanglement of the spirit soul. But that
same attachment, when reposed unto the saintly devotee,
Śrī Guru, opens the door of liberation.



One should cultivate the mood that “Let no material
attachments come between me and Śrī Guru (or sādhu, or
Kṛṣṇa)—

āmi to— tomāra, tumi to— āmāra, ki kāja apara dhane

Ātma-Nivedana (5), BVT/ SGG p. 83

I am yours, and you are mine. What else is of any value?
Let nothing else and no one else, no material

                          383
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

attachments, come between us.

4) Rejecting Unfavourable Association

Therefore one should kick out bad company and take up
saintly association

tato duḥsaṅgam utsṛjya satsu sajjeta buddhimān

santa evāsya chindanti mano-vyāsaṅgam uktibhiḥ

SB 11.26.26/CC Ādi 1.59

tataḥ—therefore; duḥsaṅgam—bad association; utsṛjya—
throwing away; satsu—to saintly devotees; sajjeta—he
should become attached; buddhimān—one who is
intelligent; santaḥ—saintly persons; eva—only; asya—his;
chindanti—cut off; manaḥ—of the mind; vyāsaṅgam—
excessive attachment; uktibhiḥ—by their words.

Therefore an intelligent person should reject all bad
association and instead take up the association of
saintly devotees, whose words cut off one’s attachment
to material existence.



Giving up bad association is an essential aspect of
Vaiṣṇava conduct

asat-saṅga-tyāga, ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra

“strī-saṅgī— eka asādhu, “kṛṣṇābhakta— āra

CC Mad 22.87/BPKG p. 264

asat-saṅga-tyāga—rejection of the association of
nondevotees; ei—this; vaiṣṇava-ācāra—the behavior of a
Vaiṣṇava; strī-saṅgī—who associates with women for sense
gratification; eka—one; asādhu—unsaintly person; kṛṣṇa-
abhakta—who is not a devotee of Kṛṣṇa; āra—another.

(Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:) “Giving up bad
association is a primary aspect of Vaiṣṇava conduct. Bad
association is of two types; a) people who have illicit
association with women or persons who associate with
such people and have attachment in worldly matters, or
b) association of non-devotees who are intent on
nirviśeṣa-jñāna [impersonalists]. Sādhakas who desire to
attain bhakti should carefully reject these two types of
bad association.”



The different kinds of bad association that destroys
bhakti

āula, bāula, karttābhajā, neḍā, daraveśa, sāñi

sahajiyā, sakhībhekī, smārta, jāta-gosāñi

ativādī, cūḍādhārī, gaurāṅga-nāgarī

tato kahe, ei terara saṅga nāhi kari

                           384
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


GKH 13.111

The names of sahajiyā saṁpradāyas are as follows: Āula
(a mendicant sect following a very easy course of
worship); Bāula ( a sect of mendicants who wander about
singing sweet melodies about the pastimes of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa while engaging in abominable practices);
Karttābhajā (a sect of "followers" of Śrī Gaurāṇga in
Bengal); Neḍā (Literally, "shaven-headed", used to
sarcastically refer to devotees whose greatest religious
principle is their shaven heads. The word also means
bald or barren and connotes someone who represents
himself as a devotee while his so-called religious life
is barren of genuine realisation); Daraveśa (A Muslim
mendicant; this word has also been used by Śrīla
Prabhupada to mean "hippie"); Sāñi (literally means
"religious instructor"); Sahajiyā (derived from the word
saha-ja, natural, and means one who thinks the
transcendental pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs
can be entered into from one’s platform of material,
conditioned nature, without giving up anarthas. It also
means "easy-ist", imitationist, indicates one who takes
the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa cheaply); Sakhībhekī
(One who imagines himself a gopī, and adopts the dress
of a woman); Smārta, (formalistic and materialistic
brāhmaṇas); Jāta-gosāṇi (caste gosvāmīs); Ativāḍī (proud
devotees); Cūḍādhārī (Those whose only religious
principle consists in shaving the head and maintaining a
cūḍa, or tuft of hair, pretending to be Vaiṣṇavas); and
Gaurāṇga-nāgarī (Those who consider that it is the
position of Śrī Caitanya to be the enjoyer of women,
when in fact as a sannyāsi in His ācārya-līlā Śrī
Caitanya avoided all association with women). One should
avoid associating with these different classes of
imitation devotees.



Sādhu-saṅga and Kṛṣṇa-kṛpā

sādhu-saṅga, kṛṣṇa-kṛpā, bhaktira svabhāva

e tine saba chāḍāya, kare kṛṣṇe “bhāva—

CC Madhya 24.104

sādhu-saṅga—the association of devotees; kṛṣṇa-kṛpā—the
mercy of Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhaktira—of devotional service;
svabhāva—nature; e tine—these three; saba chāḍāya—cause
one to give up everything else; kare—do; kṛṣṇe—unto Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; bhāva—the loving affairs.

Association with a devotee, the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, and the
nature of devotional service help one to give up all
undesirable association and gradually attain elevation
to the platform of love of Godhead.



Better to embrace a snake or a tiger than associate with
materialists

āliṅganaṁ varaṁ manye vyāla-vyāghra-jalaukasām

                             385
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


na saṅgaḥ śalya-yuktānāṁ nānā-devaika-sevinām

BRS 1.2.112/Viṣṇu-rahasya/BR 1.9

āliṅganam—the embracing; varam—better; manye—I consider;
vyāla-vyāghra-jalaukasām—of snakes, tigers or
crocodiles; na saṅgaḥ—I do not (desire) association;
śalya-yuktānām—those whose hearts are pierced with the
arrows of lusty desires; nānā-devaika—the many demigods;
sevinām—and those who serve.

It is better to live with or embrace a snake, a tiger or
an crocodile than to associate with those whose hearts
are filled with varieties of material desires and who
worship various demigods.



Better to reside in a cage of burning fire than
associate with non-devotees

varaṁ huta-vaha-jvālā pañjarāntar-vyavasthitiḥ

na śauri-cintā-vimukha-jana-saṁvāsa-vaiśasam

Kātyāyana-saṁhitā/BRS 1.2.51/CC Madhya 22.91/PJ 4.8

varam—better; vyavasthitiḥ—situation; huta-vaha-jvālā—of
burning fire; pañjara-antar—within a cage; na—rather
than; vaiśasam—the calamity; saṁvāsa—of association;
vimukha-jana —with persons inimical; śauri-cintā—to
meditating on Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

It is better to reside in a cage of burning fire than
experience the calamity of association with persons
averse to Kṛṣṇa.



Associating with those who cheat is called duḥsaṅga, bad
association

duḥsaṅga kahiye kaitava ātma-vañcanā

kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa-bhakti vinu anya kāmanā

CC Madhya 24.99

duḥsaṅga—bad, unwanted association; kahiye—I say;
kaitava—cheating; ātma-vañcanā—cheating oneself; kṛṣṇa—
Lord Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotional service to Kṛṣṇa;
vinu—without; anya—other; kāmanā—desires.

Cheating oneself and cheating others is called kaitava.
Associating with those who cheat in this way is called
duḥsaṅga, bad association. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti must be
performed without any other desire than Kṛṣṇa’s
pleasure.

Thus enda section 4) Rejecting Unfavourable Association




                          386
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

5) Further Glorification of Sādhu-saṅga



The material world has one saving grace - the
opportunity for sādhu-saṅga

aho mahātman bahu-doṣa-duṣṭo

—py ekena bhāty eṣa bhavo guṇena

sat-saṅgamākhyena sukhā-vahena

kṛtādya no yena kṛśā mumukṣā

Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya/CC Madhya 24.125

aho mahā-ātman—O great devotee; bahu-doṣa-duṣṭaḥ—
infected with varieties of material disease or
attachment; api—although; ekena—with one; bhāti—shines;
eṣaḥ—this; bhavaḥ—birth in this material world; guṇena—
with a good quality; sat-saṅgama-ākhyena—known as
association with devotees; sukha-āvahena—which brings
about happiness; kṛtā—made; adya—now; naḥ—our; yena—by
which; kṛśā—insignificant; mumukṣā—the desire for
liberation.

O great learned devotee, although there are many faults
in this material world, there is one good opportunity—
the association with devotees. Such association brings
about great happiness. Due to this good quality, our
strong desire to achieve liberation by merging into the
Brahman effulgence has become insignificant.



The rope of sādhu-saṅga is the cause of universal
protection

manasija-phaṇi-juṣṭe labdha-pāto —smi duṣṭe

timira-gahana-rūpe hanta saṁsāra-kūpe

ajita nikhila-rakṣā-hetum uddhāra-dakṣāṁ

upanaya mama haste bhakti-rajjuṁ namas te

Stava-mālā, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī

hanta—alas!; asmi—I am; labdha-pātaḥ—fallen; saṁsāra-
kūpe—in the well of material existence; duṣṭe—evil;
timira-gahana-rūpe—deep dark; manasija-phaṇi-juṣṭe—
eqipped with the snakes of lust; ajita—O infallible one;
upanaya—bring; bhakti-rajjum—the rope of devotion; haste
—in my hand; nikhila-rakṣā-hetum—for the purpose of
protecting all; uddhāra-dakṣām—it is very expert at
deliverance; mama—my; namaḥ—obeisances; te—unto You.

Alas, I have fallen into the deep, dark, filthy well of
saṁsāra, in which the viper of sex desire dwells. O
invincible Lord, the rope of sādhu-saṅga is the cause of
universal protection and is expert at delivering the
fallen souls. Please place that rope in my hand. I offer
my respectful obeisances unto You.

                          387
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017




One who does not seek sādhu-saṅga is no better than an
ass

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

SB 10.84.13/JD ch. 8, 11

yasya—whose; ātma—as his self; buddhiḥ—idea; kuṇape—in a
baglike body; tri-dhātuke—made of three basic elements;
sva—as his own; dhīḥ—idea; kalatra-ādiṣu—in wife and so
on; bhaume—in earth; ijya—as worshipable; dhīḥ—idea; yat
—whose; tīrtha—as a place of pilgrimage; buddhiḥ—idea;
salile—in water; na karhicit—never; janeṣu—in men;
abhijñeṣu—wise; saḥ—he; eva—indeed; gaḥ—a cow; kharaḥ—or
an ass [a symbol of ignorance and stupidity].

One who considers this corpse-like body, comprised of
the three elements vata, pitta, and kapha, to be his
real self; who regards his wife, children, and others as
his very own; who considers mundane forms made of
material elements to be worshipable; and who considers
that merely by bathing in the water of a holy river he
has completed his pilgrimage — but who does not consider
the bhagavad-bhaktas to be more dear than his very self,
to be his very own, to be worshipable, and to be places
of pilgrimage personifies - such a person, though human,
is no better than an ass among animals.

Sādhu-saṅga is the best activity for the jīva

śreyo-madhye kona śreyaḥ jīvera haya sāra?

kṛṣṇa-bhakta-saṅga vinā śreyaḥ nāhi āra

CC Mad 8.251

śreyaḥ-madhye—among beneficial activities; kona—which;
śreyaḥ—beneficial function; jīvera—of the jīva; haya—is;
sāra—the essence; kṛṣṇa-bhakta-saṅga—for associating
with the devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vinā—except; śreyaḥ—
beneficial activity; nāhi—there is not; āra—another.

Then Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked, “Out of all
auspicious and beneficial activities, which is best for
the living entity?” Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “The
only auspicious activity is association with the pure
devotees of Kṛṣṇa.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “If you think Kṛṣṇa is mahat-
saṅga, exalted association, then Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
mahīyasī-saṅga, the most exalted association. Her
association is even more elevated and desirable than Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s” (Harmonist 14)



                           388
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Thus ends Chapter 14 - Sādhu-saṅga




Chapter 15 - Types of Bhakti




1. Āropa-siddha, Saṅga-siddha & Svarūpa-siddha Bhakti
457

2. Mixed, Impure Bhakti (Karma-miśra, Jñāna-miśra, etc.)
460

3. Vaidhī Bhakti (Motivated by Śāstric Injunctions) 462

4. Rāgānugā Bhakti (Motivated by Spontaneous Attraction)
465

4.1 Rāgātmika Bhakti (of The Eternal Associates in
Vraja) 472

4.2 Rūpānuga Bhakti (Those Who Follow Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī) 476



1) Āropa-siddha, Saṅga-siddha, and Svarūpa-siddha bhakti



sā bhaktis trividhā | āropa-siddhā, saṅga-siddhā,
svarūpa-siddhā ca | tatrāropa-siddhā svato
bhaktitvābhāve—pi bhagavad-arpaṇādinā bhaktitvaṁ prāptā
karmādi-rūpā | saṅga-siddhā svato bhaktitvābhāve—pi tat-
parikaratayā saṁsthāpanena (SB 11.3.22) tatra bhāgavatān
dharmān śikṣed gurv-ātma-daivataḥ (SB 11.3.24) ity ādi-
prakaraṇeṣu sarvato manaso—saṅgam ity ādinā labdha-tad-
antaḥ-pātā jñāna-karma-tad-aṅga-rūpā | svarūpa-siddhā
cājñānādināpi tat-prādurbhāve bhakti tvāvyabhicāriṇī
sākṣāt tad-anugatyātmā tadīya-śravaṇa-kīrtanādi-rūpā (SB
7.5.23) | śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ ity ādau viṣṇoḥ
śravaṇaṁ viṣṇoḥ kīrtanam iti viśiṣṭasyaiva vivakṣitatvat
teṣām api nāropa-siddhatvaṁ praty uta mūḍha-
pronmmattādiṣu tad-anukartṛṣv api kathañcit sambandhena
phala-prāpakatvāt svarūpa-siddhatvaṁ, yathā śrī-
prahlādasya pūrva-janmani śrī-nṛsiṁha-caturdaśy-upavāsaḥ
| yathā kukkura-mukha-gatasya śyenasya bhagavan-mandira-
parikramaḥ | evam anya-dṛṣṭyādinā mūḍhādibhiḥ kṛtasya
vandanasyāpi jñeyam |

Bhakti-sandarbha, Anuccheda 217, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī/KGH
(P)

Devotional service is of three kinds: 1) āropa-siddhā;
2) saṅga-siddhā; and 3) svarūpa-siddhā. Amongst these
three, those who, by their nature are not attracted to
the practice of śravaṇam kīrtanam; who do not have a
favorable inclination to perform kṛṣṇānuśīlanam, but
somehow, in order to fulfill some material objective,

                          389
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

make an offering of their work to Bhagavān, that
activity becomes attributed with bhakti and is thus
named āropa-siddhā bhakti, or karma that is attributed
with devotion.

Saṅga-siddhā bhakti: Although by its intrinsic nature it
is also not embued with the quality of bhakti, it is
siddhā (established) as bhakti because it involves the
cultivation of qualities which are known as saṅgī —
associates or assistants of bhakti. These qualities
(such as peacefulness, kindness, cleanliness, etc.) are
naturally seen in the personality of a devotee but are
not intrinsically bhakti in themselves. This is
described in the following śloka:



tatra bhāgavatān dharmān śikṣed gurv-ātma-daivataḥ

amāyayānuvṛttyā yais tuṣyed ātmātma-do hariḥ

SB 11.3.22/GKH (P)

tatra—there (in the association of the spiritual
master); bhāgavatān dharmān—the science of devotional
service; śikṣet—should learn; guru-ātma-daivataḥ—from
whom the spiritual master who is his very life and
worshipable deity; amāyayā—without deceit; anuvṛttyā—by
faithful service; yaiḥ—by which (devotional science);
tuṣyet—can be satisfied; ātmā—the Supreme Soul; ātma-daḥ
—who bestows His own self; hariḥ—Lord Hari.

Accepting the bona fide spiritual master as one’s life
and soul and worshipable deity, the disciple should
learn from him the process of pure devotional service.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Hari, the soul
of all souls, is inclined to give Himself to His pure
devotees. Therefore, the disciple should learn from the
spiritual master to serve the Lord without duplicity and
in such a faithful and favourable way that the Supreme
Lord, being satisfied, will offer Himself to the
faithful disciple.



Saṅga-siddha bhakti is also described in the following
śloka:

sarvato manaso —saṅgam ādau saṅgaṁ ca sādhuṣu

dayāṁ maitrīṁ praśrayaṁ ca bhūteṣv addhā yathocitam

SB 11.3.23/GKH (P)

sarvataḥ—everywhere; manasaḥ—of the mind; asaṅgam—
detachment; ādau—in the beginning; saṅgam—association;
ca—and; sādhuṣu—with saintly persons; dayām—mercy;
maitrīm—friendship; praśrayam—reverence; ca—and; bhūteṣu
—for all living beings; addhā—thus; yathā ucitam—as is
suitable.

A sincere disciple should learn to dissociate the mind
from everything material and positively cultivate
association with his spiritual master and other saintly

                          390
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

devotees. He should be merciful to those in an inferior
position to him, cultivate friendship with those on an
equal level and meekly take shelter and serve those in a
higher spiritual position. Thus he should learn to deal
properly with all living beings.

(translation of Jīva Gosvāmī’s Bhakti-sandarbha
commentary continued:) In this way one attains
devotional service, which is sometimes attained by the
help of jñāna and karma. Svarūpa-siddhā (established as
bhakti by its contitutional nature) is manifested when
devotional service is no longer mixed with jñāna or
karma, when the Lord directly appears before the
devotee, and when the devotee has pure and unwavering
devotion for the Lord. This kind of devotional service
is characterised by the various devotional activities
that begin with hearing and chanting the glories of the
Lord. These activities are described in the following
śloka: śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ (SB 7.5.23 - see ch.
16). This means hearing about Lord Viṣṇu and chanting
the glories of Lord Viṣṇu. These activities are
different from the activities of āropa-siddhā bhakti.
Even if one is bewildered, foolish or has a host of
shortcomings, and even if one merely imitates the
activities of devotional service, by performing these
activities he comes into contact with svarūpa-siddhā
bhakti and attains the result of that service. Examples
of this are Śrī Prahlāda, who in his previous birth
fasted on Śrī Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī, the hawk who
circumambulated the temple of the Lord following a dog,
and many fools who even though they cannot see the
truth, still may sometimes bow down before the Supreme
Lord. (For a definition of svarūpa-siddhā-bhakti refer
to the śloka “anyābhilāṣita śūnyam—)

Thus ends section 1) Three types of Siddha Bhakti



2) Mixed, Impure Bhakti (Karma-miśra, Jñāna-miśra, etc.)



The four kinds of mixed bhakti - four types of
materially motivated bhakti

catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ janāḥ sukṛtino—rjuna

ārtto jijñāsur arthārthī jñānī ca bharatarṣabha

SBG 7.16

arjuna—O Arjuna; bharata-ṛṣabha—best of the Bharata
dynasty; catur-vidhāḥ—four kinds; sukṛtinaḥ—of pious,
possessing sukṛti; janāḥ—persons; bhajante—worship; mām—
Me; ārtta—the distressed; jijñāsuḥ— the inquisitive;
artha-arthī—the seeker of wealth; ca—and; jñānī—the man
in knowledge.

O best of the Bharata dynasty, there are four types of
pious men who come to Me and perform My bhajana; the
distressed (ārtta), the inquisitive (jijñāsu), the
seeker of wealth (arthārthī) and the man of wisdom
(jñānī).

                          391
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains: We come to Kṛṣṇa
initially with a motive, not with a desire to serve Him.
We desire something for ourselves, we are self-serving.
The gopīs are completely free from self-interest. In
order to get pure bhakti we have to follow their mood,
give up our agendas and cultivate the desire to do only
what He wants, to act solely for His pleasure.



Worshiping the Lord through the performance of
prescribed duties - karma

varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

Viṣṇu-Purāṇa 3.8.9/CC Mad 8.58/JD ch. 7

varṇa-āśrama-ācāravatā—by behaving according to the
system of four divisions of social order and four
divisions of spiritual life; puruṣeṇa—by a man; paraḥ—
the supreme; pumān—person; viṣṇuḥ—Lord Viṣṇu; ārādhyate—
is worshiped; panthā—way; na—not; anyat—another; tat-
toṣa-kāraṇam—cause of satisfying the Lord.

The Supreme Person, Lord Viṣṇu, is worshiped by the
proper execution of prescribed duties in the system of
varṇa and āśrama. There is no other way to satisfy the
Lord. One must be situated in the institution of the
varṇāśrama dharma.



One’s work must be done as an offering to Kṛṣṇa,
otherwise it causes bondage

yajñārthāt karmaṇo —nyatra loko —yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ

tad-arthaṁ karma kaunteya mukta-saṅgaḥ samācara

BG 3.9

yajña-arthāt—done only for the sake of Yajña, or Viṣṇu;
karmaṇaḥ—than work; anyatra—otherwise; lokaḥ—world; ayam
—this; karma-bandhanaḥ—bondage by karmic reaction; tat—
of Him; artham—for the sake; karma—work; kaunteya—O son
of Kuntī; mukta-saṅgaḥ—liberated from association;
samācara—do perfectly.

Work done as a sacrifice for Viṣṇu has to be performed,
otherwise work causes bondage in this material world.
Therefore, O son of Kuntī, perform your prescribed
duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will
always remain free from the influence of mundane
contamination.



Karma-miśra-bhakti (bhakti mixed with fruitive
activities/desires) - karmārpana

yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat

                          392
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


yat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam

BG 9.27

yat—whatever; karoṣi—you do; yat—whatever; aśnāsi—you
eat; yat—whatever; juhoṣi—you offer; dadāsi—you give
away; yat—whatever; yat—whatever; tapasyasi—austerities
you perform; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; tat—that; kuruṣva—
do; mat—unto Me; arpaṇam—as an offering.

Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer or
give away, and whatever austerities you perform—do that,
O son of Kuntī, as an offering to Me.

Jñāna-miśra-bhakti (bhakti mixed with a desire for
knowledge/liberation)

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

SBG 18.54

brahma-bhūtaḥ— one who is spiritually realised; (is)
prasanna-ātmā—a fully joyful soul; na śocati—he never
laments; na—nor; kāṅkṣati—hankers; samaḥ—he is equal;
sarveṣu—to all; bhūteṣu—beings; labhate—he attains; mad-
bhaktim—My bhakti; parām—which is blessed with the
symptoms of prema.

Being situated in the transcendental position beyond the
contamination of the three modes of nature (brahma-
bhūta), one is fully joyful and satisfied in the self,
neither lamenting nor hankering for anything, and is
equally disposed towards all living beings. Thereafter
one can attain parā bhakti unto Me.

Thus ends section 2) Mixed, Impure Bhakti



3) Vaidhī-Bhakti (Motivated by Śāstric Injunctions)



yatra rāgānavāptatvāt pravṛttir upajāyate

śāsanenaiva śāstrasya sā vaidhā bhaktir ucyate

BRS 1.2.6/BRSB p. 118/MS p. 42/BPKG p. 392

yatra—when; anavāptatvāt—on account of not having
attained; rāga—intense attachment (for śravaṇam,
kīrtanam etc.); pravṛttiḥ—the strong tendency (for
devotional practice); eva—certainly; upajāyate—becomes
manifest; śāsanena—on account of the injunction;
śāstrasya—of the śāstra; sā bhakti—that bhakti; ucyate—
is called; vaidhā—regulated.

When there is no attachment or spontaneous loving
service to the Lord, and one is engaged in the service
of the Lord simply out of obedience to the order of the
Guru or in pursuance of the scriptures, such obligatory

                          393
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

service is called vaidhī-bhakti.

Editorial note: Mukhya-lakṣaṇa (primary aspect) —
absence of spontaneous attraction; gauna-lakṣaṇa
(secondary characteristic) — motivated by śāstra.

Rules and regulations for those not on the spontaneous
platform

tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā śraddhā yāvan na jāyate

SB 11.20.9/CC Madhya 22.61/JD ch. 10

tāvat—up to that time; karmāṇi—fruitive activities;
kurvīta—one should execute; na nirvidyeta—is not
satiated; yāvatā—as long as; mat-kathā—of discourses
about Me; śravaṇa-ādau—in the matter of śravaṇam,
kīrtanam and so on; vā—or; śraddhā—faith; yāvat—as long
as; na—not; jāyate—is awakened.

As long as one is not disgusted by fruitive activity and
has not awakened his taste for devotional service by
śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, one must act according to the
regulative principles of the Vedic injunctions.

śāstroktayā prabalayā tat-tan-maryādayānvitā

vaidhī bhaktir iyaṁ kaiścin maryādā-mārga ucyate

BRS 1.2.269

Devotional service governed by the rules and regulations
of the scriptures is also called maryāda-mārga, or the
reverential path of devotion, the path of serving the
Lord in opulence (aiśvarya), by different scholars [such
as Vallabhācārya].

vaidha-bhakty-adhikārī tu bhāvāvirbhāvanāvadhi

atra śāstraṁ tathā tarkaṁ anukūlam apekṣate

BRS 1.2.293

tu—however; adhikārī—one who has eligibility; vaidha-
bhakti—for the practice of devotion under regulations;
apekṣate—depends; anukūlam—on favorable; śāstram—
scripture; tathā—and; tarkam—logic; atra avadhi—until
when (there is); avirbhāvana—the appearance; bhāva—of
spiritual ecstacy.

Those who are eligible only for vaidhi-bhakti should
remain dependent on scriptural injunctions and favorable
reasoning until bhagavat-rati (bhāva) manifests in their
hearts.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains:: Therefore, in the
beginning, everyone should strictly follow the
regulative principles of devotional service, according
to the injunctions of the scriptures and the spiritual
master. Only after the stage of liberation from material
contamination (past anartha-nivṛtti or ruci) can one
actually begin to follow in the footsteps of the

                          394
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Vrajavāsīs.



Aiśvarya and vaidhī will not attain Vrajendra-nandana
Kṛṣṇa

sakala jagate more kare vidhi-bhakti

vidhi-bhaktye vraja-bhāva pāite nāhi śakti

CC Ādi 3.15

sakala—all; jagate—in the universe; more—to Me; kare—
they do; vidhi-bhakti—regulative devotional service;
vidhi-bhaktye—by regulative devotional service; vraja-
bhāva—the feelings of those in Vraja; pāite—to obtain;
nāhi—not; śakti—the power.

Everywhere    in the world people worship Me according to
scriptural    injunctions. But simply by following such
regulative    principles (vaidhī bhakti) one cannot attain
the loving    sentiments of the devotees in Vraja.



One cannot obtain Kṛṣṇacandra in Vraja merely by
following vaidhī-bhakti

aṅghri-padma-sudhā —ya kahe “kṛṣṇa-saṅgānanda

vidhi-mārge nā pāiye vraje kṛṣṇa-candra

CC Mad 8.226

ya—who; aṅghri-padma-sudhā—by the nectar derived from
the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa; kahe—it says; kṛṣṇa-saṅga-
ānanda—transcendental bliss by the association of Kṛṣṇa;
vidhi-mārge—on the path of regulative principles; nā
pāiye—one does not get; vraje—in Goloka Vṛndāvana;
kṛṣṇa-candra—Lord Kṛṣṇa.

The phrase “aṅghri-padma-sudhā— indicates “associating
intimately with Kṛṣṇa.— One can attain such perfection
only by spontaneous love of God (rāgānuga-bhakti). One
cannot obtain Kṛṣṇa in Goloka Vṛndāvana simply by
following the path of vaidhī-bhakti, serving the Lord
according to regulative principles.

nānopacāra-kṛta-pūjanam ārta-bandhoḥ

premṇaiva bhakta-hṛdayaṁ sukha-vidrutaṁ syāt

yāvat kṣud asti jaṭhare jaraṭhā pipāsā

tāvat sukhāya bhavato nanu bhakṣya-peye

CC Mad 8.69

nānā-upacāra—by varieties of offerings; kṛta—performed;
pūjanam—worshiping; ārta-bandhoḥ—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the friend of all
distressed persons; premṇā—by ecstatic love; eva—indeed;
bhakta-hṛdayam—the heart of a devotee; sukha-vidrutam—

                             395
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

melted in transcendental bliss; syāt—becomes; yāvat—as
long as; kṣut—appetite; asti—there is; jaṭhare—in the
stomach; jaraṭhā—strong; pipāsā—thirst; tāvat—so long;
sukhāya—for happiness; bhavataḥ—are; nanu—indeed;
bhakṣya—eatables; peye—and drinkables.

Rāmānanda Rāya continued, “As long as there is hunger
and thirst within the stomach, varieties of food and
drink make one feel very happy. Similarly, when the Lord
is worshiped with pure love, the various activities
performed in the course of that worship make the heart
of the devotee melt in transcendental bliss.”

Thus ends section 3) Vaidhī-bhakti



4) Rāgānuga-bhakti (Motivated by Spontaneous Attraction)

The definition śloka of Kṛṣṇa Consciousness

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ

krīyatāṁ yadi kuto —pi labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate

Padyavali 14/CC Mad 8.70/ /MS 4, p.55/Veṇu-gīta, intro

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā—absorbed in the mellows of
executing spontaneous devotional service to Kṛṣṇa or
absorbed in the mood of the gopīs— love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
matiḥ—intelligence, consciousness, mood; krīyatām—let it
be purchased (immediately); yadi—if; kutaḥ api—anywhere;
labhyate—is available; tatra—there; laulyam—greed; api—
indeed; mūlyam—price; ekalam—only; janma-koṭi—of
millions of births; sukṛtaiḥ—by bhakty-unmukhī sukṛti,
pious activities that are related unknowingly to bhakti
and thus lead to bhakti; na—not; labhyate—is obtained.

O men of virtue! If consciousness which is infused with
the mood of the gopīs— love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is available
anywhere, then buy it at once, without delay. The only
price to get it is laulyam, an intense longing
(transcendental greed) to obtain vraja-bhāva. Without
this divine greed, it cannot be obtained even by
performing pious activities (karma-miśra-bhakti or
vaidhi-bhakti) for millions of births.27

Editorial note: Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda
derived the term “Kṛṣṇa Consciousness— from the first
line of this śloka.

The definition śloka of Rāgānuga-bhakti (1)

virājantīm abhivyaktāṁ vraja-vāsi-janādiṣu

rāgātmikām anusṛtā yā sa rāgānugocyate

BRS 1.2.270/CC Mad 22.154/MS p. 43

virājantīm—the brilliant; abhivyaktām—fully expressed;

                          396
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

rāga-ātmikām—whose intrinsic nature is profound and
spontaneous love; vraja-vāsi-jana-ādiṣu; —among the
eternal residents of Vṛndāvana; anusṛtā—follows; yā—
which; sā—that; rāga-anugā—devotional service following
in the wake of rāgātmika-bhakti; ucyate—is said.

Devotional service imbued with spontaneous, profound
love and attachment (rāgātmika-bhakti), is vividly
expressed and manifested by the eternal residents of
Vṛndāvana (Vrajavāsīs). Devotional service that follows
their devotional mood is called rāgānuga-bhakti, or
devotional service following in the wake of the
ragātmika associates of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja.

Śrīla Nārārayṇa Mahārāja explains: It is essential to
clearly understand the difference between rāgātmika and
rāgānuga. Rāga means “profound attachment for the object
of one’s love— or “that towards which the heart goes
spontaneously without any effort or deliberation—;
ātmika means “imbued with—; Anuga means “following in
the footsteps—. Therefore the term rāgātmika refers
exclusively to perfected souls, the eternal associates
of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja, while rāgānuga refers to
conditioned souls who practice bhakti in this world with
an intense greed to attain the rāgātmika-bhāva of the
Vrajavāsīs.



The definition śloka of Rāgānuga-bhakti (2)

rāgātmika-bhakti “mukhyā— vraja-vāsi-jane

tāra anugata bhaktira “rāgānugā—-nāme

CC Mad 22.149/Upadeśāmṛta 8, pt

rāgātmika-bhakti—spontaneous devotional service; mukhyā—
preeminent; vraja-vāsi-jane—in the inhabitants of Vraja,
or Vṛndāvana; tāra—that; anugata—following; bhaktira—of
devotional service; rāgānugā-nāme—named rāgānugā or
following after spontaneous devotional service.

That devotion whose very essence is constituted of
eternal spontaneous attachment (rāga) is known as
rāgātmika-bhakti. That devotion is topmost amongst all
forms of bhakti and manifests only in the Vrajavāsīs.
Devotion which follows in the wake of this rāgātmika-
bhakti is known as rāgānuga-bhakti.28

Transcendental greed (lobha)

lobhe vraja-vāsīra bhāve kare anugati

śāstra-yukti nāhi māne rāgānugāra prakṛti

CC Mad 22.153/Upadeśāmṛta 8, p. 82

lobhe—with such greed for; vraja-vāsīra bhāve—in the
moods of the inhabitants of Vraja; kare anugati—follows;
śāstra-yukti—injunctions or reasonings of the śāstras;
nāhi māne—does not consider; rāgānugāra—of spontaneous
love; prakṛti—the nature.


                          397
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

When one follows in the footsteps of the residents of
Vraja by cultivating their devotional moods with intense
greed, he does not consider the injunctions of the
scriptures or their reasoning. This is the nature of
spontaneous devotion (rāgānuga-bhakti).



The Eligibility for Rāgānuga-bhakti - Greed

rāgātmikaika-niṣṭhā ye vrajavāsi-janādayaḥ

teṣāṁ bhāvāptaye lubdho bhaved atrādhikāravān

BRS 1.2.291/MS p. 44

ye—those (persons); rāgātmika-eka-niṣṭhāḥ—who have
exclusive attachment for the rāgātmika persons such as
Nanda, Subala etc.; vrajavāsi-jana—are residing in
Vraja; ādayaḥ—performing nava-vidhi-bhakti in sādhu-
saṅga; atra—then; teṣām—their; lubdhaḥ—greed; bhāva-
āptaye—to attain the rāgātmika-jana’s mood; bhavet—can
award; adhikāravān—the eligibility to be a rāgānuga-
bhakta.

The greed of those devotees who, while residing in
Vraja, cultivate exclusive and fixed determination to
attain the bhāva of the rāgātmika-jana (the eternal
associates of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa inVraja), establishes
their qualification as rāgānuga-jana.



The symptoms of divine greed awakening

tat-tad-bhāvādi-mādhurye śrute dhīr yad apekṣate

nātra śāstraṁ na yuktiṁ ca tal lobhotpatti-lakṣaṇam

BRS 1.2.292/CC Madhya 22.155/BPKG p. 393

tat-tat—respective; bhāva-ādi-mādhurye—for the sweetness
of the loving moods (namely śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa,
sakhya-rasa, vātsalya-rasa and mādhurya-rasa) of the
eternal residents of Vṛndāvana; śrute—when heard; dhīḥ—
the intelligence; yat—which; apekṣate—depends on; na—
not; atra—then; śāstram—revealed scriptures; na—not;
yuktim—logic and argument; ca—also; tat—that; lobha—
divine greed; utpatti-lakṣaṇam—the symptom of awakening.

Upon hearing of the affairs of the Vrajavāsī parikāra
(eternal associates of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa inVraja) in their
various rasas, a devotee’s heart becomes inspired by
intense attraction to follow the particular devotion of
one of them. Thereafter he is no longer dependent on the
injunctions of śāstra to engage in the practices of
bhakti. This is the symptom of the awakening of divine
greed.



The method of Rāgānuga-bhakti (definition 1)

kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam

                          398
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

BRS 1.2.294 /BRSB p. 121/CC Mad 22.160/JD ch. 40/MS p.
45/Upad 8 pt/ BPKG p. 393,462, 474/PP p. 86/GKH (P)

kṛṣṇam—Lord Kṛṣṇa; smaran—remembering, thinking of;
janam—a devotee; ca—and; asya—of His; preṣṭham—very
dear; nija-samīhitam—chosen by oneself; tat-tat-kathā—of
those respective topics; rataḥ—attached; ca—and; asau—
that person; kuryād—should do; vāsam—residing; vraje—in
Vraja; sadā—always.

One should constantly remember one’s dearest nava-kiśora
Śrī Nanda-nandana and the beloved associate(s) of Kṛṣṇa
who is possessed of sajātīya-bhāva or the identical mood
for which one aspires. One should always reside in Śrī
Vraja-dhāma with great attachment for hearing topics
regarding Kṛṣṇa and His devotees. (If one is physically
unable to live in Vraja, one should do so mentally).
This is the method of rāgānuga-bhakti-sādhana.



The process of Rāgānuga-bhakti (definition 2)

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ

BRS 1.2.295/BRSB p. 121/MS p.45/CC Mad 22.158/JD ch. 40/
BR 6.7/Upad. 8 pt/BPKG p. 392/PP p. 86/KGH (P)

sevā—service; sādhaka-rūpeṇa—with the external body as a
devotee practicing regulative devotional service;
siddha-rūpeṇa—with a perfected spiritual body suitable
for nitya sevā; ca—also; atra—in this connection; hi—
certainly; tat—of the dear devotee of Kṛṣṇa; bhāva—the
mood; lipsunā—desiring to obtain; kāryā—to be executed;
vraja-loka—of a particular servant of Kṛṣṇa in
Vṛndāvana; anusārataḥ—by following in the footsteps.

A sādhaka who has lobha for rāgānuga-bhakti should serve
Śrī Kṛṣṇa both in the sādhaka-rūpa and the siddha-rūpa
in accordance with the bhāva of the Vrajavāsīs who
possess the same mood for which he aspires.



The external and internal processes of Rāgānuga-bhakti

bāhya, antara ihāra dui ta— sādhana

“bāhye— sādhaka-dehe kare śravaṇa-kīrtana

“mane— nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana

rātri-dine kare vraje kṛṣṇera sevana

CC Mad 22.156-157/BRSB p. 128/Upad 8, pt/PP p. 86/BPKG
p. 475

bāhya—externally; antara—internally; ihāra—of this
spontaneous love of Godhead; dui—two; ta——indeed;

                          399
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

sādhana—such processes of execution; bāhye—externally;
sādhaka-dehe—in the body of a sādhaka (a practicing
devotee); kare—does; śravaṇa-kīrtana—hearing and
chanting; mane—the mind; nija—own; siddha-deha—eternal
spiritual body or self-realised position; kariyā bhāvana
—thinking of; rātri-dine—night and day; kare—executes;
vraje—in Vṛndāvana; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sevana—
service.

There are two parallel processes by which one performs
rāgānugā bhakti—external and internal. When self-
realised, the advanced devotee externally remains like a
sādhaka and executes all the śāstric injunctions,
especially those concerning hearing and chanting. But
within the mind, in his svarūpa (internally conceived,
perfected spiritual body), he serves Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja
by his particular sevā, day and night, twenty-four
hours.



Serving in the Sādhaka-rūpa and the Siddha-rūpa

nijābhīṣṭa-kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha pācheta— lāgiyā

nirantara sevā kare antarmanā hañā

CC Mad 22.159/BRSB p. 128

nija-abhīṣṭa—one’s own choice; kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha—the
servitor of Kṛṣṇa; pācheta— lāgiyā—following; nirantara—
twenty-four hours a day; sevā—service; kare—executes;
antarmanā—within the mind; hañā—being.

The eternal residents of Vraja are known as kṛṣṇa-
preṣṭha, very dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Among Kṛṣṇa’s various
devotees, those who possess the mood of service towards
Him for which one intensely hankers are known as
nijābhīṣṭa-kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha. Following in the footsteps of
those beloved associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, for whose mood of
service one hankers, one should constantly serve Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa within the mind through one’s internally
conceived, eternal spiritual form.



The method of rāgānuga-bhakti further described

dāsa-sakhā-pitrādi-preyasīra gaṇa rāga-mārge nija-nija-
bhāvera gaṇana

ei mata kare yebā rāgānuga-bhakti kṛṣṇera caraṇe tāṅra
upajaya “prīti—

CC Mad 22.161,164/Upad 8, p. 84/BRSB p. 128

dāsa—servants; sakhā—friends; pitṛ-ādi—parents and so
forth; preyasīra gaṇa—conjugal lovers; rāga-mārge—on the
path of rāga, deep spontaneous attachment; nija-nija—of
one’s own choice; bhāvera—of the bhāva (spiritual mood);
gaṇana—counting; ei mata—in this way; kare—executes;
yebā—anyone who; rāgānuga-bhakti—spontaneous devotional
service to Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇera caraṇe—for the lotus feet of
Kṛṣṇa; tāṅra—his; upajaya—awakens; prīti—affection.

                            400
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


By following the mood and sentiment (bhāva) of one of
Kṛṣṇa’s associates among the servants, friends, parents,
or lovers, corresponding to one’s own disposition, the
sādhaka attains affection for the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa that is exactly of the same nature as the eternal
associate whom he follows. This is the method of
rāgānuga-bhakti.

The aṅgas of Vaidhī-bhakti are also necessary in
Rāgānuga-bhakti

śravaṇotkīrtanādīni vaidha-bhakty-uditāni tu

yāny aṅgāni ca tāny atra vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ

BRS 1.2.296/JD ch. 40/PP p. 86/BPKG pp. 462,474/GKH (P)

The aṅgas of bhakti such as śravaṇa, kīrtana, śrī-guru-
padāśraya, and others, which have already been described
in regard to vaidhī-bhakti, are recognised to be also
useful and necessary in rāgānuga-bhakti by intelligent
persons.



Śrī Guru’s divine greed for mādhurya-rasa

śrī-rādhikā-mādhavayor apāra-mādhurya-līlā-guṇa-rūpa-
nāmnām

prati-kṣaṇāsvādana-lolupasya vande guroḥ śrī-
caraṇāravindam

Śrī Gurvaṣṭakam (5), Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

śrī-rādhikā—of Śrīmatī Rādhikā; mādhavayoḥ—of Mādhava
(Kṛṣṇa); apāra—unlimited; mādhurya—conjugal; līlā—
pastimes; guṇa—qualities; rūpa—forms; nāmnām—of Their
holy names; pratikṣaṇa—at every moment; āsvādana—
relishing; lolupasya—hankering, transcendentally greedy
for; vande—I offer obeisances; guroḥ—Guru; śrī—endowed
with śrī, the beauty of Rādhikā’s prema and the mood of
confidential service to Her; caraṇa-aravindam—unto the
lotus feet.

Śrī Guru (who is the confidential servitor of Śrī,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā) is always intensely eager to hear and
chant about the unlimited, divine amorous pastimes of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her beloved Mādhava, and about Their
qualities, names and forms. Śrī Guru relishes these
sweet mellows (mādhurya-rasa) at every moment. I offer
my respectful obeisances unto His lotus feet.



Nārada’s lobha (transcendental greed) for Kṛṣṇa’s
association

govinda-bhuja-guptāyāṁ dvāravatyāṁ kurūdvaha

avātsīn nārado —bhīkṣṇaṁ kṛṣṇopāsana-lālasaḥ

SB 11.2.1

                          401
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


śrī-śukaḥ uvāca—Śrī Śuka said; govinda—of Lord Govinda;
bhuja—by the arms; guptāyām—protected; dvāravatyām—in
the capital Dvāravatī; —O best of the Kurus; avātsīt—
dwelled; nāradaḥ—Nārada Muni; abhīkṣṇam—constantly;
kṛṣṇa-upāsana—to engage in the worship of Kṛṣṇa; lālasaḥ
—who had great eagerness.

Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said, “Being extremely greedy to
engage in the worship of Lord Kṛṣṇa, O best of the
Kurus, Nārada Muni stayed for some time in Dvārakā,
which was always protected by the arms of Govinda.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Greed is essential. When greed
comes for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, then you can hear and
read. Greed must be one-pointed, it cannot be (reposed)
in two places. It is either for viṣayā (sense enjoyment)
- for wife, family, wealth, fame and so forth - or for
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. When such greed comes one is qualified for
sannyāsa, otherwise he will fall down. This greed comes
at (the stage of) ruci. Then there will be no fear
whatsoever, no question of attachment to worldly things.
(Govardhana, 1st October 06)

Let my mind become attracted to You in the same
spontaneous way

yuvatīnāṁ yathā yuni yunāṁ ca yuvatau yathā

mano “bhiramate tadvan mano me ramatāṁ tvayi

Padma Purāṇa/BRS 1.2.153/HBV 8.437

yuvatīnām—of young girls; yathā—as; yuni—for a young
boy; yunām—of young boys; ca—and; yuvatau—for a young
girl; yathā—as; manaḥ—mind; abhiramate—takes pleasure;
tadvan—so; manaḥ—mind; me—of me; ramatām—may take
pleasure; tvayi—in You.

O my Lord, I know that young girls   have natural
affection for young boys, and that   young boys have
natural affection for young girls.   I am praying at Your
lotus feet that my mind may become   attracted unto You in
the same spontaneous way.

Thus ends section 4) Rāgānuga-bhakti



4.1) Rāgātmika-bhakti (of The Eternal Associates in
Vraja)



The definition śloka of Rāgātmika-bhakti

iṣṭe svā-rasikī rāgaḥ paramāviṣṭatā bhavet

tan-mayī yā bhaved bhaktiḥ sātra rāgātmikoditā

BRS 1.2.272/CC Madhya 22.150/JD Ch. 21/ MS p. 43/UP 8,
pt

bhavet—if there is; rāga—deep attachment for the object

                          402
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

of one’s affection; parama-āviṣṭatā—which is
characterized by intense absorption; svā-rasikī—
appropriate for one’s own original aptitude of love
(specific rasa); iṣṭe—unto one’s worshipable deity; sā—
that; bhaktiḥ—devotional service; yā—which; tanmayī—(is)
absorbed in identical mood with one’s iṣṭa-deva; bhavet—
is; atra—here; rāgātmikā-uditā—called rāgātmikā, or
spontaneous and intense absorption, with an unquenchable
loving thirst for serving Kṛṣṇa.

[Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has given the following definition:]
Rāga is a spontaneous and profound attachment for one’s
iṣṭa-deva (worshipable deity - Śrī Rādhā- Kṛṣṇa) while
being completely absorbed in thoughts of Him/Her/Them,
with an intense desire to love and serve Them. That
bhakti which is permeated with such intense feelings of
spontaneous love is called rāgātmika-bhakti (This refers
exclusively to the eternal residents of Vraja, who are
attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a mood of intimate love, free
from any conception of the Lord’s opulence or majesty).



sā kāma-rūpā sambandha-rūpā ceti bhaved dvidhā

BRS 1.2.273/MS p. 43

Devotional service under the heading of rāgātmika-bhakti
can be further divided into two categories. The first is
called kāma-rūpa or kāmānuga-bhakti, devotion in the
form of divine lust (mādhurya-rasa, i.e. transcendental
conjugal attraction to Kṛṣṇa). This refers to either the
sakhīs who serve Kṛṣṇa through offering their
transcendental bodies for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure in
amorous love, or to the mañjarīs who assist such
relationships but have no conjugal relationship with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. The other is called sambandha-rūpa, devotion in
the form of parental (vātsalya-rasa) or friendly
(sakhya-rasa) relationships.

Kāmānuga-bhakti has two forms, “sambhoga-icchāmayī— (the
desire to enjoy directly with Śrī Kṛṣṇa) and “tat-tad
bhāva icchāmayī— (the desire to assist the amorous
pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and thereby experience the
bhāva or moods of Śrīmatī Rādhika, but not to enjoy
directly with Śrī Kṛṣṇa)



tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī

Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi /JD ch. 21

The desire (of the mañjarī gopīs) is to unmotivatedly
render service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā in Her dalliances with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In the same way that the leaves and flowers
of a creeper experience the happiness and distress of
the creeper, the mañjarīs naturally taste tat-tad-bhāva
(each and every one of Her sweet bhāvas). They do not
desire direct union with Kṛṣṇa even in their dreams
[This is the essence of Rādhā-dāsyam].




                          403
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

rāgamayī-bhaktira haya “rāgātmikā— nāma

tāhā śuni— lubdha haya kona bhāgyavān

CC Mad 22.152

rāga-mayī—consisting of attachment; bhaktira—of
devotional service; haya—is; rāgātmikā—spontaneous love;
nāma—the name; tāhā śuni——hearing this; lubdha—covetous;
haya—becomes; kona bhāgyavān—some fortunate person.

Bhakti which consists of rāga [deep attachment and love]
is called rāgātmika-bhakti [the spontaneous loving
service of the Vrajavāsīs]. If, upon hearing of this, a
devotee becomes intensely anxious to obtain such
devotion, he is considered to be most fortunate.

loka-dharma, veda-dharma, deha-dharma, karma

lajjā, dhairya, deha-sukha, ātma-sukha-marma

dustyaja ārya-patha, nija parijana

sva-jane karaye yata tāḍana-bhartsana

sarva-tyāga kari— kare kṛṣṇera bhajana

kṛṣṇa-sukha-hetu kare prema-sevana

CC Ādi 4.167-169

loka-dharma—customs of the people; veda-dharma—Vedic
injunctions; deha-dharma—necessities of the body; karma—
fruitive work; lajjā—bashfulness; dhairya—patience;
deha-sukha—the happiness of the body; ātma-sukha—the
happiness of the self; marma—the essence; dustyaja—
difficult to give up; ārya-patha—the path of varṇāśrama;
nija—own; parijana—family members; sva-jane—one’s own
family; karaye—do; yata—all; tāḍana—punishment;
bhartsana—scolding; sarva-tyāga kari——giving up
everything; kare—do; kṛṣṇera—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhajana—
worship; kṛṣṇa-sukha-hetu—for the purpose of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
happiness; kare—do; prema—out of love; sevana—service.

Social customs, scriptural injunctions, bodily demands,
fruitive action, shyness, patience, bodily pleasures,
self-gratification and the path of varṇāśrama-dharma,
which is difficult to give up—the gopīs have forsaken
all these, along with their families, and suffered their
relatives' punishment and scolding, all for the sake of
serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They render loving service to Him for
the sake of His enjoyment.



ihāke kahiye kṛṣṇe dṛḍha anurāga

svaccha dhauta-vastre yaiche nāhi kona dāga

ataeva kāma-preme bahuta antara

kāma andha-tamaḥ, prema nirmala bhāskara

ataeva gopī-gaṇera nāhi kāma-gandha

                          404
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


kṛṣṇa-sukha lāgi mātra, kṛṣṇa se sambandha

ātma-sukha-duḥkhe gopīra nāhika vicāra

kṛṣṇa-sukha-hetu ceṣṭā mano-vyavahāra

kṛṣṇa lāgi— āra saba kare parityāga

kṛṣṇa-sukha-hetu kare śuddha anurāga

CC Ādi 170-172,174-175

ihāke—concerning this; kahiye—I say; kṛṣṇe—in Lord
Kṛṣṇa; dṛḍha—strong; anurāga—love; svaccha—pure; dhauta—
clean; vastre—in cloth; yaiche—just as; nāhi—not; kona—
some; dāga—mark; ataeva—therefore; kāma-preme—in lust
and love; bahuta—much; antara—space between; kāma—lust;
andha-tamaḥ—blind darkness; prema—love; nirmala—pure;
bhāskara—sun; ataeva—therefore; gopī-gaṇera—of the
gopīs; nāhi—not; kāma-gandha—the slightest bit of lust;
kṛṣṇa-sukha—the happiness of Lord Kṛṣṇa; lāgi—for; mātra
—only; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; se—that; sambandha—the
relationship; ātma-sukha-duḥkhe—in personal happiness or
distress; gopīra—of the gopīs; nāhika—not; vicāra—
consideration; kṛṣṇa-sukha-hetu—for the purpose of Lord
Kṛṣṇa’s happiness; ceṣṭā—activity; manaḥ—of the mind;
vyavahāra—the business; kṛṣṇa lāgi——for Lord Kṛṣṇa; āra—
other; saba—all; kare—do; parityāga—give up; kṛṣṇa-
sukha-hetu—for the purpose of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s happiness;
kare—do; śuddha—pure; anurāga—attachments.

That is called firm attachment to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It is
spotlessly pure, like a clean cloth that has no stain.
Therefore lust and love are quite different. Lust is
like dense darkness, but love is like the bright sun.
Thus there is not the slightest taint of lust in the
gopīs— love. Their relationship with Kṛṣṇa is only for
the sake of His enjoyment. The gopīs do not care for
their own pleasures or pains. All their physical and
mental activities are directed toward offering enjoyment
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They have renounced everything for Kṛṣṇa
and they have pure attachment (anurāga) to giving Kṛṣṇa
pleasure.



Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā

gurau goṣṭhe goṣṭhālayiṣu sujane bhūsura-gaṇe

sva-mantre śrī-nāmni vraja-nava-yuva-dvandva-śaraṇe

sadā dambhaṁ hitvā kuru ratim apūrvām atitarāṁ

aye svāntar bhrātaś caṭubhir abhiyāce dhṛta-padaḥ

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā 1, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī

gurau—in Śrī Gurudeva; goṣṭhe—for Śrī Vraja-dhāma;
goṣṭha-ālayiṣu—for the Vrajavāsīs; sujane—for the
Vaiṣṇavas; bhūsura-gaṇe—for the brāhmaṇas; sva-mantre—
for one’s own dīkṣā-mantras; śrī-nāmni—in Śrī Harināma;
vraja—of Vraja; nava—ever-new; yuva—youthful; dvandva—

                          405
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

couple; śaraṇe—in the shelter; sadā—always; dambham—
pride; hitvā—giving up; kuru—adopt; ratim—attachment;
apūrvām—unprecedented; atitarām—exceedingly; aye—O;
svāntar—mind; bhrātaḥ—brother; caṭubhiḥ—with sweet
words; abhiyāce—I am praying; dhṛta-padaḥ—holding
tightly to your feet.

“O my dear brother, my foolish mind! Taking hold of your
feet, I humbly pray to you with sweet words. Please give
up all pride and develop sublime and incessant rati for
Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī Vraja-dhāma, the residents of Vraja,
the Viṣṇavas, the brāhmaṇas, your dīkṣā-mantras, the
holy name, and the shelter of Kiśora-Kiśorī, Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, the eternally youthful divine couple of
Vraja.”

mad-īśā-nāthatve vraja-vipina-candraṁ vraja-vane

śvarīṁ tan-nāthatve tad-atula-sakhītve tu lalitām

viśākhāṁ śikṣālī-vitaraṇa-gurutve priya-saro-

girindrau tat-prekṣā-lalita-rati-datve smara manaḥ

Śrī Manaḥ Śikṣā 9/GKH (P)

mat—my; īśā—controller (Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī); nāthatve—as
the Lord or life-and-soul; vraja—of Vraja; vipina—of the
forests; candram—the moon (Śrī Kṛṣṇa); vraja—of Vraja;
vana—of the forest; īśvarīm—the empress (Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī); tat—of Him; nāthatve—the mistress; tat—Her;
atula—incomparable; sakhītve—in the friendship; tu—and;
lalitām—Lalitā; viśākhām—Viśākhā; śikṣā—of instruction;
ālī—the gopīs; vitaraṇa—disseminating; gurutve—as the
guru; priya-saraḥ—the dearmost Rādhā-kunda; giri—of
mountains; indrau—the monarch (Govardhana Hill); tat—of
them; prekṣā—by seeing; lalita—charming; rati—pure love
of the divine couple; datve—in the state of giving;
smara—please remember; manaḥ—O mind.

(What should be the mutual relationship between
rāgānuga-bhajana and mādhurya-rasa:) O mind! Always
remember Vṛndāvana-candra Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the prāṇa-nātha
of my Svāminī Śrī Rādhikā, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā as His mistress (or my svāminī), Śrī Lalitā as
the peerless friend of my svāminī, Śrī Viśākhā as the
śikṣā-guru in instructing all the gopīs in making
arrangements of Śrī Yugala sevā, and Rādhā-kuṇḍa and
Girirāja Govardhana as those who grant darśana of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and bestow sublime rati for Their lotus
feet.



4.2) Rūpānuga-Bhakti (Those Who Follow Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī)




bhaktiḥ pūrvaiḥ śritā tān tu rasaṁ paśyed yad-ātta-dhiḥ

taṁ naumi satataṁ rūpa-nāma-priya-janaṁ hareḥ

                            406
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Mādhurya Kādambinī 1.2

Though previous mahājanas (Prahlada, Dhruva, Kumāras,
etc.) have taken up the path of bhakti, I constantly pay
my obeisances to Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī, the Lord's dearmost
associate, by whose mercy one now attains the
intelligence to understand and relish bhakti in its
complete rasa form.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: All Rūpānugas are Rāgānugas,
but not all Rāgānugas are Rūpānugas (only those who are
in the ānugatya of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī).

Hankering for the remnants of Rūpa-mañjarī’s service

śrī-rūpa-mañjari-karārcita-pāda-padma-

goṣṭhendra-nandana-bhujārpita-mastakāyāḥ

hā modataḥ kanaka-gauri-padāravinda-

samvāhanāni śanakais tava kiṁ kariṣye

Vilāpa-Kusumāñjali 72/MS p. 15/STB p. 97

śrī-rūpa-mañjari—of Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī; kara—by the hand;
arcita—worshiped; pāda—feet; padma—lotus; goṣṭhendra—of
the king of Vraja; nandana—of the son; bhuja—arm; arpita
—placed; mastakāyāḥ—on the head; hā—O!; modataḥ—out of
joy; kanaka—gold; gauri—fair; padāravinda—lotus feet;
samvāhanāni—massage; śanakaiḥ—gently; tava—of You; kim—
whether?; kariṣye—I will perform.

O Devī as fair as gold, Your lotus feet are worshiped by
Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī’s hands as You rest Your head against
Kṛṣṇa’s arm. When will I receive the remnants of Rūpa-
mañjarī’s service and happily and gently massage Your
lotus feet?



One who follows the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī will
attain the matchless gem of service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa

manaḥ-śikṣā-daikādaśaka-varam etan madhurayā

girā gāyaty uccaiḥ samadhi-gata-sarvārtha-tati yaḥ

sa-yūthaḥ śrī-rūpānuga iha bhavan gokula-vane

jano rādhā-kṛṣṇātula-bhajana-ratnaṁ sa labhate (12)

manaḥ—to the mind; śikṣā—instructions; da—giving;
ekādaśaka—eight verses; varam—excellent; etan—these;
madhurayā—with a sweet; girā—voice; gāyati—sings; uccaiḥ
—aloud; samadhigata—having thoroughly understood; sarva—
all; artha-tati—the many meanings; yaḥ—who; sa-yūthaḥ—
with associates; śrī-rūpa-anugaḥ—follower of Śrīla Rupa
Gosvami; iha—here; bhavan—becomes; gokula-vane—in this
Gokula Forest; janaḥ—person; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—unto Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa; atula—incomparable; bhajana—worship, devotional

                          407
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

service; ratnam—jewel; saḥ—he; labhate—attains.

(While instructing his own mind, Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa
Gosvāmī offers the following benediction in order to
inspire other devotees to study and recite this stotra
known as Manaḥ-śikṣā) Anyone who, adopting the line of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and his followers, takes up residence
in Gokula-vana (in Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala near Śrī
Govardhana) and loudly sings these eleven excellent
instructions to the mind in a melodious voice with full
understanding of their various meanings, will certainly
obtain the matchless gem of devotional service Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.



Thus ends section 4.2) Rūpānuga-Bhakti



Additional quotes on Rūpānuga-bhakti from the writings
of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda



The essence of all instructions

(1) In the mādhurya-rasa, characterized by conjugal
love, one can become like Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī or Her lady
friends such as Lalitā and Her serving maids (mañjarīs)
like Rūpa and Rati. This is the essence of all
instruction in the matter of devotional service. (Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Nectar of Instructin, śloka 8, purport)

The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is conducted under the
supervision of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī

(2) The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is conducted under
the supervision of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. The Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas, or Bengali Vaiṣṇavas, are mostly followers of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, of whom the six Gosvāmīs of
Vṛndāvana are direct disciples. Therefore Śrīla
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung:

rūpa-raghunātha-pade haibe ākuti, kabe hāma bujhaba se
yugala-pīriti

“When I am eager to understand the literature given by
the Gosvāmīs, then I shall be able to understand the
transcendental loving affairs of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.” Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared in order to bestow upon
human society the benediction of the science of Kṛṣṇa.
The most exalted of all the activities of Lord Kṛṣṇa are
His pastimes of conjugal love with the gopīs. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared in the mood of Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī, the best of the gopīs. Therefore, to
understand the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
follow in His footsteps, one must very seriously follow
in the footsteps of the six Gosvāmīs. (The Nectar of
Instruction, Preface)

“We Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇavas, we are known as Rūpānuga”

(3) “We Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava, we are known as rūpānuga.

                          408
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Rūpānuga means the followers of Rūpa Gosvāmī. So why we
should become followers of Rūpa Gosvāmī? Because śrī-
caitanya-mano —bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale. He
wanted to establish the mission of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.” (SB 5.5.2 lecture, Hyderabad, April 13,
1975)

Those who follow Rūpa-Sanātana - are Rūpānuga

(4) “Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī are the most
exalted servitors of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Those who adhere to their service are known
as rūpānuga devotees.” (CC Madhya-līlā 8.246, purport)

Thus ends Chapter 15 — Types of Bhakti




Chapter 16 - Sādhana-bhakti-tattva


Engaging oneself in the process to awaken love for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa



1. Sādhana-bhakti 482

2. The Benefits of Bhakti 501

3. The Six Results of Pure Bhakti 505

4. The Environment is Always Friendly 514

5. The Nine Limbs of Bhakti 519

6. Sūta Gosvāmī Explains Pure Bhakti 530

7. Yukta-vairāgya — True Renunciation 536

8. Other Ślokas Related to Sādhana-bhakti 541



1) Sādhana-bhakti



Pure bhakti perfectly defined by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

BRS 1.1.11/CC Madhya 19.167/MS p. 32 /JD ch. 8/BRSB p.
3/BPKG p. 364

anya-abhilāṣitā-śūnyam—devoid of desires other than
those for the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; jñāna—speculative
knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation; karma—fruitive
activities; ādi—artificial renunciation, yoga for mystic
powers, and so on; anāvṛtam—not covered by; ānukūlyena—

                          409
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

with a favourable mood; kṛṣṇa-anuśīlanaṁ—cultivation of
service to Kṛṣṇa; bhaktiḥ uttamā—first-class devotional
service. (The prefix ānu indicates ānugatya — “under
guidance— and “continuous, uninterrupted, like an
unbroken stream of honey—).

Uttamā bhakti, pure devotional service, is the
cultivation of activities that are meant exclusively for
the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In other words, it is the
uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, performed
through all endeavors of body, mind and speech, well as
through expression of various spiritual sentiments
(bhāvas). It is not covered by jñāna (speculative
knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation), karma
(reward-seeking activity), yoga or austerities; and it
is completely free from all desires other than the
aspiration to bring happiness to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “Although many definitions of
bhakti have been given in śāstra, Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s dear associate Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
has combined all previous definitions of bhakti, and has
given in his Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu this beautiful,
new definition which is the life and treasured
aspiration of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.” (Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī’s Biography p. 389).

Bhakti purifies the senses and mind, and frees one from
all designations

sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

BRS 1.1.12/Nārada-Pañcarātra/CC Mad 19.170/BPKG p. 388

sarva-upādhi-vinirmuktam—free from all kinds of material
designations, or free from all desires (except the
desire to render service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa); tat-
paratvena—by the sole purpose of pleasing the Divine
Couple; nirmalam—uncontaminated by the effects of
speculative knowledge or fruitive activity; hṛṣīkeṇa—by
purified, spiritualized senses; hṛṣīka-īśa—of the master
of the senses, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sevanam—the service to satisfy
Him; bhaktiḥ—pure devotional service; ucyate—is called.

Bhakti, or pure devotional service, means engaging all
of one’s senses and mind in the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
with the sole purpose of pleasing Him. It is
uncontaminated by speculative knowledge or fruitive
activities. When the spirit soul (jīva) renders service
unto Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the senses, one’s senses
become spiritualized and one is freed from all material
designations.

nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-prema “sādhya— kabhu naya

śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya

CC Mad 22.107/BRSB p. 27

kṛṣṇa-prema—ecstatic transcendental love of Kṛṣṇa;
nitya-siddha—(is) eternally established; naya—not;
sādhya—attained; kabhu—at any time; citte—in the heart;

                           410
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

śuddha—purified; śravaṇa-ādi—by hearing, etc.; karaye
udaya—it is aroused.

Kṛṣṇa-prema is an eternally established reality; it is
not brought about by sādhana. It manifests itself (by
the mercy of sad-guru) in the heart purified by sādhana
- the performance of the various limbs of bhakti such as
śravaṇa and kīrtana.



The definition of Sādhana-bhakti

kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya-bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā

BRS 1.2.2/CC Mad 22.105/BRSB p. 23/JD ch. 19/BPKG p.
391/GKH (P)

sā—that (practice); sādhana-abhidhā—called sādhana-
bhakti, or devotional service in practice; kṛti-sādhyā—
which is to be executed by the senses; bhavet—it should
be (understood as); sādhya-bhāva—by which bhāva-bhakti
is acquired; sādhyatā—(its) potentiality; prākaṭyam—(is)
the awakening; hṛdi—in the heart; bhāvasya—of the
sthāyī-bhāva (one of the primary rasas - sānta, dāsya,
sakhya, vātsalya, mādhurya); nitya-siddhasya—which is
eternally present.

Sādhana-bhakti is the engagement of the mind and senses
in the aṅgas of bhakti for the purpose of attaining
bhāva-bhakti. This bhāva is a potentiality which
eternally exists in the heart of the jīva and is
manifested in the heart purified by sādhana (through the
mercy of a nitya-siddha, a living sad-guru).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: As verified in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, bhāva is an eternally accomplished
phenomenon (nitya-siddha) which always exists in the
eternal associates of Bhagavān. This nitya-siddha-bhāva
manifests itself by the mercy of the Lord’s eternal
associates in the heart of the purified jīva. The jīva
has the “seed-adaptability— (inherent potential) to
receive it, just as a female parrot has the “seed-
adaptability— to learn to speak. (BRSB p. 27)



Real liberation means attaining one’s eternal svarūpa
and sevā

muktir hitvānyathā rūpaṁ sva-rūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ

SB 2.10.6/JD ch. 17/BPKG p. 430

muktiḥ—liberation; hitvā—giving up; anyathā—otherwise;
rūpam—form; sva-rūpeṇa—in one’s spiritual,
constitutional form; vyavasthitiḥ—eternal position.

Real liberation means realising one’s svarūpa and one’s
nitya-sevā. In other words, one is not liberated upon
leaving this body if he takes another body, nor if he
simply doesn—t take another form. Real liberation is

                          411
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

when one enters into the spiritual world by
transcendental loving devotional service.



Śuddha-bhakti - other definitions

sādhanaṁ śuddha-bhaktiṁ sādhyaṁ tat-prītim

Daśa-mūla-tattva, Invocation

Pure devotional service (sādhana) is the only means of
attaining the ultimate spiritual perfection (sādhya) -
kṛṣṇa-prema.

sā parānuraktir īśvare

Śāṇḍilya-bhakti-sūtra 1.2/BPKG p. 388

Transcendental attachment to Īśvara, the Supreme Lord,
is called bhakti; (or) pure devotional service means
intense love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

One can achieve real happiness only by pleasing Śrī
Kṛṣṇa

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati

SB 1.2.6/MK 1.4/RVC p. 111/BPKG pp. 85,198,454/STB p. 25

saḥ—that; vai—certainly; puṁsām—for mankind; paraḥ—
sublime; dharmaḥ—the essence of one’s spiritual nature
and function; yataḥ—by which; bhaktiḥ—devotional
service; adhaḥ-akṣaje—unto Him who is beyond sense
perception, the transcendent Lord; ahaitukī—causeless;
apratihatā—unbroken; yayā—by which; ātmā—the self;
suprasīdati—completely satisfied.

The topmost dharma of human life is kṛṣṇa-bhakti. This
bhakti should be without any kind of selfish desires,
regular and uninterrupted. By performing bhakti in this
manner, one’s heart feels contented, perceiving the
blissful form of Kṛṣṇa.



Unmotivated and unimpeded natural affection for Kṛṣṇa

mad-guṇa-śruti-mātreṇa mayi sarva-guhāśaye

mano-gatir avicchinna yathā gaṅgāmbhaso —mbudhau

lakṣaṇaṁ bhakti-yogasya nirguṇasya hy udāhṛtam

ahaituky avyavahitā yā bhaktiḥ puruṣottame

SB 3.29.11-12/CC Ādi 4.205-206/BPKG p. 388

mat—of Me; guṇa—qualities; śruti—by hearing; mātreṇa—
just; mayi—towards Me; sarva-guhā-āśaye—residing in
everyone’s heart; manaḥ-gatiḥ—the heart’s course;
avicchinnā—continuous; yathā—as; gaṅgā—of the Ganges;

                          412
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

ambhasaḥ—waters; ambudhau—towards the ocean; lakṣaṇam—
the manifestation; bhakti-yogasya—of devotional service;
nirguṇasya—unadulterated; hi—indeed; udāhṛtam—exhibited;
ahaitukī—causeless; avyavahitā—not separated; yā—which;
bhaktiḥ—devotional service; puruṣa-uttame—towards the
Supreme Enjoyer.

I am the Supreme Enjoyer (Puruṣottama), the Lord who
dwells within the hearts of all. When there is
unmotivated, natural affection for Me, and when, simply
on hearing My qualities, one’s mind automatically flows
towards Me, just as Śrī Gaṅgā forever flows unimpeded
and uninterrupted towards the ocean, this is called
nirguṇa-bhakti-yoga, transcendental devotional service.



Actions in relation to Hari prescribed in śāstra
constitute Bhakti and give the fruit of Prema

surarṣe vihitā śāstre harim uddiśya yā kriyā

saiva bhaktir iti proktā tayā bhaktiḥ parā bhavet

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.13/Nārada Pañcarātra/GKH (P)

O sage amongst the demigods, Nārada, those activities
prescribed in the revealed scriptures for satisfying the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Hari, are called
the regulative principles of bhakti (sādhana-bhakti), by
practicing which one may attain the parā bhakti, which
leads to kṛṣṇa-prema.



The stages of the gradual development of bhakti

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo —tha bhajana-kriyā

tato —nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

BRS 1.4.15-16/CC Mad 23.14-15/BRSB p. 29/MK ch. 8/BR
1.7/BPKG pp. 394,471

ādau—in the beginning; śraddhā—firm confidence in the
process of bhakti; tataḥ—thereafter; sādhu-saṅgaḥ—
association with pure devotees; atha—then; bhajana-kriyā
—performance of the activities of devotion (the ninefold
bhakti beginning with śravaṇa, kīrtana etc., so that
initiation takes place); tataḥ—thereafter; anartha-
nivṛttiḥ—the diminishing of all unwanted habits; syāt—
there should be; tataḥ—thereafter; niṣṭhā—firm faith;
ruciḥ—taste; tataḥ—thereafter; atha—then; āsaktiḥ—deep
attachment; tataḥ—then; bhāvaḥ—the stage of bhāva; tataḥ
—thereafter; prema—ecstatic transcendental love of God;
abhyudañcati—arises; sādhakānām—of the devotees
practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness; ayam—this; premṇaḥ—of
love of Godhead; prādurbhāve—in the appearance; bhavet—
is; kramaḥ—in that sequence.


                          413
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

In the beginning there is śraddhā (born from past
contact with devotees) in the form of faith in the words
of sādhu and śāstra. Upon its appearance, one acquires
eligibility for sādhu-saṅga, and then bhajana-kriyā
(activities of devotion which begin with taking shelter
of Guru, receiving initiation from him, etc.). Anartha-
nivṛtti (eradication of contamination in the form of
unwanted desires in the heart) also begins at this time,
and thereafter niṣṭhā (steadiness) arises in bhajana.
This is followed by ruci (taste for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa nāma,
guṇa, rūpa, līlā), and then āsakti (deep attachment)
arises for both the process of bhajana and the object of
bhajana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. When this stage ripens it is
transformed into the state of bhāva, and thereafter
prema arises. This is how prema gradually manifests in
the heart of the sādhaka.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains: Initially, contact
with devotees and with acts of devotion award special
sukṛti (called nitya-sukṛti or ajñāta-sukṛti or bhakty-
unmukī-sukṛti - unknowingly rendering service to
devotees or acts such as taking prasāda or hearing the
holy name, etc.). This gives rise to transcendental
faith (paramārthika-śraddhā), which is the first stage
mentioned above. Therefore, contact with devotees
(sādhu-saṅga) precedes the first stage of sraddhā.



One who, with faith, practices these nine limbs
certainly achieves pure bhakti

śrutiḥ kṛṣṇākhyānaṁ smaraṇa-nati-pūjā-vidhi-gaṇāḥ

tathā dāsyaṁ sakhyaṁ paricaraṇam apy ātma-dadanam

navāṅgāny etānīha vidha-gata-bhakter anudinaṁ

bhajan śraddhā-yuktaḥ suvimala-ratiṁ vai sa labhate

Daśa-mūla-tattva 9/JD ch. 19

śrutiḥ—hearing of the spiritual name, form, attributes
and pastimes; kṛṣṇa—of Śṛī Kṛṣṇa; ākhyānam—describing
and singing the glories; smaraṇa—remembrance; nati—
bowing down; pūjā-vidhi—offering worship; gaṇāḥ—
multitudes; tathā—also; dāsyam—service; sākhyam—becoming
a friend; paricaraṇam—personal service; api—and; ātma-
dadanam—offering one’s very self; nava-aṅgāni—nine
limbs; etāni—these; iha—in this world; vidhi-gata-
bhakteḥ—of devotion; anudinam—daily; bhajan—worshipping;
śrāddhā-yuktaḥ—with faith; suvimala—very pure; ratim—
love of God in the stage of bhāva; under regulation; vai
—certainly; saḥ—he; labhate— obtains.

One should perform bhajana in the form of the nine limbs
of vaidhī-bhakti, namely, śravaṇam (hearing), kīrtanam
(chanting), smaraṇam (remembering), vandanam (offering
prayers), arcanam (worshiping), pāda-sevanam (serving
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet), dāsyam (acting as Kṛṣṇa’s servant),
sakhyam (becoming Kṛṣṇa’s friend), and ātma-nivedanam
(surrendering oneself fully to Śrī Kṛṣṇa). One who with
faith daily practices bhajana in this way certainly
achieves pure kṛṣṇa-rati.

                          414
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017




Navadhā bhakti — The ninefold process of bhakti

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā

kriyeta bhagavaty addhā tan manye —dhītam uttamam

SB 7.5.23-24/BPKG p. 392/ JD ch. 4, 19

[śrī-prahrādaḥ uvāca—Prahlāda Mahārāja said]; śravaṇam—
hearing; kīrtanam—chanting; viṣṇoḥ—of Lord Viṣṇu (not
anyone else); smaraṇam—remembering; pāda-sevanam—serving
the lotus feet of the Lord; arcanam—offering worship;
vandanam—offering prayers; dāsyam—becoming the servant;
sakhyam—becoming the best friend; ātma-nivedanam—
surrendering one’s life amd soul; iti—thus; puṁsā arpitā
—offered by the devotee; viṣṇau—unto Lord Viṣṇu (not to
anyone else); bhaktiḥ—devotional service; cet—if; nava-
lakṣaṇā—possessing nine different processes; kriyeta—one
should perform; bhagavati—unto Bhagavān; addhā—directly
or completely; tat—that; manye—I consider; adhītam—
learning; uttamam—topmost.

[Prahlāda Mahārāja said:] Hearing and chanting about the
transcendental holy name, form, qualities, paraphernalia
and pastimes of Lord Viṣṇu, remembering them, serving
the lotus feet of the Lord, offering the Lord respectful
worship, offering prayers to the Lord, becoming His
servant, considering the Lord one’s best friend, and
surrendering everything unto Him (in other words,
serving Him with body, mind and words). One who has
dedicated his life and soul to the service of Guru and
Kṛṣṇa through these nine limbs of bhakti should be
understood to be the topmost devotee and the most
learned, for he has acquired perfect knowledge.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: (a) śravanaṁ kīrtanam viṣṇoḥ —
“Those who tell us only the general meaning of this
śloka should go to the Rāmānuja or Madhvācārya
sampradāya, for they only know general principles. We
should add the mood of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to these
principles. For example, in the first line of this
śloka, “Viṣnoḥ” means Kṛṣṇa with Rādhikā and the gopīs.
This is the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Try to
understand this. If you never remember, realise, and
explain this to those who are qualified, you are
derailed from our Guru Paramparā. You must come in the
proper line”. (The Origin of Ratha-Yātrā, p. 231)

(b) iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau — “Viṣṇu” here refers to both
viṣaya and āśraya-bhagavān, Kṛṣṇa and Guru. Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “The nine limbs of bhakti are not
bhakti if they are not offered first to a bona fide
Guru. Kṛṣṇa will not accept it unless one first takes
shelter of sad-guru (guru-padāśraya)”. (Murwillambha
7.2.04)



                          415
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


Of all spiritual practices, the nine limbs of bhakti are
the best

bhajanera madhye śreṣṭha nava-vidhā bhakti

“kṛṣṇa-prema—, “kṛṣṇa— dite dhare mahā-śakti

CC Antya 4.70/BRSB p. 81/JD ch. 2/MS p. 11

bhajanera madhye—in executing devotional service;
śreṣṭha—the best; nava-vidhā bhakti—the nine prescribed
methods of devotional service; kṛṣṇa-prema—ecstatic
transcendental love of Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa—and Kṛṣṇa; dite—to
deliver; dhare—possess; mahā-śakti—great potency.

Among the ways of executing devotional service, these
nine prescribed methods are the best, for these
processes have great potency to deliver Kṛṣṇa and kṛṣṇa-
prema.



Of the nine limbs, Śravaṇa, Kīrtaṇa and Smaraṇa are the
best

tasmāt sarvātmanā rājan hariḥ sarvatra sarvadā

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca smartavyo bhagavān nṛṇām

SB 2.2.36

tasmāt—therefore; sarva-ātmanā—with one’s whole soul;
rājan—O King; hariḥ—the Lord; sarvatra—everywhere;
sarvadā—always; śrotavyaḥ—must be heard; kīrtitavyaḥ—
glorified by kīrtana; ca—also; smartavyaḥ—be remembered;
bhagavān—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nṛṇām—by the human being.

O King, it is therefore essential that every human being
hears about, glorifies by kīrtana and remembers Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Bhagavān, always and everywhere.



Of the nine limbs, Nāma-Saṅkīrtana is the best (“nāma
bhajana sarvottama—)

tāra madhye sarva-śreṣṭha nāma-saṅkīrtana

niraparādhe nāma laile pāya prema-dhana

CC Antya 4.71/JD ch. 2/BPKG p. 535

tāra madhye—of the nine different types of devotional
service; sarva-śreṣṭha—the most important of all; nāma-
saṅkīrtana—chanting of the holy names; niraparādhe—
without offenses; nāma laile—if one chants the holy
names; pāya—he gets; prema-dhana—the most valuable
treasure of ecstatic love of Kṛṣṇa.

Of the nine processes of devotional service, the most
important is to always chant the holy names of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa (the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra). If one does so
without offences, one obtains the most valuable treasure

                          416
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

of prema.



The five essential limbs of bhakti delineated by Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu

sādhu-saṅga, nāma-kīrtana, bhāgavata-śravaṇa,

mathurā-vāsa, śrī-mūrtira śraddhāya sevana

CC Mad 22.128/MS p. 11

sādhu-saṅga—association with pure devotees; nāma-kīrtana
—chanting the holy name; bhāgavata-śravaṇa—hearing
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; mathurā-vāsa—living in Mathurā-
maṇdala (Vraja); śrī-mūrtira śraddhāya sevana—worshiping
the Deity with faith.

[Mahāprabhu said:] “Sādhu-saṅga, chanting the holy name,
hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, residing in Vraja maṇḍala and
worshiping the Deity with faith.”



Even a slight performance of these five awakens pure
love for Kṛṣṇa

sakala-sādhana-śreṣṭha ei pañca aṅga

kṛṣṇa-prema janmāya ei pāṅcera alpa-saṅga

CC Mad 22.129

sakala-sādhana—of all items for executing devotional
service; śreṣṭha—the best; ei pañca aṅga—these five
limbs; kṛṣṇa-prema—love of Kṛṣṇa; janmāya—awakens; ei—
these; pāṅcera—of the five; alpa-saṅga—slight
association with or performance.

[Mahāprabhu continued:] “These five limbs of devotional
service are the best of all. Even a slight performance
of these five awakens love for Kṛṣṇa.”



Guru-pādāśraya is the foremost limb of bhakti

guru-pādāśrayas tasmāt kṛṣṇa-dīkṣādi-śikṣaṇam

viśrambheṇa guroḥ sevā sādhu-vartmānu-vartanam

BRS 1.2.74

guru-pāda-āśrayaḥ—taking shelter of Śrī Guru; tasmāt—
after that; kṛṣṇa-dīkṣā-ādi—initiation into nāma, mantra
etc.; śikṣaṇam—accepting instruction; sevā—service;
guroḥ—of Śrī Guru; viśrambheṇa—with intimacy; anu-
vartanam—following; vartma—the path; sādhu—of the
saintly devotees.

[The first and foremost limbs of sādhana-bhakti are:]
Taking shelter of Śrī Guru, accepting dīkṣā (divine
knowledge coupled with removal of anarthas), receiving

                          417
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

śikṣā (instructions on the process of service/bhajana to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa), serving Śrī Guru with intimacy and
affection, and following the path of the previous
ācāryas under his guidance. (Of the 64 limbs of bhakti
given by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in BRS, the first five are
related to Śrī Guru; only then can sādhana-bhakti begin)



Six vows favorable for the performance of bhakti

utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt

saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 3

utsāhāt—enthusiasm; niścayāt— confident, firm faith in
the statements of śāstra and Guru; dhairyāt—patience or
fortitude in the practice of bhakti; tat-tat-karma-
pravartanāt —following the limbs of bhakti such as
hearing and chanting, and giving up one’s material sense
enjoyment for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa; saṅga-tyāgāt—giving
up bad association; sataḥ-vṛtteḥ —adopting the good
behaviour and character of pure devotees; ṣaḍbhiḥ—by
these six types of practice; bhaktiḥ—pure devotion;
prasidhyati—advances or becomes perfect.

Progress in bhakti may be obtained by the following six
practices: (1) enthusiasm to carry out the rules which
enhance bhakti, (2) firm faith in the statements of the
śāstra and the Guru whose words are fully in line with
the śāstra, (3) fortitude in the practice of bhakti,
even in the midst of obstacles, or patience during the
practice stage of bhakti, even when there is delay in
attaining one’s desired goal, (4) following the limbs of
bhakti such as hearing (śravaṇa) and chanting (kīrtana)
and giving up one’s material sense enjoyment for the
pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, (5) giving up illicit connection
with women, the association of those who are overly
attached to women and the association of māyāvādīs,
atheists and pseudo-religionists, and (6) adopting the
good behavior and character of pure devotees.



The process of bhakti for the ajāta-rati sādhaka

syāt kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi-sitāpy avidyā

pittopatapta-rasanasya na rocikā nu

kintv ādarād anudinaṁ khalu saiva juṣṭā

svādvī kramād bhavati tad-gada-mūla-hantrī

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 7

syāt—is; kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāma—the holy name;
carita-ādi—character, pastimes and so forth; sitā—sugar
candy; api—although; avidyā—of ignorance; pitta—by the
bile; upatapta—afflicted; rasanasya—of the tongue; na—
not; rocikā—palatable; nu—oh, how wonderful it is; kintu
—but; ādarāt—carefully; anudinam—every day, or twenty-

                          418
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

four hours daily; khalu—naturally; sā—that (sugar candy
of the holy name); eva—certainly; juṣṭā—taken or
chanted; svādvī—relishable; kramāt—gradually; bhavati—
becomes; tat-gada—of that disease; mūla—of the root;
hantrī—the destroyer.

Aho! Those whose tongues are afflicted by the jaundice
of avidyā , ignorance (born of being indifferent to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa from a time without beginning) cannot relish the
nectarean names, form, qualities and pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, which are compared to the sweetest sugar candy.
Instead, these attributes taste bitter to them. But if
with great respect one daily takes this sugar candy, it
gradually becomes relishable to him and destroys at the
root his disease, the jaundice of avidyā or indifference
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. [In other words, he becomes spontaneously
attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa]



The essence of all instructions: The process for the
jāta-rati sādhaka - tad-anurāgi janānugāmī — following
the anurāgī Vaiṣṇavas (the real Vrajavāsīs)

tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 8/BR 8.6/MS p. 14/BPKG p. 477/STB p. 65/
GKH (P)

tiṣṭhan vraje—living in Vraja; anugāmī—as a follower;
anurāgi-jana—of the eternal residents of Vraja who
possess rāgātmika, inherent spontaneous love (especially
Śrī Rūpa-Raghunātha); tad—for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; kālam
nayet—one should utilise all his time; niyojya—by
engaging; rasanā—the tongue; manasā—and the mind;
krameṇa—sequentially; sukīrtana-anu-smṛtyoḥ—in
meticulous chanting and remembring; nāma-rūpa-carita ādi
—of the names, form, qualities and pastimes; tad—of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa (Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā and Vrajendra-
nandana Kṛṣṇa); iti—this only; sāram—is the essence;
akhilam—of all; upadeśa—instruction.

While living in Vraja as a follower of the eternal
residents of Vraja (Śrī Guru and the six Gosvāmīs) who
possess inherent spontaneous love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one
should utilize all his time by sequentially engaging the
tongue and the mind in meticulous chanting and
remembrance of Kṛṣṇa’s names, form, qualities and
pastimes. This is the essence of all instructions.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains: The word “anu”
(ānugatya - being under guidance) appears three times in
this śloka to emphasize that bhakti must be performed
while being continueously under guidance.



Bhakta, Bhakti and Bhagavān are not of the material

                          419
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

world

māṁ ca yo —vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

BG 14.26

mām—unto Me; ca—also; yaḥ—a person who; avyabhicāreṇa—
without fail; bhakti-yogena—by devotional service;
sevate—renders service; saḥ—he; guṇān—the modes of
material nature; samatītya—transcending; etān—all these;
brahma-bhūyāya—elevated to the Brahman platform; kalpate
—becomes.

One who engages with one-pointedness in the spiritual
activities of pure bhakti immediately transcends the
modes of material nature and is elevated to the
spiritual platform.



Bhakti is not the activity of one’s senses, mind and
body - but an activity of the soul

nijendriya-manaḥ-kāya-ceṣṭā-rūpāṁ na viddhi tām

nitya-satya-ghanānanda-rūpā sā hi guṇātigā

Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam 2.3.133

nija—own; indriya—senses; manaḥ—mind; kāya—body; ceṣṭa—
activities; rūpam—form; na—not; vidhi—know; tam—that;
nitya—eternal; satya—reality; ghana—intense; ānanda—of
bliss; rūpa—form; sa—that; hi—indeed; guṇa—the modes of
nature; atigā—beyond.

You should know that the activities of bhakti beginning
with śravaṇa, kīrtana, smaraṇa, vandana etc are not the
activity of your ears, tongue and mind. You should
understand that this bhakti is constituted of eternity,
cognizance and condensed bliss and is not within the
scope of the senses. It is transcendental to the binding
influence of the three modes of material nature (sattva,
rajas and tamas).



Only by exclusive bhakti can one know Me and see My
eternal svarūpa

bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya aham evaṁ-vidho “rjuna

jñātuṁ draṣṭuñ ca tattvena praveṣṭuñ ca parantapa

SBG 11.54

parantapa—O chastiser of the foe; arjuna—Arjuna; tu—
however; ananyayā—by exclusive; bhaktyā—devotional
service; aham—I; śakyaḥ—can; jñātum—be known; ca—and;
draṣṭum—seen; evaṁ-vidhaḥ—in this way (in this human-
like form); ca—and; tattvena—truly; praveṣṭum—enter
(into association with Me.)


                          420
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

O Parantapa, Arjuna! Only by ananya-bhakti can one
actually know and see My eternal, beautiful human form
and truly enter into association with Me in My abode.



I can be attained and controlled only through exclusive
bhakti

bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ śraddhayātmā priyaḥ satām

bhaktiḥ punāti man-niṣṭhā śva-pākān api sambhavāt

SB 11.14.21/BPKG pp. 85,378,381,450/Brahma-Saṁhitā 33,
pt

bhaktyā—by devotional service; aham—I; ekayā—unalloyed;
grāhyaḥ—am to be obtained; śraddhayā—by faith; ātmā—the
Supreme Soul; priyaḥ—the object of love; satām—of the
devotees; bhaktiḥ—pure devotional service; punāti—
purifies; mat-niṣṭhā—fixing Me as the only goal; śva-
pākān—dog-eaters; api—even; sambhavāt—from the
contamination of low birth.

O Uddhava, I who am the Supreme Soul and the beloved of
the saintly devotees, can only be attained through
devotion and faith. Through bhakti I purify anyone who
is firmly attached to Me even if he is born in a low
(dog-eating) family.

[An expanded translation by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] O
Uddhava, bhakti is the powerful method of attaining me.
I am completely controlled by that devotion, but I am
never controlled by yoga, philosophical deliberation,
adherence to religious principles, meticulous study of
the Vedas, austerities, giving in charity, or by any
other method. I am the Supersoul in everyone’s heart,
and I am easily attained by the sādhus alone, not by
anyone else. This is because they have unadulterated and
undivided devotion, which is born of their unflinching
faith in Me. This type of exclusive devotion has the
power to purify even a member of the cast of dog-eaters.
However, all qualities such as truthfulness, mercy,
observing silence, following scriptural injunctions,
austerities and the cultivation of knowledge definitely
cannot purify the heart of a human being who is devoid
of bhakti unto me.



Without bhakti one cannot see Me

nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā na dānena na cejyayā

śakya evaṁ-vidho draṣṭuṁ dṛṣṭavān asi yan mama

BG 11.53

aham—I; na śakyaḥ—can not; draṣṭum—be seen; evam-vidhaḥ—
in this way; yathā—as; dṛṣṭavān asi—you have seen; mām—
Me; vedaiḥ—by study of the Vedas; na—nor; tapasā—by
austerities; na—not; dānena—by charitable acts; ca—and;
na—nor; ījyayā— by sacrifice.


                          421
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

It is not possible to see Me in this form as you see Me
now merely by studying the Vedas, practicing
austerities, giving in charity or performing sacrifices.



I am controlled only by the bhakti of My pure devotees

na sādhayati māṁ yogo na sāṅkhyaṁ dharma uddhava

na svādhyāyas tapas tyāgo yathā bhaktir mamorjitā

SB 11.14.20/BPKG p. 457

na—not; sādhayati—brings under control; mām—Me; yogaḥ—
the yoga system; na—nor; sāṅkhyam—the system of Sāṅkhya
philosophy; dharmaḥ—pious activities within the
varṇāśrama system; uddhava—My dear Uddhava; na—not;
svādhyāyaḥ—Vedic study; tapaḥ—austerity; tyāgaḥ—
renunciation; yathā—as; bhaktiḥ—devotional service; mama
—unto Me; ūrjitā—powerful.

My dear Uddhava, I cannot be controlled by those who
study Sankhya philosophy or śāstra, or who perform
mystic yoga, pious acts, austerity or renunciation. I am
controlled only by the bhakti rendered to Me by My pure-
hearted devotees.



Devotion is the only process by which Kṛṣṇa can be
controlled

bhaktir evainaṁ nayati bhaktir evainaṁ darśayati

bhakti-vaśaḥ puruṣo bhaktir eva bhūyasī

Māthara-śruti/BPKG pp. 381,429,458

bhaktiḥ—devotional service; eva—certainly; enam—Him;
nayati—leads to; bhaktiḥ—devotional service; eva—
certainly; enam—Him; darśayati—reveals; bhakti-vaśaḥ—
controlled by bhakti; puruṣaḥ—the Lord; bhaktiḥ—
devotion; eva—indeed; bhūyasī—most powerful.

It is only unalloyed bhagavad-bhakti that carries the
jīvas close to Bhagavān, brings about an audience with
Him, and eternal engagement in His sevā. Bhagavān is
only controlled by pure bhakti. Certainly such bhakti is
most powerful.



The beautiful and exalted nature of Bhakti is that she
makes the infinite Lord becomes submissive to the
infinitesimal living entity

premā haite kṛṣṇa haya nija bhakta-vaśa

premā haite pāya kṛṣṇera sevā-sukha-rasa

CC Ādi 7.145

premā—love of Kṛṣṇa; haite—from; kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; haya—

                          422
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

becomes; nija—His own; bhakta-vaśa—submissive to
devotees; premā—love of God; haite—from; pāya—he gets;
kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa—s; sevā-sukha-rasa—the mellow of
service.

The Supreme Lord, who is greater than the greatest,
becomes submissive to even a very insignificant devotee
because of his devotional service. It is the beautiful
and exalted nature of devotional service that the
infinite Lord becomes submissive to the infinitesimal
living entity because of it. In reciprocal devotional
activities with the Lord, the devotee actually enjoys
the transcendental ecstasy of His service.



Only that which is offered with love and devotion can
attract and control Kṛṣṇa

patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ

BG 9.26/SB 10.81.4/VG p. 60

patram—a (Tulasī) leaf; puṣpam—a flower; phalam—a fruit;
toyam—water; yaḥ—whoever; me—unto Me; bhaktyā—with
devotion; prayacchati—offers; tat—that; aham—I; bhakti-
upahṛtam—offered in devotion; aśnāmi—accept; prayata-
ātmanaḥ—from one in pure consciousness.

Whatever the devotee lovingly offers Me, such as Tulasī
leaf, flower, fruit, and water, I accept with heartfelt
affection.



Kṛṣṇa is equally disposed towards all, but is bound by
the love of His devotees

samo —haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo —sti na priyaḥ

ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā mayi te teṣu cāpy aham

SBG 9.26/JD ch. 3

samaḥ—equally disposed; aham—I; sarva-bhūteṣu—to all
living entities; na—no one; me—to Me; dveṣyaḥ—hated; na
asti—there is no-one; priyaḥ—or dear; ye—who; bhajanti—
render transcendental service; tu—however; mām—unto Me;
bhaktyā—with devotion; mayi—in Me; te—they; teṣu—in
them; ca—also; api—certainly; aham—I.

I am equal to all living beings and am neither inimical
nor partial to anyone. However those who serve Me with
love and devotion are in My heart and I am in their
hearts.

Only by bhakti can one actually know Me and enter into
My pastimes

bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā viśate tad-anantaram

                          423
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


SBG 18.55

bhaktyā—through bhakti; abhijānāti—one can fully know;
mām—Me; tattvataḥ—in truth; yāvān—how great My opulence
is; ca yaḥ asmi—and what My svarūpa (original form) is;
tataḥ—then; jñātvā—having understood; tattvataḥ—in
truth; tat-anantaram—after that; viśate—one can enter;
mām—Me (My nitya-līlā).

It is only through bhakti that one can know the tattva
of My glories and svarūpa. One then enters My eternal
pastimes through that tattva on the strength of prema-
bhakti.

oṁ amṛta-rūpā ca

Nārada-bhakti-sūtra 1.3 - I meditate on Bhakti-devī who
has a nectarean form.

oṁ yal labdhā pumān siddho bhavatyamṛtī-bhavati tṛpto
bhavati

Nārada-bhakti-sūtra 1.4

I meditate upon that sublime Bhakti-devī whose darśana
bestows perfection, immortality, and complete
satisfaction.

oṁ yat prāpya na kiñcit vāñchati na śocati na dveṣṭi na
ramate notsāhī bhavati

Nārada-bhakti-sūtra 1.5

I meditate on the sublime form of Bhakti-devī whose
darśana liberates one from worldly attachments,
hankering, lamentation and dependence on material
things.



Brahmā is praying to attain pure, Vraja bhakti

tad astu me nātha sa bhūri-bhāgo

bhave —tra vānyatra tu vā tiraścām

yenāham eko —pi bhavaj-janānāṁ

bhūtvā niṣeve tava pāda-pallavam

SB 10.14.30/BR 4.13/JD Intro

tat—therefore; astu—may it be; me—my; nātha—O master;
saḥ—that; bhūri-bhāgaḥ—greatest good fortune; bhave—in
the birth; atra—this; vā—or; anyatra—in some other
birth; tu—indeed; vā—or; tiraścām—among the animals;
yena—by which; aham—I; ekaḥ—one; api—even; bhavat—or
Your; janānām—devotees; bhūtvā—becoming; niṣeve—I may
fully engage in serving; tava—Your; pāda-pallavam—lotus
feet.

O Bhagavān, may I be so fortunate as to attain the
association of Your devotees and, under their guidance,

                          424
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

obtain service to Your lotus feet; be it in this life as
Brahmā or any other human birth, or even in a birth
among the animal species.



Whether free from desires or full of desires, one should
worship Kṛṣṇa

akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena yajeta puruṣaṁ param

SB 2.3.10/CC Madhya 22.36, 24.197

akāmaḥ—one who has transcended all material desires;
sarva-kāmaḥ—one who has the sum total of material
desires; vā—either; mokṣa-kāmaḥ—one who desires
liberation; udāra-dhīḥ—with broader intelligence;
tīvreṇa—with great force; bhakti-yogena—by devotional
service to the Lord; yajeta—should worship; puruṣam—
Person, enjoyer; param—the Supreme.

Whether one is desireless, full of desires for sense
enjoyment or desires liberation from material bondage,
if he is intelligent he should worship the Supreme
Person through intense and unalloyed cultivation of
bhakti-yoga.



Kṛṣṇa fufills material desires in such a way that the
desire to enjoy is removed

satyaṁ diśaty arthitam arthito nṛṇāṁ

naivārthado yat punar arthitā yataḥ

svayaṁ vidhatte bhajatām anicchatām

icchāpidhānaṁ nija-pāda-pallavam

SB 5.19.27/CC Mad 24.103

satyam—certainly; diśati—He offers; arthitam—the object
prayed for; arthitaḥ—being prayed to; nṛṇām—by the human
beings; na—not; eva—indeed; artha-daḥ—the bestower of
benedictions; yat—which; punaḥ—again; arthitā—a demand
for a benediction; yataḥ—from which; svayam—personally;
vidhatte—He gives; bhajatām—unto those engaged in His
service; anicchatām—although not desiring it; icchā-
pidhānam—which covers all desirable things; nija-pāda-
pallavam—His own lotus feet.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead fulfills the material
desires of a devotee who approaches Him with such
motives, but He does not bestow benedictions upon the
devotee that will cause him to demand more benedictions
again. However, the Lord willingly gives the devotee
shelter at His own lotus feet, even though such a person
does not aspire for it, and that shelter satisfies all
his desires. That is the Supreme Personality’s special
mercy.


                           425
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017



Śrī Govinda is attained by spontaneous devotion of the
soul

advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam

ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca

vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Brahma-Saṁhitā, 33

aham bhajāmi—I render service; tam ādi-puruṣam govindam—
to that primeval Person, Śrī Govinda; advaitam—who has
no second; acyutam—who is infallible; anādim—
beginningless; ananta-rūpam—who possesses limitless
forms; ādyam—who is the origin; purāṇa-puruṣam—who is
the primeval person; nava-yauvanam ca—yet is ever-
youthful; vedeṣu durlabham—whose tattva is difficult to
determine through a study of the Vedas; adurlabham—but
is understood without difficulty; ātma-bhaktau—by His
own devotee.

Although He is non-dual, infallible, beginningless,
possessed of unlimited forms and the oldest of all,
nevertheless, He is a beautiful person with everlasting,
fresh youthfulness. Although He is incomprehensible to
the Vedas, He is easily attained by śuddha-prema,
spontaneous devotion of the soul. I render service to
that ādi-puruṣa, Śrī Govinda.



Your name, form and attributes can be ascertained only
through bhakti

na nāma-rūpe guṇa-janma-karmabhir

nirūpitavye tava tasya sākṣiṇaḥ

mano-vacobhyām anumeya-vartmano

deva kriyāyāṁ pratiyanty athāpi hi

SB 10.2.36

na—not; nāma-rūpe—the name and form; guṇa—with
attributes; janma—appearance; karmabhiḥ—activities or
pastimes; nirūpitavye—cannot be ascertained; tava—Your;
tasya—of Him; sākṣiṇaḥ—who is the direct observer; manaḥ
—of the mind; vacobhyām—words; anumeya—hypothesis;
vartmanaḥ—the path; deva—O Lord; kriyāyām—in devotional
activities; pratiyanti—they realise; atha api—still; hi—
indeed.

O Lord, Your transcendental name and form are not
ascertained by those who merely speculate on the path of
hypothesis. Your name, form and attributes can be
ascertained only through devotional service.



                          426
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇa is not accessible to mental speculators or yogīs

nāyaṁ sukhāpo bhagavān dehināṁ gopikā-sutaḥ

jñānināṁ cātma-bhūtānāṁ yathā bhaktimatām iha

SB 10.9.21/CC Madhya 8.227, 9.132, 24.86, Antya 7.27

na—not; ayam—this; sukha-āpaḥ—very easily obtainable, or
an object of happiness; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; dehinām—of persons in the bodily concept of
life, especially the karmīs; gopikā-sutaḥ—Kṛṣṇa, the son
of mother Yaśodā (Kṛṣṇa as the son of Vasudeva is called
Vāsudeva, and as the son of mother Yaśodā He is known as
Kṛṣṇa); jñāninām ca—and of the jñānīs, who try to be
free from material contamination; ātma-bhūtānām—of self-
realised yogīs; yathā—as; bhakti-matām—of the devotees;
iha—in this world.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, the son of
mother Yaśodā, is accessible to devotees engaged in
spontaneous loving service, but He is not as easily
accessible to mental speculators, to those striving for
self-realisation by severe austerities and penances, or
to those who consider the body the same as the self.



By the power of bhakti Vyāsadeva saw Kṛṣṇa in His most
complete aspect

bhakti-yogena manasi samyak praṇihite —male

apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam

SB 1.7.4

bhakti—devotional service; yogena—by the process of
linking up; manasi—upon the mind; samyak—perfectly;
praṇihite—engaged in and fixed upon; amale—without any
matter; apaśyat—saw; puruṣam—the Personality of Godhead;
pūrṇam—complete; māyām—energy; ca—also; tat—His;
apāśrayam—under full control.

By the power of bhakti-yoga, Śrīla Vyāsadeva, being
firmly concentrated in meditation with a purified mind,
saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa fully endowed with spiritual effulgence,
with His plenary portions, and with His internal potency
of svarūpa-śakti (Śrīmatī Rādhikā). His external potency
māyā, being of an inferior nature, was seen in the
background under His full control.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: In this śloka the words
“apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ— indicate Kṛṣṇa in His fullest
aspect, which can only mean that He is accompanied by
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. This is the inner meaning. How did
Vyāsa see this? By the practice of bhakti-yoga. What
kind of bhakti-yoga? Was it by vaidhī-bhakti-yoga? No.
By bhakti-yoga which is full of the mood of Vraja. Will
one be able to see Kṛṣṇa as “apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ—, in
His complete form, by vātsalya-bhāva? No. Kṛṣṇa is only
complete when He is with Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Vyāsa is none
other than Bhagavān Himself, so certainly he was able to

                          427
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

see this. (Śrī Hari-kathāmṛta vol 1)



Lord Brahmā concluded that rati for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
highest perfection

bhagavān brahma kārtsnyena trir anvīkṣya manīṣayā

tad adhyavasyat kūṭa-stho ratir ātmany ato bhavet

SB 2.2.34

bhagavān—the great personality Brahmā; brahma—the Vedas;
kārtsnyena—by summarization; triḥ—three times; anvīkṣya—
scrutinizingly examined; manīṣayā—with his intelligence;
tat—that; adhyavasyat—ascertained it; kūṭa-sthaḥ—with
concentration of the mind; ratiḥ—attraction; ātmani—unto
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ataḥ—then; bhavet—it may happen.

The great personality Brahmā, with great attention and
concentration of the mind, studied the Vedas three
times, and then ascertained that attaiment of bhāva for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the highest spiritual perfection.



Kṛṣṇa’s ultimate instruction in the Bhagavad-Gītā

man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te pratijāne priyo —si me

BG 18.65/CC Madhya 22.58/—The Essence of Bhagavad-Gīta—

mat-manāḥ—absorb your mind in Me; bhava—just become;
mat-bhaktaḥ—My devotee; mat-yājī—My worshiper; mām—unto
Me; namaskuru—offer your obeisances; mām—unto Me; eva—
certainly; eṣyasi—you will come; satyam—truly; te—to
you; pratijāne—I promise; priyaḥ—dear; asi—you are; me—
to Me.

Absorb your mind and heart in Me, become My devotee,
worship Me, offer your obeisances to Me, and certainly
you will come to Me. I make this promise to you because
you are very dear to Me.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains: The meaning of “Absorb
your mind and heart in Me— is “Perform bhajana in the
mood of the gopīs.” If you cannot do this, then “become
My devotee (in spontaneous devotion - rāga-marga)”; if
you cannot do this, then “worship Me (in awe and
reverence - vaidhi-mārga)”; and if you cannot do this,
at least come to the temple and offer your obeisances to
Me (in My Deity form). Kṛṣṇa promises: “If you do this
with a little love and affection, I assure you that you
will come to Me without fail”. See Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja’s book “The essence of the Gītā— for further
discussion of this śloka.



Mahāprabhu declares: Vaiṣṇava-sevā and nāma-saṅkīrtana
bestow Śrī Kṛṣṇa caraṇa

                          428
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


prabhu kahe vaiṣṇava-sevā, nāma-saṅkīrtana

dui kara, śīghra pābe śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa

CC Mad 16.70

prabhu kahe—the Lord replied; vaiṣṇava-sevā—service to
the Vaiṣṇavas; nāma-saṅkīrtana—chanting the holy name of
the Lord; dui kara—you perform these two things; śīghra—
very soon; pābe—you will get; śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa—shelter
at the lotus feet of the Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied, “You should engage
yourself in the service of the servants of Kṛṣṇa and
always chant the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. If you do these
two things, you will very soon attain shelter at Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet.”

Thus ends section 1) Sādhana-bhakti



2) The Benefits of Bhakti



The three results of worshiping Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet

ity acyutāṅghriṁ bhajato —nuvṛttyā

bhaktir viraktir bhagavat-prabodhaḥ

bhavanti vai bhāgavatasya rājaṁs

tataḥ parāṁ śāntim upaiti sākṣāt

SB 11.2.43

iti—thus; acyuta—of the infallible Supreme Lord; aṅghrim
—the feet; bhajataḥ—for one who is worshiping; anuvṛttyā
—by constant practice; bhaktiḥ—devotion; viraktiḥ—
detachment; bhagavat-prabodhaḥ—knowledge of Bhagavān;
bhavanti—they manifest; vai—indeed; bhāgavatasya—for the
devotee; rājan—O King Nimi; tataḥ—then; parām śāntim—
supreme peace; upaiti—he attains; sākṣāt—directly.

My dear King, the devotee who worships the lotus feet of
the infallible Supreme Lord with constant endeavor thus
achieves unflinching devotion, detachment and realised
knowledge of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thereafter the successful
devotee of the Lord achieves supreme spiritual peace.

Editorial note: When bhakti manifests in the heart, it
is characterised by three symptoms: Jñāna (all tattva-
siddhānta), vairāgya (detachment from any worldly
desires) and vijñāna (realised knowledge — all of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes will manifest in one’s heart).



The symptoms of bhakti in Śrīmad-Bhagavātam

bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir

                            429
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


anyatra caiṣa trika eka-kālaḥ

prapadyamānasya yathāśnataḥ syus

tuṣṭiḥ puṣṭiḥ kṣud-apāyo —nu-ghāsam

SB 11.2.42

bhaktiḥ—devotion; para-īśa—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; anubhavaḥ—direct perception; viraktiḥ—
detachment; anyatra—from everything else; ca—and; eṣaḥ—
this; trikaḥ—group of three; eka-kālaḥ—simultaneously;
prapadyamānasya—for one in the process of taking shelter
of the Supreme Lord; yathā—in the same way as; aśnataḥ—
for one engaged in eating; syuḥ—they occur; tuṣṭiḥ—
satisfaction; puṣṭiḥ—nourishment; kṣut-apāyaḥ—
eradication of hunger; anu-ghāsam—increasingly with each
morsel.

Devotion, direct experience of the Supreme Lord, and
detachment from other things—these three occur
simultaneously for one who has taken shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the same way that
pleasure, nourishment and relief from hunger come
simultaneously and increasingly, with each bite, for a
person engaged in eating.



Devotion to Kṛṣṇa is likened to watering the root of a
tree— it satisfies everyone

yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena

tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ

prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇāṁ

tathaiva sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā

SB 4.31.14/CC Madhya 22.63/BR 4.3

yathā—as; taroḥ—of a tree; mūla—the root; niṣecanena—by
watering; tṛpyanti—are satisfied; tat—its; skandha—
trunk; bhuja—branches; upaśākhāḥ—and twigs; prāṇa—the
life air; upahārāt—by feeding; ca—and; yathā—as;
indriyāṇām—of the senses; tathā eva—similarly; sarva—of
all demigods, forefathers etc.; arhaṇam—worship; acyuta—
of the infallible Lord; ijyā—worship.

By watering the root of a tree, all its parts, such as
the trunk, branches, leaves and flowers are nourished,
and by satisfying the life-airs through eating, all of
the senses are nourished. Similarly, simply by
worshipping Śrī Kṛṣṇa all the demigods, forefathers and
everyone else is worshipped and satisfied.



One who has taken full shelter of Mukunda is not
indebted to anyone

devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

                          430
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

SB 11.5.41/CC Madya 22.141/BR 2.25/JD ch. 10,19

deva—of the demigods; ṛṣi—of the sages; bhūta—of
ordinary living entities; āpta—of friends and relatives;
nṛṇām—of ordinary men; pitṝṇām—of the forefathers; na—
not; kiṅkaraḥ—the servant; na—nor; ayam—this one; ṛṇī—
debtor; ca—also; rājan—O King; sarva-ātmanā—with his
whole being; yaḥ—a person who; śaraṇam—shelter; śaraṇyam
—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who affords shelter
to all; gataḥ—approached; mukundam—Mukunda; parihṛtya—
giving up; kartam—duties.

One who has given up all other duties complete shelter
of Bhagavān Mukunda, who is affectionate towards the
surrendered, is not indebted to the demigods, to his
forefathers, to ordinary living entities, or to
relatives and guests. He is not subordinate to anyone
other than Mukunda, nor is he their servant.

Editorial note: These last two ślokas constitute pramaṇa
that one should do only Bhāgavat-bhajana (Kṛṣṇa worship)
and not deva-bhajana (demigod worship).



Devotion saturated with love

evaṁ dharmair manuṣyāṇām uddhavātma-nivedinām

mayi sañjāyate bhaktiḥ ko —nyo —rtho —syāvaśiṣyate

SB 11.19.24/Upad 3, pt

evam—thus; dharmaiḥ—by such dharmik principles;
manuṣyānām—of human beings; uddhava—Mv dear Uddhava;
ātma-nivedinām—who are surrendered souls; mayi—to Me;
sañjāyate—arises; bhaktiḥ—loving devotion; kaḥ—what;
anyaḥ—other; arthaḥ—purpose; asya—of My devotee;
avaśiṣyate—remains.

Devotion which is saturated with love for Me arises in
the hearts of those who offer their very souls unto Me
and who follow dharmic principles which are favourable
for bhakti. What other object remains to be obtained for
those who have attained My bhakti?



For those who have accepted the boat of the lotus feet
of the Lord, the ocean of the material world is like the
water contained in a calf’s hoof-print

samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavaṁ

mahat-padaṁ puṇya-yaśo murāreḥ

bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ

                          431
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām

SB 10.14.58

samāśritāḥ—having taken shelter; ye—those who; pada—of
the feet; pallava—like flower buds; plavam—which are a
boat; mahat—of the total material creation, or of the
great souls; padam—the shelter; puṇya—supremely pious;
yaśaḥ—whose fame; mura-areḥ—of the enemy of the demon
Mura; bhava—of the material existence; ambudhiḥ—the
ocean; vatsa-padam—the hoof-print of a calf; param padam
—the supreme abode; padam padam—at every step; yat—
where; vipadām—of material miseries; na—none; teṣām—for
them.

For those who have accepted the boat of the lotus feet
of the Lord, who is the shelter of the cosmic
manifestation and is famous as Murāri, the enemy of the
Mura demon, the ocean of the material world becomes
reduced to the water contained in a calf’s hoof-print.
Since they have achieved the shelter of paraṁ padam, the
supreme destination of Goloka Vṛndāvana, they are
undisturbed by the dualities of this world where there
is danger at every step

Thus ends section 2) The Benefits of Bhakti



3) The Six Results of Pure Bhakti



The six symptoms of pure bhakti as explained by Rūpa
Gosvāmī in BRS

kleśa-ghnī śubhadā mokṣa-laghutā-kṛt sudurlabhā

sāndrānanda-viśeṣātmā śrī-kṛṣṇākarṣiṇī ca sā

BRS 1.1.17/JD ch. 19/BPKG p. 390/GKH (P)



1. kleśa-ghnī — Śrīmatī Bhakti-devī destroys all kinds
of distress.



2. śubhadā — She awards all kinds of good fortune.



3. mokṣa-laghutā-kṛt — She makes the pleasure of
impersonal liberation appear laghutā — insignificant.



4. sudurlabhā — She is rarely achieved.



5. sāndrānanda-viśeṣātmā — Her nature is imbued with the

                          432
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

most intense and superlative bliss.



6. śrī-kṛṣṇa-ākarṣiṇī — She is the sole means to attract
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Editorial note: The first two items appear in the stage
of sādhana-bhakti, the third and fourth in bhāva-bhakti,
and the last two in the stage of prema-bhakti.

1. Kleśa-ghnī - Bhakti destroys all Kleśa (material
miseries/karmic reactions)

Kleśa are of three types: pāpa or sin, pāpa-bīja or sins
in their seed form and avidyā or ignorance. Prārabdha
sins are those whereby the jīva is already tasting the
fruits or results of seeds that are fructifying (i.e.
suffering the reactions of sin in his present life
span); aprārabdha sins refers to sins which are coming
towards fructification (i.e. whose reactions will be
suffered in one’s next life).



Only pure bhakti completely uproots the weeds of sinful
desires

kecit kevalayā bhaktyā vāsudeva-parāyaṇāḥ

aghaṁ dhunvanti kārtsnyena nīhāram iva bhāskaraḥ

SB 6.1.15/ CC Mad 22.31

kecit—some people; kevalayā bhaktyā—by executing
unalloyed devotional service; vāsudeva—to Lord Kṛṣṇa;
parāyaṇāḥ—completely attached (only to such service,
without dependence on austerity, penance, cultivation of
knowledge or pious activities); agham—all kinds of
sinful reactions; dhunvanti—destroy; kārtsnyena—
completely (with no possibility that sinful desires will
revive); nīhāram—fog; iva—like; bhāskaraḥ—the sun.

Only those rare persons who have adopted complete,
unalloyed devotional service to Kṛṣṇa can uproot the
weeds of sinful actions with no possibility that they
will revive. He can do this simply by discharging
devotional service, just as the sun can immediately
dissipate fog by its rays.



Bhakti destroys prārabdha-karma (reactions to sins
experienced in this life)

yan-nāmadheya-śravaṇānukīrttanād

yat-prahvaṇād yat smaraṇād api kvacit

śvādo —pi sadyaḥ savanāya kalpate

kutaḥ punas te bhagavan nu darśanāt

SB 3.33.6/BTV ch. 3

                          433
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


yat—of whom (the Supreme Lord); nāmadheya—the name;
śravaṇa—hearing; anukīrtanāt—by chanting unser the
guidance of our ācāryas; yat—to whom; prahvaṇāt—by
offering obeisances; yat—whom; smaraṇāt—by remembering;
api—even; kvacit—at any time; śva-adaḥ—a dog-eater; api—
even; sadyaḥ—immediately; savanāya—for performing Vedic
sacrifices; kalpate—becomes eligible; kutaḥ—what to
speak of; punaḥ—again; te—You; bhagavan—O Bhagavān; nu—
then; darśanāt—by seeing face to face.

O my dear Lord! By hearing and chanting Your holy names,
by offering praṇāma unto You and by remembering You,
even a person born in a family of dog-eaters immediately
obtains the right to perform Vedic sacrifices; in other
words, he acquires the status of a brāhmaṇa. What to
speak then of the benefit one can achieve by receiving
Your direct darśana?



Bhakti destroys aprārabdha sins (reactions that will
manifest in future lives)

aprārabdha-phalaṁ pāpaṁ kūṭaṁ bījaṁ phalonmukham

krameṇaiva pralīyeta viṣṇu-bhakti-ratātmanām

Padma Purāṇa/Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.23/BTV ch. 3

For those who have undeviating and exclusive attachment
for kṛṣṇa-bhakti, their (i) aprārabdha or the
accumulated stock of sins which are lying in a dormant
condition, (ii) kūṭa or sins which are tending toward
producing seeds, which means that they are beginning to
take shape as sinful desires, (iii) bīja or seeds which
are already established as sinful desires and (iv)
prārabdha or fructified sins are all destroyed in
sequence.” [The purport is that for the destruction of
their sins, the devotees need not perform any separate
acts of either karma or jñāna as atonement.]

The desires to commit sinful activities which are
situated within the heart of the jīva are called pāpa-
bīja or the seeds of sins. Pāpa-bīja can only be
destroyed by bhakti

tais tāny aghāni pūyante tapo-dāna-vratādibhiḥ

nādharmajaṁ tad-dhṛdayaṁ tad apīśāṅghri-sevayā

SB 6.2.17/BRS 1.1.24/BTV ch. 3

taiḥ—by those; tāni—all those; aghāni—sinful activities
and their results; pūyante—become vanquished; tapaḥ—
austerity; dāna—charity; vrata-ādibhiḥ—by vows and other
such activities; na—not; adharma-jam—produced from
irreligious actions; tat—of that; hṛdayam—the heart; tat
—that; api—also; īśa-aṅghri—of the lotus feet of the
Lord; sevayā—by service.

Although one may neutralize the reactions of sinful life
through austerity, charity, vows and other such methods,
these pious activities cannot uproot the material

                          434
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

desires in one’s heart. However, if one serves the lotus
feet of the Lord, he is immediately freed from all such
contaminations.



Bhakti eradicates avidyā

kṛtānuyātrā vidyābhir hari-bhaktir anuttamā

avidyāṁ nirdahaty āśu dāva-jvāleva pannagīm

Padma Purāṇa/BRS 1.1.26

When hari-bhakti appears in the heart, she is followed
by vidyā-śakti which immediately dispels the ignorance
situated within the heart of the jīva, just as a serpent
is burnt by a blazing forest fire.

yat-pāda-pañkaja-palāśa-vilāsa-bhaktyā

karmāśayaṁ grathitam udgrathayanti santaḥ

tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo —pi ruddha-

sroto-gaṇās tam araṇaṁ bhaja vāsudevam

SB 4.22.23/BRS 1.1.25

yat—whose; pāda—feet; paṅkaja—lotus; palāśa—petals or
toes; vilāsa—enjoyment; bhaktyā—by devotional service;
karma—fruitive activities; āśayam—desire; grathitam—hard
knot; udgrathayanti—root out; santaḥ—devotees; tatvat—
similarly; na—never; rikta-matayaḥ—persons devoid of
devotional service; yatayaḥ—ever-increasingly trying;
api—even though; ruddha—stopped; srotaḥ-gaṇāḥ—the waves
of sense enjoyment; tam—unto Him; araṇam—worthy to take
shelter; bhaja—engage in devotional service; vāsudevam—
unto Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva.

Ascetics who have detached their minds from the objects
of the senses by keeping their senses away from those
objects cannot easily untie the knot of the false ego
from their hearts, whereas devotees who are exclusively
engaged in transcendental loving service unto the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa can untie this knot in no time. Hence,
one should engage in the bhajana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
supreme shelter.



Those bound to You by a tie of affection, never fall
from the path of bhakti

tathā na te mādhava tāvakāḥ kvacid

bhraśyanti mārgāt tvayi baddha-sauhṛdāḥ

tvayābhiguptā vicaranti nirbhayā

vināyakānīkapa-mūrdhasu prabho

SB 10.2.33/JD ch. 17


                           435
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

tathā—like them (the nondevotees); na—not; te—they (the
devotees); mādhava—Kṛṣṇa the master of Rādhā; tāvakāḥ—
Your devotees; kvacit—in any circumstances; bhraśyanti—
fall down; mārgāt—from the path of devotional service;
tvayi—unto You; baddha-sauhṛdāḥ—because of being fully
attached to Your lotus feet; tvayā—by You; abhiguptāḥ—
always protected from all dangers; vicaranti—they move;
nirbhayāḥ—without fear; vināyaka-anīkapa—the enemies who
maintain paraphernalia to oppose the bhakti cult;
mūrdhasu—on their heads; prabho—O Lord.

O Mādhava, the jñānīs who imagine themselves to be
liberated may fall from their so-called position of
liberation, but Your devotees who are bound to You by a
tie of intimate affection, never fall from the path of
bhakti. Because such devotees are fully protected by
You, they fearlessly cross over all obstacles by placing
their feet upon the heads of the predominating deities
who are empowered to instigate the most severe types of
obstacles.



Though the cultivation of jñāna can dispel avidyā to
some extent, without taking shelter of bhakti, a sādhaka
will certainly fall down

ye —nye —ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho —nādṛta-yusmad-aṅghrayaḥ

SB 10.2.32/CC madhya 22.30, 24.131, 25.32/JD ch.
7,15,17/BTV ch. 3/BPKG p. 519

aravinda-akṣa—O lotus-eyed one; ye anye—those others;
asta-bhāvāt—on account of their mood being displaced;
tvayi—towards You; vimukta-māninaḥ—falsely considering
themselves liberated from material bondage; aviśuddha-
buddhayaḥ—their intelligence being impure; āruhya—even
though achieving; kṛcchreṇa—by undergoing severe
austerities; param padam—the highest position (according
to their imagination and speculation); patanti—they
fall; adhaḥ—down into material existence; tataḥ—from
that position; anādṛta—because of neglecting devotion
to; yuṣmat—Your; aṅghrayaḥ—lotus feet.

O lotus-eyed Lord! Persons whose natural devotion to You
has been displaced engage in mental speculation. They
strive to achieve something different from dull matter
through the negative process of neti neti (na iti— the
ātmā is not this and also not that) and though they
consider themselves liberated, their intelligence
remains impure. Though with great difficulty they cross
the ocean of nescience to attain the stage of impersonal
Brahman, yet since they do not honor Your lotus feet
(which are the very source of that Brahman), they fall
down from such a stage.




                          436
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

2. Śubhadā - Bhakti bestows all good fortune



Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says Bhakti is auspicious by nature

śubhāni prīṇanaṁ sarva-jagatām anuraktatā

sad-guṇāḥ sukham ity ādīny ākhyātāni manīṣibhiḥ

BRS 1.1.27

Scholars define śubha or true auspiciousness as
possessing love for all living entities and becoming the
object of affection of all living entities as well as
possessing all good qualities, happiness, and other
similar auspicious achievements.



The Padma Purāṇa explains what is meant by possessing
love for all living entities and being the object of
affection of all living entities

yenārcito haris tena tarpitāni jaganty api

rajyanti jantavas tatra jaṅgamāḥ sthāvarā api

Padma Purāṇā/BRS 1.1.28

“Those who have worshipped Śrī Hari have satisfied the
entire universe. Therefore, all living entities, both
animate and inanimate, love them.” [The purport is that
those who are devoted exclusively to hari-bhajana love
everyone without any envy; therefore, others also love
them]



All varieties of good qualities naturally develop in
devotees

yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā

sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ

harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā

manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ

SB 5.18.12/BRS 1.1.29/CC Ādi 8.58, Mad 22.76/BTV ch. 3/
BR 4.20

yasya—of whom; asti—there is; bhaktiḥ—pure devotional
service; bhagavati—unto Śrī Bhagavān; akiñcanā—without
material desires; sarvaiḥ—all; guṇaiḥ—with good
qualities; tatra—there; samāsate—live; surāḥ—the
demigods; harau—unto the Lord; abhaktasya—of the
nondevotee; kutaḥ—where; mahat-guṇāḥ—the high qualities;
manaḥ-rathena—by mental concoction; asati—to temporary
material happiness; dhāvataḥ—running; bahiḥ—externally.

One who renders pure, unflinching devotional service to
Kṛṣṇa, manifests all the good qualities of Kṛṣṇa and the

                          437
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

demigods. However, he who has no devotion to Śrī
Bhagavān, is devoid of good qualities because he is
engaged by mental concoction in the service of māyā,
which is the deluding, external potency of the Lord.



Hari-bhakti bestows all varieties of happiness:
According to one’s adhikāra it bestows either vaiṣayika-
sukha, brahma-sukha or aiśvarya-sukha

siddhayaḥ paramāścaryā bhukti-muktiś ca śāśvatī

nityaṁ ca paramānandaṁ bhaved govinda bhaktitaḥ

BRS 1.1.31

Aṇimā, mahimā, laghimā, prāpti, īṣitā, vaśitvā, prākāmyā
and kāma-vasāyitā—these eight types of perfections, all
varieties of material enjoyment, brahma-sukha and
paramānanda or the supreme bliss can all be achieved by
performing bhakti unto Śrī Govinda.

[Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī:] The happiness of the conditioned
soul can be divided into three categories: vaiṣayika-
sukha (all the varieties of mundane pleasure as well as
the eighteen types of mystic perfection and heavenly
enjoyment), brahma-sukha (the impersonal pleasure
derived from eliminating all mundane feelings and
imagining oneself to be one with the unchangeable
brahma) and aiśvarya-sukha (The happiness derived from
taking permanent shelter of Bhagavān, who possesses all
opulences).

bhūyo —pi yāce deveśa tvayi bhakti-dṛḍhāstu me

yā mokṣānta-caturvarga-phaladā sukhadā latā

Śrī Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya/BRS 1.1.32

O Lord of the demigods! I repeatedly beg for the boon of
attaining exclusive bhakti unto You. Bhakti is the
bliss-bestowing creeper, which awards, according to
one’s specific qualification, the fruits of wealth,
religiosity, sense gratification and liberation.
Furthermore, to the devotees it gives the ultimate fruit
prema.

[Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī:] The purport is that bhakti is
capable of bestowing all types of happiness but the
unalloyed devotees, considering the pleasure derived
from sense gratification and brahma-sukha to be
insignificant, search exclusively for prema-sukha.
Without the help of bhakti, the paths of jñāna and karma
are incapable of yielding any result. Hence, in any
condition, happiness cannot be obtained without bhakti]



3. Mokṣa-laghutā-kṛt - She makes the pleasure of
impersonal liberation insignificant




                          438
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

By nature bhakti renders the conception of mukti
insignificant

hari-bhakti-mahādevyāḥ sarvā muktyādi-siddhayaḥ

bhuktayaś cādbhutās tasyāś ceṭikāvad anuvratāḥ

Nārada-pañcarātra/BRS 1.1.34/VG p. 124

Sālokya and the five kinds of muktis, the eight siddhis
including aṇimā and laghimā, omniscience, the post of
Indra, and the post of Brahmā are all maidservants of
Hari-bhakti Mahādevī. So wherever Mahādevī Hari-bhakti
is present, her maidservants like bhuktis, siddhis and
muktis automatically appear there with folded hands,
always waiting for her command.

manāg eva prarūḍhāyāṁ hṛdaye bhagavad- ratau

puruṣārthās tu catvāras tṛṇāyante samantataḥ

BRS 1.1.33

When bhagavat-rati (bhāva) for Śrī Bhagavān becomes
implanted in the heart to even a slight degree, the
fourfold achievements of dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa
(economic development, religiosity, sense gratification
and liberation) become insignificant for the devotee.



4. Sudurlabhā — She is rarely achieved



Attainment of hari-bhakti is extremely rare, sudurlabhā.
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describes the extreme rarity of
bhakti:

sādhanaughair anāsaṅgair alabhyā sucirād api

hariṇā cāśv adeyeti dvidhā sā syāt sudurlabhā

BRS 1.1.35

There are two reasons for hari-bhakti being so rare.
First, it cannot be achieved in spite of engaging in
many varieties of sādhana for a long period of time as
long as one is bereft of firm faith and unwavering
persistence. Second, Śrī Hari does not easily grant His
bhakti even though one may be engaged in āsaṅga-yukta-
sādhana or sādhana endowed with unflinching attachment.

jñānataḥ sulabhā muktir bhuktir yajñādi-puṇyataḥ

seyaṁ sādhana-sāhasrair hari-bhaktiḥ sudurlabhā

BRS 1.1.36

By the cultivation of jñāna one can easily obtain mukti
and by the performance of sacrifices and other pious
activities one can also easily obtain bhukti, but
despite performing innumerable sādhanas one cannot
achieve hari-bhakti so easily.

                          439
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Bhagavān does not easily grant His bhakti

rājan patir gurur alaṁ bhavatāṁ yadūnāṁ

daivaṁ priyaḥ kula-patiḥ kva ca kiṅkaro vaḥ

astv evam aṅga bhajatāṁ bhagavān mukundo

muktiṁ dadāti karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam

SB 5.6.18/BRS 1.1.37

rājan—O my dear King; patiḥ—maintainer; guruḥ—spiritual
master; alam—certainly; bhavatām—of you; yadūnām—the
Yadu dynasty; daivam—the worshipable Deity; priyaḥ—very
dear friend; kula-patiḥ—the master of the dynasty; kva
ca—sometimes even; kiṅkaraḥ—servant; vaḥ—of you (the
Pāṇḍavas); astu—to be sure; evam—thus; aṅga—O King;
bhagavān—Śrī Bhagavān; bhajatām—of those devotees
engaged in service; mukundaḥ—the Lord; muktim—
liberation; dadāti—delivers; karhicit—at any time; sma—
indeed; na—not; bhakti-yogam—loving devotional service.

“My dear King Parīkṣit! Lord Mukunda Himself was the
protector, guru, iṣṭadeva(worshipable Deity), well-
wisher and kula-pati (head of the dynasty) of the
Pāṇḍavas and the Yadu dynasty. Sometimes He even became
their obedient servant. It is a matter of great fortune
because Bhagavān easily grants mukti to those engaged in
His bhajana, but He doesn—t easily award His prema,
which is far superior to mukti.”



5. Sāndrānanda-viśeṣātmā — Her nature is imbued with the
most intense and superlative bliss



By nature bhakti is very intense ānanda or
transcendental pleasure

brahmānando bhaved eṣa cet parārddha-guṇī-kṛtaḥ

naiti bhakti-sukhāmbhodheḥ paramāṇu-tulām api

BRS 1.1.38

Even if the brahmānanda experienced by impersonalists is
multiplied by ten million times, the resulting ānanda
won—t be equal to even a drop of the ocean of pleasure
derived from bhakti.



tvat-sākṣāt-karaṇāhlāda-viśuddhābdhi-sthitasya me

sukhāni gospadāyante brāhmāṇy api jagad-guro

Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya/BRS 1.1.39

O Bhagavān! By attaining Your darśana, I am now
established in the ocean of pure bliss. What to speak of

                          440
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

material pleasure, even brahma-sukha now seems as
insignificant as the water in a calf’s hoof-print.



6. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-ākarṣiṇī — She is the sole means to attract
Śrī Kṛṣṇa

kṛtvā hariṁ prema-bhājaṁ priya-varga-samanvitam

bhaktir vaśī-karotīti śrī-kṛṣṇākarṣiṇī matā

BRS 1.1.41



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains: Bhakti in the stage
of sādhana has two aspects: kleśa-ghnatvā, meaning it
removes all types of material distress, and śubha-datva,
meaning it offers the supreme auspiciousness. In the
stage of bhāva, four aspects of bhakti are visible:
kleśa-ghnatvā, śubha-datvā, mokṣa-laghutā-kāritvā,
meaning it reveals to the practitioner the
insignificance of liberation, and sudurlabhatvā, meaning
it is extremely rare. In the stage of prema, over and
above these four attributes, two more aspects are
visible: sāndrānanda-viśeṣātmā, meaning it grants
extremely intense transcendental pleasure, and śrī-
kṛṣṇākarṣiṇī, meaning it is the only means to attract
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (BTV ch. 3)

Thus ends section 3) The Six Results of Pure Bhakti



4) The Environment is Always Friendly

(Accept all apparent obstacles and difficulties as
benedictions)



Do not complain or blame, rather, try to see Kṛṣṇa’s
grace in every situation

tat te —nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo

bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam

hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te

jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk

SB 10.14.8/CC Madhya 6.261, Antya 9.77/BRSB p. 87/BR
5.3/PJ 3.9/STB p. 142

tat—therefore; te—Your; anukampām—compassion, grace; su-
samīkṣamāṇaḥ—earnestly seeking or hoping for; bhuñjānaḥ—
enduring; eva—certainly; ātma-kṛtam—caused by himself;
vipākam—fruitive results, karma; hṛt—with his heart; vāk
—words; vapurbhiḥ—and body; vidadhan—offering; namaḥ—
obeisances; te—unto You; jīveta—may live; yaḥ—anyone
who; mukti-pade—at whose lotus feet liberation takes
shelter; saḥ—he; dāya-bhāk—deserves to ultimately

                          441
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

inherit Kṛṣṇa’s grace.

One who accepts as Your mercy the reactions of his own
karma, enduring it with an undisturbed mind while
continuing to practice devotion by offering himself unto
You with body, mind and words - such a person is
eligible to attain Your lotus feet, which are the
shelter of liberation. (or) One who, in the hope of
achieving Your grace, goes on enduring the inauspicious
fruit of his own karma, and passes his days practising
devotion unto You through every thought, word and action
- such a person is heir to the land of freedom and
attains Your lotus feet.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “This śloka should be engraved
upon your hearts in gold” and “If you understand this
śloka, you will never get angry.”

Śrīla Bhakti-rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja: “The environment
is always friendly.” Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja captured
the gist of this śloka humourously when he paraphrased
an English proverb, “A good workman doesn—t quarrel with
his stools.”

Editorial note: Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has often
mentioned three basic rules for practicing bhakti:

1. Never Criticise (vaco vegam)

2. Never Complain (tat te “nukampām)

3. Never stop Chanting (tṛṇād api sunīcena - kīrtanīyaḥ
sadā hariḥ).



Remaining equipoised in both happiness or distress

duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ

vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ sthita-dhīr munir ucyate

BG 2.56

duḥkheṣu—in the presence of the threefold miseries;
anudvigna-manāḥ—one whose mind is not agitated; sukheṣu—
in the presence of sense-pleasures; vigata-spṛhaḥ—and
remains free from hankering; vīta—(one who is) free
from; rāga—attachment; bhaya—fear; krodhaḥ—and anger;
sthita-dhīḥ—of fixed intelligence; ucyate—is called.

One whose mind is not disturbed by the three types of
miseries (ādhyātmika, ādhibhautika and ādhidaivika), who
remains free from desires in the presence of happiness,
and who is free from attachment, fear and anger, is
called a sage of steady mind. (In other words, “If one’s
mind is not disturbed by any problems whatsoever, if
one’s heart is not agitated in the presence of material
pleasure, and if one remains free from material
attachments, fear and anger — only then can one perform
bhajana with a steady mind.”)

Remaining undisturbed by material misfortune


                          442
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

alabdhe vā vinaṣṭe vā bhakṣyācchādana-sādhane

aviklava-matir bhūtvā harim eva dhiyā smaret

BRS 1.2.114

If one fails to get the necessities of life, or if one
loses everything, one's recourse is to always meditate
upon the Lord with an undisturbed mind.

Mukunda will not manifest in a heart full of anger and
lamentation

śokāmarṣādibhir-bhāvair ākrāntaṁ yasya mānasam

kathaṁ tatra mukundasya sphūrti-sambhāvanā bhavet

BRS 1.2.115/BR 4.8 /Upad 1, pt

śoka—lamentation; amarṣa—indignation, anger; ādibhiḥ—and
so forth; bhāvaiḥ—(such negative) emotions; ākrāntam—
filled or overcome with; yasya—one whose; mānasam—mind
or heart; katham—how?; tatra—there; mukundasya—of Lord
Mukunda; sphūrti—vision, revelation; sambhāvanā—
possibility; bhavet—would be.

How can Mukunda manifest in the heart of a person who is
filled with anger, lamentation and similar inauspicious
emotions?

Embrace problems as benedictions

tomāra sevāya, duḥkha hoya jato, se to— parama sukha

sevā-sukha-duḥkha, parama sampada, nāśaye avidyā-duḥkha

Ātma-Nivedana 4, BVT/SGG p. 83

Whatever problems come to me in the course of rendering
service to You I shall accept as the highest pleasure,
for in the course of Your service happiness and distress
are equally great riches. Both destroy the misery of
ignorance (i.e. the false ego).

Do not praise or criticise the nature and activities of
conditioned souls para-svabhāva-karmāṇi na praśaṁsen na
garhayet

viśvam ekātmakaṁ paśyan prakṛtyā puruṣeṇa ca

SB 11.28.1/CC Antya 8.78

[śrī-bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said:] para—anyone else
—s; svabhāva—nature; karmāṇi—and activities; na
praśaṁset—one should not praise; na garhayet—one should
not criticize; viśvam—the world; eka-ātmakam—based on
the one Lord; paśyan—seeing; prakṛtyā—by maerial nature;
puruṣeṇa—by jīvas afflicted with the enjoying spirit; ca
—also.

[Śrī Bhagavān said:] Do not criticize or praise the
conditioned nature and activities of others. Rather,
view this world as simply the combination of material
nature and souls with an enjoying spirit, both under the

                           443
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

control of the Supreme Soul.

Those who criticise others will soon fall down and
destroy themselves

para-svabhāva-karmāṇi yaḥ praśaṁsati nindati

sa āśu bhraśyate svārthād asaty abhiniveśataḥ

SB 11.28.2

para—another—s; svabhāva—characteristics; karmāṇi—
activities; yaḥ—who; praśaṁsati—praises; nindati—
criticizes; saḥ—he; āśu—quickly; bhraśyate—falls down;
sva-arthāt—from his own interest; asati—in illusory
dualities; abhiniveśataḥ—because of becoming entangled.

Whoever indulges in praising or criticizing the
characteristics and behavior of others will quickly fall
down and deviate from his own best interest by his
entanglement in the illusory dualities of material
existence.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: If one dwells on the faults of
others, these same faults will automatically manifest in
one’s heart. We are blind to our own faults, this
blindness we should cure. Don—t criticise others, only
criticise your own mind.



Conceptions of “good” and “bad” are both unfavourable
for bhakti

dvaite bhadrābhadra-jñāna, saba manodharma

ei bhāla, ei manda, ei saba bhrama

CC Antya 4.176

dvaite—in the material world of dulities; bhadra-
abhadra-jñāna—knowledge of good and bad, auspicious and
inauspicious; saba—all; manaḥ-dharma—speculative mental
creations; ei bhāla—this is good; ei manda—this is bad;
ei—this; saba—all; bhrama—mistake, misconception.

[Mahāprabhu to Sanātana Gosvāmī]: “In the material
world, conceptions of good and bad are all mental
concoctions. Therefore, saying “This is good— or “This
is bad— is all a misconception.”



Don’t allow the caṇḍāla of fault finding to contaminate
your heart

sahaje nirmala ei “brāhmaṇa—-hṛdaya kṛṣṇera vasite ei
yogya-sthāna haya

“mātsarya—-caṇḍāla kene ihāṅ vasāile parama pavitra
sthāna apavitra kaile

CC Mad 15.274-5


                          444
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

sahaje—by nature; nirmala—without contamination; ei—
this; brāhmaṇa-hṛdaya—heart of a brāhmaṇa; kṛṣṇera—of
Lord Kṛṣṇa; vasite—to sit down; ei—this; yogya-sthāna—
proper place; haya—is; mātsarya—jealousy; caṇḍāla—dog-
eating, degraded outcaste; kene—why; ihāṅ—here; vasāile—
you allowed to sit; parama pavitra—most purified; sthāna
—place; apavitra—impure; kaile—you have made.

(Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:) “The heart of a brāhmaṇa
is by nature pure and soft; therefore it is a proper
place for Kṛṣṇa to sit. Why have you allowed the caṇḍāla
of jealousy to sit there also? In this way you have
contaminated a most purified place, your heart.”



Like a honey bee, the devotee sees only the positive
qualities and ignores the faults of others

vaiṣṇavera guṇa-grāhī, nā dekhaye doṣa

kāya-mano-vākye kare vaiṣṇava-santoṣa

CC Ādi 8.62

vaiṣṇavera—of devotees; guṇa-grāhī—accepting good
qualities; nā—never; dekhaye—sees; doṣa—any fault; kāya-
manaḥ-vākye—with heart and soul; kare—does; vaiṣṇava—
devotee; santoṣa—pacification.

He (Paṇḍita Haridāsa) always accepted the good qualities
of the Vaiṣṇavas and never found fault in them. He
engaged his heart and soul only to satisfy them.

Thus ends section 4) The Environment is Always Friendly



5) The Nine Limbs of Bhakti



5.1 Śravaṇa - The process of hearing

5.2 Kīrtana - Glorifying Kṛṣṇa by chanting His Holy Name

5.3 Smaraṇa - Rememberance

5.4 Pāda-sevana - Serving the lotus feet of the Lord

5.5 Arcana - Deity Worship

5.6 Vandana - Offering prayers, Stava-stuti

5.7 Dāsya - Serving the lord

5.8 Sakhya - Serving the Lord in the mood of Friendship

5.9 Atmā-nivedana - Complete Self-dedication



Śravaṇam, kīrtanam and smaraṇam of Śrī Kṛṣṇa remove all
miseries

                             445
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


yat-kīrtanaṁ yat-smaraṇaṁ yad-īkṣaṇaṁ

yad-vandanaṁ yac-chravaṇaṁ yad-arhaṇam

lokasya sadyo vidhunoti kalmaṣaṁ

tasmai subhadra-śravase namo namaḥ

SB 2.4.15

yat—whose; kīrtanam—glorification; yat—whose; smaraṇam—
remembrances; yat—whose; īkṣaṇam—audience; yat—whose;
vandanam—prayers; yat—whose; śravaṇam—hearing about; yat
—whose; arhaṇam—worshiping; lokasya—of all people;
sadyaḥ—forthwith; vidhunoti—specifically cleanses;
kalmaṣam—effects of sins, miseries; tasmai—unto Him;
subhadra—all-auspicious; śravase—one who is heard; namaḥ
—my due obeisances; namaḥ—again and again.

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-
auspicious Śrī Kṛṣṇa, about whom glorification,
remembrances, audience, prayers, hearing and worship can
at once cleanse the effects of all sins of the
performer.

5.1) Śravaṇa - The process of hearing (See Chapter 17)

5.2) Kīrtana - Glorifying Kṛṣṇa (See Chapter 17)

5.3) Smaraṇa - Rememberance




The perfection of life is to remember Kṛṣṇa at the time
of death

etāvān sāṅkhya-yogābhyāṁ sva-dharma-pariniṣṭhayā

janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ puṁsām ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ

SB 2.1.6

etāvān—all these; sāṅkhya—complete knowledge of matter
and spirit; yogābhyām—through knowledge of mystic power;
sva-dharma—particular occupational duty; pariniṣṭhayā—by
full perception; janma—birth; lābhaḥ—gain; paraḥ—the
highest; puṁsām—of a person; ante—at the end; nārāyaṇa—
the Personality of Godhead; smṛtiḥ—remembrance.

The highest perfection of human life, achieved either by
complete knowledge of matter and spirit, by practice of
mystic powers, or by perfect discharge of occupational
duty, is to remember the Supreme Person, Nārāyaṇa at the
end of life.

anta-kāle ca mām eva smaran muktvā kalevaram

yaḥ prayāti sa mad-bhāvaṁ yāti nāsty atra saṁśayaḥ

BG 8.5


                          446
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

anta-kāle—at the end of life; ca—also; mām—Me; eva—
certainly; smaran—remembering; muktvā—quitting;
kalevaram—the body; yaḥ—he who; prayāti—goes; saḥ—he;
mat-bhāvam—My nature; yāti—achieves; na—not; asti—there
is; atra—here; saṁśayaḥ—doubt.

Whoever, at the time of death, leaves his body while
remembering Me alone, surely attains to My
transcendental nature. Of this there is no doubt.

yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram

taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ

BG 8.6

yam yam vā api—whatever; smaran—remembering; bhāvam—
nature; tyajati—gives up; ante—at the end; kalevaram—
this body; tam tam—that; eva—certainly; eti—gets;
kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; sadā—always; tat—that; bhāva—
state of being; bhāvitaḥ—remembering.

Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his
body, O son of Kuntī, that state he will attain without
fail.

bhajan kara sādhana kara murte jānle hoy

Bengali poetry/Śrīla Prabhupāda Ślokas

bhajan—worship; kara—perform; sādhana—regulative
devotional activities; kara—perform; murte—at the time
of death; jānle—one may know; hoy—is.

Whatever bhajana and sādhana one has performed
throughout life will be tested at the time of death.

sādhana bhāvibe jāha siddha-dehe pābe tāhā rāga-pathera
ei se upāya

Śrī Prema-bhakti-candrika 5.8/PP p. 87

Whatever subject is constantly meditated upon at the
time of performing sādhana (the contemplation of
ekādaśa-bhāva), engrosses the citta (heart or
consciousness) and that same subject will be the
prominent meditation at the time of death.

Without devotion to Kṛṣṇa nothing can save us from death

tapantu tāpaiḥ prapatantu parvatād aṭantu tīrthani
paṭhantu cāgamān

yajantu yāgair vivadantu vādair hariṁ vinā naiva mṛtiṁ
taranti

Bhāvārtha Dīpikā (SB 10.87.27), Śrīdhara Swāmī

You may perform mountains of austerities, visit many
holy places, study all the Vedas, and perform all kinds
of Vedic sacrifices, but without devotion to Kṛṣṇa, none
of these things can save you from death.



                          447
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


sa hānis tan mahac chidraṁ sa mohaḥ sa ca vibhramaḥ

yan-muhūrtaṁ kṣaṇaṁ vāpi vāsudevaṁ na cintayet

Viṣṇu Purāṇa

saḥ—that; hāniḥ—failure; tat—that; mahat—great; chidram—
loss; saḥ—that; mohaḥ—greatest illusion; saḥ—that; ca—
also; vibhramaḥ—bewilderment; yat—that which; muhūrtam—
short while; kṣanam—an instant; vā—or; api—indeed;
vāsudevam—Kṛṣṇa; na—does not; cintayet—think of
(remember).

If one fails to remember Kṛṣṇa (or Guru) even for a
moment, that is the greatest loss, the greatest
illusion, and the greatest bewilderment.

viṣayān dhyāyataś cittaṁ viṣayeṣu viṣajjate

mām anusmarataś cittaṁ mayy eva pravilīyate

SB 11.14.27

viṣayān—objects of sense gratification; dhyāyataḥ—of one
who is meditating on; cittam—the consciousness; viṣayeṣu
—in the objects of gratification; viṣajjate—becomes
attached; mām—Me; anusmarataḥ—of one remembering
constantly; cittam—the consciousness; mayi—in Me; eva—
certainly; pravilīyate—is absorbed.

One who meditates on the objects of the senses becomes
attached to them and to sense gratification (thus
becoming entangled in māyā). One who constantly
remembers Me, however, becomes absorbed in Me.

Constant rememberance Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet destroys all
inauspiciousness

avismṛtiḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ

kṣīṇoty abhadrāṇi ca śaṁ tanoti

sattvasya śuddhiṁ paramātma-bhaktiṁ

jñānaṁ ca vijñāna-virāga-yuktam

SB 12.12.55

avismṛtiḥ—remembrance; kṛṣṇa-pada-aravindayoḥ—of Lord
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet; kṣiṇoti—destroys; abhadrāṇi—
everything inauspicious; ca—and; śam—good fortune;
tanoti—expands; sattvasya—of the heart; śuddhim—the
purification; parama-ātma—for the Supreme Soul; bhaktim—
devotion; jñānam—knowledge; ca—and; vijñāna—with direct
realisation; virāga—and detachment; yuktam—endowed.

The Supreme Lord’s lotus feet are the greatest source of
auspiciousness. By never forgetting them, all
inauspiciousness is destroyed and peace finally settles
on the mind. When one’s being is thus genuinely
purified, devotion to the Lord is awakened, and one
attains spiritual knowledge, realisation of that
knowledge and detachment from mundane, worldly things.

                          448
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


apavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāvasthāṁ gato —pi vā

yaḥ smaret puṇḍarīkākṣaṁ sa bāhyābhyantaraḥ śuciḥ

Garuḍa Purāṇa/STB p. 36/Arcana-dīpikā p. 19

oṁ—invocation; apavitraḥ—impure; pavitraḥ—pure; vā—or;
sarva-avasthām—in all conditions of life; gataḥ—gone;
api—although; vā—or; yaḥ—one who; smaret—can remember;
puṇḍarīka-akṣam—Lord Kṛṣṇa, who has beautiful lotus
eyes; saḥ—he; bāhya—externally; abhyantaraḥ—and
internally; śuciḥ—clean.

Whether one is pure or contaminated, and regardless of
one’s external circumstances, simply by remembering the
lotus-eyed Lord, Puṇḍarīkākṣa, one becomes pure,
internally and externally.

One should always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him

smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur vismartavyo na jātucit

sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ

Padma-Purāṇa/BRS 1.2.8/CC Mad 22.113/JD ch. 19/BR 2.26

smartavyaḥ—to be remembered; satatam—always; viṣṇuḥ—Lord
Viṣṇu; vismartavyaḥ—to be forgotten; na—not; jātucit—at
any time; sarve—all; vidhi-niṣedhāḥ—rules and
prohibitions; syuḥ—they may be; etayoḥ—of these two
principles; eva—certainly; kiṅkarāḥ—the servants.

One should always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him.
All the rules and prohibitions are subservient to these
two principles.

Somehow or other, fix your mind on Kṛṣṇa

yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet

sarve vidhi-niṣedhā syur etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ

BRS 1.2.4/Padma-Purāṇa/BRS 1.2.8

yena—by which; tena—by that; prakāreṇa—by a means; manaḥ
—the mind; kṛṣṇe—in Kṛṣṇa; niveśayet—one should fix;
sarve—all; vidhi-niṣedhaḥ—rules and prohibitions
mentioned in the scripture or given by the spiritual
master; syuḥ—should be; etayoḥ—of this principle; eva—
certainly; kiṅkarāḥ—the servants.

One should fix his mind on Kṛṣṇa by any means. All the
rules and prohibitions mentioned in the śāstras should
be the servants of this principle.




5.4) Pāda-sevana - Serving the lotus feet of the Lord




                          449
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

yat-pāda-sevābhirucis tapasvinām

aśeṣa-janmopacitaṁ malaṁ dhiyaḥ

sadyaḥ kṣiṇoty anvaham edhatī satī

yathā padāṅguṣṭha-viniḥsṛtā sarit

SB 4.21.31

yat-pāda—whose lotus feet; sevā—service; abhiruciḥ—
inclination; tapasvinām—persons undergoing severe
penances; aśeṣa—innumerable; janma—birth; upacitam—
acquire; malam—dirtiness; dhiyaḥ—mind; sadyaḥ—
immediately; kṣiṇoti—destroys; anvaham—day after day;
edhatī—increasing; satī—the saintly consciousness; yathā
—as; pada-aṅguṣṭha—the lotus toes of Vāmana-avatāra;
viniḥsṛtā—emanating from; sarit—the river Gaṅgā.

By cultivating intense taste for    serving the lotus feet
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, that taste at once    nullifies the
contamination accumulated in the    mind from innumerable
births, in the same way that the    Gaṅgā river sanctifies
the whole universe after bathing    the lotus feet of
Vāmana-deva. This ruci increases    saintly qualities
within the heart day by day.

The sannyāsa mantra (of the avadhuta-brāhmaṇa)

etāṁ sa āsthāya parātma-niṣṭhām

adhyāsitāṁ pūrvatamair maharṣibhiḥ

ahaṁ tariṣyāmi duranta-pāraṁ

tamo mukundāṅghri-niṣevayaiva

SB 11.23.57/ CC Mad 3.6

etām—this; saḥ—he; āsthāya—becoming completely fixed in;
para-ātma-niṣṭhām—devotion to the Supreme Person, Kṛṣṇa;
adhyāsitām—worshiped; pūrvatamaiḥ—by previous;
mahaṛṣibhiḥ—great sages; aham—I; tariṣyāmi—shall cross
over; duranta-pāram—the insurmountable; tamaḥ—the ocean
of nescience; mukunda-aṅghri—of the lotus feet of
Mukunda; niṣevayā—by rendering service or worship; eva—
certainly.

[The brāhmaṇa from Avantī-deśa said:] “I shall cross
over the insurmountable ocean of nescience by being
firmly fixed in the service of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.
Such service was approved by the previous ācāryas, who
were fixed in firm devotion to the Lord. As the previous
great sages have accepted and shown the path of
sannyāsa, I have also accepted that very form of life.
Now, leaving everything aside, I shall run toward
Vṛndāvana. There, taking the name of Mukunda Kṛṣṇa, I
shall cross over the insurmountable ocean of nescience.
Crossing this māyā, I shall reach Vraja and fully enter
the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” (The real essence of sannyāsa
is to perform bhajana in the mood of the gopīs)




                          450
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

prabhu kahe sādhu ei bhikṣura vacana

mukunda sevana-vrata kaila nirdhāraṇa

parātma-niṣṭhā-mātra veṣa-dhāraṇa

mukunda-sevāya haya saṁsāra-tāraṇa

sei veṣa kaila, ebe vṛndāvana giyā

kṛṣṇa-niṣevaṇa kari nibhṛte vasiyā

CC Madhya 3.7-9

prabhu kahe—the Lord said; sādhu—very much purified; ei—
this; bhikṣura—of the mendicant; vacana—words; mukunda—
Lord Kṛṣṇa; sevana-vrata—decision to serve; kaila—made;
nirdhāraṇa—indication; para-ātma-niṣṭhā-mātra—only for
the determination to serve Kṛṣṇa; veṣa-dhāraṇa—changing
the dress; mukunda-sevāya—by serving Mukunda; haya—there
is; saṁsāra-tāraṇa—liberation from this material
bondage; sei—that; veṣa—dress; kaila—accepted; ebe—now;
vṛndāvana—to Vṛndāvana-dhāma; giyā—going; kṛṣṇa-niṣevaṇa
—service to the Lord; kari—I shall execute; nibhṛte—in a
solitary place; vasiyā—sitting

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu approved the purport of the
above śloka on account of the determination of the
mendicant devotee to engage in the service of Lord
Mukunda. He gave His approval of this verse, saying,
“Śādhu! Śādhu!” The real meaning of accepting the
sannyāsa dress is to dedicate oneself to the service of
Mukunda. By serving Mukunda, one can actually be
liberated from the bondage of material existence. After
accepting the sannyāsa order, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
decided to go to Vṛndāvana and engage Himself wholly and
solely in the service of Mukunda in a solitary place.



5.5) Arcana - Deity Worship

vidhinā deva-deveśaḥ śaokha cakra-dharo hariḥ

phalaṁ dadāti sulabhaṁ salilenāpi pūjitaḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇāmṛta-mahārṇava Mādhvācarya

If Śrī Hari, the master of all demigods, who holds a
conch and a cakra is worshiped properly even if by water
only, He grants a suitable result.

ayaṁ svasty-ayanaḥ panthā dvi-jāter gṛha-medhinaḥ

yac chraddhayāpta-vittena śuklenejyeta pūruṣaḥ

SB 10.84.37

The most auspicious course for householders of the
twice-born caste is that they devoutly worship the Deity
form of the Supreme Person by sacrifices performed with
honestly earned wealth.



                          451
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


5.6) Vandana - Offering prayers, Stava-stuti

tat-pāda-padma-pravaṇaiḥ kāya-mānasa-bhāṣitaiḥ

praṇāmo vāsudevasya vandanaṁ kathyate budhaiḥ

Hari-bhakti-kalpa-latikā 9.1

When those who are devoted to Lord Hari's lotus feet
offer humble obeisances to Him with their body, mind, or
words, this is called vandanam by learned devotees.

kiṁ vidyayā parama-yoga-pathaiś ca kim tair

abhyāsato'pi śataśo janibhir-duruhaiḥ

vande mukundam iha yan natimātrakeṇa

karmāṇy apohya paramaṁ padam eti lokaḥ

Hari-bhakti-kalpa-latikā 9.2

What need is there to perform the different yoga
systems, which are difficult to perfect even in a
hundred births? What need is there to struggle to attain
transcendental knowledge? I shall offer my respectful
obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, for simply by offering
obeisances to Him, one may get free from the bonds of
karma, and attain the supreme spiritual world.



The glories of Vandana

nāhaṁ vande tava caraṇayor dvandvam advandva-hetoḥ

kumbhīpākaṁ gurumapi hare nārakaṁ nāpanetum

ramyā-rāmā-mṛdu-tanu-latā-nandane nāpi rantuṁ

bhāve bhāve hṛdaya-bhavane bhāvayeyaṁ bhavantam

Mukunda-mālā-stotram 4

O my Lord Hari! I don't pray at Your lotus feet to be
saved from the duality of existence or to escape this
grim hell of boiling tribulations. Nor do I pray to
enjoy the soft-skinned beautiful women who reside in the
gardens of heaven. I only pray that I may develop love
for You within my heart of hearts, birth after birth.



5.7) Dāsya - Serving the lord

deha-dhīndraya-vāk-ceto-dharma-kāmārtha-karmaṇām

bhagavaty arpaṇaṁ prītyā dāsyam ity abhidhīyate

Hari-bhakti-kalpa-latikā 10.1

When the work performed by the body, intelligence,
senses, voice, and mind, the pious activities, enjoyment

                          452
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

and wealth, are offered with love to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, that is called dāsyam, service.

dāsye khalu nimajjanti sarvā eva hi bhaktayaḥ

vāsudeve jagantīva nabhasīva diśo daśa

Hari-bhakti-kalpa-latikā 10.2

Just as the universes enter the transcendental body of
Lord Vāsudeva, and just as the ten directions enter the
sky, in the same way, all different forms of bhakti
enter into service.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ dhyāna-pāda-sevanam arcanām

vandanaṁ svārpaṇaṁ sakhyaṁ sarvaṁ dāsye pratiṣṭhitam

Hari-bhakti-kalpa-latikā 10.3

The devotional processes of hearing about the Lord,
glorifying Him, remembering Him, serving His lotus feet,
worshiping Him, offering obeisances to Him, surrendering
everything to Him, and befriending Him, are all based on
service to Him.

The different branches of Dāsyam

ādaraḥ paricaryāyāṁ sarvāṅgair abhivandanam

mad-bhakta-pūjābhyadhikā sarva-bhūteṣu man-matiḥ

SB 11.9.21

My devotees take great care and respect in rendering Me
service, offering prayers of glorification, offering
obeisances with all their bodily limbs, and above all
worshiping My devotees. They see all living beings as
related to Me.

mad-artheṣv aṅga-ceṣṭā ca vacasā mad-guṇeraṇam

mayy arpaṇaṁ ca manasaḥ sarva-kāma-vivarjanam

SB 11.19.22

For Me they engage the entire energy of their bodies.
They use their words to describe My qualities; they
offer their minds to Me; and they reject all material
desires. These are the characteristics of My devotees.



5.8) Sakhya - Serving the Lord in the Mood of Friendship



The definition of sakhya

ati-viśvasta-cittasya vāsudeve sukhāmbudhau

sauhaṝddena parā prītiḥ sakhyam ity abhidhīyate

Hari-bhakti-kalpa-latikā 11.1

                           453
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


When a well-wishing devotee's mood for Lord Vāsudeva,
the personified ocean of bliss, is characterized by
extreme confidence and fearlessness, that transcendental
love is called sakhyam, friendship.

Two divisions of Sakhya: based on faith and based on
spontaneous friendly affection

viśvāso mitra-vṛttiś ca sakhyaṁ dvi-vidham īritiam

BRS 1.2.188

The wise have determined that sakhya, friendship, has
two divisions: sakhyam which is a generic sense of
friendship based on faith (that "God is my friend" in
sāhana-vaidhi-bhakti) and a highly refined and developed
sakhyam based on the temperament of spontaneous friendly
feelings (as in the case of the gopas in Vraja).

Generic sakhya, based on faith

evaṁ manaḥ karma-vaśaṁ prayuṅkte avidyayātmany
upadhīyamāne

prītir na yāvan mayi vāsudeve na mucyate deha-yogena
tāvat

SB 5.5.6

Thus since the living entity’s mind is overwhelmed by a
fruitive mentality, he becomes covered by the mode of
ignorance. Until prīti — friendship or affection towards
Me, the all-pervading Vāsudeva, does not arise in one’s
heart, he cannot become freed from repeated acceptance
of material bodies.



5.9) Atmā-nivedana - Self-dedication as self-sacrifice



kṛṣṇāyārpita-dehasya nirmamasyānahaṅkṛteḥ

manasas tat-svarūpatvaṁ smṛtam ātma-nivedanam

Hari-bhakti-kalpa-latikā 12.1/PJ 7.4

atha—now; atma-nivedanam—surrendering everything; āha—
the author describes; kṛṣṇāya—to Kṛṣṇa; arpita—offered;
dehasya—of he whose body; nirmamasya—without a false
sense of possesiveness; anahaṅkṛteḥ—without false ego;
manasaḥ—of the mind; tat— of him; svarūpatvam—attainment
of the original spiritual form; smṛtam—is called; ātma-
nivedanam—surrendering everything.

One who, out of love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, has 'died to live'
for the Lord's service, who is devoid of attachment for
any other objective, and who is free from false ego -
such a saintly mentality (the absence of pursuit for
personal pleasure, in quest of the Lord's pleasure) is
known as atma-nivedana, full self-sacrifice.


                          454
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

vapurādiṣu yo'pi ko'pi vā guṇato'māni yathā-tathā-vidhaḥ

tad ayaṁ tava pāda-padmayor aham adyaiva mayā samarpitaḥ

Yamuna’s Stotra-ratnam 49

Whatever may be the designations of my body in terms of
name, gender, socio-familial position, varṇa and āśrama
and so forth; whatever may be the good or bad qualities
or the character I am endowed with - I here and now
dedicate my entire being unto Your lotus feet.30



Thus ends section 5 - The Nine Limbs of Bhakti

6) Sūta Gosvāmī Explains Pure Bhakti



The Ṛṣis put questions to Sūta Gosvāmī - What is the
ultimate benefit?

tatra tatrāñjasāyuṣman bhavatā yad viniścitam

puṁsām ekāntataḥ śreyas tan naḥ śaṁsitum arhasi

SB 1.1.9/STB p. 24

tatra—thereof; tatra—thereof; añjasā—made easy; āyuṣman—
blessed with a long duration of life; bhavatā—by your
good self; yat—whatever; viniścitam—ascertained; puṁsām—
for the people in general; ekāntataḥ—absolutely; śreyaḥ—
ultimate good; tat—that; naḥ—to us; śaṁsitum—to explain;
arhasi—deserve.

Please, therefore, being blessed with many years,
explain to us, in an easily understandable way, what you
have ascertained to be the absolute and ultimate good
for the people in general.

(Since) In Kali-yuga everyone is unfortunate and always
disturbed

prāyeṇālpāyuṣaḥ sabhya kalāv asmin yuge janāḥ

mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ

SB 1.1.10

prāyeṇa—generally; alpa—short; āyuṣaḥ—duration of life;
sabhya—O most exalted member of the assembly of saints;
kalau—in this age of Kali (quarrel and hypocrisy); asmin
—herein; yuge—age; janāḥ—the public, people; mandāḥ—
lazy; sumanda-matayaḥ—having misguided intelligence;
manda-bhāgyāḥ—unlucky; hi—and above all; upadrutāḥ—
disturbed.

O learned one, in this Kali age of quarrel and
hypocricy, most people have but short lives. They are
quarrelsome, lazy, misguided, unlucky and, above all,
always disturbed.

Please explain the essence of all scriptures for the

                            455
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

benefit of all

bhūrīṇi bhūri-karmāṇi śrotavyāni vibhāgaśaḥ

ataḥ sādho —tra yat sāraṁ samuddhṛtya manīṣayā

brūhi bhadrāya bhūtānāṁ yenātmā suprasīdati

SB 1.1.11/STB p. 25

bhūrīṇi—multifarious; bhūri—many; karmāṇi—duties;
śrotavyāni—to be learned; vibhāgaśaḥ—by divisions of
subject matter; ataḥ—therefore; sādho—O sage; atra—
herein; yat—whatever; sāram—essence; samuddhṛtya—by
selection; manīṣayā—best to your knowledge; brūhi—please
tell us; bhadrāya—for the good of; bhūtānām—the living
beings; yena—by which; ātmā—the self; suprasīdati—
becomes fully satisfied.

There are many varieties of scriptures, and in all of
them there are many prescribed duties, which can be
learned only after many years of study in their various
divisions. Therefore, O sage, please select the essence
of all these scriptures and explain it for the good of
all living beings, that by such instruction their hearts
may be fully satisfied.

Sūta Gosvāmī answers the sages— questions by giving an
overview of bhakti

munayaḥ sādhu pṛṣṭo —haṁ bhavadbhir loka-maṅgalam

yat kṛtaḥ kṛṣṇa-sampraśno yenātmā suprasīdati

SB 1.2.5

munayaḥ—O sages; sādhu—this is relevant; pṛṣṭaḥ—
questioned; aham—myself; bhavadbhiḥ—by all of you; loka—
the world; maṅgalam—welfare; yat—because; kṛtaḥ—made;
kṛṣṇa—the Personality of Godhead; sampraśnaḥ—relevant
question; yena—by which; ātmā—self; suprasīdati—
completely pleased.

O sages, I have been justly questioned by you. Your
questions are worthy because they relate to Lord Kṛṣṇa
and so are of relevance to the world’s ultimate welfare.
Only questions of this sort are capable of completely
satisfying the self.



One can achieve real happiness only if one is able to
please Kṛṣṇa

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati

SB 1.2.6/MK 1.4/RVC p. 111/BPKG pp. 85,198,454/STB p. 25

saḥ—that; vai—certainly; puṁsām—for mankind; paraḥ—
sublime; dharmaḥ—the essence of one’s spiritual nature
and function; yataḥ—by which; bhaktiḥ—devotional
service; adhokṣaje—unto Adhokṣaja, the transcendent

                          456
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Lord; ahaitukī—causeless; apratihatā—unbroken; yayā—by
which; ātmā—the self; suprasīdati—completely satisfied.

The highest pursuit for all humanity is śuddha-bhakti -
to please Kṛṣṇa, the transcendent Lord Adhokṣaja, by all
one’s efforts of body, mind and soul. Such uttamā bhakti
must be performed without any desire for self-gain
(anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam) and without any break (devoid of
karma and jñāna) in order to fully satisfy the self.

vāsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairagyaṁ jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

SB 1.2.7

vāsudeve—unto Kṛṣṇa; bhagavati—unto the Personality of
Godhead; bhakti-yogaḥ—contact of devotional service;
prayojitaḥ—being applied; janayati—it does produce; āśu—
very soon; vairāgyam—detachment; jñānam—knowledge; ca—
and; yat—that which; ahaitukam—causeless.

By rendering devotional service unto Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and
detachment from the world.



Except for bhakti, all other paths are simply a waste of
time

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ śrama eva hi kevalam

SB 1.2.8

dharmaḥ—occupation; sva-nuṣṭhitaḥ—executed in terms of
one’s own position; puṁsām—of humankind; viṣvaksena—the
Personality of Godhead (plenary portion); kathāsu—in the
narrations of; yaḥ—what is; na—not; utpādayet—does
produce; yadi—if; ratim—attraction; śramaḥ—useless
labor; eva—only; hi—certainly; kevalam—entirely.

Any spiritual practices and occupational duties that do
not inspire attraction for harī-kathā, the narrations of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, are only a waste of time.



Kṛṣṇa the Absolute Truth is one - yet He manifests in
three different ways

vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate

SB 1.2.11/CC Ādi 2.11, 2.63/BPKG p. 348,353 etc./JD ch.
4

vadanti—they say; tat—that; tattva-vidaḥ—the learned
souls; tattvam—the Absolute Truth; yat—which; jñānam—
knowledge; advayam—nondual; brahma iti—known as Brahman;
paramātmā iti—known as Paramātmā; bhagavān iti—known as

                          457
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

Bhagavān; śabdyate—it is so declared.

Great seers of the truth, who understand the nature of
the Absolute Truth, describe that non-dual truth in
three ways as impersonal Brahman, localized Paramātmā
and Bhagavān, the Personality of Godhead.



tac chraddadhānā munayo jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā

paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā

SB 1.2.12

tat—that knowledge of advaya-jñāna para-tattva;
śraddadhānāḥ—seriously inquisitive; munayaḥ—sages; jñāna
—knowledge; vairāgya—detachment; yuktayā—well equipped
with; paśyanti—see; ātmani—within himself; ca—and;
ātmānam—the Paramātmā; bhaktyā—in devotional service;
śruta—the Vedas; gṛhītayā—well received.

The self-realised sages, well equipped with knowledge
and detachment, realise that Absolute Truth by rendering
devotional service in terms of what they have heard from
the Vedas.



The highest perfection is to please Śrī Hari

ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

SB 1.2.13

ataḥ—so; pumbhiḥ—by the human being; dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ—O
best among the twiceborn; varṇa-āśrama—the institution
of four castes and four orders of life; vibhāgaśaḥ—by
the division of; svanuṣṭhitasya—of one’s own prescribed
duties; dharmasya—occupational; saṁsiddhiḥ—the highest
perfection; hari—Śrī Hari; toṣaṇam—pleasing.

O best among the twice-born, it is therefore concluded
that the highest perfection one can achieve by
discharging the duties prescribed for one’s own
occupation according to caste divisions and orders of
life is to please Śrī Hari.



tasmād ekena manasā bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca dhyeyaḥ pūjyaś ca nityadā

SB 1.2.14

tasmāt—therefore; ekena—by one; manasā—attention of the
mind; bhagavān—the Personality of Godhead; sātvatām—of
the devotees; patiḥ—protector; śrotavyaḥ—is to be heard;
kīrtitavyaḥ—to be glorified; ca—and; dhyeyaḥ—to be
remembered; pūjyaḥ—to be worshiped; ca—and; nityadā—
constantly.

                          458
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Therefore, with one-pointed attention, one should
constantly hear about, glorify, remember and worship Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is the protector of the devotees.

yad-anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ karma-granthi-nibandhanam

chindanti kovidās tasya ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim

SB 1.2.15

yat—which; anudhyā—remembrance; asinā—sword; yuktāḥ—
being equipped with; karma—reactionary work; granthi—
knot; nibandhanam—binding; chindanti—cut; kovidāḥ—
intelligent; tasya—His; kaḥ—who; na—not; kuryāt—shall
do; kathā—narrations; ratim—attraction.

With sword in hand, intelligent men cut through the
binding knots of reactionary work (karma) by remembering
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, who will not be attracted to His
narrations?



śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ

syān mahat-sevayā viprāḥ puṇya-tīrtha-niṣevaṇāt

SB 1.2.16

śuśrūṣoḥ—one who is eager to hear; śraddadhānasya—with
full faith and attention; vāsudeva—in respect to
Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa; kathā—narrations; ruciḥ—taste, greed;
syāt—is made possible; mahat-sevayā—by service rendered
to pure devotees; viprāḥ—O twice-born; puṇya-tīrtha—
those who are completely pure; niṣevaṇāt—by service.

O twice-born sages, by serving those devotees who are
completely pure at heart, one develops the greed for
hearing hari-kathā, narrations of Kṛṣṇa.



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi vidhunoti suhṛt satām

SB 1.2.17/HBV/CB 2.1.239/BRSB p. 86/BR 5.2/GKH 13.24

śṛṇvatām—those who have developed the urge to hear the
message of; sva-kathāḥ—His own words; kṛṣṇaḥ—the
Personality of Godhead; puṇya—who purifies; śravaṇa—
hearing; kīrtanaḥ—through chanting; hṛdi antaḥ sthaḥ—
within one’s heart; hi—certainly; abhadrāṇi—inauspicious
desires (such as the desire to enjoy matter); vidhunoti—
cleanses; suhṛt—benefactor; satām—of the saintly
devotees.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the
Paramātmā [Supersoul] in everyone’s heart and the
benefactor of the saintly devotee, cleanses the
inauspicious desires for material enjoyment from the
heart of the devotee who has developed the urge to hear
His narrations, which are in themselves virtuous when

                          459
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

properly heard and chanted.

naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

SB 1.2.18/BR 5.2

naṣṭa—destroyed; prāyeṣu—almost to nil; abhadreṣu—all
that is inauspicious; nityam—regularly; bhāgavata—
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, or the pure devotee; sevayā—by
serving; bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead;
uttama—transcendental; śloke—ślokas or prayers; bhaktiḥ—
loving service; bhavati—comes into being; naiṣṭhikī—
irrevocable.

By regular hearing the Bhāgavatam and by rendering
service to the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to
the heart is almost completely destroyed, and loving
service unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is praised with
transcendental ślokas, is established as an irrevocable
fact.



tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

SB 1.2.19/BR 5.2

tadā—at that time; rajaḥ—in the mode of passion; tamaḥ—
the mode of ignorance; bhāvāḥ—the situation; kāma—lust
and desire; lobha—hankering; ādayaḥ—others; ca—and; ye—
whatever they are; cetaḥ—the mind; etaiḥ—by these;
anāviddham—without being affected; sthitam—being fixed;
sattve—in the mode of goodness; prasīdati—thus becomes
fully satisfied.

As soon as irrevocable loving service is established in
the heart, the effects of nature’s modes of passion and
ignorance, such as lust, desire and hankering, disappear
from the heart. Then the devotee is established in
goodness, and he becomes completely happy. [Note:
prasīdati means that the devotee at this stage becomes
completely satisfied, therefore his mind does not run
after sense objects].

evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ

bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ mukta-saṅgasya jāyate

SB 1.2.20

evam—thus; prasanna—enlivened; manasaḥ—of the mind;
bhagavat-bhakti—the devotional service of the Lord;
yogataḥ—by contact of; bhagavat—regarding the
Personality of Godhead; tattva—knowledge; vijñānam—
realised knowledge; mukta—liberated; saṅgasya—of the
association; jāyate—becomes effective.

Thus established in the mode of unalloyed goodness, the
person whose mind has been enlivened by contact with
devotional service to the Lord becomes free from all

                          460
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

material contamination and gains realised knowledge of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ

kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare

SB 1.2.21

bhidyate—pierced; hṛdaya—heart; granthiḥ—knots;
chidyante—cut to pieces; sarva—all; saṁśayāḥ—misgivings;
kṣīyante—terminated; ca—and; asya—his; karmāṇi—chain of
fruitive actions; dṛṣṭe—having seen; eva—certainly;
ātmani—unto the self; īśvare—dominating.

Thus the knot in the heart is pierced, and all
misgivings are cut to pieces. The chain of fruitive
actions is terminated when one sees the self as master.

Thus ends section 6) Sūta Gosvāmī Explains Pure Bhakti




7) Yukta-vairāgya — True Renunciation



Dovetailing everything favourable in the service of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa

anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham upayuñjataḥ

nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate

prāpañcikatayā buddhyā hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate

BRS 1.2.255-6/BR p. 116

anāsaktasya—of one who is without attachment; viṣayān—to
material sense objects; yathā-arham—according to
suitability; upayuñjataḥ—engaging; nirbandhaḥ—without
bondage; kṛṣṇa-sambandhe—in relationship with Kṛṣṇa;
yuktam—connected; vairāgyam—renunciation; ucyate—is
called; prāpañcikatayā—as material; buddhyā—with the
understanding; hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ—of things which
are related to Śrī Hari; mumukṣubhiḥ—by those who desire
liberation; parityāgaḥ—the renunciation; vairāgyam
phalgu—false renunciation; kathyate—is termed.

One who is not attached to satisfying his senses yet
accepts everything in relation to Kṛṣṇa, is rightly
situated above possessiveness. However, if those
desiring liberation renounce the things of this world,
thinking them to be material, and fail to realise that
everything is related to Śrī Hari, such renunciation is
considered superficial, false renunciation.

Editorial note: The devotee is neither a bhogī (enjoyer)
nor a tyagī (renouncer), nor a yogī (desiring mystic
perfections) but a sevāka (servant).

                          461
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017




Bhakti is naturally superior to false renunciation

prāpañcikatayā buddhyā hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate

BRS 1.2.126

That renunciation which is practiced by those desirous
of impersonal liberation and which rejects things in
connection with Lord Hari, thinking them to be material,
is called phālgu-vairāgya, external or false
renunciation.



Being regulated and restrained is a prerequisite for
practising bhakti-yoga

nāty-aśnatas —tu yogo —sti na caikāntam anaśnataḥ

na cāti-svapna-śīlasya jāgrato naiva cārjuna

yuktāhāra-vihārasya yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu

yukta-svapnāvabodhasya yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā

BG 6.16-17

na—never; ati—too much; aśnataḥ—of one who eats; tu—but;
yogaḥ—linking with the Supreme; asti—there is; na—nor;
ca—also; ekāntam—overly; anaśnataḥ—abstaining from
eating; na—nor; ca—also; ati—too much; svapna-śīlasya—of
one who sleeps; jāgrataḥ—or one who keeps night watch
too much; na—not; eva—ever; ca—and; arjuna—O Arjuna;
yukta—regulated; āhāra—eating; vihārasya—recreation;
yukta—regulated; ceṣṭasya—of one who works for
maintenance; karmasu—in discharging duties; yukta—
regulated; svapna-avabodhasya—sleep and wakefulness;
yogaḥ—practice of bhakti-yoga; bhavati—becomes; duḥkha-
hā—diminishing material miseries.

There is no possibility of one becoming a yogī, O
Arjuna, if one eats too much or eats too little, sleeps
too much or does not sleep enough. For one who is
moderate in eating and recreation, balanced in work and
regulated in sleeping and waking, his practice of
bhakti-yoga destroys all material sufferings.




To practice bhakti, one must observe celibacy and
control the mind and senses

tapasā brahmacaryeṇa śamena ca damena ca

tyāgena satya-śaucābhyāṁ yamena niyamena vā

SB 6.1.13

                          462
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


tapasā—by austerity or voluntary rejection of material
enjoyment; brahmacaryeṇa—by celibacy (or by activities
conducive to God realisation); śamena—by controlling the
mind; ca—and; damena—by fully controlling the senses; ca
—also; tyāgena—by voluntarily giving charity to good
causes; satya—by truthfulness; śaucābhyām—and by
following regulative principles to keep oneself
internally and externally clean; yamena—by chanting a
regular number of rounds and by following the four
principal regulations prohibiting meat-eating,
intoxication, illicit sex and gambling; niyamena—by
following the secondary rules such as rising up early,
attending maṅgal-āratika, etc.; vā—and.

To concentrate the mind, one must undeviatingly follow
the principles of celibate life and not fall down. One
must undergo the austerity of voluntarily giving up
sense enjoyment. One must then control the mind and
senses, give charity, be truthful, clean and nonviolent,
follow the regulative principles and regularly chant the
holy name of the Lord.



One’s first duty in spiritual life is to control the
mind and senses, without which niether peace nor
happiness are possible

nāsti buddhir ayuktasya na cāyuktasya bhāvanā

na cābhāvayataḥ śāntir aśāntasya kutaḥ sukham

BG 2.66

na asti—devoid of; buddhiḥ—transcendental intelligence;
ayuktasya—for one disconnected from the Lord; na—not; ca
—and; ayuktasya—for one devoid of connection with Kṛṣṇa;
bhāvanā—meditation on the Supreme; na—not; ca—and;
abhāvayataḥ—for the non-meditative, whose mind is not
fixed; śāntiḥ—peace; aśāntasya—of the non-peaceful;
kutaḥ—where is the question; sukham— of happiness.

One whose mind is uncontrolled, is devoid of
transcendental intelligence and is therefore unable to
meditate on the Supreme. Not being connected to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, he is unable to attain peace, and how can there
be any happiness without peace?



One should accept only that which is necessary for
oneself

īśāvāsyam idam sarvaṁ yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat

tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam

Śrī Īśopaniṣad 1/SB 8.1.10/JD ch. 6

īśa—by the Lord; āvāsyam—controlled; idam—this; sarvam—
all; yat kiñca—whatever; jagatyām—within the universe;
jagat—all that is animate or inanimate; tena—by Him;
tyaktena—set-apart quota; bhuñjīthāḥ—you should accept;

                          463
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

mā—do not; gṛdhaḥ—endeavor to gain; kasya svit—of anyone
else; dhanam—the wealth.

Everything animate or inanimate that is within the
universe is controlled and owned by the Lord. One should
therefore accept only those things necessary for
himself, which are set aside as his quota, and one
should not try to take the property of another.

Renunciation is the basic principle sustaining the lives
of Mahāprabhu’s devotees

mahāprabhura bhakta-gaṇera vairāgya pradhāna

yāhā dekhi— prīta hana gaura-bhagavān

CC Antya 6.220/BPKG p. 218

mahāprabhura—of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; bhakta-gaṇera—
of the devotees; vairāgya—renunciation; pradhāna—the
basic principle; yāhā dekhi——seeing which; prīta hana—
becomes satisfied; gaura-bhagavān—Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.

Renunciation is the basic principle sustaining the lives
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s devotees. Seeing this
renunciation, Mahāprabhu is extremely pleased.

Bharata Mahārāja renounced everything without attachment
as if it were stool

yo dustyajān dāra-sutān suhṛd rājyaṁ hṛdi-spṛśaḥ

jahau yuvaiva malavad uttamaśloka-lālasaḥ

SB 5.14.43/BPKG p. 264

yaḥ—Mahārāja Bharata (the son of Mahārāja Ṛṣabhadeva);
dustyajān—very difficult to give up; dāra-sutān—the wife
and children or the most opulent family life; suhṛt—
friends and well-wishers; rājyam—a kingdom that extended
all over the world; hṛdi-spṛśaḥ—that which is situated
within the core of one’s heart; jahau—he gave up; yuvā
eva—even as a young man; mala-vat—like stool; uttama-
śloka-lālasaḥ—who was so fond of serving Bhagavān, known
as Uttamaśloka.

Mahārāja Bharata gave up at a young age what is most
difficult to give up, his wife, sons, relatives, friends
and kingdom, as one gives up stool without attachment,
being eager to engage in bhajana of the Lord whose
glories are described in transcendental verses.



Reject false renunciation while hiding your internal
mood

markaṭa-vairāgya nā kara loka dekhāñā

yathā-yogya viṣaya bhuñja— anāsakta hañā

antare niṣṭhā kara, bāhye loka-vyavahāra


                             464
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

acirāt kṛṣṇa tomāya karibe uddhāra

CC Mad 16.238-239/ JD ch. 2

markaṭa-vairāgya—monkey renunciation; nā kara—do not do;
loka—to the people; dekhāñā—showing off; yathā-yogya—as
it is befitting; viṣaya—material things; bhuñja——enjoy;
anāsakta—without attachment; hañā—being; antare—within
the heart; niṣṭhā kara—keep strong faith; bāhye—
externally; loka-vyavahāra—behavior like ordinary men;
acirāt—very soon; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; tomāya—unto you;
karibe—will do; uddhāra—liberation.

[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī:] Do not adopt markaṭa-vairāgya (external,
false renunciation) simply to impress the general
populace. You should accept without attachment whatever
sense objects are appropriate for maintaining your
devotional practices and give up all material desires
within your heart. Internally develop staunch faith in
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and externally carry out your worldly
responsibilities in such a way that no one can detect
your inner mood. If you act like this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will
very quickly deliver you from material existence.



Niether eat nor dress luxuriously; rather, perform
manasic seva to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa

bhāla nā khāibe āra bhāla nā paribe

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevā mānase karibe

CC Antya 6.236-7/BPKG pp. 54,218

bhāla—well; nā khāibe—do not eat; āra—and; bhāla—nicely;
nā paribe—do not dress; vraje—in Vṛndāvana; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-
sevā—service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; mānase—within the mind;
karibe—you should do.

You should niether eat palatable foodstuffs nor dress
yourself luxuriously. Rather, within your mind. you
should always perform sevā to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in
Vraja.



The higher taste śloka

viṣayā vinivartante nirāhārasya dehinaḥ

rasa-varjaṁ raso —py asya paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate

BG 2.59

viṣayāḥ—objects for sense enjoyment; vinivartante—are
practiced to be refrained from; nirāhārasya—by negative
restrictions; dehinaḥ—for the embodied; rasa-varjam—
giving up the taste; rasaḥ—sense of enjoyment; api—
although there is; asya—his; param—far superior things;
dṛṣṭvā—by experiencing; nivartate—he ceases from.

The embodied jīva may refrain from sense enjoyment, yet

                          465
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

the taste for sense plaesure remains. Only by
experiencing the higher taste of bhakti-rasa can one
become fixed in higher consciousness. In this state even
though the senses are still strong and capable, there is
no attraction to sense pleasure because of the sublime
taste experienced in one’s heart, a taste which descends
from the spiritual world (by the mercy of Śrī Guru).



Thus ends section 7) Yukta-vairāgya



8) Other Ślokas related to Sādhana-bhakti



Chewing the chewed, materialistic persons cannot come to
Kṛṣṇa

matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā

mitho —bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām

adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ

punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām

SB 7.5.30/Upad 1, pt

[śrī-prahrādaḥ uvāca—Prahlāda Mahārāja said:] matiḥ—
inclination; na—never; kṛṣṇe—unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; parataḥ—
from the instructions of others; svataḥ—from their own
understanding; vā—either; mithaḥ—from combined effort;
abhipadyeta—is developed; gṛha-vratānām—of persons too
addicted to the materialistic, bodily conception of
life; adānta-gobhiḥ—because of uncontrolled senses;
viśatām—entering; tamisram—hellish life; punaḥ—again;
punaḥ—again; carvita—things already chewed; carvaṇānām—
who are chewing.

“Materialistic persons are simply mulling over that
which has already been mulled and chewing that which has
already been chewed. Because their senses are not
controlled they are proceeding towards the dreadful hell
of this material existence, repeatedly trying to enjoy
that which has already been consumed. The intelligence
of such materially attached persons cannot be turned
towards Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa either by their own
endeavour, by the instruction of others or by the
association of similar materialistic persons.”



They don’t know that the ultimate goal is Viṣṇu

na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ

durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ

andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās

te —pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ

                          466
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


SB 7.5.31

na—not; te—they; viduḥ—know; sva-artha-gatim—the
ultimate goal of life, or their own real interest; hi—
indeed; viṣṇum—Lord Viṣṇu and His abode; durāśayāḥ—being
ambitious to enjoy this material world; ye—who; bahiḥ—
external sense objects; artha-māninaḥ—considering as
valuable; andhāḥ—persons who are blind; yathā—just as;
andhaiḥ—by other blind men; upanīyamānāḥ—being led; te—
they; api—although; īśa-tantryām—the ropes (laws) of
material nature; uru—having very strong; dāmni—cords;
baddhāḥ—bound.

Persons who are strongly entrapped by the consciousness
of enjoying material life, and who have therefore
accepted as their leader or Guru a similar blind man
attached to external sense objects, cannot understand
that the goal of life is to give up this material life
and engage in the service of Lord Viṣṇu. As blind men
guided by another blind man miss the right path and fall
into a ditch, materially attached men led by another
materially attached man are bound by the ropes of
fruitive labour, which are made of very strong cords,
and they continue again and again in materialistic life,
suffering the threefold miseries.



Disregarding scriptural injunctions is condemned

yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ

na sa siddhim avāpnoti na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim

BG 16.23

yaḥ—anyone who; śāstra-vidhim—the regulations of the
scriptures; utsṛjya—giving up; vartate—remains; kāma-
kārataḥ—acting whimsically in lust; na—never; saḥ—he;
siddhim—perfection; avāpnoti—achieves; na—never; sukham—
happiness; na—never; parām—the supreme; gatim—
perfectional stage.

He who discards scriptural injunctions and acts
according to his own whims attains neither perfection,
nor happiness, nor the supreme destination.



Bhakti must be performed according to the injunctions of
śāstra

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir utpātāyaiva kalpate

Nārada-pañca./HBV/BRS 1.2.101/BRSB p. 55/Upad 2 pt/JD ch
20/BR 2.43, 6.7 pt/GKH (P)

śruti—the original Vedic literatures; smṛti—literatures
in pursuance to the original Vedic knowledge; purāṇa-ādi
—the Purāṇās, etc.; pañcarātra—the Nārada Pañcarātra;
vidhim—the regulative principles; vinā—without;

                          467
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

aikāntikī—undiverted; hareḥ—of Śrī Hari; bhakti—
devotional service; utpātāya—an unnecessary disturbance;
iva—indeed; kalpate—is considered.

Although engaged in single-minded devotion to Śrī Hari,
if one transgresses the regulations mentioned in the
śruti, smṛti, Purāṇas and the Nārada-pañcarātra,
undesired qualities (anarthas) are produced. On the
other hand, overzealous concern for the rules and
regulations of bhakti, which disregards the mood and
injunctions of the scriptures, simply becomes a
disturbance to society.



The mind is strengthened by philosophical discussions
(siddhānta)

siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa

ihā ha-ite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa

CC Ādi 2.117

siddhānta—conclusion; baliyā—considering; citte—in the
mind; nā kara—do not be; alasa—lazy; ihā—this; haite—
from; kṛṣṇe—in Lord Kṛṣṇa; lāge—becomes fixed; su-dṛḍha—
very firm; mānasa—the mind.

A sincere student should not neglect the discussion of
philosophical conclusions (siddhānta), considering them
controversial, for such discussions strengthen the mind.
Thus one’s mind becomes attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



One who dedicates himself completely to Kṛṣṇa becomes a
jīvan-muktaḥ

īhā yasya harer dāsye karmaṇā manasā girā

nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate

Nāradīya Purāṇa/Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.187/ CC Mad
19.135 pt

īhā—endeavours; yasya—whose; hareḥ—of Śrī Hari; dāsye—
(are done) for the service; karmaṇā—through the
activities of his body; manasā—his mind; girā—his words;
nikhilāsu—in all; api—although; avasthāsu—situations;
jīvan-muktaḥ—(to be) a person liberated even while
living; saḥ—he; ucyate —is said.

One who engages his or her actions, thoughts, and words
in Śrī Hari’s service, though situated in this world, is
already a liberated soul.



The six Gosvāmīs demonstrated the ideal standard for a
sādhaka

tyakvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tucchavat


                          468
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau

gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhur

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam, Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya/SGG p.
126

tyakvā—having given up; tūrṇam—quickly; aśeṣa—all;
maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīm—the circle of aristocracy; sadā—
always; tuccha-vat—as insignificant; bhūtvā—having
become; dīna-gaṇa—of the poor conditioned souls; iśakau—
who are the protectors; karuṇayā—out of mercy; kaupīna—
loincloths; kanthā—and tattered quilts; aśritau—who have
accepted; gopī-bhāva—the mood of the gopīs; rasa-amṛta-
abdhi—of the ocean of nectarean mellows; laharī-kallola—
in the ripples and waves; magnau—who are immersed; muhuḥ
—always and repeatedly; vande—I offer my respectful
obeisances; rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-
gopālakau—unto the six Gosvāmīs.

I worship the Six Gosvāmīs, who abandoned as
insignificant their position in the aristocracy and took
on the garb of renunciation. Out of extreme mercy for
the conditioned souls, they humbly took only kaupins and
old, tattered cloth for their covering to demonstrate
how a sādhaka should live. But they were always
submerged in the ecstatic ocean of the gopīs— love
(gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi) for Kṛṣṇa, experiencing again
and again towering waves of ānanda rising up in their
hearts.



Day and night the Gosvāmīs were doing their bhajana in
Vraja

kūjat-kokila-haṁsa-sārasa-gaṇākīrṇe mayūrā-kule

nānā-ratna-nibaddha-mūla-viṭapa-śrī-yukta-vṛndāvane

rādhā-kṛṣṇam ahar-niśaṁ prabajatau jīvārthadau yau mudā

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam, Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya/SGG p.
127

kūjat—cooing; kokila—of cuckoos; haṁsa—of swans; sārasa—
and of cranes; gaṇa—flocks; akīrṇe—filled with; mayūra—
peacocks; ākule—crowded with; nānā-ratna—with various
jewels; nibaddha-mūla—bound around their bases; viṭapa—
trees; śrī-yukta—endowed with splendor; vṛndāvane—in the
forest of Vṛndāvana; rādhā-kṛṣṇam—of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa;
ahaḥ-niśam—day and night; prabhajatau—who intensely
worship; jīva—upon the living entities; arthadau—who
bestow the ultimate goal of life; yau—who; mudā—with
great delight; vande—I offer my respectful obeisances;
rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau—unto the
six Gosvāmīs.

I offer prayers to the Six Gosvāmīs, who were always
engaged in worshiping Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the

                          469
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

transcendental land of Vṛndāvana, which is full of so
many swans, cuckoos, parrots, peacocks and other birds
who are always calling out their sweet songs. The very
splendid trees are full of fruits and flowers and have
all valuable jewels under their roots. Day and night the
Gosvāmīs were doing their bhajana in that Vṛndāvana and
bestowing upon all jīvas the highest benediction of life
in the form of bhakti.



The method of performing very deep and confidential
bhajana

samam śrī-rūpeṇa smara-vivaśa-rādhā-giribhṛtor

vraje sākṣāt-sevā-labhana-vidhaye tad-gaṇa-yujoḥ

tad-ijyākhyā-dhyāna-śravaṇa-nati-pañcāmṛtam idaṁ

dhayan nityā govardhanam anudinam tvam bhaja manaḥ (11)

samam—in accordance with; śrī-rūpeṇa—Śrīla Rupa Gosvami;
smara—with amorous love; vivaśa—overwhelmed; rādhā-
giribhṛtoḥ—Śrī Śrī Rādha-Giridhārī; vraje—in Vraja;
sākṣāt—the direct; sevā—service; labhana—
obtaining;vidhaye—for the method; tad-gaṇa-yujoḥ—along
with Their associates; tad-ijya— (by) worshiping Them;
akhyā—chanting Their names; dhyāna—meditating; śravaṇa—
hearing; nati—and bowing down; pañca—five; amṛtam—
nectars; idam—this; dhayan—drinking; nityā—regularly;
govardhanam—Śrī Govardhana; anudinam—every day; tvam—
you; bhaja—worship; manaḥ—O mind.

(Now the method of performing very deep and confidential
bhajana is being explained) O my dear mind, in order to
obtain the direct service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Giridhārī,
who are always entranced by amorous desire, and the
service of Their eternal associates in Vraja, one should
drink the pañcāmṛta of service to Them in accordance
with the method prescribed by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. This
pañcāmṛta is ambrosial nectar comprised of the following
five ingredients: worship of Śrī Yugala (arcana),
chanting the glories of Their transcendental names,
forms, qualities and pastimes (saṅkīrtana), meditating
upon Them (dhyāna), hearing the glories of Their names,
forms, qualities and pastimes (śravaṇa), and offering
praṇāma unto Them. In addition, one should worship Śrī
Govardhana daily in accordance with the precepts of
bhakti.

Thus ends section 8) Other Ślokas related to Sādhana-
bhakti

and Chapter 16 - Sādhana-bhakti-tattva




Chapter 17 - Śravaṇa & Kīrtana




                          470
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


1. Śravaṇa - The Process of Hearing & The Glories of
Hari-kathā 549

2. Kīrtana - The Process of Chanting and Glorifying Śrī
Kṛṣṇa 561

3. Śrī Nāma Saṅkīrtana 565

4. Preaching Through Saṅkīrtana 571



1) Śravaṇa - The Process of Hearing & The Glories of
Hari-kathā



What is the best topic to listen to?

śravaṇa-madhye jīvera kon śreṣṭha śravaṇa?

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-prema-keli karṇa-rasāyana

CC Mad 8.255

śravaṇa-madhye—out of all topics for hearing; jīvera—of
the living entity; kon—what; śreṣṭha—most important;
śravaṇa—topic of hearing; rādhā-kṛṣṇa-prema-keli—the
loving affairs between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; karṇa-rasa-ayana
—most pleasing to the ear.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked, “Out of all topics people
listen to, which is best for all living entities?”
Rāmānanda Rāya replied, “Hearing about the loving
affairs between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is most pleasing to the
ear.”



If you desire Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa to come into your heart,
listen carefully to this song

yadi hari-smaraṇe sa-rasaṁ manaḥ yadi vilāsa-kalāsu
kutahalam

madhura-komala-kānta-padāvalīm śṛṇu tadā jayadeva-
sarasvatīm

Śrī Gīta-Govinda 1.3

If you at all wish to fill your consciousness with the
remembrance of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and enter into a
serving position within their sublime pleasure pastimes
on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, then listen carefully to
this sweet and poignant song of Jayadeva, which is
filled with the narration's of Their divine love.



O Kṛṣṇa, just hearing the nectar of Your words gives
life to us

tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanaṁ

                             471
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


kavibhir īḍitaṁ kalmaṣāpaham

śravaṇa-maṅgalaṁ śrīmad ātataṁ

bhuvi gṛṇanti ye bhūri-dā janāḥ

SB 10.31.9 (Gopī-gīta)/CC Mad 14.13/BR 8.13/STB p. 62/
ORY pp. 78, 82

tava—Your; kathā-amṛtam—the nectar of words; tapta-
jīvanam—(is) life for those aggrieved; kavibhiḥ—by great
thinkers; īḍitam—described; kalmaṣa-apaham—removing
sinful reactions; śravaṇa-maṅgalam—auspicious to hear,
giving spiritual benefit; śṛīmat—spiritual opulence;
ātatam—spreading; bhuvi—within the world; gṛṇanti—chant,
glorify, propagate; ye—those who; bhūri-dāḥ—most
beneficent; janāḥ—persons.

O Kṛṣṇa, just hearing the nectar of Your words and the
narrations of Your pastimes gives life to us, who are
always suffering in this material world. These
narrations, coming from the lips of Your pure devotees,
eradicate one’s sinful reactions and bestow the ultimate
benediction of kṛṣṇa -prema upon whoever hears them with
faith. These narrations are broadcast all over the world
and are filled with spiritual beauty and opulence.
Certainly those who distribute this nectar are the most
munificent, most compassionate souls.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura: The gopīs say, “Who
can describe the sweetness of the words emanating from
Your mouth? It is indescribable. Even words glorifying
Your name and form coming from the mouths of other
people are more relishable than celestial nectar
(svarga-amṛta) or liberation (mokṣa).” Another meaning
of this śloka manifests when the gopīs say, “Songs about
Your name, form and pastimes are sweet only if they are
accompanied by Your darśana. Otherwise they create very
undesirable consequences and become the cause of death
(kathā mṛtam).” (Sārārtha- Darśinī)



Hari-kathā is non-different from Kṛṣṇa

śabda-brahma paraṁ brahma mamobhe śāśvatī tanū

SB 6.16.51

śabda-brahma—the transcendental sound vibration (the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra); param brahma—the Supreme Absolute
Truth; mama—My; ubhe—both (namely, the form of sound and
the form of spiritual identity); śāśvatī—eternal; tanū—
two bodies.

The Supreme transcendental sound vibration and the
Supreme Being are one and the same. Śabda-brahma (hari-
kathā and the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra emanating from the
lips of a pure devotee) is identical to paraṁ brahma
(the Supreme Absolute Truth) and both are My eternal
transcendental aspects.



                          472
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


The glories of hearing hari-kathā from a pure devotee

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

SB 3.25.25/CC Ādi 1.60, Mad 22.86/BRS 1.3.12/BRSB p. 36/
JD ch. 6, 8, 17/BPKG p. 380/STB p. 29

satām—of pure devotees; prasaṅgāt—through the exalted
association; mama—My; vīrya—gloriously wonderful
activities; saṁvidaḥ—by discussion of; bhavanti—become;
hṛt—to the heart; karṇa—to the ear; rasa-ayanāḥ—
nectarean; kathāḥ—narrations; tat—of that; joṣaṇāt—by
cultivation; āśu—quickly; apavarga—liberation from
material bondage; vartmani—on the path; śraddhā—
transcendental faith (here indicating sādhana-bhakti);
ratiḥ—bhāva; bhaktiḥ—pure devotion; anukramiṣyati—will
follow in order.

Through the exalted association of pure devotees, the
recitation and discussions of My glorious pastimes are a
rejuvenating nectar to both the heart and the ears. By
such cultivation one quickly becomes liberated from
ignorance. He then progressively attains śraddhā
(sādhana-bhakti), rati (bhāva bhakti) and bhakti (prema-
bhakti) unto Me.



Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-kathā is the remedy to conquer the disease
of the heart

vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ

śraddhānvito —nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ

bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ

hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.39/CC Antya 5.48/STB p. 34/
Prabandha Pañcakam p. 100

vikrīḍitam—the playful pastimes (rāsa dance); vraja-
vadhūbhiḥ—with the damsels of Vraja, the gopīs; idam—
this; ca—and; viṣṇoḥ—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; śraddhā-anvitaḥ—with
transcendental faith; anuśṛṇuyāt—continually hears in
the paramparā system; atha—also; varṇayet—describes; yaḥ
—one who; bhaktim—devotional service; parām—
transcendental; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; pratilabhya—attaining; kāmam—lusty material
desires; hṛt-rogam—the disease of the heart; āśu—very
soon; apahinoti—gives up; acireṇa—without delay; dhīraḥ—
one who is thoughtful.

A sober person who in the beginning faithfully and
continuously hears from his Guru the narrations of Lord
Kṛṣṇa’s unprecedented rāsa dance with the young gopīs of

                          473
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

Vraja, and later describes those pastimes, very soon
attains parā-bhakti or prema-bhakti for the Supreme
Lord, and thus becomes competent to quickly dispel the
heart disease of lust.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: In the Gītā śloka brahma-bhūtaḥ
prasannātmā it is said that one attains parā-bhakti only
after the disappearance of anarthas (the disease of the
heart in he form of lust, anger and so on). However, in
this śloka it is stated that one attains parā-bhakti
even before the disappearance of anarthas by hearing and
describing rāsa-līlā kathā. Therefore hearing such
rasika-kathā is one of the most powerful forms of
sādhana and it quickly dispels the heart disease of
lust.



One can attain the highest benefit by hearing rāsa-līlā-
kathā from a rasika Vaiṣṇava

anugrahāya bhaktānāṁ mānuṣaṁ deham āsthitaḥ

bhajate tādṛśīḥ krīḍā yāḥ śrutvā tat-paro bhavet

SB 10.33.36/CC Ādi 4.34/ Veṇu-Gīta introduction/PP p.
95/ORY p. 232/GG Intro/GKH (P)

anugrahāya—to show mercy; bhaktānām—to His devotees;
mānuṣam—humanlike; deham—a body; āsthitaḥ—assuming;
bhajate—He accepts; tādṛśīḥ—such; krīḍāḥ—confidential
pastimes; yāḥ—about which; śrutvā—hearing; tat-paraḥ—
dedicated to Him; bhavet—one becomes.

In order to bestow mercy upon the devotees as well as
the conditioned souls, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifests His
humanlike form and performs such extraordinary pastimes
(rāsa-līlā) that anyone who hears about them becomes
exclusively devoted to Him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “Mānuṣaṁ deham āsthitaḥ means
either that Kṛṣṇa accepts a human-like form, or that
anyone who takes a human birth should hear Kṛṣṇa līlā-
kathā. Tat-paro bhavet means, you must do this ;
otherwise you are derailed [see CC Ādi 4.35]. You should
not do anukaraṇa (imitation); you should not imitate
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. However, those of you who are coming
gradually to the stage of madhyama-adhikāra must try to
hear these pastimes; otherwise you are derailed [i.e.
not in line]. For this reason, the opinion that Bhakti-
devī enters the heart only after all anarthas,
aparādhas, lust and anger and other diseases of the
heart have been eradicated, is not appropriate. On the
contrary, by the mercy of the Supreme Lord or the pure
devotee, and by faithfully executing sādhana and
bhajana, this rare bhakti enters the heart first and
then all anarthas are automatically dissipated — this
conclusion is thoroughly agreeable.” (Further
references: The Origin of Ratha Yātrā pp. 232, 310;
Veṇu-gīta, Introduction; BPKG Biography and Five
Essential Essays/Prabandha Pañcakam ch. 5 - “The
Eligibility to Hear Rasa-līlā-kathā—).



                          474
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Drinking the nectar through the ears purify and take one
to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa

pibanti ye bhagavata ātmanaḥ satāṁ

kathāmṛtaṁ śravaṇa-puṭeṣu sambhṛtam

punanti te viṣaya-vidūṣitāśayaṁ

vrajanti tac-caraṇa-saroruhāntikam

SB 2.2.37/GKH (P)

pibanti—who drink; ye—those; bhagavataḥ—of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa;
ātmanaḥ—of the most dear; satām—of devotees; kathā-
amṛtam—the nectar of Hari-kathā; śravaṇa-puṭeṣu—through
the earholes; sambhṛtam—fully filled; punanti—purify; te
—their; viṣaya—material enjoyment; vidūṣita-āśayam—
polluted aim of life; vrajanti—go; tat—Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa;
caraṇa—feet; saroruha-antikam—near the lotus.

Those who drink through their ears hari-kathā which is
filled with the ambrosial pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa,
who are the life and soul of the devotees, purify the
polluted aim of life known as material enjoyment and
thus attain the lotus feet of the Divine Couple.



The hari-kathā from the mouths of great devotees carries
the aroma of the saffron dust of Your lotus feet

sa uttamaśloka mahan-mukha-cyutaḥ

bhavat-padāmbhoja-sudhā-kaṇānilaḥ

smṛtiṁ punar vismṛta-tattva-vartmanāṁ

kuyogināṁ no vitaraty alaṁ varaiḥ

SB 4.20.25

saḥ—that; uttama-śloka—O Lord, who is praised by
beautiful ślokas; mahat—of great devotees; mukha-cyutaḥ—
delivered from the mouths; bhavat—Your; pada-ambhoja—
from the lotus feet; sudhā—of nectar; kaṇa—particles;
anilaḥ—soothing breeze; smṛtim—remembrance; punaḥ—again;
vismṛta—forgotten; tattva—to the truth; vartmanām—of
persons whose path; ku-yoginām—of persons not in the
line of devotional service; naḥ—of us; vitarati—
restores; alam—unnecessary; varaiḥ—other benedictions.

[Pṛthu Mahārāja prayed:] My dear Lord, You are glorified
by beautiful ślokas uttered by great personalities. Such
glorification of Your lotus feet is just like saffron
particles. When the transcendental vibration from the
mouths of great devotees carries the aroma of the
saffron dust of Your lotus feet, the forgetful living
entity gradually remembers his eternal relationship with
You. Devotees thus gradually come to the right
conclusion about the value of life. My dear Lord, I
therefore do not need any other benediction but the
opportunity to hear from the lotus lips of Your pure

                          475
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

devotee.

Unlimited rivers of pure nectar

tasmin mahan-mukharitā madhubhic-caritra-

pīyūṣa-śeṣa-saritaḥ paritaḥ sravanti

tā ye pibanty avitṛṣo nṛpa gāḍha-karṇais

tān na spṛśanty aśana-tṛḍ-bhaya-śoka-mohāḥ

SB 4.29.40/ JD ch 40

tasmin—there; mahat—of great saintly persons; mukharitāḥ
—emanating from the mouths; madhu-bhit—of the killer of
the Madhu demon; caritra—the activities or the
character; pīyūṣa—of nectar; śeṣa—surplus; saritaḥ—
rivers; paritaḥ—all around; sravanti—flow; tāḥ—all of
them; ye—they who; pibanti—drink; avitṛṣaḥ—without being
satisfied; nṛpa—O King; gāḍha—attentive; karṇaiḥ—with
their ears; tān—them; na—never; spṛśanti—touch; aśana—
hunger; tṛṭ—thirst; bhaya—fear; śoka—lamentation; mohāḥ—
illusion.

In assemblies of great saints, unlimited rivers of pure
nectar flow from the lotus mouths of these great souls
in the form of descriptions of the transcendental
character, pastimes and qualities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Those
who drink without satiation through their thirsty ears
from these rivers of nectar, are never touched by hunger
and thirst and they become free from lamentation,
illusion and fear.



Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja discusses the confidentiality
of rasa-kathā and the benefit it bestows on the
qualified

e saba siddhānta gūḍha - kahite nā yuyāya/nā kahile,
keha ihāra anta nāhi pāya

ataeva kahi kichu kariñā nigūḍha/bujhibe rasika bhakta,
nā bujhibe mūḍha

hṛdaye dharaye ye caitanya-nityānanda/e-saba siddhānte
sei pāibe ānanda

e saba siddhānta haya āmrera pallava/bhakta-gaṇa-
kokilera sarvadā ballabha

abhakta-uṣṭrera ithe nā haya praveśa/tabe citte haya
mora ānanda-viśeṣa

ye lāgi kahite bhaya, se yadi nā jāne/ihā va-i kibā
sukha āche tribhuvane

ataeva bhakta-gaṇe kari namaskāra/niḥśaṅke kahiye, tāra
hauk camatkāra

CC Ādi 4.231-237/Veṇu-Gīta Introduction/Prabandha
Pañcakam p. 94


                          476
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

The esoteric and confidential conclusions regarding the
amorous pastimes of rasarāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa together with the
gopīs, who are the embodiments of mahābhāva, are not fit
to be disclosed to the common ordinary man. But without
revealing them, no one can enter into this topic. I
shall, therefore, describe these topics in a concealed
manner so that only rasika bhaktas will be able to
understand, whereas ineligible fools will not. Anyone
who has established Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu in their hearts will attain
transcendental bliss by hearing all these conclusions.
This entire subject is as sweet as newly grown mango
sprouts, which can be relished only by the devotees who
are likened to cuckoo birds. For the camel-like non-
devotees, there is no possibility of admittance into
these topics. Therefore, there is special jubilation in
my heart. If those whom I fear are themselves unable to
comprehend these topics, then what could be a greater
source of happiness in all the three worlds? Therefore,
after offering obeisances to the devotees, I am
revealing this subject without any hesitation.



tāra bhakta-saṅge sadā, rāsa-līlā prema kathā, je kore
se pāya ghanaśyāma

ihāte bimukha jei, tāra kabhu siddhi nāi, nāhi jena śuni
tāra nāma

Śrī-Rādhā-Niṣṭha 3, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura/SGG p.
70

A person who stays in the company of the devotees who
are always discussing the sweet, nectarean pastimes of
the rāsa dance (rāsa-līlā prema-kathā) is sure to attain
Ghanaśyāma Kṛṣṇa, who is dark like a monsoon raincloud.
A person averse to hearing these līlās will never attain
perfection. I refuse to hear his name.



The gradation of what is obtained by Śravaṇa

tac ca nāma-rūpa-guṇa-līlāmaya-śabdānāṁ śrota-sparśaḥ.
prathamaṁ nāmnaḥ śravaṇam-antaḥ-karaṇa-śuddhy-artham
apekṣyam. śuddhe cāntaḥ-karaṇe rūpa-śravaṇena tad-udaya-
yogyatā bhavati. samyag udite ca rūpe guṇānāṁ sphuraṇaṁ
sampadyeta, sampanne ca guṇānāṁ sphuraṇe parikara-
vaiśiṣthyena tad-vaiśiṣthyaṁ sampadyate tatas teṣu nāma-
rūpa-guṇa-parikareṣu samyak sphuriteṣu līlānāṁ sphuraṇaṁ
suṣṭhu bhavati. tatrāpi śravaṇe śrī-bhāgavata-śravaṇastu
parama-śreṣṭham

Krama Sandarbha 7.5.18

Aural contact with the sound vibrations describing the
name, form, qualities, and pastimes of Vrajendranandana
Śyāmasundara Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His devotees is called
śravaṇa. At first, hearing of śrī nāma is necessary to
purify the mind from the contamination of sense
gratification. When the mind has been purified by means
of hearing about His beautiful rūpa (form) then
eligibity (to realize that rūpa) arises within ones

                          477
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

heart. When such eligibity has fully manifested there,
the revelation of the 64 qualities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa which
exist within His transcendental form takes place.
Thereafter, through the revelation of the various unique
and special qualities of His associates, as well as
paraphernalia, abode etc., Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own excellences
become more clearly manifest. Thus through the full
manifestation of His name, form, qualities, and
associates the revelation of His līlā or pastimes
becomes beautifully manifest in the heart of the
sādhaka. In regard to śravaṇa, the hearing of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is supremely exalted.



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi vidhunoti suhṛt satām

SB 1.2.17/HBV/CB 2.1.239/BRSB p. 86/BR 5.2/GKH 13.24

śṛṇvatām—those who have developed the urge to hear the
message of; sva-kathāḥ—His own words; kṛṣṇaḥ—the
Personality of Godhead; puṇya—who purifies; śravaṇa—
hearing; kīrtanaḥ—through chanting; hṛdi antaḥ sthaḥ—
within one’s heart; hi—certainly; abhadrāṇi—inauspicious
desires (such as the desire to enjoy matter); vidhunoti—
cleanses; suhṛt—benefactor; satām—of the saintly
devotees.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the
Paramātmā [Supersoul] in everyone’s heart and the
benefactor of the saintly devotee, cleanses the
inauspicious desires for material enjoyment from the
heart of the devotee who has developed the urge to hear
His narrations, which are in themselves virtuous when
properly heard and chanted.

śṛṇvataḥ śraddhayā nityaṁ gṛṇataś ca sva-ceṣṭitam

kālena nātidīrgheṇa bhagavān viśate hṛdi

SB 2.8.4

śṛṇvataḥ—by hearing; śraddhayā—in earnestness; nityam—
regularly; gṛṇataḥ—by relating; ca—also; sva-ceṣṭitam—
His pastimes; kālena—time; na—not; ati-dīrgheṇa—very
long; bhagavān—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; viśate—becomes manifest; hṛdi—
within one’s heart.

One who hears Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam faithfully and regularly
(from a pure devotee) and describes Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
to others, will have Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifest in his heart
within a short time.



Simply by hearing about Śrī Kṛṣṇa, bhakti manifests in
the heart and dispels grief, illusion and fear

yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ śoka-moha-bhayāpahā


                          478
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

SB 1.1.7

yasyām—this Vedic literature; vai—certainly;
śrūyamāṇāyām—simply by giving aural reception; kṛṣṇe—
unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; parama—supreme; pūruṣe—unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
bhaktiḥ—feelings of devotional service; utpadyate—
sprouts up; puṁsaḥ—of the living being; śoka—
lamentation; moha—illusion; bhaya—fearfulness; apahā—
that which extinguishes.

Simply by giving aural reception to this Vedic
literature, the feeling for loving devotional service to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Enjoyer, sprouts up at once to
extinguish the fire of lamentation, illusion and
fearfulness. [lamenting about the past, being illusioned
about the present, and fearing the future].



One can see Kṛṣṇa through the ears by hearing from a
pure devotee

tvaṁ bhakti-yoga-paribhāvita-hṛt-saroja

āsse śrutekṣita-patho nanu nātha puṁsām

yad-yad-dhiyā ta urugāya vibhāvayanti

tat-tad-vapuḥ praṇayase sad-anugrahāya

SB 3.9.11

tvam—unto You; bhakti-yoga—in devotional service;
paribhāvita—inspired; hṛt—of the heart; saroje—on the
lotus; āsse—You reside; śruta-īkṣita—seen through the
ear; pathaḥ—the path; nanu—now; nātha—O my Lord; puṁsām—
of the devotees; yat yat—whichever; dhiyā—by meditating;
te—upon You; urugāya—O multiglorious; vibhāvayanti—they
specifically think of; tat-tat—the very same; vapuḥ—
transcendental form; praṇayase—do You manifest; sat-
anugrahāya—to show Your causeless mercy to the saintly
devotees.

O my Lord, Your devotees can see You through the ears by
the process of bona fide hearing, and thus their hearts
become cleansed, and You take Your seat there. You are
so merciful to Your devotees that You manifest Yourself
in the particular eternal form of transcendence in which
they always think of You.



One must hear continuously and diligently from a pure
devote

śrutasya puṁsāṁ sucira-śramasya

nanv añjasā sūribhir īḍito —rthaḥ

tat-tad-guṇānuśravaṇaṁ mukunda-

pādāravindaṁ hṛdayeṣu yeṣām

SB 3.13.4

                          479
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


śrutasya—of persons who are in the process of hearing;
puṁsām—of such persons; sucira—for a long time; śramasya
—endeavouring diligently; nanu—isn—t it so?; añjasā—
elaborately; sūribhiḥ—by pure devotees; īḍitaḥ—
worshipped by; arthaḥ—statements; tat—that; tat—that;
guṇa—transcendental qualities; anuśravaṇam—repeated
hearing; mukunda—Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who awards liberation; pāda-
aravindam—the lotus feet; hṛdayeṣu—within the heart;
yeṣām—of them.

[Vidura to Maitreya:] Are not the lotus feet of Śrī
Mukunda the goal of life contemplated in the hearts of
persons diligently engaged in the process of hearing?
And are not those lotus feet the sole object of the
prayers and glorifications sung by the sages and
devatās? The glories of His lotus feet are heard of by
those persons in accordance with their respective
qualities.



Unflinching faith, even in the face of impending doom,
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa (in the form of Śrī Hari-kathā) is the
one and only protection

taṁ mopayātaṁ pratiyantu viprā

gaṅgā ca devī dhṛta-cittam īśe

dvijopasṛṣṭaḥ kuhakas takṣako vā

daśatv alaṁ gāyata viṣṇu-gāthāḥ

SB 1.19.15/BRS 1.3.28/CC Mad 23.21/PJ 5.4

tam—Him; mā—me; upayātam—taken shelter of; pratiyantu—
just accept me; viprāḥ—O brāhmaṇas; gaṅgā—mother Ganges;
ca—also; devī—direct representative of the Lord; dhṛta—
taken into; cittam—heart; īśe—unto the Lord; dvija-
upasṛṣṭaḥ—created by the brāhmaṇa; kuhakaḥ—something
magical; takṣakaḥ—the snakebird; vā—either; daśatu—let
it bite; alam—without further delay; gāyata—please go on
singing; viṣṇu-gāthāḥ—narration of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

[Parīkṣit Mahārāja said:] “O pure brahmanas, may you
kindly know me as a surrendered soul, and let Mother
Gaṅga, the representative of the Lord, also accept me in
that way, for I have already taken the lotus feet of the
Lord into my heart. Let the winged serpent Takṣaka, or
whatever magical creation has been incited by the son of
the brāhmaṇa, bite me immediately if it so desires; may
you all simply go on singing and reciting the glories of
the Lord.”



Without hari-kathā the ears are snake-holes and the
tongue is like a frog’s

bile batorukrama-vikramān ye na śṛṇvataḥ karṇa-puṭe
narasya

jihvāsatī dārdurikeva sūta na copagāyaty urugāya-gāthāḥ

                          480
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


SB 2.3.20

bile—snake holes; bata—alas!; urukrama—the Lord, who
acts marvelously; vikramān—prowess; ye—all these; na—
never; śṛṇvataḥ—heard; karṇa-puṭe—the earholes; narasya—
of the man; jihvā—tongue; asatī—useless; dārdurikā—of
the frogs; iva—like; sūta—O Sūta Gosvāmī; na—never; ca—
also; upagāyati—chants loudly; urugāya—worth singing;
gāthāḥ—songs.

Alas! One who has not listened to the messages about the
prowess and marvelous acts of the Personality of Godhead
and has not sung or chanted loudly the worthy songs
about the Lord is to be considered to possess ear-holes
like the holes of snakes and a tongue like the tongue of
a frog.



Reading too many scriptures or hearing from many persons
only produces doubt

bahu-śāstre bahu-vākye citte bhrama haya

sādhya-sādhana śreṣṭha nā haya niścaya

CC Ādi 16.11

bahu-śāstre—by many books or scriptures; bahu-vākye—by
many versions of many persons; citte—within the heart;
bhrama—doubt; haya—there is; sādhya-sādhana—objective
and the process to attain it; śreṣṭha—about the best; nā
—not; haya—there is; niścaya—certainty.

If one reads many books and scriptures (without
realisation) and hears (conflicting) commentaries and
instructions of many persons, doubt will arise in one’s
heart. In this way one will be unable to ascertain the
ultimate objective of life or the means to attain it.



The sun decreases the duration of life, except for those
engaged in hari-kathā

āyur harati vai puṁsām udyann astaṁ ca yann asau

tasyarte yat-kṣaṇo nīta uttama-śloka-vārtayā

SB 2.3.17

āyuḥ—duration of life; harati—decreases; vai—certainly;
puṁsām—of the people; udyan—rising; astam—setting; ca—
also; yan—which; asau—the sun; tasya—of one who
glorifies the Lord; ṛte—except; yat—by whom; kṣaṇaḥ—
time; nītaḥ—utilized; uttama-śloka—of the all-good Lord;
vārtayā—in the topics.

Both by rising and by setting, the sun decreases the
duration of life of everyone, except those who utilize
their time for discussing topics of Uttama-śloka Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.


                          481
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017



Avoid prajalpa, do not eat palatable foodstuffs and do
not dress nicely

grāmya-kathā nā śunibe, grāmya-vārtā nā kahibe

bhāla nā khāibe āra bhāla nā paribe

amānī mānada hañā kṛṣṇa-nāma sadā la—be

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevā mānase karibe

CC Antya 6.236/ORY intro

grāmya-kathā—ordinary talks of common men; nā śunibe—
never hear; grāmya-vārtā—ordinary news; nā kahibe—do not
speak; bhāla—well; nā khāibe—do not eat; āra—and; bhāla—
nicely; nā paribe—do not dress; amānī—not expecting any
respect; māna-da—offering respect to others; hañā—
becoming; kṛṣṇa-nāma—the holy name of the Lord; sadā—
always; la—be—you should chant; vraje—in Vṛndāvana;
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevā—service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; mānase—
within the mind; karibe—you should do.

[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī:] “Do not listen to the mundane talk of
common men or engage in discussions about mundane
topics. Do not eat palatable foodstuffs or dress
yourself nicely. Expect no honour from others and give
honour to all. In this manner, always chant Kṛṣṇa’s holy
name and within your mind perform sevā to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa in Vraja.”

Thus ends section 1) Śravaṇa




2) Kīrtana - The Process of Chanting and Glorifying Śrī
Kṛṣṇa



Definition of Kīrtana

nāma-līlā-guṇādīnām uccair bhāṣā tu kīrtana

BRS 1.2.145

nāma—name; līlā—pastimes; guṇādīnām—of the qualities,
etc.; uccaiḥ—loudly; bhāṣā—giving praise; tu—indeed;
kīrtana—is kīrtana.

Kīrtana is defined as loudly giving voice to the glories
of the Lord, beginning with the names, pastimes, and
qualities of Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana is the best limb of bhakti

kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇuṁ tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ

dvāpare paricaryāyāṁ kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt

                           482
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


SB 12.3.52

kṛte—in the Satya-yuga; yat—which; dhyāyataḥ—from
meditation; viṣṇum—on Lord Viṣṇu; tretāyām—in the Tretā-
yuga; yajataḥ—from worshiping; makhaiḥ—by performing
sacrifices; dvāpare—in the age of Dvāpara; paricaryāyām—
by worshiping the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa; kalau—in the age
of Kali; tat—that same result (can be achieved); hari-
kīrtanāt—simply by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra.

Whatever result was obtained in Satya-yuga by meditating
on Viṣṇu, in Tretā-yuga by performing sacrifices, and in
Dvāpara-yuga by serving the Lord’s lotus feet can be
obtained in Kali-yuga simply by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mahā-mantra.



Nāma-saṅkīrtana is the prominent limb of bhakti

paraṁ śrīmat-padāmbhoja-sadā-saṅgaty-apekṣayā

nāma-saṅkīrtana-prāyaṁ viśuddhāṁ bhaktim ācara

Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta 2.3.144

param—best; śrīmat-padāmbhoja—of the Lord's lotus feet;
sadā—eternal; saṅgati—association; apekṣayā—in relation
to; nāma—of the holy name; saṅkīrtana—glorification;
prāyam—primarily; viśuddhām—pure; bhaktim—devotion;
ācara—do.

O Gopa Kumāra! If you desire to have the eternal
association of the lotus feet of the Lord, then you
should perform pure devotional service, in which is
saṅkīrtana is prominent.



yady anyā bhaktiḥ kalau kaṛtavyā tadā kīrtanākhyā
bhakti-saṁyogenaiva ity uktam. yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-
prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ iti. tatra ca svatantram
eva nāma-kīrtanam atyanta-praśastam.

Krama-Sandarbha commentary to SB 7.5.23-24

Even though in the age of Kali one should perform the
other eight limbs of bhakti, nevertheless, emphatically
one must perform them in conjunction with kīrtana.
Therefore it is stated in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 11-5.32,
yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ, "Those
who are intelligent in this age of Kali will worship the
Lord through the performance of saṅkīrtana". In this
regard nāma-kīrtana is offered especial praises because
it is independent. (The reason for this is that all of
the other aṅgas of bhakti are included within kīrtana
and are dependent on kīrtana for their potency in Kali
yuga.)



sakṛd uccāritaṁ yena harir ity akṣara-dvayam


                          483
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

baddhaḥ parikaras tena mokṣāya gamanaṁ prati

Padma-Purāṇa/Skanda-Purāṇa/HBV 11.326/BR 1.17 pt

sakṛt—once; uccaritam—spoken; yena—by whom; hariḥ—Hari;
iti—thus; akṣara-vayam—two syllables; baddhaḥ—bound;
parikaraḥ—one becomes qualified; tena—by him; mokṣāya—
for liberation; gamanam—going; prati—to.

One who vibrates the two syllables ha-ri without offense
attains liberation from repeated birth and death. He
never again has to walk the path of material bondage.



All knowledge culminates in kīrtana glorifying
Uttamaśloka Śrī Kṛṣṇa

idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā

sviṣṭasya sūktasya ca buddhi-dattayoḥ

avicyuto —rthaḥ kavibhir nirūpito

yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam

SB 1.5.22/BRS 1.2.33

idam—this; hi—certainly; puṁsaḥ—of everyone; tapasaḥ—by
dint of austerities; śrutasya—by dint of study of the
Vedas; vā—or; sv-iṣṭasya—sacrifice; sūktasya—spiritual
education; ca—and; buddhi—culture of knowledge; dattayoḥ
—charity; avicyutaḥ—infallible; arthaḥ—interest;
kavibhiḥ—by the recognized learned person; nirūpitaḥ—
concluded; yat—what; uttamaśloka—the Lord, who is
described by choice ślokas; guṇa-anuvarṇanam—description
of the transcendental qualities of.

[Śrī Vyāsadeva to Śrī Nārada:] One's advancement of
knowledge is furthered by austerities, study of the
Vedas, sacrifice, chanting of hymns, and charity. Those
who are wise, however, have concluded that knowledge
finds its culmination (attraction and love for Kṛṣṇa) in
the transcendental descriptions of the Lord, who is
glorified with choice ślokas.

Nāma-kīrtana is the only way in Kali-yuga

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

Bṛhan-Nāradīya-Purāṇa 38.126/CC Ādi 17.21/JD ch. 23/BRSB
p. 106/BPKG pp. 199, 217

hareḥ nāma—the holy name of the Lord; hareḥ nāma—the
holy name of the Lord; hareḥ nāma—the holy name of the
Lord; eva—certainly; kevalam—only; kalau—in the Age of
Kali; na asti—there is not; eva—certainly; na asti—there
is not; eva—certainly; na asti—there is not; eva—
certainly; gatiḥ—destination; anyathā—other way.

In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of
deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There

                          484
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

is no other way, no other way, no other way.



The explanation of the “harer nāma— śloka

kali-kāle nāma-rūpe kṛṣṇa-avatāra

nāma haite haya sarva-jagat-nistāra

dārḍhya lāgi— “harer nāma—-ukti tina-vāra

jaḍa loka bujhāite punaḥ eva kāra

“kevala—-śabde punar api niścaya-karaṇa

jñāna-yoga-tapa-karma-ādi nivāraṇa

anyathā ye māne, tāra nāhika nistāra

nāhi, nāhi, nāhi e tina eva kāra

CC Ādi 17.22-25

kali-kāle—in this Age of Kali; nāma-rūpe—in the form of
the holy name; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; avatāra—incarnation;
nāma—holy name; haite—from; haya—becomes; sarva—all;
jagat—of the world; nistāra—deliverance; dārḍhya lāgi——
in the matter of emphasizing; harer nāma—of the holy
name of Lord Hari; ukti—there is utterance; tina-vāra—
three times; jaḍa loka—ordinary common people; bujhāite—
just to make them understand; punaḥ—again; eva-kāra—the
word eva, or certainly; “kevala—-śabde—by the word
kevala, or “only”; puna api—again; niścaya-karaṇa—final
decision; jñāna—cultivation of knowledge; yoga—practice
of the mystic yoga system; tapa—austerity; karma—
fruitive activities; ādi—and so on; nivāraṇa—
prohibition; anyathā—otherwise; ye—anyone who; māne—
accepts; tāra—of him; nāhika—there is no; nistāra—
deliverance; nāhi nāhi nāhi—there is nothing else,
nothing else, nothing else; e—in this; tina—three; eva-
kāra—bearing the meaning of emphasis.

In this Age of Kali, Kṛṣṇa has incarnated in the form of
His Holy Name, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. The whole
world will be delivered through the grace of the Holy
Name. In order to vigorously affirm this, Nārada’s verse
repeats the words harer nāma three times. Then, just to
make it clear for the really dull, it stresses those
words with the word eva [“certainly—]. This assertion is
further strengthened by the use of the word kevala
[“alone—] which prohibits all other processes, such as
fruitive activities, cultivation of knowledge, practice
of mystic yoga, and performance of austerities. Then, to
make sure it is clear that one who disregards this
teaching will not achieve salvation, the words “there is
no other way— are repeated thrice.

Thus ends section 2) Kīrtana




                          485
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

3) Śrī Nāma-Saṅkīrtana



paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam —

“Supreme victory to the congregational chanting of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s names” — this is the Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha’s sole
object of worship.

Upadeśāvalī 1, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda



Definition of Saṅkīrtana (1)

sarvato bhāvena kīrtana - saṅkīrtana

Anuvṛtti commentary of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
on Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 1

sarvataḥ—in every way, completely; bhāvena—moods;
kīrtana—chanting, glorifying; saṅkīrtana - sam—sambandha
[knowledge of one’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa]; kīrtana—
audible chanting/glorifying of Kṛṣṇa’s names, form,
qualities and pastimes.

Saṅkīrtana means complete kīrtana, or in other words,
kīrtana that is performed in full knowledge of sambandha
and completely free from anarthas and aparādhas.



Definition of Saṅkīrtana (2)

bahubhir militvā tad-gāna-sukhaṁ śrī-kṛṣṇa-gānaṁ

Krama Sandarbha/BRSB p. 108

bahubhiḥ—many people; militvā—together; tad-gāna—in that
group; sukham—in great bliss; śrī-kṛṣṇa-gānaṁ—singing
the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

When many people congregationally and blissfully sing
the names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa (in a loud voice, with faith, for
the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa), it is called saṅkīrtana.



Loud kīrtana is a hundred times better than silent japa

japato hari-nāmāni sthāne śata-gunādhikaḥ

ātmānaṁ ca punāty uccair japau śrotṛn punāti ca

Nāradīya Purāṇa/Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata Ādī 16.283/BRSB
p. 108

Someone who chants the Holy Names aloud is a hundred
times better than one who performs silent japa in a
solitary place, because he who chants japa silently
simply benefits himself, while the person who chants
japa aloud benefits all those who hear him as well.31

                          486
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Editorial note: This śloka was spoken by Prahlāda
Mahārāja and cited by Śrīla Hāridāsa Ṭhākura in his
encounter with the offensive brāhmaṇa. Please refer to
Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Ādi 16.267-297, for a garland of
ślokas in glorification of the holy name uttered by our
nāmācārya, Śrīla Hāridāsa Ṭhākura, at that time.



Loud kīrtana benefits both the chanter and those who
hear it

paśu-pakṣī-kīṭa-ādi balite nā pāre

śunile se harināma tā'ra saba tare

japile se kṛṣṇa-nāma āpani se tare

ucca-saokīrtane para-upakāra kare

ata eva ucca kari' kīrtana karile

śata-guṇa phala haya sarva-śāstre bole

CB Ādi 11.275-277

The animals, birds, and insects cannot chant the holy
name, but by hearing the holy name chanted they can
benefit. Chanting the japa of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa
purifies oneself, but the loud saṅkīrtana of the holy
name of Kṛṣṇa benefits all living beings. Therefore,
loudly chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa in kīrtana, and you
will get one hundred times the benefit of chanting japa.
This is the verdict of all the śāstras.



Nāma-saṅkīrtana is the best means for success, whether
one is a karmī, a jñānī, or a bhakta

etan nirvidyamānānām icchatām akuto-bhayam

yogināṁ nṛpa nirṇītaṁ harer nāmānukīrtanam

SB 2.1.11/BRSB p. 103/KGH (P)

etat—it is; nirvidyamānānām—of those who are completely
free from all material desires; icchatām—of those who
are desirous of all sorts of material enjoyment; akutaḥ-
bhayam—free from all doubts and fear; yoginām—of all who
are self-satisfied; nṛpa—O King; nirṇītam—decided truth;
hareḥ—of the Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nāma—holy name; ānu—in
ānugatya (following under the guidance of Guru and
Vaiṣṇavas); kīrtanam—chanting.

O King, constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord
after the ways of the great authorities is the doubtless
and fearless way of success for all, including those who
are free from all material desires, those who are
desirous of all material enjoyment, and also those who
are self-satisfied by dint of transcendental knowledge.



                          487
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Nāma-saṅkīrtana easily bestows Kṛṣṇa-prema

tāra madhye sarva-śreṣṭha nāma-saṅkīrtana

niraparādhe nāma laile pāya prema-dhana

CC Antya 4.71

tāra madhye—of the nine different types of devotional
service; sarva-śreṣṭha—the most important of all; nāma-
saṅkīrtana—performing nāma-saṅkīrtana; niraparādhe—
without offenses; nāma laile—if one chants the holy
name; pāya—he gets; prema-dhana—the most valuable
ecstatic love of Kṛṣṇa.

Of all the different types of spiritual practices, the
nine forms of bhakti (śravaṇaṁ, kīrtanaṁ, etc.) are the
best because they have tremendous power to deliver Kṛṣṇa
and kṛṣṇa-prema. Of these nine practices, nāma-
saṅkīrtana is the best. By chanting śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma
without offences, one obtains the priceless treasure of
prema.



The superiority of kīrtana over smaraṇa is described in
Vaiṣṇava-cintāmaṇi

agha-cchit-smaraṇaṁ viṣṇor bahv-āyāsena sādhyate

oṣṭha-spandana-mātreṇa kīrtanaṁ tu tato varam

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 11.236/BR 1.5

Through performing smaraṇa (contemplation) of Viṣṇu sins
are destroyed only after great endeavor. However, simply
by vibrating His names upon one’s lips the same result
is achieved. Kīrtana is thus superior.



Smaraṇa must be performed in conjunction with saṅkīrtana

ataeva yady apy anyā bhaktiḥ kalau kartavyā

tadā kīrtanākhyā bhakti-saṁyogenaiva

Bhakti Sandarbha 273/Krama Sandarbha/SS p. 23

This means that in Kali yuga if one performs any of the
other eight limbs of devotional service, they must be
performed in conjunction with kīrtana, chanting of the
holy name. (By this method, bhakti is fully
accomplished).



Kīrtana is superior to smaraṇa

manyāmahe kīrtanam eva sattamaṁ

lolātmakaika-sva-hṛdi smarāt smṛteḥ


                          488
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

vāci sva-yukte manasi śrutau tathā

divyāt parān apy apakurvad ātmya-vat

Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛtam 2.3.148/GKH (P)

manyāmahe—we think; kīrtanam—glorification; eva—indeed;
sattamam—the best; lola-ātmaka—fickle; eka-sva-hṛdi—in
the heart; smarāt—than rememberance; smṛteḥ—from the
memeory; vāci—in the voice; sva-yukte—engaged; manasi—in
the mind; śrutau—remembered; tathā—so; divyāt—shining;
parān—others; api—also; apakurvat—drags; ātmya—the self;
vat—like.

We think that because it engages the voice, ears, and
mind, and because it attracts others as it does oneself,
glorifying the Lord is better than remembering the Lord
with the fickle mind.



Smaraṇa will come gradually and naturally as a result of
performing kīrtana

kīrtana-prabhāve, smaraṇa haibe,

se kāle bhajana-nirjana sambhava.

Mahājana-racita-gīta (duṣta mana!), Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda

kīrtana-prabhāve—by the power of chanting; smaraṇa—
remembering the Lord’s pastimes; haibe—will be possible;
se kāle—at that time; bhajana-nirjana—worship in
solitude; sambhava—possible.

By the influence of kīrtana, one may gradually come to
the exalted stage of smaraṇam, wherein one constantly
remembers the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa within one’s mind.
Nirjana-bhajana is conceivable only after attaining this
advanced level of kṛṣṇa-bhakti.



Saṅkīrtana is the best way to glorify Śrī Kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇasya nānā-vidha-kīrtaneṣu

tan-nāma-saṅkīrtanam eva mukhyam

tat-prema-sampaj-janane svayaṁ drāk

śaktaṁ tataḥ śreṣṭhatamaṁ mataṁ tat

Brhad Bhag. 2.3.158/BRSB p. 107/GKH (P)

kṛṣṇasya—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nānā—many; vidha—kinds; kīrtaneṣu
—in glorification; tan-nāma-saṅkīrtanam—glorifying His
holy name; eva—certainly; mukhyam—first; tat-prema-
sampaj-janane—creating the opulence of love; svayam—
personally; drāk—instantly; śaktam—able; tataḥ—then;
śreṣṭhatamam—best; matam—considered; tat—that.

Of the many ways to glorify Śrī Kṛṣṇa, congregational

                          489
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

chanting of His holy name is the topmost. Because it has
the power to instantly award the ultimate treasure of
pure love for Him, it is considered the best.



Anyone who always keeps Your holy name on his tongue is
already perfect

aho bata śva-paco —to garīyān

yaj-jihvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam

tepus tapas te juhuvuḥ sasnur āryā

brahmānūcur nāma gṛṇanti ye te

SB 3.33.7/CC Mad 11.192, 19.72, Antya 16.27/JD ch. 6/
BPKG p. 327,437/GKH (P)

aho bata—oh, how glorious; śva-pacaḥ—a dog-eater; ataḥ—
hence; garīyān—worshipable; yat—of whom; jihvā-agre—on
the tip of the tongue; vartate—is; nāma—the holy name;
tubhyam—unto You; tepuḥ tapaḥ—practiced austerities; te—
they; juhuvuḥ—executed fire sacrifices; sasnuḥ—took bath
in the sacred rivers; āryāḥ—Āryans; brahma anūcuḥ—
chanted the Vedas; nāma—the holy name; gṛṇanti—accept;
ye—they who; te—Your.

My dear Lord, anyone who always keeps Your holy name on
his tongue is greater than an initiated brāhmaṇa.
Although he may be born in a family of dog-eaters and
therefore, by material calculations, is the lowest of
men, he is glorious nevertheless. That is the wonderful
power of chanting the holy name of the Lord. One who
chants the holy name is understood to have performed all
kinds of austerities. He has chanted all the Vedas,
performed all the great sacrifices mentioned in the
Vedas, and has already taken his bath in all the holy
places of pilgrimage. It is he who is factually the
Āryan.

tasmāt saṅkīrtanaṁ viṣṇor jagan-maṅgalam aṁhasām

mahatām api kauravya viddhy aikāntika-niṣkṛtam

SB 6.3.31

tasmāt—therefore; saṅkīrtanam—the congregational
chanting of the holy name; viṣṇoḥ—of Lord Viṣṇu; jagat-
maṅgalam—the most auspicious performance within this
material world; aṁhasām—for sinful activities; mahatām
api—even though very great; kauravya—O descendant of the
Kuru family; viddhi—understand; aikāntika—the ultimate;
niṣkṛtam—nullification.

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, congregational
chanting of the holy name of the Lord is the most
auspicious activity for the entire world and is capable
of nullifying the reactions of even the greatest sins.
Please try to understand this so that others will take
it seriously.

kaliṁ sabhājayanty āryā guṇa-jñāḥ sāra-bhāginaḥ

                          490
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


yatra saṅkīrtanenaiva sarva-svārtho —bhilabhyate

SB 11.5.36

kalim—the age of Kali; sabhājayanti—they praise; āryāḥ—
progressive souls; guṇa-jñaḥ—who know the true value (of
the age); sāra-bhāginaḥ—who are able to pick out the
essence; yatra—in which; saṅkīrtanena—by the
congregational chanting of the holy names; eva—merely;
sarva—all; sva-arthaḥ—desired goals; abhilabhyate—are
attained.

Those who are actually advanced in knowledge are able to
appreciate the essential value of this age of Kali. Such
enlightened persons worship Kali-yuga because in this
fallen age all perfection of life can be easily achieved
by the performance of saṅkīrtana.

nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ yasya sarva-pāpa-praṇāśanam

praṇāmo duḥkha-śamanas taṁ namāmi hariṁ param

SB 12.13.23

nāma-saṅkīrtanam—the congregational chanting of the holy
name; yasya—of whom; sarva-pāpa—all sins; praṇāśanam—
which destroys; praṇāmaḥ—the bowing down; duḥkha—misery;
śamanaḥ—which subdues; tam—to Him; namāmi—I offer my
obeisances; harim—to Lord Hari; param—the Supreme.

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord,
Śrī Hari, the congregational chanting of whose holy
names destroys all sinful reactions, and the offering of
obeisances unto whom relieves all material suffering.



Śrī Nāma-saṅkīrtana draws Śrī Kṛṣṇa towards the Sādhaka

nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ proktaṁ kṛṣṇasya prema-sampadi

baliṣṭhaṁ sādhanaṁ śreṣṭhaṁ paramākarṣa-mantravat

tad eva manyate bhakteḥ phalaṁ tad-rasikair janaiḥ

bhagavat-prema-sampattau sadaivāvyabhicārataḥ

Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam 2.3.164—5/BR 1.16

nāma-saṅkīrtanam—glorification of the holy name; proktam
—said; kṛṣṇasya—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; prema—of love; sampadi—
the treasure; baliṣṭham—most powerful; sādhanam—method;
śreṣṭham—best; parama-ākarṣa—ultimate; mantra—a mantra;
vat—like; tat-that; eva-indeed; manyate-is considered;
bhakteḥ-of devotional service; phalam-the fruit; tat-
that; rasikaiḥ-expert at tasting nectar; janaiḥ-by
persons; bhagavat-of the Lord; prema-of love; sampattau-
in the treasure; sadā-always; eva-indeed;
avyabhicārataḥ-from not wavering.

It is said that to obtain the wealth of prema for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, nāma-saṅkīrtana is the best and most powerful
sādhana. This supremely attractive mantra draws Śrī

                          491
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa towards the sādhaka. Therefore rasika devotees of
Bhagavān conclude that the ability to engage in
saṅkīrtana is the result of bhakti. It is unfailing in
bestowing the wealth of bhāgavat-prema.

Thus ends section 3) - Saṅkīrtana




4) Preaching Through Saṅkīrtana



Those who have taken birth in the land of India should
preach

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari— kara para-upakāra

CC Ādi 9.41/BPKG p. 16

bhārata—of India; bhūmite—in the land; haila—has become;
manuṣya—human being; janma—birth; yāra—anyone; janma—
such a birth; sārthaka—fulfillment; kari——doing so; kara
—do; para—others; upakāra—benefit.

One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land
of India, Bhārata (the land whose residents have natural
rati, attachment, for Bhā, spiritual enlightenment),
should make his life successful and perform the supreme
welfare work for the benefit of all others, by preaching
Śrī Kṛṣṇa nāma-saṅkīrtana, the chanting of the holy name
of Kṛṣṇa.



Gaurasundara’s followers preach the Holy Name to whoever
they meet

yāre dekha, tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra— ei deśa

CC Mad 7.128

yāre—whomever; dekha—you meet; tāre—him; kaha—tell;
kṛṣṇa-upadeśa—the instructions of the Lord in Bhagavad-
gīta and the instructions to worship Kṛṣṇa in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam; āmāra ājñāya—under My order; guru hañā—
becoming a spiritual master; tāra——deliver; ei deśa—this
country.

Instruct whoever you meet in the science of Kṛṣṇa. Teach
them the instructions of Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad-gītā, and the
teachings about Kṛṣṇa in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In this way,
on my order, become a Guru and liberate everyone in the
land.



kabhu nā bādhibe tomāra viṣaya-taraṅga

                          492
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


punarapi ei ṭhāñi pābe mora saṅga

CC Madhya 7.129

kabhu—at any time; nā—not; bādhibe—will obstruct; tomāra
—your; viṣaya-taraṅga—materialistic way of life; punar
api—again; ei ṭhāñi—at this place; pābe—you will get;
mora—My; saṅga—association.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu further advised the brāhmaṇa
Kūrma, “If you follow this instruction, your
materialistic life at home will not obstruct your
spiritual advancement. Indeed, if you follow these
regulative principles, we will again meet here, or,
rather, you will never lose My company.”



In every town and village, the chanting of My name will
be heard

pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma

sarvatra pracāra haibe mora nāmas

CB Antya 4.126

pṛthivīte—on the face of the earth; āche—are; yata—as
many; nagara-ādi grāma—cities and villages; sarvatra—
everywhere; pracāra haibe—will be preached; mora nāma—My
holy name.

In every town and village, the chanting of My name will
be heard. In as many cities, towns and villages as there
are on the surface of the earth, My holy names will be
preached and chanted.



Preaching is the symptom of spiritual vitality

prāṇa āche yā—ra, se hetu pracāra

Vaiṣṇava Ke? Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda

He who has life can preach. Those who have spiritual
vitality can preach and instill spiritual life in their
audience.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “One who is really preaching
has nothing to take and everything to give.”

The devotee is concerned to benefit others (through
nāma-saṅkīrtana)

etāvaj janma-sāphalyaṁ dehinām iha dehiṣu

prāṇair arthair dhiyā vācā śreya-ācaraṇaṁ sadā

SB 10.22.35/CC Ādi 9.42

etāvat—up to this; janma—of birth; sāphalyam—perfection;
dehinām—of every living being; iha—in this world; dehiṣu

                          493
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

—toward those who are embodied; prāṇaiḥ—by life; arthaiḥ
—by wealth; dhiyā—by intelligence; vācā—by words; śreyaḥ
—eternal good fortune; ācaraṇam—acting practically; sadā
—always.

It is the duty of all embodied beings to perform welfare
activities for the benefit of others with their life,
wealth, intelligence and words.

prāṇinām upakārāya yathaiveha paratra ca

karmaṇā manasā vācā tad eva matimān vadet

Viṣṇu Purāṇa 3.12.45

Through one's work, mind, and words one should act in
such a way that it will benefit all beings both in this
world and the next. Such is the behaviour of the
intelligent.

Perfection in bhajana is attained through preaching

(śrī) rūpa-raghunātha-kathā parama-utsāhe

nirbhaye pracāra kara sarva-siddhi jāhe

Śrīla Bhakti Pramoda Puri Mahārāja, Of Love and
Separation

Preach the message of Śrī Rūpa and Raghunātha fearlessly
and with great enthusiasm. Through this preaching, you
will attain all perfection.

Thus ends Chapter 17 - Śravaṇa and Kīrtana




Chapter 18 — Nāma-tattva


Śrī Harināma is food for the soul and the foundation of
sādhana-bhajana



1. The Glories of the Holy Name 576

2. Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 587

3. The Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahā-Mantra in Śāstra 594

4. The Method of Chanting the Holy Nāme 598

5. Primary and Secondary Names of Kṛṣṇa 602

6. The Holy Name Should Always be Chanted 605

7. Śuddha-Nāma Appears by Sādhu-saṅga 607

8. Nāmābhāsa - A Shadow of Pure Nāma 609

9. The Ten Offences to the Holy Name 613

                           494
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


10. Ślokas Pertaining to Nāmāparādha 615

13. Further Glorification of Śrī Nāma 622



The holy name is the only way for the deliverance of
souls in the age of Kali

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

Bṛhan-Nāradīya-Purāṇa 38.126/JD ch. 23/BRSB p. 106/BPKG
pp. 199,217/CC Ādi 17.21

hareḥ nāma—the holy name of the Lord; hareḥ nāma—the
holy name of the Lord; hareḥ nāma—the holy name of the
Lord; eva—certainly; kevalam—only; kalau—in the Age of
Kali; na asti—there is not; eva—certainly; na asti—there
is not; eva—certainly; na asti—there is not; eva—
certainly; gatiḥ—destination; anyathā—other way.

In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of
deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There
is no other way. There is no other way. There is no
other way.

1) The Glories of the Holy Name



O Bhagavān, Your names bestow all auspiciousness upon
the jīvas

nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis

tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ

etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi

durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ

Śikṣāṣṭaka 2/ CC Antya 20.16/BR 2.1/JD ch. 24

nāmnām—of the holy names of the Lord; akāri—You
manifested; bahudhā—various kinds; nija-sarva-śaktiḥ—all
kinds of personal potencies; tatra—in that; arpitā—
bestowed; niyamitaḥ—restricted; smaraṇe—in remembering;
na—not; kālaḥ—consideration of time; etādṛśī—so much;
tava—Your; kṛpā—mercy; bhagavan—O Lord; mama—My; api—
although; durdaivam—misfortune; īdṛśam—such; iha—in this
(the holy name); ajani—it was born; na—not; anurāgaḥ—
attachment.

O Bhagavān, Your names bestow all auspiciousness upon
the jīvas. Therefore, for their benefit, You are
eternally manifest as Your innumerable names, such as
Rāma, Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Mukunda, Mādhava, Govinda and
Dāmodara. You have invested those names with all the
potencies of Their respective forms. Out of Your
causeless mercy, You have not even imposed any
restrictions on the remembrance of Your names, as is the

                          495
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

case with gāyātryī-mantras that must be chanted at
specific times (sandhyā-vandana). In other words, the
holy name of Bhagavān can be chanted and remembered at
any time of the day or night. This is the arrangement
You have made. O Prabhu, You have such causeless mercy
upon the jīvas; nevertheless, due to my nāma-aparādha, I
am so unfortunate that no attachment for Your holy name,
which is so easily accessible and which bestows all good
fortune, has awakened within me.

Kṛṣṇa (nāmī) and His name (nāma) are non-different

nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

—bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ

Padma Purāṇa/BRS 1.2.233/CC Mad 17.133/BRSB p.102/JD ch.
23/BR 2.31/BPKG pp. 48,242

nāmaḥ—the holy name; cintā-maṇiḥ—wish-fulfilling gem;
kṛṣṇaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa (Himself); caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ—the
form of all transcendental mellows; pūrṇaḥ—complete;
śuddhaḥ—pure, without material contamination; nitya—
eternally; muktaḥ—liberated; abhinna-tvāt—due to non-
difference; nāma—of the holy name; nāminoḥ—and of the
person who has the name.

The holy name is a transcendental wish-fulfilling gem
(cintāmaṇi), for there is no difference between Kṛṣṇa’s
name (nāma) and Kṛṣṇa Himself (nāmī). The name of
paramānanda-svarūpa Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the bestower of the
supreme goal (parama-puruṣārtha). This name is the very
form of transcendental mellows (caitanya-rasa-svarūpa).
It is completely pure, eternally liberated and beyond
any connection with māyā.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: Kṛṣṇa’s sublime form is as
identical to Him as His holy name. Remembering and
chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name immediately invokes His beautiful
form in the mind, and both dance there harmoniously as
inseparable partners. (Harināma-cintāmaṇi, ch. 2)



ekam eva sac-cid-ānanda-rasādi-rūpaṁ tattvaṁ dvidhā
āvirbhūtam

Jīva Gosvāmī's Durgama-saṅgamanī ṭīkā (BRS) on the above
śloka

The Supreme Absolute Truth is one reality whose form is
eternal, fully cognizant, and ecstatic. That Absolute
reality who is the origin of all rasa appears in two
forms, as Kṛṣṇa Himself and as the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.
These two forms are nondifferent manifestations of the
same eternal reality - Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Kṛṣṇa has descended as the incarnation of His holy names

                            496
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


kali-kāle nāma-rūpe kṛṣṇa-avatāra

nāma haite haya sarva-jagat-nistāra

nāma vinu kali-kāle nāhi āra dharma

sarva-mantra-sāra nāma, ei śāstra-marma

CC Ādi 17.22 and 7.74

kali-kāle—in this Age of Kali; nāma-rūpe—in the form of
the holy name; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa—s; avatāra—incarnation;
nāma—holy name; haite—from; haya—becomes; sarva—all;
jagat—of the world; nistāra—deliverance; nāma—the holy
name; vinu—without; kali-kāle—in this Age of Kali; nāhi—
there is none; āra—or any alternative; dharma—religious
principle; sarva—all; mantra—mantras and hymns; sāra—
essence; nāma—the holy name; ei—this is; śāstra—revealed
scriptures; marma—purport.

In this Age of Kali, Lord Kṛṣṇa has descended as the
incarnation of His holy names. Through Śrī Nāma the
entire world can be delivered from material bondage. In
this Age of Kali there is no religious principle other
than the chanting of the holy name, which is the essence
of all mantras and the purport of all scriptures.



The human material senses cannot perceive Śrī Harināma
because it is transcendental

ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

Padma-Purāṇa/BRS 1.2.234/CC Mad 17.136/BR 2.32/BPKG pp.
242, 330

ataḥ—therefore; śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-ādi—Lord Kṛṣṇa’s name,
form, qualities, pastimes and so on; na—not; bhavet—can
be; grāhyam—perceived; indriyaiḥ—by the blunt material
senses; sevā-unmukhe—to one favourably engaged in His
service; hi—certainly; jihvā-ādau—beginning with the
tongue; svayam—personally; eva—certainly; sphurati—
become manifest; adaḥ—those (Kṛṣṇa’s name, form,
qualities and so on).

The human material senses cannot perceive śrī harināma
because it is a transcendental sound, but it will appear
by itself to the purified senses headed by the tongue of
the sevonmukha-sādhaka, in whose heart the desire to
serve Kṛṣṇa has arisen.

Devotion is the only way and is performed through nāma-
saṅkīrtana

etāvān eva loke —smin puṁsāṁ dharmaḥ paraḥ smṛtaḥ


                           497
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

bhakti-yogo bhagavati tan-nāma-grahaṇādibhiḥ

SB 6.3.22/BR 1.37/GKH (P)

etāvān—this much; eva—indeed; loke asmin—in this
material world; puṁsām—of human beings; dharmaḥ—the
essence of one’s spiritual nature and function; paraḥ—
transcendental; smṛtaḥ—recognized; bhakti-yogaḥ—bhakti-
yoga, or devotional service; bhagavati—to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tat
—His; nāma—of the holy name; grahaṇa-ādibhiḥ—beginning
with chanting.

Only loving devotional service to Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
performed through nāma-saṅkīrtana, is called bhakti-
yoga. This alone is the supreme dharma for all human
beings.



The holy name is the essence of the Vedas

nikhila-śruti-mauli-rama-mālā-dyuti-nīrājita-pāda-
paṅkajānta

ayi mukta-kulair upāsyamānaṁ paritas tvāṁ harināma
saṁśrayāmi

Kṛṣṇa-nāmāṣṭakam 1, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī

O holy name, the tips of the toes of your lotus feet are
eternally worshiped by the glowing effulgence of the
Upaniṣads, the crest jewels of the Vedas. You are
eternally adored and chanted by great liberated souls
like Nārada and Śukadeva Gosvāmī. O harināma, I take
complete shelter of You.

The glories of the Holy Name in the Smṛti-śāstras

vede rāmāyaṇe caiva purāṇe bhārate tathā

ādāv ante ca madhye ca hariḥ sarvatraḥ gīyate

Hari-vaṁśa

Throughout the Vedas, the Rāmāyaṇa, the Purāṇas, and the
Mahābhārata, from beginning to end, only the glories of
(the holy name of) Śrī Hari are sung.



Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana is the best limb of bhakti

kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇuṁ tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ

dvāpare paricaryāyāṁ kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt

SB 12.3.52/BRSB p. 104/JD ch. 23

kṛte—in the Satya-yuga; yat—which; dhyāyataḥ—from
meditation; viṣṇum—on Lord Viṣṇu; tretāyām—in the Tretā-
yuga; yajataḥ—from worshiping; makhaiḥ—by performing
sacrifices; dvāpare—in the age of Dvāpara; paricaryāyām—
by worshiping the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa; kalau—in the age
of Kali; tat—that same result (can be achieved); hari-

                            498
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

kīrtanāt—simply by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra.

Whatever result was obtained in Satya-yuga by meditating
on Viṣṇu, in Tretā-yuga by performing sacrifices, and in
Dvāpara-yuga by serving the Lord’s lotus feet can be
obtained in Kali-yuga simply by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mahā-mantra.



dhyāyan kṛte yajan yajñais tretāyāṁ dvāpare 'rcayan

yad āpnoti tad āpnoti kalau saṅkīrtya keśavam

Viṣṇu-Purāṇa/HBV 11.456/JD ch. 19

dhyāyan—meditating; kṛte—in the Satya-yuga; yajan—
worshiping; yajñaiḥ—with the performance of great
sacrifices; tretāyām—in the Treta-yuga; dvāpare—in the
Dvapara-yuga; arcayan—worshiping the lotus feet; yat—
whatever; āpnoti—is achieved; tat—that; āpnoti—is
achieved; kalau—in the age of Kali; saṅkīrtya—simply by
saṅkīrtana; keśavam—the pastimes and qualities of Lord
Keśava.

Whatever is achieved by meditation in Satya-yuga, by the
performance of yajña in Tretā-yuga, or by the worship of
Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet in Dvāpara-yuga, is easily obtained
in the age of Kali simply by chanting and glorifying
Lord Keśava.

yad abhyarcya hariṁ bhaktyā kṛte kratu-śatair api

phalaṁ prāpnoty avikalaṁ kalau govinda-kīrtanāt

Viṣṇu-rahasya/HBV 11.455/BR 1.3

yat—what; abhyarcya—worshiping; harim—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
bhaktyā—with devotion; kṛte—in Satya-yuga; kratu-śataiḥ—
with a hundred yajñas; api—even; phalam—the result;
prāpnoti—attains; avikalam—complete; kalau—in kali-yuga;
govinda-kīrtanāt—by chanting the holy names of Lord
Govinda.

Whatever fruit can be obtained in Satya-yuga by devoutly
performing austerities and so on for hundreds of years,
can be obtained in the age of Kali simply by chanting
the names of Śrī Govinda.



The respective benefits of kṛṣṇa-mantra and kṛṣṇa-nāma

kṛṣṇa-mantra haite habe saṁsāra-mocana

kṛṣṇa-nāma haite pābe kṛṣṇera caraṇa

CC Ādi 7.73

kṛṣṇa-mantra—(the chanting of the) gopāla-mantra (kliṁ
kṛṣṇaya etc.); haite—from; habe—it will be; saṁsāra—
material existence; mocana—deliverance; kṛṣṇa-nāma—(the
chanting of the) Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra; haite—from;
pābe—one will get; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; caraṇa—lotus

                          499
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

feet.

Simply by chanting the kṛṣṇa-mantra (gopāla-mantra), one
can obtain freedom from material existence. Thereafter,
simply by chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma (the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-
mantra), one will get the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
attain kṛṣṇa-prema.



Harināma bestows unlimitedly more benefit than all kinds
of sat-karma (pious fruitive activities)

go-koṭi-dānaṁ grahaṇe khagasya

prayāga-gaṅgodaka kalpa-vāsaḥ

yajñāyutaṁ meru-suvarṇa-dānaṁ

govinda-kīrter na samaṁ śatāṁśaiḥ

Skanda-Purāṇa/Laghu Bhagavatāmṛta/HBV 11.385/JD ch. 23/
CC Ādi 3.79 pt

[sarva-sat-karmādhikatvam—harināma is better than all
pious deeds] go-koṭi-dānam—giving ten million cows;
grahaṇe—at an eclipse; khagasya—of the sun; prayāga—at
Prayāga; gaṅgā-udaka—by the Gaṅgā’s water; kalpa-vāsaḥ—
residing for a day of Brahmā; yajña—of Vedic sacrifices;
ayutam—ten thousand; meru-suvarṇa—a heap of gold like
Mount Meru; dānam—gift; govinda-kīrteḥ—of the glories of
Lord Govinda; na—not; samam—equal; śata-aṁśaiḥ—with a
hundredth part.

One may give ten million cows in charity on the day of a
solar eclipse; one may reside in Prayāga on the banks of
the Gaṅgā for a kalpa; or one may perform ten thousand
yajñas and give in charity a mountain of gold as high as
Mount Sumeru. Still, all these cannot be compared with
even a one-hundredth particle of the benefit obtained by
chanting Śrī-Govinda’s names.



viṣṇor ekaikaṁ nāmāpi sarva-vedādhikaṁ matam

tādṛk-nāma sahasreṇa rāma-nāma-samaṁ smṛtam

Śata-nāma-stotra/JD ch. 23

Chanting one name of Viṣṇu gives more benefit than
studying all the Vedas, and one name of Rāma is equal to
a thousand names (sahasra-nāma) of Viṣṇu.



rāma rāmeti rāmeti rame rāme manorame

sahasra-nāmabhis tulyaṁ rāma-nāma varānane

Padma Purāṇa 72.335/CC Madhya 9.32

rāma—Rāma; rāma—Rāma; iti—thus; rāma—Rāma; iti—thus;
rame—I enjoy; rāme—in the holy name of Rāma; manaḥ-rame—

                             500
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

most beautiful; sahasra-nāmabhiḥ—with the one thousand
names; tulyam—equal; rāma-nāma—the holy name of Rāma;
vara-ānane—O lovely-faced woman.

[Lord Śiva addressed his wife, Durgā:] “O Varānanā, I
chant the holy name of Rāma, Rāma, Rāma and thus enjoy
this beautiful sound. This holy name of Rāmacandra is
equal to one thousand holy names of Lord Viṣṇu.”



sahasra-nāmnāṁ puṇyānāṁ trir āvṛttyā tu yat phalam

ekāvṛttyā tu kṛṣṇasya nāmaikaṁ tat prayacchati

Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa/CC Madhya 9.33/JD ch. 23/BRSB p. 101

sahasra-nāmnām—of one thousand names; puṇyānām—holy;
triḥ-āvṛttyā—by thrice chanting; tu—but; yat—which;
phalam—result; eka-āvṛttyā—by one repetition; tu—but;
kṛṣṇasya—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāma—holy name; ekam—only one;
tat—that result; prayacchati—gives.

The pious results derived from chanting the thousand
holy names of Viṣṇu three times can be attained by only
once uttering the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.

[In other words, a thousand names of Viṣṇu equals one
name of Rāma, and three thousand names of Viṣṇu — that
is to say, three names of Rāma — equals one name of
Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name once gives the
same result as chanting Rāma’s name three times]



Śrī Kṛṣṇa tells the Moon-god that Rādhā’s nāma is
superior to His

mama nāma-śatenaiva rādhā-nāma sad-uttamam

yaḥ smaret tu sadā rādhām na jāne tasya kiṁ phalam

Krama-dīpikā

The name of Śrī Rādhā is superior to hundreds of My
names. Even I cannot calculate the result achieved by
constantly remembering Her name.31

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahāraja: “Relish of the very rasa of
Bhagavān, who is Himself an embodiment of concentrated
rasa, is definitely contained within His name. Although
there is such taste in His name, that same nāmī, Śrī
Śyāmasundara, becomes overwhelmed when He tastes the
name of Śrī Rādhā. It is the nature of prema that the
lover will have affection for the name of the beloved”
(BR p. 218)



Prema and kṛṣṇa-nāma cannot be compared to anything of
this world

jñānam asti tulitaṁ ca tulāyaṁ prema naiva tulitaṁ tu
tulāyāṁ

                          501
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


siddhir eva tulitātra tulāyāṁ kṛṣṇa-nāma tulitaṁ na
tulāyāṁ

Padyāvalī 15, Śrīdhara Svāmī

Knowledge and yogic perfection can be compared to one
another, but prema and kṛṣṇa-nāma have no comparison to
anything within this world. They cannot be weighed on
the scales of mundane consideration.



The mahā-mantra is the medicine to destroy the disease
of māyā

enechi auṣadhi māyā nāśibāra lāgi—

harināma-mahā-mantra lao tumi māgi—

Jīva Jāgo 4, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura [Śrī Gauḍīya
Gīti-guccha (2003 ed.) p. 105]

Śrī Gauracandra is calling, “I have brought you the
hari-nāma mahā-mantra — the medicine to destroy the
disease of māyā. Take these holy names, I beg of you!”



The elixir of śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma is the only powerful
medicine to cure the disease of material existence and
place one on the spiritual platform

idaṁ śarīraṁ pariṇāma-peśalaṁ

pataty avaśyaṁ śata-sandhi-jarjaram

kim auṣadhaṁ pṛcchasi mūḍha durmate

nirāmayaṁ kṛṣṇa-rasāyanaṁ piba

Mukunda-mālā 37/BR 3.3

idam—this; śarīram—body; pariṇāma—as subject to
transformation; peśalam—attractive; patati—falls down;
avaśyam—inevitably; śata—hundreds; sandhi—joints;
jarjaram—having become decrepit; kim—why; auṣadham—for
medication; pṛcchasi—you are asking; mūḍha—deluded;
durmate—O fool; nirāmayam—prophylactic; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa;
rasa-ayanam—the elixir; piba—just drink.

This attractive body of yours which is made of hundreds
of joints, is subject to many transformations and must
inevitably fall into decrepitude and death
(Consequently, the body will be burnt to ashes or will
become food for worms and transformed into excrement). O
foolish and wicked mind, why have you decorated such a
disgusting body with a senseless attachment? O misguided
fool, why are you asking for medicine and giving so much
attention to your bodily maintenance? Just constantly
drink the elixir of śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma which will place you
on the spiritual platform and free you from all disease.



                          502
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Those who don’t engage in hearing and chanting are the
most unfortunate

daivena te hata-dhiyo bhavataḥ prasaṅgāt

sarvāśubhopaśamanād vimukhendriyā ye

kurvanti kāma-sukha-leśa-lavāya dīnā

lobhābhibhūta-manaso —kuśalāni śaśvat

SB 3.9.7/BR 2.5

daivena—by fate of misfortune; te—they; hata-dhiyaḥ—
bereft of memory; bhavataḥ—of You; prasaṅgāt—from the
topics; sarva—all; aśubha—inauspiciousness; upaśamanāt—
curbing down; vimukha—turned against; indriyāḥ—senses;
ye—those; kurvanti—act; kāma—sense gratification; sukha—
happiness; leśa—brief; lavāya—for a moment only; dīnāḥ—
poor fellows; lobha-abhibhūta—overwhelmed by greed;
manasaḥ—of one whose mind; akuśalāni—inauspicious
activities; śaśvat—always.

Those persons who refrain from the hearing and chanting
of Your glories, which destroys all misfortune, and
instead always engage in inauspicious activities, being
obsessed with a desire for a particle of material sense
enjoyment, are certainly wretched, for fate has stolen
away their intelligence.



Those who are materially engrossed cannot appreciate the
holy name

tac ca deha-draviṇa-janatā-lobha-pāṣaṇḍa-madhye

nikṣiptaṁ syān na phala-janakaṁ śighram evātra vipra

Padma-Purāṇa (Svarga-khaṇḍa 48.56)

“O brāhmaṇa, if the Lord’s holy name is uttered among
the atheists who are lustful towards the body, material
possessions and family members, it will not quickly
produce the fruit of love for Him.”



Padyāvalī on the glories of Śrī Nāma

ākṛṣṭiḥ kṛta-cetasāṁ sumahatām muccāṭanaṁ cāṁhasāṁ

ācaṇḍālam amūka-loka-sulabho vaśyaś ca mokṣa-śriyaḥ

no dīkṣāṁ na ca dakṣināṁ na ca puraścaryāṁ manāg īkṣate

mantro'yaṁ rasanā-spṛg eva phalati śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmātmakaḥ

Padyāvalī 29, Śrī Lakṣmīdhara

ākṛṣṭiḥ—attraction; kṛta-cetasām—of saintly persons; su-
manasām—of the most high-minded; uccāṭanam—annihilator;
ca—also; aṁhasām—of sinful reactions; ā-caṇḍālam—even to

                          503
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

the caṇḍālas; amūka—except the dumb; loka-sulabhaḥ—very
easy to achieve for all persons; vaśyaḥ—full controller;
ca—and; mokṣa-śriyaḥ—of the opulence of liberation; no—
not; dīkṣām—initiation; na—not; ca—also; sat-kriyām—
pious activities; na—not; ca—also; puraścaryām—
regulative principles before initiation; manāk—slightly;
īkṣate—depends upon; mantraḥ—mantra; ayam—this; rasanā—
tongue; spṛk—touching; eva—simply; phalati—is fruitful;
śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-ātmakaḥ—consisting of the holy name of
Lord Kṛṣṇa.

The holy name of Kṛṣṇa is an attractive feature for many
saintly, liberal people. It is the annihilator of all
sinful reactions and is so powerful that save for the
dumb who cannot chant it, it is readily available to
everyone, including the lowest type of man, the caṇḍāla.
The holy name of Kṛṣṇa is the controller of the opulence
of liberation, and it is identical with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Simply by touching the holy name with one's tongue,
immediate effects are produced. Chanting the holy name
does not depend on initiation, pious activities, or the
puraścaryā regulative principles generally observed
before initiation. The holy name does not wait for all
these activities. It is self-sufficient.



Other kinds of atonement (prāyaścitta) are not necessary
for one who chants the holy name

nāmno —sti yāvatī śaktiḥ pāpa-nirharaṇe hareḥ

tāvat kartuṁ na śaknoti pātakaṁ pātakī janaḥ

Bṛhad-viṣṇu Purāṇa/BR 1.4

Śrī Hari’s name possesses such potency to destroy sins
that it can counteract more sins than even the most
sinful person is able to commit.



yena janma-śataiḥ pūrvaṁ vāsudevaḥ samarcitaḥ

tan-mukhe hari-nāmāni sadā tiṣṭhanti bhārataḥ

HBV 11.237/BR 1.6

O best of the dynasty of Bharata, the holy name of Śrī
Hari is eternally present only in the mouth of one who
has perfectly worshipped Vāsudeva for hundreds of
births.



A pure devotee chanting in ecstasy aspires for millions
of tongues and ears

tuṇḍe tāṇḍavinī ratiṁ vitanute tuṇḍāvalī-labdhaye

karṇa-kroḍa-kaḍambinī ghaṭayate karṇārbudebhyaḥ spṛhām

cetaḥ-prāṅgaṇa-saṅginī vijayate sarvendriyāṇāṁ kṛtiṁ


                            504
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

no jāne janitā kiyadbhir amṛtaiḥ kṛṣṇeti varṇa-dvayī

Vidagdha-mādhava 1.15/CC Antya 1.99/GV p. 34

tuṇḍe—in the mouth; tāṇḍavinī—dancing; ratim—the
inspiration; vitanute—expands; tuṇḍa-āvalī-labdhaye—to
achieve many mouths; karṇa—of the ear; kroḍa—in the
hole; kaḍambinī—sprouting; ghaṭayate—causes to appear;
karṇa-arbudebhyaḥ spṛhām—the desire for millions of
ears; cetaḥ-prāṅgaṇa—in the courtyard of the heart;
saṅginī—being a companion; vijayate—conquers; sarva-
indriyāṇām—of all the senses; kṛtim—the activity; na u—
not indeed; jāne—I know; janitā—produced; kiyadbhiḥ—of
what measure; amṛtaiḥ—by nectar; kṛṣṇa—the name of
Kṛṣṇa; iti—thus; varṇa-dvayī—the two syllables.

[Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī:] “I do not know how much nectar the
two syllables “Kṛṣ-ṇa— have produced. When the holy name
of Kṛṣṇa is chanted, it appears to dance within the
mouth. We then desire many, many mouths. When that name
enters the holes of the ears, we desire many millions of
ears. And when the holy name dances in the courtyard of
the heart, it conquers the activities of the mind, and
therefore all the senses become inert.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Hearing this śloka from Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura began to jump,
laugh and chant, “Hari bol! Hari bol!” This is also
Gaura-vāṇī.



O mind! with pure devotion perform the kīrtana of the
holy name

paraṁ śrimat-padāmbhojaṁ sadā sangaty-apekṣayā

nāma-saṅkirtana-prayaṁ viśuddhāṁ bhaktim ācara

Bṛhad-Bhagavatāmṛtam 2.3.144

param—best; śrīmat-padāmbhoja—of the Lord's lotus feet;
sadā—eternal; saṅgati—association; apekṣayā—in relation
to; nāma—of the holy name; saṅkīrtana—glorification;
prāyam—primarily; viśuddhām—pure; bhaktim—devotion;
ācara—do.

O Gopa Kumāra! If you desire to have the eternal
association of the lotus feet of the Lord, then you
should perform pure devotional service, in which is
saṅkīrtana is prominent.



Everything (sādhya and sādhana) is included in hari-
nāma-saṅkīrtana

sādhya-sādhana-tattva ye kichu sakala

hari-nāma-saṅkīrtane milibe sakala

CB Ādi 14.143

By congregationally chanting the holy names you achieve

                          505
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

everything, including the goal of life and the process
for attaining it.

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda: Love of
Kṛṣṇa is the sādhya, and congregational chanting the
names of Kṛṣṇa is the sādhana. Any questions that may
arise in this regard can be resolved only by chanting
the names of Kṛṣṇa. The uselessness of the insignificant
desires of the sense enjoyers, fruitive workers, and
mental speculators is easily realised by persons who are
under the shelter of the holy names through the process
of saṅkīrtana. (Upadeśāvalī)

Thus ends section 1) The Gloties of the Holy Name



2) Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka - The seven excellent results of
Saṅkīrtana



By performing Śrī Kṛṣṇa Saṅkīrtana, one obtains seven
kinds of transcendental perfections. These are explained
in Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. The
first verse describes the sequence of bhajana:

ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ

śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ

sarvātma-snapanaṁ paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 1/BR 1.11/BPKG p. 295

cetaḥ—of the heart; darpaṇa—the mirror; mārjanam—
cleansing; bhava—of material existence; mahā-dāva-agni—
the blazing forest fire; nirvāpaṇam—extinguishing;
śreyaḥ—of good fortune; kairava—the white lotus;
candrikā—the moonshine; vitaraṇam—spreading; vidyā-vadhū
—of Divya-Sarasvatī who awards divine knowledge; jīvanam
—the life; ānanda—of bliss; ambudhi—the ocean; vardhanam
—increasing; prati-padam—at every step; pūrṇa-amṛta—of
the full nectar; āsvādanam—giving a taste; sarva—for
everyone; ātma-snapanam—bathing of the self; param—
transcendental; vijayate—let there be victory; śrī-
kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam—for the congregational chanting of the
holy name of Kṛṣṇa.

Let there be supreme victory for the chanting of the
holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which cleanses the mirror of the
heart and completely extinguishes the blazing forest
fire of material existence. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana
diffuses the moon rays of bhāva, which cause the white
lotus of good fortune for the jīvas to bloom. The holy
name is the life and soul of Divyā Sarasvatī who reveals
divine knowledge in the devotees— hearts. It
continuously expands the ocean of transcendental bliss,
enabling one to taste complete nectar at every step, and
thoroughly cleanses and cools everything, both
internally and externally, including one’s body, heart,
self (ātmā) and nature.

                          506
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


1. ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ — The holy name cleanses the
mirror of the heart (anartha-nivṛtti):

sūditāśrita-janārti-rāśaye ramya-cid-ghana-sukha-
svarūpiṇe

nāma gokula-mahotsavāya te kṛṣṇa-pūrṇa-vapuṣe namo namaḥ

Nāmāṣṭaka 7/BR 1.12/Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka p. 23

sūdita—destroyed; āśrita—sheltered; jana—of the people;
ārti—sufferings; rāśaye—abundance; ramya—charming; cid—
spirit; ghana—intense; sukha—happiness; svarūpiṇe—own
form; nāma —the holy name; gokula—in Gokula; mahotsavāya
—for a great festival; te—of You; kṛṣṇa —of Lord Kṛṣṇa;
pūrṇa—the perfect and full; vapuṣe —transcendental form;
na-maḥ na-maḥ—not I, not I!.

O holy name, destroyer of the numerous sufferings of
those who have taken shelter of You! O embodiment of
delightful transcendental bliss! O great festival for
the residents of Gokula (the gopīs, gopas, cows, calves
and all other life forms of Vraja)! O all-pervading one!
O kṛṣṇa-nāma, time and again I offer respects to You,
who are the complete form of Kṛṣṇa. [This seventh verse
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Nāmāṣṭaka describes the holy
name as the embodiment of concentrated transcendental
bliss and knowledge].



2. bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ — Nāma-saṅkīrtana
extinguishes the blazing forest fire of material
existence (niṣṭhā):

nātaḥ paraṁ karma-nibandha-kṛntanaṁ

mumukṣatāṁ tīrtha-padānukīrtanāt

na yat punaḥ karmasu sajjate mano

rajas-tamobhyāṁ kalilaṁ tato —nyathā

SB 6.2.46/BR 1.16/JD ch.6/Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka p. 24

na—not; ataḥ—therefore; param—better means; karma-
nibandha—the bondage of fruitive activities; kṛntanam—
that which can completely cut off; mumukṣatām—of persons
desiring to get out of the clutches of material bondage;
tīrtha-pada—about the Lord at whose feet create all the
holy places; anukīrtanāt—than constantly chanting under
the direction of the bona fide spiritual master; na—not;
yat—because; punaḥ—again; karmasu—in fruitive
activities; sajjate—becomes attached; manaḥ—the mind;
rajaḥ-tamobhyām—by the modes of passion and ignorance;
kalilam—affected by; tataḥ—thereafter; anyathā—by any
other means.

For those who desire liberation from the bondage of this
material existence, there is no better means than
chanting the names of Bhagavān, who sanctifies even the
holy places by the touch of His lotus feet. This nāma-
saṅkīrtana is able to destroy the root cause of all

                          507
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

sinful activities, because when the mind has taken
shelter of Bhagavān it will never again be caught by
fruitive activities. By taking shelter of any atonement
other than the name of Bhagavān, the heart will remain
affected by the modes of passion and ignorance, and sins
will not be destroyed at the root.



3. śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ — Harināma diffuses
the moonrays of bhāva-bhakti for the supreme benefit of
all living beings (ruci):

madhura-madhuram etan maṅgalāṁ maṅgalānāṁ

sakala-nigama-vallī sat-phalaṁ cit-svarūpam

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛgu-vara! nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇanāma

Skanḍa-Purāṇa/HBV 11.234/Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka p. 24/JD ch. 25/
BR 1.18

madhura—of all sweet things; madhuram—the most sweet;
etat—this; mangalam—the most aupicious; mangalānām—of
all auspicious things; sakala—all; nigama—of the Vedas;
vallī—the creepers; sat—the transcendental; phalam—
fruit; cit—with a spiritual; svarūpam—form; sakṛt—once;
api—even; parigītam—spoken; śraddhayā—with faith; helayā
—with mockery; vā—or; bhṛgu—of the Bhrgu dynasty; vara—
the most exalted; nara—a human being; mātram—even;
tarayet—delivers; kṛṣṇa—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nāma—the name.

Kṛṣṇa-nāma is the sweetest of the sweet and the most
auspicious of all that is auspicious. It is the
flourishing creeper and eternal, fully-ripened fruit of
the all the Vedas, and the embodiment of divine
knowledge, cit-śakti. O best of the Bhṛgu dynasty! If
someone chants the holy name only once, be it with faith
or contempt (helā), he is immediately delivered from
this ocean of birth and death!



sakṛd uccāritaṁ yena harir ity-akṣara-dvayam

baddhaḥ parikaras tena mokṣāya gamanaṁ prati

Padma-Purāṇa/Skanda-Purāṇa/HBV 11.326/BR 1.17 pt

sakṛt—once; uccaritam—spoken; yena—by whom; hariḥ—Hari;
iti—thus; akṣara-vayam—two syllables; baddhaḥ—bound;
parikaraḥ—belt; tena—by him; mokṣāya—for liberation;
gamanam—going; prati—to.

A person who even once chants the two syllables ha and
ri easily attains liberation.



4. vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam — It is the life of all
transcendental knowledge (āsakti):


                          508
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

yadīcchasi paraṁ jñānaṁ jñānād yat paramaṁ padam

tadādareṇa rājendra kuru govinda-kīrtanam

Gāruḍa-Purāṇa/HBV 11.441/BR 1.19/Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka p. 25

[gāruḍe—in the Garuḍa Purāṇa; ambarīṣam—King Ambarīṣa;
prati—to; śrī-śukena—by Śrī Śuka] yadi—if; icchasi—you
desire; param—transcendental; jñānam—knowledge; jñānāt—
than knowledge; yat—what; paramam—supreme; padam—abode;
tadā—then; ādareṇa—with respect; rājendra—O king; kuru—
do; govinda-kīrtanam—the chanting of Lord Govinda's holy
names.

O best of kings, if you desire to obtain the topmost
knowledge and the supreme goal of that knowledge, prema-
bhakti, then chant the holy name of Śrī Govinda with
love and devotion.

It is further stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

dhātar yad asmin bhava īśa jīvās

tāpa-trayeṇābhihatā na śarma

ātman labhante bhagavaṁs tavāṅghri-

cchāyāṁ sa-vidyām ata āśrayema

SB 3.5.40/Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka p. 25

dhātaḥ—O maintainer of the cosmos; yat—because; asmin—in
this; bhave—material world; īśa—O Lord; jīvāḥ—the living
entities; tāpa—miseries; trayeṇa—by the three; abhihatāḥ
—always afflicted; na—never; śarma—in happiness; ātman—O
Supreme Soul; labhante—they gain; bhagavan—O Personality
of Godhead; tava—Your; aṅghri-chāyām—in the shade of
Your feet; sa-vidyām—full of knowledge; ataḥ—obtain;
āśrayema—shelter.

O maintainer ofthe cosmos, O Lord, O Personality of
Godhead, the living entities in the material world can
never have any happiness because they are always
overwhelmed by the three-fold miseries. Therefore they
take shelter of the shade of Your lotus feet, which are
full of knowledge, and we also thus take shelter of
them.



5. ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ — The chanting of the holy
name expands the ocean of transcendental bliss (bhāva —
external symptoms):

ekāntino yasya na kañcanārthaṁ

vāñchanti ye vai bhagavat-prapannāḥ

aty-adbhutaṁ tac-caritaṁ sumaṅgalaṁ

gāyanta ānanda-samudra-magnāḥ

SB 8.3.20/BR 1.22/Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka p.26


                          509
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

ekāntinaḥ—unalloyed devotees (who have no desire other
than Kṛṣṇa consciousness); yasya—the Lord, of whom; na—
not; kañcana—some; artham—benediction; vāñchanti—desire;
ye—those devotees who; vai—indeed; bhagavat-prapannāḥ—
fully surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord; ati-
adbhutam—which are wonderful; tat-caritam—the activities
of the Lord; su-maṅgalam—and very auspicious (to hear);
gāyantaḥ—by chanting and hearing; ānanda—of
transcendental bliss; samudra—in the ocean; magnāḥ—who
are immersed

The devotees who are exclusively surrendered unto
Bhagavān, and who have no other desire than to attain
Him, become immersed in an ocean of bliss by performing
saṅkīrtana of His wonderful and supremely auspicious
pastimes.



6. prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ — It enables one to
taste complete nectar at every step (bhāva — internal
symptoms of perfection — Vipralambha):

tebhyo namo —stu bhava-vāridhi-jīrṇa-paṅka-

sammagna-mokṣaṇa-vicakṣaṇa-pādukebhyaḥ

kṛṣṇeti varṇa-yugalaṁ śravaṇena yeṣām

ānandathur bhavati nartita-roma-vṛndaḥ

Padma-Purāṇa/Padyāvalī 54/BR 1.23

tebhyaḥ—to them; namaḥ—obeisances; astu—let there be;
bhava—of repeated birth and death; vāridhi—of the ocean;
jīrṇa—in the festering; paṅka—mud; sammagna—stuck;
mokṣaṇa—releasing; vicakṣaṇa—expert; pādukebhyaḥ—unto
their sandals; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; iti—thus; varṇa—of
syllables; yugala—the pair; śravaṇena—by hearing; yeṣām—
of whom; ānandathuḥ—in bliss; bhavati—become; nartita—
dancing; roma-vṛndaḥ—hairs standing up.

I offer my obeisances to the sandals of those devotees
whose bodily hairs stand on end, who begin to dance and
whose hearts tremble with bliss upon hearing the two
syllables kṛṣ and ṇa. They are expert in delivering the
living entities stuck in the festering mud of the ocean
of material existence. (Clear-sighted, intelligent
persons who desire eternal auspiciousness surrender to
the lotus feet of these rasika-bhaktas).



7. sarvātma-snapanaṁ — Premānanda is completely pure; it
thoroughly cleanses and cools the entire self (prema):

saṅkīrtyamāno bhagavān anantaḥ

śrutānubhāvo vyasanaṁ hi puṁsām

praviśya cittaṁ vidhunoty aśeṣaṁ

yathā tamo —rko —bhram ivāti-vātaḥ


                          510
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

SB 12.12.48/BR 1.24/Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka p. 27

saṅkīrtyamānaḥ—being properly chanted about; bhagavān—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anantaḥ—the
unlimited; śruta—are heard of; anubhāvaḥ—His glories;
vyasanam—the misery; hi—indeed; puṁsām—of persons;
praviśya—enter; cittam—the heart; vidhunoti—cleans away;
aśeṣam—entirely; yathā—just as; tamaḥ—darkness; arkaḥ—
the sun; abhram—clouds; iva—as; ati-vātaḥ—a strong wind.

Bhagavān Śrī Hari Himself enters the heart of a devotee
who describes His name, form, qualities, pastimes and so
on, or hears His glories; and He destroys all the
darkness of the sins present there. Upon entering the
heart of the jīva, Bhagavān destroys his offences,
impediments, duplicity and material desires, just as the
sun drives away darkness or a powerful wind scatters the
clouds. (This cleanses the mirror-like hearts of those
who take shelter of Kṛṣṇa’s name, and very quickly they
attain their pure transcendental forms).



The holy name is Kṛṣṇa Himself and the sweet embodiment
of transcendental mellows (caitanya-rasa-vigraha). Śrī
Nāmāṣṭaka states:

nārada-vīṇojjīvana! sudhormi-niryāsa-mādhurī-pūra!

tvaṁ kṛṣṇa-nāma! kāmaṁ sphura me rasane rasena sadā

Stava-mālā 21.8 (Nāmāṣṭaka 8)/SS p. 28/BR 1.25

nārada—of Nārada; vīṇā—of the lute; ujjīvana—the vibrant
life; sudhā—of nectar; ūrmi—waves; niryāsa—of the
essence; mādhurī-pūra—the sweet beverage; tvam—You;
kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; nāma—O nāme; kāmaṁ—if You wish; sphura—
please appear; me—of me; rasane—of the tongue; rasena—
with nectar; sadā—always.

O life of Nārada’s vīṇā! O sweet beverage distilled from
the transcendental ocean of nectar! O condensed form of
all sweetness! O kṛṣṇa-nāma! By Your own sweet will, may
You always appear on my tongue along with all
transcendental rasa.

jaya nāmadheya! muni-vṛnda-geya!

jana-rañjanāya paramākṣarākṛte!

tvam anādarād api manāg udīritaṁ

nikhilogra-tāpa-paṭalīṁ vilumpasi

Stava-mālā 21.2 (Nāmāṣṭaka)/SS p. 28/BR 1.26

jaya—all glories; nāmadheya—O holy name; muni—of sages;
vṛnda—by the multitudes; geya—chanted; jana—of the
people; rañjanāya—for the happiness; param—supreme;
akṣara—of syllables; ākṛte—the form; tvam—You; anādarād
—without respect; api —even; manāg—slightly; udīritam—
spoken; nikhila—all; ugra—terrible; tāpa—sufferings;
paṭalīm—abundance; vilumpasi—you destroy.


                          511
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

O Harināma, the great sages constantly chant Your
glories. To delight the devotees You have appeared in
the form of transcendental syllables. All victory unto
You! May Your excellence forever be splendidly manifest,
and may You display it to all. Prabhu, Your excellence
is such that even if Your name is uttered only once and
without respect — that is, to indicate something else,
jokingly and so forth — it nullifies a vast number of
terrible sins, and even sinful thoughts. (Thus, make me
surrender to You without fail, and by my remembrance of
Your power, purify me because I proclaim Your glories).



The principal result of chanting the Holy Name is Kṛṣṇa-
prema, not dharma, artha, kāma or mokṣa

bhaktis tvayi sthiratarā bhagavan yadi syād

daivena naḥ phalati divya-kiśora-mūrtiḥ

muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjaliḥ sevate —smān

dharmārtha-kāma-gatayaḥ samaya-pratīkṣāḥ

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 107/BR 6.11/PJ 3.19

bhaktiḥ—devotional service; tvayi—unto You; sthiratarā—
very steady; bhagavan—O Lord; yadi—if; syāt—it may be;
daivena—by destiny; naḥ—unto us; phalati—bears the
fruit; divya—transendental; kiśora-mūrtiḥ—the youthful
form of Kṛṣṇa; muktiḥ—liberation; svayam—personally;
mukulita-añjaliḥ—standing with folded hands; sevate—
renders service; asmān—unto us; dharma—religiosity;
artha—economic development; kāma—sense gratification;
gatayaḥ—the final goals; samaya—nearby; pratīkṣāḥ—
expecting.

O Bhagavān, if someone has unwavering, one-pointed
devotion unto Your lotus feet, he easily perceives Your
most charming divine youthful form. Thereafter,
liberation stands before him with folded hands, and
dharma, artha and kāma also wait for an opportunity to
serve him.

3) The Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahā-Mantra in Śāstra



Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata on the mahā-mantra

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma, rāma rāma hare hare

prabhu kahe kahilāma ei mahā-mantra

ihā japa giyā sabe kariyā nirbandha

ihā haite sarva-siddhi haibe sabāra

sarva-kṣaṇa bala ithe vidhi nāhi āra

CB Madhya-khaṇḍa 23.76—78/BR 1.30/SS p. 29

                          512
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, “I have spoken this mahā-
mantra, now all of you return home and perform japa and
kīrtana of śrī nāma with great love and faith, keeping
track of the number of mālās (“rounds—) you chant. By
this practice, all types of perfection will arise for
all people. Chant at every moment. Other than this,
there are no rules and regulations regarding the
performance of harināma.”



Lord Brahmā instructed Nārada Muni

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma, rāma rāma hare hare

iti ṣoḍaśakaṁ nāmnāṁ kali-kalmaṣa-nāśanaṁ

nātaḥ parataropayaḥ sarva-vedeṣu dṛśyate

Kali-Santaraṇa Upaniṣad 5.6

iti—this; ṣoḍaśakam—sixteen; nāmnām—of the holy names;
kali—age of Kali; kalmaṣa—sins (dirt); nāśanam—
destroying (counteracting); na—not; ataḥ—then; paratara—
better; upayaḥ—method; sarva—all; vedeṣu—in the Vedas;
dṛśyate—it is found.

Through chanting the sixteen words of the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mantra all of the contamination and degrading qualities
of the age of Kali are destroyed. After searching
through the entire Vedic literature one cannot find a
sādhana for this age as sublime as this chanting.

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare

ei śloka nāma bali— laya mahā-mantra

śola-nāma batriśa-akṣara ei tantra

CB Ādi 14.145-6/GKH (P)

This verse is called the mahā-mantra. It contains
sixteen holy names of the Lord composed of thirty-two
syllables.



The Opinion of Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa on the form of the
Mahā-mantra

hare kṛṣṇeti mantra-pratīka-grahaṇaṁ.

ṣoḍaśa-nāmātmanā dvātrīṁśad-akṣareṇa mantreṇoccair
uccāritena sphuritā kṛta-nṛtyā rasanā jihvā yasya sah.

Stava-mālṁ-vibhūñaṛa-bhāñya, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa

When the sixteen names and thirty-two syllables of the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra are loudly vibrated, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself

                          513
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

dances on one’s tongue.

Hare Kṛṣṇa is the Mahā-mantra for the age of Kali

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare

ṣoḍaśaitāni nāmāni dvātriṁśad-varṇakāni hi

kalau yuge mahā-mantraḥ sammato jīva-tāraṇe

varjayitvā tu nāmaitad durjanaiḥ parikalpitam

chandobaddhaṁ susiddhānta-viruddhaṁ nābhyaset padam

tārakaṁ brahma nāmaitad brahmaṇā guruṇādinā

kali-santaraṇādyāsu śrutiṣv adhigataṁ hareḥ

prāptaṁ śrī-brahma-śiṣyeṇa śrī nāradena dhīmatā

nāmaitad uttamaṁ śrauta-pāramparyeṇa brahmaṇaḥ

utsṛjyaitan mahā-mantraṁ ye tv anyat kalpitaṁ padam

mahā-nāmeti gāyanti te śāstra-gurūllaṅghinaḥ

tattva-virodha-sampṛktaṁ tādṛśaṁ daurjanaṁ matam

sarvathā parihāryaṁ syād ātma-hitārthinā sadā

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare

Ananta-Saṁhitā

Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare, hare rāma
hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare. This sixteen-name,
thirty-two syllable mantra, is the mahā-mantra in the
age of Kali by which all living beings can be delivered.
One should never abandon chanting this mahā-mantra and
take to other so-called purificatory processes which are
practiced by rascals, or engage in chanting other
metrical compositions of the name of Kṛṣṇa that are
against the pure conclusions of the scriptures, or are
filled with rasābhāsa. This divinely spiritual mahā-
mantra is tāraka-nāma (that name which delivers one from
material existence). The original Guru, Lord Brahmā, has
stated in Vedic texts headed by the Kali-santaraṇa
Upaniṣad, that this mantra is the best means of
deliverance in the age of Kali. This excellent mantra
was obtained and meditated on by Nārada, the intelligent
son of Brahmā and passed down through the Brahmā Mādhvā
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava disciplic succession. Those who give up
this mahā-mantra and chant instead some concocted
arrangement of names which are contrary to the tattva
established in śāstra are considered rascals and
miscreants for they try to supercede the injunctions
established in śāstra and taught by their Guru, Lord
Brahmā. Their association must always be wholly
discarded by one who desires the welfare of his soul
(ātmā).

                          514
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017




The Purāṇas on the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

raṭanti helayā vāpi te kṛtārthā na saṁśayaḥ

Agni-Purāṇa

Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare. Whoever
chants this mantra, even neglectfully, will attain the
supreme goal of life. Of this there is no doubt.



sādhite sādhite yabe premāṅkura habe

sādhya-sādhana-tattva jānibā se tabe

CB Ādi 24.147/KGH (P)

By regularly chanting this mahā-mantra without
interruption, the seed of prema will sprout in your
heart. Then you will understand the goal of life and the
process for achieving it.



Śrī Gopāla-Guru explains the meaning of the holy name as
follows:

vijñāpya bhagavat-tattvaṁ cid-ghanānanda-vigraham

haraty avidyāṁ tat kāryam ato harir iti smṛtaḥ

harati śrī-kṛṣṇa-manaḥ kṛṣṇāhlāda-svarūpiṇī

ato harety anenaiva śrī-rādhā parikīrtitā

ānandaika-sukha-svāmī śyāmaḥ kamala-locanaḥ

gokulānandano nandanandanaḥ kṛṣṇa īryate

vaidagdhī sāra-sarvasvaṁ mūrti-līlādhidaivatam

rādhikāṁ ramyan nityaṁ rāma ity abhidhīyate

BR 1.34

(The Supreme Person Śrī Bhagavān has descended in the
form of the holy name, which is the embodiment of
condensed knowledge and bliss. While remembering the
name of Bhagavān, one should remember that nāma and nāmī
are non-different). In the first stage of a sādhaka’s
progress, the holy name removes ignorance. Therefore He
is Hari, “He who removes”. The rasika-ācāryas, however,
taste harināma by thinking that, in the kuñjas
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrī Rādhā is stealing away the mind of
Śrī Hari by Her service. (He who chants Hare Kṛṣṇa with
this meditation attains prema-bhakti). Śrī Rādhā is
kṛṣṇa-hlādinī-svarūpiṇī, the embodiment of Kṛṣṇa’s own
pleasure potency. She steals away Kṛṣṇa’s mind, and

                          515
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

therefore Her name is Harā. The vocative form of Harā is
Hare. (Thus, Hare Kṛṣṇa means Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. The
names Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are sac-cid-ānanda, full of eternity,
knowledge and bliss. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are personally
present in Hare Kṛṣṇa). The eternal master of Śrī Rādhā,
who is bliss personified, is Śyāma, who has eyes like
lotus petals and who desires that Śrī Rādhikā always be
happy. Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the giver of bliss to
the residents of Gokula, is always yearning to taste
happiness with Śrī Rādhā. Kṛṣṇa is līleśvara, a clever
dhīra-lalita-nāyaka (A hero who is expert in the sixty-
four arts and in amorous love, always situated in fresh
youth, expert at joking, devoid of anxiety and
controlled by the prema of his beloveds); therefore His
name is Rādhā-ramaṇa. The Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra is
comprised of names of the Divine Couple. While chanting
this mantra one should remember Their pastimes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja commentary: Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
personification of condensed eternity, knowledge and
bliss (sac-cid-ānanda). He is an ocean of compassion.
The clear proof of this is that He has appeared on this
Earth in the form of His name for the benefit of the
living entities. This form of Hari is performing the
task of removing ignorance. Therefore those who
affectionately chant harināma are saved from this
illusory world created by ignorance. Śrī Rādhā is the
essence of the hlādinī-śakti, and She is always giving
supreme pleasure to Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She even
steals away the mind of parama-puruṣa Śrī Kṛṣṇa with Her
sweet form and qualities and by Her service, which is
filled with prema. Therefore, one of Her names is Harā.
“Hare” in the mahā-mantra is the vocative form of Harā,
which refers to Śrī Rādhā. Thus, the devotee who is
exclusively intent on the Divine Couple (the aikāntika-
bhakta) accepts Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa as the only meaning of Hare
Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Rādhā is the personification of bliss
(ānanda-svarūpiṇī). Kamala-locana Śyāmasundara is Her
eternal beloved, prāṇa-vallabha. He is always intent on
pleasing Śrī Rādhā, but He nonetheless remains indebted
to Her. The source of the great festival of bliss of
Gokula, Nanda-nandana, is the supremely attractive
attractor. Therefore He is named Kṛṣṇa. Even though He
always tastes happiness in Śrī Rādhā’s association, He
always remains eager for it. He is famous as Rādhā-
ramaṇa because He, līleśvara, the personification and
essence of all vaidagdhya (cleverness in amorous
pastimes), is always with Śrī Rādhā, playing (ramaṇa)
inside and outside Her heart. This Rādhā-ramaṇa Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is called Rāma in the mahā-mantra. It should be
understood that Hare Kṛṣṇa in the mahā-mantra means
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. Therefore, while performing japa or
kīrtana of the mahā-mantra, one should continuously
remember the pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. (Śrī
Bhajana-rahasya p. 55)

Thus ends section 3) The Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahā-mantra in
Śāstra



4) The Method of Chanting the Holy Name (or mantras)



                          516
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


The method of perfecting the chanting of Śrī Nāma

manaḥ saṁharaṇaṁ śaucaṁ maunaṁ mantrārtha-cintanam

avyagratvam anirvedo japa-sampatti-hetavaḥ

HBV/BR 1.33

While chanting, one should be one-pointed and give up
talking about mundane topics. With a pure heart, one
should think about the meaning of the holy name, and be
steadfast and patient in his chanting and remembrance of
the holy name.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s commentary: The method for one
to perfect the chanting of his mantras, both harināma
and gāyatrī, is described within this śloka:

Manaḥ saṁharaṇam — While chanting the holy name, one
should fix the mind on the desired name of the Lord and
remember pastimes connected with that name. The mind of
the conditioned living entity wanders to different
subject matters, and therefore one should stay in the
association of sādhus and control the mind through
renunciation and practice.

Śauca — It is necessary for the sādhaka to maintain a
standard of external cleanliness through bathing and so
forth, and to keep his mind pure through internal
cleanliness [by regularly taking harināma]. He can do
this by bringing the six enemies headed by lust under
control. In this way his mind will not be attracted to
anything other than Kṛṣṇa.

Mauna — To speak only bhagavat-kathā and reject talk
unrelated to Kṛṣṇa is known as mauna (silence). One
should not talk about anything mundane while chanting.

Avyagratā — The restless nature of the unsteady mind is
called vyagratā. One should chant with avyagratā, a
peaceful and undisturbed mind.

Anirveda — One should not become discouraged by moving
slowly in his endeavour to attain the desired goal;
rather, one should chant with patience.

Nāmārtha-cintana — While chanting the holy name, the
sādhaka should remember Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes of
meeting (milana) and separation (vipralambha). When he
chants his mantras, he should practise in the following
five ways:

(1) Iṣṭadevatā - The sādhaka should know the meaning of
the mantra, remember the qualities and pastimes of the
predominating deity of the mantra (the mantra-devatā)
and his own specific relationship with Him, Her or Them.

(2) Nyāsa — “The deity of the mantra is my protector” —
this conviction is called nyāsa. It is true that success
can be attained by uttering the mantra one time only;
nonetheless, the mantra is uttered 10 or 108 times for
the pleasure of the mantra-devatā. This is also called
nyāsa.

                          517
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


(3) Prapatti — “The mantra is everything, it is non-
different from the deity I am addressing and encompasses
both internal and external reality. I take shelter of
the mantra-devatā as the exclusive maintainer of my
life.” — this is prapatti.

(4) Śaraṇāgati — “I am a jīva who is suffering
extremely, and therefore I surrender my life and soul to
the deity” — this resolve is śaraṇāgati.

(5) Ātma-nivedana — “Whatever I have, including my body,
belongs to Him; it is not mine. I am not mine either; I
am His for for His pleasure, for Him to use me in His
service and in enhancing His pastimes.”

If one follows the process comprised of these five
limbs, he will quickly attain perfection in chanting his
mantras. (Śrī Bhajana-rahasya pp. 52-53)



The method of performing nāma-sādhana is to chant the
holy name while feeling more humble than a blade of
grass

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ



ūrdhva-bāhu kari— kahoṅ, śuna sarva-loka

nāma-sūtre gāṅthi— para kaṇṭhe ei śloka

prabhu-ājñāya kara ei śloka ācaraṇa

avaśya pāibe tabe śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa

CC Ādi 17.31-3/BR 8.4 pt

tṛṇāt api—than downtrodden grass; su-nīcena—being lower;
taroḥ—than a tree; iva—like; sahiṣṇunā—with tolerance;
amāninā—without being puffed up by false pride; māna-
dena—giving respect to all; kīrtanīyaḥ—to be chanted;
sadā—always; hariḥ—the holy name of the Lord; ūrdhva-
bāhu—raising my hands; kari——doing so; kahoṅ—I declare;
śuna—please hear; sarva-loka—all persons; nāma—of the
holy name; sūtre—on the thread; gāṅthi—stringing; para—
get it; kaṇṭhe—on the neck; ei—this; śloka—verse. prabhu
—of the Lord; ājñāya—on the order; kara—do; ei śloka—of
this verse; ācaraṇa—practice; avaśya—certainly; pāibe—he
will get; tabe—afterwards; śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa—the lotus
feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Considering oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass that has been trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless and offering respect to everyone according to
their respective positions, one should continually chant
the holy name of Śrī Hari.

Śrī Caitanya Mhāprabhu said: “Raising My hands, I

                           518
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

declare, “Everyone please hear Me! For continuous
remembrance, string this śloka on the thread of the holy
name and wear it around your neck.—” One must strictly
follow the principles given by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
in this śloka. If one simply follows in the footsteps of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu and the Gosvāmīs, he will certainly
achieve the ultimate goal of life, the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.



The method of Japa (solitary chanting of nāma on beads)

mano madhye sthito mantro

mantra-madhye sthitaṁ manaḥ

mano mantro sama-yuktaṁ

etad hi japa-lakṣaṇam

Dhyana-candra Paddhati ch. 1, verse 64

manaḥ—of the mind; madhye—in the midst; sthitaḥ—
situated; mantraḥ—the mantra; mantraḥ-madhye—in the
midst of the mantra; —in the midst; sthitam—situated;
manaḥ—of the mind; manaḥ— the mind; mantraḥ—the mantra;
sama-yuktam—united in equilibrium; etat—this; hi—indeed;
japa-lakṣaṇam—the characteristic of japa.

The mantra should first be situated in the core of the
devotee’s mind and the mind should be firmly situated in
the heart of the mantra. Thereafter, when one’s mind is
devotionally absorbed in the mantra in a state of
equilibrium, that is the symptom of real japa.

Editorial note: Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains that
Śrī Nāma establishes one’s heart connection with Śrī
Guru. Therefore, one should invoke Śrī Guru when
beginning to chant. When one of his disciples asked
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja how to maintain enthusiasm for
chanting in his absence, he instructed that, “Just as
you see me now, you should think that “Śrī Gurudeva is
sitting in front of me, taking harināma and looking into
my eyes, and I am chanting along with him. The japa-mālā
is the umbilical cord through which he nourishes my
bhakti and removes my anarthas.— Don—t think that I ever
leave you; never, never. I am always with you.”



The six Gosvāmīs set the ideal example of chanting a
fixed number of harināma while considering themselves
lower than a blade of grass

saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ kālāvasānī-kṛtau

nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-smṛter madhurimānandena sammohitau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam, Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya/SGG p.

                            519
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

126

saṅkhyā-pūrvaka—in a scheduled measurement; nāma-gāna—
singing the holy names; gāna—chanting; natibhiḥ—and by
bowing down; kāla-avasānī-kṛtau—who pass their time in
this way; nidra-āhāra—sleeping and eating; vihāraka-ādi—
recreation, etc.; vijitau—who have conquered; ca—and;
atyanta-dīnau—who are extremely meek and humble; ca—and;
yau—who; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; guṇa-smṛteḥ—of
remembering the transcendental qualities; madhurimā—of
the sweetness; ānandena—by the bliss; sammohitau—who are
completely enchanted; vande—I offer my respectful
obeisances; rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-
gopālakau—unto the six Gosvāmīs.

I worship the Six Gosvāmīs, who passed all their time in
chanting the holy names, singing songs, and offering
daṇḍavat-praṇāma, thereby humbly fulfilling their vow to
complete a fixed number daily. In this way they utilized
their valuable lives and conquered over eating and
sleeping. They were always very meek and humble and thus
they became enchanted in divine rapture, remembering Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s sweet qualities.

nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ

BRS 1.3.25-26/CC Madhya 23.18-19/BRSB p. 139/BR 6.3

To constantly chant the name of Hari with the faith that
śrī-nāma-bhajana is the topmost form of bhajana, is
called nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ, taste in chanting the holy
name.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahāraja: To have a taste for the holy
name is the key to obtaining the ultimate
auspiciousness. Kṛṣṇa-nāma is both the practice and the
goal. The topmost name, as taught by Śrī Gaurasundara,
is the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Nowadays, non-devotees
write lyrics that are imaginary and full of rasa-ābhāsa,
overlapping of transcendental mellows. Many people
understand these lyrics to be nāma-mantras, but such
mantras [i.e. Nitai-Gaura Rādhe-Śyām; Rādhe Rādhe Śyāma
milade, etc.] are not mentioned in the scriptures and it
is improper to chant them. Śrīman Mahāprabhu has given
the order: “ihā vai āra nā bolibā bolāibā — ask them to
chant only Hare Kṛṣṇa, nothing else, and not induce
others to chant anything else [Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata,
Madhya-khaṇḍa 13.10].”

Thus ends section 4) The Method of Chanting the Holy
Name

5) Primary and Secondary names of Kṛṣṇa



The secondary names of God and their symptoms

jaḍākṛtira paricaye nāma yata

prakṛtir guṇe gauṇa vedera sammata

sṛṣṭi karttā paramātmā brahma sthiti-kara


                          520
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

jagat saṁhartā pātā yajñeśvara hara

Hari-nāma-cintāmaṇi

According to the Vedas, those names of the Supreme Lord
Śrī Kṛṣṇa which describe Him in relation to the material
world such as: God, the Almighty, the Creator,
Maintainer or Destroyer of the Universe, Paramātmā
(Supersoul), Brahman, the Savior, the Lord of Sacrifice,
and He who takes away, are inferior or secondary names
of Godhead.



The primary and secondary names of the Lord and their
respective results

ei rūpa nāma, karma-jñāna-kāṇḍa-gata

puṇya mokṣa dāna kare śāstrera sammata

nāmera ye mukhya-phala kṛṣṇa-prema-dhana

tāra mukhya nāme mātra labhe sādhu-gaṇa

Hari-nāma-cintāmaṇi

Thoe inferior names of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, are called upon by those who are on
the paths of karma and jñāna. According to the
scriptures, one who calls upon these names gets piety
and liberation. On the other hand, the result of
chanting the principal names of the Lord [Govinda,
Gopāla, Yaśomati-nandana, Nanda-nandana, Rāma, Rādhā-
ramaṇa, Rādhā-nātha, Hari, Madana-mohana, Śyāmasundara,
Mādhava, Gopīnātha, and Yadava] is kṛṣṇa-prema. In this
way, the saintly attain love of Godhead by chanting the
principal names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa [while those attached to
karma and jñāna get mere piety and impersonal liberation
by chanting inferior and secondary names because their
conception of Godhead is also secondary and inferior].



Day and night without shyness one should chant the
principal names

naktaṁ divā ca gatabhir jita-nidra eko

nirviṇṇa īkṣita-patho mita-bhuk praśāntaḥ

yady acyute bhagavati sva-mano na sajjen

nāmāni tad-rati-karāṇi paṭhed vilajjaḥ

Bhāgavata-nāma-kaumudī/BR 1.36

If your mind is not absorbed in the name of Śrī Bhagavān
Acyuta, then day and night without shyness chant those
principal names that are endowed with rati (such as
Rādhā-ramaṇa, Vraja-vallabha and Gopījana-vallabha.
These names will endow the chanter with that rati).
Minimize sleep, eat moderately, and proceed on the path
of spiritual truth with a peaceful mind and a disregard

                          521
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

for worldly things.

A prayer for attaining attachment to the (primary) holy
names

agha-damana-yaśodā-nandanau nanda-sūno

kamala-nayana-gopī-candra-vṛndāvanendrāḥ

praṇata-karuṇa-kṛṣṇāv ity aneka-svarūpe

tvayi mama ratir uccair vardhatāṁ nāmadheya

Nāmāṣṭaka 5/BR 2.2

agha-damana—crusher of Agha; yaśodā-nandanau—son of
Yaśodā; nanda-sūno—son of Nanda Mahārāja; kamala-nayana—
lotus-eyed; gopī-candra—moon of the gopīs; vṛndāvana-
indrāḥ—O Indra of Vṛndāvana; praṇata-karuṇa—merciful to
the worshipper; kṛṣṇau—Kṛṣṇa; iti—thus; aneka—many;
svarūpe—forms; tvayi—in You; mama—of me; ratiḥ—love;
uccaiḥ—greatly; vardhatām—may increase; nāmadheya— the
holy name.

O Aghadamana! O Yaśodā-nandana! O Nanda-sūnu! O Kamala-
nayana! O Gopīcandra! O Vṛndāvanendra! O Praṇata-karuṇa!
O Kṛṣṇa! O Nāma Bhagavān, possessor of inconceivable
glories, may my affection for You and my attachment for
the original forms of Your innumerable names continue to
always increase.



The mantra given to Gopa Kumāra by his Guru

śrī-kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda govinda he nanda-kiśora
kṛṣṇa

hā śrī-yaśodā-tanaya prasīda śrī-ballavī-jīvana
rādhikeśa

Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam 2.4.7/SGG p. 197

śrī-kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; gopāla—Gopāla; hare—Hari; mukunda—
Mukunda; govinda—Govinda; he—O!; nanda—of Nanda; kiśora—
son; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa; hā—O!; śrī-yaśodā—of Yaśodā; tanaya—
son; prasīda—be kind; śrī-ballavī—of the gopīs; jīvana—
life; rādhikā—of Rādhikā; īśa—Lord [or rādhikeśa—He who
is controlled by Śrīmati Rādhikā].

O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! Gopāla! Hari! Mukunda! Govinda! O son of
Nanda! Kṛṣṇa! O son of Yaśodā! Life of the gopīs! Lord
of Rādhikā! May you be pleased with me!



Kṛṣṇa has invested all His potencies in His primary
names

dāna-vrata-tapas-tīrtha-yātrādīnaś ca yāḥ sthitāḥ

śaktayo deva-mahatāṁ sarva-pāpa-harāḥ śubhāḥ

rājasūyāśvamedhānāṁ jñānasyādhyātma-vastunaḥ

                          522
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


ākṛṣya hariṇā sarvāḥ sthāpitāḥ sveṣu nāmasu

Skanda Purāṇa/BR 2.3

Whatever potency to nullify sins or bestow
auspiciousness found in charity, vows, austerities,
pilgrimage, the rājasūya and aśvamedha yajñas, knowledge
of transcendental objects, and so forth, has been
invested by Śrī Hari in His own holy names (that is, the
primary names).



Tāraka (bestowing liberation) and Pāraka (bestowing
prema) names

mukti-hetuka tāraka haya “rāma-nāma—

“kṛṣṇa-nāma— pāraka hañā kare prema-dāna

CC Antya 3.257

mukti-hetuka—the cause of liberation; tāraka—deliverer;
haya—is; rāma-nāma—the holy name of Lord Rāma; kṛṣṇa-
nāma—the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa; pāraka—that which
delivers one from birth and death; hañā—being; kare—
gives; prema-dāna—the wealth of Kṛṣṇa-prema.

The holy name of Lord Rāma (tāraka-nāma) transports one
to the other side of the ocean of nesience and gives
liberation, but the holy name of Kṛṣṇa (pāraka-nāma)
bestows the wealth of kṛṣṇa-prema.



Oṁ is famous as Tāraka-brahma

oṁ ity etad brahmaṇo nediṣṭaṁ nāma yasmād uccāryamāna

eva saṁsāra-bhayāt tārayati tasmād ucyate tāra iti

Ṛg Veda 1.156.3/BR 1.27

I meditate on Oṁ, the name of Param Brahma Bhagavān who
is most close to all jīvas, since He dwells within their
heart of hearts. One who utters that name is liberated
from the fear of the material world and for this reason
Oṁ is famous by the name tāraka-brahma (that which
bestows liberation).

Thus ends section 5) Primary and Secondary names of
Kṛṣṇa



6) The Holy Name Should Always be Chanted

(regardless of time, place, and circumstance)



Determination to continue chanting in the face of all
obstacles

                          523
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


khaṇḍa-khaṇḍa hai deha jāya yadi prāṇa

tabu āmi vadane nā chāḍi harināma

CB Ādi 16.94/Upad. 3, pt

Regardless if my body is cut to pieces and the life-air
exits my body, I will never abandon the chanting of
harināma. (Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura)

When Your Lordship’s holy name is chanted, everything
becomes faultless

mantratas tantrataś chidraṁ deśa-kālārha-vastutaḥ

sarvaṁ karoti niśchidram anusaṅkīrtanaṁ tava

SB 8.23.16/HBV 11.376

mantrataḥ—in pronouncing the Vedic mantras improperly;
tantrataḥ—in insufficient knowledge for following
regulative principles; chidram—discrepancy; deśa—in the
matter of country; kāla—and time; arha—and recipient;
vastutaḥ—and paraphernalia; sarvam—all these; karoti—
makes; niśchidram—without discrepancy; anusaṅkīrtanam—
constantly chanting the holy name; tava—of Your
Lordship.

There may be discrepancies in pronouncing the mantras
and observing the regulative principles, and there may
be discrepancies in regard to time, place, person and
paraphernalia. But when Your Lordship’s holy name is
chanted, everything becomes faultless.



In the performance of nāma-bhajana, there is no
consideration of cleanliness or uncleanliness, nor of
proper or improper time

na deśa-kāla-niyamo na śaucāśauca-nirṇayaḥ

paraṁ saṅkīrtanād eva rāma rāmeti mucyate

Vaiśvānara-saṁhitā/BR 2.4

In chanting the holy name, there is no rule concerning
place and time, nor regarding cleanliness or
uncleanliness. By repeating the name “Rāma”, or in other
words by performing saṅkīrtana of the mahā-mantra, the
topmost liberation — namely prema-bhakti — is obtained.



The Holy Name is independent of time, place, and
circumstance

na deśa niyamo rājan na kāla niyamas tathā

vidyate nātra sandeho viṣṇor nāmānukīrtane

kālo'sti dāne yajñe ca snāne kālo' sti saj jape


                            524
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

viṣṇu-saṅkīrtane kālo nāsty atra pṛṭhivī-tale

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 11.412, 413

O king, there are no rules governing the time and place
wherein the holy name of Viṣṇu can be chanted. Of this
there is no doubt. Charity and sacrifice are governed by
various rules regarding time and place, such as the
taking of bath and the silent uttering of mantras. But
the holy name of Viṣṇu can be chanted in saṅkīrtana at
any time, in any circumstances, in any place on earth.

na deśa-niyamas tasmin na kāla-niyamas tathā

nocchiṣṭhādau niṣedho 'sti śrī harer-nāmni lubdhaka

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 11.408

O hunter,   there are no restrictions on when or where the
holy name   of Śrī Hari may be chanted and no prohibitions
regarding   the uncleanness of the mouth from which the
holy name   comes forth.

Thus ends section 6) The Holy Name Should Always be
Chanted



7) Śuddha-Nāma Appears by Sādhu-saṅga

mamāham iti dehādau hitvāmithyārtha-dhīr matim

dhāsye mano bhagavati śuddhaṁ tat-kīrtanādibhiḥ

iti jāta-sunirvedaḥ kṣaṇa-saṅgena sādhuṣu

gaṅgā-dvāram upeyāya mukta-sarvānubandhanaḥ

SB 6.2.38-39

mama—my; aham—I; iti—thus; deha-ādau—in the body and
things related to the body; hitvā—giving up; amithyā—not
false; artha—on values; dhīḥ—with my consciousness;
matim—the attitude; dhāsye—I shall engage; manaḥ—my
mind; bhagavati—on the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
śuddham—pure; tat—His name; kīrtana-ādibhiḥ—by chanting,
hearing and so on; iti—thus; jāta-sunirvedaḥ—(Ajāmila)
who had become detached from the material conception of
life; kṣaṇa-saṅgena—by a moment’s association; sādhuṣu—
with devotees; gaṅgā-dvāram—to Hardwar (hari-dvāra);
upeyāya—went; mukta—being freed from; sarva-anubandhanaḥ
—all kinds of material bondage.

Simply because I chanted the holy name of the Lord in
the association of pure devotees, my heart is now
becoming purified. Therefore I shall not fall victim
again to the false lures of material sense
gratification. Now that I have become fixed in the
Absolute Truth, henceforward I shall not identify myself
with the body. I shall give up false conceptions of “I”
and “mine” and fix my mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.
Because of a moment’s association with pure devotees
(the Viṣṇudūtas), Ajāmila detached himself from the
material conception of life with determination. Thus

                            525
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

freed from all material attraction, he immediately
started for Hardwar.



sārvabhauma-saṅge tomāra “kaluṣa— haila kṣaya

“kalmaṣa— ghucile jīva “kṛṣṇa-nāma— laya

CC Madhya 15.276

sārvabhauma-saṅge—by the association of Sārvabhauma;
tomāra—your; kaluṣa—contamination; haila kṣaya—is now
vanquished; kalmaṣa—contamination; ghucile—when
dispelled; jīva—the living entity; kṛṣṇa-nāma—the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra; laya—can chant.

“However, due to the association of (a pure devotee
like) Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, all your contamination is
now vanquished. When a person’s heart is cleansed of all
contamination, he is able to chant the mahā-mantra, Hare
Kṛṣṇa.”



asādhu-saṅge bhāi "kṛṣṇa nāma" nāhi haya

"nāmākṣara" bāhirāya baṭe nāma kabhu naya

Prema-vivarta

O brothers, the holy name of Kṛṣṇa is never to be found
in the association of those who are un-saintly. The
external sound of the holy name is never the same as the
pure name.



My heart is just like a desert, yearning for the nectar
shower of Śrī Nāma

kṛṣṇa-nāma dhare kata bala

viṣaya-vāsanānale mora citta sadā jwale

ravi-tapta maru-bhūmi sama

karṇa-randhra-patha diyā,

hṛdi mājhe praveśiyā

variṣoya sudhā anupam

Śaraṇāgati, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura/KGH 17.60

What power does the name of Kṛṣṇa possess? My heart
constantly burns in the fire of worldly desires, just
like a desert scorched by the rays of the sun. The holy
name, entering the core of my heart through the holes of
my ears, showers unparalleled nectar upon my soul.

[an alternative translation:] How much power is there in
kṛṣṇa-nāma? The desire for mortal things cannot satisfy
me because by nature they are death-producing. And not

                             526
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

one or two, but thousands of such death-producing
desires have taken shelter in my mind. So, my
subconscious region is always burning. This is my
internal mental condition. But somehow, by the grace of
sādhu and Guru, the holy name of Kṛṣṇa with its infinite
prospect has entered through the holes of my ears and
reached the plane of my heart. And there, with some
peculiar hope, with infinite, auspicious possibilities,
it touched my heart with a new kind of nectar. (SSM)

Thus ends section 7) Śuddha-nāma Appears by Sādhu-saṅga




8) Nāmābhāsa (A Shadow of Pure Nāma)



Nāmābhāsa liberates from material bondage

sakṛd eva (api) parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛguvara nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma

Padma-Purāṇa/Skanda Purāṇa/Padyāvalī 26/HBV 11.451/JD
ch. 6, 25/BR 1.18/MK 1.16

sakṛt—once; api—even; parigītam—chanted; śraddhayā—with
faith; helayā—with contempt; vā—or; bhṛgu-vara—O best of
the Bhṛgus; nara-mātram—a person; tārayet—delivers;
kṛṣṇa—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāma—the name.

O best of the Bhṛgu dynasty, if one even once chants the
holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, either with faith or contempt,
the holy name will liberate that chanter from material
bondage.



Even once chanting without offence (nāma-ābhāsa)
eradicates all of one’s karmic reactions

aṁhaḥ saṁharad akhilaṁ sakṛd udayād eva sakala-lokasya

taraṇir iva timira-jaladhiṁ jayati jagan-maṅgalaṁ harer
nāma

Padyāvalī 16, Śrīdhara Svāmī /CC Antya 3.181

aṁhaḥ—the resultant action of sinful life, which causes
material bondage; saṁharat—completely eradicating;
akhilam—all; sakṛt—once only; udayāt—by rising; eva—
certainly; sakala—all; lokasya—of the people of the
world; taraṇiḥ—the sun; iva—like; timira—of darkness;
jala-dhim—the ocean; jayati—all glories to; jagat-
maṅgalam—auspicious for the whole world; hareḥ nāma—the
holy name of the Lord.

[Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura said:] “As the rising sun
immediately dissipates all the world’s darkness, which
is deep like an ocean, so the holy name of the Lord, if
chanted even once without offences (i.e. nāma-ābhāsa),

                          527
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

dissipates all the reactions of a living being’s sinful
life. All glories to that holy name of the Lord, which
is auspicious for the entire world.”



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu states that even nāmābhāsa
destroys all sins and liberates one from material
existence

taṁ nirvyājaṁ bhaja guṇa-nidhiṁ pāvanaṁ pāvanānāṁ

śraddhā rajyan matir atitarām uttama-śloka-maulim

prodyann antaḥ-karaṇa-kuhare hanta yan-nāma-bhānor

ābhāso —pi kṣapayati mahā-pātaka-dhvānta-rāśim

BRS 2.1.103/CC Antya 3.62/BR 1.10

tam—Him; nirvyājam—without duplicity; bhaja—worship;
guṇa-nidhim—O reservoir of all good qualities; pāvanam—
purifier; pāvanānām—of all other purifiers; śraddhā—with
faith; rajyan—being enlivened; matiḥ—mind; atitarām—
exceedingly; uttamaḥ-śloka-maulim—the best of the
personalities who are worshiped by choice poetry or who
are transcendental to all material positions; prodyan—
manifesting; antaḥ-karaṇa-kuhare—in the core of the
heart; hanta—alas; yat-nāma—whose holy name; bhānoḥ—of
the sun; ābhāsaḥ—slight appearance; api—even; kṣapayati—
eradicates; mahā-pātaka—the resultant actions of greatly
sinful activities; dhvānta—of ignorance; rāśim—the mass.

O reservoir of good qualities, just faithfully perform
bhajana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa without duplicity. He is the
supreme savior among all saviors, and the most exalted
of those worshipped with transcendental ślokas. When
even a slight appearance of His name, which is like the
sun, arises in one’s cave-like heart, it destroys the
darkness of great sins that are present there.



The four kinds of Nāmābhāsa

sāṅketyaṁ pārihāsyaṁ vā stobhaṁ helanam eva vā

vaikuṇṭha-nāma-grahaṇam aśeṣāgha-haraṁ viduḥ

SB 6.2.14

sāṅketyam—as an assignation; pārihāsyam—jokingly; vā—or;
stobham—as musical entertainment; helanam—neglectfully;
eva—certainly; vā—or; vaikuṇṭha—of the Lord; nāma-
grahaṇam—chanting the holy name; aśeṣa—unlimited; agha-
haram—neutralizing the effect of sinful life; viduḥ—
advanced transcendentalists know.

One who chants the holy name of the Lord is immediately
freed from the reactions of unlimited sins, even if he
chants indirectly [to indicate something else],
jokingly, for musical entertainment, or even
neglectfully. This is accepted by all the learned
scholars of the scriptures.

                          528
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017




The example of Ajāmila

mriyamāṇo harer nāma gṛṇan putropacāritam

ajāmilo —py agād dhāma kim uta śraddhayā gṛṇan

SB 6.2.49/CC Antya 3.187/BPKG p. 327/GKH (P)

mriyamāṇaḥ—at the time of death; hareḥ nāma—the holy
name of Hari; gṛṇan—chanting; putra-upacāritam—
indicating his son; ajāmilaḥ—Ajāmila; api—even; agāt—
went; dhāma—to the spiritual world; kim uta—what to
speak of; śraddhayā—with faith and love; gṛṇan—chanting.

While dying, Ajāmila chanted the holy name of the Lord,
intending to call his son Nārāyaṇa. Nevertheless, he
attained the spiritual world. What then to speak of
those who chant the holy name with faith and reverence?



etāvatālam agha-nirharaṇāya puṁsāṁ

saṅkīrtanaṁ bhagavato guṇa-karma-nāmnām

vikruśya putram aghavān yad ajāmilo —pi

nārāyaṇeti mriyamāṇa iyāya muktim

SB 6.3.24/KGH (P)

etāvatā—with this much; alam—sufficient; agha-
nirharaṇāya—for taking away the reactions of sinful
activities; puṁsām—of human beings; saṅkīrtanam—the
congregational chanting; bhagavataḥ—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; guṇa—of the transcendental
qualities; karma-nāmnām—and of His names according to
His activities and pastimes; vikruśya—crying to without
offense; putram—his son; aghavān—the sinful; yat—since;
ajāmilaḥ api—even Ajāmila; nārāyaṇa—the Lord’s name,
Nārāyaṇa; iti—thus; mriyamāṇaḥ—dying; iyāya—achieved;
muktim—liberation.

Therefore it should be understood that one is easily
relieved from all sinful reactions by chanting the holy
name of the Lord and chanting of His qualities and
activities. This is the only process recommended for
relief from sinful reactions. Even if one chants the
holy name of the Lord with improper pronunciation, he
will achieve relief from material bondage if he chants
without offenses. Ajāmila, for example, was extremely
sinful, but while dying he merely chanted the holy name,
and although calling his son, he achieved complete
liberation because he remembered the name of Nārāyaṇa.



mukti tuccha-phala haya nāmābhāsa haite

ye mukti bhakta nā laya, se kṛṣṇa cāhe dite


                          529
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

CC Antya 3.186,188

mukti—liberation; tuccha-phala—insignificant result;
haya—is; nāma-ābhāsa haite—from a glimpse of the
awakening of offenseless chanting of the holy name; ye—
which; mukti—liberation; bhakta—a devotee; nā laya—does
not take; se—that; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; cāhe dite—wants to
offer.

Liberation is insignificant in   comparison to nāmābhāsa
(a glimpse of the awakening of   offenseless chanting of
the holy name). Thus a devotee   will never accept mukti
even if Kṛṣṇa wants to give it   to him.

oṁ āsya jānanto nāma cid-viviktan mahas te viṣṇo sumatiṁ
bhajāmahe oṁ tat sat

Bhagavata-Sandarbha 47

This mantra (oṁ tat sat) means, "O Lord Visnu, Your name
is conscious (cit) and therefore self-effulgent (mahaḥ)
and so even one with partial knowledge of the eternal
nature of Your name, and incomplete understanding of the
glory of proper chanting, can attain knowledge of You
merely by repeating the syllables, because You, who are
known by Oṁ, are self-existent (sat)." Thus it is seen
that nāmābhāsa liberates a person from fear and envy
even if only alluded to.



he viṣṇo! te tava nāma cit cit-svarūpam ataeva mahaḥ
sva-prakāśa-rūpam | tasmād asya nāmnaḥ ā īṣad api
jānantaḥ na tu samyag uccāra-māhātmyādi-puraskāreṇa |
tathāpi vivaktan bruvāṇāḥ kevalaṁ tad-akṣarābhyāsa-
mātraṁ kurvāṇāḥ sumatiṁ tad-viṣayāṁ vidyāṁ bhajāmahe
prāpnumaḥ | yatas tad eva praṇava-vyañjitaṁ vastu sat
svataḥ-siddham iti | ataeva bhaya-dveṣādau śrī-mūrteḥ
sphūrter iva sāṅketyādāv apy asya muktidatvaṁ śrūyate

Bhagavata Sandarbha 4

O Viṣṇu! Your holy name is of the nature of divine
consciousness - it is transcendental reality par-
excellence. It is a manifestation of Your own divine
form, even if someone utters it without being aware of
its full glories. To utter the name without being fully
aware of its glories means nāmābhāsa, or uttering the
syllables of the holy name which are only the outer
reflection. Even in such a positon we shall attain
divine knowledge of the Lord, by such worship. Because
this line contains the word oṁ it indicates that the use
of the word "sat" means svata-siddhaḥ. Therefore the
Lord’s divine form manifests even for one uttering
nāmābhāsa (because of sāṅketya and so forth), and thus
one attains liberation from the postion of fear and
envy.

Thus ends section 8) Nāmābhāsa

9) The Ten Offences to the Holy Name




                          530
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Padma-Purāṇa, Brahma-Khaṇḍa 25.15—18, 22-23

satāṁ nindā nāmnaḥ paramam aparādhaṁ vitanute

yataḥ khyātiṁ yātaṁ katham u sahate tad-vigarhām (1)

satām—of devotees; nindā—blasphemy; nāmnaḥ—against the
holy name; paramam—the greatest; aparādham—offence;
vitanute—makes; yataḥ—because; khyātim—broadcasting the
glories; yātam—engaged in preaching the glories of the
Lord; katham—how?; u—indeed; sahate—he will tolerate;
tad—of them; vigarhām—such blasphemy.

To blaspheme devotees who have dedicated their lives to
chanting the holy name and broadcasting the glories of
the Lord is the greatest offence. The holy name, who is
identical with Kṛṣṇa, will never tolerate such
blasphemous activities.

śivasya śrī-viṣṇor ya iha guṇa-nāmādi-sakalaṁ

dhiyā bhinnaṁ paśyet sa khalu hari-nāmāhita-karaḥ (2)

śivasya—the name of Lord Śiva; śrī-viṣṇoḥ—Lord Viṣṇu;
yaḥ—who; iha—in this material world; guṇa—qualities;
nāma—name; ādi-sakalam—everything; dhiyā—with the
conception; bhinnam—difference; paśyet—may see; saḥ—he;
khalu—indeed; hari-nāmā—the holy name of the Lord;
ahita-karaḥ—offender.

One who considers the name of Lord Śiva to be equal to
the holy name of Lord Viṣṇu or thinks that nāma and nāmī
are different is an offender to Śrī hari-nāma



guror avajñā (3)

guroḥ—of the spiritual master; avajñā—disrespect or
disobedience.

To disobey the orders of the Guru or to consider him an
ordinary person (i.e. to consider his body material).




śruti-śāstra-nindanam (4)

śruti-śāstra-nindanam—(to find fault with) the Vedas or
their corollary literature.

To blaspheme the Vedic literatures or literatures in
pursuance of the Vedic version.

artha-vādaḥ (5)

artha-vādaḥ—to give some interpretation

To consider the exalted glories of the Lord described in
śāstra to be exaggeration.

hari-nāmni kalpanam (6)

                            531
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


hari-nāmni—of Śrī-nāma; kalpanam—to make an imaginary
interpretation.

To give a concocted interpretation of the holy name of
the Lord.

nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhir

na vidyate tasya yamair hi śuddhiḥ (7)

nāmnaḥ—the holy name; balād—on the strength; yasya—who
has; hi—indeed; pāpa—sinful; buddhiḥ—mentality; na—not;
vidyate—is; tasya—of him; yamaiḥ—by austerities; hi—
indeed; śuddhiḥ—purification.

To think that the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra can counteract all
sinful reactions and one may therefore go on with his
sinful activities and at the same time chant the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mantra to neutralize them is the greatest offense
at the lotus feet of hari-nāma. There is no way for such
a person to be purified through practising austerities.

dharma-vrata-tyāga-hutādi-sarva-

śubha-kriyā-sāmyam api pramādaḥ (8)

dharma—religious performances or pious deeds; vrata—vows
of penance and austerity; tyāga—renunciation; huta—
agnihotra yajñas or sacrificial offerings; ādi—etc.;
sarva—all; śubha—auspicious; kriyā—activities; sāmyam—
equality; api—also; pramādaḥ—inattentive.

To consider that the results achieved through auspicious
pious activities such as religious vows, renunciation,
offering oblations in the sacrificial fire etc., are
comparable to the chanting of the divine names of Śrī
Hari.

aśraddadhāne vimukhe —py aśṛṇvati

yaś copadeśaḥ śiva-nāmāparādhaḥ (9)

aśraddadhāne—to one who is faithless; vimukhe—inimical;
api—even; aśṛṇvati—does not want to hear; yaḥ—one who;
ca—and; upadeśaḥ—gives instruction; śiva—filled with
auspiciousness; nāmāparādhaḥ—offence to the holy name.

It is an offence to preach the confidential glories of
the all-auspicious names of the Lord to a person in
whose heart śraddhā (faith) has not arisen or to the
inimical.

śrutvāpi nāma-māhātmye yaḥ prīti-rahito naraḥ

ahaṁ-mamādi-paramo nāmni so —py aparādha-kṛt (10)

Padma-Purāṇa/Upadeśāmṛta 1, pt

śrutvā—who has heard; api—even; nāma—the holy name;
māhātmye—the glories; yaḥ—who is; prīti—of love; rahitaḥ
—devoid; naraḥ—a person; aham—false ego, “I and Mine”;
mamādi—mine etc.; paramaḥ—dedicated; nāmni—the holy
name; saḥ—he; api—even; aparādha—offense; kṛt—doing.

                          532
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


That person who, in spite of hearing the astonishing
glories of śrī-nāma, maintains the consciousness of aham
mama ādi (“I am this body and things related to this
body are mine—) and who displays no persistence in or
love for chanting the holy name, is an offender at the
feet of śrī-nāma.

api pramādaḥ

api—also; pramādaḥ—inattentive (chanting).



Thus ends section 9) The Ten Offences to the Holy Name



10) Ślokas Pertaining to Nāmāparādha



The definition of aparādha (offences)

apagata-rādho yasmāt iti aparādhaḥ

Mahājana vākya

apagata—disappear; rādho—affection; yasmāt—on account of
which; iti—thus; aparādhaḥ—offence.

Any act or emotion which hinders the flow of love and
affection. (Any activity which causes Kṛṣṇa to withdraw
his affection and protection or any activity performed
with an envious mood is also aparādha).



The principal offence to the Holy Name (Vaiṣṇava
aparādha)

nāścaryam etad yad asatsu sarvadā

mahad-vinindā kuṇapātma-vādiṣu

serṣyaṁ mahāpūruṣa-pāda-pāṁsubhir

nirasta-tejaḥsu tad eva śobhanam

SB 4.4.13

na—not; āścaryam—wonderful; etat—this; yat—which; asatsu
—evil; sarvadā—always; mahat-vinindā—the deriding of
great souls; kuṇapa-ātma-vādiṣu—among those who have
accepted the dead body as the self; sa-īrṣyam—envy;
mahā-pūruṣa—of great personalities; pāda-pāṁsubhiḥ—by
the dust of the feet; nirasta-tejaḥsu—whose glory is
diminished; tat—that; eva—certainly; śobhanam—very good.

It is not surprising that persons who have accepted the
transient material body as the self are always engaged
in deriding great souls. Such envy on the part of
materialistic persons is very good because that is the
way they fall down. They are diminished by the dust of

                          533
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

the feet of great saintly devotees.

One who offends devotees does not chant the real name

hena vaiṣṇavera nindā kare yai jana

sei pāya duḥkha-janma jīvana-maraṇa

vidyā-kula-tapa-saba viphala tāhāra

vaiṣṇava nindaye ye ye pāpī durācāra

pūjā o tāhāra kṛṣṇa nā kare grahaṇa

vaiṣṇavera nindā kare ye pāpiṣṭha-jana

CB Madhya 4.360

One who commits offenses against Vaiṣṇavas attains only
misery, life after life. His learning, exalted births
and austerity bears no fruit. Blasphemy of Vaiṣṇavas is
the worst kind of sinful behavior and one who does so
will find that Kṛṣṇa does not accept his worship. A
person who blasphemes Vaiṣṇavas is therefore the worst
kind of sinner.



śūlapāṇi-sama yadi vaiṣṇavere ninde

tathāpiha nāśa yāya, kahe śāstra-vṛṇde

ihā nā māniyāye sujana-nindā kare

janme janme se pāpiṣṭha deva-doṣe mare

CB Madhya 22.54,56

It is the conclusion of all the revealed scriptures that
one who blasphemes a devotee is doomed. For such a
person, everything is torn to pieces by the powerful
trident of his sinful reactions. A sinful person who
disregards this principle and insults great souls will
suffer birth after birth for his offense.



Vaiṣṇava-aparādhis are severely punished by Yamarāja

prabhu bale, vaiṣṇava nindaye yei jana

kuṣṭha-roga kon tāra śātiye likhana

āpātataḥ śāstri kichu haiyāche mātra

āra kata āche yama-yātanāra pātra

caurāśī sahasra yama-yātanā pratyekṣe

punaḥ punaḥ kari bhūñje vaiṣṇava-nindake

CB Madhya 4.375-377

Mahāprabhu said, "It is written that one who blasphemes

                          534
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

the Vaiṣṇavas will suffer from leprosy, after which he
will be punished by the agents of Yamarāja again and
again, in thousands of births”.



Śiva’s wife declares: Vaiṣṇava-aparādhis should have
their tongues cut out

karṇau pidhāya nirayād yad akalpa īśe

dharmāvitary asṛṇibhir nṛbhir asyamāne

chindyāt prasahya ruśatīm asatīṁ prabhuś cej

jihvām asūn api tato visṛjet sa dharmaḥ

SB 4.4.17

karṇau—both ears; pidhāya—blocking; nirayāt—one should
go away; yat—if; akalpaḥ—unable; īśe—the master; dharma-
avitari—the maintainers of dharma; asṛṇibhiḥ—by
irresponsible; nṛbhiḥ—persons; asyamāne—being
blasphemed; chindyāt—he should cut; prasahya—by force;
ruśatīm—vilifying; asatīm—of the blasphemer; prabhuḥ—one
is able; cet—if; jihvām—tongue; asūn—(his own) life; api
—certainly; tataḥ—then; visṛjet—should give up; saḥ—
that; dharmaḥ—is the process.

[Satī (Śiva’s wife) said:] “If one hears an
irresponsible person blaspheme the saintly maintainers
of dharma, one should block his ears and go away if
unable to punish him. But if one is able to kill, then
one should by force cut out the blasphemer’s tongue and
kill the offender, and after that one should give up his
own life.”



The great fault of hearing blasphemy of Vaiṣṇavas

[vaiṣṇava nindā śravane 'pi doṣa uktaḥ] (SB 10.74.40)

nindāṁ bhagavataḥ śṛṇvan tat parasya janasya vā

tato nāpaiti yaḥ so 'pi yāty adha sukṛtāt cyutaḥ

tato'pagamaś cāsamarthasya eva; samarthena tu nindaka-
jihvā chettavyā; tatrāpy asamarthena sva-prāṇa-parityāgo
'pi kartavyaḥ

Bhakti Sandarbha 265

The Śrīmad Bhāgavatam says that it is a great fault to
hear blasphemy of Vaiṣṇavas. It states: "He who does not
leave the place where devotees of the Lord are
blasphemed, but continues to hear such blasphemy, is
guilty of a great sin. He is deprived of all his piety
and falls down into hell." It is enjoined that one must
leave the place of blasphemy. But that is for those who
are not adept at śāstric argument. If capable, one
should “cut out the tongue of the blasphemer— (i.e.
defeat his arguments). If unable to do that, one should
give up his life rather than continue to hear such

                          535
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

blasphemy.



The way to overcome Vaiṣṇava-aparādha

ye vaiṣṇava-sthāne aparādha haya yāra

puna se kṣamile aparādha ghuce tāra

CB Madhya 22.32

If one offends a Vaiṣṇava, the only way to get free from
the offense is to go back that Vaiṣṇava and beg his
forgiveness.

kāñṭā phuṭe yei mukhe, sei mukhe yāya

pāye kāñṭā phuṭile ki skāndhe bāhirāya

CB Antya 4.380

Just as it takes a thorn to remove a thorn, the offense
committed by the mouth [against a Vaiṣṇava] must be
cured with the mouth [by begging forgiveness from that
same Vaiṣṇava].



The proper mentality for chanting without offence

tad aśma-sāraṁ hṛdayaṁ batedaṁ

yad gṛhyamāṇair hari-nāma-dheyaiḥ

na vikriyetātha yadā vikāro

netre jalaṁ gātra-ruheṣu harṣaḥ

SB 2.3.24

tat—that; aśma-sāram—is steel-framed; hṛdayam—heart;
bata idam—certainly that; yat—which; gṛhyamāṇaiḥ—in
spite of chanting; hari-nāma—the holy name of the Lord;
dheyaiḥ—by concentration of the mind; na—does not;
vikriyeta—change; atha—thus; yadā—when; vikāraḥ—
reaction; netre—in the eyes; jalam—tears; gātra-ruheṣu—
at the pores; harṣaḥ—eruptions of ecstasy.

Certainly that heart is steel-framed which, in spite of
one's chanting the holy name is not transformed. When
such transformation does take place, tears fill the eyes
and the hairs stand on end.



nāmaikaṁ yasya vāci smaraṇa-patha-gataṁ śrotra-mūlaṁ
gataṁ vā

śuddhaṁ vāśuddha-varṇaṁ vyavahita-rahitaṁ tārayaty eva
satyam

tac ced deha-draviṇa-janatā-lobha-pāṣaṇḍa-madhye


                          536
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

nikṣiptaṁ syān na phala-janakaṁ śīghram evātra vipra

Padma-Purāṇa/Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 11.289/CC Antya 3.60/JD
ch. 24

If a devotee once utters the holy name of the Lord, or
if it penetrates his mind or enters his ear, which is
the channel of aural reception, that holy name will
certainly deliver him from material bondage, whether
vibrated properly or improperly, with correct or
incorrect grammar, and properly joined or vibrated in
separate parts. O brāhmaṇa, the potency of the holy name
is therefore certainly great. However, if one utters the
vibration of śrī nāma for the benefit of the material
body, for material wealth and followers, or under the
influence of greed or atheism - in other words, if one
utters the name with offences - such chanting will not
produce the desired result very soon. Therefore one
should diligently avoid offences in chanting śrī hari-
nāma.



kṛṣṇa-nāma kare aparādhera vicāra

kṛṣṇa balile aparādhīra nā haya vikāra

CC Ādi 8.24

kṛṣṇa-nāma—the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kare—takes;
aparādhera—of offences; vicāra—consideration; kṛṣṇa—Lord
Kṛṣṇa; balile—if one chants; aparādhīra—of the offender;
nā—never; haya—becomes; vikāra—transformed.

There are offences to be considered while chanting the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. If the holy name is chanted with
offences, one will not experience any change of heart.

Offences block the appearance of prema

bahu janma kare yadi śravaṇa, kīrtana

tabu ta— nā pāya kṛṣṇa-pade prema-dhana

CC 8.24.16/BPKG p. 20

bahu—many; janma—births; kare—does; yadi—if; śravaṇa—
hearing; kīrtana—chanting; tabu—still; ta——in spite of;
nā—does not; pāya—get; kṛṣṇa-pade—unto the lotus feet of
Kṛṣṇa; prema-dhana—love of God.

(If one’s heart is infested with the ten offences in the
chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra) Despite his
endeavor to chant the holy name for many births, he will
not get kṛṣṇa-prema which is the ultimate goal of this
chanting.



eka kṛṣṇa-nāme kare sarva-pāpa nāśa

premera kāraṇa bhakti karena prakāśa

anāyāse bhava-kṣaya, kṛṣṇera sevana

                          537
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


eka kṛṣṇa-nāmera phale pāi eta dhana

CC Ādi 8.26 and 8.28

eka—one; kṛṣṇa-nāme—by chanting the holy name of Lord
Kṛṣṇa; kare—makes; sarva—all; pāpa—sinful life; nāśa—
exhausted; premera—of love of Godhead; kāraṇa—cause;
bhakti—devotional service; karena—becomes; prakāśa—
manifest; anāyāse—without hard labor; bhava-kṣaya—
stoppage of repetition of birth and death; kṛṣṇera—of
Lord Kṛṣṇa; sevana—service; eka—one; kṛṣṇa-nāmera—
chanting the name of Kṛṣṇa; phale—as a result of; pāi—we
achieve; eta—so much; dhana—wealth.

Simply chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra without
offences vanquishes all sinful activities. Thus pure
devotional service, which is the cause of love of
Godhead, becomes manifest. As a result of chanting the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, one makes such great advancement
in spiritual life that simultaneously his material
existence terminates and he receives love of Godhead.
The holy name of Kṛṣṇa is so powerful that by chanting
even one pure name, one very easily achieves these
transcendental riches.



hena kṛṣṇa-nāma yadi laya bahu-bāra

tabu yadi prema nahe, nahe aśrudhāra

tabe jāni, aparādha tāhāte pracura

kṛṣṇa-nāma-bīja tāhe nā kare aṅkura

CC Ādi 8.29-30

hena—such; kṛṣṇa-nāma—holy name of the Lord; yadi—if;
laya—one takes; bahu-bāra—again and again; tabu—still;
yadi—if; prema—love of Godhead; nahe—is not visible;
nahe aśru-dhāra—there are no tears in the eyes; tabe—
then; jāni—I understand; aparādha—offense; tāhāte—there
(in that process); pracura—enough; kṛṣṇa-nāma—the holy
name of Kṛṣṇa; bīja—seed; tāhe—in those activities; nā—
does not; kare—do; aṅkura—sprout.

If one chants the exalted holy name of the Lord again
and again and yet his love for the Supreme Lord does not
develop and tears do not appear in his eyes, it is
evident that because of his offenses in chanting, the
seed of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa does not sprout.

The real Holy Name can never awaken in māyāvādis

prabhu kahe māyāvādī kṛṣṇe aparādhī/ brahma ātmā
caitanya kahe niravadhi

ataeva tāra mukhe nā āise kṛṣṇa-nāma/kṛṣṇa-nāma kṛṣṇa-
svarūpa duita samāna

nāma vigraha svarūpa tina eka-rūpa/tine bheda nāhi tina
cid-ānanda-rūpa


                          538
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

deha-dehīra, nāma-nāmīra kṛṣṇe nāhi bheda/jīvera dharma
nāma-deha-svarūpe vibheda

CC Madhya 17.129-132

[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:] Māyāvādī impersonalists
are offenders to Kṛṣṇa. They consantly repeat words like
Brahman, ātma, and caitanya. As a result, they are
unable to utter Kṛṣṇa’s holy name. Kṛṣṇa’s name, His
form and His essential being are all one. They are
spiritual and there is no distinction to be made between
them. In Kṛṣṇa, there is no difference between body and
the proprietor of the body, nor between the name and the
person named, as is the case with the jīva, in whom all
these distinctions are present.



There is no consideration of offences in chanting the
names of Gaura-Nitāi

caitanya-nityānande nāhi e saba vicāra

nāma laile prema deya, vahe aśru-dhāra

CC Ādi 8.31/BPKG p. 20

caitanya-nityānande—when chanting the holy names of Lord
Caitanya and Nityānanda; nāhi—there are not; e saba—all
these; vicāra—considerations; nāma—the holy name; laile—
simply by chanting; prema—ecstatic love of God; deya—
they give; vahe—there is a flow; aśru-dhāra—tears in the
eyes.

If one only chants, with some slight faith, the holy
names of Lord Caitanya and Nityānanda, very quickly he
is cleansed of all offences. Thus as soon as he chants
the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, he feels the ecstasy of love
for God and tears flow from his eyes.



Gaura does not consider offences, therefore by chanting
Gaura’s names one easily attains Śrī Kṛṣṇa

gaura-nāma na laiyā, jei kṛṣṇa bhaje giyā, sei kṛṣṇa
bahu kāle pāya

gaura-nāma laya jei, sadya kṛṣṇa pāya sei, aparādha nāhi
rahe tāya

Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma Māhātmya

na laiyā—without uttering; gaura-nāma—Śrī Gaura’s names;
jei—who; kṛṣṇa— Kṛṣṇa’s names; bhaje—adores; giyā—
singing; sei—he; kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇa; bahu kāle—after a long
time; pāya—attains; gaura-nāma—Gaura’s names; laya—
utters; jei—he; sadya—at once; kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; pāya—
attains; sei—he; aparādha—offense; nāhi—not; rahe—
remain; tāya—in him.

One who does not utter the names of Gaura yet worship
Śrī Krṣna and sings His names attains Ḥis shelter only
after a long time. However one who utters Gaura’s names

                          539
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

at once attains Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Offence does not remain in
His heart.

Thus ends section 10) Ślokas Pertaining to Nāmāparādha




11) Further Glorification of Śrī Nāma



Kali-yuga is an ocean of faults but simply by chanting
the holy name one can counteract all faults and attain
perfection

kaler doṣa-nidhe rājann asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ

kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet

SB 12.3.51/CC Mad 20.344

kaleḥ—of the age of Kali; doṣa-nidheḥ—in the ocean of
faults; rājan—O King; asti—there is; hi—certainly; ekaḥ—
one; mahān—very great; guṇaḥ—good quality; kīrtanāt—by
chanting; eva—certainly; kṛṣṇasya—of the holy name of
Kṛṣṇa; mukta-saṅgaḥ—liberated from material bondage;
param—to the transcendental spiritual kingdom; vrajet—
one can go.

My dear King, although Kali-yuga is an ocean of faults,
there is still one redeeming quality of this age: Simply
by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, one can become
free from material bondage and go to the transcendental
abode.



Everyone can be freed by simply chanting the holy name

āpannaḥ saṁsṛtiṁ ghorāṁ yan-nāma vivaśo gṛṇan

tataḥ sadyo vimucyeta yad bibheti svayaṁ bhayam

SB 1.1.14

āpannaḥ—entangled; saṁsṛtim—in the hurdle of birth and
death; ghorām—terrible; yat—of whom; nāma—the absolute
name; vivaśaḥ—unconsciously; gṛṇan—chanting; tataḥ—from
that; sadyaḥ—at once; vimucyeta—gets freedom; yat—that
which; bibheti—fears; svayam—personally; bhayam—fear
itself.

Living beings who are entangled in the terrible meshes
of birth and death can be freed immediately by even
unconsciously chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, which is
feared by fear personified.



Kṛṣṇa became Nāma-rūpa and Gaura-dhāma

baddha-jīve kṛpā kari kṛṣṇa haila nāma

                           540
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


kali-jīve dayā kari kṛṣṇa haila gauradhāma

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s Bhagavattā-Pramāṇa (Hindi)

Being merciful on the jīvas who are bound within this
age of quarrel, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has become nāma-rūpa; then
feeling still more compassion, He also became Śrī Gaura-
dhāma (Navadvīpa).



I do not dwell in Vaikuṇṭha nor in the hearts of the
yogīs. I reside only in the heart of My devotees who
glorify Me

nāhaṁ tiṣṭhāmi vaikuṇṭhe yogināṁ hṛdayeṣu vā

yatra gāyanti mad-bhaktāḥ tatra tiṣṭhāmi nārada



(or alternative version)

nāhaṁ vasāmi vaikuṇṭhe yogināṁ hṛdayena ca

mad-bhaktā yatra gāyanti tatra tiṣṭhāmi nārada

Padma Purāṇa/Nārada-bhakti-sūtra 3.37/Bhakti Sandarbha
269/GKH (P)

na—not; aham—I; tiṣṭhāmi [vasāmi]—reside; vaikuṇṭhe—in
Vaikuṇṭha; yoginām—of the yogīs; hṛdayeṣu—in the hearts;
vā—either; [ca—and;] yatra—where; gāyanti—they sing
about Me; mat-bhaktāḥ—My devotees; tatra—at the
respective places; tiṣṭhāmi—I remain; nārada—O Nārada.

O Nārada, I do not dwell in Vaikuṇṭha nor am I in the
hearts of the yogīs. I reside where My devotees glorify
My name, form, qualities and transcendental pastimes.

kṛṣṇa-nāmera phala “premā—, sarva-śāstre kaya

bhāgye sei premā tomāya karila udaya

CC Ādi 7.86/GKH (P)

kṛṣṇa-nāmera—of the holy name of the Lord; phala—result;
premā—love of Godhead; sarva—in all; śāstre—revealed
scriptures; kaya—describe; bhāgye—fortunately; sei—that;
premā—love of Godhead; tomāya—in You; karila—has done;
udaya—arisen.

The conclusion of all revealed scriptures is that the
ultimate result of chanting śrī nāma is prema. By great
great fortune this very prema has arisen in your heart.

one should awaken his dormant love of Godhead by
chanting the holy name. You are greatly fortunate to
have already done so.



Yamarāja takes only those who fail to chant the holy

                           541
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

name

jihvā na vakti bhagavad-guṇa-nāmadheyaṁ

cetaś ca na smarati tac-caraṇāravindam

kṛṣṇāya no namati yac-chira ekadāpi

tān ānayadhvam asato —kṛta-viṣṇu-kṛtyān

SB 6.3.29/GKH (P)

jihvā—the tongue; na—not; vakti—chants; bhagavat—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa—transcendental
qualities; nāmadheyam—and the nomenclature; cetaḥ—the
heart; ca—also; na—not; smarati—remembers; tat—His;
caraṇa-aravindam—lotus feet; kṛṣṇāya—unto Lord Kṛṣṇa
through His Deity in the temple; no—not; namati—bows;
yat—whose; śiraḥ—head; ekadā api—even once; tān—them;
ānayadhvam—bring before me; asataḥ—the nondevotees;
akṛta—not performing; viṣṇu-kṛtyān—duties toward Lord
Viṣṇu.

My dear servants, please bring to me only those sinful
persons who do not use their tongues to chant the holy
name and qualities of Kṛṣṇa, whose hearts do not
remember the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa even once and whose
heads do not bow down even once before Lord Kṛṣṇa. Send
me those who do not perform their duties toward Viṣṇu,
which are the only duties in human life. Please bring me
all such fools and rascals.



Hearing the holy name only once frees one from material
contamination

na hi bhagavann aghaṭitam idaṁ

tvad-darśanān nṛṇām akhila-pāpa-kṣayaḥ

yan-nāma sakṛc chravaṇāt

pukkaśo —pi vimucyate saṁsārāt

SB 6.16.44/GKH (P)

na—not; hi—indeed; bhagavan—O my Lord; aghaṭitam—not
occurred; idam—this; tvat—of You; darśanāt—by seeing;
nṛṇām—of all human beings; akhila—all; pāpa—of sins;
kṣayaḥ—annihilation; yat-nāma—whose name; sakṛt—only
once; śravaṇāt—by hearing; pukkaśaḥ—the lowest class,
the caṇḍāla; api—also; vimucyate—is delivered; saṁsārāt—
from the entanglement of material existence.

My Lord, it is not impossible for one to be immediately
freed from all material contamination by seeing You. Not
to speak of seeing You personally, merely by hearing the
holy name of Your Lordship only once, even caṇḍālas, men
of the lowest class, are freed from all material
contamination. Considering this, who will not be freed
from material contamination simply by seeing You?



                           542
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


mat-kathā-vācakaṁ nityaṁ mat-kathā-śravaṇe ratam

mat-kathā-prīti-manasaṁ nāhaṁ tyakṣyāmi taṁ naram

Bhakti-Sandarbha 269/GKH (P)

In the Viṣṇu-dharma-Purāṇa and Skanda-Purāṇa the Supreme
Lord declares: “I will never abandon any person who
always recounts My glories, or delights in hearing My
glories, or whose heart enjoys descriptions of My
glories.”

tārakāj jāyate muktiḥ samādhiketi bhavaḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Sandarbha 256/GKH (P)

tārakāt—from the liberator; jāyate—is generated; muktiḥ—
liberation; samādhikā—greater; iti—thus; bhāvaḥ—the
meaning.

From chanting the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one attains
pure love of God, which makes the happiness of
liberation seem very insignificant.



nāmnāṁ mukhyatamaṁ nāma kṛṣṇākhyaṁ me parantapeti

Sri Kṛṣṇa-Sandarbha 257/GKH (P)

nāmnām—of names; mukhyatamam—most important; nāma—name;
kṛṣṇa-ākhyam—the name Kṛṣṇa; me—My; parantapa—O subduer
of the enemies (Arjuna); iti—thus.

O Arjuna, of all My holy names, the name Kṛṣṇa is the
most important.



What is the topmost worshipable object?

upāsyera madhye kon upāsya pradhāna?

śreṣṭha upāsya - yugala “rādhā-kṛṣṇa— nāma

CC Mad 8.256

upāsyera—objects of worship; madhye—among; kon—which;
upāsya—worshipable object; pradhāna—the chief; śreṣṭha—
the chief; upāsya—worshipable object; yugala—the couple;
rādhā-kṛṣṇa nāma—the holy name of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, or Hare
Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked, “Among all worshipable
objects, which is the chief?” Rāmānanda Rāya replied,
“The highest worshipable object is the holy name of
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra.”



Śrī Nāma Vandanā

jayati jayati nāmānanda-rūpaṁ murārer

                          543
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


viramita-nija-dharma-dhyāna-pūjādi-yatnam

katham api sakṛd āttaṁ mukti-daṁ prāṇināṁ yat

paramam amṛtam ekaṁ jīvanaṁ bhūṣaṅaṁ me

Śrī Bṛhad-Bhāgvatāmṛta 1.9, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī

jayati jayati—all glories, all glories; nāma-ānanda—of
the all-ecstatic name; rūpam—to the form; murāreḥ—of
Kṛṣṇa Murāri, the enemy of lust; viramita—giving up;
nija—of one’s own; dharma—social duties; dhyāna—
meditation; pūjā-ādi—ritual worship and so on; yatnam—
the endeavors; katham api—somehow or other; sakṛt—just
once; āttam—taken; mukti-dam—giving liberation; prāṇinām
—to living entities; yat—which; paramam—the supreme;
amṛtam—eternal nectar; ekam—the only; jīvanam—life-
giving, maintaining; bhūṣaṇam—ornament; me—my.

All glories, all glories to Kṛṣṇa-Murāri’s name, the
embodiment of divine bliss! It halts the cycle of birth
and death and relieves one of all painful endeavors in
practicing religion, meditation, charity, deity worship,
and austerity. It awards liberation to one who utters it
even once. Kṛṣṇa-nāma stands alone as the supreme nectar
and sole treasure of my life.



The experience of one’s internal spiritual form
(svarūpa), required for the culture of rāgānuga-bhakti
proper, is revealed by the grace of Kṛṣṇa-nāma

īsāt vikaśi punaḥ dekhāya nija-rūpa-guṇa

citta hari laya kṛṣṇa pāśa

pūrṇa-vikaśita haiyā vraje more jāya laiyā

dekhāya nija-svarūpa-vilāsa

Kṛṣṇa-nāma dhare kata bala, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura

When śrī nāma is even slightly revealed, it shows me my
own spiritual form and characteristics. It steals my
mind and takes it to Kṛṣṇa’s side. When śrī nāma is
fully revealed, it takes me directly to Vraja, where it
shows me my personal role in the eternal pastimes.



The prema flower of śrī-nāma

pūrṇa-vikaśita hañā, braje more jāya lañā

dekhāya more svarūpa-vilāsa

more siddha-deha diyā, kṛṣṇa-pāse rākhe giyā

e dehera kare sarba-nāśa

Prema-vivarta ch. 7/JD ch. 25


                             544
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Now blossoming fully, the prema flower of śrī-nāma takes
me to Vraja, and reveals to me the pastimes of His own
love dalliance. Nāma gives me my own siddha-deha, keeps
me by the side of Kṛṣṇa, and then He completely destroys
everything related to this mortal frame of mine.



Rādhā-nāma and Kṛṣṇa-nāma together produce unprecedented
nectar

rādheti nāma nava-sundara-sīdhu mugdhaṁ

kṛṣṇeti nāma maḍhurādbhuta-gāḍha-dugdham

sarva-kṣaṇaṁ surabhi-rāga-himena ramyaṁ

kṛtvā tadaiva piba me rasane kṣud-ārte

Śrī Stavāvalī, Abhīṣṭa-sūcanam 10, Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa
Gosvāmī

rādhā—Rādhā; iti—thus; nāma—name; nava—fresh; sundara—
delicious; sīdhu—nectar; mugdham—charming; kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa;
iti—thus; nāma—name; madhura—sweet; adbhuta—wonderful;
gāḍha—thick; dugdham—milk; sarva—at every; kṣaṇam—
moment; surabhi—fragrant; rāga—of love; himena—with the
ice; ramyam—pleasing; kṛtvā—doing; tadā—then; eva—
certainly; piba—please drink; me—of me; rasane—O tongue;
kṣud-ārte—tortured by thirst.

O tongue tortured by thirst, please mix the delicious
nectar of the name Rādhā with the wonderfully sweet
condensed milk of the name Kṛṣṇa, add the fragrant ice
of pure love and drink this charming drink at every
moment!

Thus ends Chapter 18 — Nāma-tattva




3rd Division: Prayojana-tattva



The Ultimate Objective — Love of God (Kṛṣṇa-prema)



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains: Divine Love for the
Supreme Lord (prema) is a broad term. For some, it means
to attain Śrī Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha.
For others, it means Śrī Sīta-Rāma in Ayodhyā. In our
Rūpānugā line we do not aspire for the above, neither do
we aspire for the service of Dvārakādhīśa Kṛṣṇa, nor for
that of Mathureśa Kṛṣṇa. Our sole object is loving
devotional service unto Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
Vraja: Vraja-prema. We do not desire the prema of Kṛṣṇa
for Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs. We desire the prema
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs for Kṛṣṇa. We desire to
serve Kṛṣṇa, but not directly or independently, only
through Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs, and under their

                          545
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

guidance. We do not aspire for a direct union of love
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in competition with Śrīmatī Rādhikā. We
desire only to experience prema through Her and assist
Her in meeting with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the
mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs (gopī-bhāva) is
the goal of the Śrī Rūpānugā line. Our primary
relationship is with Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is our primary
worshipable Deity and we think of Śrī Kṛṣṇa only as the
beloved, the life and soul of our Svāminī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

There are various types of rasas (mellows of love) in
Vraja: sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya. Our goal is
mādhurya-mayī bhakti, the love of the gopīs for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. We follow in the footsteps of our rasa-ācārya
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who came to establish the mission
and innermost heart’s desires of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. The essence of what Mahāprabhu is teaching
us through Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is to follow in the
footsteps of the gopī maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
and serve Her in mañjarī-bhāva (tat-tad-bhāva-
icchāmayī). She is our iṣṭa-devatā, our worshipable
object of loving service, our all-in-all. Therefore, our
exclusive goal, our prayojana, is Rādhā-dāsyam. This is
the speciality and the glory of our Śrī Rūpānugā line.




Chapter 19 — Rasa-tattva


“raso vai saḥ— - Śrī Kṛṣṇa is an ocean of rasa



1. Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the Different Rasas 632

2. Ingredients of the Five Rasas 638

3. Ślokas Delineating the five Rasas 639

4. Other Aspects of Rasa-tattva 652

5. Kṛṣṇa Reciprocates According to One’s Particular Mood
656

6. Kṛṣṇa is Controlled Only by Mādhurya 660

7. Mādhurya-Rasa in Parakīyā-bhāva 662



1) Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the Different Rasas

Śrī Kṛsṇa is the reservoir of all relationships and
transcendental mellows

akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ prasṛmara-ruci-ruddha-tārakā-
pāliḥ

kalita-śyāmā-lalito rādhā-preyān vidhur jayati


                           546
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

BRS 1.1.1/BRSB p. 2/CC Mad 8.142

akhila-rasa-amṛta-mūrtiḥ—the embodiment of rasa,
transcendental mellows of love, namely śānta, dāsya,
sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya; prasṛmara—spreading
forth; ruci—by His bodily luster; ruddha—who has
subjugated; tārakā—the gopī named Tārakā (a vipakṣa-
gopī, representing a rival group to that of Śrī Rādhā);
pāliḥ—the gopī named Pāli (or Pālikā, a tatastha-gopī,
representing a neutral group); kalita—who has accepted;
śyāmā—the gopī named Śyāmalā (a suhṛt-pakṣa-gopī,
representing a friendly group); lalitaḥ—and the gopī
named Lalitā (a sva-pakṣa-gopī, belonging to Rādhikā’s
own group); rādhā-preyān—dearmost beloved of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā (priya - he who endeavours to please, preyān -
he who endeavours to please to the utmost); vidhuḥ—the
moon, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; jayati—all glories to.

Let Śrī Kṛṣṇa, be glorified! By virtue of His expanding
attractive features, He subjugated the gopīs named
Tārakā and Pāli and accepted Śyāmā and Lalitā as His
very self. He is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s dearmost beloved,
always endeavouring to please Her to the utmost degree.
He is the reservoir of rasa for devotees in all
transcendental mellows.

[An alternative translation:] Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the destroyer
of all sin and the bestower of all bliss, the very form
of the highest bliss, filled with all rasas, excels all
others in glory. He brings Tārakā and Pālikā under His
control by the diffusion of His beauty. He is controlled
by the love of Śyāmalā and Lalitā, and completely
controlled by Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s super-excellent love.
Thus He gives Her pleasure by His super-excellent
qualities.32

[another translation:] The full moon (Śrī Kṛṣṇa), which
destroys suffering and creates happiness by its cooling
rays, shines everywhere with its excellent qualities and
beauty. This moon is the very form of nectar, filled
with all varieties of rasa. It eclipses the host of
stars (tārakā-pāliḥ) by its light, accepts the playful
gestures of the night (śyāma-lalitā), and lovingly
approaches the Rādhā constellation (rādhā-preyān) in the
spring season (thus becoming most beautiful and has His
full glory revealed only when in the company of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā).



Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā enhance each other’s
qualities

rādhayā mādhavo devo mādhavenaiva rādhikā vibhrājante
janeṣu

Ṛk-pariśiṣṭa/BRS 1.1.1 pt

Śrī Kṛṣṇa eternally shines with supreme qualities only
in the company of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and She shines with
supreme qualities only in His company.




                            547
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

The definition śloka of rasa

vyatītya bhāvanā-vartma yaś camatkāra-bhāra-bhūḥ

hṛdi sattvojjvale bāḍhaṁ svadate sa raso mataḥ

BRS 2.5.132/JD ch. 28, 31/SB 10.43.17 pt/STB p. 51

Rasa is that which transcends the platform of thought,
causes great astonishment and wonder, and is immensely
relished within the heart which is effulgent with
śuddha-sattva.

[an alternative translation:] That which becomes even
more intensely relishable in the heart made bright with
hlādinī and saṁvit śaktis (attainment of bhāva), after
surpassing the stage of distinguishing the constituent
bhāvas, and which becomes even more astonishing in bliss
than bhāva, is called rasa.

raso vai saḥ, rasaṁ hy evāyaṁ labdhvānandī bhavati

Chāndogya-Upaniṣad 8.13.1/Taittirīya-Upaniṣad 2.7.1/JD
ch. 10,31/BPKG pp. 48,362

Rasika-śekhara Śrī Nanda-nandana Kṛṣṇa is the embodiment
of rasa (transcendental mellows of love); He is the
personification of all rasa and an ocean of rasa. He
Himself is rasa, the taste or flavour or mellow of a
particular relationship. And certainly one who achieves
this rasa becomes ānandī, filled with bliss. (or:) Only
when one achieves Kṛṣṇa, the embodiment of pleasure and
the ocean of rasa, does one actually become
transcendentally blissful.

raso vai saḥ, rasaṁ hy evāyaṁ labdhvānandī bhavati, ko
hy evānyat kaḥ prāṇyāt yad eṣa ākāśa ānando na syāt, eṣa
hy evānandayati

Taittirīya-Upaniṣad 2.7.1/BPKG pp. 48,362/JD ch. 18

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the personification of rasa (transcendental
mellows). The jīva can become blissful only by obtaining
Him. If parama-tattva paramānanda-svarūpa Śrī Kṛṣṇa did
not reside in the spiritual sky, who could maintain his
life? Who would care to protect his life? Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
personification of supreme bliss filled with rasa, gives
ānanda (bliss) to everyone.

rasika-śekhara kṛṣṇa parama-karuṇa

CC Ādi 4.15-16/GV p. 63

rasika-śekhara—the supreme enjoyer of rasa; kṛṣṇa—Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; parama-karuṇa—the supremely merciful.

Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa is known as the topmost relisher of rasa,
the king of transcendental mellows of love (and as
supremely merciful).

Daśa-mūla on Rasa-tattva

sa vai hlādinyāś ca praṇaya-vikṛter hlādana-ratas


                           548
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

tathā samvic-chakti-prakaṭita-raho-bhāva-rasitaḥ

tathā śrī-sāndhinyā kṛta-viśada-tad-dhāma-nicaye

rasāmbhodhau magno vraja-rasa-vilāsī vijayate

Daśa-mūla-tattva 4/JD ch. 14

sah vai—that same Śrī Hari; hlādinyāḥ—for His hlādinī
potency, Śrī Rādhā; ca—and; praṇaya-vikṛteḥ—on account
of a transformation caused by love; hlādana-rataḥ—is
attached to the activities of pleasure; tathā—in the
same way; samvit-śakti—of the cognitive potency;
prakaṭita—is manifested; rahaḥ—confidential; bhāva—
transcendental love; rasitaḥ—tasted; tathā—and; śrī-
sandhinyāḥ—through His existence-sustaining potency;
kṛta—created; viśada-tat-dhāma—of His splendid abodes;
nicaye—multitude; rasa-ambhodhau—in an ocean of rasa
(transcendental mellows); magnaḥ—is immersed;vraja—in
Vraja; rasa-vilāsī—that enjoyer of pleasure pastimes;
vijayate—may He be gloriously victorious.

There are three functions of svarūpa-śakti: hlādinī,
sandhinī and saṁvit. Kṛṣṇa remains perpetually immersed
in the praṇaya, transformations of ever newer and newer
love manifested by His hlādinī-śakti. Because of the
confidential bhāvas evoked by saṁvit-śakti, He is ever-
situated as rasika-śekhara in relishing newer and newer
rasa. That supremely independent pastime prince, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, is ever-drowned within the ocean of vraja-rasa in
His transcendental bliss-filled abodes, headed by
Vṛndāvana, which are manifest through sandhinī-śakti.
All glories to Him!



Kṛṣṇa as the Viṣaya (object) of all twelve rasas at the
same time

daityācāryās tadāsye vikṛtim aruṇatāṁ malla-varyāḥ
sakhāyo

gaṇḍaunnatyaṁ khaleśāḥ pralayam ṛṣi-gaṇā dhyānam
uṣṇaśrum ambā

romañcaṁ sāṁyugīnāḥ kam api nava-camatkāram antaḥ
surendrā

lāsyaṁ dāsāḥ kaṭākṣaṁ yayur asita-dṛśaḥ prekṣya raṅge
mukundam

Lalita Mādhava 4.1.11/BRS 4.8.84/BRSB p. 263

daitya—of the demons; ācāryāḥ—the teachers; tadā—then on
the face; asye— ; vikṛtim—transformation; aruṇatām—
redness; malla—of wrestlers; varyāḥ—the best; sakhāyaḥ—
the friends; ganda-unnatyam—smiling; khala—of the demon;
īśāḥ—the kings; pralayam—devastation; ṛṣi—of sages;
gaṇāḥ—cheeks; dhyānam—meditation; uṣṇa—warm; aśrum—
tears; amba—mother; roma-añcam—hairs standing up;
samyuginaḥ—the chivalrous fighters; kam api—something;
nava—new; camatkāram—wonder; antaḥ—within; sura—of
demigods; indraḥ—the leaders; lāsyam—dancing; dāsāḥ—the
menial servants; kaṭa-akṣam—sidelong glances; yayuḥ—

                          549
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

attained; asita—black; dṛśaḥ—whose eyes; prekṣya—seeing;
raṅge—in the arena; mukundam—Kṛṣṇa.

[Different people saw Kṛṣṇa in different ways:] When the
priests of Kaṁsa saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa enter the wrestling arena
anointed with blood after killing the elephant
Kuvalayāpīḍa their faces became contorted with disgust
(bībhatsa). The faces of the wrestlers turned red with
anger (rudra). The cheeks of Kṛṣṇa’s friends blossomed
with joy (hāsya and sakhya). The wicked lost all
consciousness as if on the verge of death (bhayānaka -
fear). The sages became absorbed in deep meditation
(śānta). Devakī and the other mothers began to cry warm
tears in parental compassion (vātsalya and karuṇa). The
bodily hairs of the of the warriors stood on end in
chivalry (vīra). Indra and the other demigods
experienced unprecedented astonishment within their
hearts (adbhuta). The dāsya-bhaktas danced (dāsya), and
the young girls cast sidelong amorous glances with their
black eyes (mādhurya).

tataś ca tathā-vidha-veśo daśa-vidhair eṣa
daśadhānvabhāvi. tathā hi

[tataḥ—then; ca—also; tathā—in that; vidha—way; veśaḥ—
appearances; daśa—ten; vidhaiḥ—with kinds; eṣaḥ—He;
daśadhā—in ten ways; ānvabhāvi—one after another; tathā
hi—furthermore.]

[In the heading to the “daityācāryās— śloka, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī states:] Ten rasas 1. bībhatsa (loathing); 2.
raudra (anger); 3. hāsya (comedy) and sakhya
(friendship); 4. bhayānaka (terror); 5. śānta (peaceful
meditation); 6. vātsalya (parental love) and karuṇa
(compassion); 7. vīra (chivalry); 8. adbhuta (wonder);
9. dāsya (servitude); and 10. śṛṅgāra (conjugal love)
are manifested one after another.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the Āśraya (subject) of all twelve rasas at
the same time

svasmin dhurye “py amānī śiśuṣu giri-dhṛtāv udyateṣu
smitāsyas

thūtkārī dadhni visre praṇayiṣu vivṛta-prauḍhir indre
“ruṇākṣaḥ

goṣṭhe sāśrur vidūne guruṣu hari-makhaṁ prāsya kampaḥ sa
pāyād

āsāre sphāra-dṛṣṭir yuvatiṣu pulakī bibhrad adriṁ vibhur
vaḥ

BRS 4.8.85/BRSB p. 271

Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa supported the great weight of
Govardhana, He was devoid of pride (śānta). He smiled
when He saw that the small boys were prepared to hold up
the hill (hāsya and vātsalya). He spat at the smell of
musty yogurt (bībhatsa). He displayed tremendous prowess
to lift Govardhana in the presence of His beloved
friends (sakhya and vīra). He looked at Indra with eyes

                          550
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

red with anger (raudra). Tears came to His eyes when He
saw the residents of Vraja tormented by the powerful
wind and rain (karuṇa). He trembled before His
respectful elders on account of having spoiled the Indra
yajña (dāsya and bhayānaka). His eyes widened at the
torrential downpour of water (adbhuta), and His hairs
stood on end when He saw the young gopīs (mādhurya). May
that Śrī Giridhārī protect you.



Kṛṣṇa, the ocean of rasa, appears differently to
different persons according to their bhāva

mallānām aśanir nṛṇāṁ nara-varaḥ strīṇāṁ smaro mūrtimān

gopānāṁ sva-jano —satāṁ kṣiti-bhujāṁ śāstā sva-pitroḥ
śiśuḥ

mṛtyur bhoja-pater virāḍ aviduṣāṁ tattvaṁ paraṁ yogināṁ

vṛṣṇīnāṁ para-devateti vidito raṅgaṁ gataḥ sāgrajaḥ

SB 10.43.17/MK 1.3

mallānām—for the wrestlers; aśaniḥ—lightning; nṛṇām—for
the males; nara-varaḥ—the best of men; strīṇām—for the
women; smaraḥ—Cupid; mūrti-mān—incarnate; gopānām—for
the cowherds; sva-janaḥ—their relative; asatām—impious;
kṣiti-bhujām—for the kings; śāstā—a punisher; sva-pitroḥ
—for His parents; śiśuḥ—a child; mṛtyuḥ—death; bhoja-
pateḥ—for the King of the Bhojas, Kaṁsa; virāṭ—the
totality of the material universe; aviduṣām—for the
unintelligent; tattvam—the Absolute Truth; param—
Supreme; yoginām—for the yogīs; vṛṣṇīnām—for the members
of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty; para-devatā—their most worshipable
Deity; iti—in these ways; viditaḥ—understood; raṅgam—the
arena; gataḥ—He entered; sa—along with; agra-jaḥ—His
elder brother.

The various groups of people in the arena regarded Kṛṣṇa
in different ways when He entered it with His elder
brother. The wrestlers saw Kṛṣṇa as a lightning bolt,
the men of Mathurā as the best of males, the women as
Cupid in person, the cowherd men as their relative, the
impious rulers as a chastiser, His parents as their
child, the King of the Bhojas (Kaṁsa) as death
personified, the unintelligent as the Supreme Lord’s
universal form, the yogīs as the Absolute Truth and the
Vṛṣṇis as their supreme worshipable Deity.33



In his commentary Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī quotes the
following śloka

raudro —dbhutaś ca śṛṅgāro hāsyaṁ vīro dayā tathā

bhayānakaś ca bībhatsaḥ śāntaḥ sa-prema-bhaktikaḥ

SB 10.43.17 pt

[There are ten different moods:] fury [perceived by the
wrestlers], wonder [by the men], conjugal attraction

                          551
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

[the women], laughter [the cowherds], chivalry [the
kings], mercy [His parents], terror [Kaṁsa], ghastliness
[the unintelligent], peaceful neutrality [the yogīs] and
loving devotion [the Vṛṣṇis].

The five principle Rasas

śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, madhura-rasa nāma

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-madhye e pañca pradhāna

CC Mad 19.185

śānta—neutrality; dāsya—servitude; sakhya—friendship;
vātsalya—parental affection; madhura-rasa—conjugal love;
nāma—different names; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—of devotional service
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; rasa—the mellows; madhye—among; e—these;
pañca—five; pradhāna—chief.

The chief transcendental mellows experienced with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa are five—śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and
mādhurya.

The seven secondary Rasas

hāsya, adbhuta, vīra, karuṇa, raudra, bībhatsa, bhaya

pañca-vidha-bhakte gauṇa sapta-rasa haya

CC Mad 19.187

hāsya—laughter; adbhuta—wonder; vīra—chivalry; karuṇa—
compassion; raudra—anger; bībhatsa—disaster; bhaya—
fearfulness; pañca-vidha-bhakte—in five kinds of
devotees; gauṇa—indirect; sapta-rasa—seven kinds of
mellows; haya—there are.

There are seven indirect mellows, known as laughter,
wonder, chivalry, compassion, anger, disgust and fear
which manifest at different times in the personalities
of Kṛṣṇa’s associates whose principal rasas are sakhya,
vātsalya, mādhurya etc.

2) Ingredients of the Five Rasas



Śānta — kṛṣṇa-niṣṭhā and tṛṣṇa-tyāga — fixed, unwavering
devotion to Kṛṣṇa and complete detachment from material
desires (tṛṣṇā—thirst, hankering, lusty desires; tyāga—
devoid of).



Dāsya — mamatā and sevā-vṛtti - possessiveness (“You are
Mine”) and a desire to serve, are added.



Sakhya — viśrambha — intimacy based on feelings of
equality is added. Viśrambha means a mood of intimacy,
devoid of reverential attitude.



                            552
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


Vātsalya — pālana-poṣaṇa and taḍana-bhartsana -
protecting and nourishing (“I am Kṛṣṇa’s guardian, I
have to protect and nourish Him”), and chastising (“I am
His parent, I have to discipline Him for His own
welfare”) are added.



Mādhurya — nija-aṅga diyā — offering one’s whole body,
serving Kṛṣṇa with all bodily limbs, is added.



The five rasas are graded and the highest is mādhurya-
rasa

yathottaram asau svāda-viśeṣollāsamayy api

ratir vāsanayā svādvī bhāsate kāpi kasyacit

BRS 2.5.38/ CC Ādi 4.45, Mad 8.84

yathā—just as; uttaram—one after another; asau—that;
svāda-viśeṣa—of particular tastes; ullāsa-mayī—filled
with delight; api—however; ratiḥ—love; vāsanayā—on
account of the desire; svādvī—sweet (mādhurya); bhāsate—
shines; kā api—a certain; kasyacit—for someone (the
devotee).

Increasing love is experienced in various tastes, one
above another. But that love which has the sweetest
taste in the gradual succession of desires shines in the
form of mādhurya-rasa. Even though rati always consists
of the bliss of a particular rasa, it is differentiated
in a hierarchical manner as the five rasas. The
particular form that rati takes for a given person is
determined by inherent (eternal) spiritual desires
(gāḍha-saṁskāras).

3) Ślokas Delineating the Five Rasas



Śānta-rasa

The essential features of Śānta-rasa

svarga, mokṣa kṛṣṇa-bhakta 'naraka' kari' māne

kṛṣṇa-niṣṭhā, tṛṣṇa-tyāga śāntera 'dui' guṇe

śāntera svabhāva kṛṣṇe mamatā-gandha-hīna

'param-brahma'-'paramātmā'-jñāna pravīṇa

CC Madhya 19.215,218

svarga—the heavenly kingdom; mokṣa—liberation from
material bondage; kṛṣṇa-bhakta—a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa;
naraka kari— māne—considers as good as hell; kṛṣṇa-
niṣṭhā—unwavering devotion to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa;
tṛṣṇā-tyāga—devoid of thirst for anything material;
śāntera—of one on the neutrality platform; dui guṇe—two

                          553
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

transcendental qualities; śāntera svabhāva—the
characteristic of śānta-rasa; kṛṣṇe—in Kṛṣṇa; mamatā-
gandha-hīna—not even the slightest smell of mamatā
(possessiveness); param-brahma—the impersonal, all-
encompassing Brahman; paramātmā—the localized, all-
pervading Supersoul; jñāna—knowledge; pravīṇa—
prominence.

When a devotee is on the platform of śānta-rasa, he
desires neither elevation to the heavenly planets nor
liberation. These are the results of karma and jñāna,
and the devotee considers them no better than hell. A
person on the śānta platform manifests the two
transcendental qualities of detachment from all material
desires and full attachment to Kṛṣṇa. However, the
nature of śānta-rāsa is that not even the slightest
mamatā (possessiveness) exists. Rather, knowledge of
impersonal Brahman and localized Paramātmā is prominent.

The Upaniṣads on Śānta-rasa

sarvaṁ khalu idaṁ brahma taj-jalān iti śānta upāsīta

Chāndogya Upaniṣad. 3.14.1

sarvam—everything; khalu—indeed; idam—this; brahma—the
Supreme Spirit (Brahman).

Everything is Brahman, the all-encompassing aspect of
the Supreme. That is, everything that exists has
emanated from Brahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth.
Nothing can exist that is unrelated to Him. From Him
everything emanates, by Him everything is maintained,
into Him everything is dissolved. Therefore, one who is
śānta, or peaceful, who has intuitive wisdom, should
worship Him through devotional service. [One who
worships the Lord in this way, free from any trace of
material hankering, is said to be a devotee in śānta-
rasa]



Śrīmad Bhāgavatam on Śānta-rasa

vāta-vasanā ya ṛṣayaḥ śramaṇā ūrdhva-manthinaḥ

brahmākhyaṁ dhāma te yānti śāntāḥ sannyāsino 'malāḥ

SB 11.6.47

vāta-vasanāḥ—dressed by the air (naked); ye—those who
are; ṛṣayaḥ—sages; śramaṇāḥ—strict observers of
spiritual practices; ūrdhva-manthinaḥ—who have conserved
their semen to the point that it has risen up to their
heads; brahma-ākhyam—known as Brahman; dhāma—the
(impersonal) spiritual abode; te—they; yānti—to go;
śāntāḥ—peaceful; sannyāsinaḥ—sannyāsīs; amalāḥ—pure,
sinless.

Sages who    subsist on air, those who exert themselves in
penances,    those who observe strict celibacy for life,
those who    are peaceful, and those who are sannyāsīs,
attain to    the spiritual abode known as Brahman.


                             554
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017



Being fixed on Kṛṣṇa is a quality of Śānta-rasa

śamo man-niṣṭhatā buddher dama indriya-saṁyamaḥ

titikṣā duḥkha-sammarṣo jihvopastha-jayo dhṛtiḥ

SB 11.19.36/CC Madhya 19.213

śamaḥ—neutrality; mat-niṣṭhatā—attachment for Me;
buddheḥ—of intelligence; damaḥ—self-control; indriya-
saṁyamaḥ—controlling the activities of the senses;
titikṣā—tolerance; duḥkha—of unhappiness; sammarṣaḥ—
endurance; jihvā—tongue; upastha—and the urge of the
genitals; jayaḥ—conquering; dhṛtiḥ—control.

The word śama, or śānta-rasa, indicates that one has
unwavering attachment to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. His
mind is fixed in constantly meditating on the Lord. Dama
means controlling the senses and not being deviated from
the Lord's service; titikṣā means to tolerate
unhappiness; dhṛti means complete control of the tongue
and the genitals.

tvaṁ pratyag-ātmani tadā bhagavaty ananta

ānanda-mātra upapanna-samasta-śaktau

bhaktiṁ vidhāya paramāṁ śanakair avidyā-

granthiṁ vibhetsyasi mamāham iti prarūḍham

SB 4.11.30/GKH (P)

tvam—you; pratyak-ātmani—unto the Supersoul; tadā—at
that time; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; anante—who is unlimited; ānanda-mātre—who is
constituted of pleasure; upapanna—possessed of; samasta—
all; śaktau—potencies; bhaktim—devotional service;
vidhāya—by rendering; paramām—supreme; śanakaiḥ—
gradually; avidyā—of illusion; granthim—the knot;
vibhetsyasi—you will cut; mama—my; aham—I; iti—thus;
prarūḍham—firmly fixed.

[Manu to Dhruva:] “Thus regaining your natural position
by rendering devotional service unto the Supreme Lord,
whose nature is unalloyed delight, who is possessed of
all potencies, and who dwells in the heart of all beings
as the Supersoul, you will gradually cut the tight knot
of the false conception of “I and Mine” and become
firmly fixed in Your svarūpa.”



Dāsya-rasa (love in servitude)



Dāsya-rasa includes Śānta with the addition of mamatā
and sevā

kevala 'svarūpa-jñāna' haya śānta-rase


                          555
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

'pūrṇaiśvarya-prabhu-jñāna' adhika haya dāsye

īśvara-jñāna, sambhrama-gaurava pracura

'sevā' kari' kṛṣṇe sukha dena nirantara

śāntera guṇa dāsye āche, adhika 'sevana'

ataeva dāsya-rasera ei 'dui' guṇa

CC Madhya 19.219-221

kevala—only; svarūpa-jñāna—knowledge of the
constitutional position of one’s self; haya—there is;
śānta-rase—in the mellow of neutrality; pūrṇa-aiśvarya-
prabhu-jñāna—knowledge of the full opulences of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhika—greater; haya—
becomes; dāsye—in the transcendental mellow of
servitude; īśvara-jñāna—knowledge of the supreme
controller; sambhrama-gaurava—awe and reverence; pracura
—abundant; sevā—service; kari——performing; kṛṣṇe—unto
Lord Kṛṣṇa; sukha—happiness; dena—gives; nirantara—
constantly; śāntera—of the platform of śānta-rasa; guṇa—
the qualities; dāsye—on the platform of servitude; āche—
are; adhika—additional; sevana—serving; ataeva—
therefore; dāsya-rasera—of the platform of dāsya-rasa;
ei dui guṇa—these two qualities (namely śānta and
dāsya).

In śānta-rasa one only realises his constitutional
position, but when one is raised to dāsya-rasa, he
better understands the full opulence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In dāsya-rasa, knowledge of the
Supreme Person is aiśvarya-jñāna, imbued with awe and
reverence. By rendering service to Kṛṣṇa, the devotee in
dāsya-rasa gives constant happiness to the Lord. The
qualities of śānta-rasa are also present in dāsya-rasa,
but in dāsya-rasa service is added. Thus dāsya-rasa has
the qualities of śānta-rasa and dāsya-rasa.



Śrīmad Bhāgavatam on Dāsya-rasa

itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā

dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena

māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa

sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ

SB 10.12.11/CC Mad 8.75, Antya 7.32/GKH (P)

ittham—in this way; satām—of the transcendentalists;
brahma-sukha-anubhūtyā—with Kṛṣṇa, the source of the
happiness of brahma; dāsyam—servitorship; gatānām—of the
devotees who have accepted; para-daivatena—with the
Supreme Lord; māyā-āśritānām—for those in the clutches
of material energy; nara-dārakeṇa—with Him who is like
an ordinary child; sākam—along with; vijahruḥ—played;
kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ—all these boys, who had accumulated
the results of life after life of pious activities.


                             556
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Having accumulated the results of pious activities for
many lives, the cowherd boys were able to play and
frolic with the same Kṛṣṇa who is the source of the
Brahman effulgence for jñānīs, who is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead for devotees in dāsya-rasa, and
who, for ordinary persons under the clutches of māyā, is
but another ordinary child.

Note: Rāmānanda Rāya cited this śloka to Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu as an example of the superiority of sakhya-
rasa over dāsya-rasa.



Śrīmad Bhāgavatam on the glories of Dāsya-rasa

tvayopabhukta-srag-gandha-vāso-'laokāra-carcitāḥ

ucchiṣṭa-bhojino dāsās tava māyāṁ jayema hi

SB 11.6.46

tvayā—by You; upabhukta—already enjoyed; srak—with the
garlands; gandha—fragrances; vāsaḥ—garments; alaṅkāra—
and ornaments; carcitāḥ—adorned; ucchiṣṭa—the remnants
of Your food; bhojinaḥ—eating; dāsāḥ—Your servants; tava
—Your; māyām—illusory energy; jayema—we will conquer; hi
—indeed.

Simply by decorating ourselves with the garlands,
fragrant oils, clothes, and ornaments that You have
already enjoyed, and by eating the remnants of Your
meals, we, Your servants will indeed conquer Your
illusory energy.



The glories of being a servant of Kṛṣṇa

alpa kari' nā māniha dāsa hena nāma

alpa bhāgye dāsa nāhi karena bhagavān

agre haya mukti, tabe sarva-bandha-nāśa

tabe se haite pāre śrī kṛṣṇera dāsa

CB Madhya 17.103-104

[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:] Those who are devoid of
a service attitude and do not wish to call themselves
"kṛṣṇa-dāsa," are devoid of good fortune. The Lord will
never accept them as His servants. Let those who would
be liberated from material bondage accept the service of
Kṛṣṇa.



When will I bloom in a life of servitude

bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ

praśānta-niḥśeṣa-mano-rathāntaraḥ


                          557
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

kadāham aikāntika-nitya-kiṅkaraḥ

praharṣayiṣyāmi sa-nātha-jīvitam

Śrī Stotra-ratna 43/CC Madhya 8.73/BR 3.11/PJ 3.17

bhavantam—You; eva—certainly; anucaran—serving;
nirantaraḥ—always; praśānta—pacified; niḥśeṣa—all;
manaḥ-ratha—desires; antaraḥ—other; kadā—when; aham—I;
aikāntika—exclusive; nitya—eternal; kiṅkaraḥ—servant;
praharṣayiṣyāmi—I shall become joyful; sa-nātha—with a
fitting master; jīvitam—living.

When will I bloom in a life of servitude as Your eternal
devotee, my heart pacified due to all other desires
being consumed by engagement in Your uninterrupted
service?



Sakhya-rasa (love in friendship)



In Sakhya-rasa there may be quarrels in which the Lord
is defeated by His friends

uvāha kṛṣṇo bhagavān śrīdāmānaṁ parājitaḥ

vṛṣabhaṁ bhadrasenas tu pralambo rohiṇī-sutam

SB 10.18.24

uvāha—carried; kṛṣṇaḥ—Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhagavān—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; śrīdāmānam—His devotee
and friend Śrīdāmā; parājitaḥ—being defeated; vṛṣabham—
Vṛṣabha; bhadrasenaḥ—Bhadrasena; tu—and; pralambaḥ—
Pralamba; rohiṇī-sutam—the son of Rohiṇī (Balarāma) .

Being defeated, Kṛṣṇa bore His friend Śrīdāma upon His
back; and Vrṣabha, Bhadrasena and Pralambha took
Balarāma, the powerful son of Rohinī, upon their back.



sakhā śuddha-sakhye kare, skandhe ārohaṇa

tumi kon baḍa loka,—tumi āmi sama

CC Ādi 4.25

sakhā—the friend; śuddha-sakhye—in pure friendship; kare
—does; skandhe—on the shoulders; ārohaṇa—mounting; tumi—
You; kon—what; baḍa—big; loka—person; tumi—You; āmi—I;
sama—the same.

My friends climb on My shoulders in pure friendship,
saying, “What kind of big man are You? You and I are
equal.

The Śrutis on Sakhya-rasa

dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyā sa-mānaṁ vṛkṣaṁ pariṣasvajāte


                            558
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

tayor anyaḥ pippalaṁ svādvaty anaśnam anyo 'bhicākasīti

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 4.6

The Supreme Lord is the friend of the living being. He
is so kind to him that He always accompanies the living
being. In the same way that two birds occupy the same
branch of a tree, the Lord sits in the heart of every
living being ready to bestow auspiciousness upon the
soul. In this way the Lord acts as the indwelling
witness, even while the soul pursues the fruits of karma
which give happiness and distress.



Sakhya-rasa includes śānta-rasa and dāsya-rasa plus
viśrambha (intimacy)

śāntera guṇa, dāsyera sevana sakhye dui haya

dāsyera 'sambhrama-gaurava'-sevā, sakhye 'viśvāsa'-maya

kāndhe caḍe, kāndhe caḍāya, kare krīḍa-raṇa

kṛṣṇe seve, kṛṣṇe karāya āpana-sevana!

viśrambha-pradhāna sakhya gaurava-sambhrama-hīna

ataeva sakhya-rasera 'tina' guṇa cihna

'mamatā' adhika, kṛṣṇe ātma-sama jñāna

ataeva sakhya-rasera vaśa bhagavān

CC Madhya 19.222-225

śāntera guṇa—qualities of śānta-rasa; dāsyera sevana—the
service of the dāsya-rasa; sakhye—on the platform of
fraternity; dui—the qualities of two rasas; haya—there
are; dāsyera—of the dāsya platform; sambhrama-gaurava—
with awe and reverence; sevā—service; sakhye—on the
platform of fraternity; viśvāsa-maya—mixed with
confidence; kāndhe—on the shoulders; caḍe—gets up;
kāndhe caḍāya—sometimes takes on his own shoulders; kare
—performs; krīḍā-raṇa—mock fighting; kṛṣṇe seve—serves
Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇe—from Kṛṣṇa; karāya—causes; āpana-sevana—his
own service; viśrambha-pradhāna sakhya—sakhya, where
intimacy is prominent; gaurava-sambhrama—awe and
reverence; hīna—devoid of; ataeva—therefore; sakhya-
rasera—of the platform of fraternity; tina guṇa—the
qualities of three rasas, namely śānta, dāsya and
sakhya; cihna—the symptom; mamatā—possessiveness; adhika
—increase; kṛṣṇe—with Kṛṣṇa; ātma-sama jñāna—the notion
of equality; ataeva—therefore; sakhya-rasera—by the
mellow of fraternity; vaśa—controlled; bhagavān—
Bhagavān.

The qualities of śānta-rasa and the service of dāsya-
rasa are both present on the platform of sakhya-rasa
(fraternity). On the sakhya platform, the qualities of
dāsya-rasa are mixed with the confidence of fraternity
instead of awe and reverence (aiśvarya). In sakhya-rasa,
the devotee sometimes offers the Lord service and
sometimes makes Kṛṣṇa serve him in exchange. In their

                            559
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

mock fighting, the cowherd boys would sometimes climb on
Kṛṣṇa’s shoulders and have Him carry them. They serve
Kṛṣṇa and sometimes they make Kṛṣṇa serve them. Awe and
reverence are absent on the platform of fraternity,
since this rasa is predominated by service imbued with
the confidence of mamatā (possessiveness, “He is mine”).
Therefore sakhya-rasa is characterized by the qualities
of three rasas. On this platform, Kṛṣṇa Bhagavān is
controlled by the devotees who are intimate with Him and
think themselves equal to Him.



Vātsalya-rasa (parental love)



Vātsalya-rasa includes Śānta + Dāsya + Sakhya +
Nurturing and Chastising

vātsalye śāntera guṇa, dāsyera sevana

sei sei sevanera ihāṅ nāma “pālana—

sakhyera guṇa “asaṅkoca—, “agaurava— sāra

mamatādhikye tāḍana-bhartsana-vyavahāra

āpanāre “pālaka— jñāna, kṛṣṇe “pālya—-jñāna

“cāri— guṇe vātsalya rasa amṛta-samāna

CC Madhya 19.226-228

vātsalye—on the platform of parental love; śāntera guṇa—
the qualities of śānta-rasa; dāsyera sevana—the service
of dāsya-rasa; sei sei sevanera—the service moods of
śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa and sakhya-rasa; ihāṅ—on this
platform; nāma—named; pālana—protection; sakhyera guṇa—
the mood of sakhya (fraternity); asaṅkoca—without any
formality; agaurava—without any reverence; sāra—the
essence; mamatā-adhikye—on account of greater
possessiveness; tāḍana—of chastisement; bhartsana—of
rebuking; vyavahāra—behavior; āpanāre—unto himself;
pālaka jñāna—the notion of a guardian; kṛṣṇe—in Kṛṣṇa;
pālya—as object of protection; jñāna—notion; cāri—four;
guṇe—in qualities; vātsalya-rasa—the mellow of parental
love; amṛta-samāna—like nectar.

In vātsalya-rasa (parental love), the qualities of
śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa, and sakhya-rasa are transformed
into a form of service called pālana-poṣaṇa, protecting
and nourishing (guardianship). The essence of fraternal
love is intimacy devoid of the formality and reverence
found in dāsya-rasa. Due to an increase in possessivenes
(mamatā), the devotee endowed with the mood of paternal
love chastises and rebukes the Lord as ordinary parents
do (tāḍana-bhartsana). In paternal love the devotee
considers himself the Lord's maintainer and protector.
Thus the Lord is the object of nourishment and
protection, like a son. Since this mellow has the
combined qualities of śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa, sakhya-
rasa, and vātsalya-rasa, it is just like nectar.


                          560
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017



How greatly fortunate are the cows and ladies of
Vṛndāvana

aho —ti-dhanyā vraja-go-ramaṇyaḥ

stanyāmṛtaṁ pītam atīva te mudā

yāsāṁ vibho vatsatarātmajātmanā

yat-tṛptaye —dyāpi na cālam adhvarāḥ

SB 10.14.31/GKH (P)

aho—oh; ati-dhanyāḥ—most fortunate; vraja—of Vṛndāvana;
go—the cows; ramaṇyaḥ—and the gopīs; stanya—the breast-
milk; amṛtam—which is like nectar; pītam—has been drunk;
atīva—fully; te—by You; mudā—with satisfaction; yāsām—of
whom; vibho—O almighty Lord; vatsatara-ātmaja-ātmanā—in
the form of the calves and the sons of the cowherd
women; yat—whose; tṛptaye—for the satisfaction; adya api
—even until now; na—not; ca—and; alam—sufficient;
adhvarāḥ—the Vedic sacrifices.

O almighty Lord, how greatly fortunate are the cows and
ladies of Vṛndāvana, the nectar of whose breast-milk You
have happily drunk to Your full satisfaction, taking the
form of their calves and children! All the Vedic
sacrifices performed from time immemorial up to the
present day have not given You as much satisfaction.



mātā more putra-bhāve karena bandhana

atihīna-jñāne kare lālana pālana

CC Ādi 4.24

mātā—mother; more—Me; putra-bhāve—in the mood of
(considering Me) her son; karena—does; bandhana—binding;
ati-hīna-jñāne—in thinking very helpless; kare—does;
lālana—nourishing; pālana—protecting.

Mother sometimes binds Me as her son. She nourishes and
protects Me, thinking Me utterly helpless.



The sūtra śloka of vātsalya-rasa

trayyā copaniṣadbhiś ca sāṅkhya-yogaiś ca sātvataiḥ

upagīyamāna-māhātmyaṁ hariṁ sāmanyatātmajam

SB 10.8.45

trayyā—by studying the three Vedas (Sāma, Yajur and
Atharva); ca—also; upaniṣadbhiḥ ca—and by studying the
Vedic knowledge of the Upaniṣads; sāṅkhya-yogaiḥ—by
reading the literature of sāṅkhya-yoga; ca—and;
sātvataiḥ—by the great sages and devotees, or by reading
Vaiṣṇava-tantra, Pañcarātras; upagīyamāna-māhātmyam—

                          561
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

whose glories are worshiped; harim—unto Śrī Hari; sā—
she; amanyata—considered (ordinary); ātmajam—as her own
son.

The glories of Śrī Hari are studied through the three
Vedas, the Upaniṣads, the literature of Sāṅkhya-yoga,
and other Vaiṣṇava literatures, yet mother Yaśodā
considered that Supreme Person her ordinary child.
(Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī states that this śloka is
the sūtra of vātsalya-līlā).



The fortune of Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā

nandaḥ kim akarod brahman śreya evaṁ mahodayam

yaśodā ca mahā-bhāgā papau yasyāḥ stanaṁ hariḥ

SB 10.8.46/CC Mad 8.77

śrī-rājā uvāca—Mahārāja Parīkṣit further inquired (from
Śukadeva Gosvāmī); nandaḥ—Mahārāja Nanda; kim—what;
akarot—performed; brahman—O learned brāhmaṇa; śreyaḥ—
auspicious activities, like performing penances and
austerities; evam—as exhibited by him; mahā-udayam—from
which they achieved the greatest perfection; yaśodā—
mother Yaśodā; ca—also; mahā-bhāgā—most fortunate; papau
—drank; yasyāḥ—of whom; stanam—the breast milk; hariḥ—
Śrī Hari.

[Having heard of the great fortune of mother Yaśodā,
Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī:] O
learned brāhmaṇa, mother Yaśodā’s breast milk was sucked
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What past
auspicious activities did she and Nanda Mahārāja perform
to achieve such perfection in ecstatic love?



Mādhurya-rasa (conjugal love)



Mādhurya-rasa includes Śānta + Dāsya + Sakhya + Vātsalya
plus the desire to offer one's whole body in loving
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa (nija-aṅga diyā)



madhura-rase kṛṣṇa-niṣṭhā, sevā atiśaya

sakhyera asaṅkoca, lālana-mamatādhikya haya

kānta-bhāve nijāṅga diyā karena sevana

ataeva madhura-rasera haya “pañca— guṇa

ākāśādi guṇa yena para para bhūte

eka-dui-tina-cāri krame pañca pṛthivīte

ei-mata madhure saba bhāva-samāhāra


                          562
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

ataeva āsvādādhikye kare camatkāra

CC Madhya 19.231-234

madhura-rase—on the platform of conjugal love; kṛṣṇa-
niṣṭhā—being fixed on Kṛṣṇa; sevā atiśaya—an intensity
of service mood; sakhyera—of the platform of fraternity;
asaṅkoca—uninhibited; lālana—nourishing; mamatā-adhikya—
increased sense of mamatā (possessiveness); haya—there
is; kānta-bhāve—on the platform of conjugal love; nija-
aṅga—own body; diyā—offering; karena—executes; sevana—
service; ataeva—therefore; madhura-rasera—of the mellow
of conjugal love; haya—there are; pañca guṇa—five kinds
of transcendental qualities; ākāśa-ādi—beginning with
the sky; guṇa—qualities; yena—as; para para—one after
another; bhūte—in the material elements; eka—one; dui—
two; tina—three; cāri—four; krame—in this way; pañca—all
five qualities; pṛthivīte—in earth; ei mata—in this way;
madhure—on the platform of conjugal love; saba—all;
bhāva-samāhāra—amalgamation of all five bhāvas (moods);
ataeva—therefore; āsvāda-adhikye—the intensified
tasting; kare camatkāra—is astonishingly relishable.

In conjugal love, attachment for Kṛṣṇa, rendering
service to Him, the uninhibited, playful feelings of
fraternity and the feelings of protecting and
nourishing, all increase in intimacy and intensity. In
conjugal love, the devotee offers his body in the
service of the Lord. Thus on this platform all five
transcendental qualities are present. All the qualities
of matter evolve one after another in the material
sphere, beginning with the element of space. By gradual
evolution, first one quality develops, then two, then
three and four, until all five qualities are found in
the element earth. Similarly, all the service moods of
the devotees in the other four rasas are amalgamated
within conjugal love. Thus this intensified rasa is
astonishingly relishable.



The qualities and taste increase with every successive
rasa

guṇādhikye svādādhikya bāḍe prati-rase

śānta-dāsya-sakhya-vātsalyera guṇa madhurete vaise

CC Madhya 8.86

guṇa-ādhikye—by the increase of transcendental
qualities; svāda-ādhikya—increase of taste; bāḍe—
increases; prati-rase—in each mellow; śānta—of
neutrality; dāsya—of servitude; sakhya—of fraternity;
vātsalyera—and of parental affection; guṇa—the
qualities; madhurete—in the conjugal mellow; vaise—
appear.

As the qualities increase, so the taste also increases
in each and every mellow. Therefore the qualities found
in śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa, sakhya-rasa and vātsalya-rasa
are all manifested in conjugal love [mādhurya-rasa].



                          563
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Complete bhakti is possible only by mādhurya-rasa

paripūrṇa-kṛṣṇa-prāpti ei “premā— haite

ei premāra vaśa kṛṣṇa - kahe bhāgavate

CC Madhya 8.88

paripūrṇa—completely full; kṛṣṇa-prāpti—achievement of
the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ei—this; premā—pure love of
God; haite—from; ei premāra—of this type of prema; vaśa—
under the control; kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; kahe—it is said;
bhāgavate—in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Complete attainment of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
made possible only in mādhurya-rasa, or conjugal love.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is indeed brought under the control of such
love. This is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. (mayi bhaktir
hi bhūtānām - SB 10.82.44)

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda: Conjugal love
(mādhurya-rasa) is also known as śṛṅgāra-rasa. It is the
conclusion of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that in the complete
combination of loving service to the Lord—namely in
conjugal love—the Supreme Lord fully agrees to be under
the control of the devotee. The highest form of conjugal
love is represented by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; therefore in
the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa we can see that Kṛṣṇa is
always subjugated by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s influence. (CC
Madhya 8.88 pt)



The gopīs say: To see You is the perfection of the eyes

akṣaṇvatāṁ phalam idaṁ na paraṁ vidāmaḥ

sakhyaḥ paśūn anaviveśayator vayasyaiḥ

vaktraṁ vrajeśa-sutayor anuveṇu-juṣṭaṁ

yair vā nipītam anurakta-kaṭākṣa-mokṣam

SB 10.21.7 (Veṇu-gīta)/CC Ādi 4.155/STB p. 56/GKH (P)

śrī-gopyaḥ ūcuḥ—the gopīs said; akṣaṇvatām—of those who
have eyes; phalam—the success; idam—this (beautiful
sight of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as He enters Vṛndāvana with the cows
and cowherd boys); na—not; param—other (success of the
eyes); vidāmaḥ—we know; sakhyaḥ—O friends; paśūn—the
cows; anuviveśayatoḥ—entering one forest after another;
vayasyaiḥ—with Their friends of the same age; vaktram—
the sweetness of Their faces; vraja-īśa—of Mahārāja
Nanda; sutayoḥ—of the two sons Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma [or
Kṛṣṇa the son of Nanda and Rādhikā the daughter of King
Vṛṣabhānu]; anu-veṇu-juṣṭam—following behind and
touching the flute to His lips; yaiḥ—by those who; vā—
and; nipītam—drinking (the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s sidelong
glances); anurakta—filled with love; kaṭa-akṣa—sidelong
glances; mokṣam—pouring on (smiles, laughter and
sidelong glances).

The gopīs began to speak among themselves: “O sakhīs! We

                          564
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

think that for those who have eyes, there is no greater
object of vision. Success of the eyes lies in beholding
this object alone; we know of no other. It is the vision
of the two sons of Mahārāja Nanda, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva, accompanied by the gopas, as They enter the
forest taking the cows, or as They bring them back to
Vṛndāvana. They hold Their flutes to Their lips and look
upon us with mild smiles and amorous sidelong glances
filled with love. At that time, we drink the sweetness
of Their faces.”



The gopīs see the Pulindī girls through the eyes of
prema

kvemāḥ striyo vana-carīr vyabhicāra-duṣṭāḥ

kṛṣṇe kva caiṣa paramātmani rūḍha-bhāvaḥ

nanv īśvaro —nubhajato —viduṣo —pi sākṣāc

chreyas tanoty agada-rāja ivopayuktaḥ

SB 10.47.59/GKH (P)

kva—where, in comparison; imāḥ—these; striyaḥ—(Pulindī)
women; vana—in the forests; carīḥ—who wander; vyabhicāra
—by improper behavior; duṣṭāḥ—contaminated; kṛṣṇe—for
Kṛṣṇa; kva ca—and where; eṣaḥ—this; parama-ātmani—for
the Supreme Soul; rūḍha-bhāvaḥ—stage of perfect love
(known technically as mahā-bhāva); nanu—certainly;
īśvaraḥ—the Personality of Godhead; anubhajataḥ—to one
who constantly worships Him; aviduṣaḥ—not learned; api—
even though; sākṣāt—directly; śreyaḥ—the highest good;
tanoti—bestows; agada-rājaḥ—the king of medicines
(namely, the nectar which the demigods drink for long
life); iva—as if; upayuktaḥ—taken.

[The gopīs said:] How amazing it is that these simple
women who wander about the forest, seemingly spoiled by
improper behavior, have achieved the perfection of
unalloyed love for Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Soul! Still, it is
true that the Supreme Lord Himself awards His blessings
even to an ignorant worshiper, just as the best medicine
works even when taken by a person ignorant of its
ingredients.

In this connection see the śloka “pūrṇāḥ pulindya
urugāya— SB 10.21.17

Thus ends section 3) Ślokas Delineating the Five Rasas



4) Other aspects of rasa



Sthāyi-bhāva - permanent ecstasy, eternally inherent
mood towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa

ei pañca sthāyī bhāva haya pañca “rasa—


                           565
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

ye-rase bhakta “sukhī—, kṛṣṇa haya “vaśa—

CC Mad 23.46

ei pañca—these five kinds of transcendental mellows;
sthāyī bhāva—permanent ecstatic moods; haya—become;
pañca rasa—five kinds of transcendental mellows; ye-rase
—in these mellows; bhakta sukhī—a devotee becomes happy;
kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; haya—becomes; vaśa—under the control.

These five transcendental mellows śānta, dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya and mādhurya rasa are called sthāyī bhāva or
the inherent moods which exist permanently in the heart
of the respective devotees. Once situatd in that rasa,
one becomes completelyhappy. Kṛṣṇa also becomes inclined
towards such a devotee and comes under his or her
control.



Sthāyī bhāva is the predominant emotion within the
bhakta’s heart

aviruddhān viruddhāṁś ca bhāvān yo vaśatāṁ nayan

su-rājeva virājeta sa sthāyī bhāva ucyate

sthāyī bhāvo —tra sa proktaḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-viṣayā ratiḥ

BRS 2.5.1/BRSB p. 189

Sthāyī bhāva is the predominant emotion within the
bhakta’s heart, which is so strong that it controls and
rules over all other emotions, both favorable (i.e.
laughter) and unfavourable (i.e. anger) just as a king
rules over his citizens. This sthāyī bhāva is kṛṣṇa-
rati, attachment for Śrī Kṛṣṇa; the devotee’s permanent
relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Subdivisions of Rasa - anubhāvas and sāttvika-bhāvas

anubhāva - smita, nṛtya, gītādi udbhāsvara

stambhādi - sāttvika anubhāvera bhitara

CC Madhya 23.51

anubhāva—subordinate ecstasy; smita—smiling; nṛtya—
dancing; gīta-ādi—songs and so on; udbhāsvara—symptoms
of bodily manifestation; stambha-ādi—being stunned and
others; sāttvika—natural; anubhāvera bhitara—within the
category of subordinate ecstasies.

There is one kind of anubhāva or subordinate ecstasies,
(which are voluntary actions) such as smiling, dancing,
and singing; as well as udbhāsvaras (involuntary
manifestations in the body) such as being stunned which
are also in the category of anubhāva. They are called
sāttvika-bhāva or moods which come about following a
transformation of one’s sattva or existence.



Thirty-three varieties of vyabhicāri (transitory bhāvas)

                          566
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


nirveda-harṣādi tetriśa 'vyabhicāri'

saba mili' 'rasa' haya camatkāra-kārī

CC Madhya 23.52

nirveda-harṣa-ādi—complete despondency, jubilation and
so on; tetriśa—thirty-three; vyabhicārī—transitory
bhāvas; saba mili——all meeting together; rasa—the
mellow; haya—becomes; camatkāra-kārī—a cause of wonder.

There are other ingredients, beginning with complete
despondency and jubilation. Altogether, there are
thirty-three varieties of vyabhicāri-bhāvas (transitory
moods) and when these combine with one another in
various ways, they cause the relishing of rasa to be
astonishingly wonderful.



Sthāyi-bhāva, together with different ingredients of
subordinate bhāvas are transformed into bhakti-rasa

premādika sthāyi-bhāva sāmagrī-milane

kṛṣṇa-bhakti rasa-rūpe pāya pariṇāme

vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika, vyabhicārī

sthāyi-bhāva 'rasa' haya ei cāri mili'

CC Madhya 23.47-48

prema-ādika—prema, beginning with śānta, dāsya and so
on; sthāyi-bhāva—the permanent ecstasies; sāmagrī-milane
—by mixing with other ingredients; kṛṣṇa-bhakti—
devotional service to Kṛṣṇa; rasa-rūpe—composed of
transcendental mellows; pāya—becomes; pariṇāme—by
transformation; vibhāva—special ecstasy; anubhāva—
subordinate ecstasy; sāttvika—natural ecstasy;
vyabhicārī—transitory ecstasy; sthāyi-bhāva—permanent
ecstasy; rasa—mellow; haya—becomes; ei cāri—these four;
mili——meeting.

When the permanent ecstasy (stāyi-bhāva) is mixed with
the different ingredients of subordinate bhāvas,
devotion in ecstasy (bhāva) is transformed and becomes
transcendental mellows (bhakti-rasa). The permanent
ecstasy becomes increasingly relishable through the
mixture of the four ingredients, special ecstasy
(vibhāva), subordinate ecstasy (anubhāva), natural
ecstasy (sāttvika), and transitory ecstasy (vybhicārī).

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-sudhā-pānād deha-daihika-vismṛteḥ

teṣāṁ bhautika-dehe'pi sac-cid-ānanda-rūpatā

Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta 2.3.45

kṛṣṇa—to Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhakti—of pure devotional service;
sudhā—of the nectar; pānāt—from drinking; deha—of the
body; daihika—and things in relation to the body;
vismṛteḥ—forgetfulness; teṣām—of them; bhautika—

                             567
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

material; dehe—in the body; api—even; sat—eternal; cit—
full of knowledge; ānanda—and full of bliss; rūpata—the
state of having a form.

Drinking the nectar of kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa, the living
being forgets the gross and subtle material bodies and
becomes absorbed in transcendence. The body of such a
devotee, although material, attains the qualities sat,
cit and ānanda, or eternity, knowledge, and bliss.



Two kinds of Vibhāva, causes for tasting bhakti-rasa

dvi-vidha “vibhāva— ālambana, uddīpana

vaṁśī-svarādi “uddīpana—, kṛṣṇādi “ālambana—

CC Mad 23.50

dvi-vidha—two kinds; vibhāva—particular ecstasy;
ālambana—the support; uddīpana—stimulant; vaṁśī-svara-
ādi—such as the vibration of the flute; uddīpana—
stimulant; kṛṣṇa-ādi—Kṛṣṇa and others; ālambana—the
support.

There are two kinds of vibhāva, causes for tasting
bhakti-rasa. One is called ālambana—the support for
bhakti-rasa, and the other is called uddīpana—the
stimuli for bhakti-rasa. The vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute
is an example of uddīpana, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself is an
example of ālambana.



Two kinds of Ālambana, Viṣaya and Āśraya

kṛṣṇaś ca kṛṣṇa-bhaktaś ca buddhairālambanā matāḥ

ratyāder-viṣayatvena tathādhāratayā'pi ca

BRS 2.1.16

According to   the learned scholars, Lord Kṛṣṇa and His
devotees are   the two kinds of ālambana-vibhāva. Lord
Kṛṣṇa is the   object of love (viṣaya) and the devotee is
the abode of   the love (āśraya).



Śrīmatī Rādhārānī is the best of all Āśrayas (abodes of
prema)

anayārādhito nūnaṁ bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ

yan no vihāya govindaḥ prīto yām anayad rahaḥ

SB 10.30.28

anayā—by this one; ārādhitaḥ—worshiped; nūnam—certainly;
bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ—Lord
Kṛṣṇa; īśvaraḥ—the Supreme Lord; yat—from which; naḥ—us;
vihāya—leaving behind; govindaḥ—Govinda; prītaḥ—pleased;
yām—whom; anayat—lead; rahaḥ—to a secluded place.

                            568
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


[The Vraja-gopīs said:] O my friend! Leaving us aside
Kṛṣṇa has gone off to a secluded place with a particular
gopī. She must truly be expert in worshiping
(anayārādhito) Him, for He was so pleased with Her
service that He has left us all behind.

kaṁsārir api saṁsāra-vāsanābaddha-śṛnkhalām

rādhām ādhāya hṛdaye tatyāja vraja-sundarīḥ

Gīta Govinda 3.1/BRS 3.5.10/CC Ādi 4.219, Madhya 8.106

kaṁsa-ariḥ—Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Kaṁsa; api—moreover;
saṁsāra—for the essence of enjoyment (rāsa-līlā); vāsanā
—by the desire; baddha—tied on; śṛṅkhalām—which was like
the ropes; rādhām—Śrīmatī Rādhikā; ādhāya—taking; hṛdaye
—in the heart; tatyāja—left aside; vraja-sundarīḥ—the
other gopīs.

When Rādhā left the arena of the rāsa dance out of
pride, Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Kaṁsa, gave up the
association of the other beautiful gopīs and left the
arena, thinking only of Rādhā and being bound by the
ropes of Her matchless prema.



Direct and indirect tasting of rasa

etāvad eva jijñāsyaṁ tattva-jijñāsunātmanaḥ

anvaya-vyatirekābhyāṁ yat syāt sarvatra sarvadā

SB 2.9.36/CC Ādi 1.56/BR 2.15

etāvat—up to this; eva—certainly; jijñāsyam—is to be
inquired; tattva—the Absolute Truth; jijñāsunā—by the
student; ātmanaḥ—of the Self; anvaya—direct meaning;
vyatirekābhyām—indirect, confidential meaning; yat—
whatever; syāt—it may be; sarvatra—in all circumstances;
sarvadā—at all times.

One who is inquisitive about the truth of the self
(ātma-tattva) inquires always and everywhere through
direct (anvaya) and indirect (vyatireka) means of
deliberation about that Person who is rasa personified
(raso vai saḥ).

5) Kṛṣṇa Reciprocates According to One’s Particular Mood



Kṛṣṇa reciprocates with His devotees according to their
mood (bhāva)

āmāke ta— ye ye bhakta bhaje yei bhāve

tāre se se bhāve bhaji - e mora svabhāve

CC Ādi 4.19

āmāke—Me; ta’—certainly; ye ye—whatever; bhakta—devotee;
bhaje—worships; yei—which; bhāve—in the mood; tāre—him;

                          569
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

se se—that; bhāve—in the mood; bhaji—I reciprocate; e—
this; mora—My; svabhāve—in the nature.

In whatever transcendental mellow My devotee worships
Me, I reciprocate with him. That is My nature.



As My devotees surrender unto Me, I reward them
accordingly

ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

mama vartmānuvartante manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

BG 4.11/CC Mad 4.20/STB p. 61/BPKG p. 459

ye—all who; yathā—as; mām—unto Me; prapadyante—
surrender; tān—them; tathā—so; eva—certainly; bhajāmi—
reward; aham—I; mama—My; vartma—path; anuvartante—
follow; manuṣyāḥ—all men; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā;
sarvaśaḥ—in all respects.

In whatever way My devotees surrender unto Me, I reward
them accordingly. Everyone follows My path in all
respects, O son of Pṛthā.



However, the prema of the gopīs is so exalted that Kṛṣṇa
is unable to keep His promise

na pāraye —haṁ niravadya-saṁyujāṁ

sva-sādhu-kṛtyaṁ vibudhāyuṣāpi vaḥ

yā mābhajan durjaya-geha-śṛṅkhalāḥ

saṁvṛścya tad vaḥ pratiyātu sādhunā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.32.22/CC Ādi 4.180/BMP p. 418/BR
7.23 pt/ORY p. 199/STB p. 64

na—not; pāraye—am able to make; aham—I; niravadya-
saṁyujām—to those who are completely free from deceit;
sva-sādhu-kṛtyam—proper compensation; vibudha-āyuṣā—with
a lifetime as long as that of the demigods; api—
although; vaḥ—to you; yāḥ—who; mā—Me; abhajan—have
worshiped; durjara—difficult to overcome; geha-śṛṅkhalāḥ
—the chains of household life; saṁvṛścya—cutting; tat—
that; vaḥ—of you; pratiyātu—let it be returned; sādhunā—
by the good activity itself.

[When the gopīs were overwhelmed with dissatisfaction
due to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s absence from the rāsa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa
returned to them and told them:] My dear gopīs, our
meeting is certainly free of all material contamination.
I must admit that in many lives it would be impossible
for Me to repay My debt to you because you have cut off
the shackles of family life which are so difficult to
break, just to search for Me. Consequently I am unable
to repay you. Therefore please be satisfied with your
saintly activities in this regard.


                          570
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017



The Lord’s pastimes are wonderful and rasika for
everyone

yan martya-līlaupayikaṁ sva-yoga-

māyā-balaṁ darśayatā gṛhītam

vismāpanaṁ svasya ca saubhagarddheḥ

paraṁ padaṁ bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇāṅgam

SB 3.2.12/CC Mad 21.100/BR 6.17/GKH (P)

yat—His eternal form which; martya—mortal world; līlā-
upayikam—just suitable for the pastimes; sva-yoga-māyā-
balam—potency of the internal energy; darśayatā—through
manifestation; gṛhītam—took; vismāpanam—wonderful;
svasya—of His own; ca—and; saubhaga-ṛddheḥ—of the
opulent; param—supreme; padam—ultimate stand; bhūṣaṇa—
ornament; bhūṣaṇa-aṅgam—of the ornaments.

The astonishing form which Śrī Kṛṣṇa accepted for the
purpose of displaying His transcendental opulence and
auspicious abode was created by His internal potency
Yogamāyā and was just suitable for His pastimes within
the material world. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s body was so attractive
that it beautified its own ornaments, thus becoming
known as the ornament of all ornaments.



Kṛṣṇa is known as the all-attractive one

puruṣa, yoṣit, kibā sthāvara-jaṅgama

sarva-cittākarṣaka, sākṣāt manmatha-madana

CC Mad 8.139

puruṣa—a male; yoṣit—a female; kibā—whether; sthāvara-
jaṅgama—immobile and mobile living entities; sarva—of
everyone; citta-ākarṣaka—the attractor of the minds;
sākṣāt—directly; manmatha-madana—the Cupid of Cupid
himself.

The very name Kṛṣṇa means that He attracts even Cupid.
He is therefore attractive to everyone—whether male or
female, moving or inert living entities. Indeed, Kṛṣṇa
is known as the all-attractive one.



Whoever directs his mind towards Kṛṣṇa will become Kṛṣṇa
conscious

kāmaṁ krodhaṁ bhayaṁ snehaṁ aikyaṁ sauhṛdam eva ca

nityaṁ harau vidadhato yānti tan-mayatāṁ hi te

SB 10.29.15

kāmam—lust; krodham—anger; bhayam—fear; sneham—loving

                          571
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

affection; aikyam—unity; sauhṛdam—friendship; eva ca—
also; nityam—always; harau—for Lord Hari; vidadhataḥ—
exhibiting; yānti—they achieve; tat-mayatām—absorption
in Him; hi—indeed; te—such persons.

Persons who constantly direct their lust, anger, fear,
protective affection, feeling of impersonal oneness or
friendship towards Lord Hari are sure to become absorbed
in thought of Him.



One receives Kṛṣṇa’s mercy simply by concentrating one’s
mind upon Him

kāmād dveṣād bhayāt snehāt yathā bhaktyeśvare manaḥ

āveśya tad-aghaṁ hitvā bahavas tad-gatiṁ gatāḥ

SB 7.1.30/JD ch. 21

kāmāt—from lust; dveṣāt—from hatred; bhayāt—from fear;
snehāt—from affection; yathā—as well as; bhaktyā—by
devotion; īśvare—in the Supreme; manaḥ—the mind; āveśya—
absorbing; tat—of that; agham—sin; hitvā—giving up;
bahavaḥ—many; tat—of that; gatim—path of liberation;
gatāḥ—attained.

Many, many persons have attained liberation simply by
thinking of Kṛṣṇa with great absorbtion and giving up
sinful activities. This great absorbtion may be due to
lusty desires, inimical feelings, fear, affection or
devotional service. (I shall now explain how one
receives Kṛṣṇa’s mercy simply by concentrating one’s
mind upon Him).



Whatever mood one fosters towards Kṛṣṇa, he will attain
His mercy

gopyaḥ kāmād bhayāt kaṁso dveṣāc caidyādayo nṛpāḥ

sambandhād vṛṣṇayaḥ snehāt yūyaṁ bhaktyā vayaṁ vibho

SB 7.1.31

gopyaḥ—the gopīs; kāmāt—out of amorous desires; bhayāt—
out of fear; kaṁsaḥ—King Kaṁsa; dveṣāt—out of envy;
caidya-ādayaḥ—Śiśupāla and others; nṛpāḥ—kings;
sambandhāt—out of kinship; vṛṣṇayaḥ—the Vṛṣṇis or the
Yādavas; snehāt—out of affection; yūyam—you (the
Pāṇḍavas); bhaktyā—by devotional service; vayam—we;
vibho—O great King.

My dear King Yudhiṣṭhira, the gopīs by their amorous
desires, Kaṁsa by fear, Śiśupāla and other kings by
envy, the Yādus by their familial relationship with
Kṛṣṇa, you Pāṇḍavas by your great affection for Kṛṣṇa,
and we, the general devotees, by our devotional service,
have obtained the mercy of Kṛṣṇa.

yaṁ krodha-kāma-sahaja-praṇayādi-bhīti-


                          572
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

vātsalya-moha-guru-gaurava-sevya-bhāvaiḥ

sañcintya tasya sadṛśīṁ tanum āpur ete

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā 55

yam — whom; krodha — of anger (such as that shown by
Śiśupāla toward Kṛṣṇa out of enmity); kāma — of divine
lust felt by the vraja-gopīs, out of their desire to
give Kṛṣṇa pleasure (in other words mādhurya-rasa or
prema); sahajapraṇaya-ādi — of sakhya-bhāva, the
spontaneous friendly affection of the cowherd friends
(sakhās) such as Śrīdāmā, Subala, etc.; bhīti — of
incessant terror felt by persons such as Kaṁsa,
accompanied by the fearful thought, “I shall be slain by
Kṛṣṇa!”; vātsalya — of parental affection felt by
persons headed by Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā; moha — of
delusion felt by those of the Māyāvādī cult, i.e. a mood
of total forgetfulness in the contemplation of sāyujya-
mukti (liberation through merging one’s identity with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s impersonal aspect of the non-differentiated
divine light, known as nirbheda-brahma); guru-gaurava —
of śānta-bhāva, wherein one contemplates Him as a great
personage, worthy of respect; sevya — of dāsya-bhāva,
the mood of servitude rendered by those who contemplate
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the sole object worthy of their service;
bhāvaiḥ — through the moods; sañcintya — by full
contemplation; tasya — for His service; sadṛśīm — an
appropriate; tanum — body; āpuḥ — attain; ete — those
persons; ādi-puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person,
Śrī Govinda; tam — of that; aham bhajāmi — I engage in
bhajana.

Those who contemplate Him with feelings of lust, anger,
the natural intimacy of friendship, fear, parental
affection, bewilderment, reverence and servitude, attain
bodies (suitable for the eternal associates of Bhagavān)
with various degrees of beauty and qualities
corresponding to their individual meditations. I worship
that original personality, Govinda.

6) Kṛṣṇa is Controlled Only by Mādhurya (not Aiśvarya)

(controlled by love, not by awe and reverence)



Kṛṣṇa is not satisfied with prema enfeebled by awe and
reverence

aiśvarya-jñānete saba jagat miśrita

aiśvarya-śithila-preme nā hi mora prīta

CC Ādi 3.16, 4.17

aiśvarya-jñānete—with knowledge of the opulences; saba—
all; jagat—the world; miśrita—mixed; aiśvarya-śithila-
preme—to love enfeebled by a reverential attitude, the
mood that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Godhead; nā hi—there is
not; mora—My; prīta—attraction.


                          573
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Knowing My opulences and majesty, the whole world looks
upon Me with awe and reverence. But devotion made feeble
by such a mood of aiśvarya certainly does not attract
Me.



Love in awe and reverence cannot control Me

āmāre īśvara māne, āpanāke hīna

tāra preme vaśa āmi nā ha-i adhīna

CC Ādi 4.18

āmāre—Me; īśvara—the Lord; māne—regards; āpanāke—
himself; hīna—low; tāra—of him; preme—by the love; vaśa—
controlled; āmi—I; nā ha-i—am not; adhīna—subservient.

If one regards Me as the Supreme Lord and himself as a
subordinate, I do not become subservient to his love,
nor can it control Me.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is conquered only by those free from knowledge
of aiśvarya

itīdṛk-sva-līlābhir ānanda-kuṇḍe

sva-ghoṣaṁ nimajjantam ākhyāpayantam

tadīyeśita-jñeṣu bhaktair jitatvaṁ

punaḥ prematas taṁ śatāvṛtti vande

Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam 3, Padma-Purāṇa/HBV/SGG p. 142

iti—thus; īdṛk-sva-līlābhiḥ—by such activities; ānanda-
kuṇḍe—in a lake of bliss; sva-ghoṣam—His village or
Vraja; nimajjantam—submerging; ākhyāpayantam—
disclosing; tadīya-īśita-jñeṣu—to those aware of His
aiśvarya; bhaktaiḥ jitatvam— Who is conquered by the
devotees; punaḥ— again; premataḥ—out of affection; tam—
to Him; śata-āvṛtti—hundred of times; vande—I offer
prayers (or chant His glories).

By childhood pastimes such as this (Dāmodara-līlā), He
perpetually immerses the inhabitants of Gokula (the
Vrajavāsīs) in pools of pure bliss, and through them
teaches the devotees desirous of knowing His aspect of
supreme opulence and majesty that He is conquered only
by those who are free from knowledge of His aiśvarya.
With great love I again and again worship that Dāmodara
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is superior to Nārāyaṇa from the viewpoint of
rasa-tattva

siddhānta tas tv abhede “pi śrīśa-kṛṣṇa-svarupayoḥ

rasenotkṛṣyate kṛṣṇaḥ kṛṣṇa-rūpam eṣā rasa-sthitiḥ

BRS 1.2.59/BTV ch. 1

                          574
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Although from the viewpoint of siddhānta Nārāyaṇa and
Kṛṣṇa are non-different, Kṛṣṇa is superior from the
viewpoint of rasa-tattva because of possessing more rasa
(all twelve rasas in full). The form of Kṛṣṇa is the
abode of all rasa.



Kṛṣṇa becomes controlled by the prema of His eternal
associates in Vraja

mora putra, mora sakhā, mora prāṇa-pati

ei-bhāve yei more kare śuddha-bhakti

āpanāke baḍa māne, āmāre sama-hīna

sei bhāve ha-i āmi tāhāra adhīna

CC Ādi 4.21-22

mora—my; putra—son; mora—my; sakhā—friend; mora—my;
prāṇa-pati—lord of life; ei bhāve—in this way; yei—those
who; more—unto Me; kare—do; śuddha-bhakti—pure devotion;
āpanāke—himself; baḍa—great; māne—he regards; āmāre—Me;
sama—equal; hīna—or lower; sei bhāve—in that way; ha-i—
am; āmi—I; tāhāra—to him; adhīna—subordinate.

If one performs pure loving devotion to Me, considering
Me his son, his friend or his beloved, regarding himself
as great and considering Me his equal or inferior, I
become subordinate to him.

Thus ends section 6) Kṛṣṇa is Controlled Only by
Mādhurya




7) Madhurya-rasa in Parakīyā-bhāva

(the highest form of Prema)

parakīyā-bhāve ati rasera ullāsa

vraja vinā ihāra anyatra nāhi vāsa

CC Ādi 4.47

parakīyā-bhāve—in the mood of parakīyā, or conjugal
relations outside of marriage; ati—very great; rasera—of
mellow; ullāsa—increase; vraja vinā—except for Vraja;
ihāra—of this; anyatra—anywhere else; nāhi—there is not;
vāsa—residence.

There is a great increase of rasa (mellows of love) in
the unwedded paramour mood (parakīyā-bhāva). Such love
is found only in Vraja.



This exclusive mood is unbounded in the damsels of Vraja

                          575
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

(the gopīs)

vraja-vadhū-gaṇera ei bhāva niravadhi

tāra madhye śrī-rādhāya bhāvera avadhi

CC Ādi 4.48

vraja-vadhū-gaṇera—of the young wives of Vraja, the
Gopīs; ei—this; bhāva—mood; niravadhi—unbounded; tāra
madhye—among them; śrī-rādhāya—in Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī;
bhāvera—of the mood; avadhi—the highest limit.

This exclusive mood is unbounded in the damsels of Vraja
(gopīs), but among them it finds its perfection in Śrī
Rādhā.



After touching Your lotus feet we will never be
attracted to anyone else

yarhy ambujākṣa tava pāda-talaṁ ramāyā

datta-kṣaṇaṁ kvacid araṇya-jana-priyasya

asprākṣma tat-prabhṛti nānya-samakṣam añjaḥ

sthātuṁs tvayābhiramitā bata pārayāmaḥ

SB 10.29.39 (Praṇaya-gīta)

yarhi—when; ambuja—like lotuses; akṣa—O You whose eyes;
tava—Your; pāda—of the feet; talam—at the base; ramāyāḥ—
for the goddess of fortune, Śrīmatī Lakṣmīdevī; datta—
affording; kṣaṇam—a few moments; kvacit—sometimes;
araṇya—who dwell in the forest; jana—the people;
priyasya—who hold dear; asprākṣma—we shall touch; tat-
prabhṛti—from that moment forward; na—never; anya—of any
other man; samakṣam—in the presence; añjaḥ—directly;
sthātum—to stand; tvayā—by You; abhiramitāḥ—filled with
joy; bata—certainly; pārayāmaḥ—will we be able.

O lotus-eyed one, the goddess of fortune considers it a
festive occasion whenever she has the opportunity to
touch the soles of Your lotus feet. You are very dear to
the residents of the forest, and therefore we will also
touch those lotus feet. From that time on we will be
unable even to stand in the presence of any other man,
for we will have been fully satisfied by You.



The qualification for entering Mādhurya-rasa

yadi hari-smaraṇe sarasaṁ manaḥ yadi vilāsa-kalāsu
kutūhalam

madhura-komala-kānta-padāvalīm śṛṇu tadā jayadeva-
sarasvatīm

Gīta-govinda 1.4.1

If your heart is greedy to delight in remembrance of Śrī

                             576
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Hari; if you are hankering to contemplate upon him with
intense affection; if you are overwhelmed with curiosity
to know about his skill in amorous pastimes; then by all
means read this book. You will find my lovely poetry to
be extremely relishable. Although it is so emotive and
mellifluous, if you are not possessed of the
aforementioned qualifications then you must not read it.
This literature is not for you.

[an alternative translation:] If you at all wish to fill
your consciousness with the remembrance of Śrī Śrī Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa and enter into a serving position within their
sublime pleasure pastimes on the banks of Śrī Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, then listen carefully to this sweet and poignant
song of Jayadeva, which is filled with the narrations of
their divine love.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Within this śloka there is
relationship (sambandha) and the means of attaining
perfection (abhidheya). The qualifications (adhikāra)
for entering one’s constitutional position in the
confidential pastimes of Rādhā-Mādhava, rendering Them
service, and realising the highest ecstasy in that
position, is attainable by those rasika devotees who are
free from all anārthas. They are qualified to read this
book and thus reach the highest goal (prayojana). [Those
not free of anarthas should keep off]



The prohibition for those who are unqualified

naitat samācarej jātu manasāpi hy anīśvaraḥ

vinaśyaty ācaran mauḍhyād yathārudro —bdhi-jaṁ viṣam

SB 10.33.30

na—not; etat—this; samācaret—should perform; jātu—ever;
manasā—with the mind; api—even; hi—certainly; anīśvaraḥ—
one who is not a controller; vinaśyati—he is destroyed;
ācaran—acting; mauḍhyāt—out of foolishness; yathā—as;
arudraḥ—one who is not Lord Rudra; abdhi-jam—generated
from the ocean; viṣam—poison.

One should never imitate the behavior of great persons.
If out of foolishness an ordinary person imitates such
behavior [i.e. Kṛṣṇa's dancing with the gopīs] even
mentally, he is doomed, just as one who imitates Rudra
by swallowing a ocean of poison.



Love and lust are opposites and should never be confused

kāma, prema—dıhākāra vibhinna lakṣaṇa

lauha āra hema yaiche svarūpe-vilakṣaṇa

ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā—tāre bali “kāma—

kṛṣṇendriya-prīti-icchā dhare “prema— nāma

kāmera tātparya—nija-sambhoga kevala

                          577
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


kṛṣṇa-sukha-tātparya—prema mahā-bala

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.164—66)

The characteristics of worldly lust and transcendental
love are completely different. If mundane lust is
likened to iron then spiritual love can be likened to
gold. The desire to give satisfaction to one’s own
senses is called lust. However, the desire to satisfy
the senses of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called pure love or prema.
The goal of lust is one’s own enjoyment, whereas the
purpose of love is to please Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Such prema is
immensely powerful.



Kṛṣṇa is perfect and free from faults (such as that of
mundane parakīyā)

aṣṭādaśa-mahādoṣaiḥ rahitā bhagavat-tanuḥ

sarvaiśvaryamayī satya-vijñānānanda-rūpiṇī

Vaiṣṇava-tantra/JD ch. 26

Bhagavān is endowed with all kinds of superhuman powers,
perfect knowledge and joy, and His body is free from the
eighteen types of general faults.



There is no impropriety in Kṛṣṇa’s parakīyā-bhāva

laghutvam atra yat proktaṁ tat tu prākṛta-nāyake

na kṛṣṇe rasa-niryāsa-svādārtham avatāriṇi

Ujjvala-Nīlamaṇi, Nāyaka-bheda, 16/BRSB, Preface

Whatever fault or impropriety has been pointed out (in
mundane rasa-śāstras) in regards to the love of
paramours, applies to ordinary worldly lovers and not to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, for He is the taster of the liquid essence of
rasa and the source of all incarnations. (In other
words, the Lord’s incarnations are the controllers of
religion and irreligion and are never subject to their
control. How then can Śrī Kṛṣṇa be subjected to such
codes when He is the source of all incarnations?)



All glories to parakīyā-bhāva

jaya jayojjvala-rasa sarva-rasa-sāra

parakīyā-bhāve jāhā vrajete pracāra

Śrī Vraja-Dhāma-Mahimāmṛta/SGG p. 78

All glories, all glories to ujjvala-rasa (mādhurya-rasa,
śṛṅgāra-rasa), which is the essence of all rasa and is
propagated in Vraja as parakīyā-bhāva.


                            578
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017



In comparison to śṛṅgāra-rasa, mundane rasa is
completely insignificant. When a taste for the sweetness
of mādhurya-rasa appears in a devotee’s heart, he no
longer finds either aiśvarya or mundane rasa to be
tasteful

sādhvī mādhvīka cintā na bhavati bhavataḥ śarkare
karkarāsi

drākṣe drakṣyanti ke tvām amṛta mṛtam asi kṣīra nīraṁ
rasas te

mākanda kranda kāntādhara dharaṇi-talaṁ gaccha yacchanti
yāvad

bhāvaṁ śṛṅgāra-sārasvatam iha jayadevasya viṣvag-vacāṁsi

Śrī Gīta-govinda 12.27

Hey powerful wine! Do not think you are so intoxicating.
Hey sugar! You are too harsh. Hey grapes! Who will look
at you? Hey nectar (amṛta)! You are like death (mṛta).
Hey milk! You taste like water. Hey ripe mango! Now go
and weep. Hey lips of a beautiful woman! Now you can go
to hell. As long as the complete essence of divine love
(mādhurya-rasa) exists in the form of the auspicious,
artful compositions of Śrī Jayadeva, I have nothing to
do with you.

Thus ends Chapter 19 — Rasa-tattva




Chapter 20 — Bhāva-bhakti-tattva


Bhāva - The first ray of the sun of Prema



Definition of Bhāva

śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk

rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-kṛd asau bhāva ucyate

BRS 1.3.1/BRSB p.136/CC Mad 23.5 /BPKG p. 397/BR 6.2 pt

śuddha-sattva—pure goodness; viśeṣa—distinguished; ātmā—
whose nature; prema—of love of God; sūrya—like the sun;
aṁśu—a ray; sāmya-bhāk—which is similar to; rucibhiḥ—by
different tastes; citta—of the heart; masṛṇya—softness;
kṛt—which causes; asau—that softness; bhāvaḥ—emotion;
ucyate—is called.

Bhāva-bhakti is (1) constituted entirely of viśuddha-
sattva. (2) It is like a ray of the sun of prema, and
(3) it softens the heart by various tastes (abhilāṣa).

Bhāva — (1) spiritual emotions, love or sentiments; (2)

                          579
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

the initial stage of perfection in devotion (bhāva-
bhakti). A stage of bhakti in which śuddha-sattva, the
essence of the Lord’s internal potency consisting of
spiritual knowledge and bliss, is transmitted into the
heart of the practicing devotee from the heart of one of
the Lord’s eternal associates and softens the heart by
different kinds of taste. It is the sprout of prema, and
it is also known as rati. This is the seventh stage of
the creeper of devotion. (JD p. 526-7)



Devotion on the platform of pure goodness (viśuddha-
sattva)

sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ vasudeva-śabditaṁ

yad īyate tatra pumān apāvṛtaḥ

sattve ca tasmin bhagavān vāsudevo

hy adhokṣajo me namasā vidhīyate

SB 4.3.23

sattvam viśuddham—pure consciousness (the stage of
bhāva); vasudeva—Vasudeva; śabditam—known as; yat—
because; īyate—is revealed; tatra—there; pumān—the
Supreme Person; apāvṛtaḥ—without any covering; sattve—in
pure goodness; ca—and; tasmin—in that; bhagavān—Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; vāsudevaḥ—Vāsudeva; hi—because; adhaḥ-kṣajaḥ—
transcendental, beyond the range of sense perceprtion;
me—by Me; namasā—with obeisances; vidhīyate—may it be
done (worshiped).

The state of viśuddha-sattva, purely transcendental
goodness, is also known as vasudeva, for in the same way
that Mahārāja Vasudeva gave birth to Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa,
practice in unadulterated, pure goodness will pull the
curtain of māyā away and reveal the transcendental
svarūpa of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s amorous pastimes in one’s
heart. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is always pure consciousness,
in which Kṛṣṇa, known as Vāsudeva, is revealed without
any covering. I offer my obeisances to Adhokṣaja Kṛṣṇa.
Although He is beyond the range of my imperfect senses,
let Him be the object of my worship and bhajana.



bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyā

SB 11.3.31/MK ch. 1

Bhakti arises from bhakti (not from any other cause).
From the heart of a pure devotee, a living sad-guru, it
is inspired into the heart of a sādhaka. Thus the fruit
of sādhana-bhakti is bhāva-bhakti which leads to prema-
bhakti.

One must transcend miśra-sattva - the impure material
existence of māyā and her three agents, the modes of
tamas, rajas and sattva - to enter bhāva

traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna

                            580
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho niryoga-kṣema ātmavān

BG 2.45

trai-guṇya—the three modes of material nature; viṣayāḥ—
on the subject matter; vedāḥ—Vedic literatures; nistrai-
guṇyaḥ—transcendental to the three modes of material
nature; bhava—be; arjuna—O Arjuna; nirdvandvaḥ—devoid of
duality; nitya-sattva-sthaḥ—in a pure state of spiritual
existence (śuddha-satva); niryoga-kṣemaḥ—free from
concerns for maintainance and protection; ātma-vān—be
established in the self (in your eternal spiritual form,
svarūpa).

The Vedas deal mainly with the subject of the three
modes of material nature. O Arjuna, you must become
transcendental to these three modes. Be free from all
dualities and from all anxieties for maintenance or
safety. Thereafter, be established in the self (in your
svarūpa).



Daśa-Mūla on Bhāva

svarūpāvasthāne madhura-rasa-bhāvodaya iha

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-svajana-jana-bhāvaṁ hṛdi vahan

parānande prītiṁ jagad-atula-sampat-sukham aho

vilāsākhye tattve parama-paricaryāṁ sa labhate

Daśa-mūla tattva, 10a/JD ch. 22

sva-rūpa—of one’s original spiritual form; avasthāne—in
the state; madhura-rasa—of madhura rasa; bhāva—of the
love; udayaḥ—the arousal; iha—here; vraje—in Vrajabhūmi;
rādhā—of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; kṛṣṇa—and Lord Kṛṣṇa;
svajana-jana—of the associates; bhāvam—the pure love;
hṛdi—in the heart; vahan—carrying; para—supreme; ānande—
in bliss; prītim—pure love; jagat—of the universe; atula
—not comparable; sampat—opulence; sukham—happiness; aho—
O! what a great wonder; vilāsa—as spiritual pastimes;
ākhye—known; tattve—in the truth; parama—supreme;
parīcaryām—devotional service; saḥ—he; labhate—attains.

In the mature stage of sādhana-bhakti, when the jīva
becomes situated in his svarūpa, then by the influence
of the hlādinī potency, the state of bhāva in mādhurya-
rasa arises within him. In other words, the mood to
follow in the footsteps of the dearmost associates of
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja manifests in his heart.
Gradually he obtains happiness and prosperity that is
unsurpassed in this world, in the form of the supreme
service of paramānanda-tattva, which is known as vilāsa.
There is no greater gain than this for the jīva.



Bhāva can only be attained by sādhu-saṅga

yathā duṣṭatvam me davayati śaṭhasyāpi kṛpayā

                          581
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


yathā mahyam premāmṛtam api dadāty ujjvalam asau

yathā śrī-gāndharvā-bhajana-vidhaye prerayati māṁ

tathā goṣṭhe kākvā giridharam iha tvam bhaja manaḥ (8)

yathā—so that; duṣṭatvam—wickedness; me—my; davayati—
drives away; śaṭhasyāpi—although corrupt; kṛpayā—
mercifully; yathā—so that; mahyam—to me; premāmṛtam—
nectar of divine love; api—also; dadāti—He gives;
ujjvalam—the radiant; asau—He; yathā—so that; śrī-
gāndharvā—of Śrīmatī Rādhikā; bhajana-vidhaye—in the
service; prerayati—He impels; mām—me; tathā—in such a
manner; goṣṭhe—in Vraja; kākvā—with humble words;
giridharam—Śrī Giridhārī; iha—here; tvam—you; bhaja—
worship; manaḥ—O mind.

(By the association of sādhus, hlādinī-śakti is
transmitted into the sādhaka’s heart, dispels all
contamination and brings about the highest perfection.
But that type of sādhu-saṅga is not easily available)
Therefore, O mind, with utter humility and grief-
stricken words, just worship Śrī Giridhārī Kṛṣṇa in such
a way that He will become pleased with me. By His
causeless mercy He will remove my wickedness, bestow the
nectar of His supremely radiant prema, and confer upon
me the inspiration to worship Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



A bhāva-bhakta is eligible to drink the pure nectar of
the holy name

prabhuḥ kaḥ ko jīvaḥ kathaṁ idam acid-viśvam iti vā

vicāryaitān arthān hari-bhajana-kṛc chāstra-caturaḥ

abhedāśāṁ dharmān sakalam aparādhaṁ pariharan

harer nāmānandaṁ pibati hari-dāso hari-janaiḥ

Daśa-mūla-tattva, 10b/JD ch. 22

prabhuḥ—the Supreme Lord; kaḥ—Who?; kaḥ—who?; jīvaḥ—the
living entity; katham—what?; idam—this; acit—inanimate;
viśvam—material universe; iti—thus; vā—and; vicārya—
reflecting; etān—on these; arthān—points; hari—of Lord
Hari; bhajana-kṛt—describing the devotional service;
śāstra—in the scriptures; caturaḥ—expert; abheda—of
liberation; āśām—the hope; dharmān—material pious
duties; sakalam—completely; aparādham—offenses;
pariharan—abandoning; hareḥ—of Lord Hari; nāma—of the
Holy Names; ānandam—the transcendental bliss; pibati—
drinks; hari—of Lord Hari; dāsaḥ—the servant; harijanaiḥ
—with the devotees.

Who is Kṛṣṇa? Who am I, the jīva? What is this temporary
material (acit) world, and the eternal spiritual (cit)
world? He who is exclusively devoted to the bhajana of
Śrī Hari and has made an intelligent analysis of the
Vaiṣṇava-śāstras under the guidance of śuddha-bhaktas,
who has abandoned all offences and attachment to dharma
and adharma, as well as any trace of desire for

                          582
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

impersonal liberation, and who can consider and dispose
of all questions — that servant of Śrī Hari drinks the
sublime nectar of śrī-hari-nāma in the company of other
hari-janas (devotees).



Without the wealth of prema, my wretched life is useless

prema dhana vinā vyartha daridra jīvana

“dāsa— kari— vetana more deha prema-dhāna

BR 6.1 (Bengali)

Without the wealth of prema, my wretched life is
useless. O Lord, please accept me as Your paid servant
and grant me the wealth of prema as my wages.



The sixth verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka describes the external
manifestations of perfection

nayanaṁ galad-aśru-dhārayā

vadanaṁ gadgada-ruddhayā girā

pulakair nicitaṁ vapuḥ kadā

tava nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati

Śikṣāṣṭaka 6/CC Antya 20.36/ BR 6.1

nayanam—the eyes; galat-aśru-dhārayā—by streams of tears
running down; vadanam—mouth; gadgada—faltering; ruddhayā
—choked up; girā—with words; pulakaiḥ—with erection of
the hairs due to transcendental happiness; nicitam—
raised up; vapuḥ—the body; kadā—when; tava—Your; nāma-
grahaṇe—in chanting the name; bhaviṣyati—will be.

Oh Prabhu! When will tears flow from my eyes like
torrents of rain, my voice falter and the hairs on my
body stand erect as I chant Your holy names?



On the appearance of bhāva-bhakti the following nine
symptoms are observed:

kṣāntir avyartha-kālatvaṁ viraktir māna-śūnyatā

āśā-bandhaḥ samutkaṇṭhā nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ

āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne prītis tad-vasati-sthale

ity ādayo —nubhāvāḥ syur jāta-bhāvāṅkure jane

BRS 1.3.25-26/CC Madhya 23.18-19/BRSB p. 139/BR 6.3

kṣāntiḥ—forgiveness; avyartha-kālatvam—being free from
wasting time; viraktiḥ—detachment; māna-śūnyatā—devoid
of pride, absence of false prestige; āśā-bandhaḥ—the
bondage of hope; samutkaṇṭhā—eagerness; nāma-gāne—in

                             583
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

chanting the holy names; sadā—always; ruciḥ—taste;
āsaktiḥ—attachment; tat—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; guṇa-ākhyāne—in
describing the transcendental qualities; prītiḥ—
affection; tat—His; vasati-sthale—for places of
residence (the temple or holy places); iti—thus; ādayaḥ—
and so on; anubhāvāḥ—the signs; syuḥ—are; jāta—
developed; bhāva-aṅkure—whose seed of ecstatic emotion;
jane—in a person.

(1) kṣānti - forbearance or tolerance, (2) avyartha-
kālatva - not wasting time, (3) virakti - detachment
from worldly enjoyment, (4) māna-śūnyatā - absence of
pride, (5) āśā-bandha - steadfast hope that Kṛṣṇa will
bestow His mercy, (6) samutkaṇṭhā - intense longing to
obtain one’s goal, (7) nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ -
spontaneous attraction for always chanting the holy
name, (8) tad-guṇākhyāne āsakti - attachment to Hari-
kathā and (9) tad-vasati-sthale prītiḥ - affection for
the transcendental pastime places of the Lord — these
are the nine sprouts of love of God (prītiḥ), or in
other words, the symptoms of the appearance of bhāva.

Editorial note: In this connection see CC Madhya
23.20-37 for ślokas exemplifying each of these nine
symptoms. These ślokas are not given here since they
appear under different headings elsewhere in the book.



Vṛtrāsura has expressed his samutkaṇṭhā thus:

ajāta-pakṣā iva mātaraṁ khagāḥ

stanyaṁ yathā vatsatarāḥ kṣudhārtāḥ

priyaṁ priyeva vyuṣitaṁ viṣaṇṇā

mano —ravindākṣa didṛkṣate tvām

SB 6.11.26/BR 6.3 pt/GKH (P)

ajāta-pakṣāḥ—who have not yet grown wings; iva—like;
mātaram—the mother; khagāḥ—small birds; stanyam—the milk
from the udder; yathā—just as; vatsatarāḥ—the young
calves; kṣudha-ārtāḥ—distressed by hunger; priyam—the
beloved or husband; priyā—the wife or lover; iva—like;
vyuṣitam—who is separated; viṣaṇṇā—morose; manaḥ—my
mind; aravinda-akṣa—O lotus-eyed one; didṛkṣate—wants to
see; tvām—You.

O lotus-eyed Lord, as baby birds whose wings are not yet
grown always look for their mother to return and feed
them, as small calves tied with ropes await anxiously
the time of milking when they will be allowed to drink
the milk of their mothers, or as a beloved whose lover
is far away always longs for him to return and satisfy
her in all respects, I always yearn for the opportunity
to render direct service unto You.



For a devotee in bhāva all worldly things and even
liberation are insignificant


                          584
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

pañcama puruṣārtha - premānandāmṛta-sindhu

mokṣādi ānanda yāra nahe eka bindu

CC. Ādi 7.85/GKH (P)

pañcama—fifth; puruṣa-artha—goal of life; prema-ānanda—
the spiritual bliss of love of Godhead; amṛta—eternal;
sindhu—ocean; mokṣa-ādi—liberation and other principles
of religiosity; ānanda—pleasures derived from them; yāra
—whose; nahe—never comparable; eka—one; bindu—drop.

For a devotee who has actually developed bhāva, the
pleasure derived from dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa
appears like a drop of water in the presence of the sea.



Devotion in dāsya-rati is evident in Vṛtrāsura’s prayer

ahaṁ hare tava pādaika-mūla-

dāsānudāso bhavitāsmi bhūyaḥ

manaḥ smaretāsu-pater guṇāṁs te

gṛṇīta vāk karma karotu kāyaḥ

SB 6.11.24/BR 5.6/GKH (P)

aham—I; hare—O my Lord; tava—of Your Lordship; pāda-eka-
mūla—whose only shelter is the lotus feet; dāsa-anudāsaḥ
—the servant of Your servant; bhavitāsmi—shall I become;
bhūyaḥ—again; manaḥ—my mind; smareta—may remember; asu-
pateḥ—of the Lord of my life; guṇān—the attributes; te—
of Your Lordship; gṛṇīta—may chant; vāk—my words; karma—
activities of service to You; karotu—may perform; kāyaḥ—
my body.

O Lord, please bestow such mercy upon me, that in my
next birth I may obtain the opportunity to exclusively
serve the servants who have taken shelter of Your lotus
feet. May my mind always remember Your all-auspicious
qualities, my speech always chant the glories of these
qualities, and my body always remain engaged in Your
service.



One has to give up dehātma-buddhi (thinking “I am this
material body”) and remember one’s eternal svarūpa

nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir nāpi vaiśyo na śūdro

nāhaṁ varṇī na ca gṛha-patir no vanastho yatir vā

kintu prodyan-nikhila-paramānanda-pūrṇāmṛtābdher

gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ

Padyāvalī 74/BR 6.6

na—not; aham—I; vipraḥ—a brāhmaṇa; na—not; ca—also;
nara-patiḥ—a king or kṣatriya; na—not; api—also; vaiśyaḥ

                            585
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

—a merchant; na—not; śūdraḥ—a worker; na—not; aham—I;
varṇī—a brahmacārī; na—not; ca—also; gṛha-patiḥ—a
householder; no—not; vana-sthaḥ—vānaprastha; yatiḥ—a
mendicant or renunciant; vā—either; kintu—but; prodyan—
brilliant; nikhila—universal; parama-ānanda—with
transcendental bliss; pūrṇa—complete; amṛta-abdheḥ—of
the ocean of nectar; gopī-bhartuḥ—of the maintainer of
the gopīs; pada-kamalayoḥ—of the two lotus feet; dāsa—of
the servant; dāsa-anudāsaḥ—this insignificant servant of
the servant.

My identity is not that of a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya
or śūdra, nor a brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha or
sannyāsī, but only that of a servant of the servants of
the Vaiṣṇavas who are the servants of the lotus feet of
Śrī Rādhā-vallabha, the maintainer of the gopīs. He is
naturally effulgent and the complete ocean of bliss.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: The happiness of service to
Bhagavān is the only relishable mellow. It is
accomplished by an unwavering conviction in the process
of bhakti, whose very nature is such that the soul
becomes established in the following relationship: “The
ultimate shelter is the Supreme Enjoyer, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
I am the predominated or enjoyed principle in the form
of a maidservant of Śrī Rādhā.” (BS 3-4 pt)

Editorial note: One may therefore contemplate as
follows, “I am not young or old, male or female, black
or white, rich or poor, father or child, husband or
wife, Jewish or Christian, Muslim or Hindu or Buddhist -
I am only an insignificant servant of Śrī Guru and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in this world, and in the spiritual world (and for
those who have the adhikāra, “I am a Radhā-dāsī, a
mañjarī maidservant in Vraja under the Guidance of my
Guudeva and Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī).”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu has described the external behaviour
of rāga-mārga bhaktas with the following words:

para-vyasaninī nārī vyagrāpi gṛha-karmasu

tad evāsvādayaty antar nava-saṅga-rasāyanam

CC Mad 1.211/BR 6.8

para-vyasaninī—attached to another man; nārī—a woman;
vyagrā api—although zealous; gṛha-karmasu—in household
affairs; tat eva—that only; āsvādayati—tastes; antaḥ—
within herself; nava-saṅga—of new association; rasa-
ayanam—mellow.

When a woman is attached to a man other than her
husband, she continues to carry out her many household
duties, but within her heart she relishes the new
pleasure of her meeting with her paramour. (Similarly, a
devotee may be engaged in activities within this world,
but he always relishes the rasa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that he has
tasted in the association of devotees)




                          586
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

In this state of rāga-mārga-bhajana, the devotee has
affection for places that are dear to Kṛṣṇa, and he
longs to stay in such places

kadāhaṁ yamunā-tīre nāmāni tava kīrtayan

udvāṣpaḥ puṇḍarīkākṣa! racayiṣyāmi taṇḍavam

BRS 1.2.156/BRSB p. 84/BR 6.9

O lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa, when, upon the banks of the Yamunā,
will I chant Your holy names and dance like a madman, my
eyes brimming with tears of love?

If one doesn—t experience ecstacy while chanting, this
is due to offences

tad aśma-sāraṁ hṛdayaṁ batedaṁ

yad gṛhyamānair hari-nāmadheyaiḥ

na vikriyetātha yadā vikāro

netre jalaṁ gātra-ruheṣu harṣaḥ

SB 2.3.24/BR 6.10

tat—that; aśma-sāram—is steel-framed; hṛdayam—heart;
bata idam—certainly that; yat—which; gṛhyamāṇaiḥ—in
spite of chanting; hari-nāma—the holy name; dheyaiḥ—by
the influence of the names; na—does not; vikriyeta—
change; atha—thus; yadā—when; vikāraḥ—reaction; netre—in
the eyes; jalam—tears; gātra-ruheṣu—at the pores; harṣaḥ
—eruptions of ecstasy.

When a sādhaka performs harināma-saṅkīrtana, the hairs
of his body stand on end and tears of joy begin to flow
from his eyes. But the heart of one in whom such
sāttvika-bhāva transformations do not arise, is not
actually a heart, but a hard thunderbolt.



When attachment (rati) for the holy name arises, the
youthful form of Kṛṣṇa naturally and easily manifests

bhaktis tvayi sthiratarā bhagavan yadi syād

daivena naḥ phalati divya-kiśora-mūrtiḥ

muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjaliḥ sevate —smān

dharmārtha-kāma-gatayaḥ samaya-pratīkṣāḥ

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 107/BR 6.11/PJ 3.19

bhaktiḥ—devotional service; tvayi—unto You; sthiratarā—
very steady; bhagavan—O Lord; yadi—if; syāt—it may be;
daivena—as destiny; naḥ—unto us; phalati—bears the
fruit; divya—transendental; kiśora—mūrtiḥ—the youthful
form of Kṛṣṇa; muktiḥ—liberation; svayam—personally;
mukulita-añjaliḥ—standing with folded hands; sevate—
renders service; asmān—unto us; dharma—religiosity;
artha—economic development; kāma—sense gratification;

                          587
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

gatayaḥ—the final goals; samaya—nearby; pratīkṣāḥ—
expecting.

O Bhagavān, if someone has steady devotion unto Your
lotus feet, he easily perceives Your most charming
divine youthful form. Thereafter, liberation stands
before him with folded hands, and dharma, artha and kāma
also wait for an opportunity to serve him.



Sometimes the prideless pure devotee preaches nāma-prema
throughout the world by the medium of kīrtana

nāmāny anantasya hata-trapaḥ paṭhan

guhyāni bhadrāṇi kṛtāni ca smaran

gāṁ paryaṭaṁs tuṣṭa-manā gata-spṛhaḥ

kālaṁ pratīkṣan vimado vimatsaraḥ

SB 1.6.26/BR 6.13

nāmāni—the holy name, fame, etc.; anantasya—of the
unlimited; hata-trapaḥ—being freed from all formalities
of the material world; paṭhan—by recitation, repeated
reading, etc.; guhyāni—mysterious; bhadrāṇi—all
benedictory; kṛtāni—activities; ca—and; smaran—
constantly remembering; gām—on the earth; paryaṭan—
traveling all through; tuṣṭa-manāḥ—fully satisfied;
gata-spṛhaḥ—completely freed from all material desires;
kālam—time; pratīkṣan—awaiting; vimadaḥ—without being
proud; vimatsaraḥ—without being envious.

[While telling his life story, Śrī Nārada said:] “Not
feeling shy or embarrassed, I began to chant and
remember the mysterious and auspicious sweet names and
pastimes of Bhagavān. My heart was already free from
longing, pride and envy. Now I roamed the Earth
joyfully, waiting for the right time.”



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes the practice of chanting the
holy name at the stage of rati in the association of
pure devotees:

parasparānukathanaṁ pāvanaṁ bhagavad-yaśaḥ

mitho ratir mithas tuṣṭir nivṛttir mitha ātmanaḥ

smarantaḥ smārayantaś ca mitho —ghaugha-haraṁ harim

bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyā bibhraty utpulakāṁ tanum

SB 11.3.30-31/BR 6.12

paraspara—mutual; anukathanam—discussion; pāvanam—
purifying; bhagavat—of the Supreme Lord; yaśaḥ—glories;
mithaḥ—mutual; ratiḥ—loving attraction; mithaḥ—mutual;
tuṣṭiḥ—satisfaction; nivṛttiḥ—cessation of material
miseries; mithaḥ—mutual; ātmanaḥ—of the soul; smarantaḥ—
remembering; smārayantaḥ ca—and reminding; mithaḥ—one

                          588
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

another; agha-ogha-haram—the killer of Aghasura or He
who removes everything inauspicious from His devotees;
harim—Śrī Hari; bhaktyā—because bhakti; sañjātayā—is
awakened; bhaktyā—by bhakti; bibhrati—possess; utpulakām
—agitated by ecstasy; tanum—body.

The devotees of the Lord constantly discuss the glories
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa among themselves. They remember the Lord
and remind one another of His qualities and pastimes. In
this way, by their devotion to the principles of bhakti-
yoga, the devotees please the Personality of Godhead,
who takes away from them everything inauspicious. Being
purified of all impediments, the devotees awaken to pure
love of God, which can only be obtained from those who
have it, for bhakti comes from bhakti. Thus, even within
this world, their spiritualized bodies exhibit symptoms
of transcendental ecstasy, such as standing of the
bodily hairs on end.



My bhaktas derive great satisfaction and bliss from
always sharing hari-kathā

mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā bodhayantaḥ parasparam

kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca

BG 10.9/GKH 12.54

mat-cittāḥ—their minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-
prāṇāḥ—their lives devoted to Me; bodhayantaḥ—
enlightening; parasparam—among themselves; kathayantaḥ—
talking; ca—also; mām—about Me; nityam—perpetually;
tuṣyanti—become pleased; ca—also; ramanti—enjoy
transcendental bliss; ca—also.

The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their
lives are fully devoted to My service, and they derive
great satisfaction and bliss from always enlightening
one another and conversing about Me.



The perfected devotee serves Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana day and
night within his mind, in his original, pure, self-
realised spiritual body (nija-siddha-deha)

mane nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana

rātri-dine kare vraje kṛṣṇera sevana

nijābhīṣṭa kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha pāche ta— lāgiyā

nirantara sevā kare antarmanā hañā

CC Mad 22.157,159/BR 6.13 pt

mane—the mind; nija—own; siddha-deha—eternal body or
self-realized position; kariyā bhāvana—thinking of;
rātri-dine—night and day; kare—executes; vraje—in
Vṛndāvana; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sevana—service; nija-
abhīṣṭa—one’s own choice; kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha—the servitor of
Kṛṣṇa; pācheta— lāgiyā—following; nirantara—twenty-four

                          589
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

hours a day; sevā—service; kare—executes; antarmanā—
within the mind; hañā—being.

The perfected devotee serves Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana day and
night within his mind, in his original, pure, self-
realised position (nija-siddha-deha). Actually, the
inhabitants of Vṛndāvana are very dear to Kṛṣṇa. If a
person wants to engage in spontaneous loving service, he
must follow the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana and constantly
engage in devotional service within his mind.



The transcendental bhāvas of the mahā-bhāgavata

kvacid rudanty acyuta-cintayā kvacid

dhasanti nandanti vadanty alaukikāḥ

nṛtyanti gāyanty anuśīlayanty ajaṁ

bhavanti tūṣṇīṁ param etya nirvṛtāḥ

SB 11.3.32/BR 6.14

kvacit—sometimes; rudanti—they cry; acyuta—of the
infallible Supreme Lord; cintayā—by the thought; kvacit—
sometimes; hasanti—they laugh; nandanti—take great
pleasure; vadanti—speak; alaukikāḥ—acting amazingly;
nṛtyanti—they dance; gāyanti—sing; anuśīlayanti—and
imitate; ajam—the unborn; bhavanti—they become; tūṣṇīm—
silent; param—the Supreme; etya—obtaining; nirvṛtāḥ—
freed from distress.

The transcendental mahā-bhāgavata’s condition is
astonishing. Sometimes he starts to worry, thinking ,
“So far I have not had direct audience of Bhagavān. What
shall I do? Where shall I go? Whom shall I ask? Who will
be able to find Him for me?” Thinking like this he
begins to weep. Sometimes he receives an internal
revelation (sphūrti) of Bhagavān’s sweet pastimes, and
he laughs loudly as he beholds Bhagavān, who is endowed
with all opulences, hiding in fear of the gopīs.
Sometimes he is submerged in bliss upon receiving
Bhagavān’s darśana and directly experiencing His prema.
Sometimes, when situated in his siddha-deha, he speaks
with Bhagavān, saying, “O Prabhu, after so long, I have
attained You,” and he proceeds to sing the glories of
his Lord. Sometimes, when he receives Bhagavān’s
affection, he starts to dance, and sometimes he
experiences great peace and remains silent.



Kṛṣṇa’s beauty attracts the hearts of all

yasyānanaṁ makara-kuṇḍala-cāru-karṇa-

bhrājat-kapola-subhagaṁ savilāsa-hāsam

nityotsavaṁ na tatṛpur dṛśibhiḥ pibantyo

nāryo narāś ca muditāḥ kupitā nimeś ca


                          590
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

SB 9.24.65/BR 6.18

yasya—whose; ānanam—face; makara—resembling sharks;
kuṇḍala—by earings; cāru-karṇa—by beautiful ears;
bhrājat—glistening; kapola—cheeks; subhagam—declaring
all opulences; sa-vilāsa-hāsam—with smiles of enjoyment;
nitya-utsavam—whenever one sees Him, one feels festive;
na tatṛpuḥ—they could not be satisfied; dṛśibhiḥ—by
seeing the form of the Lord; pibantyaḥ—as if drinking
through the eyes; nāryaḥ—all the women of Vṛndāvana;
narāḥ—all the male devotees; ca—also; muditāḥ—fully
satisfied; kupitāḥ—angry; nimeḥ—the moment (they are
disturbed by the blinking of the eyes); ca—also.

The makara-shaped earrings that swing on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
ears cast glistening reflections on the lake of His
cheeks, and this splendour increases even further the
beauty of His cheeks. When He smiles with enjoyment, the
bliss that is always present on His face is augmented.
With the cups of their eyes, all men and women drink the
perpetual festival of His lotus face. They are never
satisfied, however, so they become angry with Brahmā for
creating eyes that blink and thus obstruct their relish
of this sweetness.




The result of having darśana of the deity with deep,
loving attachment (anurāga)

yasyānurāga-pluta-hāsa-rāsa

līlāvaloka-pratilabdha-mānāḥ

vraja-striyo dṛgbhir anupravṛtta-

dhiyo —vatasthuḥ kila kṛtya-śeṣāḥ

SB 3.2.14/BR 6.20

yasya—whose; anurāga—attachment; pluta—enhanced by; hāsa
—laughter; rāsa—humors; līlā—pastimes; avaloka—glancing;
pratilabdha—obtained thereof; mānāḥ—anguished; vraja-
striyaḥ—damsels of Vraja; dṛgbhiḥ—with the eyes;
anupravṛtta—following; dhiyaḥ—by intelligence;
avatasthuḥ—stood silently; kila—indeed; kṛtya-śeṣāḥ—
without finishing household duties.

When the young women of Vraja were honoured by Kṛṣṇa’s
affectionate laughter, joking words and playful glances,
their eyes would become fixed on Him. Their minds would
become so absorbed in Him that they would become unaware
of their bodies and homes, and they would remain
standing as if lifeless dolls.



The mood of absolute opulence assuming the form of
sweetness (mādhurya)

svayaṁ tv asāmyātiśayas try-adhīśaḥ


                          591
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

svārājya-lakṣmy-āpta-samasta-kāmaḥ

baliṁ haradbhiś cira-loka-pālaiḥ

kirīṭa-koṭīḍita-pāda-pīṭhaḥ

SB 3.2.21/BR 6.21

svayam—Himself; tu—but; asāmya—unique, unequalled;
atiśayaḥ—greater; tri-adhīśaḥ—Lord of the three;
svārājya—independent supremacy; lakṣmī—goddess of
fortune; āpta—achieved; samasta-kāmaḥ—all desires; balim
—worshiping paraphernalia; haradbhiḥ—offered by; cira-
loka-pālaiḥ—by the eternal maintainers of the order of
creation; kirīṭa-koṭi—by millions of helmets; īḍita-
pāda-pīṭhaḥ—feet honored by prayers.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Himself the Supreme Lord of the three
potencies (sandhinī, saṁvit and hlādinī). No one is
equal to Him, so who can be greater than Him? All of His
desires are fulfilled by His own transcendental goddess
of fortune (Śrīmatī Rādhikā). Indra and innumerable
other loka-pālas, deities presiding over different
regions of the universe, bring Him varieties of
offerings and pay their obeisances, touching the tops of
their crowns to His lotus feet.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy is inconceivable (acintya) and
causeless (ahaitukī)

kasyānubhāvo —sya na deva vidmahe

tavāṅghri-reṇu-sparśādhikāraḥ

yad-vāñchayā śrīr lalanācarat tapo

vihāya kāmān su-ciraṁ dhṛta-vratā

SB 10.16.36/CC Mad 9.114/BMP p. 391/BR 6.22

kasya—of what; anubhāvaḥ—a result; asya—of the serpent
(Kāliya); na—not; deva—my Lord; vidmahe—we know; tava—
Your; aṅghri—of the lotus feet; reṇu—of the dust;
sparaśa—for touching; adhikāraḥ—qualification; yat—for
which; vāñchayā—with the desire; śrīḥ—the goddess of
fortune; lalanā—enchanted by desires; ācarat—performed;
tapaḥ—austerity; vihāya—giving up; kāmān—all desires;
su-ciram—for a long time; dhṛta—upheld; vratā—her vow.

[The Nāgapatnīs, wives of Kālīya, prayed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa:]
“Oh Deva! Śrī Lakṣmī-devī gave up all her desires, took
a vrata and performed austerities for a long long time
just to attain the dust of Your lotus feet. Nonetheless,
she failed to achieve her heart’s desire. Who knows what
pious activities Kālīya Nāga performed to become
qualified to receive that same rare footdust.”



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam states that the vraja-gopīs— devotion
is topmost


                          592
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

nāyaṁ śriyo —ṅga u nitānta-rateḥ prasādaḥ

svar-yoṣitāṁ nalina-gandha-rucāṁ kuto —nyāḥ

rāsotsave —sya bhuja-daṇḍa-gṛhīta-kaṇṭha-

labdhāśiṣāṁ ya udagād vraja-sundarīṇām

SB 10.47.60/CC Mad 8.80, 8.232, 9.120,Antya 7.29/BR 6.23

na—not; ayam—this; śriyaḥ—of the goddess of fortune;
aṅge—on the chest; u—alas; nitānta-rateḥ—who is very
intimately related; prasādaḥ—the favor; svaḥ—of the
heavenly planets; yoṣitām—of women; nalina—of the lotus
flower; gandha—having the aroma; rucām—and bodily
luster; kutaḥ—much less; anyāḥ—others; rasa-utsave—in
the festival of the rāsa dance; asya—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
bhuja-daṇḍa—by the “elephant-trank-like— (or vine-like)
arms; gṛhīta—embraced; kaṇṭha—their necks; labdha-āśiṣām
—who achieved such a blessing; yaḥ—which; udagāt—became
manifest; vraja-sundarīnām—of the beautiful gopīs of
Vrajabhūmi.

In the rāsa festival, Śrī Kṛṣṇa embraced the vraja-
sundarīs around their necks with His vine-like arms,
thus fulfilling their hearts— desires. Even Lakṣmī, who
eternally resides on His chest, does not attain this
mercy. It is also not attained by the most beautiful
girls of the heavenly planets, whose bodily lustre and
fragrance resemble the lotus flower, what to speak of
other (mortal) beautiful women.



The superiority of paramour love

yat tv ahaṁ bhavatīnāṁ vai dūre varte priyo dṛśām

manasaḥ sannikarṣārthaḥ mad-anudhyāna-kāmyayā

yathā dūra-care preṣṭhe mana āviśya vartate

strīṇāṁ ca na tathā cetaḥ sannikṛṣṭe —kṣi-gocaraḥ

SB 10.47.34-35/BR 6.23 pt

yat—the fact that; tu—however; aham—I; bhavatīnām—from
your; vai—indeed; dūre—far away; varte—am situated;
priyaḥ—who am dear; dṛśām—to the eyes; manasaḥ—of the
mind; sannikarṣa—of the attraction; artham—for the sake;
mat—upon Me; anudhyāna—for your meditation; kāmyayā—out
of My desire; yathā—as; dūra-care—being situated far
away; preṣṭhe—a lover; manaḥ—the minds; āviśya—becoming
absorbed; vartate—remain; strīṇām—of women; ca—and; na—
not; tathā—so; cetaḥ—their minds; sannikṛṣṭe—when he is
near; akṣi-gocare—present before their eyes.

But the actual reason why I, the beloved object of your
sight, have stayed far away from you is that I wanted to
intensify your meditation upon Me and thus draw your
minds closer to Me. When her lover is far away, a woman
thinks of him more than when he is present before her.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura: “The lover’s heart

                            593
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

is more attracted to the beloved when she is far from
him than when she is living near him. Due to this,
although Lakṣmī perpetually sports upon Nārāyaṇa’s
chest, the glories of her good fortune are less than
those of the gopīs—.”



All types of devotees long for gopī-bhāva

āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām

SB 10.47.61/CC Antya 7.47/VG p. 82/BMP p. 275/ORY p.
113/BR 6.24

āsam—of the gopīs; aho—Oh! How astonishing; caraṇa-reṇu—
by the dust of the lotus feet; juṣām—favourably devoted
to; aham syām—let me become; vṛndāvane—in Vṛndāvana; kim
api—any one; gulma-latā-auṣadhīnām—among bushes,
creepers and herbs; yāḥ—they who; dustya-jam—very
difficult to give up; sva-janam—family members; ārya-
patham—the path of dharma or chastity; ca—and; hitvā—
giving up; bhejuḥ—worshiped; mukunda-padavīm—the lotus
feet of Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa; śrutibhiḥ—by the Vedas; vimṛgyām
—to be searched for.

[Śrī Uddhavajī prayed:] Aho! The vraja-devīs have given
up everything that is difficult to renounce, such as
children, family and the path of chastity, and they have
taken shelter of the path of prema-bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
that is searched for but rarely attained by the Śrutis.
My prayer is that I may appear as a bush, a creeper or a
blade of grass in Śrī Vṛndāvana and thus receive the
footdust of these gopīs— lotus feet.



Lord Brahmā prays for the dust of the Vrajavāsīs

tad bhūri-bhāgyam iha janma kim apy aṭavyāṁ

yad gokule —pi katamāṅghri-rajo-—bhiṣekam

yaj-jīvitaṁ tu nikhilaṁ bhagavān mukundas

tv adyāpi yat-pada-rajaḥ śruti-mṛgyam eva

SB 10.14.34/BMP p. 379

tat—that; bhūri-bhāgyam—the greatest good fortune; iha—
here; janma—the birth; kim api—any whatsoever; aṭavyām—
in the forest (of Vṛndāvana); yat—which; gokule—in
Gokula; api—even; katama—of any (of the devotees);
aṅghri—of the feet; rajaḥ—by the dust; abhiṣekam—
bathing; yat—whose; jīvitam—life; tu—indeed; nikhilam—
whole; bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
mukundaḥ—Lord Mukunda; tu—but; adya api—even until now;
yat—whose; pāda-rajaḥ—dust of the feet; śruti—by the

                          594
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Vedas; mṛgyam—sought after; eva—certainly.

Aho! It would be my great fortune to take birth as a
blade of grass, a shrub or any other species which may
be anointed with the dust falling from the lotus feet of
any of the Brajabāsīs of Vṛndāvana. Even the śrutis, who
have been searching for so long, have not yet received
the dust of the lotus feet of Bhagavān Mukunda, who is
the life and soul of these Brajabāsīs. If it is
impossible for me to take birth in any species in
Vṛndāvana, then let me take birth even as a rock on the
border of Nanda-Gokula. The ladies who sweep the streets
will then rub their feet on this rock to clean them, and
by this I will receive the good fortune of touching the
dust of their feet (or as a rocky hill - Brahma-parvat -
so that I may witness and serve Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s sweet
līlās).



Even Brahmā longs to take birth in Vraja as a blade of
grass

mudā yatra brahmā tṛna-nikara-gulmādiṣu paraṁ

sadā kāṅkṣan janmārpita-vividha-karmāpy anudinam

kramād ye tatraiva vraja-bhuvi vasanti priya-janā

mayā te te vandyāḥ parama-vinayāt puṇya-khacitāḥ

Śrī Vraja-vilāsa-stava 100, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī/BMP
p. 422

Although Brahmā is always very busy carrying out his
many weighty duties including creating the material
universe, still he longs to take birth in Vṛndāvana as a
blade of grass, a shrub, or in any other species. With
utmost humility I worship all of the dear devotees who
reside in that Vṛndāvana. They are all highly virtuous
and supremely worshipable on account of their
unparalleled humility.



The grass, bushes, insects, and other creatures in Vraja
all assist Kṛṣṇa in His pastimes

yat kiñcit tṛṇa-gulma-kīkaṭa-mukhaṁ goṣṭhe samastaṁ hi
tat

sarvānandamayaṁ mukunda-dayitaṁ līlānukūlaṁ param

Vraja-vilāsa-stava 102/VG p. 91/MS p. 16/BMP p. 211

The grass, bushes, insects, and other creatures in Vraja
are all very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa. They assist the Lord in
ways favourable for His pastimes. They are filled with
all varieties of transcendental bliss. (Again and again
the scriptures recount the earnest request of Brahmā and
others to reside in Vraja in the form of an animal, a
tree, a bush or a stone). For these reasons I vow to
offer my respects to all the living entities who reside
in Vraja.

                          595
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017




Uddhava tells that even Brahmā is distracted upon seeing
the mood of the gopīs

etāḥ paraṁ tanu-bhṛto bhuvi gopa-vadhvo

govinda eva nikhilātmani rūḍha-bhāvāḥ

vāñchanti yad bhava-bhiyo munayo vayaṁ ca

kiṁ brahma-janmabhir ananta-kathā-rasasya

SB 10.47.58/BR 6.25

etāḥ—these (gopīs); param—alone; tanu—their bodies;
bhṛtaḥ—maintain successfully; bhuvi—on the earth; gopa-
vadhvaḥ—the young cowherd women; govinde—for Lord Kṛṣṇa;
eva—certainly; nikhila—of all; ātmani—the Soul; rūḍha—
perfected; bhāvāḥ—ecstatic loving attraction; vāñchanti—
they desire; yat—which; bhava—material existence; bhiyaḥ
—those who are afraid of; munayaḥ—sages; vayam—we; ca—
also; kim—what use; brahma—as a brāhmaṇa or as Lord
Brahmā; janmabhiḥ—with births; ananta—of the unlimited
Lord; kathā—for the topics; rasasya—for one who has a
taste.

The gopīs have one-pointed rūḍha-bhāva towards Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is the soul of all living entities. This is
the topmost level of kṛṣṇa-prema, and by this, their
lives are successful. This bhāva is hankered for, not
only by fearful persons desiring liberation from this
material existence, but also by great mahāpuruṣas, as
well as devotees like ourselves; but none of us are able
to attain it. For such persons whose minds are
spontaneously attached to kṛṣṇa-kathā, what is the
benefit of taking birth, even as Brahmā, again and again
for many mahā-kalpas?



The glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana seen with the eyes of bhāva

puṇyāt puṇyaṁ maṅgalaṁ maṅgalānāṁ

divyād divyaṁ kāma-daṁ kāma-dānām

sārāt sāraṁ prema-daṁ prema-dānām

anyad vṛndāraṇyato manyatāṁ kaḥ

Vṛndāvana Mahimāmṛta 13.45

puṇyāt-of the sacred; puṇyam-the most sacred; maṅgalam-
of the auspicious; maṅgalānām-the most auspicious;
divyāt-of the splendidly transcendental; divyam-the most
splendidly transcendental; kāmadam-of the the fulfiller
of desires; kāmadānām-the best of they who fulfil
desires; sārāt-of the essence; sāram-the essence;
premadam-of the the bestowers of prema; premadānām-the
best of bestowers of prema; anyat-other (place);
vṛndāraṇyataḥ-than Vṛndāvana; manyatām-could be
considered; kaḥ-what?

                             596
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


This dhāma is the most sacred of all sacred places. The
most auspicious of all auspicious things. The most
splendidly transcendental of all that is splendidly
transcendental. The greatest desire-fulfilling
benefactor of all desire-fulfilling benefactors. The
essence of the essence and the greatest bestower of
prema. What other place than Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma can be
considered in this way?



Jāta (in bhāva) and ajāta-rati-sādhaka (prior to bhāva)
— different meditations for different adhikāras

cañcala-jīvana-srota pravāhiyā, kālera sāgare dhāya

gela je divāsa, nā āsibe āra, ebe kṛṣṇa ki upāya

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-Vijñapti 6, BVT/SGG p. 68

(For the ajāta-rati-sādhakas:) This flickering life is
rushing towards the ocean of death and can end in any
moment. The days that have passed without performing
bhajana can never be reclaimed. Alas, Kṛṣṇa, what am I
to do now?

(The jāta-rati-sādhaka considers that a gopī is
praying:) The youthful beauty of my life is rushing like
a river towards the ocean of Your love. It will only
last for a few days and will soon dry up. Alas, a day
that has passed without Your association can never be
reclaimed. O Kṛṣṇa, what am I to do now?

Queen Kuntī devī expresses her rati for Kṛṣṇa

tvayi me —nanya-viṣayā matir madhu-pate “sakṛt

ratim udvahatād addhā gaṅgevaugham udanvati

SB 1.8.42

tvayi—unto You; me—my; ananya-viṣayā—unalloyed; matiḥ—
attention; madhu-pate—O Lord of Madhu; asakṛt—
continuously; ratim—attraction; udvahatāt—may flow;
addhā—directly; gaṅgā—the Ganges; iva—like; ogham—flows;
udanvati—down to the sea.

O my Lord of Sweetness (Madhu)! As the Gaṅgā forever
flows to the sea without hindrance, let my attraction be
constantly drawn unto you without being diverted to
anyone else.



Even devotees inclined to aiśvarya, Bhagavān’s opulence,
long for gopī-bhāva

gopyas tapaḥ kim acaran yad amuṣya rūpaṁ

lāvaṇya-sāram asamordhvam ananya-siddham

dṛgbhiḥ pibanty anusavābhinavaṁ durāpam


                          597
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

ekānta-dhāma yaśasaḥ śriya aiśvarasya

SB 10.44.14/CC Ādi 4.156, Mad 21.112/BR 6.26/BS 33 pt/
STB p. 86

gopyaḥ—the gopīs; tapaḥ—austerities; kim—what; acaran—
performed; yat—from which; amuṣya—of such a one (Lord
Kṛṣṇa); rūpam—the form; lāvaṇya-sāram—the essence of
loveliness; asama-ūrdhvam—not paralleled or surpassed;
ananya-siddham—not perfected by any other ornament
(self-perfect); dṛgbhiḥ—by the eyes; pibanti—they drink;
anusava-abhinavam—constantly new; durāpam—difficult to
obtain; ekānta-dhāma—the only abode; yaśasaḥ—of fame;
śriyaḥ—of beauty; aiśvarasya—of opulence.

[The Mathurā-ramaṇīs prayed:] “Aho! What kind of
austerities did the gopīs perform to be able to
constantly drink the unequaled and unsurpassed sweetness
of His bodily beauty, which is newer and newer at every
moment? The gopīs directly see with their own eyes the
very rare and ever-fresh loveliness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form,
which is the essence of all lustre, and is the
unrivaled, exclusive reservoir of independently perfect
fame, beauty and opulence.”



The desire to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa becomes the obsession of
the devotee’s heart in the stage of bhāva

ānamrām asita-bhruvor upacitām akṣiṇa-pakṣmāṅkureṣv

ālolām anurāgiṇor nayanayor ārdrāṁ mṛdau jalpite

ātāmrām adharāmṛte mada-kalām amlāna-vaṁśī-svaneṣv

āśāste mama locanaṁ vraja-śiśor mūrttiṁ jagan mohinīm

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 54/BRS 1.3.36/BRSB p. 140

ānamrām—curved; asita—black; bhruvoḥ—eyebrows; upacitām—
furnished abundantly with; akṣīna—thick; pakṣmā—
eyelashes; aṅkureṣu—like sprouts; ālolām—rolling;
anurāginoḥ—passionate; nayanayoḥ—eyes; ārdrām—full of
feeling; mṛdau—gentle; jalpite—speech; ātāmrām—very red;
adhara—of the lips; amṛte—nectar; madakalām—soft,
slurred; amlāna—clear; vaṁśī—of the flute; svaneṣu—deep
notes; āśāste—desires; mama—my; locanam—eye; vraja-śiśor
—of Vraja’s child (Kṛṣṇa); mūrtim—the form; jagat—the
universe; mohinīm—enchanter.

My eyes are ever restless to see the form of vraja-
kiśora (that adolescent boy of Vraja) who enchants the
entire world, who is endowed with gracefully curving
black eyebrows, whose eyelashes are thick and dense,
whose eyes are always restless to see those who are
possessed of anurāga (or whose eyes always display
anurāga), whose voice is soft and filled with rasa,
whose lips are as sweet and tasty as nectar and slightly
reddish-copper in hue, and who carries a flawless flute
whose inexplicably sweet and mild tones madden all (and
incite the gopīs— kāma).



                          598
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


The śruti-phala of Daśa-mūla (i.e. bhāva) is attained
through sādhu-saṅga

saṁsevya daśa-mūlaṁ vai hitvā “vidyām ayaṁ janaḥ

bhāva-puṣṭiṁ tathā tuṣṭiṁ labhate sādhu-saṅgataḥ

Daśa mūla tattva, Śruti-phala

saṁsevya—accepting; daśa—ten; mūlam—axioms, fundamental
truths; vai—certainly; hitvā—abandoning; avidyām—
ignorance; ayam—this; janaḥ—person; bhāva—of pure love
of God; puṣṭim—nourishment; tathā—in the same way;
tuṣṭim—satisfaction; labhate—attains; sādhu—of the
saintly devotees; saṅgataḥ—because of the association.

When the jīva studies and carefully follows the
teachings of this Daśa-mūla, he throws far away material
disease in the form of ignorance. Thereafter, through
the association of sādhus, he obtains the nourishment of
bhāva, and becomes fully satisfied.



Bhāva bhakti can only arise by association with a pure
devotee (alternatively, at the stage of bhāva one will
get darśana of Kṛṣṇa and lose all attraction to family
and worldly things)

dṛg-ambhobhir dhautaḥ pulaka-patalī maṇḍita-tanuḥ

skhalann antaḥ-phullo dadhad atipṛthuṁ vepathum api

dṛśoḥ kakṣaṁ yāvan mama sa puruṣaḥ ko —py upayayau

na jāte kiṁ tāvan matir iha gṛhe nābhiramate

BRS 1.2.241/MS 7 pt

I don—t know why my mind no longer remains attached to
household affairs since the time when that extraordinary
person appeared on the pathway of my eyes. His body was
drenched in showers of tears, his bodily hairs stood on
end in ecstasy, he faltered at every step and was
submerged in transcendental bliss within his heart while
feverishly trembling.

[an alternative translation:] Ever since I saw a certain
person whose body was washed with his own tears, whose
hairs were standing on end, and who stumbled around with
a joyous heart while profusely quivering, my mind has
become so attached to that form of Kṛṣṇa that I no
longer have any attachment to my family.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī: The meaning here is, “My
consciousness (mama matiḥ) dwells on (abhiramate) the
indescribable Śyāmasundara who has appeared in my heart
(iha) and thus my mind does not dwell (na abhiramate) on
my family and home (gṛhe).”

Thus ends Chapter 19 — Bhāva-bhakti



                          599
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017




Chapter 21 — Prema-bhakti-tattva


Desiring to gratify one’s own senses is kāma (lust),
desiring to please Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is prema



The definition śloka of Prema (1)

samyaṅ masṛṇita-svānto mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ

bhāvaḥ sa eva sāndrātmā budhaiḥ premā nigadyate

BRS 1.4.1/CC Madhya 23.7/BRSB p. 145/MS p. 83/BPKG p.
397/GKH (P)

samyak—completely; masṛṇita-sva-antaḥ—which makes the
heart soft; mamatva—of a sense of ownership or “mineness
—; atiśaya-aṅkitaḥ—marked with an abundance; bhāvaḥ—
emotion; saḥ—that; eva—certainly; sāndra-ātmā—whose
nature is very condensed; budhaiḥ—by learned persons;
premā—pure ecstatic love of God; nigadyate—is described.

When bhāva-bhakti or rati deepens and matures, the
sādhaka’s heart becomes completely soft and melted with
an overwhelming sense of mamatā or possessiveness
towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thereafter the devotee experiences
the supreme exaltation of condensed transcendental
bliss. Learned authorities describe this condition as
prema.



What is Prema? (definition śloka 2)

sarvathā dhvaṁsa-rahitaṁ yadyapi dhvaṁsa-kāraṇe

yad bhāva-bandhanaṁ yūnoḥ sa premā parikīrtitaḥ

Ujjvala-nīlāmaṇi/CC Adi 4.165 pt/SB 10.60.51 pt/STB p.
54

saḥ—that; bhāva-bandhanam—bondage of ecstatic love;
yūnoḥ—between a youthful couple; yad—which; yady api—
although; dhvaṁsa-kāraṇe—there is cause for dissolution;
sarvathā—in everyway; dhvaṁsa-rahitam—free from
dissolution; parikīrtitaḥ—declared; premā—to be pure
transcendental love.

When the affectionate bond between a young man and a
young woman can never be destroyed, even when there is
every cause for its destruction, but instead of breaking
it becomes unlimitedly newer and more relishable, such
an attachment is called prema - pure transcendental
love.



Kṛṣṇa-prema does not exist in the material world


                          600
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

akaitava kṛṣṇa-prema, yena jāmbūnada-hema,

sei premā nṛloke nā haya

yadi haya tāra yoga, nā haya tabe viyoga,

viyoga haile keha nā jīyaya

CC Madhya 2.43

akaitava kṛṣṇa-prema—unalloyed love of Kṛṣṇa; yena—like;
jāmbū-nada-hema—gold from the Jāmbū River; sei premā—
that love of Godhead; nṛ-loke—in the material world; nā
haya—is not possible; yadi—if; haya—there is; tāra—with
it; yoga—connection, binding; nā—not; haya—is; tabe—
then; viyoga—separation; viyoga—separation; haile—if
there is; keha—someone; nā jīyaya—cannot live.

Pure kṛṣṇa-prema, just like gold from the Jāmbū River,
does not exist in the material world. If it existed,
there could not be separation. If separation were there,
one could not live.



The difference between lust and love (kāma and prema)

ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā - tāre bali “kāma—

kṛṣṇendriya-prīti-icchā dhare “prema— nāma

CC Adi 4.165/BR 8.9 pt

ātma-indriya-prīti—for the pleasure of one’s own senses;
vāñchā—desires; tāre—to that; bali—I say; kāma—lust;
kṛṣṇa-indriya-prīti—for the pleasure of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s
senses; icchā—desire; dhare—holds; prema—love; nāma—the
name.

The desire to gratify one’s own senses is kāma (lust),
but the desire to please the senses of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
prema (pure love of God). [Briefly, lust is “for me” -
love is “for Śrī Kṛṣṇa”].

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura [Kṛṣṇa is saying:] “Those
jīvas who do not serve Me by correctly using their free
will, have to accept kāma, an enjoying mood, which is
the perverted form of the jīvas— pure love for Me,
prema.”



The love between Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs is pure prema, not
lust

gopī-gaṇera premera rūḍha-bhāva nāma

viśuddha nirmala prema, kabhu nahe kāma

CC Ādi 4.162

gopī-gaṇera—of the gopīs; premera—of the love; rūḍha-
bhāva—the ecstatic mood in the state of ascended, fully
blown bhāva; nāma—named; viśuddha—pure; nirmala—

                           601
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

spotless; prema—love; kabhu—at anytime; nahe—is not;
kāma—lust.

The love of the gopīs is called rūḍha-bhāva. It is pure
and spotless prema. It is not at any time kāma (lust).



Lust and love are as different as iron and gold

kāma, prema - doṅhākāra vibhinna lakṣaṇa

lauha āra hema yaiche svarūpe vilaksana

CC Ādi 4.164

kāma—lust; prema—love; doṅhākāra—of the two; vibhinna—
separate; lakṣaṇa—symptoms; lauha—iron; āra—and; hema—
gold; yaiche—just as; svarūpe—in nature; vilakṣaṇa—
different.

Lust and prema are completely different, just as iron
and gold have different natures.



Lust is like dense darkness, but love is like the bright
sun

ataeva kāma-preme bahuta antara

kāma - andha-tamaḥ, prema - nirmala bhāskara

CC Ādī 4.171/PS 58 pt

ataeva—therefore; kāma-preme—in lust and love; bahuta—
much; antara—difference; kāma—lust; andha-tamaḥ—blind
darkness; prema—love; nirmala—pure; bhāskara—sun.

Therefore lust and prema are quite different. Lust is
like dense darkness, but prema is like the bright sun.

premaiva gopa-rāmāṇāṁ kāma ity agamat prathām

ity uddhavādayo —py etaṁ vāñchanti bhagavat-priyāḥ

CC Ādi 4.163/BRS 1.2.285/PS 58 pt

prema—love; eva—only; gopa-rāmāṇām—of the women of
Vraja; kāmaḥ—lust; iti—as; agamat—went to; prathām—fame;
iti—thus; uddhava-ādayaḥ—headed by Śrī Uddhava; api—
even; etam—this; vāñchanti—desire; bhagavat-priyāḥ—dear
devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The pure prema of the gopīs has become celebrated by the
name “kāma— (lust). The dear devotees of the Lord,
headed by Śrī Uddhava, desire to taste that love.
[Although the gopīs— prema is sometimes referred to as
kāma, this refers to divine, transcendental desire to
satisfy Kṛṣṇa in conjugal love and is completely devoid
of lust].

ataeva gopī-gaṇera nāhi kāma-gandha


                          602
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-sukha lāgi mātra, kṛṣṇa se sambandha

CC Ādi 4.172/PS 8 pt

ataeva—therefore; gopī-gaṇera—of the gopīs; nāhi—not
indeed; kāma-gandha—the slightest bit of lust; kṛṣṇa-
sukha—the happiness of Lord Kṛṣṇa; lāgi—for; mātra—only;
kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; se—that; sambandha—the relationship.

Thus there is not the slightest taint of lust in the
gopīs— love. Their relationship with Kṛṣṇa is only for
the sake of His enjoyment.

āmāra darśane kṛṣṇa pāila eta sukha

ei sukhe gopīra praphulla-aṅga-mukha

CC Ādi 4.191/PS 58 pt

āmāra darśane—in seeing me; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; pāila—
obtained; eta—so much; sukha—happiness; ei—this; sukhe—
in happiness; gopīra—of the gopīs; praphulla—full-blown;
aṅga-mukha—bodies and faces.

[The gopīs think:] “Śrī Kṛṣṇa has obtained so much
pleasure by seeing me.” That thought increases the
fullness and beauty of their faces and bodies.



gopī-śobhā dekhi— kṛṣṇera śobhā bāḍhe yata

kṛṣṇa-śobhā dekhi— gopīra śobhā bāḍhe tata

Ādi 4.192/PS 58 pt

gopī-śobhā—the beauty of the gopīs; dekhi—seeing;
kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; śobhā—the beauty; bāḍhe—
increases; yata—as much as; kṛṣṇa-śobhā—the beauty of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; dekhi—seeing; gopīra—of the gopīs; śobhā—the
beauty; bāḍhe—increases; tata—that much.

As much as the beauty of Śrī Kṛṣṇa increases at the
sight of the beauty of the gopīs, the gopīs— beauty
increases when they see Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty.

ataeva sei sukha kṛṣṇa-sukha poṣe

ei hetu gopī-preme nāhi kāma-doṣe

CC Ādi 4.195/PS 58 pt

ataeva—therefore; sei—that; sukha—happiness; kṛṣṇa-sukha
—the happiness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; poṣe—nourishes; ei—this;
hetu—reason; gopī-preme—in the love of the gopīs; nāhi—
there is not; kāma-doṣe—the fault of lust.

Therefore we find that the joy of the gopīs nourishes
the joy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. For that reason the fault of lust
is not present in their love.

kāma-gandha-hīna svābhāvika gopī-prema

nirmala, ujjvala, śuddha yena dagdha hema

                          603
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


CC Ādi 4.209

kāma-gandha-hīna—without any scent of lust; svābhāvika—
natural; gopī-prema—the love of the gopīs; nirmala—
spotless; ujjvala—blazing (indicating mahābhāva); śuddha
—pure; yena—like; dagdha hema—molten gold.

The natural love of the gopīs is devoid of any trace of
lust. It is faultless, bright and pure, like molten
gold.



pahilehi rāga nayana-bhaṅge bhela anudina bāḍhala,
avadhi nā gela

nā so ramaṇa, nā hāma ramaṇī duṅhu-mana manobhava peṣala
jāni—

e sakhi, se-saba prema-kāhinī kānu-ṭhāme kahabi
vichurala jāni—

nā khoṅjaluṅ dūtī, nā khoṅjaluṅ ān duṅhukeri milane
madhya ta pāṅca-bāṇa

ab sohi virāga, tuṅhu bheli dūtī su-purukha-premaki
aichana rīti

CC Madhya 8.194/STB p. 56

pahilehi—in the beginning; rāga—attraction; nayana-
bhaṅge—by activities of the eyes; bhela—there was; anu-
dina—gradually, day after day; bāḍhala—increased; avadhi
—limit; nā—not; gela—reached; nā—not; so—He; ramaṇa—the
enjoyer; nā—not; hāma—I; ramaṇī—the enjoyed; duṅhu-mana—
both the hearts; manaḥ-bhava—of (mind-born) Cupid;
peṣala—pressed together; jāni——knowing; e—this; sakhi—My
dear friend; se-saba—all those; prema-kāhinī—affairs of
love; kānu-ṭhāme—before Kṛṣṇa; kahabi—you will say;
vichurala—He has forgotten; jāni——knowing; nā—not;
khoṅjaluṅ—searched out; dūtī—a messenger; nā—not;
khoṅjaluṅ—searched out; ān—anyone else; duṅhukeri—of
both of Us; milane—by the meeting; madhya—in the middle;
ta—indeed; pāṅca-bāṇa—five arrows of Cupid; ab—now; sohi
—that; virāga—separation; tuṅhu—you; bheli—became; dūtī—
the messenger; su-purukha—of a beautiful person; premaki
—of loving affairs; aichana—such; rīti—the consequence.

Alas, before We met there was an initial attachment
between Us brought about by an exchange of glances. In
this way attachment evolved. That attachment has
gradually grown, and there is no limit to it. Now that
attachment has become a natural sequence between
Ourselves. It is not that it is due to Kṛṣṇa, the
enjoyer, nor is it due to Me, for I am the enjoyed. It
is not like that. This attachment was made possible by
the meeting of our two hearts and the pressure of mind-
born Cupid whereby Kṛṣṇa’s mind and My mind have merged
together. Now, during this time of separation, it is
very difficult to explain these loving affairs. My dear
friend, though Kṛṣṇa might have forgotten all these
things, you can understand and bring this message to
Him. But during Our first meeting there was no messenger

                            604
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

between Us, nor did I request anyone to see Him. Indeed,
Cupid’s five arrows were Our via media. Now, during this
separation, that attraction has increased to another
ecstatic state. My dear friend, please act as a
messenger on My behalf, because if one is in love with a
beautiful person, this is the consequence.



Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa began to play sweetly on His flute,
attracting the minds of the beautiful-eyed gopīs

dṛṣṭvā kumudvantam akhaṇḍa-maṇḍalaṁ

ramāna-nābhaṁ nava-kuṅkumāruṇam

vanaṁ ca tat-komala-gobhī rañjitaṁ

jagau kalaṁ vāma-dṛśāṁ manoharam

SB 10.29.3/STB p. 59

dṛṣṭvā—observing; kamudvantam—causing the night-blooming
kumuda lotuses to open; akhaṇḍa—unbroken; maṇḍalam—the
disk of whose face; ramā—of the goddess of fortune;
ānana—(resembling) the face; ābham—whose light; nava—
new; kuṅkuma—with vermilion powder; aruṇam—reddened;
vanam—the forest; ca—and; tat—of that moon; komala—
gentle; gobhiḥ—by the rays; rañjitam—colored; jagau—He
played His flute; kalam—sweetly; vāma-dṛśām—for the
girls who had charming eyes; manaḥ-haram—enchanting.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw the unbroken disk of the full moon glowing
with the red effulgence of newly applied vermilion, as
if it were the face of the goddess of fortune. He also
saw the kumuda lotuses opening in response to the moon’s
presence and the forest gently illumined by its rays.
Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa began to play sweetly on His flute,
attracting the minds of the beautiful-eyed gopīs.



The Gopīs run towards Kṛṣṇa upon hearing his flute song

niśamya gītāṁ tad-anaṅga-vardhanaṁ

vraja-striyaḥ kṛṣṇa-gṛhīta-mānasāḥ

ājagmur anyonyam alakṣitodyamāḥ

sa yatra kānto java-lola-kuṇḍalāḥ

SB 10.29.4/BMP p. 417/GKH (P)

niśamya—hearing; gītam—the music; tat—that; anaṅga—
Cupid; vardhanam—which fortifies; vraja-striyaḥ—the
young women of Vraja; kṛṣṇa—by Kṛṣṇa; gṛhīta—seized;
mānasāḥ—whose minds; ājagmuḥ—they went; anyonyam—to one
another; alakṣita—unnoticed; udyamāḥ—their going
forward; saḥ—He; yatra—where; kāntaḥ—their boyfriend;
java—because of their haste; lola—swinging; kuṇḍalāḥ—
whose earrings.

When the young women of Vṛndāvana heard Kṛṣṇa’s flute

                          605
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

song, which arouses Cupid within the heart, their minds
were absorbed in thoughts of the Lord. They went to
where their lover waited, each unknown to the others,
moving so quickly that their earrings swung back and
forth.



The Queens of Dvārakā have samañjasa-rati and cannot
control Kṛṣṇa by their prema

smāyāvaloka-lava-darśita-bhāva-hāri-

bhrū-maṇḍala-prahita-saurata-mantra-śauṇḍaiḥ

patnyas tu śoḍaśa-sahasram anaṅga-bāṇair

yasyendriyaṁ vimathitum karaṇair na śekuḥ

SB 10.61.5/PS 58 pt

smāya—with concealed laughter; avaloka—of glances; lava—
by the traces; darśita—displayed; bhāva—by the
intentions; hāri—enchanting; bhrū—of the eyebrows;
maṇḍala—by the arch; prahita—sent forth; saurata—
romantic; mantra—of messages; śauṇḍaiḥ—with the
manifestations of boldness; patnyaḥ—wives; tu—but;
ṣoḍaśa—sixteen; sahasram—thousand; anaṅga—of Cupid;
bāṇaiḥ—with the arrows; yasya—whose; indriyam—senses;
vimathitum—to agitate; karaṇaiḥ—and by (other) means; na
śekuḥ—were unable.

The arched eyebrows of these sixteen thousand queens
enchantingly expressed those ladies— secret intentions
through coyly smiling sidelong glances. Thus their
eyebrows boldly sent forth conjugal messages. Yet even
with these arrows of Cupid, and with other means as
well, they could not agitate Lord Kṛṣṇa’s senses.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: The Queens of Dvārakā have kāma
(the desire to saisfy their own senses) and therefore
their love is not capable of controlling Kṛṣṇa
(samañjasa-rati). By contrast, the gopīs— prema is
completely pure and devoid of kāma. Their only desire is
to please Kṛṣṇa and therefore they control Kṛṣṇa by
their prema (samartha-rati).



The gopīs— prema is samarthā - capable of controlling
Kṛṣṇa

sādhāraṇī dhūmayitā samañjasā sadā dīptā

rūḍhe tathoddīptā samarthāya

śuddīptā śrī-rādhā-prema jena ujjvalita hema

modanādi bhābe sadā tāya

Gīta māla, song 24, text 1

sādhāraṇī—general; dhūmayitā—smoky; samañjasā—proper,
according to social standards; sadā—always; dīptā—

                             606
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

blazing; rūḍhe—in rudha; tathā—so; uddīptā—shining;
samarthāya—of that perfect love which is capable of
controlling the lover; śūddīpta—brilliantly shining;
śrī-rādhā—Śrī Rādhā;prema—pure transcendental love; jena
—like; ujjvalita—shining; hema—gold; modanādi—beginning
with modana; bhābe—in bhāva; sadā—always; tāya—of Her.

The sādhāraṇī lovers (like Kubjā) manifest ecstatic love
that is dhūmayitā (smoky). The samañjasā lovers (like
the Dvārakā queens) manifest ecstatic love that is dīptā
(shining). The samarthā lovers (the gopīs) in rūḍha-
mahā-bhāva manifest ecstastic love that is uddīptā
(brilliantly shining). Śrī Rādhā manifests ecstatic love
that is sūddīptā (very brilliantly shining), love that
glistens like gold. In that love modana and the other
bhāvas are always manifest. (samarthā means competent,
capable, highly effective (at controlling Kṛṣṇa).

Jaiva Dharma on this topic: There are three kinds of
rati: 1. sādhāraṇī—general, 2. samañjasā—proper (having
a sense of social propriety) and 3. samarthā—perfect
(capable of controlling Kṛṣṇa). Sādhāraṇī love is like a
maṇi (jewel), samañjasā love is like Cintāmaṇi, and
samarthā love, which has no equal, is like a Kaustubha-
maṇi. In sādhāraṇī and samañjasā rati, the desire for
sambhoga is for one’s own personal satisfaction.
Samarthā is the special bhāva that is completely
selfless and free from self-interest. (JD ch. 36)



The devotees keep Me bound in their hearts with the
ropes of prema

bhakta āmā preme bāndhiyāche hṛdaya-bhitare

yāhāṅ netra paḍe tāhāṅ dekhaye āmāre

CC Mad 25.127/BR 2.30 pt

bhakta—a devotee; āmā—Me; preme—by love; bāndiyāche—has
bound; hṛdaya-bhitare—within his heart; yāhāṅ—wherever;
netra—the eyes; paḍe—fall; tāhāṅ—there; dekhaye—he sees;
āmāre—Me.

The pure devotee binds Me in his heart with the ropes of
prema, and sees only Me wherever he looks.



The pure devotees bring Kṛṣṇa under their control

mayi nirbaddha-hṛdayāḥ sādhavaḥ sama-darśanāḥ

vaśe kurvanti māṁ bhaktyā sat-striyaḥ sat-patiṁ yathā

SB 9.4.66/GKH (P)

mayi—unto Me; nirbaddha-hṛdayāḥ—firmly attached in the
core of the heart; sādhavaḥ—the pure devotees; sama-
darśanāḥ—who are equal to everyone; vaśe—under control;
kurvanti—they make; mām—unto Me; bhaktyā—by devotional
service; sat-striyaḥ—chaste women; sat-patim—unto the
gentle husband; yathā—as.

                           607
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


As chaste women bring their gentle husbands under
control by service, the pure devotees, who are equal to
everyone and completely attached to Me in the core of
the heart, bring Me under their full control.



nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-prema “sādhya— kabhu naya

śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya

CC Mad 22.107/BRSB p. 27

nitya-siddha—eternally established; kṛṣṇa-prema—pure
love of Kṛṣṇa; sādhya—to be gained; kabhu—at any time;
naya—not; śravaṇa-ādi—by hearing, etc.; śuddha—purified;
citte—in the heart; karaye udaya—awakens.

Kṛṣṇa-prema is a potentiality which eternally exists in
the hearts of the living entities. It is not something
to be gained from another source. When the heart is
purified by hearing and chanting (under the guidance of
sad-guru) this love naturally awakens.



Prema-bhakti is the aim and object of life

yasyāḥ śreyas-karaṁ nāsti yayā nirvṛtim āpnuyāt

yā sādhayati mām eva bhaktiṁ tām eva sādhayet

Brahma-saṁhitā 60

na asti—there is nothing else; śreyaḥ-karam—which is
more potent in promoting auspiciousness; yasyāḥ—than
that (śuddha-bhakti); yayā—by that; āpnuyāt—one can
attain; nirvṛtim—supreme bliss; eva—certainly; yā
sādhayati—it captivates; mām—Me; eva—indeed; sādhayet—
one should practice sādhana; tām bhaktim—for that
śuddha-bhakti.

Prema-bhakti is the aim and object of life, and there is
nothing more auspicious than this. The platform of
supreme bliss is attained only through prema-bhakti.
This prema-bhakti, which controls Me, is only achieved
through sādhana-bhakti.



Love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate aim and objective of
human life

brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

mālī hañā kare sei bīja āropaṇa

śravaṇa-kīrtana-jale karaye secana

“prema-phala— pāki— paḍe, mālī āsvādaya


                           608
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

latā avalambi— mālī “kalpa-vṛkṣa— pāya

tāhāṅ sei kalpa-vṛkṣera karaye sevana

sukhe prema-phala-rasa kare āsvādana

ei ta parama-phala “parama-puruṣārtha—

yāṅra āge tṛṇa-tulya cāri puruṣārtha

CC Mad 19. 151-152,162-164/BPKG p. 396

brahmāṇḍa bhramite—wandering in this universe; kona—
some; bhāgyavān—most fortunate; jīva—living being; guru—
of the spiritual master; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; prasāde—by the
mercy; pāya—gets; bhakti-latā—of the creeper of
devotional service; bīja—the seed; mālī hañā—becoming a
gardener; kare—does; sei—that; bīja—seed of devotional
service; āropaṇa—sowing; śravaṇa—of hearing; kīrtana—of
chanting; jale—with the water; karaye—does; secana—
sprinkling; prema-phala—the fruit of love of God; pāki——
becoming mature; paḍe—falls down; mālī—the gardener;
āsvādaya—tastes; latā avalambi——taking advantage of the
growing bhakti-latā; mālī—the gardener; kalpa-vṛkṣa pāya
—reaches the desire tree in Goloka Vṛndāvana; tāhāṅ—
there (in Goloka Vṛndāvana); sei kalpa-vṛkṣera—of the
lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, which are compared to a desire
tree; karaye sevana—engages in the service; sukhe—in
transcendental bliss; prema-phala-rasa—the juice of the
fruit of devotional service; kare—does; āsvādana—
tasting; eita—this; parama-phala—the supreme goal of
life; parama—supreme; puruṣa-artha—interest of the
living being; yāṅra āge—in the presence of which; tṛṇa-
tulya—very insignificant; cāri—four; puruṣa-artha—the
four goals of human life (dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa).

While wandering on and on in this material existence,
some fortunate jīva, by the mercy of Guru and Kṛṣṇa,
attains the bhakti-latā-bīja, the seed of the creeper of
devotion, in the form of Kṛṣṇa sevā-vāsanā (the desire
to serve Kṛṣṇa). He becomes a gardener and waters that
seed with the water of śravaṇa and kīrtana. At first it
begins to sprout, and then it becomes a creeper. It
pierces the coverings of the universe, and one after
another traverses the Virajā, Brahmaloka and the
Paravyoma. Finally, it climbs up to the desire-tree of
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet in Goloka
Vṛndāvana. There it bears fruits in the form of prema.
When the fruit of prema becomes ripe, it falls here in
this world, and the gardener tastes it. Taking support
from that bhakti-latā he takes shelter of the desire
tree of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet and always tastes the
rasa of the prema fruit. This very prema is the crest
jewel of all achievements for the jīva.



Love for Kṛṣṇa is the supreme goal of human life,
parama-puruṣārtha

kṛṣṇa-viṣayaka premā parama puruṣārtha

yāra āge tṛṇa-tulya cāri puruṣārtha


                          609
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

CC Ādi 7.84/KGH (P)

kṛṣṇa-viṣayaka—in the subject of Kṛṣṇa; premā—love;
parama—the highest; puruṣa-artha—achievement of the goal
of life; yāra—whose; āge—before; tṛṇa-tulya—like the
grass in the street; cāri—four; puruṣa-artha—
achievements.

Krishna-prema is the supreme goal of human life, or
parama-puruṣārtha. The other four goals of life are
insignificant in comparison to it. This fifth goal of
life, prema, is like an ocean of ecstatic nectar. In
comparison, the joys derived from dharma, artha, kāma,
and mokṣa are nothing more than a drop of water.



Prema-bhakti is extremely rare — who could desire
anything else?

taṁ durārādhyam ārādhya satām api durāpayā

ekānta-bhaktyā ko vāñchet pāda-mūlaṁ vinā bahiḥ

SB 4.25.55/BS 60 pt

tam—unto You; durārādhyam—very difficult to worship;
ārādhya—having worshiped; satām api—even for the most
exalted persons; durāpayā—very difficult to attain;
ekānta—pure; bhaktyā—by devotional service; kaḥ—who is
that man; vāñchet—should desire; pāda-mūlam—lotus feet;
vinā—without; bahiḥ—outsiders.

O Bhagavān, Your unalloyed devotional service is
extremely difficult to attain, even for sādhus. After
worshiping Your lotus feet, which are rarely attained,
what kind of unfortunate person in this world could give
up loving service to them and desire anything else born
of ignorance, such as the happiness derived from the
gross physical body, from elevation to heaven, or from
liberation?




laukika-sad-bandhuvat

tat tu laukika-sad-bandhu-buddhyā prema bhayādi-jam

vighnaṁ nirasya tad gopa-gopī-dāsyepsayārjayet

Śrī Bṛhad-Bhāgatāmṛtam 2.5.217

tat—that; tu—indeed; laukika—in this world; sad-bandhu—
friend; buddhyā—with the idea; prema—love; bhaya—fear;
ādi—beginning; jam—born; vighnam—impediment; nirasya—
rejecting; tat—that; gopa—of the gopas; gopī—of the
gopis; dāsya—service; ipsayā—with the desire; arjayet—
one should develop.

Thinking of the Lord as one’s own friend or relative
(just as one has a natural, spontaneous affection for a
friend or a relative in this material world), and

                          610
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

yearning to serve the gopas and gopīs, one should reject
awe and reverence (aiśvarya mood) as well as all other
impediments and strive to attain that pure love.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī explains
that the mood of laukika-sad-bandhuvat, which is
characterized by intense possessiveness (mamatā) in
relation to Kṛṣṇa, is indeed the symptom of deep prema
for Him. (BR 1.2 pt)



Definition of Bhakti endowed with Mamatā (i.e. prema)

ananya-mamatā viṣṇau mamatā prema-saṅgatā

bhaktir ity ucyate bhīṣma-prahlādoddhava-nāradaiḥ

Śrī Bhakti-Rasāmṛta-Sindhu 1.4.2/GKH (P)

When one develops an unflinching sense of ownership or
possessiveness (mamāta) in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or in
other words, when one thinks Kṛṣṇa and no one else to be
the only object of love, such an awakening is called
prema-bhakti by exalted persons like Bhīṣma, Prahlāda,
Uddhava, and Nārada.



The development of Prema into Sneha, Rāga, Anurāga,
Bhāva, and Mahābhāva

syād dṛḍheyaṁ ratiḥ premā prodyan snehaḥ kramād ayam

syān mānaḥ praṇayo rāgo 'nurāgo bhāva ity api

bījam ikṣuḥ sa ca rasaḥ sa guḍaḥ khaṇḍa eva saḥ

sa śarkarā sitā sā ca sā yathā syāt sitopalā

Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Sthāyibhāva Pra 53-54/JD ch. 36

When rati, or constant affectionate attachment to Kṛṣṇa,
is very fixed, steady, and determined, then it is known
as prema, or pure love of God. The development of such
divine love may be compared to the refinement of sugar.
Just as in the development of sugar first there is the
sugar-cane, then the juice, then molasses, then crude
sugar, refined sugar, sugar candy, and rock candy, so in
the same way, rati matures into prema, and then sneha,
mana, praṛaya, rāga, anurāga and bhāva.

sādhana-bhakti haite haya “rati—ra udaya

rati gāḍha haile tāra “prema— nāma kaya

prema vṛddhi-krame nāma sneha, māna, praṇaya

rāga, anurāga, bhāva, mahābhāva haya

CC Madhya 19.177-178

sādhana-bhakti—the process of regularly rendering
devotional service; haite—from; haya—there is; ratira—of

                          611
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

attachment; udaya—the awakening; rati—such attachment;
gāḍha haile—becoming thick; tāra—of this; prema—love of
Godhead; nāma—the name; kaya—is said; prema—ecstatic
love for God; vṛddhi-krame—in terms of progressive
increase; nāma—named; sneha—affection; māna—sulky mood;
praṇaya—love; rāga—attachment; anurāga—further
attachment; bhāva—ecstasy; mahā-bhāva—great ecstasy;
haya—are.

By regularly practicing devotional service (sādhana-
bhakti), one gradually becomes attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
This is called rati. When rati becomes intensified, it
becomes prema. The various stages of prema, when
gradually increasing in intensity, are sneha, māna,
praṇaya, rāga, anurāga, bhāva, and mahābhāva.



Only the eyes of devotion smeared with love can see
Śyāmasundara

premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Śrī Brahma-Samhitā 38/JD ch. 40/BPKG p. 354

prema-añjana—with the salve of love; churita—tinged;
bhakti-vilocanena—with eyes of devotion; santaḥ—
exclusively devoted saints; sadā—at all times; eva—
certainly; hṛdayeṣu—within their purified hearts;
vilokayanti—certainly behold; yam—whose; śyāmasundaram—
as beautiful Śyāma; acintya-guṇa—which is possessed of
inconceivable transcendental qualities; svarūpam—
original form; ādi-puruṣam govindam—primeval Supreme
Person, Śrī Govinda; tam—to that; aham bhajāmi—I render
service.

The saintly personalities, whose eyes of bhakti are
smeared with the kājala of prema, always behold Śrī
Kṛṣṇa within their hearts as Śyāmasundara, the
embodiment of inconceivable qualities. I render service
to that ādi-puruṣa, Govinda.



The six Gosvāmīs, intoxicated by Kṛṣṇa-prema, were
overwhelmed in bhāva and jubilantly sang of Śrī Hari’s
brilliantly sublime mādhurya-rasa

rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭe kalinda-tanayā-tīre ca vaṁśīvaṭe

premonmāda-vaśād aśeṣa-daśayā grastau pramattau sadā

gāyantau ca kadā harer guṇa-varaṁ bhāvābhibhūtau mudā

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam, Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya/SGG p.
127

                          612
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


rādhā-kuṇḍa—of the pond called Rādhā-kuṇḍa; taṭe—on the
shore; kalinda-tanayā—of the Yamunā River; tīre—on the
bank; ca—also; vaṁśī-vaṭe—at the Vaṁśī-vaṭa rasa-sthalī;
prema-unmāda—of the madness of love of God; vaśād—
occasioned by the force; aśeṣa-daśayā—by limitless
ecstatic symptoms; grastau—who are seized; pramattau—who
are maddened; sadā—always; gāyantau—who sing; ca—and;
kadā—sometimes; hareḥ—of Lord Hari; guṇa-varam—the
excellent qualities; bhāva—in ecstasy; abhibhūtau—who
are overwhelmed; mudā—with delight; vande—I offer my
respectful obeisances; rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-
jīva-gopālakau—unto the six Gosvāmīs.

I offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma to the Six Gosvāmīs, who had
become mad in prema (premonmāda) in the mood of
separation. Sometimes they were going to the banks of
Rādhā-kuṇḍa or the Yamunā and sometimes to Vaṁśī-vaṭa.
Intoxicated in kṛṣṇa-prema, they were overwhelmed in
bhāva and jubilantly sang of Śrī Hari’s most sublime and
brilliant mādhurya-rasa.



All glories, all glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa-prema-bhakti!

jayati jayati kṛṣṇa-prema-bhaktir yad-aṅghriṁ

nikhila-nigama-tattvaṁ gūḍham ājñāya muktiḥ

bhajati śaraṇa-kāmā vaiṣṇavais tyajyamānā

japa-yajana-tapasyā-nyāsa-niṣṭhāṁ vihāya

Śrī Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam 1.1.8

jayati jayati—all glories; kṛṣṇa—to Kṛṣṇa; prema-bhaktiḥ
—to pure devotional service in mature love; yat—whose;
aṅghrim—feet; nikhila—all; nigama—of the Vedas; tattvam—
the truth; gūḍham—confidential; ājñāya—knowing which;
muktiḥ—liberation personified; bhajati—worships her;
śaraṇa—shelter; kāmā—being eager to have; vaiṣṇavaiḥ—by
the devotees of the Lord; tyajyamānā—having been
abandoned; japa—on mantra chanting; yajana—Vedic
sacrifices; tapasyā—penances; nyāsa—and renunciation;
niṣṭhām—her dependence; vihāya—giving up.

All glories, all glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa-prema-bhakti!
Knowing that the feet of prema-bhakti secretly comprise
all the truths of the Vedas, Liberation herself has come
to worship her. Indeed, Liberation, abandoned by the
Vaiṣṇavas, has now given up her dependence on mantras,
penance, sacrifice, and renunciation and is eager to
have the shelter of Prema-bhakti.



Prema, Kṛṣṇa and His devotees dance together

kṛṣṇere nācāya premā, bhaktere nācāya

āpane nācaye, tine nāce eka-ṭhāñi

CC Antya 18.18

                          613
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


kṛṣṇere—Kṛṣṇa; nācāya—causes to dance; premā—love of
Kṛṣṇa; bhaktere—the devotee; nācāya—causes to dance;
āpane—personally; nācaye—dances; tine—all three; nāce—
dance; eka-ṭhāñi—in one place.

Prema makes Kṛṣṇa and His devotees dance, and She also
dances personally. In this way, all three dance together
in one place.



One who tries to describe Prema is like a dwarf trying
to catch the moon

premāra vikāra varṇite cāhe yei jana

cānda dharite cāhe, yena hañā “vāmana—

CC Antya 18.19

premāra—of ecstatic love of Kṛṣṇa; vikāra—
transformations; varṇite—to describe; cāhe—wants; yei
jana—that person; cānda dharite—to catch the moon; cāhe—
he wants; yena—as if; hañā—being; vāmana—a dwarf.

One who wants to describe the transformations of Kṛṣṇa-
prema is like a dwarf trying to catch the moon in the
sky.

Jaiva-Dharma: Prema-rasa is like the ocean of milk,
which becomes unpalatable when it is mixed with the
donkey urine of logic and argument. It is not
appropriate to apply philosophical considerations of
tattva in the context of prema-rasa. Bhakti-devī bestows
the illumination of knowledge and bliss in the hearts of
qualified devotees so they realise the essence of all
siddhānta without the assistance of any logic
whatsoever, but witholds these inconceivable conclusions
from those who want to comprehend siddhānta through
mundane logic, argument and worldly scholarship. (JD ch.
34)



The “kāma-gāyatrī— mantra is identical with Śrī Kṛṣṇa

kāma-gāyatrī-mantra-rūpa, haya kṛṣṇera svarūpa,

sārdha-cabbiśa akṣara tāra haya

se akṣara candra haya, kṛṣṇe kari— udaya,

tri-jagat kailā kāmamaya

CC Mad 21.125/BRSB Introduction

kāma-gāyatrī-mantra-rūpa—the form of mantra known as
kāma-gāyatrī; haya—is; kṛṣṇera svarūpa—Kṛṣṇa’s original
form; sārdha-cabbiśa—twenty-four and a half; akṣara—
syllables; tāra—of that; haya—are; se akṣara—these
syllables; candra haya—are like moons; kṛṣṇe—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
kari— udaya—awakening; tri-jagat—the three worlds; kailā
—made; kāma-maya—full of desire.

                           614
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


The kāma-gāyatrī mantra is identical with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In
this king of mantras there are twenty-four and a half
syllables and each syllable is a full moon. This
aggregate of moons has caused the moon of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to
rise and fill the three worlds with prema.



Kṛṣṇa is worshiped by the “kāma-gāyatrī— mantra

vṛndāvane “aprākṛta navīna madana—

kāma-gāyatrī kāma-bīje yāṅra upāsana

CC Mad 8.138

vṛndāvane—in Vṛndāvana; aprākṛta—spiritual; navīna—new;
madana—Cupid; kāma-gāyatrī—hymns of desire; kāma-bīje—by
the spiritual seed of desire called klīṁ; yāṅra—of whom;
upāsana—the worship.

In the spiritual realm of Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa is the
spiritual, ever-fresh Cupid. He is worshiped by the
chanting of the kāma-gāyatrī-mantra, with the spiritual
seed klīṁ.



This mantra, consisting of the eighteen divine syllables
prefixed by the “kāma-bīja—, is alone superexcellent

uvāca puratas tasmai tasya divya sarasvatī

kāma-kṛṣṇāya govinda he gopī-jana ity api

vallabhāya priyā vahner mantram te dāsyati priyam

Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā 5.24/Śrī Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha 8

uvāca—said; purataḥ—in front; tasmai—to him; tasya—of
Him (the Supreme Lord); divyā—divine; sarasvatī—the
goddess of learning; kāma—the kāma-bīja (klīṁ); kṛṣṇāya—
to Kṛṣṇa; govinda (govindāya)—to Govinda; he—O; gopī-
jana—of the gopīs; iti—thus; api—also; vallabhāya—to the
dear one; priyā vahneḥ—the wife of Agni, Svāhā (the word
svāhā is uttered while offering oblations); mantram—
mantra; te—to you; dāsyati—will give; priyam—the heart’s
desire.

Then the goddess of learning Sarasvatī, the divine
consort of the Supreme Lord, said to Brahmā who saw
nothing but gloom in all directions, “O Brahmā, this
mantra, viz., klīṁ kṛṣṇāya govindāya gopī-jana-
vallabhāya svāhā, will assuredly fulfill your heart’s
desire.”

Purport: The mantra, consisting of the eighteen divine
letters prefixed by the kāma-bīja, is alone
superexcellent. It has a twofold aspect. One aspect is
that it tends to make the pure soul run after all-
attractive Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Gokula and the divine
milkmaids. This is the acme of the spiritual tendency of
jīvas. When the devotee is free from all sorts of

                          615
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

mundane desires and willing to serve the Lord he attains
the fruition of his heart’s desire, viz., the love of
Kṛṣṇa. But in the case of the devotee who is not of
unmixed aptitude this superexcellent mantra fulfills his
heart’s desire also. The transcendental kāma-bīja is
inherent in the divine logos (yantras) located in
Goloka; the kāma-bīja pervertedly reflected in worldly
affairs satisfies all sorts of desires of this mundane
world.



The Śrutis state that Oṁ and Kliṁ are synonymous,
therefore kāma-bīja indicates Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa tattva

tasmād oṁkāra-sambhūto gopālo viśva-sambhavaḥ

klīm oṁkārasya caikatvaṁ paṭhyate brahma-vādibhiḥ

Uttara-gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad 13/Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā p.
55

Oṁkāra, the sacred syllable oṁ, is the perfect and
complete truth, the combination of potency and the
possessor of potency. It is non-different from Gopāla,
from whom the entire universe has arisen. Those who know
the Absolute Truth, Brahman, regard oṁkāra and klīṁ as
synonyms. Consequently, oṁkāra is Gopāla and klīṁ is
also oṁkāra. Therefore kāma-bīja indicates Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-
tattva.34



My heart is solely captivated by that personification of
a blue tamāla tree

alaṁ tri-diva-vārtayā kim iti sārvabhauma-śrīyā

vidūratara-vārtinī bhavatu mokṣa-lakṣmīr api

kalinda-giri-nandinī-taṭa-nikuñja-puñjodare

mano harati kevalaṁ nava-tamāla-nīlaṁ mahaḥ

Padyāvalī 102 (Śrī Haridās)/ MS 4 pt

alam—enough!; tri-diva—of the heavenly planets; vārtayā—
with talk; kim—what is the use?; iti—thus; sārva-bhauma—
of emperorship; śrīyā—with the opulence; vidūratara—far
away; vārtinī—being; bhavatu—let it become; mokṣa—of
liberation; lakṣmīḥ—the opulence; api—also; kalinda-
giri-nandinī—of the Yamunā River, the daughter of Mount
Kalinda; taṭa—on the shore; nikuñja—the groves; puñja—of
the multitude; udare—within; manaḥ—my heart; harati—
steals; kevalam—exclusively; nava—a new; tamāla—tamāla
tree; nīlam—blue; mahaḥ—splendor.

Enough with this talk of celestial planets! And what is
the use of becoming emperor of the earth? Still further,
may any thought of the opulence of liberation go far
away from me for none of these afford me any pleasure.
My heart is captivated only by that Person whose
complexion resembles a splendid blue-blackish young
tamāla tree and who graces the kuñjas on the banks of

                          616
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

the Yamunā.



May that cowherd boy who is a festival of ecstatic bliss
eternally enjoy transcendental pastimes in our hearts

dhanyānāṁ hṛdi bhāsatāṁ girivara-pratyagra-kuñjaukasāṁ

satyānanda-rasaṁ vikāra-vibhava-vyāvṛttam antar-mahaḥ

asmākaṁ kila ballavī-rati-raso vṛndāṭavī-lālaso

gopaḥ ko “pi mahendrānīla-ruciraś citte muhuḥ krīḍatu

Padyāvalī 75 (Śrī Iśvara Purī)/MS 4 pt

dhanyānām—of those who are fortunate; hṛdi—in the heart;
bhāsatām—manifest; girivara—of Govardhana Hill; prati—in
each; agra-kuñja—grove; aukasām—residing; satya—
transcendental; ānanda—of bliss; rasam—nectar; vikāra-
vibhava-vyāvṛtam—transcendental ecstasy; antaḥ—in the
heart; mahaḥ—festival; asmākam—of us; kila—indeed;
ballavī—with the gopīs; rati-rasaḥ—with the nectar of
love; vṛndā-aṭavi—in Vṛndāvana forest; lālasaḥ—eagerly
enjoying pastimes; gopaḥ—cowherd boy; kaḥ api—a certain;
mahā—great; indranīla—of a sapphire; ruciraḥ—with the
splendor; citte—in the heart; muhuḥ—repeatedly; krīḍatu—
may enjoy pastimes.

May that cowherd boy who is a festival of ecstatic bliss
for the hearts of the fortunate creatures residing in
the groves of Govardhana Hill, who is the lover of the
gopīs, who eagerly enjoy pastimes in Vṛndāvana forest,
and whose complexion is as splendid as a great sapphire,
eternally enjoy transcendental pastimes in our hearts.



We will simply take shelter of a flutist who wears a
guñjā-necklace

rasaṁ praśaṁsantu kavitva-niṣṭhā

brahmāmṛtaṁ veda-śiro-niviṣṭāḥ

vayaṁ tu guñjā-kalitāvataṁsaṁ

gṛhīta-vaṁśaṁ kam api śrayāmaḥ

Padyāvalī 76 (Śrī Mādhavendra Purī)/MS 4 pt

rasam—the mellows of poetry; praśaṁsantu—let them
glorify; kavitva—to poetry; niṣṭhāḥ—those devoted;
brahma—of Brahman; amṛtam—the nectar; veda-śiraḥ-
niviṣṭāḥ—those devoted to studying the Vedas; vayam—we;
tu—but; guñja—of small red, white and black berries worn
by Kṛṣṇa and said to be a form of Śrī Rādhā; kalita—
fashioned; avataṁsam—with a garland; gṛhīta—taken;
vaṁśam—a flute; kam api—of a certain person; śrayāmaḥ—we
have taken shelter.

Those devoted to poetry may praise the nectar of poetry
and those devoted to Vedic study may praise the nectar

                          617
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

of impersonal Brahman. We will praise neither. We will
simply take shelter of that flutist who wears a guñjā
necklace



My mind runs only after that blue boy in Vraja on the
banks of the Yamunā

jātu prārthayate na pārthiva-padaṁ naindre pade modate

sandhate na ca yoga-siddhiṣu dhiyaṁ mokṣaṁ ca nākāṅkṣate

kālindī-vana-sīmāni sthira-taḍin-megha-dyutau kevalam

śuddhe brahmaṇi ballavī-bhuja-latā-baddhe mano dhāvati

Padyāvalī 78 (Śrī Kaviratna)/MS 4 pt

jātu—ever; prārthayate—prays; na—not; pārthiva—of an
earthly king; padam—the post; na—not; aindre—of Indra,
the king of Svargaloka; pade—the post; modate—pleases;
sandhate—fixes; na—not; ca—and; yoga—of the yoga system;
siddhiṣu—on the mystic perfections; dhiyam—the mind;
mokṣam—liberation; ca—also; na—not; ākāṇkṣate—desires;
kālindī—of the Yamunā River; vana—in the forest; sīmāni—
on the shore; sthira—stationary; taḍit—lightning flash;
megha—a cloud; dyutau—the splendor; kevalam—only; śuddhe
—purified; brahmaṇi—the Brahman; ballavī—of a gopī;
bhuja—of the arm; latā—by the vine; baddhe—bound; manaḥ—
the mind; dhāvati—runs.

My mind never prays for the post of an earthly king. The
post of King Indra does not appeal to it. It does not
like the yogic perfections. It does not yearn after
liberation. It only runs after the purified realisation
of the supreme Brahman, who, being embraced by the
creeper-like arms of the gopīs, appears like a lustrous
fresh raincloud interlaced with steady streaks of
lightning in the Vṛndāvana forest on the banks of the
Yamunā.



I pray that the cowherd boy who expertly casts amorous
glances may at once appear within the temple of my heart

anaṅga-rasa-cāturī capala-cāru-netrāñcalaś

calan-makara-kuṇḍala-sphurita-kānti-gaṇḍa-sthalaḥ

vrajollāsita-nāgarī-nikara-rāsa-lāsyotsukaḥ

sa me sapadi mānase sphuratu ko “pi gopālakaḥ

Padyāvalī 97 (Śrī Mādhavendra Purī)/MS 4 pt

anaṅga—of amorous love; rasa—in the mellows; cāturī—
clever Person; capala—restless; cāru—beautiful; netra—of
the eyes; añcalaḥ—the corners; calat—moving; makara—
shark; kuṇḍala—earrings; sphurita—glistening; kānti—
splendor; gaṇḍa-sthalaḥ—on the cheekṣ; vraja—of Vraja;
ullāsita—splendid; nāgarī—of girls; nikara—with a
multitude; lāsya—dance; rāsa—inspiring the essence of

                          618
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

all rasa; lāsya—dance; utsukaḥ—eager; saḥ—He; me—of me;
sapadi—at once; mānase—in the heart; sphuratu—may
appear; kaḥ api— a certain; gopālakaḥ—cowherd boy.

I pray that that certain cowherd boy who is expert in
amorous pastimes, who restlessly glances from the
corners of His eyes, whose lustrous cheeks are further
illuminated by brilliant shark-shaped earrings that
swing to and fro, and who is very eager to enjoy the
rāsa dance with a throng of the blissful gopīs of Vraja,
may at once appear within my mind.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Only by the worship of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala in Vraja is this jewel of rati
(bhāva) awakens within one’s heart.

Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti

yā dohane —vahanane mathanopalepa-

preṅkheṅkhanārbha-ruditokṣaṇa-mārjanādau

gāyanti cainam anurakta-dhiyo —śru-kaṇṭhyo

dhanyā vraja-striya urukrama-citta-yānāḥ

SB 10.44.15/STB p. 87

yaḥ—who (the gopīs); dohane—while milking; avahanane—
threshing; mathana—churning; upalepa—smearing; preṅkha—
on swings; iṅkhana—swinging; arbha-rudita—(taking care
of) crying babies; ukṣaṇa—sprinkling; mārjana—cleaning;
ādau—and so on; gāyanti—they sing; ca—and; enam—about
Him; anurakta—very much attached; dhiyaḥ—whose minds;
aśru—with tears; kaṇṭhyaḥ—whose throats; dhanyāḥ—
fortunate; vraja-striyaḥ—the ladies of Vraja; urukrama—
of Lord Kṛṣṇa; citta-yānāḥ—in the chariots of their
hearts.

[The Mathurā-ramaṇīs said:] “The gopīs of Vraja are the
most fortunate of women because their minds are fully
attached to Kṛṣṇa. They keep Him always seated on the
chariots of their hearts and with their throats choked
up by tears, they constantly sing about Him while
milking the cows, threshing grain, churning butter,
smearing their courtyards with watery cow dung, riding
on swings, taking care of crying babies, sprinkling the
ground with water, cleaning their houses, gathering cow
dung for fuel, and so forth.”



The gopīs see Him as He walks down the road, His smiling
face lovingly glancing upon them

prātar vrajād vrajata āviśataś ca sāyaṁ

gobhiḥ samaṁ kvaṇayato —sya niśamya veṇum

nirgamya tūrṇam abalāḥ pathi bhūri-puṇyāḥ

paśyanti sa-smita-mukhaṁ sa-dayāvalokam

SB 10.44.16/STB p. 89

                             619
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


prātaḥ—in the early morning; vrajāt—from cow grazing;
vrajataḥ—of Him who is going; āviśataḥ—entering; ca—and;
sāyam—in the evening; gobhiḥ samam—together with the
cows; kvaṇayataḥ—who is playing; asya—His; niśamya—
hearing; veṇum—the flute; nirgamya—coming out; tūrṇam—
quickly; abalāḥ—the women; pathi—on the road; bhūri—
extremely; puṇyāḥ—pious; paśyanti—they see; sa—with;
smita—smiling; mukham—face; sa-daya—with mercy (or
love); avalokam—with glances.

When the gopīs hear Kṛṣṇa playing His flute as He leaves
Vraja in the morning with His cows or returns with them
at sunset, the young girls quickly come out of their
houses to see Him. They must have performed many pious
activities to be able to see Him as He walks on the
road, His smiling face mercifully glancing upon them.



Oh sakhiī, this Vṛndāvana is spreading the fame of the
Earth

vṛndāvanaṁ sakhi bhuvo vitanoti kīṛtiṁ

yad devakī-suta-padāmbuja-labdha-lakṣmi

govinda-veṇum anu matta-mayūra-nṛtyaṁ

prekṣyādri-sānv-avaratānya-samasta-sattvam

SB 10.21.10 (Veṇu-gīta 10)/BMP p. 380

vṛndāvanam—Vṛndāvana; sakhi—O friend; bhuvaḥ—of the
earth; vitanoti—spreads (the glories of the Earth which
far exceed even that of Vaikuṇṭha); kīrtim—the glories;
yat—because; devakī-suta—of the son of Devakī (another
name for Yaśodā); pada-ambuja—from the lotus feet;
labdha—received; lakṣmi—the beautiful markings; govinda-
veṇum—the flute of Govinda; anu—continuous; matta—
maddened; mayūra—of the peacocks; nṛtyam—in which there
is the dancing; prekṣya—seeing; adri-sānu—in the meadows
of Govardhana; avarata—stunned; anya—other; samasta—all;
sattvam—creatures.

O sakhī, this Vṛndāvana is spreading the fame of the
Earth planet even above that of Vaikuṇṭha because it is
splendidly decorated by the marks of the lotus feet of
Yaśodānandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Sakhī, when rasikendra Śrī
Kṛṣṇa plays on His muralī, which enchants the whole
world, the peacocks become intoxicated and, thinking the
sound of the flute to be the roaring thunder of the
clouds, spread their tail feathers and begin to dance.
Seeing this, the birds and animals roaming in the
meadows of Govardhana become completely stunned and
relish the sound of the flute with their ears and the
dance of the peacocks with their eyes.



O sakhīs, this Govardhana is the crown jewel of Śrī
Hari’s servants

hantāyam adrir abalā hari-dāsa-varyo

                          620
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


yad rāma-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa-sparaśa-pramodaḥ

mānaṁ tanoti saha-go-gaṇayos tayor yat

pānīya-sūyavasa-kandara-kandamūlaiḥ

SB 10.21.18 (Veṇu-gīta)/CC Madhya 18.34, Antya 14.86/BMP
p. 125/GKH (P)

hanta—Oh (indicating distress); ayam—this (as if
indicating with the finger that Govardhana is just
nearby); adriḥ—hill (Govardhana); abalāḥ—O sakhīs
(literally meaning those who have no balā or power to
serve Kṛṣṇa as Govardhana does); hari-dāsa-varyaḥ—the
best among the servants of Hari (who steals away the
mind, sinful activities and all distress); yat rāma-
kṛṣṇa-caraṇa sparaśa—because of the touch of the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma (or because of the touch
of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His beloved gopīs);
pramodaḥ—jubilaton; mānam tanoti—offers respect (by
offering various services); saha—with; go-gaṇayoḥ—the
cows, calves and cowherd boys; tayoḥ—to Them (the two
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa or of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa yugala); yat—
because; pānīya—with drinking water or cooling
waterfalls; sūyavasa—very soft grass, food-grains,
flowers and fruits; kandara—kuñja-like caves; kanda-
mūlaiḥ—and edible roots.

O sakhīs, this hill, Govardhana, is the crown jewel of
Śrī Hari’s servants (hari-dāsa-varyaḥ). Blessed is his
fortune! By the touch of the lotus feet of our prāṇa-
vallabha Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva Prabhu, who are most
pleasing to the eyes, Govardhana is blossoming with
delight and supplying crystal-clear water, soft grass,
wonderful caves and varieties of roots. By thus serving
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, who are surrounded by the
cowherd boys and cows, he highly honours them.



Śrīmatī Rādhikā says, this hill is “Hari-dāsa-varyaḥ— -
the best servant of Śrī Hari

giri-nṛpa! haridāsa-śreṇī-varyeti-nāmā

mṛtam idam uditaṁ śrī-rādhikā-vaktra-candrāt

vraja-nava-tilakatve klṛpta! vedaiḥ sphuṭaṁ me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam

Śrī Govardhana-vāsa-prārthanā 8, RDG/VG 18 pt

giri—of hills; nṛpa—the king; hari—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; dāsa—
of servants; śreṇi—of the multitudes; varya—the best;
iti—thus; nāma—name; amṛtam—nectar; idam—this; uditam—
spoken; śrī-rādhikā—of Śrī Rādhā; vaktra—of the mouth;
candrāt—from the moon; vraja—of Vraja; nava—new;
tilakatve—as the tilaka marking; klpta—conceived; vedaiḥ
—by the Vedas; sphuṭam—manifested; me—of me.

O Girirāja Mahārāja, from the moon-like face of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā the following words have issued: “This hill is

                          621
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

the best of those who are known as haridāsa.” These
words from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.18) have
revealed the nectar of your name, and all the Vedas have
established you as the fresh tilaka of Vraja-maṇḍala.
You are such a high-class devotee, so if I stay with
you, I will certainly get high-class bhakti. Therefore
the most desirable place to reside is near your side;
please grant me a dwelling there.



Śrīmatī Rādhikā attributes Her own prema to the
aborigine girls (Pulindīs)

pūrṇāḥ pulindya urugāya-padābja-rāga-

śrī-kuṅkumena dayitā-stana-maṇḍitena

tad-darśana-smara-rujas tṛṇa-rūṣitena

limpantya ānana-kuceṣu jahus tad-adhim

SB 10.21.17 (Veṇu-gīta 17)/GKH (P)

pūrṇāḥ—fully satisfied; pulindyaḥ—the young girls of the
low-caste Pulinda tribe; urugāya—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
loudly sings sweet songs by mouth or flute; pada-abja—
from the lotus feet; rāga—the reddish color of
affection; śrī-kuṅkumena—by the beautifully
transcendental kuṅkuma powder or paste; dayitā—of His
beloved (Śrī Rādhikā); stana—the breasts; maṇḍitena—
which had adorned; tat—of that; darśana—by the sight;
smara—by the force of kāma; rujaḥ—the burning torment of
desire; tṛṇa—upon the blades of grass; rūṣitena—
touching; limpantyaḥ—smearing; ānana—upon their faces;
kuceṣu—and breasts; jahuḥ—they gave up; tat—that; ādhim—
the disease of the heart or the anguish caused by kāma.

[Śrīmatī Rādhikā said:] “O sakhi! These Pulindīs, the
young women who live in the forest, are fully satisfied
because they possess anurāga, extraordinary attachment
for Śrī Śyāmasundara within their hearts. When they see
our dearmost beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the anguish of divine
lust arises within them, and their hearts are struck
with the disease of love. One of His beloveds had
adorned her breast with reddish kuṅkuma which came off
on Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. When Śyāma roams through
Vṛndāvana, the grass gets covered with this kuṅkuma. The
supremely fortunate Pulindī girls see it and are
immediately overwhelmed by the burning torment of smara
(Cupid). They take this kuṅkuma and smear it on their
faces and breasts. In this way they alleviate the
anguish of their kāma.



The gopīs attribute their own confidential, mood of
prema to the rivers

nadyas tadā tad-upadhārya mukunda-gītam

āvarta-lakṣita-manobhava-bhagna-vegāḥ

āliṅgana-sthagitam ūrmi-bhujair murārer

                          622
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


gṛhṇanti pāda-yugalaṁ kamalopahārāḥ

SB 10.21.15 (Veṇu-gīta)/GKH (P)

nadyaḥ—the rivers (Yamunā, Mānasī-Gaṅgā, etc.); tadā—
then; tat—that; upadhārya—attentively hearing the song
of the flute; mukunda—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; gītam—the song of
His flute, which gives rise to supreme bliss; āvarta—by
their whirlpools (the awakening of their desire to meet
with Kṛṣṇa); lakṣita—manifest; manaḥ-bhava—by their
conjugal desire; bhagna—broken; vegāḥ—their currents;
āliṅgana—by their embrace; sthagitam—motionless; ūrmi-
bhujaiḥ—by the arms of their waves; murāreḥ—of Lord
Murāri; gṛhṇanti—they carry; pāda-yugalam—the two lotus
feet; kamala-upahārāḥ—offering of lotus flowers.

When the rivers hear the flute-song of Kṛṣṇa, their
minds begin to desire Him, and thus the flow of their
currents is broken and their waters are agitated, moving
around in whirlpools. Then with the arms of their waves
the rivers embrace Murāri’s lotus feet and, holding on
to them, present offerings of lotus flowers.



Internal symptoms of Prema

tās tāḥ kṣapāḥ preṣṭhatamena nītā

mayaiva vṛndāvana-gocareṇa

kṣaṇārdha-vat tāḥ punar aṅga tāsāṁ

hīnā mayā kalpa-samā babhūvuḥ

SB 11.12.11/GKH (P)

tāḥ tāḥ—all those; kṣapāḥ—nights; preṣṭhatamena—with
their most dearly beloved; nītāḥ—spent; mayā—with Me;
eva—indeed; vṛndāvana—in Vṛndāvana; go-careṇa—who can be
known; kṣaṇa—a moment; ardha-vat—like half; tāḥ—those
very nights; punaḥ—again; aṅga—dear Uddhava; tāsām—for
the gopīs; hīnāḥ—bereft; mayā—of Me; kalpa—a day of
Brahmā (432 billion years); samāḥ—equal to; babhūvuḥ—
became.

Dear Uddhava, all of those nights that the gopīs spent
with Me, their most dearly beloved, in the land of
Vṛndāvana seemed to them to pass in less than a moment.
Bereft of My association, however, the gopīs felt that
those same nights dragged on forever, as if each night
were equal to a day of Brahmā.



Kṛṣṇa admires and glorifies the gopīs— prema

tā man-manaskā mat-prāṇā mad-arthe tyakta-daihikāḥ

mām eva dayitaṁ preṣṭham ātmānaṁ manasā gatāḥ

ye tyakta-loka-dharmāś ca mad-arthe tān bibharmy aham


                             623
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

SB 10.46.4/STB p. 93

tāḥ—they (the gopīs); mat—absorbed in Me; manaskāḥ—their
minds; mat—fixed upon Me; prāṇāḥ—their lives; mat-arthe—
for My sake; tyakta—abandoning; daihikāḥ—everything on
the bodily platform; mām—Me; eva—alone; dayitam—their
beloved; preṣṭham—dearmost; ātmānam—Self; manasā gatāḥ—
understood; ye—who (the gopīs, or anyone); tyakta—giving
up; loka—this world; dharmāḥ—religiosity; ca—and; mat-
arthe—for My sake; tān—them; bibharmi—sustain; aham—I.

The minds of those gopīs are always absorbed in Me, and
indeed, I am their very prāṇa, life-force. For My sake
they have abandoned everything related to their bodies,
renouncing ordinary happiness in this life, as well as
religious duties necessary for such happiness in the
next life. I alone am their dearmost beloved. Therefore
I take it upon Myself to sustain them in all
circumstances.



Prema-kathā of the gopīs (1)

kā stry aṅga te kala-padāyata-veṇu-gīta-

sammohitārya-caritān na calet tri-lokyām

trailokya-saubhagam idaṁ ca nirīkṣya rūpaṁ

yad go-dvija-druma-mṛgāḥ pulakāny abibhran

SB 10.29.40 (Praṇaya-gīta)/CC Madhya 24.56/GKH (P)

kā—which; strī—woman; aṅga—dear Kṛṣṇa; te—Your; kala—
sweet-sounding; pada—having stanzas; āyata—drawn-out;
veṇu—of Your flute; gīta—by the song; sammohitā—
completely bewildered; ārya—of civilized people; caritāt
—from the proper behavior; na calet—does not deviate;
tri-lokyām—within the three worlds; trai-lokya—of all
the three worlds; saubhagam—the cause of auspiciousness;
idam—this; ca—and; nirīkṣya—seeing; rūpam—the personal
beauty; yat—because of which; go—the cows; dvija—birds;
druma—trees; mṛgāḥ—and deer; pulakāni—bodily hair
standing on end; abibhran—they bore.

Dear Kṛṣṇa, what woman in all the three worlds wouldn—t
deviate from religious behavior when enchanted by the
melodious, drawn-out melody of Your flute? Your beauty
makes all three worlds auspicious. Indeed, even the
cows, birds, trees and deer manifest the ecstatic
symptom of bodily hair standing on end when they see
Your beautiful form which makes all three worlds
auspicious.



Prema-kathā of the Gopīs (2)

mṛgayur iva kapīndraṁ vivyadhe lubdha-dharmā

striyam akṛta-virūpāṁ strī-jitaḥ kāma-yānām

balim api balim attvāveṣṭayad dhvāṅkṣavad yas

                          624
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


tad alam asita-sakhyair dustyajas tat-kathārthaḥ

SB 10.47.17 (Bhramara-gīta)/GKH (P)

mṛgayuḥ—a hunter; iva—like; kapi—of the monkeys; indram—
the king; vivyadhe—shot; lubdha-dharmā—behaving like a
cruel hunter; striyam—a woman (namely, Śūrpaṇakhā);
akṛta—made; virūpām—disfigured; strī—by a woman (Sītā-
devī); jitaḥ—conquered; kāma-yānām—who was impelled by
lusty desire; balim—King Bali; api—also; balim—his
tribute; attvā—consuming; aveṣṭayat—bound up;
dhvāṅkṣavat—just like a crow; yaḥ—who; tat—therefore;
alam—enough; asita—with black Kṛṣṇa; sakhyaiḥ—of all
kinds of friendship; dustyajaḥ—impossible to give up;
tat—about Him; kathā—of the topics; arthaḥ—the
elaboration.

Like a hunter, He cruelly shot the king of the monkeys
with arrows. Because He was conquered by a woman, He
disfigured another woman who came to Him with lusty
desires. And even after consuming the gifts of Bali
Mahārāja, He bound him up with ropes as if he were a
crow. So let us give up all friendship with this dark-
complexioned boy, even if we can—t give up talking about
Him.



Those who relish just a single drop of this nectar end
up in the land of prema

yad-anucarita-līlā-karṇa-pīyūṣa-vipruṭ-

sakṛd-adana-vidhūta-dvandva-dharmā vinaṣṭāḥ

sapadi gṛha-kuṭumbaṁ dīnam utsṛjya dīnā

bahava iha vihaṅgā bhikṣu-caryāṁ caranti

SB 10.47.18 (Bhramara-gīta)/GKH (P)

yat—whose; anucarita—constantly performed activities;
līlā—of such pastimes; karṇa—for the ears; pīyūṣa—of the
nectar; vipruṭ—of a drop; sakṛt—just once; adana—by the
partaking; vidhūta—removed entirely; dvandva—of duality;
dharmāḥ—their propensities; vinaṣṭāḥ—ruined; sapadi—
immediately; gṛha—their homes; kuṭumbam—and families;
dīnam—wretched; utsṛjya—rejecting; dīnāḥ—becoming
themselves wretched; bahavaḥ—many persons; iha—here (in
Vṛndāvana); vihaṅgāḥ—(like) birds; bhikṣu—of begging;
caryām—the livelihood; caranti—they pursue.

For those who relish just a single drop of the nectar of
the pastimes that Kṛṣṇa regularly performs, their
dedication to material life and their conception of
duality is ruined. Many such persons have suddenly given
up their homes and families and, becoming wretched,
traveled here to Vṛndāvana to wander about like birds,
begging for their living.



If you want to enjoy life, don—t go to Keśī-ghāṭa and

                          625
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

don—t look at Govinda

smerāṁ bhangī-traya-paricitāṁ sāci vistīrṇa-driṣṭiṁ

vaṁśī-nyastādhara-kiśalayām ujjvalāṁ candrakeṇa

govindākhyāṁ hari-tanum itaḥ keśi-tīrthopakaṇṭhe

mā prekṣiṣṭhās tava yadi sakhe bandhu-sange 'sti rangaḥ

BRS 1.2.239, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī/CC Ādi 5.224

smerām—smiling; bhaṅgī-traya-paricitām—bent in three
places, namely the neck, waist and knees (or has crooked
eyes, smile and heart); sāci-vistīrṇa-dṛṣṭim—with a
broad sideways glance; vaṁśī—on the flute; nyasta—
placed; adhara—lips; kiśalayām—newly blossomed; ujjvalām
—very bright; candrakeṇa—by the moonshine; govinda-
ākhyām—named Govinda; hari-tanum—the transcendental body
of the Lord; itaḥ—here; keśī-tīrtha-upakaṇṭhe—on the
bank of the Yamunā in the neighborhood of Keśī-ghāṭa; mā
—do not; prekṣiṣṭhāḥ—glance over; tava—your; yadi—if;
sakhe—O dear friend; bandhu-saṅge—to worldly friends,
family and society; asti—there is; raṅgaḥ—attachment.

Oh friend! If you have any desire to enjoy in the
company of your friends and relatives, then never go
near Keśī-ghāṭa, for there Śrī Hari in His most
attractive form of Govinda is standing in a posture that
forcefully attracts the heart. Watch out for that
crooked Person whose face is always fascinatingly
captivating, whose long-drawn eyes are crafty and
enchanting, whose soft lips are kissing the holes of the
flute, whose head is decorated with charmingly beautiful
peacock feathers, and whose entire form, gracefully bent
in a threefold posture, is illuminated by the soft
moonshine.



Don’t go to Vṛndāvana (parokṣa-vāda)

Bandhu-Saṅge, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura (SGG p. 62)

bandhu-saṅge yadi tava raṅga parihāsa, thāke abhilāṣa
(thāke abhilāṣa)

tabe mora kathā rākha, jeyo nāko jeyo nāko,

vṛndāvana keśī-tīrtha-ghāṭera sakāśa (1)

If you want to enjoy laughing and joking with friends
and family, if this is really your desire, then please
listen to me. Don—t go, don—t go to Vṛndāvana to Keśī-
ghāṭa.

govinda vigraha dhari—, tathāya āchena hari,

nayane vaṅkima-dṛṣṭi, mukhe manda-hāsa

kivā tri-bhaṅgama ṭhāma, varṇa samujjvala śyāma,

nava-kiśalaya śobhā śrī aṅge prakāśa (2)


                          626
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

There Śrī Hari has taken the form of Govinda, who gives
pleasure to all, whose crooked glance is quite
captivating, whose mouth is gently smiling, who is
standing in His tribhaṅga pose, whose complexion is a
very effulgent śyāma color, and whose limbs are
attractive like tender new leaves.

adhare vaṁśī-ṭī tā—ra, anarthera mūlādhāra,

śikhi-cūḍākeo bhāi koro nā viśvāsa

se mūrti nayane here, keha nāhi ghare phire,

saṁsārī gṛhīra je go hoya sarva-nāśa (tāi mora mane baḍa
trāsa)

ghaṭibe vipada bhārī, jeyo nāko he saṁsārī,

vṛndāvana keśī-tīrtha-ghāṭera sakāśa (3)

The sound of His vamśī enthroned upon His lips is the
root cause of all bad qualities, especially madness.
Brother, have no faith in that person who wears a crest
of peacock feathers. If you see that form, you will not
be able to return home again. Your family life will be
ruined (This is my great fear!). There is great danger
in going there. If you want to enjoy family life, don—t
go to Vṛndāvana near Keśī-ghāṭa.



The method to attain residence in Vraja on the platform
of Rāgātmika-bhakti

yadīccher āvāsaṁ vraja-bhuvi sa-rāgaṁ prati-janur

yuva-dvandvaṁ tac cet paricaritum ārād abhilaṣeḥ

svarūpaṁ śrī-rūpaṁ sa-gaṇam iha tasyāgrajam api

sphuṭaṁ premṇā nityaṁ smara nama tadā tvaṁ śṛṇu manaḥ

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā 3/JD ch. 40

yadi—if; iccheḥ—you desire; āvāsam—residence; vraja-
bhuvi—in the land of Vraja; sa-rāgam—with rāgātmika-
bhakti; prati-januḥ—in every birth; yuva-dvandvam—the
youthful divine couple; tat—that; cet—[and] if;
paricaritum—to serve; ārāt—directly; abhilaṣeḥ—desire;
svarūpam—Svarupa Damodara; śrī-rūpam—Śrila Rūpa Gosvāmī;
sa-gaṇam—with their associates; iha—here; tasya—of him;
agrajam— his elder brother; api—also; sphuṭam—
distinctly; premṇā—with love; nityam—always; smara—
remember; nama—bow down; tadā—then; tvam—you; śṛṇu—
listen; manaḥ—O mind.

My dear mind! Please hear me. If you are eager to gain
residence in Vraja on the platform of rāgātmika-bhakti,
and if you desire to obtain the direct service of nava-
yugala-kiśora, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, then birth after birth
always distinctly remember and bow down with great love
to Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, his
elder brother Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, and all other
associates of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who are

                          627
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

recipients of His mercy.

Thus ends Chapter 20 — Prema-bhakti-tattva




Chapter 22A — Vipralambha-rasa-tattva


The river of Prema has two banks, vipralambha and
sambhoga; without separation, there cannot be much
pleasure in meeting



The internal symptom of devotion at the stage of
perfection (sādhya-bhakti) is worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a
mood of separation

yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam

śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa me

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 7/BR 7.1

govinda-viraheṇa—in separation from Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Krṣṇa; nimeṣeṇa—even a moment; yugāyitam—seems like
a millenium; cakṣuṣā—from my eyes; prāvṛṣāyitam—tears
flow like rain from the monsoon clouds; sarvaṁ jagat—
this entire world; śūnyāyitam—seems void; me—to me.

O sakhī! In separation from Govinda, even a moment seems
like a millennium. Tears begin to shower from my eyes
like torrents of rain from the clouds, and this entire
world seems void.

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu states:

sa vipralambha-sambhoga-bhedena dvi-vidho mataḥ

BRS 3.5.24

Mādhurya-bhakti-rasa has two types: vipralambha (love in
separation) and sambhoga (love in union).

Jaiva-Dharma: Vipralambha can occure in any state,
either during meeting (milan) or separation (viraha),
and it especially nourishes the mood of sambhoga. Just
as dipping a coloured cloth repeatedly in the same dye
increasingly enhances the brilliance of the colour,
vipralambha enhances the super-excellent brilliance of
sambhoga-rasa. Sambhoga cannot develop fully without
vipralambha. (JD ch. 37)



Three types of separation

sa pūrva-rāgo mānaś ca pravāsādi-mayas tatha

vipralambho bahu-vidho vidvadbhir iha kathhyate


                            628
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

BRS 3.5.25

The wise describe many types of vipralambha such as
pūrva-rāga, māna, and pravāsa.



Pūrva-rāga - love in separation prior to meeting

prāg-asaṅgatayor bhāvaḥ pūrva-rāgo bhaved dvayoḥ

BRS 3.5.26

The love in separation of the two lovers before they
ever meet each other is called pūrva-rāga.



An example of “pūrva-rāga— from Padyāvalī

akasmād ekasmin pathi sakhī mayā yāmuna-taṭaṁ

vrajantyā dṛṣṭo yo nava-jaladhara-śyāmala-tanuḥ

sa dṛg-bhaṅgyā kiṁ vākuruta na hi jāne tata idaṁ

mano me vyālolaṁ kvacana gṛha-kṛtyo na lagate

Padyāvalī 164, Śrī Jayanta/BRS 3.5.27

akasmāt—by accident; ekasmin—on one; pathi—path; sakhī—O
friend; mayā—by Me; yamunā—of the Yamunā; tatam—to the
baṅk; vrajantya—going; dṛṣṭaḥ—was seen; ayam—He; nava—
fresh; jaladhara—raincloud; śyāmala—black; tanuḥ—whose
body; saḥ—He; dṛk-bhaṅgya—with a crooked glance; kim—
what?; vā—or; akuruta—did; na—not; hi—indeed; jāne—I
know; tataḥ—since then; idam—this; manaḥ—mind; me—my;
vyālolam—restless; kvacana—something; gṛha-kṛtye—in
household duties; na—not; lagate—is able.

Friend, one time as I walked on the path to the Yamunā’s
bank, I saw a boy whose complexion was the color of a
dark raincloud. What spell did He cast on Me when He
glanced at Me playfully with His crooked eyes? I do not
know. Since that time My heart has become unstable and
My mind agitated. It no longer allows Me to perform My
household duties.



An example of “purva-rāga— from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

yathā vinidrā yac cittā rukmiṇī kamalekṣaṇā

tathāham api tac-citto nidrāṁ ca na labhe niśi

vedāham rukmiṇā dveṣān mamodvāho nivāritaḥ

SB 10.53.2/BRS 3.5.28

yathā—just as; vinidrā—devoid of sleep; yac—because;
cittā—mind; rukmiṇī—Rukmiṇi; kamala-īkṣaṇa—whose eyes
are like the petals of the lotus flower; tathā—in the
same way; aham—I; api—also; tat—fixed on her; cittaḥ—My

                          629
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

mind; nidrām—sleep; ca—and; na labhe—I cannot get; niśi—
at night; veda—know; aham—I; rukmiṇā—by Rukmī; dveṣāt—
out of enmity; mama—My; udvāhaḥ—marriage; nivāritaḥ—
forbidden.

Just as lotus-eyed Rukmiṇī is unable to sleep because
her mind is absorbed in Me, My mind is absorbed in her
and I can—t even sleep at night. I know that Rukmī, out
of envy, has forbidden our marriage.



“Māna— - Separation due to sulky mood, indignation at
Kṛṣṇa

viharati vane rādhā sādhāraṇa-praṇaye harau

vigalita-nijotkarṣād īṛsyā-vaśena gatānyataḥ

kvacid api latā-kuñje guñjan-madhu-vrata-maṇḍalī-

mukhara-nikhare līnā dīnāpy uvāca rahaḥ sakhīm

Śrī Gīta Govinda 2.1.1/BRS 3.5.30

When Kṛṣṇa was sporting with all the gopīs in the forest
in the rāsa dance, treating them all with equal
affection, Rādhā left that place in anger at Kṛṣṇa’s
slighting Her superior position. Later, while hiding in
a grove of creepers with bees buzzing overhead, She
spoke to Her sakhī in grief-stricken words.

Jaiva-Dharma: Māna is the bhāva that prevents the lover
and beloved from engaging in their cherished activities
of embracing, looking at each other, kissing, talking in
a pleasing way and so forth, even though they are both
in the same place and they share a deep attachment for
each other. The basis of māna is praṇaya and there are
two types of māna, with a cause (sahetu) and without
cause (hetu). (JD ch. 37)



“Pravāsa— - Separation after meeting

hastodare vinihitaika-kapola-pāler

aśrānta-locana-jala-snapitānanāyāḥ

prasthāna-maṅgala-dināvadhi mādhavasya

nidrā-lavo —pi kuta eva saroruhākṣyāḥ

Padyāvalī 354, Śrī Harihara/BRS 3.5.32

hasta—of Her hand; udare—in the middle; vinihita—placed;
eka—one; kapola—of the cheek; paneḥ—the middle; asranta—
ceaseless; locana—from the eyes; jala—water, tears;
snapita—bathed; ananayaḥ—whose face; prasthana—of the
departure; maṅgala—auspicious; dina—day; avadhi—since;
mādhavasya—of Mādhava Kṛṣṇa; nidra—of sleep; lavaḥ—a
moment; api—even; kutaḥ—where?; eva—certainly; saroruha-
akṣyaḥ—of this lotus-eyed girl.


                          630
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Since that auspicious day of Kṛṣṇa’s departure for
Mathurā, the lotus-faced Śrī Rādhā, putting Her left
hand on Her left cheek, soaked Her face with unremitting
tears. How could She get even a moment’s sleep in this
state?



Śrī Uddhava describes Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s state of separation to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā

bhagavān api govindaḥ kandarpa-śara-pīḍitaḥ

na bhuṅkte na svapiti ca cintayan vo hy ahar-niśam

Prahlāda-saṁhitā/BRS 3.5.33

Lord Govinda also, being afflicted by the arrows of
Cupid, is thinking of You alone day and night, and
therefore cannot eat or sleep.



Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi describes a fourth type of separation,
prema-vaicittya

priyasya sannikarṣe —pi premotkarṣa-svabhāvataḥ

yā viśeṣa-dhiyārtis tat prema-vaicittyam ucyate

UN, Vipralambha-prakaraṇa 134/CC Madhya 23.63 pt

Prema-vaicittya is a word used to indicate an abundance
of love that brings about grief from fear of separation,
although the lover is present.



Jaiva-Dharma explains prema-vaicittya

Prema-vaicittya refers to heartfelt pangs of separation
that the beloved feels, even when she is very close to
her lover. It is a feature of prema in its highest
state. This super-excellent feature results in
helplessness or agitation of the mind that creates the
illusion of being separate from Kṛṣṇa even when He is
present.



The sentiments of Śrī Rādhā in “pravāsa—

ayi dīna-dayārdra nātha he

mathurā-nātha kadāvalokyase

hṛdayaṁ tvad-aloka-kātaraṁ

dayita bhrāmyati kiṁ karomy aham

Padyāvalī 334, Śrī Mādhavendra Purī/CC Mad 4.197/BR 7.7

ayi—O My Lord; dīna—on the poor; dayā-ārdra—
compassionate; nātha—O master; he—O; mathurā-nātha—the

                             631
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

master of Mathurā; kadā—when; avalokyase—I shall see
You; hṛdayam—My heart; tvat—of You; aloka—without
seeing; kātaram—very much aggrieved; dayita—O most
beloved; bhrāmyati—becomes overwhelmed; kim—what; karomi
—shall do; aham—I.

O You whose heart is most merciful to the wretched! O
Master! O Lord of Mathurā! When will I have Your
darśana? O Lord of My life, because I cannot see You, My
heart has become agitated. What shall I do now?



In extreme separation, Śrīmatī Rādhikā calls upon Kṛṣṇa

he deva he dayita he bhuvanaika-bandho

he kṛṣṇa he capala he karuṇaika-sindho

he nātha he ramaṇa he nayanābhirāma

hā hā kadā nu bhavitāsi padaṁ dṛśor me

Kṛṣṇa-karnāmṛta 40/CC Mad 2.65/BR 7.15

he deva—O lord; he dayita—O most dear one; he bhuvana-
eka-bandho—O only friend of the universe; he kṛṣṇa—O
Lord Kṛṣṇa; he capala—O restless one; he karuṇa-eka-
sindho—O only ocean of mercy; he nātha—O my Lord; he
ramaṇa—O my enjoyer; he nayana-abhirāma—O most beautiful
to my eyes; hā hā—alas, alas; kadā—when; nu—certainly;
bhavitā asi—will You be; padam—the dwelling place; dṛśoḥ
me—of my vision.

O Lord! O dearest one! O only friend of the three
worlds! O Kṛṣṇa! O restless one! O only ocean of
compassion! O Deva! O lover (ramaṇa)! O You who delight
the eyes! When will You again be visible to My eyes?
When will I receive Your darśana?



The divyonmāda (transcendental madness) of Śrī Rādhā,
who is restless in the intense fire of separation from
Śrī Kṛṣṇa

amūny adhanyāni dināntarāṇi

hare! tvad-ālokanam antareṇa

anātha-bandho! karuṇaika-sindho!

hā hanta! hā hanta! kathaṁ nayāmi

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 41/CC Mad 2.58/BR 7.14

amūni—all those; adhanyāni—inauspicious; dina-antarāṇi—
intervening days; hare—O My Lord; tvat—of You; ālokanam—
seeing; antareṇa—without; anātha-bandho—O friend of the
helpless; karuṇā-eka-sindho—O only ocean of mercy; hā
hanta—alas; hā hanta—alas; katham—how; nayāmi—shall I
pass.

Alas! Alas! O Hari! O friend of the helpless! O You who

                          632
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

are the only ocean of mercy! How can I pass these
miserable days without Your darśana?



Śrī Rādhā’s condition of anxiety in separation from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa

kim iha kṛṇumaḥ kasya brūmaḥ kṛtaṁ kṛtam āśayā

kathayata kathām anyāṁ dhanyām aho hṛdaye śayaḥ

madhura-madhura-smerākāre mano-nayanotsave

kṛpaṇa-kṛpaṇā kṛṣṇe tṛṣṇā ciraṁ bata lambate

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 42/BR 7.13

kim—what?; iha—here; kṛṇumaḥ—shall I do; kasya—to whom;
brūmaḥ—shall I speak; kṛtam kṛtam—what’s done is done;
āśayā—with the hope; kathayata—please tell; kathām—
topic; anyām—other; dhanyām—auspicious; aho—alas; hṛdaye
—within My heart; śayaḥ—lying; madhura-madhura—sweeter
than sweetness; smera—smiling; ākāre—whose form; manaḥ-
nayana—to the mind and eyes; utsave—who gives pleasure;
kṛpaṇa-kṛpaṇā—the best of misers; kṛṣṇe—for Kṛṣṇa; tṛṣṇā
—thirst; ciram—for a very long time; bata—alas; lambate—
is dependent.

What shall I do now? To whom shall I speak? What’s done
is done. What is the purpose of holding on to the futile
hope of receiving His darśana? Please speak about
something better. Aho! But how can I possibly stop
talking about He who is contained within My heart? His
gentle, sweet smile is a festival for the mind and eyes.
Alas! I have been hankering to see this form of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa for a very long time.



Śrī Rādhikā is lamenting in separation from Kṛṣṇa

hā nātha ramaṇa preṣṭha kvāsi kvāsi mahā-bhuja

dāsyās te kṛpaṇāyā me sakhe darśaya sannidhim

SB 10.30.39/BMP p. 407

hā—O; nātha—master; ramaṇa—lover; preṣṭha—dearmost; kva
asi kva asi—where are You, where are You; mahā-bhuja—O
mighty-armed one; dāsyāḥ—to the maidservant; te—Your;
kṛpaṇāyāḥ—of the wretched; me—Me; sakhe—O friend;
darśaya—please show; sannidhim—Your presence.

O master! My lover! O dearest, where are You? Where are
You? Please, O mighty-armed one, O friend, show Yourself
to Me, Your maidservant who is very much aggrieved by
Your absence.



The gopīs describe the good fortune of the female deer
and their husbands


                             633
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

dhanyāḥ sma mūḍha-matayo —pi hariṇya etā

yā nanda-nandanam upātta-vicitra-veśam

ākarṇya veṇu-raṇitaṁ saha-kṛṣṇa-sārāḥ

pūjāṁ dadhur viracitāṁ praṇayāvalokaiḥ

SB 10.21.11 (Venu-gīta)/BR 7.3

dhanyāḥ—fortunate, blessed; sma—certainly; mūḍha-matayaḥ
—having foolish minds; api—although; hariṇyaḥ—she-deer;
etāḥ—these; yāḥ—who; nanda-nandanam—the son of Mahārāja
Nanda; upātta-vicitra-veśam—dressed in startingly
captivating manner; ākarṇya—hearing; veṇu-raṇitam—the
sound of His flute; saha-kṛṣṇa-sārāḥ—accompanied by the
black deer (their husbands); pūjām dadhuḥ—they worshiped
Kṛṣṇa; viracitām—performed; praṇaya-avalokaiḥ—by their
affectionate glances.

O sakhī, when Nanda-nandana Śyāmasundara, wearing
astonishing attire, vibrates a sweet melody on His
flute, even the does, who are foolish due to having
taken birth from the wombs of ignorant animals, run
towards Him along with their husbands and gaze upon Him
with love-laden eyes. They are not merely gazing, sakhī,
but are offering Him pūjā with their crooked sidelong
glances from their large lotus-like eyes, and He is
accepting their worship with His own loving sidelong
glance. The lives of these deer are truly blessed.
Sakhī, although we are gopīs of Vṛndāvana, we are unable
to offer ourselves like this because our family members
harass us. How ironic!



What to speak of the deer, even the wives of the devas
fall unconscious into the laps of their husbands upon
hearing the bewitching flute-song of Kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇaṁ nirīkṣya vanitotsava-rūpa-śīlaṁ

śrutvā ca tat-kvaṇita-veṇu-vivikta-gītam

devyo vimāna-gatayaḥ smara-nunna-sārā

bhraśyat-prasūna-kabarā mumuhur vinīvyaḥ

SB 10.21.12 (Veṇu-gīta)

kṛṣṇam—Śrī Kṛṣṇa (the attractor of the heart); nirīkṣya—
observing; vanitā—for all young adolescent girls; utsava
—a festival; rūpa—whose beauty; śīlam—and character;
śrutvā—hearing; ca—and; tat—by Him; kvaṇita—vibrated;
veṇu—of the flute; vivikta—clear; gītam—song; devyaḥ—the
wives of the demigods; vimāna-gatayaḥ—traveling in their
celestial airplanes; smara—by Cupid; nunna—agitated;
sārāḥ—their patience; bhraśyat—slipping; prasūna-kabarāḥ
—the flowers tied in their hair; mumuhuḥ—they became
bewildered; vinīvyaḥ—their belts loosening.

O sakhi! What to speak of the deer, when the wives of
the devas see Śrī Kṛṣṇa and hear His enchanting flute-
song, they become completely infatuated by the force of

                          634
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Cupid. After all, He attracts the hearts of all
adolescent girls and is a treasury of ultimate beauty
for them. He bestows upon them supreme bliss with His
sweet form, qualities and uniquely captivating
character. The devīs fall down unconscious into the laps
of their husbands in their celestial airplanes. How do I
know this, O friend? Just hear! When their hearts become
possessed of an intense desire to meet with Vrajendra-
nandana, they become so bewildered that they cannot even
detect that the flowers binding their braided hair are
falling upon the surface of the earth. What’s more, they
don—t even know that their sarīs are slipping from their
waists and falling to the ground.



What to speak of the devīs, even the cows and calves
show ecstatic symptoms

gāvaś ca kṛṣṇa-mukha-nirgata-veṇu-gīta

pīyūṣam uttabhita-karṇa-puṭaiḥ pibantyaḥ

śāvāḥ snuta-stana-payaḥ-kavalāḥ sma tasthur

govindam ātmani dṛśāśru-kalāḥ spṛśantyaḥ

SB 10.21.13 (Veṇu-gīta)

gāvaḥ—the cows; ca—and; kṛṣṇa-mukha—from the mouth of
Lord Kṛṣṇa; nirgata—emitted; veṇu—of the flute; gīta—the
song; pīyūṣam—the nectar; uttabhita—raised high; karṇa—
with their ears; puṭaiḥ—which were like cups; pibantyaḥ—
drinking; śāvāḥ—the calves; snuta—exuding; stana—from
their udders; payaḥ—the milk; kavalāḥ—whose mouthfuls;
sma—indeed; tasthuḥ—stood still (the sāttvik-bhāva of
becoming stunned); govindam—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ātmani—within
their hearts; dṛśā—by their eyes; aśru-kalāḥ—their eyes
full of tears; spṛśantyaḥ—embracing.

O sakhī! Enough talk about the devīs! Just take a look
at the cows. When our beloved Śyāmasundara fills the
flute with the sweet sound flowing from His mouth, and
when the cows hear that mellifluous song, they cup their
ears up high and drink the nectar of rasa. How can this
happen? O sakhī, taking beloved Śyāmasundara onto the
altar of their hearts through the doorway of their eyes,
they seat Him there and embrace Him within their minds.
O sakhī, just see how tears are flowing from their eyes!
And their calves, as they drink from the cows— udders,
they are unable to swallow and the milk gets stuck in
their throats. Their ears perk up and drink the nectar
of the veṇu-gīta flowing from Kṛṣṇa’s mouth. With their
eyes they welcome Kṛṣṇa in their hearts and embrace Him.
Therefore, their eyes overflow with tears, they start
trembling and their hairs stand on end.



Everything changes its nature upon hearing Kṛṣṇa’s flute

gā gopakair anu-vanaṁ nayator udāra-

veṇu-svanaiḥ kala-padais tanu-bhṛtsu sakhyaḥ

                          635
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


aspandanaṁ gati-matāṁ pulakas tarūṇāṁ

niryoga-pāśa-kṛta-lakṣaṇayor vicitram

SB 10.21.19 (Veṇu-gīta)/CC Madhya 24.207/BR 7.6

gāḥ—the cows; gopakaiḥ—with the cowherd boys; anu-vanam—
to forest after forest; nayatoḥ—leading; udāra—very
liberal (because it carries kṛṣṇānurāga to the gopīs
wherever they may be); veṇu-svanaiḥ—by the vibrations of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute; kala-padaiḥ—having sweet tones; tanu-
bhṛtsu—among the embodied beings; sakhyaḥ—O friends;
aspandanam—motionless; gati-matām—causing the moving
beings to completely transform their nature; pulakaḥ—the
ecstatic jubilation; taruṇam—of the non-moving trees;
niryoga-pāśa—the ropes for binding the rear legs of the
cows; kṛta-lakṣaṇayoḥ—of those two (Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma),
who are characterized by; vicitram—extraordinarily
wonderful.

O sakhīs, the elegance and charm of the two brothers,
our Śyāmasundara and Balarāma, are quite unique and
wonderful. When Śyāmasundara, together with His cowherd
friends, leads the cows from one forest to another by
sweetly playing a melody on His veṇu, He binds the top
of His turban with the niryoga rope, which is used for
binding the legs of calves, and from His shoulders hangs
a rope known as pāśa. Upon seeing that sweet,
unparalleled beauty and hearing the sound of the veṇu,
moving living entities, such as animals and birds, as
well as rivers — and what to speak of human beings —
become inert like stone. And ecstatic symptoms like
horripilation are displayed in non-moving entities, such
as trees. Sakhī, how can I describe the magical sound of
that flute?



Whatever mood and relationship an uttama-adhikārī
devotee has with his worshipful deity Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is seen
by him to exist in all living entities

mahā-bhāgavata dekhe sthāvara-jaṅgama

tāhāṅ tāhāṅ haya tāṅra śrī-kṛṣṇa-sphuraṇa

sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe, nā dekhe tāra mūrti

sarvatra haya nija iṣṭa-deva-sphūrti

CC Mad 8.273-4/BR 7.4 pt

mahā-bhāgavata—a first-class advanced devotee; dekhe—
sees; sthāvara-jaṅgama—the movable and inert; tāhāṅ
tāhāṅ—here and there; haya—is; tāṅra—his; śrī-kṛṣṇa-
sphuraṇa—manifestation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sthāvara-jaṅgama—
movable and inert; dekhe—he sees; nā—not; dekhe—sees;
tāra—its; mūrti—form; sarvatra—everywhere; haya—there
is; nija—his own; iṣṭa-deva—worshipable Lord; sphūrti—
manifestation.

When a mahā-bhāgavata observes the moving and non-moving
beings he does not exactly see their form; rather,

                           636
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

everything he sees here and there is but a manifestation
of his worshipable Deity, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the constant
object of his vision.



For the Gopīs, a moment of separation seems like a
millennium

aṭati yad bhavān ahni kānanaṁ

truṭi-yugāyate tvām apaśyatām

kuṭila-kuntalaṁ śrī-mukhaṁ ca te

jaḍa udīkṣatāṁ pakṣma-kṛd dṛśām

SB 10.31.15/GKH (P)

aṭati—travel; yat—when; bhavān—You; ahni—during the
daytime; kānanam—to the forest; truṭi—a fraction of a
second; yugāyate—becomes like an entire millennium; tvām
—You; apaśyatām—for those who do not see; kuṭila—
curling; kuntalam—with locks of hair; śrī—beautiful;
mukham—face; ca—and; te—Your; jaḍaḥ—foolish; udīkṣatām—
for those who are eagerly looking; pakṣma—of lids; kṛt—
the creator; dṛśām—of the eyes.

When You go off to the forest during the day, a tiny
fraction of a second becomes like a millennium for us
because we cannot see You. And even when we can eagerly
look upon Your beautiful face, so lovely with its
adornment of curly locks, our pleasure is hindered by
our eyelids, which were fashioned by the foolish
creator.



Agitated by separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs blame
Providence

aho vidhātas tava na kvacid dayā

saṁyojya maitryā praṇayena dehinaḥ

tāṁś cākṛtārthān viyunaṅkṣy apārthakaṁ

vikrīḍitaṁ te —rbhaka-ceṣṭitaṁ yathā

SB 10.39.19/CC Antya 19.45/BR 7.8

aho—alas; vidhātaḥ—O Creator; tava—your; na—not; kvacit—
at any time; dayā—mercy; saṁyojya— bringing together ;
maitryā—by friendship; praṇayena—and by affection;
dehinaḥ—of the embodied souls; tān—them; ca—and; akṛta-
unfulfilled; arthān—their desires; viyunaṅkṣi—you cause
to separate; apārthakam—uselessly; vikrīḍitaṁ—playful;
te—your; arbhaka—of a child; ceṣṭitam—activities; yathā—
like.

O Creator (Vidhātā), you are the arranger of everything,
but there is not even a trace of mercy in your heart.
First you unite living entities in this world in
friendship and love, but before they can fulfill their

                          637
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

desires and hopes, you pointlessly separate them while
they are still unsatisfied. The truth is that your
activities are meaningles, just like the play of a
child.



For the gopīs, even a moment of separation from Kṛṣṇa is
intolerable

yasyānurāga-lalita-smita-valgu-mantra-

līlāvaloka-parirambhaṇa-rāsa-goṣṭhyām

nītāḥ sma naḥ kṣaṇam iva kṣaṇadā vinā taṁ

gopyaḥ kathaṁ nv atitarema tamo durantam

SB 10.39.29/BR 7.9

yasya—whose; anurāga—with loving affection; lalita—
charming; smita—smiles; valgu—attractive; mantra—
intimate discussions; līlā—playful; avaloka—glances;
parirambhaṇa—and embraces; rāsa—of the rāsa dance;
goṣṭhyām—in the assembly; nītāḥ sma—passed; naḥ—for us;
kṣaṇam—a moment; iva—like; kṣaṇa-dāḥ—the nights; vinā—
without; tam—Him; gopyaḥ—O gopīs; katham—how; nu—indeed;
atitarema—will we cross over; tamaḥ—the darkness;
durantam—insurmountable.

Sakhīs, by His captivating, affectionate smile, sweet,
intimate conversations, playful glances and loving
embraces, the long, long nights of the rāsa-līlā passed
in a moment. Indeed, how can we now overcome the
boundless anguish of separation from Him?



Śrī Rādhā’s strong expressions of separation from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa

yadā yāto gopī-hṛdaya-madano nanda-sadanān

mukundo gāndhinyās tanayam anurundhan madhu-purīm

tadāmāṅkṣīc cintā-sariti ghana-ghūrṇāparicayair

agādhāyāṁ bādhāmaya-payasi rādhā-virahiṇī

Haṁsa-dūta 2/BR 7.10

yadā—when; yātaḥ—went; gopī—of the gopīs; hrḍaya—in the
heart; madanaḥ—cupid; nanda—of Nanda Mahārāja; sadanāt—
from the house; mukundaḥ—Lord Mukunda; gāndinyāḥ—of
Gāndinī-devī; tanayam—the son (Akrūra); anuvindan—
meeting; madhu-purīm—the city of Mathura; tadā—then;
amānkṣīt—longed; cintā—of anxiety; sariti—in the river;
ghana—intense; ghūrṇa—movements; paricayaiḥ—with an
abundance; agādhāyām—very deep; bādhāmaya—painful;
payasi—in the water; rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; virahiṇī—
separated from Kṛṣṇa.

Upon the request of Akrūra, Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, who
captivates the gopīs— hearts in amorous attraction,

                          638
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

departed from Nanda-bhavana for Mathurā. Now separated
from Her lover, Śrī Rādhikā became greatly agitated and
was completely submerged in fathomless river of anxiety,
which was full of intense whirlpools of suffering.



While Śrī Rādhā suffers from the scorching poison of
viraha, She expresses Her transcendental emotions thus:

prema-ccheda-rujo —vagacchati harir nāyaṁ na ca prema vā

sthānāsthānam avaiti nāpi madano jānāti no durbalāḥ

anyo veda na cānya-duḥkham akhilaṁ no jīvanaṁ vāśravaṁ

dvi-trīṇy eva dināni yauvanam idaṁ hā hā vidhe kā gatiḥ

Jagannātha-vallabha-nāṭaka 3.9/BR 7.12

prema-cheda-rujaḥ—the sufferings of a broken loving
relationship; avagacchati—knows; hariḥ—the Supreme Lord;
na—not; ayam—this; na ca—nor; prema—love; vā—nor; sthāna
—the proper place; asthānam—an unsuitable place; avaiti—
knows; na—not; api—also; madanaḥ—Cupid; jānāti—knows;
naḥ—us; durbalāḥ—very weak; anyaḥ—another; veda—knows;
na—not; ca—also; anya-duḥkham—the difficulties of
others; akhilam—all; naḥ—our; jīvanam—life; vā—or;
āśravam—pain; dvi—two; trīni—three; eva—certainly;
dināni—days; yauvanam—youth; idam—this; hā-hā—alas;
vidhe—O creator; kā—what; gatiḥ—our destination.

Śrī Hari does not understand our pain of separation in
prema. In fact, prema personified Herself is unaware of
what is the proper and what is the improper time and
place for loving exchanges. Kāmadeva also torments us,
knowing us to be weak women. It is impossible for anyone
to understand another’s misery. Thus our life is nothing
but a series of mishaps and our youth is so fleeting —
remaining only for a few days. Alas! Alas! O Destiny!
Where are You taking us?

sakhī he, nā bujhiye vidhira vidhāna

sukha lāgi— kailuṅ prīta, haila duḥkha viparīta,

ebe yāya, nā rahe parāṇa

CC Mad 2.20/BR 7.12 pt

sakhī he—(My dear) friend; nā bujhiye—I do not
understand; vidhira—of the Creator; vidhāna—the
regulation; sukha lāgi——for happiness; kailuṅ—I did;
prīta—love; haila—it became; duḥkha—unhappiness;
viparīta—the opposite; ebe—now; yāya—going; nā—does not;
rahe—remain; parāṇa—life.

O sakhī, I do not understand the regulative principles
given by the Creator. I loved Kṛṣṇa for happiness, but
the result was just the opposite. I am now in an ocean
of distress. It must be that I am now going to die, for
My vital force no longer remains. This is My state of
mind.


                           639
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017



Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta describes an internal vision (sphūrti-
darśana) of Kṛṣṇa

māraḥ svayaṁ nu madhura-dyuti-maṇḍalaṁ nu

mādhuryam eva nu mano-nayanāmṛtaṁ nu

veṇī-mṛjo nu mama jīvita-vallabho nu

kṛṣṇo —yam abhyudayate mama locanāya

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 68/CC Mad 2.74/BR 7.16

māraḥ—Cupid; svayam—personally; nu—whether?; madhura—
sweet; dyuti—of effulgence; maṇḍalam—encirclement; nu—
whether?; mādhuryam—sweetness; eva—even; nu—whether;
manaḥ-nayana-amṛtam—nectar for the mind and eyes; nu—
whether?; veṇī-mṛjaḥ—loosening of the hair; nu—whether?;
mama—My; jīvita-vallabhaḥ—the pleasure of the life and
soul; nu—whether?; kṛṣṇaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa; ayam—this;
abhyudayate—manifests; mama—My; locanāya—for the eyes.

Is this Cupid himself, or is it a halo of sweet
effulgence? Is this the personification of sweetness, or
the life-giving nectar of the mind and eyes? Is this the
lover who loosens My braid, the beloved of My life, the
youthful Kṛṣṇa, who has manifest before My eyes?



A description of the direct darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
Cupid of all Cupids

tāsām āvirabhūc chauriḥ

smayamāna-mukhāmbujaḥ

pītāmbara-dharaḥ sragvī

sākṣān manmatha-manmathaḥ

SB 10.32.2/BR 7.17

tāsām—before them; āvirabhūt—He appeared; śauriḥ—Lord
Kṛṣṇa; smayamāna—smiling; mukha—His face; ambujaḥ—
lotuslike; pīta—yellow; ambara—a garment; dharaḥ—
wearing; srak-vī—wearing a flower garland; sākṣāt—
directly; man-matha—of Cupid (who bewilders the mind);
man—of the mind; mathaḥ—the bewilderer.

Just then, Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared in the midst of the gopīs.
His lotus face blossomed with a mild, gentle smile.
Hanging from His neck was a garland of forest flowers,
and He wore a golden-yellow garment (pītāmbara). What
was the nature of His beauty? That beauty stirs the mind
of Kāmadeva (Cupid), who himself stirs the minds of
everyone.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form as “sākṣāt-manmatha-manmatha— is only
displayed in the Rāsa-maṇḍala at the rāsa dance

                            640
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


vṛndāvana-purandara śrī-madana-gopāla

rāsa-vilāsī sākṣāt brajendra-kumāra

śrī-rādhā-lalitā-saṅge rāsa-vilāsa

manmatha-manmatha-rūpe yāṅhāra prakāśa

CC Ādi 5.212-3/BR 7.17 pt

vṛndāvana-purandara—the chief Deity of Vṛndāvana; śrī-
madana-gopāla—Śrī Madana Gopāla; rāsa-vilāsī—the enjoyer
of the rāsa dance; sākṣāt—directly; vrajendra-kumāra—the
son of Nanda Mahārāja; śrī-rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī;
lalitā—Her personal associate named Lalitā; saṅge—with;
rāsa-vilāsa—enjoyment of the rāsa dance; manmatha—of
Cupid; manmatha-rūpe—in the form of Cupid; yāṅhāra—of
whom; prakāśa—manifestation.

Śrī Madana-gopāla, the worshipable Deity of Vṛndāvana,
is the enjoyer of the rāsa dance and is directly the son
of the King of Vraja. He enjoys the rāsa dance with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrī Lalitā and others. He manifests
Himself as the Cupid of Cupids.



Śrī Rādhā’s meeting with Kṛṣṇa in Nava-Vṛndāvana,
Dvārakā, and an expression of a desire for “vraja-bhāva
—, is described in Lalita-mādhava

cirād āśā-mātraṁ tvayi viracayantaḥ sthira-dhiyo

vidadhyur ye vāsaṁ madhurima-gabhīre madhu-pure

dadhānaḥ kaiśore vayasi sakhi tāṁ gokula-pate

prapadyethās teṣāṁ paricayam avaśyaṁ nayanayoḥ

Lalita-mādhava 10.260/BR 7.18

cirāt—after a long time; āśā-mātram—only yearning; tvayi
—for You; viracayantaḥ—doing; sthira—steady; dhiyaḥ—with
intelligence; vidadhyuḥ—do; ye—those who; vāsam—
residence; madhurima—with sweetness; gabhīre—deep;
madhupure—in Vṛndāvana; dadhānaḥ—manifesting; kaiśore—in
youth; vayasi—in the age; sakhitām—the position of being
a friend; gokula—of Gokula; pate—O master; prapadyethāḥ—
please attain; teṣām—of them; paricayam—association;
avaśyam—certainly; nayanayoḥ—of the eyes.

[Śrī Rādhā said :] O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, for a long time, persons
with fixed intelligence have sustained their lives with
the hope that You will one day return. You reside in
Madhupurī, which is filled with profound sweetness. O
master of Gokula, the adolescent sakhīs are patiently
gazing at Your return path. Therefore, You must give us
Your darśana without fail.



In separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā desires to bring Him
back to Vṛndāvana

                            641
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


yā te līlā-rasa-parimalodgāri-vanyāparītā

dhanyā kṣauṇī vilasati vṛtā māthurī mādhurībhiḥ

tatrāsmābhiś caṭula-paśupī-bhāva-mugdhāntarābhiḥ

saṁvītas tvaṁ kalaya vadanollāsi-veṇur vihāram

Lalita-mādhava 10.261/CC Mad 1.84/BR 7.19

yā—that; te—Your; līlā-rasa—of the mellows tasted in the
pastimes; parimala—the fragrance; udgāri—spreading;
vanya-āparītā—filled with forests; dhanyā—glorious;
kṣauṇī—the land; vilasati—it shines; vṛtā—surrounded;
māthurī—the Mathurā district; mādhurībhiḥ—by the
beauties; tatra—there; asmābhiḥ—by us; caṭula—
flickering; paśupī-bhāva—with ecstatic enjoyment as
gopīs; mugdha-antarābhiḥ—by those whose hearts are
enchanted; saṁvītaḥ—surrounded; tvam—You; kalaya—kindly
perform; vadana—on the mouth; ullāsi—shining; veṇuḥ—with
the flute; vihāram—playful pastimes.

Near the highly praised Mathurā is that land of
Vṛndāvana, which is full of forests that emit the
sublime fragrance of the mellows of Your pastimes (līlā-
rasa), and which is made splendid with sweetness and
beauty. With a smiling face and playing the flute,
please sport in that Vṛndāvana with those whose hearts
are infatuated with capricious and unpredictable gopī-
bhāva.



The gopīs display “madanākya-mahābhāva— upon meeting
Kṛṣṇa in Kurukṣetra after many years of separation

gopyaś ca kṛṣṇam upalabhya cirād abhīṣṭaṁ

yat-prekṣaṇe dṛśiṣu pakṣma-kṛtaṁ śapanti

dṛgbhir hṛdi kṛtam alaṁ parirabhya sarvās

tad-bhāvam āpur api nitya-yujāṁ durāpam

SB 10.82.39/BR 7.20

śrī-śukaḥ uvāca—Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; gopyaḥ—the young
cowherd women; ca—and; kṛṣṇam—Kṛṣṇa; upalabhya—sighting;
cirāt—after a long time; abhīṣṭam—their object of
desire; yat—whom; prekṣaṇe—while seeing; dṛśiṣu—on their
eyes; pakṣma—of lids; kṛtam—the maker; śapanti—they
would curse; dṛgbhiḥ—with their eyes; hṛdi kṛtam—taken
into their hearts; alam—to their satisfaction;
parirabhya—embracing; sarvāḥ—all of them; tat—in Him;
bhāvam—ecstatic absorption; āpuḥ—attained; api—even
though; nitya—constantly; yujām—for those who engage in
yogic discipline; durāpam—difficult to attain.

[Śrīla   Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who was experiencing the mood
of the   gopīs when they saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra,
said:]   The vraja-sundarīs, who cursed the Creator for
making   eyelids that obstructed their darśana of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa,   now saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa again after a very long time.

                            642
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

They took Him from the path of their eyes into their
hearts and tightly embraced Him there. They attained
that rare absorption that cannot be attained either by
yogīs or by Rukmiṇī and the other queens of Dvārakā, who
are always with Him.



The gopīs— intense longing to receive Śrī Kṛṣṇa in their
own home, Vṛndāvana

āhuś ca te nalina-nābha padāravindaṁ

yogeśvarair hṛdi vicintyam agādha-bodhaiḥ

saṁsāra-kūpa-patitottaraṇāvalambaṁ

gehaṁ juṣām api manasy udiyāt sadā naḥ

SB 10.82.48/CC Mad 13.136/BR 7.21/ORY pp. 133, 147

āhuḥ—the gopīs said; ca—and; te—Your; nalina-nābha—O
Lord, whose navel is just like a lotus flower; pada-
aravindam—lotus feet; yoga-īśvaraiḥ—by the great mystic
yogīs; hṛdi—within the heart; vicintyam—to be meditated
upon; agādha-bodhaiḥ—who were highly learned
philosophers; saṁsāra-kūpa—the dark well of material
existence; patita—of those fallen; uttaraṇa—of
deliverers; avalambam—the only shelter; geham—family
affairs; juṣām—of those engaged; api—though; manasi—in
the minds; udiyāt—let be awakened; sadā—always; naḥ—our.

[At the meeting in Kurukṣetra, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the
prominent gopīs said:] “O Kamala-nābha (You whose navel
is like a lotus), great yogīs who possess profound
intelligence meditate upon Your lotus feet in their
hearts. Your lotus feet are the only means of escape for
those who have fallen into the well of material
existence. O Lord, please give us the benediction that,
even when we perform household work, Your lotus feet
shall always reside in our hearts and we shall never
forget them, even for a moment.”

An alternative meaning by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura (Sārārtha-Darśinī):

[The sva-pakṣa gopīs say:] “O sun who directly scorches
the darkness of ignorance, we are scorched by the heat
of this philosophical knowledge. We are cakora birds
living only on the moonlight radiating from Your
beautiful moonlike face. Therefore come back to
Vṛndāvana and bring us to life with Your pastimes such
as rāsa-līlā. The masters of yoga meditate on Your lotus
feet within their hearts, but we hold them above our
hearts on our breasts. Only by holding them are we able
to maintain our lives and not otherwise. Those with deep
intelligence, (agādha-bodhaih; gambhīra-buddhibhiḥ)
meditate on Your feet, but we have shallow intelligence.
Therefore as soon as we start meditating on Your feet we
drown in the ocean of swooning, so what is the question
of meditating? Furthermore, meditation on them is the
means for upliftment from the well of material existence
but such meditation cannot uplift us who have fallen
into an ocean of separation from You. Certainly we gopīs

                          643
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

have not fallen in the well of material life, having
renounced the happiness of husband, home and children
from an early age.” If Kṛṣṇa says, “Come to Dvārakā and
I will enjoy with you there”, the gopīs reply, “Śrī
Vṛndāvana is our home, and we are too attached to it to
take up residence anywhere else. It is there alone that
You attract us by wearing peacock feathers in Your
turban and playing enchanting music on Your flute. We
can be saved only by seeing You in Vraja and not by any
other kind of meditation or theoretical knowledge of the
self (ātma-jñāna).”



Śrī Kṛṣṇa meets with the gopīs in a solitary place at
Kurukṣetra

bhagavāṁs tās tathā-bhūtā vivikta upasaṅgataḥ

āśliṣyānāmayaṁ pṛṣṭvā prahasann idam abravīt

SB 10.82.40/BR 7.22

bhagavān—the Supreme Lord; tāḥ—them; tathā-bhūtāḥ—being
in such a state; vivikte—in a secluded place;
upasaṅgataḥ—approached; āśliṣya—embracing; anāmayam—
health; pṛṣṭvā—asking about; prahasan—laughed; idam—
this; abravīt—said.

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw that the gopīs had attained oneness
(tādātmya) with Him, He went with them to a secluded
place. After embracing them to His heart and inquiring
about their well-being, He laughed and spoke as follows.



Kṛṣṇa speaks the following words to give the gopīs
consolation

mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām amṛtatvāya kalpate

diṣṭyā yad āsīn mat-sneho bhavatīnāṁ mad-āpanaḥ

SB 10.82.44/CC Mad 13.160/ORY pp. 138, 183/BR 7.23

mayi—to Me; bhaktiḥ—devotional service; hi—only;
bhūtānām—for living beings; amṛtatvāya—to immortality;
kalpate—leads; diṣṭyā—by good fortune; yat—which; āsīt—
has developed; mat—for Me; snehaḥ—the love; bhavatīnām—
on the part of your good selves; mat—Me; āpanaḥ—which is
the cause of obtaining.

Sakhīs, it is greatly fortunate that you have developed
prema for Me, which is the only way to attain Me. Loving
devotional service unto Me qualifies living entities to
attain My supremely blissful eternal abode.



The gopīs express their supreme love for Kṛṣṇa

yat te sujāta-caraṇāmburuhaṁ staneṣu

bhītāḥ śanaiḥ priya dadhīmahi karkaśeṣu

                          644
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


tenāṭavīm aṭasi tad vyathate na kiṁ svit

kūrpādibhir bhramati dhīr bhavad-āyuṣāṁ naḥ

SB 10.31.19/BR 7.23 pt/JD ch 36

yat—which; te—Your; su-jāta—very fine; caraṇa-ambu-ruham
—lotus feet; staneṣu—on the breasts; bhītāḥ—being
afraid; śanaiḥ—gently; priya—O dear one; dadhīmahi—we
place; karkaśeṣu—rough; tena—with them; aṭavīm—the
forest; aṭasi—You roam; tat—they; vyathate—are
distressed; na—not; kim svit—is it?; kūrpa-ādibhiḥ—by
sharp stones; bhramati—flutters; dhīḥ—the mind; bhavat-
āyuṣām—of those of whom Your Lordship is the very life;
naḥ—of us.

[The gopīs said:] “A fear has arisen in our minds that
Your very soft lotus feet may be pained by being placed
on our hard breasts. How much more so when You roam into
the forest where Your feet may be cut by sharp pebbles.
Our minds are agitated by such thoughts, as if tormented
by a stinging scorpion, because You are our very life.”



As Mahāprabhu was ecstatically dancing at the Ratha-
yātrā, He was singing in Rādhikā’s mood of separation

sei ta parāṇa-nātha pāinu, yāhā lāgi— madana-dahane
jhuri— genu—

CC Mad 13.113/ORY 37, 104, 128-9/BR 1.2 pt/BPKG pp.
98,214

sei ta—that indeed; parāṇa-nātha—the master of My life;
pāinu—I have gotten; yāhā lāgi——for whom; madana-dahane—
being burned by Cupid; jhuri— genu—I became dried up.

Now I have gained the Lord of My life, in whose absence
I was being burned by Cupid and was withering away.



prāṇa-nātha, śuna mora satya nivedana

vraja — āmāra sadana, tāhāṅ tomāra saṅgama, nā pāile nā
rahe jīvana

CC Mad 13.138/BR 7.23 pt

prāṇa-nātha—O My Lord, master of My life; śuna—please
hear; mora—My; satya—true; nivedana—submission; vraja—
Vṛndāvana; āmāra—My; sadana—place; tāhāṅ—there; tomāra—
Your; saṅgama—association; nā pāile—if I do not get; nā—
not; rahe—remains; jīvana—life.

O Prāṇanātha, hear My true submission. My home is
Vṛndāvana, and I wish to have Your association there. If
not, it will be very difficult for Me to maintain My
life.




                           645
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

Will You please place Your lotus feet in Vṛndvana (which
is My heart)?

anyera hṛdaya - mana, mora mana - vṛndāvana,

“mane— “vane— eka kari— jāni

tāhāṅ tomāra pada-dvaya, karāha yadi udaya,

tabe tomāra pūrṇa kṛpā māni

CC Mad 13.137

anyera—of others; hṛdaya—consciousness; mana—mind; mora
mana—My mind; vṛndāvana—Vṛndāvana consciousness; mane—
with the mind; vane—with Vṛndāvana; eka kari——as one and
the same; jāni—I know; tāhāṅ—there, at Vṛndāvana; tomāra
—Your; pada-dvaya—two lotus feet; karāha—You do; yadi—
if; udaya—appearance; tabe—then; tomāra—Your; pūrṇa—
complete; kṛpā—mercy; māni—I accept.

[Speaking in the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Caitanya
Mahāprabhu said:] “For most people, the mind and heart
are one, but because My mind is never separated from
Vṛndāvana, I consider My mind and Vṛndāvana to be one.
My mind is already Vṛndāvana, and since You like
Vṛndāvana, will You please place Your lotus feet there?
I would deem that Your full mercy.”



Floating in the ocean of separation

ei-mate mahāprabhu nīlācale vaise

rātri-dine kṛṣṇa-vicchedārṇave bhāse

CC Antya 18.3

ei-mate—in this way; mahāprabhu—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu;
nīlācale—at Jagannātha Purī; vaise—resides; rātri-dine—
night and day; kṛṣṇa-viccheda—of separation from Kṛṣṇa;
arṇave—in the ocean; bhāse—floats.

While thus living at Jagannātha Purī, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu floated all day and night in an ocean of
separation from Kṛṣṇa.38

In separation, one moment seems like ten million aeons

yarhy ambujākṣāpasasāra bho bhavān

kurūn madhūn vātha suhṛd-didṛkṣayā

tatrābda-koṭi-pratimaḥ kṣaṇo bhaved

raviṁ vinākṣṇor iva nas tavācyuta

SB 1.11.9/GG 1.27

yarhi—whenever; ambuja-akṣa—O lotus-eyed one; apasasāra—
You go away; bho—oh; bhavān—Yourself; kurūn—the
descendants of King Kuru; madhūn—the inhabitants of
Mathurā (Vrajabhūmi); vā—either; atha—therefore; suhṛt-

                          646
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

didṛkṣayā—desiring to meet Your friends; tatra—at that
time; abda-koṭi—millions of years; pratimaḥ—like; kṣaṇaḥ
—moments; bhavet—becomes; ravim—the sun; vinā—without;
akṣṇoḥ—of the eyes; iva—like that; naḥ—ours; tava—Your;
acyuta—O infallible one.

O Lotus-eyed one, when you go away to Kurukṣetra and
Madhupurī (Mathurā), one moment seems like ten million
aeons. As the eyes see only darkness in the absence of
the sun, in your absence all four directions appear to
be an empty, desolate void.



mayi tāḥ preyasāṁ preṣṭhe dūra-sthe gokula-striyaḥ

smarantyo —ṅga vimuhyanti virahautkaṇṭhya-vihvalāḥ

SB 10.46.5/STB p. 94

mayi—I; tāḥ—they; preyasām—of all objects of endearment;
preṣṭhe—the most dear; dūra-sthe—being far away; gokula-
striyaḥ—the women of Gokula; smarantyaḥ—remembering;
aṅga—dear (Uddhava); vimuhyanti—become stunned; viraha—
of separation; autkaṇṭhya—by the anxiety; vihvalāḥ—
overwhelmed.

My dear Uddhava, for those women of Gokula I am the
dearest of the dear and the most cherished object of
love. Thus when they remember Me, who am so far away,
they faint by the anxiety of separation.



dhārayanty ati-kṛcchreṇa prāyaḥ prāṇān kathañcana

pratyāgamana-sandeśair ballavyo me mad-ātmikāḥ

SB 10.46.6/STB p. 95

dhārayanti—they hold on; ati-kṛcchreṇa—with great
difficulty; prāyaḥ—barely; prāṇān—to their lives;
kathañcana—somehow; prati-āgamana—of return; sandeśaiḥ—
by the promises; ballavyaḥ—the cowherd women; me—My;
mat-ātmikāḥ—who are fully dedicated to Me.

Simply because I have promised to return to them, My
fully devoted cowherd girlfriends struggle to maintain
their lives somehow or other.



What is the most painful kind of distress?

duḥkha-madhye kona duḥkha haya gurutara?

kṛṣṇa-bhakta-viraha vinā duḥkha nāhi dekhi para

CC Mad 8.149

duḥkha-madhye—among the miserable conditions of life;
kona—what; duḥkha—misery; haya—is; gurutara—more
painful; kṛṣṇa-bhakta-viraha—separation from the devotee
of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vinā—besides; duḥkha—unhappiness; nāhi—

                          647
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

there is not; dekhi—I see; para—other.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked, “Of all kinds of
distress, what is the most painful?” Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya
replied, “Apart from separation from the devotee of
Kṛṣṇa, I know of no unhappiness.”



“This entire world is a bunch of straw” - In separation
from You, the Vaiṣṇavas consider their own bodies to be
heavy burdens

tvad-bhaktaḥ saritāṁ patiṁ culukavat khadyotavad
bhāskaraṁ

merum paśyati loṣṭravat kim aparaṁ bhūmeḥ patiṁ
bhṛtyavat

cintāratna-cayaṁ śilā-śakalavat kalpa-drumaṁ kaṣṭavat

saṁsāraṁ tṛṇa-rāśivat kim aparaṁ dehaṁ nijaṁ bhāravat

Padyāvalī 56 (Śrī Sarvajña)/MS 5 pt

tvad-bhaktaḥ—Your devotee; paśyati—sees; patim—the king;
saritām—of rivers; culukavat—like a handful of water;
bhāskaram—the sun; khadyotavat—like a firefly; merum—
Mount Meru; loṣṭravat— like a clod of earth; kim aparam—
still further; patim bhūmeḥ —an emperor, king of the
Earth; bhṛtyavat — like a servant; cintāratna-cayam — a
host of desire jewels; śilā-śakalavat—like a heap of
stones; kalpa-drumam—a desire tree; kaṣṭavat—like a
piece of wood; saṁsaram—the whole world; tṛṇa-rāśivat—
like a heap of straw; kim aparam — what further?; deham
nijam— his own body; bhāravat—like a burden.

O Bhagavān! Your devotees consider the ocean to be like
a handful of water, the sun like a firefly, Mount Meru a
clump of earth, the emperor of the world an
insignificant servant, a multitude of cintāmaṇi jewels
simply pebbles, a valuable kalpa-druma tree a mere
stick, and the entire world a bunch of straw. What more
can be said? In separation from You, they consider their
own bodies to be heavy burdens.



The six Gosvāmīs worshipped Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in an intense
mood of separation

he rādhe vraja-devīke ca lalite he nanda-sūno kutaḥ

śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vanye kutaḥ

ghoṣantāv iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair mahā-vihvalau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam, Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya/SGG p.
127

he rādhe—O Rādhā; vraja-devīke—O Queen of Vraja; ca—and;
lalitā—O Lalitā sakhī; he nanda-sūnaḥ—O son of Nanda

                          648
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Mahārāja; kutaḥ—where are you; śrī-govardhana—on
beautiful Govardhana Hill; kalpa-pādapa-tale—at the base
of the desire trees; kālindī-vane—in the forest on the
bank of the Yamunā; kutaḥ—where are you?; ghoṣantau—who
are shouting; iti—thus; sarvataḥ—everywhere; vraja-pure—
in Vṛndāvana; khedaiḥ—by distress; mahā-vihvalau—who are
greatly agitated; vande—I offer my respectful
obeisances; rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-
gopālakau—unto the six Gosvāmīs.

I am doing vandanā to the Six Gosvāmīs, who were always
calling out, “O Rādhe! O Queen of Vṛndāvana! Where are
You? O Lalite! O son of Nanda Mahārāja! Where are You?
Are You seated beneath the kalpa-vṛkṣa trees of Śrī
Govardhana Hill? Or are You roaming in the forests along
the soft banks of the Kālindī?” They were always
lamenting, overwhelmed and burning in feelings of great
separation as they wandered throughout all Vraja-
maṇḍala.



Devoid of your association, even Vraja looks empty and
desolate

śūnyāyate mahā-goṣṭhaṁ girīndro “jagarāyate

vyāghra-tuṇḍāyate kuṇḍa jīvātu-rahitasya me

Prārthanāśraya-caturdaśaka 11, Śrī Stavāvalī, śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī

śūnyāyate—becomes void; mahā-goṣṭham—the land of Vraja;
giri-indraḥ—the king of mountains; ajagarāyate—becomes
like a python; vyāghra—of a tiger; tuṇḍāyate—becomes
like the gaping mouth; kuṇḍam—Rādhā kuṇḍa; jīvātu—the
sustainer of life; rahitasya—without; me—of me.

Now that I no longer have the sustainer of my life
[Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī], the land of Vraja has become empty
and desolate, Govardhana Hill has become like a great
python, and Rādhā-kuṇḍa has become like the gaping mouth
of a ferocious tiger.



Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura laments in separation from
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī

tuwā adarśana-ahi, garale jārala dehī, cira-dina tāpita
jīvana

hā hā prabhu! kara dayā, deha more pada-chāyā, narottama
laila śaraṇa

Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī-pada/SGG p. 72

tuwā—of you; adarśana—by not seeing; ahi—of the snake;
garale—by the poison; jārala—wasted; dehī—this embodied
soul; cira-dina— for many days; tāpita—burning; jīvana-
life; hā—O; hā—O; prabhu—Rupa Gosvāmī; kara—please
grant; dayā—mercy; deha— please give; more—to me; pada—
of your lotus feet; chāyā—the shade; narottama dāsa—
Narottama dāsa; laila—takes; śaraṇa— shelter.

                          649
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


Your absence from my vision is like snake poison
spreading throughout my body, consuming all my strength.
For the rest of my life my soul will be burning.
Narottama dāsa laments, “Alas, Prabhu! O Rūpa Gosvāmī!
Please give me the shade of your lotus feet. There I am
taking shelter.”



The key for perfection

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā māna-dena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

Śikṣāṣṭaka 3/CC Ādi 17.31/JD ch. 3,8,25/BR 3.1

hariḥ—Śrī Hari’s names; kīrtaniyaḥ—should be chanted;
sadā—always; sunīcena—by being humbler; api—even; tṛṇāt—
than the grass; sahiṣṇunā—by being more tolerant; api—
even; taroḥ—than a tree; amāninā—by being prideless;
mānadena—by giving respect (to others according to their
respective positions).

Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass which is trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless (not desiring respect for oneself), and
offering respect to all others according to their
respective positions, one should continuously chant the
holy name of Śrī Hari.36

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda: “Śrī
Gaurasundara explains that to genuinely call out for
Bhagavān, one has to become more humble than a blade of
grass. We cannot cry out for Kṛṣṇa until we have
accepted our own insignificance in relation to Him. We
beg for help only when we are forced to acknowledge our
helplessness.” (lec. 28.1.1931, Harmonist 15)



Gopī-gīta — song of separation

jayati te —dhikaṁ janmanā vrajaḥ śrayata indirā śaśvad
atra hi

dayita dṛśyatāṁ dikṣu tāvakās tvayi dhṛtāsavas tvāṁ
vicinvate

SB 10.31.1/Gopī-gīta 1/STB p. 62

gopyaḥ ūcuḥ—the gopīs said; jayati—is glorious; te—Your;
adhikam—exceedingly; janmanā—by the birth; vrajaḥ—the
land of Vraja; śrayate—is residing; indirā—Lakṣmī, the
goddess of fortune (referring to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the
mūla Lakṣmī); śaśvat—perpetually; atra—here; hi—indeed;
dayita—O beloved; dṛśyatām—may (You) be seen; dikṣu—in
all directions; tāvakāḥ—Your (devotees); tvayi—for Your
sake; dhṛta—sustained; asavaḥ—their life airs; tvām—for
You; vicinvate—they are searching.

The gopīs said: “O beloved, your birth in the land of

                          650
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

Vraja has made it exceedingly glorious, and thus Indirā,
the goddess of fortune, always resides here. It is only
for Your sake that we, who are yours, maintain our
lives. We have been searching everywhere for you, so
please show yourself to us.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: It has been said in śāstra that
if one wants to have darśana of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
or Śrī Kṛṣṇa or the gopīs - especially in kali-yuga -
the only way is to perform saṅkīrtana accompanied by
weeping. Specifically, that kīrtana should be in the
mood of separation. Kṛṣṇa will then manifest Himself to
the chanter. Jīva Gosvāmī says that while the gopīs sing
this verse, they are weeping so that Kṛṣṇa may hear and
thus bestow His mercy upon them, for mercy comes
especially to those who can weep bitterly for someone
else. (Gopī-gīta, text 1, pt)



The key to the treasure of bhakti is to chant and weep
in separation

bhakti-yoga bhakti-yoga bhakti-yoga dhana

bhakti ei kṛṣṇa namera smaraṇa krandana

Mahājana-vākya

bhakti yoga—loving devotion; dhana—treasure ; bhakti—
devotion; ei—this ; kṛṣṇa namera—Kṛṣṇa’s name ; smaraṇa—
remembering; krandana—crying.

Bhakti-yoga is the only wealth. Bhakti-yoga means to
chant and remember the name of Kṛṣṇa, and weep. (or:) If
you want to attain the treasure of bhakti-yoga you have
to remember Kṛṣṇa’s name and chant while crying from the
depths of your soul.

In Your separation, all the Vrajavāsīs are weeping and
are about to die

Tuhū Se Rohili Madhupura, Śrīla Govinda dāsa Kavirāja
(SGG p. 80)

tuhū se rohili madhupura

vrajakula ākula, dukūla kalarava, kānu kānu kori jhura
(1)

O Kṛṣṇa-candra, now You are staying very far away in
Madhupurī, in Mathurā. But what is the condition of
Vṛndāvana? All the Vrajavāsīs, in great pain and
distress of separation, are calling, “Kānu, Kānu! Where
are You?” Even the birds are calling. But there is no
answer, only an echo. All are weeping and are about to
die.

yaśomatī-nanda, andha sama baiṭhai,

sāhase uṭhai nā pāra

sakhā-gaṇa dhenu, veṇu-rava nā śuniye,


                           651
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

vichurala nagara bājāra (2)

Yaśodā-maiyā and Nanda Bābā are crying so much that it
is as if they have become blind and cannot see any more.
They are only sitting and crying. They have no strength
and are like skeletons, unable to even stand up. They
are about to die because they are not cooking. For whom
will they cook? And all the cows and Your friends —
where are they? Because they cannot hear You calling
them on Your flute, the marketplaces and the roads are
all deserted — no one is there!

kusuma tyajiyā ali, kṣiti-tale luṭata,

taru-gaṇa malina samāna

mayurī nā nācata, kapotī nā bolata,

kokilā nā karatahi gāṇa (3)

Even the bumblebees, which were so busy collecting
honey, are now so upset they have left the flowers. They
are crying and rolling on the ground in the pain of
separation. All the trees look so drab and distressed.
The peacocks are no longer dancing, the pigeons are no
longer singing, and the cuckoos are silent — they are
not calling, “Koohoo, koohoo,” any more. All are feeling
so much pain of separation.

virahiṇī rāī, viraha-jvare jara jara,

caudike viraha hutāśa

sahaje yamunā jala, āgi samāna bhela,

kahatahi govinda dāsa (4)

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is burning up in the fever of
separation. In all directions, everyone is sinking in
the ocean of separation from You. Even the Yamunā, whose
waters are now made of the tears coming from the gopīs,
does not flow anymore. This is the condition of
Vṛndāvana! Govinda dāsa tells this sad story.



Śrī-Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam describes the condition of
Vraja in separation

kintv idānīm api bhavān yadi tān nānukampate

yama eva tadā sarvān vegenānugrahīṣyati

Śrī-Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam 1.6.119

kintu—but; idānīm—now; api—indeed; bhavān—Your good
self; yadi—if; tān—to them; na anukampate—does not show
mercy; yamaḥ—Yamarāja; eva—indeed; tadā—then; sarvān—
all; vegena—quickly; anugrahīṣyati—will give his mercy.

Oh Kṛṣṇa, if you still do not show mercy to the
surviving Vrajavāsīs, then Yamarāja will quickly show
them his mercy. (It is only by the mercy of Yamarāja
that the distress and grief of separation from beloved

                            652
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

kinsc becomes relieved).

tatratya-yamunā svalpa-jalā śuṣkeva sājani

govardhano —bhūn nīco —sau svaḥ-prāpto yo dhṛtas tvayā

Śrī-Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam 1.6.121

tatratya—present there; yamunā—the Yamunā; su-alpa—
meager; jalā—whose water; śuṣkā—dried up; iva—as if; sā—
she; ajani—has become; govardhanaḥ—Govardhana; abhūt—has
become; nīcaḥ—short; asau—he; svaḥ—heaven; prāptaḥ—
reaching; yaḥ—who; dhṛtaḥ—held; tvayā—by You.

There is now very little water left in the Yamunā, for
she has almost dried up. Girirāja Govardhana which was
carried by Your left hand and was thus reaching up to
heaven, has now entered into the earth and is gradually
disappearing.

na yānty anaśanāt prāṇās tvan-nāmāmṛta-sevinām

paraṁ śuṣka-mahāraṇya-dāvāgnir bhavitā gatiḥ

Śrī-Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam 1.6.122

na yānti—they do not leave; anaśanāt—because of fasting;
prāṇāḥ—their life airs; tvat—Your; nāma-amṛta—the nectar
of names; sevinām—of those who serve; param—rather;
śuṣka—dry; mahā—great; araṇya—in a forest; dāva-agniḥ—a
conflagration; bhavitā—will be; gatiḥ—their end.

What more can I say about the condition of Vraja. Those
who are still alive, have abandoned bathing, eating and
drinking. Their life-airs are not leaving their bodies
only because they are tasting the nectar of Your holy
name. Therefore, the blazing forest-fire of Mahāvana
shall be their ultimate destination.



I am unable to tolerate Śrī Rādhikā’s separation from
Kṛṣṇa

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Virahe, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura (SGG p. 75)

śrī kṛṣṇa-virahe, rādhikāra daśā, āmi ta— sahite nāri

yugala-milana, sukhera kāraṇa, jīvana chāḍite pāri (1)

I am absolutely unable to tolerate Śrī Rādhikā’s
pitiable condition when She is suffering in separation
from Śrī Kṛsna, but I am fully prepared to immediately
give up my life for the sake of Their happy reunion.

rādhikā-caraṇa, tyajiyā āmāra, kṣaṇeke pralaya haya

rādhikāra tare, śata-bāra mari, se duḥkha āmāra soya (2)

If I were ever to renounce Rādhikā’s lotus feet for even
an instant, I would be totally devastated. For Her sake
I will gladly tolerate the pain and agony of death
hundreds of times.


                           653
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

e hena rādhāra, caraṇa-yugale, paricaryā pā—ba kabe

hāhā vraja-jana, more dayā kari—, kabe vraja-vane labe
(3)

When will I be able to serve Rādhikā’s two lotus feet?
Alas, I beg you all, O residents of Vraja, please be
merciful to me now. When will you take me into the
forests of Vraja?

vilāsa mañjarī, anaṅga mañjarī, śrī rūpa mañjarī āra

āmāke tuliyā, laha nija pade, deha more siddhi sāra (4)

O Vilāsa Mañjarī! O Anaṅga Mañjarī! O Rūpa Mañjarī!
Please lift me up and bring me close to your own lotus
feet, thereby bestowing upon me the ultimate perfection.



Finally, Kṛṣṇa meets with the gopīs and soothes their
pain of separation

kṛṣṇo —pi taṁ dantavakraṁ hatvā yamunām uttīrya nanda-
vrajaṁ gatvā sotkaṇṭhau pitarau abhivādyāśvāsya tābhyāṁ
sāśru-kaṇṭham āliṅgitaḥ sakala gopa-vṛndān
praṇamyāśvāsya sarvān santarpayām āsa

Padma-Purāṇa/GG 1.27

After killing Dantavakra, Kṛṣṇa crossed the Yamunā and
arrived in Vraja. There he offered obeisances to Nanda
and Yaśodā and comforted them in various ways. They
bathed Kṛṣṇa in their tears and pacified their long-
lived anguish by embracing him to their hearts. Then he
met with all the other cowherders and relieved their
sorrows. Finally, he met with the gopīs and soothed
their pain of separation.

Thus ends Chapter 22A— Vipralambha-rasa




Chapter 22B — Sambhoga-rasa-tattva


Prema in Meeting



Steadiness in perfection is described in the last verse
of Śikṣāṣṭaka

āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu mām

adarśanān marma-hatāṁ karotu vā

yathā tathā vā vidadhātu lampaṭo

mat-prāṇa-nāthas tu sa eva nāparaḥ

Śikṣāṣṭaka 8/CC Antya 20.47/BR 8.1

                          654
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


āśliṣya—embracing with great pleasure; vā—or; pāda-ratām
—who have fallen at the lotus feet; pinaṣṭu—let Him
trample; mām—Me; adarśanāt—by not being visible; marma-
hatām—brokenhearted; karotu—let Him make; vā—or; yathā—
as (He likes); tathā—so; vā—or; vidadhātu—let Him do;
lampaṭaḥ—a debauchee, who mixes with other women; mat-
prāṇa-nāthaḥ—the Lord of My life; tu—but; saḥ—He; eva—
only; na aparaḥ—not anyone else.

Let that debauchee (Kṛṣṇa) tightly embrace this
maidservant, who is devoted to serving Him, and thus
delight Me. Or, let Him trample Me under His feet, or
break My heart by not giving Me His darśana. He may do
whatever He desires. Even if He sports with His other
beloveds directly in front of Me, He is still My
prāṇanātha, My life and soul. In My heart, there is none
other than Him.



The definition of Sambhoga - love in union

dvayor militayor bhogaḥ sambhoga iti kīrtyate

BRS 3.5.34

The enjoyment experienced when the two lovers meet is
called sambhoga.



An example of Sambhoga from Padyāvalī

paramānurāga-parayātha rādhayā

parirambha-kauśala-vikāśi-bhāvayā

sa tayā saha smara-sabhājanotsavaṁ

niravāhayac chikhi-śikhaṇḍa-śekharaḥ

Padyāvalī 200, Śrī Kavirāja Miśra/BRS 3.5.35

parama—supremely; anurāga—to love; parayā—devoted; atha—
then; rādhayā—with Rādhā; parirambha—in embracing;
kauśala—expertise; vikāsi-bhāvayā—manifesting; saḥ—He;
tayā—Her; saha—with; smara—of cupid; sabhājana—
welcoming; utsavam—a festival; niravāhayat—performed;
śikhi-śikhaṇḍa-śekharaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa, who wears a peacock
feather crown.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, with peacock feathers on His head, performs
the transcendental festival of Cupis with Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, who is endowed with the highest attachment for
Kṛṣṇa, and who expresses Her love with skilful embraces.



An example of of the eternal union of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with the
Gopīs

jayati jana-nivāso devakī-janma-vādo


                          655
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

yadu-vara-pariṣat svair dorbhir asyann adharmam

sthira-cara-vṛjina-ghnaḥ su-smita-śrī-mukhena

vraja-pura-vanitānāṁ vardhayan kāma-devam

SB 10.90.128/BRS 3.3.128/BRS 3.5.35 purport (Jīva
Gosvāmī)

jayati—eternally lives gloriously; jana-nivāsaḥ—He who
lives among human beings like the Vrajavāsīs and the
Yadus, He who lives in the heart of all and is the
ultimate shelter of all living entities; devakī-janma-
vādaḥ—known as the son of Devakī (meaning that He is
known as the son of Devakī but actually He is the son of
mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja); yadu-vara-pariṣat—
lovingly served by the members of the Yadu dynasty or
the Vrajavāsīs (all of whom are His eternal associates);
svaiḥ dorbhiḥ—by His own arms, or by His devotees like
Arjuna who are just like His own arms; asyan—killing;
adharmam—demons or adharmic, impious tendencies; sthira-
cara-vṛjina-ghnaḥ—the destroyer of all ill fortune for
all living entities; su-smita—always smiling; śrī-
mukhena—by His beautiful face; vraja-pura-vanitānām—of
the damsels of Vṛndāvana, the gopīs; vardhayan—
increasing; kāma-devam—the amorous desires.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa lives among the Vrajavāsīs (the cowherd
community of Vṛndāvana) and the Yādavas (His royal
family of Mathurā and Dvārakā) and is conclusively the
son of Yaśodā-maiyā. He is the guide and protector of
the Yadu dynasty and the Vrajavāsīs, and with His mighty
arms He kills everything inauspicious in Vraja, Mathurā
and Dvārakā. By His presence He destroys all things
inauspicious for all living entities, moving and inert,
as well as the suffering of separation of the
inhabitants of Vraja and Dvārakā. His blissful smiling
face always increases the amorous desires of the gopīs
of Vraja. This is His eternal pastime and He remains
eternally in this position.



I do not mind My personal distress; I only wish for the
happiness of Kṛṣṇa

nā gaṇi āpana-duḥkha, sabe vāñchi tāṅra sukha,

tāṅra sukha - āmāra tātparya

more yadi dile duḥkha, tāṅra haila mahā-sukha,

sei duḥkha - mora sukha-varya

CC Antya 20.52

nā—not; gaṇi—I count; āpana-duḥkha—own personal misery;
sabe—only; vāñchi—I desire; tāṅra sukha—His happiness;
tāṅra sukha—His happiness; āmāra tātparya—the aim and
object of My life; more—unto Me; yadi—if; dile duḥkha—
giving distress; tāṅra—His; haila—there was; mahā-sukha—
great happiness; sei duḥkha—that unhappiness; mora
sukha-varya—the best of My happiness.


                          656
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

[Śrīmatī Rādhikā says:] “I do not mind My personal
distress. I only wish for the happiness of Kṛṣṇa, for
His happiness is the aim and object of My life. However,
if He feels great happiness in giving Me distress, that
distress is the best of My happiness.”



Out of intense love the devotee overlooks all
impediments and only wants to to render loving service

pragāḍha-premera ei svabhāva-ācāra

nija-duḥkha-vighnādira nā kare vicāra

CC Mad 4.186

pragāḍha—intense; premera—of love of Godhead; ei—this;
svabhāva—natural; ācāra—behavior; nija—personal; duḥkha—
inconvenience; vighna—impediments; ādira—and so on; nā—
not; kare—does; vicāra—consideration.

This is the natural result of intense kṛṣṇa-prema: The
devotee does not consider personal inconveniences or
impediments. In all circumstances he wants to serve
Kṛṣṇa.



Upon full surrender the devotee becomes a recipient of
prema

martyo yadā tyakta-samasta-karmā

niveditātmā vicikīrṣito me

tadāmṛtatvaṁ pratipadyamāno

mayātma-bhūyāya ca kalpate vai

SB 11.29.34/BR 8.2/GKH (P)

martyaḥ—a mortal; yadā—when; tyakta—having given up;
samasta—all; karmā—his fruitive activities; nivedita-
ātmā—having offered his very self; vicikīrṣitaḥ—desirous
of doing something special; me—for Me; tadā—at that
time; amṛtatvam—immortality; pratipadyamānaḥ—in the
process of attaining; mayā—with Me; ātma-bhūyāya—for
equal opulence; ca—also; kalpate—he becomes qualified;
vai—indeed.

[Śrī Kṛṣṇa says to Uddhava:] When a person abandons all
fruitive activities and fully surrenders himself to Me,
he becomes a recipient of special prema. This is a
result of My special mercy on him. I release him from
old age and grant him entrance into My eternal pastimes,
where he serves Me eternally.



Steadiness in bhajana is described by Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī

na dharmaṁ nādharmaṁ śruti-gaṇa-niruktaṁ kila kuru

                             657
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pracura-paricaryām iha tanu

śacī-sūnuṁ nandīśvara-pati-sutatve guru-varaṁ

mukunda-preṣṭhatve smara param ajasraṁ nanu manaḥ

Manaḥ-śikṣā 2/BR 8.3/JD ch. 39

na—not; dharmam—piety; na—not; adharmam—impiety; śruti-
gaṇa—in the Vedas; niruktam—described; kila—indeed; kuru
—do; vraje—in Vraja; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa;
pracura—profuse; paricaryām—service; iha—here; tanuḥ—
body; śacī-sūnum—the son of Śacī; nandīśvara-pati-
sutatve—as the son of King Nanda; guru-varam—the best
Guru (refers to both Śrī Guru and Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu); mukunda-preṣṭhatve—most dear to Lord
Mukunda; smara—meditate; param ajasram—always,
incessantly; nanu—indeed; manaḥ—mind.

O my dear mind, please do not perform either dharma
(which brings pious benefits such as high birth, wealth
etc.), or adharma (which awards disease, poverty, etc.)
which are mentioned in the Śrutis. Rather, render
profuse loving service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala, who
the Śrutis have ascertained to be the supreme object of
worship and the topmost Truth. Always remember
Śacīnandana Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is endowed with
the sentiments and bodily lustre of Śrī Rādhā, knowing
Him to be non-different from Śrī Nanda-nandana; and
always remember Śrīla Gurudeva (who is the
representative of Śrīmatī Rādhikā) as most dear to Śrī
Mukunda.



Humility and prema go side by side

na premā śravaṇādi-bhaktir api vā yogo —tha vā vaiṣṇavo

jñānaṁ vā śubha-karma vā kiyad aho saj-jātir apy asti vā

hīnārthādhika-sādhake tvayi tathāpy acchedya-mūlā satī

he gopī-jana-vallabha vyathayate hā hā mad-āśaiva mām

BRS 1.3.35/CC Mad 23.29/BR 8.4

na—not; premā—love of Godhead; śravaṇa-ādi—consisting of
chanting, hearing and so on; bhaktiḥ—devotional service;
api—also; vā—or; yogaḥ—the power of mystic yoga; atha vā
—or; vaiṣṇavaḥ—befitting a devotee; jñānam—knowledge; vā
—or; śubha-karma—pious activities; vā—or; kiyat—how
much?; aho—O my Lord; sat-jātiḥ—birth in a good family;
api—even; asti—there is; vā—or; hīna-artha-adhika-
sādhake—who bestows greater benedictions upon one who is
fallen and possesses no good qualities; tvayi—unto You;
tathā api—still; acchedya-mūlā—whose root is uncuttable;
satī—being; he—O; gopī-jana-vallabha—most dear friend of
the gopīs; vyathayate—gives pain; hā hā—alas; mat—my;
āśā—hope; eva—certainly; mām—to me.

O my Lord, I do not have any love for You, nor am I
qualified for discharging devotional service by chanting

                          658
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

and hearing and so forth. I do not possess mystic
powers, nor am I qualified as a Vaiṣṇava. I have no
knowledge nor have I performed any pious activities. Nor
do I belong to a very high-caste family. Overall, I have
no assets either material or spiritual. Still, O beloved
of the gopīs, because You bestow Your mercy on the most
fallen, I have an unbreakable hope that is constantly in
my heart. That hope is always giving me pain.



The premī bhakta’s behaviour, characteristics and
activities

evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā

jātānurāgo druta-citta uccaiḥ

hasaty atho roditi rauti gāyaty

unmādavan nṛtyati loka-bāhyaḥ

SB 11.2.40/CC Ādi 7.94, Antya 3.179/BR 8.8

evam-vrataḥ—when one thus vows to follow, and engages
in, the process of pure bhakti; sva—own; priya—very
dear; nāma—holy name; kīrtyā—by chanting; jāta—in this
way develops; anurāgaḥ—attachment; druta-cittaḥ—with a
melted heart; uccaiḥ—loudly; hasati—laughs; atho—also;
roditi—cries; rauti—becomes agitated; gāyati—chants;
unmāda-vat—like a madman; nṛtyati—dancing; loka-bāhyaḥ—
without caring for outsiders.

In the heart of one who adopts such a transcendental
vow, attachment for chanting the name of his most dear
iṣṭadeva arises and melts his heart. Thereafter anurāga
is born in his heart (wherein he feels the relish of Śrī
Nāma is ever increasingly fresh and ecstatic). In a
natural way — not out of pretence — he acts as if mad.
Sometimes he bursts out laughing and sometimes he sheds
floods of tears. Sometimes, in a loud voice, he calls
out to Bhagavān and sometimes, with a sweet voice, he
sings Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s glories. At other times, when he
perceives his beloved standing before his eyes, he even
starts dancing in order to please Him, being obvlivious
to the consideration of those around him.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has given a very
nice example to illustrate ecstatic laughing and other
symptoms of prema: “Oh, that thief Kṛṣṇa, the son of
Yaśodā, has entered the house to steal the fresh butter.
Grab Him! Keep Him away!— Hearing these menacing words
spoken by the elderly gopī Jaratī, Kṛṣṇa immediately
leaves the house. The devotee to whom this
transcendental pastime is revealed laughs in ecstasy.
But suddenly he can no longer see Kṛṣṇa. He then cries
in great lamentation, “Oh! I achieved the greatest
fortune in the world, and now it has suddenly slipped
from my hands!— Thus the devotee cries loudly, “So my
Kṛṣṇa! Where are You? Give me Your answer!— Śrī Kṛṣṇa
answers, “My dear devotee, I heard your loud complaint,
and so I have again come before you.— Upon seeing Kṛṣṇa
again, the devotee begins to sing, “Today my life has
become perfect.— Thus overwhelmed with transcendental

                          659
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

bliss, he begins to dance like a madman.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura also notes that the
word druta-cittaḥ or “with a melted heart,” indicates
that one’s heart, melted by the fire of anxiety to see
the Lord, becomes like Jambūnadī, a river of molten
gold. The ācārya further points out, nāma-kīrtanasya
sarvotkarṣam: the above verse clearly distinguishes the
exalted position of śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB
7.5.23], chanting and hearing the name and glories of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa



First You steal our hearts and then You disappear. Isn—t
this murder?

śarad-udāśaye sādhu-jāta-sat-sarasijodara-śrī-muṣā dṛśā

surata-nātha te —śulka-dāsikā vara-da nighnato neha kiṁ
vadhaḥ

SB 10.31.2/Gopī-gīta 2/BRS 3.5.29

śarat—of the autumn season; uda-āśaye—in the reservoir
of water; sādhu—excellently; jāta—grown; sat—fine;
sarasi-ja—of the lotus flowers; udara—in the middle; śrī
—the beauty; muṣā—which excels; dṛśā—with Your glance;
surata-nātha—O Lord of love; te—Your; aśulka—acquired
without payment; dāsikāḥ—maidservants; vara-da—O giver
of benedictions; nighnataḥ—for You who are killing; na—
not; iha—in this world; kim—why; vadhaḥ—murder.

O Lord of love, in beauty Your glance excels the whorl
of the finest, most perfectly formed lotus within the
autumn pond. (And where did You get this beauty? You
have expertly stolen it from the lotus. At first You
have stolen our hearts with Your glance but then You
disappeared). O bestower of benedictions, You are
killing Your maidservants who have given themselves to
You freely, without any price. Isn—t this murder?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Surata-nātha does not simply
mean “the lord of love.— Surata refers to the meeting of
the nāyaka and nāyikā in complete solitude, not only
talking but engaging in all the activities of love. Rata
means “mixing together—, and su means “especially—. The
nāyaka and nāyikā mix together in every possible way -
attaining the stage in which it seems there is no
difference between them. Surata is described in the
following śloka:

pahilehi rāga nayana-bhaṅge bhela

anudina bāḍhala, avadhi nā gela

nā so ramaṇa, nā hāma ramaṇī

duṅhu-mana manobhava peṣala jāni—

CC Madhya 8.194

pahilehi—in the beginning; rāga—attraction; nayana-
bhaṅge—by activities of the eyes; bhela—there was; anu-

                          660
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

dina—gradually, day after day; bāḍhala—increased; avadhi
—limit; nā—not; gela—reached; nā—not; so—He; ramaṇa—the
lover or enjoyer; nā—not; hāma—I; ramaṇī—the beloved or
enjoyed; duṅhu-mana—both the minds; manaḥ-bhava—the
mental condition; peṣala—pressed together; jāni——
knowing.

Before We met there was an initial attachment between
us, brought about by an exchange of glances. In this way
our attachment evolved, and it increased day by day
without ever reaching a limit. He is not the enjoyer,
nor am I the enjoyed, but by the influence of manobhava,
or Cupid. Kṛṣṇa’s mind and My mind have merged together.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: This śloka refers to Rasika-
śekhara Kṛṣṇa and Mahābhāva-svarūpinī Rādhikā meeting
together and becoming one in every respect - in their
hearts, their bodies and their souls. Rata means
“activity or engagement—, and with the addition of su it
becomes surata, “meeting together in every way.— This is
called sambhoga-līlā. (Gopī-gīta 2, pt)



As Mahāprabhu dances at the Ratha-yātrā Festival, He
raises His arms and repeatedly recites one mundane love
poem in a loud voice:

yaḥ kaumāra-haraḥ sa eva hi varas tā eva caitra-kṣapās

te conmīlita-mālatī-surabhayaḥ prauḍhāḥ kadambānilāḥ

sā caivāsmi tathāpi tatra surata-vyāpāra-līlā-vidhau

revā-rodhasi vetasi-taru-tale cetaḥ samutkaṇṭhate

Padyāvalī 386/CC Mad 13.121, Antya 1.78/ORY p. 123, 227/
BR 8.9

yaḥ—who; kaumāra-haraḥ—the thief of my heart during
youth; saḥ—he; eva hi—certainly; varaḥ—lover; tāḥ—these;
eva—certainly; caitra-kṣapāḥ—moonlit nights of the month
of Caitra; te—those; ca—and; unmīlita—fructified; mālatī
—of mālatī flowers; surabhayaḥ—fragrances; prauḍhāḥ—
full; kadamba—with the fragrance of the kadamba flower;
anilāḥ—the breezes; sā—that one; ca—also; eva—certainly;
asmi—I am; tathā api—still; tatra—there; surata-vyāpāra—
in intimate amorous exchangs; līlā—of pastimes; vidhau—
in the manner; revā—of the river named Revā; rodhasi—on
the bank; vetasī—of the name Vetasī; taru-tale—
underneath the tree; cetaḥ—my mind; samutkaṇṭhate—is
very eager to go.

O My friend, that beautiful lover who stole my youth is
now here. These are also the same pleasant nights of the
month of Caitra, with the same fragrance of blossoming
mālatī flowers and the same cool, gentle, fragrant
breeze from the kadamba trees. I am also the same and he
is the same. Nonetheless, my mind is eager for amorous
play at the foot of the vetasī tree on the bank of the
river Revā.




                          661
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Only Svarūpa (Dāmodara) and Rūpa (Gosvāmī) could
understand the essence of the mood in which Mahāprabhu
chanted the above śloka. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has
explained that śloka by composing the following text:

priyaḥ so —yaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ sahacari kuru-kṣetra-militas

tathāhaṁ sā rādhā tad idam ubhayoḥ saṅgama-sukham

tathāpy antaḥ-khelan madhura-muralī-pañcama-juṣe

mano me kālindī-pulina-vipināya spṛhayati

Padyāvali 387/CC Mad 1.76, Antya 1.79/ORY p. 228, 286/BR
8.10

priyaḥ—very dear; saḥ—He; ayam—this; kṛṣṇaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
saha-cari—O My dear companion; kuru-kṣetra-militaḥ—who
is met on the field of Kurukṣetra; tathā—also; aham—I;
sā—that; rādhā—Rādhārāṇī; tat—that; idam—this; ubhayoḥ—
of both of Us; saṅgama-sukham—the happiness of meeting;
tathā api—still; antaḥ—within; khelan—playing; madhura—
sweet; muralī—of the flute; pañcama—the fifth note; juṣe
—which delights in; manaḥ—the mind; me—My; kālindī—of
the river Yamunā; pulina—on the bank; vipināya—the
trees; spṛhayati—desires.

[After meeting Śrī Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra, Śrī Rādhā said:]
O sakhi, today at Kurukṣetra, I met My same prāṇa-priya,
Kṛṣṇa. I am that same Rādhā and there is also happiness
in Our meeting. But nonetheless, I deeply yearn for
Vṛndāvana, for the kuñja on the bank of the Kālindī that
is inundated by bliss as a result of Kṛṣṇa vibrating the
fifth note on His playful muralī.



nikhila-bhuvana-lakṣmī-nitya-līlāspadābhyāṁ

kamala-vipina-vīthī-garva-sarvāṅkaṣābhyāṁ

praṇamad-abhaya-dāna-prauḍhi-gāḍhādṛtābhyāṁ

kim api vahatu cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-pādāmbujābhyām

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 12/BR 8.17

nikhila—all; bhuvana—the worlds; lakṣmī—beauties (i.e.,
the milkmaids); nitya—eternal; līlā—pastimes;
aspadābhyām—home; kamala—lotus; vipina-vīthī—thickets or
clusters; garva—pride; sarvam—all; kaṣābhyām—break down;
praṇamad—those who bow down (i.e., His devotees); abhaya
—fearlessness; dāna—giving; prauḍhi—assurance; gāḍha—
excessively; adṛtābhyām—worshiped; kim api—something in
expressible, inexpressible bliss; vahatu—attain; cetaḥ—
my mind; kṛṣṇa—of Kṛṣṇa; pāda—the feet; ambujābhyām—
lotus.

May my heart attain indescribable bliss at Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet, which are the eternal abode of pastimes for
the supreme goddesses of fortune, the vraja-gopīs, which
thwart a multitude of lotus flowers— pride in their
beauty, and which are deeply respected everywhere for
their great power in giving shelter to the surrendered

                             662
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

souls.



The amṛtam śloka: May the sweet nectar of His lips sport
in my heart

taruṇāruṇa-karuṇāmaya-vipulāyata-nayanaṁ

kamalākuca-kalaśībhara-vipulī-kṛta-pulakam

muralī-rava-taralī-kṛta-muni-mānasa-nalinaṁ

mama khelatu mada-cetasi madhurādharam amṛtam

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 18/BR 8.18

taruṇa—like the sun; aruṇa—red; karuṇāmaya—full of
compassion; vipulāyata—large and wide; nayanam—eyes;
kamalā—Lakṣmī (Rādhā); kuca—breasts; kalaśī—pitcherlike;
bhara—heavy; vipulī—pressing; kṛta—caused; pulakam—
standing of the hairs on end; muralī—flute; rava—sound;
taralī—loose, liquified; kṛta—made; muni—of the sages;
mānasa—the minds; nalinam—lotuses; mama—my; khelatu—
play; mada—intoxicated with glee; cetasi—mind; madhura—
sweet; adharam—lips; amṛtam—nectar.

His eyes are fresh and reddish like the early dawn, full
of compassion and very long and wide; His bodily hair
stands on end by the touch of Śrī Rādhā’s breast; and
the sound of His flute makes the lotus-like minds of the
munis restless like the gopīs. May the sweet nectar of
His lips sport in my heart.



The superiority of paramour love (parakīya-bhāva)

kurvanti hi tvayi ratiṁ kuśalāḥ sva ātman

nitya-priye pati-sutādibhir ārti-daiḥ kim

tan naḥ prasīda parameśvara mā sma chindyā

āśāṁ dhṛtāṁ tvayi cirād aravinda-netra

SB 10.29.33 (Praṇaya-gīta)/BR 5.9

kurvanti—they make; hi—indeed; tvayi—for You; ratim—
attraction; kuśalāḥ—expert persons; sve—for their own;
ātman—O Self; nitya—eternally; priye—who is dear; pati—
with our husbands; suta—children; ādibhiḥ—and other
relations; ārti-daiḥ—who only give trouble; kim—what;
tat—therefore; naḥ—to us; prasīda—be merciful; parama-
īśvara—O supreme controller; mā sma chindyāḥ—please do
not cut down; āśām—our hopes; dhṛtām—sustained; tvayi—
for You; cirāt—for a long time; aravinda-netra—O lotus-
eyed one.

[The gopīs said:] “O Parama-īśvara! O Soul of all souls!
The great personalities, who are the well-wishers of
everyone’s soul and who are expert in fulfilling their
true, innermost desire, direct their loving attachment
towards You, because You are their eternal beloved. What

                          663
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

is the use of loving or serving husbands, sons and so
forth, who are temporary and sources of misery? Be
pleased with us and give us Your mercy. O lotus-eyed
one, please do not cut the flourishing creeper of our
desire to serve You, which we have nourished for such a
long time.”



Taking shelter of the perfect sentiments of the gopīs
(siddha-gopī-bhāva)

vīkṣyālakāvṛta-mukhaṁ tava kuṇḍala-śrī-

gaṇḍa-sthalādhara-sudhaṁ hasitāvalokam

dattābhayaṁ ca bhuja-daṇḍa-yugaṁ vilokya

vakṣaḥ śriyaika-ramaṇaṁ ca bhavāma dāsyaḥ

SB 10.29.39 (Praṇaya-gīta)/CC Mad 25.50, Antya 15.70/BR
5.8

vīkṣya—seeing; alaka—by Your hair; āvṛta—covered; mukham
—face: tava—Your; kuṇḍala—of Your earrings; śrī—with the
beauty; gaṇḍa-sthala—having the cheeks; adhara—of Your
lips; sudham—and the nectar; hasita—smiling; avalokam—
with glances; datta—bestowing; abhayam—fearlessness; ca—
and; bhuja-daṇḍa—of Your mighty arms; yugam—the pair;
vilokya—glancing upon; vakṣaḥ—Your chest; śrī—of the
goddess of fortune (or Rādhā); eka—the only; ramaṇam—
source of pleasure; ca—and; bhavāma—we must become;
dāsyaḥ—Your maidservants.

[The gopīs said:] “Priyatama, after seeing Your
beautiful lotus face, decorated with glossy black
curling tresses; Your beautiful cheeks, upon which
enchanting earrings (kuṇḍalas) radiate Your boundless
loveliness; Your sweet lips, whose nectar defeats all
other nectar; Your sidelong glance, made radiant by Your
slight smile; Your powerful arms assuring fearlessness
to surrendered souls, and Your chest which is the
pleasure abode of Mahā Lakṣmī, we have all become Your
maidservants.”



O sakhī! Kṛṣṇa is sporting like amorous love personified
in the spring season

viśveṣām anurañjanena janayann ānandam indīvara-

śreṇī-śyāmala-komalair upanayann aṅgair anaṅgotsavam

svacchandaṁ vraja-sundarībhir abhitaḥ pratyaṅgam
āliṅgitaḥ

śṛṅgāraḥ sakhi mūrtimān iva madhau mugdho hariḥ krīḍati

Śrī Gīta-govinda 1.12/CC Ādi 2.224/BR 8.23

viśveṣām—of all the gopīs; anurañjanena—by the act of
pleasing; janayan—producing; ānandam—the bliss;
indīvara-śreṇī—like a row of blue lotuses; śyāmala—

                          664
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

bluish black; komalaiḥ—and soft; upanayan—bringing;
aṅgaiḥ—with His limbs; anaṅga-utsavam—a festival for
Cupid; svacchandam—without restriction; vraja-
sundarībhiḥ—by the young women of Vraja; abhitaḥ—on both
sides; prati-aṅgam—each limb; āliṅgitaḥ—embraced;
śṛṅgāraḥ—amorous love; sakhi—O friend; mūrtimān—
embodied; iva—like; madhau—in the springtime; mugdhaḥ—
perplexed; hariḥ—Lord Hari; krīḍati—plays.

O sakhī, He who gives pleasure and bliss to all the
gopīs; whose limbs are bluish-black, very soft and
resemble blue lotuses; whose qualities awaken the
festival of Kandarpa (Cupid) that lies dormant within
the gopīs— hearts; and whose each and every limb is
embraced by a gopī — that Kṛṣṇa is sporting like amorous
love personified in the spring season.



If He will come within My vision again, I will decorate
that moment with jewels

yadā yāto daivān madhu-ripur asau locana-pathaṁ

tadāsmākaṁ ceto madana-hatakenāhṛtam abhūt

punar yasminn eṣa kṣaṇam api dṛśor eti padavīṁ

vidhāsyāmas tasminn akhila-ghaṭikā ratna-khacitāḥ

Jagannātha-vallabha-nāṭaka 3.11/BR 8.24

yadā—when; yātaḥ—entered upon; daivāt—by Providence;
madhu-ripuḥ—the enemy of the demon Madhu; asau—He;
locana-patham—the path of the eyes; tadā—at that time;
asmākam—our; cetaḥ—consciousness; madana-hatakena—by
wretched Cupid; āhṛtam—stolen; abhūt—has become; punaḥ—
again; yasmin—when; eṣaḥ—Kṛṣṇa; kṣaṇam api—even for a
moment; dṛśoḥ—of the two eyes; eti—goes to; padavim—the
path; vidhāsyāmaḥ—we shall make; tasmin—at that time;
akhila—all; ghaṭikāḥ—indications of time; ratna-khacitāḥ
—bedecked with jewels.

[Śrīmatī Rādhīkā said:] From the moment Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
enemy of the Madhu demon, unexpectedly came before My
eyes by the design of Providence, that wretched Cupid
stole My heart. Nonetheless, if He will come within My
vision again for even a moment, I will decorate that
moment with jewels.




Thus ends Chapter 22B — Sambhoga-rasa-tattva




Chapter 23 — Rādhā-tattva


Śrīmatī Rādhikā is Our Be-all and End-all

                            665
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017




Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the most condensed form of love for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa

rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktir asmād

ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau

caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptaṁ

rādhā-bhāva-dyuti-suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa-svarūpam

Śrī-Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, Ādi-līla 1.5/JD ch. 14

rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhikā; kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; praṇaya—of love
of God; vikṛtiḥ—the special transformation (increasing
unlimitedly, up to madanakya mahābhāva); hlādinī-śaktiḥ—
pleasure potency; asmāt—from this; eka-ātmānau—both the
same in identity; api—although; bhuvi—on earth; purā—
from beginningless time; deha-bhedam—separate forms;
gatau—obtained; tau—these two; caitanya-ākhyam—known as
Śrī Caitanya; prakaṭam—manifest; adhunā—now; tat-dvayam—
the two of Them; ca—and; aikyam—unity; āptam—obtained;
rādhā—of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; bhāva—mood; dyuti—the
luster; suvalitam—who is adorned with; naumi—I offer my
obeisances; kṛṣṇa-svarūpam—to Him who is identical with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is a transcendental manifestation of the
most condensed form of love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She is the
personification of His internal pleasure-giving potency.
Although Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are one in Their identity, They
separated Themselves eternally. Now these two
transcendental identities have again united, in the form
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. I bow down to Him, who has
manifested Himself with the sentiment and complexion of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī although He is Kṛṣṇa Himself.

She is the be-all and end-all of Govinda, and the crest
jewel of all His consorts

govindānandinī rādhā, govinda-mohinī

govinda-sarvasva, sarva-kāntā-śiromaṇi

CC Ādi 4.82

govinda-ānandinī—She who gives pleasure to Govinda;
rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; govinda-mohinī—She who
mystifies Govinda; govinda-sarvasva—the be-all and end-
all of Lord Govinda; sarva-kāntā—of all the Lord’s
lovers; śiro-maṇi—the crown jewel.

Rādhā is the one who gives pleasure to Govinda, and She
is also the enchantress of Govinda. She is the be-all
and end-all of Govinda, and the crest jewel of all His
consorts.



She is the Goddess of He who is the God of the entire
creation

                          666
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


jagat-mohana kṛṣṇa, tāṅhāra mohinī

ataeva samastera parā ṭhākurāṇī

CC Ādi 4.95/Venu-gīta 7, pt

jagat-mohana—enchanting the universe; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
tāṅhāra—of Him; mohinī—the enchantress; ataeva—
therefore; samastera—of all; parā—foremost; ṭhākurāṇī—
goddess.

That very Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who attracts the entire universe
with His beauty, qualities, pastimes, nature, opulence,
sweetness, and other aspects, is Himself attracted and
rendered helpless by the unparalleled and unsurpassed
love of Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the
most supremely accomplished of all in the art of love
and affection, who is the embodiment of mahābhāva, and
who is extremely dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Indeed, She is the
Goddess of He who is the God of the entire creation.
Therefore She is all-in-all.



Śrī Rādhikā is the topmost worshipper who completely
controls Kṛṣṇa by Her love

devī kṛṣṇa-mayī proktā rādhikā para-devatā

sarva-lakṣmīmayī sarva-kāntiḥ sammohinī parā

Bṛhad-gautamīya-tantra/CC Ādi 4.83/BS p. 49

devī—self-effulgent, brilliantly shining, the pleasure
abode of Kṛṣṇa’s love; kṛṣṇa-mayī—nondifferent from Lord
Kṛṣṇa, always absorbed in Him; proktā—called; rādhikā—
(rādh—to worship, to give pleasure; adhika—topmost) the
best worshipper, the best in fulfilling Kṛṣṇa’s desires,
whose life and soul is to give pleasure to Kṛṣṇa; para-
devatā—Supreme Goddess (āśraya-Bhagavān), supremely
worshipable, She who manifests all of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes,
who is capable of completely controlling Kṛṣṇa, who is
the supreme mother, and who protects, maintains and
nourishes Kṛṣṇa; sarva-lakṣmī-mayī—the shelter of all
the goddesses of fortune, the source of all opulences
and all sweetness; sarva-kāntiḥ—in whom all beauty and
splendor exists; sammohinī—who completely bewilders
Kṛṣṇa and subdues Him by Her qualities and loving
service; parā—the superior energy.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the Supreme Goddess (para-devatā),
the exclusive abode of Kṛṣṇa’s playful pastimes or the
illustrious enactress of amorous līlā (devī), and the
shelter of all goddesses of fortune (Mahā-Lakṣmī). She
is superlatively beautiful. Her whole being is nothing
but Kṛṣṇa, and She is incessantly absorbed in Kṛṣṇa. She
is the embodiment of all splendor, and is the
enchantress of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart.



The key Bhāgavatam śloka glorifying Śrīmatī Rādhikā


                          667
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

anayārādhito nūnaṁ bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ

yan no vihāya govindaḥ prīto yām anayad rahaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.30.28/CC Ādi 4.88/VG p. 128/BR 5.10
pt

anayā—by this one; ārādhitaḥ—worshiped; nūnam—certainly;
bhagavān—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ—Lord
Kṛṣṇa; īśvaraḥ—the Supreme Lord; yat—because; naḥ—us;
vihāya—leaving aside; govindaḥ—Govinda; prītaḥ—pleased;
yām—whom; anayat—lead; rahaḥ—to a lonely place.

[The gopīs said:] “O sakhis! Śrī Rādhikā is much more
fortunate than all of us! She has surely performed the
highest ārādhana of Bhagavān Śrī Hari; thus She has
received the name Rādhikā. That is why, being very much
pleased with Her, Govinda has left us in the rāsa-sthalī
and went off with Her to a solitary place.”




Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the topmost beloved of Kṛṣṇa

yathā rādhā priyā viṣṇos tasyāḥ kuṇḍaṁ priyaṁ tathā

sarva-gopīṣu saivaikā viṣṇor atyanta-vallabhā

Padma-Purāṇa/Laghu-bhāg. 2.1.45/CC Ādi 4.215, Mad 8.99,
18.8/Upad. 9 pt/BMP p. 99

yathā—just as; rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; priyā—very dear;
viṣṇoḥ—vyapnotīti Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa who expands Himself into
millions of forms in the rasa dance; tasyāḥ—Her; kuṇḍam—
bathing pond; priyam—very dear; tathā—so also; sarva-
gopīṣu—among all the gopīs; sā—She; eva—certainly; ekā—
alone; viṣṇoḥ—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; atyanta-vallabhā—most dear.

Just as Śrīmatī Rādhikā is most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Her
pond, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, is equally dear to Him. Among all
the beloved gopīs, none are as dear as Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



This Earth is glorious because of Vṛndāvana and the
gopīs, and the gopīs are glorious because among them is
My Rādhikā

trai-lokye pṛthivī dhanyā yatra vṛndāvanaṁ purī

tatrāpi gopikāḥ pārtha yatra rādhābhidhā mama

Ādi Purāṇa (spoken by Kṛṣṇa to Arjuna)/CC Ādi 4.216

trai-lokye—in the three worlds; pṛthivī—the earth;
dhanyā—fortunate; yatra—where; vṛndāvanam—Vṛndāvana;
purī—the town; tatra—there; api—certainly; gopikāḥ—the
gopīs; pārtha—O Arjuna; yatra—where; rādhā—Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī; abhidhā—named; mama—My.

O Pārtha, in all the three planetary systems, this Earth
is especially fortunate, for on Earth is the town of

                          668
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Vṛndāvana, and within Vṛndāvana the gopīs are especially
glorious because among them is My Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



trailokye pṛthivī manyā jambudvīpo tato varam

tatrāpi bhārataṁ varṣaṁ tatrāpi mathurā purī

Padma Purāṇa (Pātāla-khaṇḍa 59)/Nārada-pañcarātra (Śrī
Sanatkumāra-saṁhitā 78)

trailokye—in the three worlds; pṛthivī—the earth; manyā—
highly regarded; jambudvīpaḥ—Jambudvīpa; tataḥ—than;
varam—greater; tatrāpi—still more than that; bhāratam
varṣam—Bharata-varṣa; tatrāpi—still more; mathurā purī—
the city of Mathurā.

In the three worlds the most fortunate place is the
earthly planets. The best of them is Jambudvīpa. In
Jambudvīpa the best place is Bhārata-varṣa. In Bhārata-
varṣa the best place is Mathurā-purī.

Of all the exalted gopīs, the most illustrious is
Śrīmati Rādhikā

tatra vṛndāvanaṁ nāma tatra gopī-kadambakam

tatra rādhā-sakhī-vargas tatrāpi rādhikā varā

Padma Purāṇa (Pātāla-khaṇḍa 60)/Nārada-pañcarātra (Śrī
Sanatkumāra-saṁhitā 79)

tatra—there; vṛndāvanam—Vṛndāvana; nāma—named; tatra—
there; gopī-kadambakam—many gopīs; tatra—there; rādhā-
sakhī-vargaḥ—the friends of Śrī Rādhā; tatrāpi—there
also; rādhikā—Rādhā; varā—the supreme.

The best place in Mathurā-purī is called Vṛndāvana. In
Vṛndāvana there reside a multitude of milkmaids, amongst
whom the eight friends of Śrī Rādhā are the most
exalted, and still more illustrious is the supreme
Goddess, Śrī Rādhā



Kṛṣṇa tells Arjuna, “The Gopīs are everything to Me”

sahāyā guravaḥ śiṣyā bhujiṣyā bāndhavāḥ striyaḥ

satyaṁ vadāmi te pārtha gopyaḥ kiṁ me bhavanti na

Gopī-premāmṛta/CC Ādi 4.211

sahāyāḥ—helpers; guravaḥ—teachers; śiṣyāḥ—disciples;
bhujiṣyāḥ—servants; bāndhavāḥ—friends; striyaḥ—consorts;
satyam—truthfully; vadāmi—I say; te—unto you; pārtha—O
Arjuna; gopyaḥ—the gopīs; kim—what; me—for Me; bhavanti—
are; na—not.

O Pārtha, I speak to you the truth. The gopīs are My
helpers, teachers, disciples, servants, friends and
consorts. I do not know what they are not to Me.


                          669
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017



All the gopīs assist Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure pastimes

rādhā-saha krīḍā rasa-vṛddhira kāraṇa

āra saba gopī-gaṇa rasopakaraṇa

CC Ādi 4.217

rādhā-saha—with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; krīḍā—pastimes; rasa—
of mellow; vṛddhira—of the increase; kāraṇa—the cause;
āra—the other; saba—all; gopī-gaṇa—gopīs; rasa-upakaraṇa
—paraphernalia, varieties of food, ingredients of rasa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure-pastimes with Śrī Rādhā are the
cause for expanding the relishable mellows of rasa, and
all the other gopīs assist that development.



Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s prema is Kṛṣṇa’s guru

rādhikāra prema—guru, āmi—śiṣya naṭa

sadā āmā nānā nṛtye nācāya udbhaṭa

Ādi 4.124

rādhikāra—of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; prema—the prema; Guru—
teacher; āmi—I; śiṣya naṭa—dancing disciple; sadā—
always; āmā—Me; nānā—various; nṛtye—in dances; nācāya—
causes to dance; udbhaṭa—novel.

The prema of Rādhikā is My Guru, and I am Her dancing
pupil. Her prema makes Me dance various novel dances.



Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the epitome of transcendental rasa

ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis

tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ

goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

Brahma-saṁhitā 5.37/CC Adi 4.72/Mad 8.163/JD ch. 32

ānanda—bliss; cit—and knowledge; maya—consisting of;
rasa—mellows; prati—at every second; bhāvitābhiḥ—who are
saturated with (love for Kṛṣṇa); tābhiḥ—with those; yaḥ—
who; eva—certainly; nija-rūpatayā—with His own form;
kalābhiḥ—who are portions of His supreme pleasure
potency; goloke—in Goloka Vṛndāvana; eva—certainly;
nivasati—resides; akhila-ātma—as the soul of all; bhūtaḥ
—who exists; govindam—Śrī Govinda; ādi-puruṣam—the
original personality; tam—Him; aham—I; bhajāmi—worship.

Śrī Govinda, who is all-pervading and who exists within
the hearts of all, resides in His Goloka-dhāma along
with Śrī Rādhā, who is the embodiment of His pleasure

                          670
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

potency and the counterpart of His own spiritual form.
She is the epitome of transcendental rasa, and is expert
in the sixty-four arts. They are also accompanied by the
sakhīs, who are expansions of Śrī Rādhā’s own
transcendental body, and who are infused with blissful,
spiritual rasa. I worship that original personality, Śrī
Govinda.



The essence of prema is mahābhāva

hlādinīra sāra “prema—, prema-sāra “bhāva—

bhāvera parama-kāṣṭhā, nāma—”mahā-bhāva—

CC Ādi 4.68

hlādinīra—of the pleasure potency; sāra—the essence;
prema—love for God; prema-sāra—the essence of such love;
bhāva—emotion; bhāvera—of emotion; parama-kāṣṭhā—the
highest limit; nāma—named; mahā-bhāva—the topmost form
of prema.

The essence of the hlādinī potency is love of God, the
essence of love of God is bhāva, and the ultimate
development of bhāva is mahābhāva.



Śrīmati Rādhikā is the embodiment of mahābhāva

mahābhāva-svarūpā śrī-rādhā-ṭhākurāṇī

sarva-guṇa-khani kṛṣṇa-kāntā-śiromaṇi

CC Adi 4.69

mahā-bhāva—of mahābhāva; svarūpā—the form; śrī-rādhā-
ṭhākurāṇī—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; sarva-guṇa—of all good
qualities; khani—mine; kṛṣṇa-kāntā—of the lovers of Lord
Kṛṣṇa; śiromaṇi—crown jewel.

Śrī Rādhā Ṭhākurāṇī is the embodiment of mahābhāva. She
is the repository of all good qualities and the crest
jewel among all the lovely consorts of Lord Kṛṣṇa.



The meaning of mahābhāva

rādhāyā bhavataś ca citta-jatunī svedair vilāpya kramād

yuñjann adri-nikuñja-kuñjara-pate nirdhūta-bheda-bhramam

citrāya svayam anvarañjayad iha brahmāṇḍa-harmyodare

bhūyobhir nava-rāga-hiṅgula-bharaiḥ śṛṅgāra-kāruḥ kṛtī

Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Sthāyībhāva prakaraṇa 155/CC Mad
8.195/Jaiva Dharma ch. 36

rādhāyāḥ—of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; bhavataḥ ca—and of You;
citta-jatunī—the two minds like shellac; svedaiḥ—by

                           671
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

perspiration; vilāpya—melting; kramāt—gradually; yuñjan—
making; adri—of Govardhana Hill; nikuñja—in a solitary
place for enjoyment; kuñjara-pate—O king of the
elephants; nirdhūta—completely taken away; bheda-bhramam
—the misunderstanding of differentiation; citrāya—for
increasing the wonder; svayam—personally; anvarañjayat—
colored; iha—in this world; brahmāṇḍa—of the universe;
harmya-udare—within the palace; bhūyobhiḥ—by profuse;
nava-rāga—of new attraction; hiṅgula-bharaiḥ—by the
vermilion; śṛṅgāra—of loving affairs; kāruḥ—the
craftsman; kṛtī—very expert.

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa continuously enjoy Their loving play in
the nikuñjas. Vṛṇdā-devī, having realised the excellence
of their anurāga, says to Kṛṣṇa, “O King of mad
elephants, who sports in the groves on Govardhana Hill,
there is an accomplished artist of the name Śṛṅgāra-rasa
(Kāmadeva) and upon the fire generated from the heat of
Your two bhāvas, he has slowly melted Your shellac-like
hearts and made them one. Then mixing that with profuse
quantities of the kuṅkuma of Your everfresh rāga, he is
painting an astonishing picture upon the inner walls of
the grand temple of the universe.”




Kṛṣṇa is begging the footdust of Śrīmatī Rādhikā

smara-garala-khaṇḍanaṁ mama śirasi maṇḍanam

dehi pada-pallavam udāraṁ

Śrī Gīta-Govinda 10.8/Seva-kuñja at Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana

dehi—kindly bestow; maṇḍanam—the ornament; pallavam—
blossom-soft; pada—feet; udāram—(which are imbued with)
munificence; mama śirasi—upon my head; khaṇḍanam—
nullify; garala—the poison; smara—of Cupid.

O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, I am burning in the fire of
separation. Please be merciful to Me and decorate My
head with the footdust of Your lotus feet to relieve Me
from this burning poison of Cupid.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja [Kṛṣṇa is praying:] “Rādhā! My
suffering will be vanquished only when you accept me. I
am overwhelmed by a sphūrti of your all-conquering
qualities, and I pray to you to kindly place the freshly
sprouted buds of your feet upon my head. Your lotus feet
are munificent. They fulfill the innermost cherished
desires of those who pray to them. They are ornaments
because they are red, soft and cool like new petals. If
you were to place them upon my head, my head would be
decorated and simultaneously the poisonous effect of
kāma would be counteracted.”



O mind! Give up attachment for all others and just
worship the most beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā

ratim gaurī-līle api tapatī saundarya-kiraṇaiḥ

                            672
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


śacī-lakṣmī-satyāḥ paribhavati saubhāgya-valanaiḥ

vaśī-kāraiś candrāvalī-mukha-navīna-vraja-satīḥ

kṣipaty ārād yā tāṁ hari-dayita-rādhāṁ bhaja manaḥ

Śri Manaḥ-śikṣa 10

ratim—Cupid’s consort (Rati devī); gaurī—Gauri devī,
Pārvatī, Śiva’s consort; līle—Līlā devī, pastime potency
of Viṣṇu; api—also; tapati—inflames; saundarya—of
beauty; kiraṇaiḥ—with Her effulgence; śacī—Śacī devī,
Indra’s queen; lakṣmī—Lakṣmī devī, consort of Nārāyaṇa;
satyāḥ—and Satyabhāmā, prominent consort of Kṛṣṇa in
Dvārakā; paribhavati—defeats; saubhāgya—of Her good
fortune; valanaiḥ—by the superabundance; vaśī-kāraiḥ—by
Her ability to bring Kṛṣṇa under Her control;
candrāvalī-mukha—headed by Candrāvalī; navīna-vraja-
satīḥ—the chaste young girls of Vraja; kṣipati—tosses
aside; ārāt—far away; yā—who; tām—that; harī-dayita-
rādhām—Lord Hari’s beloved, Śrīmatī Rādhikā; bhaja—
worship; manaḥ—O mind.

(Without taking shelter of the Lord’s internal potency
or svarūpa-śakti — Śrīmatī Rādhikā — one can never
obtain the fullest aspect of the Absolute Truth, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is the possessor of that potency. Therefore,
the following statement is expressed): “O mind! Give up
attachment for all others and just worship the most
beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who inflames
Rati, Gauri, and Lila by the effulgent rays of Her
beauty; who vanquishes Śrī Śacī, Śrī Lakṣmī, and Śrī
Satyabhāmā by the profusion of Her good fortune; and who
dispels the pride of the chaste young girls of Vraja
headed by Śrī Candrāvalī by Her ability to bring Śrī
Kṛṣṇa under Her control. This Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the
most beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”



Rādhārāṇī’s love is superior to Candrāvalī’s

tayor apy ubhayor madhye rādhikā sarvathādhikā

mahābhāva-svarūpeyaṁ guṇair ativarīyasī

CC Ādi 4.70/Mad 8.161/ Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 4.3

tayoḥ—of them; api—even; ubhayoḥ—of both (Candrāvalī and
Rādhārāṇī); madhye—between; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī;
sarvathā—in every way; adhikā—greater; mahā-bhāva-
svarūpā—the form of mahābhāva; iyam—this one; guṇaiḥ—
with good qualities; ativarīyasī—the best of all.

Of these two gopīs [Rādhārāṇī and Candrāvalī], Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī is superior in all respects. She is the
embodiment of mahābhāva, and She surpasses all in good
qualities.

Saṁyoginī, Viyoginī and Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā

śaktiḥ saṁyoginī kāmā vāmā śaktir viyoginī


                          673
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

hlādinī kīrttidā putrī caivaṁ rādhā-trayaṁ vraje

mama prāṇeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇas tyaktvā vṛndāvanaṁ kvacit

kadācin naiva yātīti jānīte kīrttidā sutā

Sanat-Kumāra-Saṁhitā 303-4

[śrī-sadāśiva uvāca—Lord Sadāśiva said:] śaktih
samyoginī—the potency of meeting; kāmā—amorous pastimes;
vāmā—contrariness; śaktiḥ—potency; viyoginī—separation;
hlādinī—pleasure; kīrtidā-putrī—the daughter of Kīrtidā;
ca—also; evaṁ—thus; rādhā—Śrī Rādhā; trayam—three; vraje
—in Vraja; mama—of Me; prāṇeśvaraḥ—the Lord of life;
kṛṣṇaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tyaktvā—leaving; vṛndāvanam—Vṛndāvana;
kvacit—somewhere; kadācin—sometimes; na—not; eva—indeed;
yāti—goes; iti—thus; jānite—knows; kīrtidā-sutā—the
daughter of Kīrtidā.

Śrīmati Rādhikā has three manifestations: (1) as
saṁyoginī (endeavouring to meet with Kṛṣṇa) or kāmā
(desirous of meeting with Kṛṣṇa); (2) as viyoginī
(anguished due to separation from Kṛṣṇa, or relishing
love in separation) or vāmā (in māna, indignant due to
Kṛṣṇa leaving Her for another gopī); and (3) as
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu and
Kīrttidā in Vraja who is always with Kṛṣṇa. Saṁyoginī
and viyogiṇī are two different manifestations of the
original Śrī Rādhā, the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja
and Kīrttidā. Saṁyoginī refers to the partial expansion
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā when She goes to meet Kṛṣṇa in
Kurukṣetra. Viyoginī refers to Śrī Rādhā in viyoga (or
viraha, separation) as she and the other gopis lamented
in divyonmāda and other ecstatic moods at Uddhava Kyāri
near Nanda-gāon, as well as to Her manifestation in
Sūrya-loka and Nava-Vṛndāvana in Dvārakā. The daughter
of Vṛṣabhanu and Kīrttidā thinks, “My prāṇeśvara Śrī
Kṛṣṇa never leaves Vṛndāvana to go anywhere else.”

Editorial note: Correspondingly, Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa
is His most complete form, He is saṁyoginī Kṛṣṇa in
Kurukṣetra and viyoginī Kṛṣṇa in Mathura and Dvārakā.
Similarly, the original, most complete form of
Mahāprabhu is that of Śacīnandana Gaurahari in
Navadvīpa, He is saṁyoginī Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in
Godāvarī and at the Ratha-yātrā pastimes in Puri, and
viyoginī Mahāprabhu in the Gambhira pastimes in Puri.



What is the topmost holy place?

vaikuṇṭhāj janito varā madhu-purī tatrāpi rāsotsavād

vṛndāraṇyam udāra-pāṇi-ramaṇāt tatrāpi govardhanaḥ

rādhā-kuṇḍam ihāpi gokula-pateḥ premāmṛtāplāvanāt

kuryād asya virājato giri-taṭe sevāṁ vivekī na kaḥ

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 9

vaikuṇṭhāt—than Vaikuṇṭha, the spiritual world; janitaḥ—
because of birth; varā—better; madhu-purī—the

                             674
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

transcendental city known as Mathurā; tatra api—superior
to that; rāsa-utsavāt—because of the performance of the
rāsa-līlā; vṛndā-araṇyam—the forest of Vṛndāvana; udāra-
pāṇi—of Lord Kṛṣṇa whose hand is munificent; ramaṇāt—
because of various kinds of loving pastimes; tatra api—
superior to that; govardhanaḥ—Govardhana Hill; rādhā-
kuṇḍam—a place called Rādhā-kuṇḍa; iha api—superior to
this; gokula-pateḥ—of Kṛṣṇa, the master of Gokula;
prema-amṛta—with the nectar of divine love; āplāvanāt—
because of being overflooded; kuryāt—would do; asya—of
this (Rādhā-kuṇḍa); virājataḥ—situated; giri-taṭe—at the
foot of Govardhana Hill; sevām—service; vivekī—who is
intelligent; na—not; kaḥ—who.

Due to Śrī Kṛṣṇa having taken birth there, the abode of
Mathurā is superior even to Vaikuṇṭha, the realm of
spiritual opulence. Superior to Mathurā is the forest of
Vṛndāvana because there the festival of the rāsa dance
took place. Superior to Vṛndāvana forest is Govardhana
Hill because Śrī Kṛṣṇa raised it with His lotus hand and
performed many pastimes there with His devotees. Yet
superior even to Govardhana Hill is Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa
because it immerses one in the nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
divine love. What intelligent person would not desire to
render service to this magnificent pond, which shines at
the base of Govardhana Hill?



Who is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost beloved?

karmibhyaḥ parito hareḥ priyatayā vyaktiṁ yayur jñāninas

tebhyo jñāna-vimukta-bhakti-paramāḥ premaika-niṣṭhās
tataḥ

tebhyas tāḥ paśu-pāla-paṅkaja-dṛśas tābhyo —pi sā
rādhikā

preṣṭhā tadvad iyaṁ tadīya-sarasī tāṁ nāśrayet kaḥ kṛtī

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 10

karmibhyaḥ—than all fruitive workers; paritaḥ—in all
respects; hareḥ—by the Supreme Lord; priyatayā—because
of being favored; vyaktim yayuḥ—it is said in the
śāstra; jñāninaḥ—those advanced in knowledge; tebhyaḥ—
superior to them; jñāna-vimukta—liberated by knowledge;
bhakti-paramāḥ—those engaged in devotional service;
prema-eka-niṣṭhāḥ—those who have attained pure love of
God; tataḥ—superior to them; tebhyaḥ—better than them;
tāḥ—they; paśu-pāla-paṅkaja-dṛśaḥ—the gopīs who always
gaze at Kṛṣṇa, the cowherd boy; tābhyaḥ—above all of
them; api—certainly; sā—She; rādhikā—Śrīmatī Rādhikā;
preṣṭhā—very dear; tadvat—similarly; iyam—this; tadīya-
sarasī—Her lake, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa; tām—Rādhā-kuṇḍa; na—
not; āśrayet—would take shelter of; kaḥ—who; kṛtī—
accomplished persons, perfected sādhakas.

One who selflessly performs virtuous acts in accordance
with the path of karma-yoga is superior to those who
engage in fruitive activities. The brahma-jñānīs, who by
dint of their spiritual knowledge are transcendental to
the three modes of material nature, are more dear to Śrī

                          675
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa than those pious followers of the karma path who
are forever occupied in performing virtuous deeds. More
dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa than the brahma-jñānīs are His
devotees like Sanaka, who have abandoned the pursuit of
knowledge and who consider bhakti alone to be the best
path. In doing so, they have followed the statement in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.3): Jñāne prayāsam udapāsya —
one should abandon the endeavour for knowledge. Pure
devotees like Nārada, who are resolutely fixed in prema
for Kṛṣṇa, are even more dear to Him than all such
devotees. The vraja-gopīs, whose very lives belong
solely to Kṛṣṇa, are even more beloved to Him than all
such loving (premī) devotees. Amongst all those beloved
gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is more dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa than
His own life; in the same way, He dearly loves Her pond,
Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Therefore, what accomplised,
spiritually perfected person would not reside on the
banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa in a state of transcendental
consciousness, performing bhajana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
eightfold daily pastimes?



The glories of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa

kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ praṇaya-vasatiḥ preyasībhyo —pi rādhā

kuṇḍaṁ cāsyā munibhir abhitas tādṛg eva vyadhāyi

yat preṣṭhair apy alam asulabhaṁ kiṁ punar bhakti-bhājāṁ

tat-premedaṁ sakṛd api saraḥ snātur āviṣkaroti

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 11

kṛṣṇasya—of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; uccaiḥ—very highly; praṇaya-
vasatiḥ—object of love; preyasībhyaḥ—out of the many
lovable gopīs; api—certainly; rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī;
kuṇḍam—lake; ca—also; asyāḥ—of Her; munibhiḥ—by great
sages; abhitaḥ—in all respects; tādṛk eva—similarly;
vyadhāyi—is described; yat—which; preṣṭhaiḥ—by the most
advanced devotees; api—even; alam—enough; asulabham—
difficult to obtain; kim—what; punaḥ—again; bhakti-
bhājām—for persons engaged in devotional service; tat—
that; prema—love of Godhead; idam—this; sakṛt—once; api—
even; saraḥ—lake; snātuḥ—of the bather; āviṣkaroti—
arouses.

The sages declare that as Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the
foremost object of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s prema, Her pond of is
similarly dear to Him By taking aprākṛta-snāna even once
within Her divine waters Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa bestows the
rare treasure of gopī-prema for Yugala-Kiśora which is
so immensely difficult to attain even for such dear
devotees of Bhagavān as Śrī Nārada — what to speak of
ordinary sādhakas.

śyāmāc chabalaṁ prapadye, śabalāc chyāmaṁ prapadye.

Chāndogya Up. 8.13.1/JD ch. 10,13/BPKG p. 355

For receiving the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, I surrender unto His
supreme potency (Rādhā), and for receiving the mercy of
Kṛṣṇa’s potency (Rādhā), I surrender unto Him. (Śrīla

                          676
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Bhakti Pramoda Purī Gosvāmī: The word śabala means
sarva-śakti, complete potencies. That means Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī).



lalitādi sakhī krodha kahe bāra bāra adhikārī rājya ke
karaye adhikāra

aiche kata kahi lalitādi sakhīgaṇa adhikārī umrāo kailā
īkṣaṇa

Bhakti-ratnākara/BMP p. 298

Lalitā became angry and said, “Who is that person who
dares to claim authority over Rādhikā’s kingdom? We will
retaliate against Him.” So saying, she seated Śrīmatī
Rādhikā upon a royal throne and declared Her to be the
umrāo, or undisputed empress of Vraja.



Praying for Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mercy

lakṣmīr yad-aṅghrī-kamalasya nakhāñcalasya

saundarya-bindum apī nārhati labdhum īśe

sā tvaṁ vidhāsyasi na cen mama netra-dānaṁ

kīm jīvitena mama duḥkha-davāgnidena

Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ, 101/MS 10, pt

lakṣmīḥ—the goddess of fortune; yad—of whom; aṅghri—of
the feet; kamalasya—of the lotus flower; nakha—of the
nails; añcalasya—of the edge; saundarya—of beauty;
bindum—a drop; api—even; na—not; arhati—is worthy;
labdhum—to obtain; īśe—O queen; sā—she; tvam—You;
vidhāsyasi—will give; na—not; cet—if; mama—of me; netra—
of the eyes; dānam—the gift; kīm—what is the use?;
jīvitena—with the life; mama—of me; duḥkha—of
sufferings; davāgni-dena—bringing a forest-fire.

O Prāṇeśvari Śrī Rādhikā! Śrī Lakṣmīdevī is unable to
obtain even a drop of the beauty which radiates from the
tips of the toenails of Your lotus feet. If You do not
grant me the eyes to behold Your splendorous form,
qualities, and pastimes, then of what use to me is this
miserable life which blazes in a raging conflagration of
anguish?



Kṛṣṇa says, go file your petition in Rādhikā’s
department

govinda-vallabhe rādhe prārthaye tvām ahaṁ sadā

tvadīyam iti jānātu govindo māṁ tvayā saha

Arcana-Paddhati (HBV)/BR sankṣepa, vijñāpti-pañcaka

O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, dearest of Lord Govinda, this is my

                          677
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

perpetual entreaty to You, may You and Govinda consider
me to be Yours.

Śrīla BR Śrīdhara Mahārāja: Kṛṣṇa says to his devotee,
“Oh, do you want an intimate relationship with me? It is
not to be found within my department. You will have to
go to another department. Go then to the department of
Rādhikā.” Then, at once, the devotee’s thought is
transferred towards that side. All his energy is
monopolized there. It is Her monopoly. “Your inner quest
is not to be found within my department,” Kṛṣṇa says.
“You—ll have to go elsewhere and file a petition there.”
(Śrī Guru and his Grace)




O Rādhikā! When will You mercifully make me Your dāsī?

makheśvari! kriyeśvari svadheśvari sureśvari

triveda-bhāratīśvari pramāṇa-śāsaneśvari

rameśvari! kṣameśvari pramoda-kānaneśvari

vrajeśvari vrajādhipe śrī-rādhike namo —stu te

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛpā-Kaṭākṣa-Stava-Rāja 12

makha—of sacrifices; īśvari—O queen; kriya—of pious
activities; īśvari—controller; svadha—of the material
world; īśvari—controller; sura—of the demigods; īśvari—
controller; tri—three; veda—of the Vedas; bhārati—
scholarship; īśvari— controller; pramāṇa—of evidence;
śāsana—of instruction; īśvari—controller; ramā—of
goddesses of fortune; īśvari—controller; kṣamā—of
forgiveness; īśvari—controller; pramoda—of bliss; kānana
—of the forest; īśvari—controller; vraja—of Vraja;
īśvari—controller; vraja—of Vraja; adhipe—Empress; Śrī-
rādhike—O Śrīmatī Rādhīkā; namaḥ astu—I offer respectful
obeisances; te—unto You.

You are the mistress of all kinds of sacrifices
(especially of the topmost yugala milana-yajña); of all
actions (since You are the root of all potencies — mūla-
śaktitattva); of the mantras uttered at yajñas and of
the sacrificial offerings presented to the demigods; of
all the demigods; of the words and ślokas of the three
Vedas; of the enforcement of all scriptural principles;
of Śrī Ramā-devī (the goddess of fortune); of Śrī Kṣamā-
devī (the goddess of forgiveness); and especially of the
delightful kuñjas in Vṛndāvana. When will You mercifully
make me Your dāsī and grant me the qualification to
render service in Your amorous pastimes with the prince
of Vraja? O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, owner and maintainer of
Vraja! I offer praṇāma unto You time and again.



Remembering You and praying for Your sevā miraculously
removes all miseries, sins, and offences

munīndra-vṛnda-vandite tri-loka-śoka-hāriṇī

                          678
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


prasanna-vaktra-paṇkaje nikuñja-bhū-vilāsini

vrajendra-bhānu-nandini vrajendra-sūnu-saṅgate

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛpā-Kaṭākṣa-Stava-Rāja 1/SGG p. 154

muni—of sages; indra—of the best; vṛnda—by the assembly;
vandite—worshiped; tri—three; loka—of the worlds; śoka—
the distress; hāriṇī—removing; prasanna—bright; vaktra—
face; paṅkaje—lotus flower; nikuñja-bhū—in the groves of
Vṛndāvana; vilāsini—performing pastimes; vraja—of Vraja;
indra—of the king; bhānu—of Vṛśabhānu; nandini—the
daughter; vraja—of Vraja; indra—of the king; sūnu—with
the Son (Kṛṣṇa); saṅgate—associated; kadā—when?;
kariṣyasi—will You make; iha—here; mām—me; kṛpā—of
mercy; kaṭākṣa—of Your sidelong glance; bhājanam—the
recipient.

O Śrīmatī Rādhikā — Śukadeva, Nārada, Uddhava, and all
the topmost munis are always offering vandanā (prayers)
to Your lotus feet. Remembering You and praying for Your
sevā miraculously removes all the miseries, sins, and
offenses of the three spheres. Your joyful face blooms
like a lotus and You delight in pastimes in the kuñjas
of Vraja. You are the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja and
are the dearly beloved of Brajendra-nandana, with whom
You always play vilāsa — when, oh when will You bestow
upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?



Śrī Rādhā-Vandanā

amala-kamala-kāntiṁ nīla-vastrāṁ sukeśīṁ

śaśadhara-sama-vaktrāṁ khañjanākṣīṁ manojñām

stana-yuga-gata-muktā-dāma-dīptāṁ kiśorīṁ

vraja-pati-suta-kāntāṁ rādhikām aśraye “ham

Śrī Stava-mālā, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī

amala—spotles; kamala—lotus; kāntim—lustre; nīla—blue;
vastrām—cloths; sukeśīm—fine long hair; śaśadhara—moon;
sama—like; vaktrām—lotus face; khañjanā akṣīm—eyes
restless like female wag-tail bird; manojñām—pleasing,
charming, splendid; stana—breast; yuga—two; gata—
resting; muktā-dāma—pearl necklace; dīptām—effulgent;
kiśorīm—adolescent girl, young maiden; vraja-pati-suta—
son of Nanda Mahārāja; kāntām—dear lover; rādhikām—of
Rādhikā; aśraye—take shelter; aham—I

I take shelter of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose complexion is
like that of a spotless lotus, who is attired in blue
cloth, whose hair is long and beautiful, whose face is
like the full moon, whose charming, restless eyes move
to and fro like khañjana birds, upon whose breasts rests
a radiant pearl necklace, who is eternally youthful, and
who is the dearmost lover of the son of Nanda Mahārāja.


                          679
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017




When will Śrī Rādhikā bathe me in Her service?

amala-kamala-rāji-sparśi-vāta-praśīte

nija-sarasi nidāghe sāyam ullāsinīyam

parijana-gaṇa-yuktā krīḍayantī bakāriṁ

snapayati nija-dāsye rādhikā māṁ kadā nu

Śrī Rādhikāṣṭakam 8, Stavāvalī, Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa
Gosvāmī/SGG p. 160

amala—splendid; kamala—of lotuses; rāji—rows; sparśi—
touching; vāta—breeze; praśīte—cool; nija—own; sarasi—at
the lake; nidāghe—in the hot summer; sāyam—in the
evening; ullāsinī—splendid and jubilant; iyam—She;
parijana—of friends; gaṇa—with hosts; yuktā—accompanied;
krīḍayantī—playing; baka-arim—with Lord Kṛṣṇa, the enemy
of the Baka demon.

On summer nights in the waters of Her own kuṇḍa, cooled
by the gentle breeze which caresses the many spotless
lotuses there, Śrī Rādhikā very joyfully engages Śrī
Kṛṣṇa (the enemy of Bakāsura) in water-sports in the
company of Lalitā and Her other sakhīs. When will She
bathe me in Her service?



Śrī Rādhā Praṇāma

mahābhāva-svarūpā tvaṁ kṛṣṇa-priyā-varīyasī

prema-bhakti-prade devi rādhike tvāṁ namāmy aham

Pañcarātra-Pradīpa, Rādhā-praṇāma

O Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, You are the exalted form of
mahābhāva, therefore You are the most dear to Kṛṣṇa. O
Goddess, You alone are able to bestow prema-bhakti;
therefore I bow before You.



Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s Qualities (Jaiva-Dharma ch. 33)

Śrīmatī Rādhā has innumerable qualities, among which
twenty-five are prominent



1. She is sweet (madhura), that is, She is incomparably
beautiful in appearance.

2. She is an ever-fresh youth.

3. Her eyes are restless and inclined to give sidelong
glances.


                          680
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

4. She has a radiant, gentle and sweet smile.

5. She has beautiful lines, indicating auspiciousness.

6. She maddens Kṛṣṇa with the fragrance of Her bodily
limbs.

7. She is expert in the musical arts.

8. She speaks sweetly.

9. She is expert in making jokes.

10. She is very polite and modest.

11. She is merciful

12. She is cunning.

13. She is expert in all duties.

14. She is shy.

15. She is always steadfast on the path of righteous
conduct.

16. She is patient.

17. She is grave, so that it is very difficult to
understand the import of Her mind.

18. She is fond of enjoying pastimes.

19. She is acutely eager to manifest the supermost
excellence of mahābhāva.

20. When the residents of Gokula see Her, their hearts
immediately

overflow with prema.

21. Her fame pervades the entire universe.

22. She is the object of affection for Her superiors
(guru-jana).

23. She is controlled by the intense love (praṇaya) of
Her sakhīs.

24. She is prominent among all Kṛṣṇa’s sakhīs.

25. Keśava always remains submissive to Her orders.



Thus ends Chapter 23 — Rādhā-tattva




Chapter 24 — Rādhā-dāsyam



                            681
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

When will Śrī Rādhikā engage me in Her service?



Introduction

Śrīla Bhakti-rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja: But amongst all
His associates, and amongst all the gopīs, the highest
order of divine loving service is rendered to the Lord
by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Therefore the acme of rāga-mārga
is to render service unto Rādhārāṇī (Rādhā-dāsyam). This
is the highest goal of the Rūpānuga Gauḍīya Sampradayā,
the followers of pure devotion as taught by Śrīla Rūpa
Goswāmī Prabhupāda, in the line of Lord Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. (Hidden Treasure of the Sweet Absolute ch.
10)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains: Śrīmatī Rādhikā is our
iṣṭa-devatā, our Svāminī. We love Kṛṣṇa because He is
the exclusive object of Rādhikā’s love. Since the jīva
is a minute particle of parā-śakti (Śrīmatī Rādhikā) his
adhikāra as taṭastha-śakti is to serve the supreme parā-
śakti to facilitate Her sublime rāsa with the parama-
puruṣa Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thus, although we serve both Rādha and
Kṛṣṇa, we serve Them under the guidance of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and according to Her desire. We do not serve
Kṛṣṇa directly or independently of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
Her intimate associates. Service to Her lotus feet,
under the guidance of Śrī Guru, is the exclusive goal,
the ultimate spiritual perfection, and the cherished
aspiration of any devotee in the line of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī. This service, Rādhā-dāsyam in mañjarī-bhāva, is
the speciality and glory of the Śrī Rūpānuga Gauḍīya
guru-varga. Loving service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā is our be-
all and end-all.



Kṛṣṇa begs the mercy of the mañjarīs in order to meet
with Śrīmatī Rādhikā

yat-kiṅkarīṣu bahuśaḥ khalu kāku-vāṇī

nityaṁ parasya puruṣasya śikhaṇḍa-mauleḥ

tasyāḥ kadā rasa-nidher vṛṣabhānu-jāyās

tat-keli-kuñja-bhavanāṅgana-marjanī syām

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhiḥ 8, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī

yat-kiṅkarīṣu—among whose maidservants; bahuśaḥ—many;
khalu—indeed; kāku-vāṇī—plaintive words; nityam—always;
parasya—of the supreme; puruṣasya—personality, enjoyer;
śikhaṇḍa-mauleḥ—who wears a peacock-feather crown;
tasyāḥ—of Her; kadā—when?; rasa-nidheḥ—an ocean of
nectar; vṛṣabhānu—of King Vrsabhanu; jāyāḥ—of the
daughter; tat-keli—confidential pastime; kuñja—groves;
bhavanā—abode; aṅgana—courtyard; marjanī—cleaning; syām—
I will be.

O daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, O ocean of rasa! The
Supreme Enjoyer, the source of all avatāras who wears a
peacock feather in His hair, falls at the feet of Your

                          682
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

maidservants and propitiates them with many humble and
grief-stricken words to be allowed entrance into Your
kuñja (where both of You would engage in playful,
amorous pastimes). If only I could become one stick in
the broom used by Your sakhīs to clean Your delightful
kuñja, I would consider my life a success.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays to be solely
attached to serving Śrī Rādhā (Rādhā-dāsyam)

pādābjayos tava vinā vara-dāsyam eva

nānyat kadāpi samaye kila devi yāce

sakhyāya te mama namo —stu namo —stu nityaṁ

dāsyāya te mama raso —stu raso —stu satyam

Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ 16/VG p. 137/BR 5.18/BPKG p.
502/GV p. 103

pāda-abjayoḥ—at the lotus feet; tava—of You; vinā—
without; vara—excellent; dāsyam—service; eva—certainly;
na—not; anyat—anything else; kadā api—ever; samaye—at
the time; kila—certainly; devi—O queen; yāce—I beg;
sākhyāya—for friendship; te—of You; mama—of me; namaḥ—
obeisances; astu—may be; namaḥ—obeisances; astu—may be;
nityam—eternally; dāsyāya—for service; te—of You; mama—
of me; rasaḥ—sweetness; astu—may be; rasaḥ—sweetness;
astu—may be; satyam—in truth.

O Devī Rādhikā! I am not praying for anything except
that most exalted direct service to Your lotus feet.
Time and again I offer praṇāma from afar to Your
sakhītva, a position as Your sakhī, but I vow that my
unwavering devotion will always be only for Your
dāsītva, a position as Your maidservant. [Therefore, let
me truly have eager spiritual thirst for Your service!
And if I am not qualified for this, then at least make
me attached to this aspiration, so that one day I may
attain it.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: When he is praying for “dāsitva
—, we should understand that this means a position as a
“pālya-dāsī— of Rādhikā. It is considered superior
because from this position one can witness and serve
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s intimate pastimes, which even the sakhīs
cannot. This śloka expresses the essence of Rādha-
dāsyam. (VK lecture 12.02.92)



A prayer to attain the position of a maidservant of Śrī
Rādhā, who attracts and bewilders the mind of Śrī Kṛṣṇa

veṇuṁ karān nipatitaṁ skhalitaṁ śikhaṇḍaṁ

bhraṣṭaṁ ca pīta-vasanaṁ vraja-rāja-sūnoḥ

yasyāḥ kaṭākṣa-śara-ghāta-vimūrcchitasya

tāṁ rādhikāṁ paricarāmi kadā rasena

RRSN 39/BR 5.20/BMP p. 87/ORY p. 29/GV p. 44

                          683
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


veṇum—veṇu flute; karāt—from His hand; nipatitam—
falling; skhalitaṁ—slipping; śikaṇḍam—peacock-feather
crown; bhraṣṭam—slips off; ca—and; pīta-vasanam—yellow
cloth; vraja-rāja-sūnoḥ—the son of the King of Vraja;
yasyāḥ—of whose; kaṭa-akṣa—sidelong glances; śara—of the
arrows; ghāta—by the striking; vimūrcchitasya—who
faints; tām—that; rādhikām—of Śrīmatī Rādhikā;
paricarāmi—will I serve; kadā—when; rasena—with rasa.

When will the time come that I can continuously render
service with rasa, in accordance with the natural
disposition of my svarūpa, to Śrīmatī Kiśorījī by whose
shower of arrow-like sidelong glances Śrī Nanda-nandana
faints, His flute tumbles from His hands, His crown of
peacock feathers falls from His head, and His yellow
cloth slips from His hips.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: This śloka of Śrīla
Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura explains Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s mahābhāva. A devotee in the stage of āsakti
can think about this after having heard about such
topics from great souls like Mādhavendra Purīpada,
Īśvara Purīpada, Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda, Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja,
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and also Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, the seventh Gosvāmī. One who is in the
association of these exalted personalities can think
about this when he has attained āsakti. He cannot do so
before then. (GV p. 45)



I meditate upon Śrīmatī’s footdust. Her unlimited power
instantly subdues Kṛṣṇa

yo brahma-rudra-śuka-nārada-bhīṣma-mukhyair

ālakṣito na sahasā puruṣasya tasya

sadyo vaśī-karaṇa-cūrṇam ananta-śaktiṁ

taṁ rādhikā-caraṇa-reṇum anusmarāmi

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 4/ORY p. 168

yaḥ—who; brahma-rudra-śuka-nārada-bhīṣma-mukhyaiḥ—headed
by Brahmā, Śiva, Śuka, Nārada, and Bhīṣma; ālakṣitaḥ—
seen; na—not; sahasā—easily; puruṣasya—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
tasya—of Him; sadyaḥ—instantly; vaśī-karaṇa—bringing
under control; cūrṇam—powder; ananta-śaktim—limitless
power; tam—to that; rādhikā-caraṇa-reṇum—the dust of Śrī
Rādhā’s feet; anusmarāmi—I meditate.

I meditate after the ways of our previous ācāryas upon
the footdust of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose unlimited power
instantly subdues the Supreme Person Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
not easily seen even by great souls like Brahmā, Śiva,
Śukadeva, Nārada Muni and Bhīṣma.



O Kṛṣṇa, please make me a Kiṅkarī (maidservant) at the
feet of Your beloved Rādha

                          684
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


śyāmasundara śikhaṇḍa-śekhara

smera-hāsa muralī-manohara

rādhikā-rasika māṁ kṛpā-nidhe

sva-priyā-caraṇa-kiṅkarīṁ kuru

Śrī Rādhā-Prārthanā 2/SGG p. 167

śyāmasundara—O You who have a beautifully radiant
blackish-blue colour; śikhaṇḍa-śekhara—O You who wear a
peacock feather; smera-hāsa—O You whose smile evokes and
captivates Cupid; muralī-manohara—O You who play
enchantingly on Your Muralī flute; rādhikā-rasika—O You
who are expert in relishing the mellows of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā; kṛpā-nidhe—O ocean of mercy; kuru—make; mām—me;
sva-priyā-caraṇa-kiṅkarīm—a maidservant at the feet of
Your beloved.

O Śyāmasundara! O You whose head is adorned with peacock
feathers! Your face is always graced with a playful
smile, Your flute-playing is enchanting, and You are
expert in relishing rasa with Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Because
You are an ocean of mercy, I am appealing to You to
please make me a kiṅkarī (maidservant) at the feet of
Your beloved.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Śrī Kiśorī’s maidservants
(kiṅkarīs) are always devoted to Her service. The word
kaiṅkarya expresses a mood of being ardent to serve and
it means kiṁ karomi, “What may I do? What service can I
do?” — This mood is expressed in pure rādhā-dāsya, or
mañjarī-bhāva. May I attain this kaiṅkarya of Śrī
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī birth after birth. (BR)



A sincere prayer for attaining Śrī-Rādhā-dāsya, is found
in Stava-mālā

hā devi kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vācā

yāce nipatya bhuvi daṇḍavad udbhaṭārtiḥ

asya prasādam abudhasya janasya kṛtvā

gāndharvike nija-gaṇe gaṇanāṁ vidhehi

Śrī Gāndharvā-samprārthanāṣṭakam 2, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī/
BR 5.19/SGG pp. 11, 164

hā devi—O illustrious enactor of pleasure-pastimes;
kāku-bhara—filled with emotion; gadgadayā-ādya—with
choked voice and so forth; vācā—with words; yace—I beg;
nipatya—falling down; bhuvi—on the ground; daṇḍavat—like
a stick; udbhaṭa-ārtiḥ—being afflicted with distress;
asya—to him; prasādam—mercy; abudhasya—foolish; janasya—
person; kṛtvā—give (mercy); gandharvike—O Rādhā; nija-
gaṇe—amongst Your own associates; gaṇanām—please count;
vidhehi—make.

O Devi Gāndharvike! In utter desperation I throw myself

                             685
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

on the ground like a stick and with a choked voice I
humbly implore You to be merciful to this fool and count
him as one of Your own.



Touched by the breeze coming from Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa thinks,
“My life has now returned”

yasyāḥ kadāpī vasanāñcala-khelanottha-

dhanyāti-dhanya-pavanena kṛtārtha-mānī

yogīndra-durgama-gatir madhusūdano “pi

tasyā namo “stu vṛṣabhānu-bhuvo diśe “pi

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 2/BMP p. 87

yasyāḥ—of whom; kadāpi—sometimes; vasana—of the garment;
āñcala—the corner (hem); khelana—playfully; uttha—
lifted; dhanyātī-dhanya—very fortunate and glorious;
pavanena—by the breeze; kṛtārtha-mānī—considering
successful; yogīndra-durgama-gatiḥ—the goal unattainable
even by the kings of yogīs; madhu-sūdanaḥ—Kṛṣṇa, the
propagator of honey-like pastimes; api—also; tasyāḥ—of
Her; namaḥ—obeisances; astu—may be; vṛṣabhānu-bhuvaḥ—of
the land of King Vṛṣabhānu; diśe—to the direction; api—
even.

Let us bow down even to the direction of the land of
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, for Madhusūdana Kṛṣṇa, who is the
rarely attained goal of great yogīs, considers that His
life is completely fulfilled by the mere touch of that
glorious, playful breeze that has touched the tip of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s garment. He thinks, “Oh, My life has
now returned.”

nāma-sametaṁ kṛta-saṅketaṁ vādayate mṛdu-veṇum

bahu manute nanu te tanu-saṅgata-pavana-calitam api
reṇum

(refrain) dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre vasati vane vanamālī

Śrī Gīta-govinda, Song 11, Act Five, Verse 9

O Rādhā, he is softly playing his flute, as if calling
Your name. He considers himself immensely fortunate to
be touched by so many dust particles that have first
touched Your body. As they come to him upon the breeze,
He receives them with the utmost honour.



Kṛṣṇa cannot be attained without Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The
necessity of taking shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī
Rādhā is expressed by Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī:

anārādhya rādhā-padāmbhoja-reṇum

anāśritya vṛndāṭavīṁ tat-padāṅkām

asambhāṣya-tad-bhāva-gambhīra-cittān

                          686
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


kutaḥ śyāma-sindho rasasyāvagāhaḥ

Sva-saṅkalpa-prakāśa stotra 1/VG p. 135/BR 5.10

anārādhya—not worshiping; rādhā-padāmbhoja—Śrī Rādhā’s
lotus feet; renum—dust; anāśritya—not taking shelter;
vṛndāṭavīṁ—of Vṛndāvana; tat-pada-aṅkam—Her footprints;
asambhāṣya—without conversing; tad-bhāva—for Her love;
gambhīra-cittān—deep hearts; kutaḥ—where; śyāma-sindhoḥ—
the ocean of śyāma-rasa, śṛṅgāra-rasa; rasasya—of
transcendental mellows; vagāhaḥ—plunging in the nectar.

How can a person become immersed in the ocean of śyāma-
rasa (mādhurya-rasa) if he has never worshipped the dust
of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet; if he has never taken shelter
of Her pastime-place Śrī Vṛndāvana, which is marked with
the impressions of Her lotus feet; and if he has never
associated with and served the devotees whose hearts are
submerged in Her profound sentiments? It will never be
possible.



Śrīmatī Rādhikā is my life and soul; I have no other
goal than serving Her

bhajāmi rādhāṁ aravinda-netrāṁ

smarāmi rādhāṁ madhura-smitāsyāṁ

vadāmi rādhāṁ karuṇā-bharārdrāṁ

tato mamānyāsti gatir na kāpi

Śrī Stavāvali, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī/SGG p. 11

bhajāmi—I worship; rādhām—Rādhā; aravinda—lotus; netrām—
eyes; smarāmi—I remember; rādhām—Rādhā; madhura—sweet;
smita—smile; asyām—face; vadāmi—I glorify; rādhām—Rādhā;
karuṇā—of mercy; bhara—with an abundance; ardrām—
melting; tataḥ—other than that; mama—for me; anyā—
another; asti—is; gatiḥ—goal; na—not; ka api—anything
else.

I worship Śrīmatī Rādhikā who has lotus eyes, I remember
Śrīmatī Rādhikā whose face is sweetly smiling, and I
speak of Her whose heart is melting with compassion.
Thus my life has no other goal than serving Her.



A grief-filled supplication at the feet of Śrīmati
Rādhikā

tavaivāsmi tavaivāsmi na jīvāmi tvayā vinā

iti vijñāya devi (radhe) tvaṁ naya māṁ caraṇāntikam

Śrī Stavāvali, Vilāpa-kusumāñjali 96, Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī

tava—Yours; eva—indeed; asmi—I am; tava—Yours; eva—
indeed; asmi—I am; na—not; jīvāmi—I live; tvayā—You;

                          687
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

vinā—without; iti—thus; vijñāya—understanding; devi—
Śrīmati Rādhikā; tvam—You; naya—please lead; mām—me;
caraṇāntikam—to the tips of Your feet.

I am Yours! I am Yours! I cannot live without You! O
Devi (Rādhikā), please understand this and bring me to
Your lotus feet.



I forever pray to the dust of the lotus feet of the
gopīs

vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ punāti bhuvana-trayam

SB 10.47.63/BMP p. 276/STB p. 34

vande—I offer my respects; nanda-vraja—of the cowherd
village of Nanda Mahārāja; strīṇām—of the women; pāda—of
the feet; reṇum—to the dust; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ—perpetually;
yāsām—whose; hari—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kathā—about the topics;
udgītam—loud chanting; punāti—purifies; bhuvana-trayam—
the three worlds.

[Śrī Uddhava:] “I forever pray to the dust of the lotus
feet of the gopīs in Nandagaon. The hari-kathā emanating
from their lotus lips in their separation from Kṛṣṇa
purifies the entire universe.”



Without being in the ānugatya of the gopīs one cannot
attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa

gopī-ānugatya vinā aiśvarya-jñāne

bhajileha nāhi pāya vrajendra-nandane

CC Madhya 8.230

gopī-ānugatya—subservience to the gopīs; vinā—without;
aiśvarya-jñāne—in the knowledge of opulence; bhajileha—
if serving the Supreme Lord; nāhi—not; pāya—gets;
vrajendra-nandane—the son of Mahārāja Nanda, Kṛṣṇa.

Unless one follows in the footsteps of the gopīs, he
cannot attain the service of the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja. If one is overcome by
knowledge of the Lord’s opulence, he cannot attain the
Lord’s lotus feet, even though he is engaged in
devotional service.



Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s Rādhā-niṣṭhā

ya ekaṁ govindaṁ bhajati kapaṭī dāmbhikatayā

tad-abhyarṇe śīrṇe kṣaṇam api na yāmi vratam idam

Stavāvali, Sva-niyama-daśakam 6/BR 5.10 pt


                          688
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

ya—who; ekam—alone; govindam—Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhajati—
worships; kapaṭī—cheater; dāmbhikatayā—with hypocrisy;
tad-abhyarṇe—near Him; śīrṇe—despicable; kṣaṇam—for a
moment; api—even; na—not; yāmi—I shall go; vratam—vow;
idam—this.

I will never go near a despicable hypocrite who worships
Govinda alone without Rādhā. This is my vow.



Kṛṣṇa cannot be attained without Rādhā-dāsyam

rādhā-dāsyam apāsya yaḥ prayatate govinda-saṅgāśayā

so —yaṁ pūrṇa-sudhā-ruceḥ paricayaṁ rākāṁ vinā kaṅkṣati

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 80/BR 5.10 pt

rādhā—to Rādhā; dāsyam—service; apasya—renouncing; yaḥ—
who; prayatate—endeavors; govinda-saṅgāśayā—with a hope
to attain the association of Lord Kṛṣṇa; saḥ ayam—that
person; pūrṇa-sudhā-ruceḥ—of the sweetest nectar;
paricayām—acquaintance with; rākām—of the full moon;
vinā—without; kaṅkṣati—desires.

Those who endeavor to attain the association of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa but reject Rādhā-dāsya are like people who want
the moon without its nectarean effulgence.



Without taking shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā,
one can never meet Kṛṣṇa, whom śāstra declares to be the
property of Her mañjarī maidservants

rādhikā ujjvala-rasera ācārya

rādhā-mādhava-śuddha-prema vicārya

ye dharila rādhā-pada parama-yatane

se pāila kṛṣṇa-pada amūlya ratane

rādhā-pada vinā kabhu kṛṣṇa nāhi mile

rādhikā dāsīra kṛṣṇa sarva-vede bole

Rādhikā-caraṇa-padma, BVT/ BR 5.10 pt/SGG p. 67

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the ācārya of the mellows of amorous
love (ujjvala-rasa). The pure love between Rādhā and
Mādhava is meant to be discussed and contemplated. Those
who place Śrīmatī Rādhikā's lotus feet in their hearts
and worship them with great care obtain the priceless
jewel of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet. Without taking shelter of
the lotus feet of Rādhā, one can never meet Kṛṣṇa. The
Vedic scriptures declare that Kṛṣṇa is the property of
the mañjarī maidservants of Śrī Rādhā.



Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī expresses his hankering
for Rādha-dāsyam

                          689
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


śrī-rūpa-mañjari-karārcita-pāda-padma-

goṣṭhendra-nandana-bhujārpita-mastakāyāḥ

hā modataḥ kanaka-gauri-padāravinda

samvāhanāni śanakais tava kiṁ kariṣye

Vilāpa-Kusumāñjali 72/MS p. 15/STB p. 97

śrī-rūpa-mañjari—of Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī; kara—by the hand;
arcita—worshiped; pāda—feet; padma—lotus; goṣṭhendra—of
the king of Vraja; nandana—of the son; bhuja—arm; arpita
—placed; mastakāyāḥ—on the head; hā—O!; modataḥ—out of
joy; kanaka—gold; gauri—fair; pada-aravinda—lotus feet;
samvāhanāni—massage; śanakaiḥ—gently; tava—of You; kim—
whether?; kariṣye—I will perform.

O Devi as fair as gold, Your lotus feet are worshiped by
Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī’s hands as You rest Your head against
Kṛṣṇa’s arm. When will I receive the remnants of Rūpa-
mañjarī’s service and happily and gently massage Your
lotus feet?



O Rādhā-kuṇḍa! Be merciful, show me my Svāminī, who is
my very life and soul

he śrī sarovara sadā tvayi sā mad-īṣā-

praṣṭhena sārdham iha khelati kāma-raṅgaiḥ

tvaṁ cet priyāt priyam atīva tayor itīmāṁ

ha darśayādya kṛpayā mama jīvitaṁ tām

Vilāpa Kusumāñjaliḥ 98, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī/MS 9.5

he—O!; śrī-sarovara—beautiful lake; sadā—eternally;
tvayi—in you; sā—She; mad—my; īśā—queen; preṣṭhena—Her
beloved; sārdham—with; iha—here; khelati—enjoys
transcendental pastimes; kāma—of Kāma; raṅgaiḥ—with the
bliss; tvam—you; cet—if; priyāt—than the dear; priyam—
more dear; atīva—great; tayoḥ—of Them; iti—thus; imam—
this; hā—O!; darśaya—please reveal; adya—now; kṛpayā—
with mercy; mama—of me; jīvitam—the life; tam—that.

O Rādhā-kuṇḍa! My mistress is engaging in very secret
and beautiful playful pastimes with Her darling Kṛṣṇa in
the kuñjas on your banks. You are so near and dear to
Them. Therefore I am taking shelter of you and pray for
your mercy. When will you show me my Svāminī, who is my
very life and soul?



O Kṛṣṇa! please lead me to the place where You two enjoy
loving pastimes

hā nātha gokula-sudhākara su-prasanna-

vaktrāravinda madhura-smita he kṛpārdra

                          690
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


yatra tvayā viharate praṇayaiḥ priyārāt

tatraiva mām api naya priya-sevanāya

Vilāpa-Kusumāñjaliḥ 100/JD ch. 39

hā—O!; nātha—Lord; gokula—of Gokula; sudhākara—O moon;
su—very; prasanna—cheerful; vaktra—face; aravinda—lotus
flower; madhura—sweet; smita—smile; he—O!; kṛpā—with
mercy; ardra—melting; yatra—where; tvayā—with You;
viharate—enjoys pastimes; praṇayaiḥ—with love; priyā—
Your beloved; ārāt—near; tatra—there; eva—indeed; mām—
me; api—even; naya—please lead; priya—with love;
sevanāya—to the service.

O Lord, O nectar moon of Gokula, O Lord whose cheerful
face is a lotus flower, O sweetly-smiling one, O Lord
melting with compassion. Please lead me to the place
where Your beloved enjoys loving pastimes with You, so
that I may serve You both with love.



O Rādhike! I am passing my time with the sole hope of
being able to serve You

āśā-bharair amṛta-sindhu-mayaiḥ kathañcit

kālo mayātigamitaḥ kila sāmprataṁ hi

tvaṁ cet kṛpāṁ mayi vidhāsyasi naiva kiṁ me

prāṇair vrajena ca varoru bakāriṇāpi

Vilāpa-Kusumāñjaliḥ 102/BR 6.3 pt/JD ch. 39/MS 10 pt

āśā-bharaiḥ—with many hopes; amṛta—of nectar; sindhu—
ocean; mayaiḥ—consisting; kathañcit—somehow; kālaḥ—the
time; mayā—by me; atigamitaḥ—is passed; kila—indeed;
sāmpratam—now; hi—indeed; tvam—You; cet—if; kṛpām—mercy;
mayi—to me; vidhāsyasi—will give; na—not; eva—certainly;
kim—what is the use?; me—to me; prāṇaiḥ—of my life;
vrajena—of Vraja; ca—and; vara—beautiful; uru—thighs;
bakāriṇāpi—also of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Baka.

O Varoru Rādhā, I am passing my time with the sole hope
of being able to serve You. If You withhold Your mercy,
what value to me is this life, the land of Vraja, and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Baka?



The conception of being a Rādhā-dāsī is described by the
Gosvāmīs:

abhimānaṁ parityajya prākṛta-vapur-ādiṣu

śrī-kṛṣṇa-kṛpayā gopī-dehe vraje vasāmy aham

rādhikānucarī bhūtvā pārakīya-rase sadā

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-vilāseṣu paricaryāṁ karomy aham


                          691
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

BR 5.11

After giving up false identification with this material
body, may I obtain the body of a gopī and reside in
Vraja by the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Becoming a maidservant
of Śrī Rādhā, may I always serve and attend Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, who enjoy pastimes of paramour love (pārakīya-
rasa).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Pārakīya-rase sadā — The
scriptures establish the pre-eminence of the pārakīya-
rasa of Vraja. By serving Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the mood of
wedded love (svakīya), one will attain Goloka [the outer
area of Goloka Vṛndāvana], and by serving in paramour
love, one will attain Vraja-Vṛndāvana, the absolute
innermost chamber of Goloka-Vṛndāvana where Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s nikuñja-līlās take place. There, the mañjarī-
sakhīs, being endowed with ullāsa-rati (much stronger
affection for Rādhā than for Kṛṣṇa), are topmost. They
render service to the rasa-keli-līlā-vilāsa in the
secluded groves without any hesitation.



Definition of Bhāvollāsa-rati

sañcārī syāt samanā vā kṛṣṇa-ratyāḥ suhṛd-ratiḥ

adhika puṣyamānā ced bhāvollāsa itīryate

BRS 2.5.128/Venu-gīta, p. 39

cet—if; suhṛd-ratiḥ—the bhāva of being a well-wisher and
intimate friend of Śrī Rādhā; (which is) sañcārī—an
infused mood; syāt—may become; samanā—equal; vā—or;
adhika—greater; kṛṣṇa-ratyāḥ—than the attachment to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; puṣayamānā—nourishes; iryate—it is said; iti—to
be; bhāva-ullāsaḥ—shining forth due to innermost mood.

Bhāvollāsa-rati is the sañcārī-bhāva of the mañjarī-
sakhīs, whose suhṛd-rati (for Śrī Rādhā and everything
connected with Her) abundantly exceeds their kṛṣṇa-rati,
and constantly increases due to their full absorption in
it. (This is also their sthāyī-bhāva, their permanent
rati).

[an alternative translation:] If the sañcārī-bhāva of
being the friend and well-wisher of Śrī Rādhā becomes
equal to or greater than the attachment to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
and continues to increase through being nourished by
full absorption in Her, then in consideration of these
unique characteristics it is called bhāvollāsa-rati.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: By nature the living entity is
the object to be enjoyed (bhogya-vastu) and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the enjoyer (bhoktā). By performing bhajana in the
association of rasika-bhaktas, the desire to serve Śrī
Rādhā, who is permeated with transcendental bliss,
becomes strong, and the loving sentiments of the
mañjarī-gopīs (gopī-bhāva) awaken.



Śrī Rādhā-Bhajana-Mahimā

                           692
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


Glorification of Worship to Śrī Rādhā, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura (SGG p. 65)

rādhā-bhajane yadi mati nāhi bhelā

kṛṣṇa-bhajana taba akāraṇa gelā (1)

If the desire to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā does not appear
in my heart, my worship of Kṛṣṇa is simply useless.

ātapa-rahita sūraya nāhi jāni

rādhā-virahita mādhava nāhi māni (2)

Just as the sun cannot be perceived without sunlight, in
the same way I do not recognize Mādhava without Rādhā.

kevala mādhava pūjaye, so ajñānī

rādhā-anādara koroi abhimānī (3)

Those who worship Mādhava alone are ignorant; they
simply neglect Śrīmatī Rādhikā out of unmitigated pride.

kabahī nāhi karobi tākara saṅga

citte icchasi yadi vraja-rasa-raṅga (4)

Don—t ever associate with such persons if you desire the
loving playfulness of vraja-rasa to appear in your
heart.

rādhikā-dāsī jadi hoya abhimāna

śīgrai milai taba gokula-kāna (5)

If you develop pride in being Śrīmatī Rādhikā's
exclusive maidservant, then very quickly you will meet
Gokula Kāna (Kṛṣṇa).

brahmā, śiva, nārada, śruti, nārāyaṇī

rādhikā-pada-raja pūjaye māni (6)

Brahmā, Śiva, Nārada, the Śruti-cari ṛṣīs and Nārāyāṇī
honor and worship the dust of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s lotus
feet.

umā, ramā, satyā, śacī, candrā, rukmiṇī

rādhā avatāra sabe — āmnāya-vāṇī (7)

Our āmnāya, revealed scriptures, declare that Umā, Ramā,
Satyā, Śacī, Candrāvalī and Rukmiṇī are all Rādhā’s
expansions.

hena rādhā-paricaryā jāṅkara dhana

bhakativinoda tāṅ—ra māgaye caraṇa (8)

Bhaktivinoda is begging at the lotus feet of those whose
wealth is the service of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.


                          693
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura expresses his internal mood
in Gītā-mālā

Dekhite Dekhite (SGG p. 74)

dekhite dekhite, bhulibo vā kabe, nija-sthūla-paricaya

nayane heribo, vraja-pura-śobhā, nitya cid-ānanda-maya
(1)

When O when, while beholding the exquisite beauty of
Vraja which is full of eternal spiritual bliss and
cognizance, will I forget my connection with this gross
body and let go of my bodily identity?

vṛṣabhānu-pure, janama laibo, yāvaṭe vivāha ha'be

vraja-gopī-bhāva, hoibe svabhāva, āna bhāva nā rohibe
(2)

I shall take birth in Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja's town and will
marry in the nearby village of Yāvaṭ. My sole
disposition and nature will be that of a cowherd maiden.

nija-siddha-deha, nija-siddha-nāma, nija-rūpa-sva-vasana

rādhā-kṛpā-bale, labhibo vā kabe, kṛṣṇa-prema-prakaraṇa
(3)

When will I obtain, by the power of Rādhā's mercy, my
own eternal spiritual body, my own realised name and
dress embellishing by form? When will I receive
initiation into the techniques of expressing divine love
for Kṛṣṇa?

yāmuna-salila-āharaṇe giyā, bujhibo yugala-rasa

prema-mugdha ha—ye, pāgalinī-prāya, gāiba rādhāra yaśa
(4)

As I go to draw water from the Yamunā, I will understand
the confidential mellows of Yugala-Kiśora’s loving
affairs. Being captivated by prema, I will sing Śrī
Rādhikā’s glories just like a madwoman.



Taking shelter of the mañjarīs is described by Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī

tāmbūlārpaṇa-pāda-mardana-payodānābhisārādibhir

vṛndāraṇya-maheśvarīṁ priyatayā yās toṣayanti priyāḥ

prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhī-kulād api kilāsaṅkocitā bhūmikāḥ

kelī-bhūmiṣu rūpa-mañjarī-mukhās tā dāsikāḥ saṁśraye

Stavāvalī (Vraja-vilāsa-stava 38)/JD ch. 39/BR 8.20


                          694
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

saṁśraye—I take shelter; tāḥ priyāḥ dāsikāḥ—of those
dear servants; rūpa-mañjarī-mukhāḥ—headed by Śrī Rūpa
Mañjarī; yāḥ toṣayanti—who give pleasure; vṛndāraṇya-
maheśvarīm—to the queen of Vṛndāvana; priyatayā—by their
endearing qualities; abhisāra—by taking her out to Her
trysts with Śrī Kṛṣṇa; payaḥ-dāna—offering (refreshing
and fragrant) water; tāmbūla-arpaṇa—offering betel-nuts;
pāda-mardana—massaging Her feet; ādibhiḥ—and so forth;
bhūmikāḥ—they act as her chaperones; kila—indeed; api—
unlike; sakhī-kulāt—the group of sakhīs; prāṇa-preṣṭha—
headed by Lalitā and Viśākhā; api asaṅkocitāḥ—(they are)
without hesitation; kelī-bhūmiṣu—within the pleasure
groves.

I take shelter of the maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
headed by Rūpa Mañjarī. They act as Her chaperones and
affectionately satisfy Śrīmatī Rādhikā by their various
services, such as offering tāmbūla, massaging Her feet,
bringing Her water and taking Her to Her rendevouses
with Kṛṣṇa. Unlike the prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhīs, they can
without hesitation perform any service within the
pleasure groves.



Pride in one’s service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā

navaṁ divyaṁ kāvyaṁ sva-kṛtam atulaṁ nāṭaka-kulaṁ

prahelī-gūḍhārthāḥ sakhi-rucira-vīṇā-dhvani-gatiḥ

kadā snehollāsair lalita-lalitā-preraṇa-balāt

sa-lajjaṁ gāndharvā sa-rasam asakṛc chikṣayati mām

Sva-saṅkalpa-prakāśa-stotra 2/BR 8.21

navam—new; divyam—transcendental; kāvyam—poem; sva-kṛtam
—written by you; atulam—peerless; nāṭaka—drama; kulam—
plural; prahelī—riddles and puns; gūḍha—hidden; arthāḥ—
meanings; sakhi—O friend; rucira—beautiful; vīṇā—of the
vīṇā; dhvani—the sound; gatiḥ—movement; kadā—when?;
sneha—with love; ullāsaiḥ—with splendid happiness;
lalita—charming and playful; lalitā—Lalitā; preraṇa—of
the direction; balāt—on the strength; sa—with; lajjam—
shyness; gāndharvā—Śrī Rādhā; sa—with; rasam—sweetness;
asakṛt—again and again; chikṣayati—will teach; mām—me.

Aho! When, in a secluded place, will I receive such
fortune that Śrīmatī Rādhikā will, upon the request of
Śrīmatī Lalitā-devī, affectionately and happily — yet
shyly — teach me dramas composed by Herself, new poems,
riddles with deep meanings, and melodies on the vīṇā?



Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī-pada describes the mood of
rejecting all types of dharma, out of the desire to
serve Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet

dūrād apāsya svajanān sukham artha-koṭiṁ

sarveṣu sādhana-vareṣu ciraṁ nirāśaḥ


                          695
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

varṣantam eva sahajādbhuta-saukhya-dhārāṁ

śrī-rādhikā-caraṇa-reṇum ahaṁ smarāmi

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhiḥ 33/BR 5.12

The desires for the pleasure derived from relationships
with family and friends; for the four goals of life,
namely dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa; for limitless
wealth and so forth, are the causes of anarthas. For a
long time now I have lost all hope in the excellent
sādhanas mentioned in śāstra. I have abandoned them all
far behind. My only sādhana and sādhya is to worship the
foot-dust of Śrī Rādhikā which showers natural,
wonderful happiness. I always hold this foot-dust upon
my head.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Sādhakas who possess exclusive
faith in Śrī Rādhā (rādhā-niṣṭhā) are solely attached to
the fragrance of Her lotus feet. Without Śrī Rādhā, they
do not even have a taste for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Material
happiness seems insignificant to such sādhakas, who have
firm attachment for Her lotus feet and who are not
inclined towards any other spiritual goal (sādhya) or
any other practice (sādhana) to attain it. Even other
exalted sādhanas are obstacles on the path of prema-
bhakti.

The mood of a sādhaka who has attained attachment for
Rādhā-dāsyam

tvayopabhukta-srag-gandha vāso-—laṅkāra-carcitāḥ

ucchiṣṭa-bhojino dāsās tava māyāṁ jayema hi

SB 11.6.46/BR 5.21/BRSB p.76/JD ch. 20

tvayā—by You; upabhukta—already enjoyed; srak—with the
garlands; gandha—fragrances; vāsaḥ—garments; alaṅkāra—
and ornaments; carcitāḥ—adorned; ucchiṣṭa—the remnants
of Your food; bhojinaḥ—eating; dāsāḥ—Your servants; tava
—Your; māyām—illusory energy; jayema—we will conquer; hi
—indeed.

O Prabhu, we decorate ourselves with the garlands,
sandalwood paste, cloth and ornaments worn by You. Since
we are Your servants who eat Your remnants, we will
certainly conquer Your illusory energy (māyā).
(Therefore, Prabhu, we are not afraid of Your māyā — we
are only afraid of being separated from You).



In this way, the sādhaka worships the dust of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s lotus feet

āśāsya dāsyaṁ vṛṣabhānu-jāyās

tīre samadhyāsya ca bhānu-jāyāḥ

kadā nu vṛndāvana-kuñja-vīthiṣv

ahaṁ nu rādhe hy atithir bhaveyam


                          696
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 198/BR 5.13

āśā—hope; āsya—of Her; dāsyam—service; vṛṣabhānu-jāyāḥ—
of Rādhā, Vṛṣabhānu’s daughter; tīre—on the shore;
samadhyā asya—arranging; ca—and; bhānu-jāyāḥ—of the
Yamunā; kadā—when?; nu—indeed; vṛndāvana-kuñja-vīthiṣu—
in the pathways of Vṛndāvana forest groves; aham—I; nu—
indeed; rādhe—O Rādhā; hi—indeed; atithiḥ—a guest;
bhaveyam—may become.

O Rādhe! O Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī! When will I, with the hope
of becoming Your maidservant, reside as a guest (a
mendicant sādhu) on on the bank of the Yamunā within the
pathways of Vṛndāvana’s kuñjas, absorbed in deep
contemplation on Your service?



Constantly seeking Kṛṣṇa through saṅkīrtana in the mood
of śrī-rādhā-dāsya

dhyāyantaṁ śikhi-piccha-maulim aniśaṁ tan-nāma
saṅkīrtayan

nityaṁ tac-caraṇāmbujaṁ paricaran tan-mantra-varyaṁ
japan

śrī-rādhā-pada-dāsyam eva paramābhīṣṭaṁ hṛdā dhārayan

karhi syāṁ tad-anugraheṇa paramādbhutānurāgotsavaḥ

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 259/BR 5.14

dhyāyan—meditating; tam—on Him; śikhi-piccha-maulim—who
wears a peacock-feather crown; aniśam—constantly; tan-
nāma—His name; saṅkīrtayan—chanting; nityam—always; tat-
caraṇāmbhujam—His lotus feet; paricaran—serving; tan-
mantra-varyam—His excellent mantra; japan—chanting; śri-
rādhā-pāda-dāsyam—service to Śrī Rādhā’s feet; eva—
indeed; parama-abhiṣṭam—greatest desire; hṛdā—with the
heart; dhārayan—holding; karhi—when?; syām—I will be;
tad-anugrahena—by His mercy; parama-adbhuta-anurāga-
utsavaḥ—a most wonderful festival of love for Her.

Keeping at my heart my highest aspiration of one day
becoming a maidservant of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, I will
constantly meditate on Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose head is
decorated with a peacock feather. I will constantly
chant His name, eternally serve His lotus feet and
always utter His most excellent mantras. May He bestow
mercy upon me at any moment so I will attain
anurāgotsava, the great festival of attachment to Śrī
Rādhā.



Praying to attain the service of Śrī Rādhā birth after
birth

tasyā apāra-rasa-sāra-vilāsa-mūrter

ānanda-kanda-paramādbhuta-saukhya-lakṣmyāḥ

brahmādi-durlabha-gater vṛṣabhānu-jāyāḥ

                          697
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


kaiṅkaryam eva mama janmani janmani syāt

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 40/BR 5.15

Birth after birth, may I attain the position of being a
maidservant of the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu. She is
the vilāsa-mūrti (personification of playful pastimes)
of Śyāmasundara, who is Himself the essence of limitless
rasa. She is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s supremely wonderful pleasure-
Lakṣmī, and She is most difficult to attain even for
Brahmā and other exalted personalities.

mad-īśā-nāthatve vraja-vipina-candraṁ vraja-vaneśvarīṁ
tāṁ nāthatve

MS 9/BR p. 212 (please see 11.65for the full śloka)

Always remember Vṛndāvana-candra as the prāṇanātha of my
Svāminī, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrī Rādhikā, and remember Her,
the controlling deity of the forests of Vraja as His
mistress.

hā nātha gokula-sudhākara su-prasanna-

vaktrāravinda madhura-smita he kṛpārdra

yatra tvayā viharate praṇayaiḥ priyārāt

tatraiva mām api naya priya-sevanāya

Śrī Vilāpa-kusumañjaliḥ 100, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī/STB p. 148

hā—O!; nātha—Lord; gokula—of Gokula; sudhā-kara—O moon
(nectar-bestowing); su—very; prasanna—cheerful; vaktra—
face; aravinda—lotus flower; madhura—sweet; smita—smile;
he—O!; kṛpā—with mercy; ardra—melting; yatra—where;
tvayā—with You; viharate—enjoys pastimes; praṇayaiḥ—with
love; priyā—Your beloved; ārāt—near; tatra—there; eva—
indeed; mām—me; api—even; naya—please lead; priya—of my
dear Rādhikā; sevanāya—to the service.

O Nātha! O nectar moon of Gokula, whose lotus face is
very cheerful and smiles so sweetly! O You whose heart
is soft and melting, wanting to bestow mercy upon all!
Wherever You go to enjoy loving pastimes with Your
beloved, please take me there, and allow me to render
confidential loving service to You both. (or) O Kṛṣṇa,
if You are pleased with me, then give me this
benediction only: I am about to die because I don—t know
where my svāminī is. Please take me with You when You go
to meet Her, so that I may engage in Her service.



Without being in the ānugatya of the gopīs one cannot
enter mādhurya- līlā

sakhī vinā ei līlāya anyera nāhi gati

sakhī-bhāve ye tāṅre kare anugati

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-kuñja-sevā-sādhya sei pāya

                          698
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


sei sādhya pāite āra nāhika upāya

CC Mad 8.204-5/BR 5.15 pt/GV p. 63/BPKG p. 473

sakhī vinā—without the gopīs; ei līlāya—in these
pastimes; anyera—of others; nāhi—there is not; gati—
entrance; sakhī-bhāve—in the mood of the gopīs; ye—
anyone who; tāṅre—Lord Kṛṣṇa; kare—does; anugati—
following; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; kuñja-sevā—of
service in the kuñjas, or gardens, of Vṛndāvana; sādhya—
the goal; sei pāya—he gets; sei—that; sādhya—
achievement; pāite—to receive; āra—other; nāhika—there
is not; upāya—means.

Without the guidance of the sakhīs, one cannot enter
these mādhurya pastimes. One who worships Kṛṣṇa in the
mood of the mañjarī-sakhīs, following in their
footsteps, can attain the service of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the
kuñjas of Vṛndāvana. There is no other means to achieve
this goal.

In Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describes
the mañjarīs:

prema-līlā-vihārāṇāṁ samyag vistārikā sakhī viśrambha-
ratna-peṭī ca

One who expands the conjugal love of Kṛṣṇa and His
enjoyment among the gopīs is called a sakhī (mañjarī).
Such a person is a confidential gopī in the conjugal
affairs. Such assistants are like jewels in the form of
Kṛṣṇa’s confidantes.

[Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda:] The actual
business of the sakhīs (mañjarīs) is described thus in
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi: In the conjugal pastimes of Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa is the hero (nāyaka), and Rādhikā is the heroine
(nāyikā). The first business of the gopīs is to chant
the glories of both the hero and the heroine. Their
second business is to gradually create a situation in
which the hero may be attracted to the heroine and vice
versa. Their third business is to induce both of Them to
approach each other. Their fourth business is to
surrender unto Kṛṣṇa, the fifth is to create a jovial
atmosphere, the sixth to give Them assurance to enjoy
Their pastimes, the seventh to dress and decorate both
hero and heroine, the eighth to show expertise in
expressing Their desires, the ninth to conceal the
faults of the heroine, the tenth to cheat their
respective husbands and relatives, the eleventh to
educate, the twelfth to enable both the hero and heroine
to meet at the proper time, the thirteenth to fan the
hero and heroine, the fourteenth to sometimes reproach
the hero and heroine, the fifteenth to set conversations
in motion, and the sixteenth to protect the heroine by
various means. (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā
8.204-205, purport)



Searching for Śrī Rādhānātha while engaged in the
service of Śrī Rādhā


                          699
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

rādhā-nāma-sudhā-rasaṁ rasayituṁ jihvāstu me vihvalā

pādau tat-padakāṅkitāsu caratāṁ vṛndāṭavī-vīthisu

tat-karmaiva karaḥ karotu hṛdayaṁ tasyāḥ pādaṁ dhyāyatāt

tad-bhāvotsavataḥ paraṁ bhavatu me tat-prāṇa-nāthe ratiḥ

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 142/BR 5.16

rādhā-nāma-sudhā-rasam—the mellows of the nectar of
Rādhā’s name; rasayitum—to taste; jihvā—tongue; asti—is;
me-of me; vihvalā—overwhelmed; pādau—feet; tat-
padakāṅkitāsu—marked with Her footprints; caratām—should
walk; vṛndāṭavī-vīthisu—on the pathways in Vṛndāvana;
tat-karma—Her work; eva—indeed; karaḥ—hand; karotu—
should do; hṛdayam—heart; tasyāḥ—of Her; pādam—feet;
dhyāyatāt—should meditate; tad-bhāvotsavataḥ—on account
of the festival of love for Her; param—great; bhavatu—
may be; me—of me; tat-prāṇa-nāthe—to the Lord of Her
life; ratiḥ—love.

May my tongue become constantly overwhelmed by relishing
the nectarean rasa of the name Rādhā, may my feet wander
on the pathways of that Vṛndāvana where Vṛṣabhānu-
nandinī walks, may both my hands be engaged in Svāminī’s
service, and may my heart contemplate Her lotus feet. By
engaging in Śrīmatī’s festival of ecstatic moods
(bhāvotsava), may one-pointed attachment manifest within
me for Her prāṇanātha, Śrī Śyāmasundara. This is my
earnest prayer.



Tāṁ vraja-vane-īśvarīṁ nāthatve smara — Remember Śrīmatī
Rādhikā as one’s svāminī

aty-utkaṭena nitarāṁ virahānalena

dandahyamāna-hṛdayā kila kāpi dāsī

hā svāmini kṣaṇam iha praṇayena gāḍham

ākrandanena vidhurā vilapāmi padyaiḥ

Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ 7/MS 9.2

aty-utkatena—very great longing; nitarām—completely;
viraha—of separation; analena—because of the fire;
dandahyamāna—always burning; hṛdayā—heart; kila—indeed;
kāpi—a certain; dāsī—maidservant; hā—O; svāmini—
mistress; kṣaṇam—for a moment; iha—here; praṇayena—with
love; gāḍham—deeply; ākrandhanena—with crying; vidhurā—
agitated; vilapāmi—I lament; padyaiḥ—in poetic ślokas.

O svāminī Śrī Rādhikā! I am Your mañjarī maidservant.
But my heart is burning due to the virulent fire of
separation from You. I cry repeatedly and thus I have
become thoroughly aggrieved. Seeing no other means of
reprieval, I reside at Śrī Govardhana by the bank of Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and lovingly supplicate Your lotus feet with
these few ślokas of lamentation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: In his Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ,

                          700
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī has acknowledged Śrīmatī
Rādhikā as his svāminī. With great fervor and
perturbation he prays in a mood of single-minded
devotion in order to obtain Her service.



A prayer to attain Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, which are the
only goal

devi duḥkha-kula-sāgarodare

dūyamānam ati-durgataṁ janam

tvaṁ kṛpā-prabala-naukayādbhutaṁ

prāpaya svapada-paṅkajālayam

Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ 8/MS 9.2/BR 5.17

devi—O queen; duḥkha—of sufferings; kula—of multitudes;
sāgara—an ocean; udare—in the belly; dūyamānam—
suffering; atī-durgatam—very unfortunate; janam—person;
tvam—You; kṛpā—of mercy; prabala—the strength; naukayā—
with the boat; adbhutam—wonderful; prāpaya—please cause
to attain; sva-pada-paṅkaja—of Your own lotus feet;
alayam—the abode.

May You be pleased, O Vraja-vilāsini, Śrīmatī Rādhikā!
Due to my extreme bad fortune I have fallen into the
belly of an unfathomable ocean of intense grief, and I
am severely tormented and seized by calamity. O Parama-
karuṇāmayi! Kindly place me upon the indestructible boat
of Your mercy and grant me the direct service of Your
lotus feet.



One who aspires for Rādha-dāsyam will never desire
enjoyment with Śrī Hari, even in dreams

ananya-śrī-rādhā-pada-kamala-dāsyaika-rasa-dhīr

hareḥ saṅge raṅga-svapana-samaye nāpi dadhatī

Śrī Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta 16.94/BR 5.18 pt

ananya—without an other; śrī-rādhā—of Śrī Rādhā; pada-
kamala—to the lotus feet; dāsya—of service; eka—sole;
rasa—nectar; dhīr—thoughts; hareḥ—of Lord Hari; saṅge—in
the association; aṅga—limbs; svapana—of sleeping;
samayena—at the time; api—also; dadhatī—placing;

Single-pointed service to the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā is
an ocean of transcendental rasa. One who wishes to enter
that ocean will never desire enjoyment with Śrī Hari,
even in dreams.



A happiness millions of times greater

rādhāra svarūpa — kṛṣṇa-prema-kalpa-latā


                          701
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

sakhī-gaṇa haya tāra pallava-puṣpa pātā

kṛṣṇa-līlāmṛta yadi latāke siñcaya

nija-sukha haite pallavādyera koṭi-sukha haya

CC Mad 8.209—10/BR 5.18 pt/GV p. 65

rādhāra svarūpa—the spiritual nature of Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī; kṛṣṇa-prema—of love of Kṛṣṇa; kalpa-latā—a
creeper; sakhī-gaṇa—the gopīs; haya—are; tāra—of that
creeper; pallava—the twigs; puṣpa—flowers; pātā—and
leaves; kṛṣṇa-līlāmṛta—the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes;
yadi—if; latāke—the creeper; siñcaya—sprinkles; nija-
sukha haite—than personal happiness; pallava-ādyera—of
the twigs, flowers and leaves; koṭi—ten million times;
sukha—the happiness; haya—there is.

By nature Śrī Rādhā is like a creeper of kṛṣṇa-prema and
the sakhīs are the leaves, flowers and twigs of that
creeper. When the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is
sprinkled on that creeper, the leaves, flowers and twigs
experience a happiness millions of times greater than if
they were to be directly sprinkled with this nectar.

In his Amṛta-pravāha-bhāṣya, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
states, “Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the creeper of love of
Godhead, and the gopīs are exactly like twigs, flowers
and leaves. When water is sprinkled on the creeper, the
twigs, flowers and leaves indirectly receive all the
benefits of the creeper itself. But water sprinkled
directly on the twigs, leaves and flowers is not as
effective as water sprinkled on the creeper’s root. The
gopīs [mañjarīs] are not as pleased when they directly
mix with Kṛṣṇa as when they serve to unite Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī with Kṛṣṇa. Their transcendental pleasure lies
in uniting Them.”

Rādhā’s bhāva is reflected in the mañjarīs. This is
described in the first śloka of Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ

tvaṁ rūpa-mañjari sakhī! prathitā pure —smin

puṁsaḥ parasya vadanaṁ na hi paśyasīti

bimbādhare kṣatam anāgata-bhartṛkāyā

yat te vyadhāyi kim u tac chuka-puṅgavena

Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ 1/BR 5.18 pt/MS P. 14

tvam—you; rūpa-mañjarī—O Rūpa mañjari; sakhi—O friend;
prathitā—famous; pure—city; asmin—in this; puṁsaḥ—of the
person; parasya—supreme; vadanam—the face; na—not; hi—
indeed; paśyasi—you see; iti—thus; bimba—bimba fruit;
adhare—lips; kṣatam—bite; anāgata—not arrived;
bhartṛkāyāḥ—whose husband; yat—which; te—of you;
vyadhāyi—caused; kim—what?; u—indeed; tac—that; chuka—
parrot; puṅgavena—great.

“My dear sakhī Rūpa Mañjari, you are well known in Vraja
for not even looking at the face of any man other than
your husband. Therefore it is surprising that your lips,
red-like bimba fruits, have been bitten, even though

                          702
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

your husband is not at home. Has this been done by the
best of parrots?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: When Kṛṣṇa drinks the nectar of
Rādhā’s lips, the resultant bhāva is also reflected in
the mañjaris who become as if intoxicated.



A sincere prayer for attaining śrī-rādhā-dāsya

rādhe vṛndāvanādhīśe karuṇāmṛta-vāhini

kṛpayā nija-pādābja-dāsyaṁ mahyaṁ pradīyatām

Arcana Paddhati (HBV)/BR saṅkṣepa, vijñāpti-pañcaka

O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, O queen of Vṛndāvana, You are a
flowing river of incomparable compassion. Please bestow
upon me the service of Your lotus feet.



The identity of a perfected soul (siddha-paricaya)

dukūlaṁ vibhrāṇām atha kuca-taṭe kañcu-kapaṭaṁ

prasādaṁ svāminyāḥ sva-kara-tala-dattaṁ praṇayataḥ

sthitāṁ nityaṁ pārśve vividha-paricaryaika-caturāṁ

kiśorīm ātmānaṁ caṭula-parakīyāṁ nu kalaye

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 53/BR 8.5

When will I wear the prasādī silken cloth and bodice of
my svāminī that She affectionately gave me with Her own
hands, and remain near Her, intent on serving in various
ways? Thus will I be able to count myself as a clever
and very beautiful kiśorī eligible to perform parakīyā-
sevā.



The cherished desire of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas is to
possess the self-identity (abhimāna) of being a
maidservant of Śrī Rādhā. The appropriate sādhana to
attain one’s “svarūpa— and one’s service to Śrī Rādhā is
revealed by Śrī Guru

ātmānaṁ cintayet tatra tāsāṁ madhye manoramam

rūpa-yauvana-sampannāṁ kiśorīṁ pramadākṛtim

Sanat-kumāra-saṁhitā/JD ch. 38/BR 8.5 pt

A sādhaka of rāga-mārga should internally perceive
himself in the form of a charming and extremely
captivating kiśorī mañjarī equipped with youth and
beauty and situated amongst the gopī beloveds of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

sakhīnāṁ saṅginī-rūpām ātmānaṁ vāsanā-mayīm


                          703
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

ājñā-sevā-parāṁ tat-tat-kṛpālaṅkāra-bhūṣitām

Prema-bhakti-candrikā 5.11

A sādhaka of rāga-mārga should internally perceive his
svarūpa as one of the young, beautiful gopī beloveds of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He should meditate on his desired svarūpa as
a female companion of Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants, such as
Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and Śrī Rati Mañjarī, and, adorned in
the ornaments mercifully given by them, he should
completely absorb himself in service to Śrī Rādhā-
Mādhava according to Rūpa’s and Rati’s instructions.

ātmānaṁ cintayet tatra tāsāṁ madhye manoramām

rūpa-yauvana-sampannāṁ kiśorīṁ premodākṛtim

rādhikānucarīṁ nityaṁ tat-sevana-parāyaṇāṁ

kṛṣṇād apy adhikaṁ prema rādhikāyāṁ prakurvatīm

Sanat-kumāra-saṁhitā/BPKG p. 476/PP p. 88

[Sadāśiva is giving instruction to Nāradajī on the
subject of siddha-deha suitable for rendering service to
the Divine Couple:] “O Nārada! Meditate in this way upon
your own svarūpa among Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved associates
who take pride in being His paramours in the aprākṛta
Vṛndāvana Dhāma. “I am an extremely lovely and supremely
blissful kiśorī (adolescent girl), endowed with youthful
beauty. I am an eternal maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
fully absorbed in Her service. Remaining always and
forever engaged in the service of the Divine Couple, I
maintain more love for Śrīmatī than for Kṛṣṇa.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: The word cintayet in the above
verse from the Sanat-kumāra-saṁhitā means that the
sādhaka should nourish the following firm conception: “I
am a kiśorī with the same moods and qualities as the
nitya-siddha-mañjarīs of Śrī Rādhā.” A Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
sādhaka in deep meditation will maintain the conception
that, “I am not this body, these senses and so forth; I
am a maidservant of Śrī Rādhā and I am endowed with
qualities such as the beauty and rasa of a gopa-kiśorī.”
This deep meditation on the soul (ātma-cintana) will
quickly result in his giving up identification with the
material body, and he will attain svarūpa-siddhi. The
main goal of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas is to become a rādhā-
dāsī, a maidservant of Śrī Rādhā. The sādhaka remains
ever fixed on this goal, just as the position of the
pole star is fixed in the sky. By the mercy of Śrī Guru,
the sādhaka is introduced to his eternal identity as a
maidservant of Śrī Rādhā. Upon attaining that, he
abandons his bodily identity as a servant of māyā, and
he completely maintains the self-identity of being a
rādhā-dāsī. (BR 8.5 pt)

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has described his siddha-
svarūpa as follows:

Varaṅe Taḍit (Siddhi-Lalāsa), Gīta-mālā/BPKG /PP p. 90/
KSH A25

varaṅe taḍit vāsa tārāvalī kamala maṇjarī nāma

                             704
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


sāḍe bāra varṣa vayasa satata svānanda-sukhada dhāma

“My complexion is like a flash of lightning and my dress
is bedecked with twinkling stars. My name is Kamalā
Maṇjarī and I am eternally twelve-and-a-half years old.
My abode is Svānanda Sukhada Kuñja.”

karpūra-sevā lalitāra gaṅa rādhā yūtheśvarī hana

mameśvarī-nātha śrī-nanda-nandana āmāra parāṅa-dhana

“My service is to supply camphor to Śrī Yugala. I serve
in the gaṅa of Lalitā and Śrī Rādhā is my yūtheśvarī.
The Beloved of my Svāminī, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, is
the treasure of my life.”

śrī-rūpa-mañjarī prabhṛtira sama yugala sevāya āśa

avaśya se-rūpa sevā pāba āmi parākāṣṭhā suviśvāsa

“I aspire to serve Śrī Yugala like Rūpa Maṇjarī and
others, and I am confident that I must surely attain
this service. This is my highest aspiration.”

kabe vā e dāsī saṁsiddhi labhibe rādhā-kuṇḍe vāsa kari—

rādhā-kṛṣṅa sevā satata karibe pūrva-smṛti parihari—

“Oh, when will this maidservant attain complete
perfection and, residing at Śrī Rādhā-kuṅḍa, serve Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṅa in complete forgetfulness of my past?”



O Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī! please make me the perpetual object
of Your merciful glance

itīmam adbhutaṁ-stavaṁ niśamya bhānu-nandinī

karotu santataṁ janaṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam

bhavet tadaiva-sañcita-tri-rūpa-karma-nāśanaṁ

bhavet tadā vrajendra-sūnu-maṇḍala-praveśanam

Śrī Rādhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-stava-rājaḥ 13/SGG p. 155

iti—this; imam—mine; adbhutam—wonderful; stavam—prayer;
niśamya—hearing; bhānu—of Vṛṣabhānu; nandinī—daughter;
karotu—must make; santatam—always; janam—person; kṛpā—of
mercy; kaṭa-akṣa—of Her sidelong-glance; bhājanam—object
of; bhavet—should; tadaiva—then certainly; sañcita—
accumulated; tri-rūpa—three types; karma—of karma;
nāśanam—destroyed; bhavet—should; tadā—then; vrajendra—
of the king of Vraja; sūnu—of the son; maṇḍala—circle;
praveśanam—entrance to.

O Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī! Upon hearing this wonderful prayer,
You will be compelled make me the perpetual object of
Your merciful glance. Then, by the influence of Your
mercy, all the reactions to my karma will be destroyed
and, realising my internal identity as a mañjarī, I will
enter the circle of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sakhīs to

                          705
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

participate in Śrī Vrajendra-sūnu’s eternal pastimes.




Kṛṣṇa will become pleased with one-pointed Rādhā-dāsyam
and grant one entrance into Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s entourage

paṭhati vimala-cetā mṛṣṭa-rādhāṣṭakaṁ yaḥ

parihṛta-nikhilāśā-santatiḥ kātaraḥ san

paśupa-pati-kumāraḥ kāmam āmoditas taṁ

nija-jana-gaṇa-madhye rādhikāyās tanoti

Śrī Rādhikāṣṭakam 9, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī /SGG
p. 161

Śrī Kṛṣṇa will become so pleased with that person of
pure heart and mind who, abandoning all hopes and
aspirations other than rādhā-dāsyam, humbly recites this
pure Rādhikāṣṭakam, that He will grant them entrance
into Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s eternal entourage.




Mañjarī-bhāva

Pālya-Dāsī kari—, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura (Gīta-mālā,
song 4)/GV p. 82

palya-dāsī kari—, lalitā sundari, āmāre loiyā kabe

śrī-rādhikā-pade, kāle milāibe, ajña-sevā samarpibe

When will beautiful Lalitā foster me as her own aspirant
novice maidservant? Then later, in due course of time,
she will offer me up unto the lotus feet of Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī, and will place me entirely at Her disposal
for rendering various services according to Her own
merciful orders.

śrī rūpa mañjarī, saṅge jābo kabe, rasa-sevā-śikṣā tare

tad-anugā ho—ye, rādhā-kuṇḍa-tate, rahibo harṣitāntare

When will Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī take me along with herself to
the banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa to give me lessons in the
performance of services to the Divine Couple. She will
take me there and make me practice by following her
instructions and activities. Thus I will feel great
delight in my heart.

śrī-viśākhā-pade, saṅgīta śikhibo, kṛṣṇa-līlā rasamoy

śrī-rati-mañjarī, śrī-rasa-mañjarī, hoibe sabe sadoy

At the lotus feet of Śrī Viśākhā I will learn music and
songs which are all abounding in the transcendental
mellows of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. All the other sakhīs in our

                          706
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

group, including Śrī Rati Mañjarī and Śrī Rasa Mañjarī
will also share their most kind and affectionate
dealings with me.

parama ānanda, sakale miliyā, rādhikā caraṇe rabo

ei parākāṣṭha, siddha kabe habe, pābo rādhā-padāsava

All of us will meet together, feeling supreme bliss and
remaining by the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā. When, O when
will there be this highest excellence of the culmination
of spiritual perfection, whereby I will receive the
intoxicating honey flowing from the lotus feet of Śrī
Rādhikā?

Thus ends Chapter 24 — Rādhā-dāsyam




Additional Chapters




Chapter 25 — Pramāṇa-tattva


The teachings of the Vedas received through Guru-varga



svataḥ-siddho vedo hari-dayita-vedha-prabhṛtitaḥ

pramāṇaṁ sat-prāptaṁ pramiti-viṣayān tān nava-vidhān

tathā pratyakṣādi-pramiti-sahitaṁ sādhayati naḥ

na yuktis tarkākhyā praviśati tathā śakti-rahitā

Daśa-mūla 1/JD ch. 13

svataḥ—independently; siddhaḥ—perfect; vedaḥ—the Vedas;
hari—of Lord Hari; dayita—the object of mercy; vedhaḥ—
Lord Brahmā, the creator of the universe; prabhṛtitaḥ—
beginning with; pramāṇam—evidence; sat—transcendental;
prāptam—attained; pramiti—of knowledge; viṣayān—the
scope; tat—of that; nava—nine; vidhān—parts; tathā—in
that way; prati-akṣa—present before the eyes; ādi—
beginning with; pramiti—knowledge; sahitam—along with;
sādhayati—stands as evidence; naḥ—for us; na—not; yuktiḥ
—reason; tarka—as logic; ākhya—names; praviśati—enters;
tathā—in that realms; śakti—of power; rahitā—devoid.

The self-evident Vedas, which have been received in the
sampradāya through the Guru-paramparā by recipients of
Śrī Hari’s mercy such as Brahmājī and others, are known
as āmnāya-vākya. The nine prameya-tattvas are
established by these āmnaya-vākyas with the help of
other pramānas that follow the guidance of these
śastras, such as evidence obtained by direct sense
perception (pratyakṣa). Reasoning that is only based on

                          707
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

logic is always lame in the matter of evaluating
inconceivable subject matters, since logic and argument
have no access to the realm of the inconceivable.



The definition of āmnāya

āmnāyah śrutayaḥ sāksād brahma-vidyeti viśrutaḥ

guru-paramparā prāptāḥ viśva-kartuḥ hi brāhmaṇa

Mahājana-kārikā/Daśa-mūla/GKH 1.62

Āmnāya, the authorised sacred tradition, is directly
embodied in the form of the Vedas and renowned as
brahma-vidyā, transcendental knowledge, which is
received from Brahmā, the universal creator, through the
system of guru-paramparā, disciplic succession.



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes the four kinds of evidence
(pramāṇa)

śrutiḥ pratyakṣam aitihyam anumānaṁ catuṣṭayam

pramāṇeṣv anavasthānād vikalpāt sa virajyate

SB 11.19.17

śrutiḥ—Vedic knowledge; pratyakṣam—direct experience;
aitihyam—traditional wisdom; anumānam—logical induction;
catuṣṭayam—fourfold; pramāneṣu—among all types of
evidence; anavasthānāt—due to the flickering nature;
vikalpāt—from material duality; saḥ—a person; virajyate—
becomes detached.

There are four types of pramāṇa, evidence: Vedic
knowledge, direct experience, traditional wisdom and
logical induction. Through researching these four, one
can understand the temporary, insubstantial situation of
material existence, and become detached from doubt and
duality.



Manu-saṁhitā describes three kinds of evidence

pratyakṣaś cānumanañ ca śāstrañ ca vividhāgamam

trayaṁ suviditaṁ kāryaṁ dharma-śuddhim abhīpsatā

Manu-saṁhitā 12.105

If one wants to understand what is factual reality or
what is the essential principle of dharma, one must
consider the three kinds of evidence: Vedic evidence,
direct perception, and logical inference.



Of the three kinds of evidence, revealed scriptures
(Vedic śāstra) is the best

                           708
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


pratyakṣe “ntarbhaved yasmād atithyaṁ tena deśikah

pramāṇaṁ trividhaṁ prākhyāt tatra mukhyā śrutir bhavet

Prameya-ratnāvalī 9.2

Since hearsay (history) is included in perception,
Madhvācārya has said that the means of proper knowledge
are three, among which śruti, or revelation scriptures,
is the highest, because it describes the Absolute Truth
in detail.

Divine sound is the best evidence for understanding
reality

yadyapi pratyakṣānumāna-śabdāryopamānārthāpattyabhava-
sambhavaitihya-ceṣṭhākhyāni daśa pramāṇāni viditānī,
tathāpi bhrama-pramāda-vipralipsā-karaṇāpāṭava-doṣa-
rahitavacanātmakaḥ śabda eva mūlaṁ pramāṇam

Tattva-Sandarbha, Sarva-samvādinī

Although pratyakṣa (direct evidence) anumāna
(hypothesis), ārya (teachings of the sages), upamāna
(analogy), arthāpatti (inference from circumstance),
abhava (ultimate nonexistence of the phenomenal world),
saṁbhava, (equivalence), aithihya (purāṇika histories),
and ceṣṭa (endeavour) are known as ten kinds of
evidence. However only śabda, or the revealed wisdom of
the Vedic literature, is free from the four faults of
vipralipsā — cheating, karaṇāpāṭava — imperfect senses,
pramāda — illusion, and bhrama — the tendency to make
mistakes. Therefore, it is the mūla-pramāṇa or root
evidence upon which true knowledge of the Absolute Truth
can be established.



The Vedas are self-evident, the original knowledge and
the foremost evidence

pramāṇera madhye śruti-pramāṇa pradhāna

śruti ye mukhyārtha kahe, sei se pramāṇa

jīvera asthi-viṣṭhā dui śaṅkha-gomaya

śruti-vākye sei dui mahāpavitra haya

svatah-pramāṇa veda satya yei kaya

"lakṣaṇā" karile svatah-prāmāṇya-hāni haya

CC Madhya 6.135-137

pramāṇera—of the evidences; madhye—in the midst; śruti—
the Vedic version; pramāṇa—evidence; pradhāna—chief;
śruti—the Vedic version; ye—whatever; mukhya-artha—chief
meaning; kahe—says; sei se—that indeed; pramāṇa—
evidence; jīvera—of the living entity; asthi—the bone;
viṣṭhā—stool; dui—two; śaṅkha—conchshell; go-maya—cow
dung; śruti-vākye—in the words of the Vedic version; sei
—that; dui—two; mahā—greatly; pavitra—pure; haya—are;

                          709
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

svataḥ-pramāṇa—self-evident; veda—Vedic literature;
satya—truth; yei—whatever; kaya—say; lakṣaṇā—
interpretation; karile—by making; svataḥ-prāmāṇya—self-
evidential proof; hāni—lost; haya—becomes.

[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:] Amongst the different
kinds of evidences, Śruti or the Vedic evidence are
chief, and thus whatever the Vedas directly states is
also evidence. Just as a conch shell and the dung of a
cow are nothing but bones and stool of certain living
entities, yet according to the statements of the Veda
they are both accepted as highly pure. If someone
superficially accepts that the truths of the Vedas are
self-evident yet makes an interpretation of the Vedic
statements, then the authority of the Vedas is
immediately lost.



Real dharma is enacted by Kṛṣṇa

dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītaṁ

SB 6.3.19/BPKG p. 423

dharmam—real religious principles, or bona fide
spiritual principles; tu—but; sākṣāt—directly; bhagavat—
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; praṇītam—enacted.

Real religious principles are personally established by
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructed Brahmā directly thus initiating the
paramparā

yathā brahmaṇe bhagavān svayam upadiśyānubhāvitavān

CC Ādi 1.50

yathā—just as; brahmaṇe—unto Lord Brahmā; bhagavān—the
Supreme Lord; svayam—Himself; upadiśya—having
instructed; anubhāvitavān—caused to perceive.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead taught Brahmā and
made him self-realised (so transcendental knowledge is
passed from Guru to disciple in paramparā).



Transcendental knowledge descends through the disciplic
succession

oṁ brahmā devānāṁ prathamaḥ sambabhūva / viśvasya kartā
bhuvanasya goptā sa brahma-vidyāṁ sarva-vidyā-pratiṣṭhām
/ atharvāya jyeṣṭha-putrāya prāha

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.1.1

oṁ—the original sound incarnation of Kṛṣṇa; addressing
divinity, invoking auspiciousness; brahmā—Brahmā;
devānām—of the demigods; prathamam—first; sambabhūva—
born; viśvasya—of the universe; kartā—the creator;

                          710
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

bhuvanasya—of the worlds; goptā—the protector; sa—he;
brahma-vidyām—spirtiual knowledge; sarva-vidyā-
pratiṣṭhām—the basis of all knowledge; atharvāya—to
Atharvā; jyeṣṭha-putrāya—his eldest son; prāha—spoke.

Lord Brahmā is the foremost of the demigods. He is the
creator of the universe, and its guardian. He instructed
his eldest son, Atharva in the science of transcendental
knowledge (brahma-vidyā), and thus became the first
teacher within the universe. All other knowledge is
based on this knowledge.



What is brahma-vidyā?

yenākṣaraṁ puruṣaṁ veda satyaṁ

provāca tāṁ tattvato brahma-vidyām

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.13

Brahma-vidyā is knowledge that reveals the true svarūpa
of para-brahma, the indestructible Puruṣottama.



Transcendental knowledge can be received only through
the Paramparā

evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ

sa kāleneha mahatā yogo naṣṭaḥ parantapa

BG 4.2

evam—thus; paramparā—by disciplic succession; prāptam—
received; imam—this knowledge of bhakti; rāja-ṛṣayaḥ—the
saintly kings; viduḥ—understood; saḥ—that knowledge;
kālena—in the course of time; iha—in this world; mahatā—
great; yogaḥ—the science of one’s relationship with the
Supreme; naṣṭaḥ—scattered; parantapa—O Arjuna, subduer
of the enemies.

O subduer of your foes, this supreme knowledge of bhakti
was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession (guru-varga), and the saints and kings
understood it in that way. But by the powerful influence
of Śrī Bhagavān’s time potency, the succession was
broken, and therefore this knowledge appears to be lost.



The Paramparā is an eternal principle

kālena naṣṭā pralaye vāṇīyaṁ veda-saṁjñitā

mayādau brahmaṇe proktā dharmo yasyāṁ mad-ātmakaḥ

tena proktā sva-putrāya manave pūrva-jāya sā

tato bhṛgv-ādayo —gṛhṇan sapta brahma-maharṣayaḥ

SB 11.14.3-4/JD ch. 6, 13

                            711
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


śrī-bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead
said; kālena—by the influence of time; naṣṭā—lost;
pralaye—at the time of annihilation; vāṇī—message; iyam—
this; veda-saṁjñitā—consisting of the Vedas; mayā—by Me;
ādau—at the time of creation; brahmaṇe—unto Lord Brahmā;
proktā—spoken; dharmaḥ—religious principles; yasyām—in
which; mat-ātmakaḥ—identical with Me; tena—by Brahmā;
proktā—spoken; sva-putrāya—to his son; manave—to Manu;
pūrva-jāya—the oldest; sā—that Vedic knowledge; tataḥ—
from Manu; bhṛgu-ādayaḥ—those headed by Bhṛgu Muni;
agṛhṇan—accepted; sapta—seven; brahma—in Vedic
literature; mahā-ṛṣayaḥ—most learned sages.

Śrī Bhagavān said: By the influence of time, the
transcendental sound of Vedic knowledge was lost at the
time of annihilation. Then, when the subsequent creation
took place, I spoke the Vedic knowledge of spiritual
truths, which is non-different than Myself, to Brahmā.
Lord Brahmā instructed his eldest son, Manu in the Vedic
knowledge, and Manu in turn instructed the same science
to the seven great sages headed by Bhṛgu Muni.



Mundane arguments cannot touch transcendental subject
matters

acintyāḥ khalu ye bhāvā na tāṁs tarkeṇa yojayet

prakṛtibhyaḥ paraṁ yac ca tad acintyasya lakṣaṇam

Mahābhārata (Bhīṣma-parva 5.22)/JD ch. 13/BPKG p. 446

acintyāḥ—inconceivable; khalu—certainly; ye—those;
bhāvāḥ—subject matters; na—not; tān—them; tarkeṇa—by
argument; yojayet—one may understand; prakṛtibhyaḥ—to
material nature; param—transcendental; yat—that which;
ca—and; tat—that; acintyasya—of the inconceivable;
lakṣaṇam—a symptom.

Anything transcendental to material nature is called
inconceivable, whereas arguments are all mundane. Since
mundane arguments cannot touch transcendental subject
matters, one should not try to understand transcendental
subjects through mundane arguments.



The Vedic literature must not to be interpreted

svataḥ-pramāṇa veda - pramāṇa-śiromaṇi

lakṣaṇā karile svataḥ-pramāṇatā-hāni

CC Ādi 7.132/BPKG p. 351

svataḥ-pramāṇa—self-evident; veda—the Vedic literatures;
pramāṇa—evidence; śiromaṇi—topmost; lakṣaṇā—
interpretation; karile—doing; svataḥ-pramāṇatā—self-
evidence; hāni—lost.

[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed Prakāśānanda
Sarasvatī:] “The self-evident Vedic literatures are the

                           712
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

highest evidence of all, but if these literatures are
interpreted, their self-evident nature is lost.”



Thus ends Chapter 25 — Pramāṇa-tattva




Chapter 26 — Other Topics




1. Māyāvādism (Māyāvāda is thoroughly condemned) 818

2. The Glories of Rūpa, Sanātana & Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmīs 827

3. Śrī Rūpa-Śikṣā 831

4. Śrī Sanātana-Śikṣā 833

5. Śrī Rāmānanda-saṁvāda 836

6. Ornamental Ślokas by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī 839

7. Mahā-prasādam 841

8. Tulasī-devī 845

9. Vedānta-sūtra Ślokas & Single-line Aphorisms 848

10. Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā 852

11. Śrī Sva-niyāma-daśakam & dvadaśakam 866

12. Vaiṣṇava Ke? Who is a Real Vaiṣṇava? 877

13. Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam 885

14. The Holy Dhāma 890

15. Prominent Ślokas Used by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja 897




1) Māyāvādism

(Māyāvāda is thoroughly condemned)



The māyāvāda philosophy is false and against the Vedas

māyāvādam asac-chāstraṁ pracchannaṁ baudham ucyate

mayaiva kathitaṁ devi kalau brāhmaṇa-rūpiṇā

Padma Purāṇa/JD ch. 18/Paramātma San. 71/Beyond Nirvāṇa/

                             713
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

BPKG p. 482

māyāvādam—the philosophy of māyāvāda; asac-chāstram—
false scriptures; pracchannam—covered; baudham—Buddhism;
ucyate—is said; maya—by me; eva—only; kathitam-executed;
devi—O goddess of the material world; kalau—in the age
of Kali; brāhmaṇa-rūpiṇā—assuming the body of a
brahmana.

[Lord Śiva tells Pārvatī:] "The māyāvāda philosophy is
false and against the Vedas. It is covered Buddhism. My
dear Pārvatī, in the form of a brāhmaṇa in Kali-yuga
(Śaṅkarācārya) I teach this concocted māyāvāda
philosophy."



Lord Śiva as Śaṅkarācārya came to cheat the atheists by
teaching māyāvāda

brahmaṇaś cāparaṁ rūpaṁ nirguṇaṁ vakṣyate mayā

sarvasvaṁ jagato 'py asya mohanārthaṁ kalau yuge

Padma Purāṇa/Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam 2.3.108-111 pt/Beyond
Nirvāṇa

In order to cheat the atheists, I describe the Supreme
Absolute Truth to be without form and without qualities.
Similarly, in explaining Vedānta I describe the same
māyāvāda philosophy in order to mislead the entire
population toward atheism by denying the personal form
of the Lord.

Why Lord Śiva came as Śaṅkarācārya (to deprive the
unfaithful of bhakti, and thus protect pure bhakti from
the contamination of māyā)

svāgamaiḥ kalpitais tvaṁ ca janān mad-vimukhān kuru

māṁ ca gopaya yena syāt sṛṣṭir eṣottarottarā

Padma Purāṇa/Beyond Nirvāṇa

sva-āgamaiḥ—with your own theses; kalpitaiḥ—imagined;
tvam—you; ca—also; janān—the people in general; mat-
vimukhān—averse to Me and addicted to fruitive
activities and speculative knowledge; kuru—make; mām—Me,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca—and; gopaya—just
cover; yena—by which; syāt—there may be; sṛṣṭiḥ—material
advancement; eṣā—this; uttara-uttarā—more and more.

[Addressing Lord Śiva, Śrī Bhagvān said:] “Please make
the general populace averse to Me by concocting your own
interpretation of the Vedas. Also, cover Me in such a
way that people will take more interest in advancing
material civilization just to propagate a population
bereft of spiritual knowledge.”



Worship Govinda, you fools and rascals

bhaja govindaṁ bhaja govindaṁ bhaja govindaṁ mūḍha-mate

                          714
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


samprāpte sannihite kāle na hi na hi rakṣati dukṛñ-
karaṇe

Śaṅkarācārya (at the end of his life)

bhaja—just worship; govindam—Govinda; mūḍha-mate—O
fools; samprāpte—attained; sannihite—placed; kāle—when
the time; na—not; hi—indeed; rakṣati—protects; dukṛn-
karaṇe—the grammatical affix dukṛn.

You fools and rascals, all your grammatical word
jugglery of suffixes, prefixes and philosophical
speculation will not save you at the time of death. Just
worship Govinda! Worship Govinda! Worship Govinda!



The five kinds of liberation

yadyapi se mukti haya pañca-parakāra

sālokya-sāmīpya-sārūpya-sārṣṭi-sāyujya āra

CC Mad 6.266

yadyapi—although; se—that; mukti—liberation; haya—is;
pañca-parakāra—of five different varieties; sālokya—of
the name sālokya; sāmīpya—of the name sāmīpya; sārūpya—
of the name sārūpya; sārṣṭi—of the name sārṣṭi; sāyujya—
of the name sāyujya; āra—and.

There are five kinds of liberation: sālokya, sāmīpya,
sārūpya, sārṣṭi and sāyujya.



My devotees reject the five kinds of liberation, even if
I offer them Myself

sālokya-sārṣṭi-sāmīpya-sārūpyaikatvam apy uta

dīyamānaṁ na gṛhṇanti vinā mat-sevanaṁ janāḥ

SB 3.29.13/CC Ādi 4.207, Antya 3.189/SBG

sālokya—living on the same planet; sārṣṭi--having the
same opulence; sāmīpya--to be a personal associate;
sārūpya—having the same bodily features; ekatvam—
oneness; api--also; uta--even; dīyamānam—being offered;
na--not; gṛhṇanti--do accept; vinā—without; mat--My;
sevanam--devotional service; janāḥ--pure devotees.

[Lord Kapiladeva to Devahūti:] “My devotees do not
accept sālokya, sārṣṭi, sārūpya, sāmīpya or oneness with
Me (sāyujya)—even if I offer these liberations—in
preference to serving Me.”



A pure devotee would rather go to hell than merge into
the effulgence of the Lord

sāyujya śunite bhaktera haya ghṛṇā-bhaya

                          715
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


naraka vāñchaye, tabu sāyujya nā laya

CC Mad 6.268

sāyujya—liberation by merging into the effulgence;
śunite—even to hear; bhaktera—of the devotee; haya—there
is; ghṛṇā—hatred; bhaya—fear; naraka—a hellish condition
of life; vāñchaye—he desires; tabu—still; sāyujya—
merging into the effulgence of the Lord; nā laya—never
accepts.

A pure devotee does not like even to hear about sāyujya-
mukti, which inspires him with fear and hatred. Indeed,
the pure devotee would rather go to hell than merge into
the effulgence of the Lord.



Those who desire sayujya-mukti, merging into the Brahman
effulgence, are actually committing spiritual suicide.
The devotees totally reject such liberation

kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tri-daśa-pūr ākāśa-puṣpāyate

durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate

viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate

yat kāruṇya-kaṭākṣa-vaibhavavatāṁ taṁ gauram eva stumaḥ

Caitanya-candrāmṛta 5

kaivalyam—the pleasure of merging into the existence of
Brahman; narakāyate—is considered hellish; tri-daśa-pūr—
the heavenly planets; ākāśa-puṣpāyate—something
imaginary, like a flower in the sky; durdānta—difficult
to subdue; indriya—the senses; kāla-sarpa—venomous
snake; paṭalī—multitude; protkhāta—extracted;
daṁṣṭrāyate—teeth; viśvam—the material world; pūrṇa—
completely; sukhāyate—happy; vidhi—Lord Brahmā; mahendra
—Indra, the king of heaven; ādiḥ—the demigods; ca—and;
kīṭāyate—become like an insect; yat—of whom; kāruṇya—
mercy; kaṭākṣa—glance; vaibhavavatām—of the most
confidential devotee; tam—unto; gauram—Lord Caitanya
Mahāprabhu; eva—certainly; stumaḥ—glorify.

We offer our praise unto Śrī Gaurāṅga because for those
devotees who have attracted His potent merciful sidelong
glance, the pleasure of merging into Brahman appears
like hell, the pleasures of the heavenly planets like a
phantasmagoric flower in the sky, the poisonous serpent-
like senses like harmless snakes whose poisenous fangs
havs been extracted, the great demigods such as Brahmā
and Śiva like insignificant insects, and the whole world
an abode of joy. Let us offer our eulogy to this most
magnanimous personality, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.



The Gīta state that the māyāvāda doctrine is very
offensive and condemned

avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

                          716
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto mama bhūta-maheśvaram

moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ

rākṣasīm āsurīṁ caiva prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ

BG 9.11-12/BPKG p. 516

avajānanti—deride; mām—Me; mūḍhāḥ—foolish men; mānuṣīm—
in a human form; tanum—a body; āśritam—assuming; param—
transcendental; bhāvam—nature; ajānantaḥ—not knowing;
mama—My; bhūta—of everything that be; mahā-īśvaram—the
supreme proprietor; mogha-āśāḥ—baffled in their hopes;
mogha-karmāṇaḥ—baffled in fruitive activities; mogha-
jñānāḥ—baffled in knowledge; vicetasaḥ—bewildered;
rākṣasīm—demonic; āsurīm—atheistic; ca—and; eva—
certainly; prakṛtim—nature; mohinīm—bewildering; śritāḥ—
taking shelter of.

Fools deride Me, the Supreme Īśvara of all living
entities. They fail to understand the supreme nature of
My svarūpa by their limited human intelligence, which is
covered by māyā. All the hopes, actions and knowledge of
such fools go in vain. Their minds become agitated and,
deviating from the spiritual path, they take shelter of
the demoniac nature, which destroys intelligence. Thus
they head towards the hellish planets.

Kṛṣṇa states: The soul is eternal; the jīva’s
individuality can never be lost

na tv evāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥ

na caiva na bhaviṣyāmaḥ sarve vayam ataḥ param

BG 2.12

na—never; tu—but; eva—certainly; aham—I; jātu—at any
time; na—did not; āsam—exist; na—not; tvam—you; na—not;
ime—all these; jana-adhipāḥ—kings; na—never; ca—also;
eva—certainly; na—not; bhaviṣyāmaḥ—shall exist; sarve
vayam—all of us; ataḥ param—hereafter.

Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you,
nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us
ever cease to be.



Liberation and eradication of karma are merely two by-
products of chanting

ānuṣaṅgika phala nāmera - “mukti—, “pāpa-nāśa—

tāhāra dṛṣṭānta yaiche sūryera prakāśa

CC Antya 3.180

ānuṣaṅgika—concomitant; phala—result; nāmera—of the holy
name; mukti—liberation; pāpa-nāśa—extinction of the
resultant actions of sinful life; tāhāra—of that;
dṛṣṭānta—example; yaiche—as; sūryera prakāśa—light of
the sun.

                          717
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


Liberation and extinction of the reactions of sinful
life are two concomitant by-products of chanting the
holy name of the Lord. An example is found in the gleams
of morning sunlight.



Liberation is the insignificant result derived from
nāma-ābhāsa

mukti tuccha-phala haya nāmābhāsa haite

CC Antya 3.186

mukti—liberation; tuccha-phala—insignificant result;
haya—is; nāma-ābhāsa haite—compared with the results of
even a dim reflection of the pure holy name.

The attaiment of Liberation is insignificant compared to
the result achieved from even a glimpse of the awakening
of offenseless chanting of the holy name (nāma-ābhāsa).



By chanting, one attains prema which makes the happiness
of liberation insignificant

tārakāj jāyate muktiḥ samādhiketi bhavaḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Sandarbha 256/GKH (P)

tārakāt—from the liberator; jāyate—is generated; muktiḥ—
liberation; samādhikā—equal and greater; iti—thus;
bhavaḥ—the meaning.

Through chanting the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one attains
pure love of God, which makes the happiness of
liberation seem very insignificant. (or) The potency of
Śrī Rāma — tāraka-nāma, dwarfs the pleasure of
impersonal liberation and the potency of Śrī Kṛṣṇa —
pāraka-nāma, renders it completely insignificant.



Real liberation means to be established in one’s eternal
svarupa and sevā

muktir hitvānyathā rūpaṁ sva-rūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ

SB 2.10.6/JD ch. 17/BPKG p. 430

muktiḥ—liberation; hitvā—giving up; anyathā—otherwise;
rūpam—form; sva-rūpeṇa—in one’s spiritual,
constitutional form; vyavasthitiḥ—permanent situation,
eternal position.

Liberation means to give up one’s external forms and
becoming situated in one’s svarūpa. Real liberation
means realising one’s eternal svarūpa and being
established in one’s nitya-sevā. [In other words, one is
not liberated upon leaving this body if he takes another
body, nor if he simply does not take another form. Real
liberation is when one enters, by loving devotional

                          718
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

service, into the spiritual world (SSM)].



The Śrīmad Bhagavātam completely rejects the cheating
ways of materially motivated religiosity and
impersonalism, dharmaḥ projjihita-kaitavo (SB 1.1.2).
Explaining this Bhagavātam śloka, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
says:

tāra madhye mokṣa-vāñchā kaitava-pradhāna

yāhā haite kṛṣṇa-bhakti haya antardhāna

CC Ādi 1.92

tāra—of them; madhye—in the midst; mokṣa-vāñchā—the
desire to merge into the Supreme; kaitava—of cheating
processes; pradhāna—the chief; yāhā haite—from which;
kṛṣṇa-bhakti—devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa; haya—becomes;
antardhāna—disappearance.

The foremost process of cheating is to desire to achieve
liberation by merging into the Supreme, for this causes
the permanent disappearance of loving service to Kṛṣṇa.



Unequivocally give up hearing all talk of liberation

kathā mukti-vyāghryā na śṛṇu kila sarvātma-gilaṇīḥ

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā 4 (2nd line)

kathā—talk; mukti—of impersonal liberation; vyāghryā—the
tigress; na—don—t; śṛṇu—hear; kila—unequivocally; sarva-
ātma-gilaṇīḥ—devouring your very soul.

You must unequivocally give up hearing all talk of
liberation which, like a tigress, devours your very
soul.



I have been forcibly turned into a maidservant by some
cunning boy who is always joking with the gopīs

advaita-vīthī-pathikair upāsyāḥ

svānanda-siṁhāsana-labdha-dīkṣāḥ

śaṭhena kenāpi vayaṁ haṭhena

dāsī-kṛtā gopa-vadhū-viṭena

Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura/BRS 3.1.44/BRSB p. 204/CC Mad
10.178, 24.133

advaita-vīthī—of the path of monism; pathikaiḥ—by the
wanderers; upāsyāḥ—worshipable; sva-ānanda—of self-
realisation; siṁha-āsana—on the throne; labdha-dīkṣāḥ—
being initiated; śaṭhena—by a cheater; kena-api—some;
vayam—we; haṭhena—by force; dāsī-kṛtā—made into a
maidservant; gopa-vadhū—in joking with the gopīs; viṭena

                          719
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

—by a tricky boy.

Although I was worshiped by those on the path of
impersonal liberation and initiated into self-
realisation through the yoga system, I have nonetheless
been forcibly turned into a maidservant by some cunning
boy who is always joking with the gopīs.



Expert and most intelligent persons do not care for
liberation, only for hari-kathā

nātyantikaṁ vigaṇayanty api te prasādaṁ

kimv anyad arpita-bhayaṁ bhruva unnayais te

ye —ṅga tvad-aṅghri-śaraṇā bhavataḥ kathāyāḥ

kīrtanya-tīrtha-yaśasaḥ kuśalā rasa-jñāḥ

SB 3.15.48

na—not; ātyantikam—liberation; vigaṇayanti—care for; api
—even; te—those; prasādam—benedictions; kim u—what to
speak; anyat—other material happinesses; arpita—given;
bhayam—fearfulness; bhruvaḥ—of the eyebrows; unnayaiḥ—by
the raising; te—Your; ye—those devotees; aṅga—O Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tvat—Your; aṅghri—lotus feet;
śaraṇāḥ—who have taken shelter; bhavataḥ—Your; kathāyāḥ—
narrations; kīrtanya—worth chanting; tīrtha—pure;
yaśasaḥ—glories; kuśalāḥ—very expert; rasa-jñāḥ—knowers
of the mellows or rasa.

Persons who are very expert and most intelligent in
understanding things as they are engage in hearing
narrations of the auspicious activities and pastimes of
the Lord, which are worth chanting and worth hearing.
Such persons do not care even for the highest material
benediction, namely liberation, to say nothing of other
less important benedictions like the material happiness
of the heavenly kingdom.



Paramānanda is far superior to Brahmānanda

yā nirvṛtis tanu-bhṛtāṁ tava pāda-padma-

dhyānād bhavaj-jana-kathā-śravaṇena vā syāt

sā brahmaṇi sva-mahimany api nātha mā bhūt

kiṁ tv antakāsi-lulitāt patatāṁ vimānāt

SB 4.9.10/BR 4.16

yā—that which; nirvṛtiḥ—bliss; tanu-bhṛtām—of the
embodied; tava—Your; pāda-padma—lotus feet; dhyānāt—from
meditating upon; bhavat-jana—from Your intimate
devotees; kathā—topics; śravaṇena—by hearing; vā—or;
syāt—comes into being; sā—that bliss; brahmaṇi—in the
impersonal Brahman; sva-mahimani—Your own magnificence;
api—even; nātha—O Lord; mā—never; bhūt—exists; kim—what

                          720
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

to speak of; tu—then; antaka-asi—by the sword of death;
lulitāt—being destroyed; patatām—of those who fall down;
vimānāt—from their airplanes.

My Lord, the transcendental bliss derived from
meditating upon Your lotus feet or hearing about Your
glories from pure devotees is so unlimited that it is
far beyond the stage of brahmānanda, wherein one thinks
himself merged in the impersonal Brahman as one with the
Supreme. Since brahmānanda is also defeated by the
transcendental bliss derived from devotional service,
then what to speak of the temporary blissf of elevating
oneself to the heavenly planets, which is ended by the
separating sword of death? Although one may be elevated
to the heavenly planets, he falls down in due course of
time.



Liberation is insignificant compared to hearing hari-
kathā from a sādhu

na kāmaye nātha tad apy ahaṁ kvacin

na yatra yuṣmac-caraṇāmbujāsavaḥ

mahattamāntar-hṛdayān mukha-cyuto

vidhatsva karṇāyutam eṣa me varaḥ

SB 4.20.24/BR 4.17

na—not; kāmaye—do I desire; nātha—O master; tat—that;
api—even; aham—I; kvacit—at any time; na—not; yatra—
where; yuṣmat—Your; caraṇa-ambuja—of the lotus feet;
āsavaḥ—the nectarean beverage; mahat-tama—of the great
devotees; antaḥ-hṛdayāt—from the core of the heart;
mukha—from the mouths; cyutaḥ—being delivered; vidhatsva
—give; karṇa—ears; ayutam—one million; eṣaḥ—this; me—my;
varaḥ—benediction.

O Lord, I do not want liberation. I receive no pleasure
in hearing any topic other than the glorious narrations
of the nectar of Your lotus feet. This nectar emanates
from the mouths of saintly persons from deep within
their hearts. I beg only for the benediction that You
will give me millions of ears with which I can always
hear the sweetness of Your pastimes.



Residence in heaven, sovereignty over the Earth, the
perfections of yoga and even liberation are all
insignificant for a devotee, as confirmed in Vṛtrāsura’s
prayer:

na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ

na sārva-bhaumaṁ na rasādhipatyam

na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā

samañjasa tvā virahayya kāṅkṣe


                          721
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

SB 6.11.25/BR 4.18

na—not; nāka-pṛṣṭham—the heavenly planets or Dhruvaloka;
na—nor; ca—also; pārameṣṭhyam—the planet on which Lord
Brahmā resides; na—nor; sārva-bhaumam—sovereignty of the
whole earthly planetary system; na—nor; rasā-ādhipatyam—
sovereignty of the lower planetary systems; na—nor;
yoga-siddhīḥ—eight kinds of mystic yogic power (aṇimā,
laghimā, mahimā, etc.); apunaḥ-bhavam—liberation from
rebirth in a material body; vā—or; samañjasa—O source of
all opportunities; tvā—You; virahayya—being separated
from; kāṅkṣe—I desire.

O source of all good fortune, I have no desire to have a
position of great sovereignty like that of Dhruva or
Brahmā, or rulership over the Earth; nor do I desire
aṇimā or any other mystic perfections. I do not even
want liberation, if it means to give up Your
association.



hari-bhakti-mahādevyāḥ sarvā muktyādi-siddhayaḥ

bhuktayaś cādbhutās tasyāś ceṭikāvad anuvratāḥ

Nārada-pañcarātra/Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.34/VG p.
124/BTV p. 68

Sālokya and the five kinds of muktis, the eight siddhis,
omniscience, the post of Indra and the post of Brahmā
are all maidservants of Hari-bhakti Mahādevī. So
wherever she is present, her maidservants like bhuktis,
siddhis, and muktis automatically appear there with
folded hands waiting for her orders.

Editorial note: For more ślokas on this topic, please
refer to (1) BPKG Biography, “The life history of
māyāvāda” (p. 481); (2) Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī’s book “Beyond Nirvāna”; (3) CC Ādi 7.65-150,
Mahāprabhu converting Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī and the
Māyāvādi sannyāsīs (a demolition of māyāvāda
philosophy).

Thus ends section 1) Māyāvādism

2) The Glories of Rūpa, Sanātana ana Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmīs

Rūpa and Sanātana are the recipients of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s mercy

kālena vṛndāvana-keli-vārtā lupteti tāṁ khyāpayituṁ
viśiṣya

kṛpāmṛtenābhiśiṣeca devas tatraiva rūpaṁ ca sanātanaṁ ca

Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka 9.38/CC Mad 19.119

kālena—in the course of time; vṛndāvana-keli-vārtā—
topics concerning the transcendental mellows of the
pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana; luptā—almost lost;
iti—thus; tām—all those; khyāpayitum—to enunciate;
viśiṣya—making specific; kṛpā-amṛtena—with the nectar of

                          722
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

mercy; abhiśiṣeca—sprinkled; devaḥ—the Lord; tatra—
there, in Vṛndāvana; eva—indeed; rūpam—Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī; ca—and; sanātanam—Sanātana Gosvāmī; ca—as well
as.

In the course of time, the tidings of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s divine
pastimes in Vṛndāvana had been lost. After first clearly
describing those pastimes, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
sprinkled His mercy on Rūpa and Sanātana and instructed
them to describe those pastimes again.

Rūpa Gosvāmī is glorified

priya-svarūpe dayita-svarūpe prema-svarūpe sahajābhirūpe

nijānurūpe prabhur eka-rūpe tatāna-rūpe sva-vilāsa-rūpe

Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka 9.39/CC Mad 19.121

priya-svarūpe—unto the person whose dear friend was
Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī; dayita-svarūpe—who was
very dear to Him (Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu); prema-
svarūpe—unto the replica of His personal ecstatic love;
sahaja-abhirūpe—who was naturally very beautiful; nija-
anurūpe—who exactly followed the principles of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu; prabhuḥ—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu;
eka-rūpe—to the one; tatāna—explained; rūpe—unto Rūpa
Gosvāmī; sva-vilāsa-rūpe—who describes the pastimes of
Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Indeed, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, whose dear friend was
Svarūpa Dāmodara, was the exact replica of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and he was very, very dear to the Lord.
Being the embodiment of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
ecstatic love, Rūpa Gosvāmī was naturally very
beautiful. He very carefully followed the principles
enunciated by the Lord, and he was a competent person to
explain properly the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu expanded His mercy to Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī just so he could render service by writing
transcendental literatures.



śrīmad-rūpa-padāmbhoja-dhūli-mātraika-sevinā

kenacid grathitā padyair mālāghreyā tad-āśrayaiḥ

Śrī Viśākhānandābhida-stotra 134 (Stavāvalī), Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī

śrīmad-rūpa—of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; padāmbhoja—of the
lotus feet; dhūlī—the dust; mātraika—only; sevinā—by a
servant; kenacid—by someone; grathitā—strung; padyaiḥ—
with verses; mālā—a garland; āghreyā—to be smelled; tad—
of Him; āśrayaiḥ—by they who have taken shelter.

A certain servant of the dust of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
lotus feet has strung this garland of verses glorifying
Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet. They who have taken shelter of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī will be able to appreciate the sweet
fragrance of this garland of verses.



                            723
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


abhīra-pallī-pati-putra-kāntā-dāsyābhilāṣāti-balāśva-
vāraḥ

śrī-rūpa-cintāmaṇi-sapti-saṁstho mat-svānta-durdānta-
hayecchur āstām

Śrī Stavāvalī, Abhīṣṭa-sūcanam 1, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī

abhīra—of the cowherds; pallī—of the village; pati—of
the king; putra—the son; kāntā—the beloved; dāsya—
service; abhilāṣa—desire; ati—great; bala—strong; aśva—
horse; vāraḥ—riding; śrī-rūpa—Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī;
cintāmaṇi—gemlike conceptions; sapti—seventy; saṁsthaḥ—
mount; mat—of me; svānta—the heart; durdānta—
uncontrollable; haya—that horse; icchuḥ—desiring; āstām—
let it be.

May the powerful horseman of my desire for the service
of the beloved of the son of the King of Vraja mount the
great horse of the manifold gemlike conceptions of Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī and subdue the untamed horse of my mind.
(or) Let the wild horse of my heart become like the
Cintāmaṇi-jewel horse of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s heart,
which carries as its rider the exclusive desire to serve
the gopa-prince’s beloved, Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



Without Rūpa Gosvāmī who could have opened the store
house of vraja-prema

yaṅ kali rūpa śarīra nā dharata?

taṅ vraja-prema-mahānidhi-kuṭharika, kaun kapāṭa
ughāḍata (1)

Yan Kali Rūpa, Mādhava dāsa/SGG p. 32

If Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī would not have appeared in this
age of Kali, then who could have opened the great store-
house of vraja-prema that contained the topmost love of
the vraja-gopīs? Who could have opened the door and
distributed its contents freely?

Caitanya Mahāprabhu empowered Rūpa Gosvāmī

vṛndāvanīyāṁ rasa-keli-vārtāṁ kālena luptāṁ nija-śaktim
utkaḥ

sañcārya rūpe vyatanot punaḥ sa prabhur vidhau prāg iva
loka-sṛṣṭim

CC Mad 19.1

vṛndāvanīyām—conducive to Vṛndāvana; rasa-keli-vārtām—
talks about the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; kālena—with the
course of time; luptām—lost; nija-śaktim—His personal
potency; utkaḥ—being eager; sañcārya—infusing; rūpe—to
Rūpa Gosvāmī; vyatanot—manifested; punaḥ—again; saḥ—He;
prabhu—Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; vidhau—unto Lord Brahmā;
prāk iva—as formerly; loka-sṛṣṭim—the creation of this
cosmic manifestation.

                          724
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Just as prior to the creation of this cosmic
manifestation, Śrī Kṛṣṇa enlightened the heart of Lord
Brahmā with the details of the creation and manifested
the Vedic knowledge, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, being anxious
to revive the Vṛndāvana pastimes, infused the heart of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī with spiritual potency. By this
potency, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī could revive the topics of
rasa-tattva conducive to realising Śrī Gandhārvikā-
Giridhārī’s pleasure pastimes in Vṛndāvana, which were
almost lost to memory. Thus He spread Kṛṣṇa
consciousness throughout the world.



Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī Vandanā

vairāgya-yug bhakti-rasaṁ prayatnair

apāyayan mām anabhīpsum andham

kṛpāmbudhir yaḥ para-duḥkha-duḥkhī

sanātanāṁ taṁ prabhum āśrayāmi

Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ 6, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī

vairāgya—renunciation; yug—endowed with, connected;
bhakti-rasam—bhakti-rasa; prayatnaiḥ—with great effort;
apāyayan—made to drink; mām—me; anabhīpsum—unwilling;
andham—blind; kṛpā—of mercy; ambudhiḥ—an ocean; yaḥ—who;
para—of others; duḥkha—by the unhappiness; duḥkhī—
unhappy; sanātanam—Sanātana Gosvāmī; tam—of him; prabhum
—the master; āśrayāmi—I take shelter.

I was unwilling to drink the nectar of bhakti-rasa
endowed with renunciation, but Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī,
being an ocean of mercy who cannot tolerate the
sufferings of others, induced me to drink it. Therefore,
I take shelter of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī as my śikṣa-
guru.37



Śrīla Raghunṭha dāsa Gosvāmī Prārthanā

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Socaka, Rādhā vallabha dāsa

śrī caitanya kṛpā haite, raghunātha dāsa cite, parama
vairāgya upajilā

dārā gṛha sampada, nija rājya adhipada, mala prāya
sakali tyajilā

By th mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the highest
degree of renunciation manifested within the heart of
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. He left his wife, house,
wealth, kingdom and prestige just like one rejects
stool.

chāppāna daṇḍa rātri dine, rādhā-kṛṣṇa guṇa gāne,
smaranete sadāi gonāya

cāri daṇḍa śuti thāke, svapne rādhā-kṛṣṇa dekhe, eka

                          725
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

tila vyartha nāhi yāya

He slept for only an hour-and-a-half a day, but while
taking rest he remained absorbed in līlā-smaraṇa
(remembering Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s loving pastimes). He never
wasted a single moment.

gaurāṅgera padām bhuje, rākhe mana bṛṅga rāje, svarūpere
sadāi dhyāya

abheda śrī rūpa sane, gati yāra sanātane, bhaṭṭa yuga
priya mahāśaya

First he would fix his mind on the nactarean lotus feet
of Śrī Gaurāṅga, then he would maditate on his seva and
svarūpā (his service to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in his spiritual
form as Rati mañjarī). His desire was one with that of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī—s. He strictly followed Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī, and was dear to both Gopal Bhaṭta and
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmīs.

sei raghunātha dāsa, pūrāha manerā āśa, ei mora baḍa
āche sādha

e rādhā vallabha dāsa, mane baḍa abhilāṣa, prabhu more
kara parasāda

O Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, please fulfill my one and
only desire. I, Rādhā Vallabha dāsa, intensely desire to
serve Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His eternal
associates.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī glorified by Śrī Kavi-
karṇapūra

yaḥ sarva-lokaika-mano-—bhirucyā

saubhāgya-bhūḥ kācid akṛṣṭa-pacyā

yatrāyam āropaṇa-tulya-kālaṁ

tat-prema-śākhī phalavān atulyaḥ

Śrī Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka 10.4/CC Antya 6. 264

yaḥ—who; sarva-loka—of all the devotees in Purī; eka—
foremost; manaḥ—of the minds; abhirucyā—by the
affection; saubhāgya-bhūḥ—the ground of good fortune;
kācit—indescribable; akṛṣṭa-pacyā—perfect without
tilling or perfect without practice; yatra—in which;
ayam—this; āropaṇa-tulya-kālam—at the same time as the
sowing of the seed; tat-prema-śākhī—a tree of the love
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; phala-vān—fruitful; atulyaḥ—
the matchless.

Because he is very pleasing to all the devotees,
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī easily became like the fertile
earth of good fortune in which it was suitable for the
seed of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu to be sown. At the same
time that the seed was sown, it grew into a matchless
tree of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s prema and produced
fruit.

Thus ends section 2) The Glories of Rūpa, Sanātana &

                          726
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

Raghunātha



3) Śrī Rūpa-śīkṣā (selected ślolkas)

(Śrī Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Madhya līlā, ch. 19)



mālī hañā kare sei bīja āropaṇa

śravaṇa-kīrtana-jale karaye secana

Mad 19.152/BPKG p. 396

mālī hañā—becoming a gardener; kare—does; sei—that; bīja
—seed of devotional service; āropaṇa—sowing; śravaṇa—of
hearing; kīrtana—of chanting; jale—with the water;
karaye—does; secana—sprinkling.

When a person receives the seed of devotional service,
he should take care of it by becoming a gardener and
sowing the seed in his heart. If he waters the seed
gradually by the process of śravaṇa and kīrtana [hearing
and chanting], the seed will begin to sprout.

upajiyā bāḍe latā “brahmāṇḍa— bhedi— yāya

“virajā—, “brahma-loka— bhedi— “para-vyoma— pāya

Mad 19.153

upajiyā—being cultivated; bāḍe—grows; latā—the creeper
of devotional service; brahmāṇḍa—the whole universe;
bhedi——penetrating; yāya—goes; virajā—the river between
the spiritual world and the material world; brahma-loka—
the Brahman effulgence; bhedi——penetrating; para-vyoma—
the spiritual sky; pāya—attains.

As one waters the bhakti-latā-bīja, the seed sprouts,
and the creeper gradually grows to the point where it
penetrates the walls of this universe and goes beyond
the Virajā River, lying between the spiritual world and
the material world. It reaches the Brahman effulgence
and, penetrating through that stratum, it reaches the
spiritual sky (para-vyoma).

tabe yāya tad-upari “goloka-vṛndāvana—

“kṛṣṇa-caraṇa—-kalpa-vṛkṣe kare ārohaṇa

CC Mad 19.154

tabe—thereafter; yāya—goes; tat-upari—to the top of that
(the spiritual sky); goloka-vṛndāvana—to Goloka
Vṛndāvana (the topmost realm of the spiritual world) ;
kṛṣṇa-caraṇa—of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; kalpa-vṛkṣe
—on the desire tree; kare ārohaṇa—climbs.

Being situated in one’s heart and being watered by
śravaṇa-kīrtana, the bhakti creeper grows more and more.
In this way it attains the shelter of the desire tree of
the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is eternally situated

                          727
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

in Goloka Vṛndāvana, the topmost realm of the spiritual
sky.



tāhāṅ vistārita hañā phale prema-phala

ihāṅ mālī sece nitya śravaṇādi jala

Mad 19.155

tāhāṅ—there; vistārita—expanded; hañā—becoming; phale—
produces; prema-phala—the fruit known as pure ecstatic
love of God; ihāṅ—in the material world, where the
devotee is still present; mālī—exactly like a gardener;
sece—sprinkles; nitya—regularly, without fail; śravaṇa-
ādi jala—the water of śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on.

The creeper of bhakti greatly expands in Goloka
Vṛndāvana and there it produces the fruit of kṛṣṇa-
prema. Although remaining in the material world, the
gardener regularly sprinkles the creeper with the water
of hearing and chanting.



Vaiṣṇava-aparādha is the greatest obstacle to bhakti

yadi vaiṣṇava-aparādha uṭhe hātī mātā

upāḍe vā chiṇḍe, tāra śukhi— yāya pātā

Mad 19.156

yadi—if; vaiṣṇava-aparādha—an offense at the feet of a
Vaiṣṇava; uṭhe—arises; hātī—an elephant; mātā—mad; upāḍe
—uproots; vā—or; chiṇḍe—breaks; tāra—of the creeper;
śukhi—shriveling up; yāya—goes; pātā—the leaf.

If the devotee commits an offense at the feet of a
Vaiṣṇava while cultivating the creeper of devotional
service in the material world, his offense is compared
to a mad elephant that uproots the creeper and breaks
it. In this way the leaves of the creeper are dried up.

Thus ends section 3) Śrī Rūpa-śikṣā



4) Śrī Sanātana-śīkṣā (selected ślokas)

(Śrī Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā, Ch. 20-23)



Sanātana Gosvāmī inquired from Mahāprabhu:

ke āmi, kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya

ihā nāhi jāni - kemane hita haya

Mad 20.102

ke āmi—who am I; kene—why; āmāya—unto me; jāre—give

                          728
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

trouble; tāpa-traya—the three kinds of miserable
conditions; ihā—this; nāhi jāni—I do not know; kemane—
how; hita—my (ultimate) welfare; haya—there is.

Who am I? Why do the threefold material miseries always
give me trouble? If I do not know this, how can I be
benefited and come to know the ultimate goal of life?

Mahāprabhu replied to Sanātana Gosvāmī:

jīvera “svarūpa— haya - kṛṣṇera “nitya-dāsa—

kṛṣṇera “taṭasthā-śakti— “bhedābheda-prakāśa—

sūryāṁśa-kiraṇa, yaiche agni-jvālā-caya

svābhāvika kṛṣṇera tina-prakāra “śakti— haya

kṛṣṇera svābhāvika tina-śakti-pariṇati

cic-chakti, jīva-śakti, āra māyā-śakti

CC Mad 20.108-109, 111

jīvera—of the living entity; svarūpa—the constitutional
position; haya—is; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nitya-dāsa—
eternal servant; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; taṭasthā—
marginal; śakti—potency; bheda-abheda—one and different;
prakāśa—manifestation; sūrya-aṁśa—part and parcel of the
sun; kiraṇa—a ray of sunshine; yaiche—as; agni-jvālā-
caya—molecular particle of fire; svābhāvika—naturally;
kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; tina-prakāra—three varieties;
śakti—energies; haya—there are; kṛṣṇera—of Lord Kṛṣṇa;
svābhāvika—natural; tina—three; śakti—of energies;
pariṇati—transformations; cit-śakti—spiritual potency;
jīva-śakti—spiritual sparks, living entities; āra—and;
māyā-śakti—illusory energy.

It is the living entity’s constitutional position to be
an eternal servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa because he is the
marginal energy of Kṛṣṇa and a manifestation
simultaneously one with and different from the Lord,
like a molecular particle of sunshine or fire. Kṛṣṇa has
three varieties of energy. In accordance with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s nature, those energies undergo transformations
and become known as His spiritual potency (cit-śakti),
His living entity potency (jīva-śakti) and His deluding
material potency (māyā-śakti).

Where there is light there is no darkness

kṛṣṇa - sūrya-sama, māyā haya andhakāra

yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa, tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra

CC Mad 22.31

kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sūrya-
sama—like the sun planet; māyā—the illusory energy; haya
—is; andhakāra—darkness; yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa—wherever Kṛṣṇa is
present; tāhāṅ—there; nāhi—not; māyāra—of māyā, or the
darkness of ignorance; adhikāra—the jurisdiction.

Kṛṣṇa is compared to sunshine, and māyā, His deluding

                          729
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

potency, is compared to darkness. Wherever there is
sunshine, there cannot be darkness. Wherever Kṛṣṇa is
present, māyā cannot be present or exert her influence.



However, the Jīva cannot revive his Kṛṣṇa consciousness
by his own efforts

māyā-mugdha jīvera nāhi svataḥ kṛṣṇa-jñāna

jīvere kṛpāya kailā kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa

Mad 20.122

māyā-mugdha—bewildered by the illusory energy; jīvera—of
the conditioned soul; nāhi—there is not; svataḥ—
automatically; kṛṣṇa-jñāna—knowledge of Kṛṣṇa; jīvere—
unto the conditioned soul; kṛpāya—out of mercy; kailā—
presented; kṛṣṇa—Lord Kṛṣṇa; veda-purāṇa—the Vedic
literature and the Purāṇas.

The conditioned soul, bewildered by māyā, cannot revive
his Kṛṣṇa consciousness by his own effort. Thus, out of
His causeless mercy, Śrī Kṛṣṇa compiled the Vedic
literature and its supplements, the Purāṇas.

śāstra-guru-ātma-rūpe āpanāre jānāna

kṛṣṇa mora prabhu, trātā—jīvera haya jñāna

CC Mad 20.123

śāstra-guru-ātma-rūpe—in the form of the Vedic
literature, Śrī Guru and the Supersoul; āpanāre jānāna—
reveals Himself; kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; mora—my; prabhu—Lord;
trātā—deliverer; jīvera—of the conditioned soul; haya—
there is; jñāna—knowledge.

The materially afflicted conditioned soul is enlightened
by Kṛṣṇa through the Vedic literature, Śrī Guru and the
Supersoul. Through these, he can realise that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is his eternal Lord and master and deliverer from the
clutches of māyā. Unless Śrī Kṛṣṇa reveals this
knowledge, the jīva cannot realise it (and become free).



One must follow a clearly defined sequence (krama) in
order to enter the realm of bhakti

kona bhāgye kona jīvera “śraddhā— yadi haya

tabe sei jīva “sādhu-saṅga— ye karaya

sādhu-saṅga haite haya “śravaṇa-kīrtana—

sādhana-bhaktye haya “sarvānartha-nivartana—

anartha-nivṛtti haile bhaktye “niṣṭhā— haya

niṣṭhā haite śravaṇādye “ruci— upajaya

ruci haite bhaktye haya “āsakti— pracura

                          730
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


āsakti haite citte janme kṛṣṇe prīty-aṅkura

sei “bhāva— gāḍha haile dhare “prema—-nāma

sei premā “prayojana— sarvānanda-dhāma

CC Mad 23.9-13/PP p . 83

kona bhāgye—by some good fortune; kona jīvera—of some
living entity; śraddhā yadi haya—if there is faith; tabe
—then; sei jīva—that living entity; sādhu-saṅga—
association with devotees; ye—certainly; karaya—makes;
sādhu-saṅga haite—from association with devotees; haya—
there is; śravaṇa-kīrtana—hearing, chanting and so on;
sādhana-bhaktye—by devotional service; haya—there is;
sarva—all; anartha-nivartana—disappearance of unwanted
things. anartha-nivṛtti—disappearance of all unwanted
contamination; haile—when there is; bhaktye—in
devotional service; niṣṭhā—firm faith; haya—there is;
niṣṭhā haite—from such firm faith; śravaṇa-ādye—in
hearing, chanting and so on; ruci—taste; upajaya—
awakens. ruci haite—from such a taste; bhaktye—in
devotional service; haya—there is; āsakti—attachment;
pracura—deep; āsakti haite—from attachment; citte—within
the heart; janme—appears; kṛṣṇe—for Kṛṣṇa; prīti-aṅkura—
the seed of bhāva; sei bhāva—that bhāva; gāḍha haile—
when it becomes intensified; dhare—takes; “prema— nāma—
whose name is prema; sei premā—that pure love of God;
prayojana—the ultimate goal of life; sarva-ānanda-dhāma—
the abode of all pleasure.

If, by good fortune, a jīva develops faith (śraddhā) in
Kṛṣṇa, he begins to associate with pure devotees (sādhu-
saṅga), and in that association he engages in hearing
and chanting. By following sādhana-bhakti he becomes
free from all anarthas (anartha-nivṛtti) and advances to
the stage of firm faith (niṣṭhā). Thereafter, taste
(ruci) awakens for bhajana (śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on).
After ruci, āsakti (deep attachment for the object of
bhajana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa) arises and when āsakti thickens, the
seed of of bhāva (deep affection, the first stage of
love of God) is born in the heart. When bhāva is
intensified, it becomes prema (love of God). This prema
is the ultimate goal and the abode of all bliss.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: It is quite impossible for
those who transgress this sequence to enter the realm of
bhakti. Thus, those who want to enter this realm while
neglecting the limbs of vaidhī sādhana-bhakti are in all
respects unrestrained and outside the conclusions of
śāstra. They have no relation at all with śuddha-bhakti.
(PP p. 84)

Thus ends section 4) Śrī Sanātana-śikṣā



5) Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda-saṁvāda

(The discussion between Mahāprabhu and Rāmānanda Rāya)




                           731
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

The ocean of truth and the raincloud of mercy nourish
each other

sañcārya rāmābhidha-bhakta-meghe

sva-bhakti-siddhānta-cayāmṛtāni

gaurābdhir etair amunā vitīrṇais

taj-jñatva-ratnālayatāṁ prayāti

CC Mad 8.1

sañcārya—by empowering; rāma-abhidha—of the name Rāma;
bhakta-meghe—in the cloud-like devotee; sva-bhakti—of
His own devotional service; siddhānta—of conclusions;
caya—all collections; amṛtāni—nectar; gaura-abdhiḥ—the
ocean known as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; etaiḥ—by these;
amunā—by the cloud known as Rāmānanda Rāya; vitīrṇaiḥ—
distributed; tat-jñatva—of knowledge of devotional
service; ratna-ālayatām—the quality of being an ocean
containing valuable jewels; prayāti—achieved.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is known as Gaurāṅga, is
the ocean of all conclusive knowledge in devotional
service. He empowered Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, who may be
likened to a cloud of devotional service. This cloud was
filled with the water of all the conclusive purports of
devotional service and was empowered by the ocean to
spread this water over the sea of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu Himself. Thus the ocean of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu became filled with the jewels of the
knowledge of pure devotional service.



Mahāprabhu enquired: What is the ultimate goal (sādhya)
and process (sādhana)?

sādhya-vastu sādhana vinu keha nāhi pāya

kṛpā kari— kaha, rāya, pābāra upāya

CC Mad 8.197/PP p. 84

sādhya-vastu—the goal of life; sādhana vinu—without
practicing the process; keha nāhi pāya—no one achieves;
kṛpā kari——very mercifully; kaha—please explain; rāya—My
dear Rāmānanda Rāya; pābāra upāya—the means of
achieving.

The goal of life (sādhya) cannot be achieved unless one
accepts the appropriate process (sādhana). Now, being
merciful upon Me, please explain the means by which this
goal can be attained.



Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya replied: One should do bhajana in the
mood of the gopīs (gopī-bhāva) and under their guidance
(in ānugatya)

rādhā-kṛṣṇera līlā ei ati gūḍhatara


                          732
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

dāsya-vātsalyādi-bhāve nā haya gocara

sabe eka sakhī-gaṇera ihāṅ adhikāra

sakhī haite haya ei līlāra vistāra

sakhī vinā ei līlā puṣṭa nāhi haya

sakhī līlā vistāriyā, sakhī āsvādaya

sakhī vinā ei līlāya anyera nāhi gati

sakhī-bhāve ye tāṅre kare anugati

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-kuñja-sevā-sādhya sei pāya

sei sādhya pāite āra nāhika upāya

CC Mad 8. 202-205/PP p. 84/BPKG p. 473

rādhā-kṛṣṇera līlā—the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; ei—
this is; ati—very much; gūḍhatara—more confidential;
dāsya—of servitude; vātsalya-ādi—and of parental love,
etc.; bhāve—in the moods; nā haya—is not; gocara—
appreciated. sabe—only; eka—one; sakhī-gaṇera—of the
gopīs; ihāṅ—in this; adhikāra—qualification; sakhī—the
gopīs; haite—from; haya—is; ei līlāra—of these pastimes;
vistāra—the expansion; sakhī vinā—without the gopīs; ei
līlā—these pastimes; puṣṭa—nourished; nāhi haya—are
never; sakhī—the gopīs; līlā—the pastimes; vistāriyā—
expanding; sakhī—the gopīs; āsvādaya—taste this mellow;
sakhī vinā—without the gopīs; ei līlāya—in these
pastimes; anyera—of others; nāhi—there is not; gati—
entrance; sakhī-bhāve—in the mood of the gopīs; ye—
anyone who; tāṅre—the gopīs; kare—does; anugati—
following; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; kuñja-sevā—of
service in the kuñjas, or pleasure bowers of Vṛndāvana;
sādhya—the goal; sei pāya—he gets; sei—that; sādhya—
achievement; pāite—to receive; āra—other; nāhika—there
is not; upāya—means.

The pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are very confidential
and cannot be understood through the mellows of
servitude, fraternity or parental affection. In truth,
only the gopīs have the right to appreciate these
transcendental pastimes, and it is only by them that
these pastimes can be expanded. Without the gopīs, these
pastimes between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa cannot be nourished.
Only by their cooperation are such pastimes broadcast.
It is their prerogative to taste rasa (the mellows of
love). One cannot enter into these pastimes without the
help of the gopīs. Only one who does bhajana in the mood
of the gopīs, following in their footsteps, can attain
the sādhya or ultimate objective of serving Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the leafy bowers of Vṛndāvana. Only then
can one understand the conjugal love between Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa. There is no other procedure.



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: By considering the gradations
of sādhya-vastu (ultimate objective) we find that the
prema of Śrīmatī Rādhājī for Kṛṣṇa is the crest-jewel.
Furthermore, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has explained that

                          733
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

the sādhya for the living entities is Rādhā-dāsyam,
service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā imbued with pārakīya-bhāva.
In order to obtain this sādhya-vastu, proper sādhana is
absolutely necessary.



Therefore one should accept the mood of the gopīs in
their service

ataeva gopī-bhāva kari aṅgīkāra

rātri-dina cinte rādhā-kṛṣṇera vihāra

siddha-dehe cinti— kare tāhāṅ niṣevana

sakhī-bhāve pāya rādhā-kṛṣṇera caraṇa

CC Mad 8.228-229/PP p. 85/ BPKG p. 473

ataeva—therefore; gopī-bhāva—the loving mood of the
gopīs; kari—making; aṅgīkāra—acceptance; rātri-dina—day
and night; cinte—one meditates; rādhā-kṛṣṇera—of Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa; vihāra—the pastimes; siddha-dehe—in the
perfected spiritual body; cinti——by meditating; kare—
does; tāhāṅ—in the spiritual world; niṣevana—service;
sakhī-bhāve—in mood of the gopīs; pāya—gets; rādhā-
kṛṣṇera—of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; caraṇa—the lotus feet.

Therefore one should accept the mood of the gopīs in
their service. In such a transcendental mood, one should
always think of the pastimes of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
After meditating on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and Their pastimes
for a long time in the internally conceived spiritual
body (siddha-deha), one attains the opportunity to serve
the lotus feet of Rāhā-Kṛṣṇa as one of the vraja-gopīs.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Essentially, the gist of the
matter is that the love-laden līlā of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is so
confidential and so full of mysteries that it is
imperceptible, even for those in the moods of dāsya and
vātsalya. Only the sakhīs are eligible for this.
Therefore, no one can attain the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā or the kuñja-sevā of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala by
sādhana without accepting the ānugatya of the sakhīs
(being under their guidance). Thus the only means of
attaining this supreme sādhya is meditation on the līlās
of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa throughout the day and night by the
internally conceived siddha-deha in the mood of the
sakhīs and under their guidance. (PP p. 85)



Thus ends section 5) Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda-saṁvāda



6) Ornamental ślokas by Śrīla Rupa Gosvāmī

(From Śrī Stava-māla, Citra-kavitva)



rasāsāra-susārorur asurāriḥ sasāra saḥ

                          734
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


saṁsārāsir asau rāse suriraṁsuḥ sa-sārasaḥ

rasa—of nectar; āsāra—shower; susāra—broad; uruḥ—thighs;
asura—of the demons; ariḥ—the enemy; sasāra—went; saḥ—
He; saṁsāra—for the cycle of repeated birth and death;
asiḥ—a sword; asau—He; rāse—in the rāsa dance;
suriraṁsuḥ—filled with amorous desires; sa—with; sārasaḥ
—a lotus.

The Lord, who is a shower of nectar, whose thighs are
broad, who kills the demons, and who with a sword cuts
the cycle of repeated birth and death, holding a lotus
flower, and filled with transcendental amorous desire,
entered the rāsa dance.

carcoru-rocir uccorā ruciro “raṁ carācare

caurācāro “cirāc cīraṁ rucā cārur acūcurat

carcā—with ointments; uru—very; rociḥ—splendid; ucca—a
broad; urā—chest; ruciraḥ—handsome; aram—very; cara-
acare—in the world of moving and non-moving beings;
caura—of theft; ācāraḥ—activities; acirāc—quickly; cīram
—the garments; rucā—with splendor; cāruḥ—handsome;
acūcurat—stole.

The Lord, who is splendidly anointed with sandal paste,
whose chest is broad, and who is the most handsome
person in the world of moving and nonmoving creatures,
became the thief that gracefully stole the gopīs—
garments.



dhare dharādhara-dharaṁ dhārādhara-dhurā-rudham

dhīra-dhīr ārarādhādhi-rodhaṁ rādhā dhurandharam

dhare—on the hill; dharādhara—of the hill; dharam—the
holder; dhārādhara—of the rainclouds; dhurā—the burden;
rudham—holding back; dhīra—steady; dhīḥ—at heart;
ārarādha—worshiped; ādhi—distress at heart; rodham—
stopping; rādhā—Rādhā; dhurandharam—the protector of the
devotees.

On the hill earnest Rādha worshiped the Supreme Lord,
who lifted Govardhana Hill, checked the devastating
rain, and stopped the anguish of the devotees.



ninunnānonanaṁ nūnaṁ nānūnonnānano “nuniḥ

nānenānaṁ ninun nenaṁ nānaun nānānano nanu

ninunnānonanam—Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the killer of Śakaṭāsura;
nūnam—certainly; nānūna—completely; unna—full of tears;
ānanaḥ—face; anuniḥ—trying to pacify; nānā—various;
inānam—of the demigods; ninun—impelled; na—not; inam—Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; na—not; anaun—offered prayers; nānā-ānanaḥ—many-
headed Lord Brahmā; nanu—indeed.

Did not Lord Brahmā, tears streaming down his face,

                          735
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

recite many prayers, trying to pacify Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
killer of Śakaṭāsura?

Thus ends section 6) Ornamental Ślokas by Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī




7) Mahā-prasāda



The Glories of Mahā-prasāda

naivedyaṁ jagadīśasya annapānādikañ ca yat

bhakṣyābhakṣa-vicāraś ca nāsti tad-bhakṣaṇe dvijāḥ

HBV 9.403

O brāhmaṇas, those foodstuffs and beverages that are
offered to Kṛṣṇa for His pleasure are transcendental and
one should never try to distinguish them as eatables and
non-eatables.

brahmavan nirvikāram hi yathā viṣṇus tathaiva tat

vikāraṁ ye prakurvanti bhakṣaṇe tad dvijātayaḥ

kuṣṭha-vyādhi-samāyuktāḥ putra-dāra-vivarjitāḥ

nirayaṁ yānti te viprā yasmān nāvartate punaḥ

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 9.404,405

O brāhmaṇas, the offerings to Śrī Hari are
transcendental, incorruptible, and nondifferent from
Viṣṇu. Those who have a perverted mentality, and who
thinks them to be material will develop leprosy, be
devoid of children, wife, and family, and go to the
deepest darkest regions of hell from which he will never
return.

kukkurasya mukhād bhraṣṭaṁ tad-annaṁ patate yadi

brāhmaṇena 'pi bhoktavyaṁ itareṣām tu kā kathā

Skanda Purāṇa, Puri Māhātmya 2.2.38.17

Mahā-prasāda destroys all sins. Even if it has been
touched by the lips of a dog or has fallen on the
ground, it will still be relished by brāhmaṇas. Then
what to speak if it is touched by others.



aśucir vāpy anācāro manasā pāpam ācaran

prāpti-mātreṇa bhoktavyaṁ nātra kāryā vicāraṇā

Skanda Purāṇa, Puri Māhātmya 2.5.3.14


                          736
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Even if one is in unclean state of body or mind, engaged
in irreligious acts, he should eat mahā-prasāda whenever
it is available to him. There is no need to deliberate
on this.

Prasādam remnants from the lotus mouth of Śrī Kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa-vaktrāmbujocchiṣṭaṁ prasādaṁ paramādarāt

dattaṁ dhaniṣṭhayā devi kim āneṣyāmi te 'grataḥ

Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ 48

kṛṣṇa—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; vaktra—mouth; ambuja—lotus;
ucchiṣṭam—left; prasādam—mercy, offered food; param—
great; ādarāt—with respect; dattam—placed; dhaniṣṭhayā—
by Dhaniṣṭhā; devi—O queen; kim—whether?; āneṣyāmi—I
will bring; te—of You; agrataḥ—into the presence.

O Devi! When will I place before You the prasādam
remnants from the lotus mouth of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, that were
most diligently brought to me by Dhaniṣṭhā?

When will I lovingly feed You ambrosial foodstuffs mixed
with the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips?

nānā-vidhair amṛta-sāra-rasāyanais taiḥ

kṛṣṇa-prasāda-militair iha bhojya-peyaiḥ

hā kuṅkumāṅgi lalitādi-sakhī-vṛtā tvaṁ

yatnān mayā kim u tarām upabhojanīyā

Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ 49

nānā—various; vidhaiḥ—kinds; amṛta—of nectar; sāra—
better; rasāyanaiḥ—with nectar; taiḥ—with them; kṛṣṇa—of
Lord Kṛṣṇa; prasāda—with the prasādam; militaiḥ—mixed;
iha—here; bhojya—to be eaten; peyaiḥ—to be drank; hā—O!;
kuṅkuma-aṅgi—girl whose limbs are decorted with kuṅkuma;
lalitādi—headed by Lalitā; sakhī—by the gopī friends;
vṛtā—accompanied; tvam—You; yatnān—with great endeavor;
mayā—by me ; kim—whether?; u—indeed; tarām—more;
upabhojanīyā—to be enjoyed.

O Kuṅkumāṅgi (She whose limbs are anointed with
kuṅkuma), when with great care will I lovingly feed You,
Lalitā, and Your other sakhīs nectar drinks and
varieties of ambrosial foodstuffs mixed with the nectar
of Kṛṣṇa’s lips?



The prasādam tasted millions upon millions of times
better than nectar

koṭi-amṛta-svāda pāñā prabhura camatkāra

sarvāṅge pulaka, netre vahe aśru-dhāra

CC Antya 16.93

koṭi—millions upon millions; amṛta—nectar; svāda—taste;

                             737
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

pāñā—getting; prabhura—of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu;
camatkāra—great satisfaction; sarva-aṅge—all over the
body; pulaka—standing of the hair; netre—from the eyes;
vahe—flows; aśru-dhāra—a stream of tears.

To Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu the prasādam tasted millions
upon millions of times better than nectar, and thus He
was fully satisfied. The hair all over His body stood on
end, and incessant tears flowed from His eyes.



Where has such a taste in this prasādam come from? Has
it been touched by the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips?

ei dravye eta svāda kāhāṅ haite āila?

kṛṣṇera adharāmṛta ithe sañcārila—

CC Antya 16.94

ei dravye—in these ingredients; eta—so much; svāda—
taste; kāhāṅ—where; haite—from; āila—has come; kṛṣṇera—
of Lord Kṛṣṇa; adhara-amṛta—nectar from the lips; ithe—
in this; sañcārila—has spread.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu considered, “Where has such a
taste in this prasādam come from? Certainly it is due to
its having been touched by the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips.”



Your transcendental lips vanquish shame, religion and
patience, especially in women. Indeed, they inspire
madness in the minds of all.

tanu-mana karāya kṣobha, bāḍāya surata-lobha,

harṣa-śokādi-bhāra vināśaya

pāsarāya anya rasa, jagat kare ātma-vaśa,

lajjā, dharma, dhairya kare kṣaya

nāgara, śuna tomāra adhara-carita

mātāya nārīra mana, jihvā kare ākarṣaṇa,

vicārite saba viparīta

CC Antya 16.122-123

tanu—body; mana—mind; karāya—cause; kṣobha—agitation;
bāḍāya—increase; surata-lobha—lusty desires for
enjoyment; harṣa—of jubilation; śoka—lamentation; ādi—
and so on; bhāra—burden; vināśaya—destroy; pāsarāya—
cause to forget; anya rasa—other tastes; jagat—the whole
world; kare—make; ātma-vaśa—under their control; lajjā—
shame; dharma—religion; dhairya—patience; kare kṣaya—
vanquish; nāgara—O lover; śuna—hear; tomāra—Your; adhara
—of lips; carita—the characteristics; mātāya—madden;
nārīra—of women; mana—mind; jihvā—tongue; kare ākarṣaṇa—
attract; vicārite—considering; saba—all; viparīta—
opposite.

                          738
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


“My dear lover,” Lord Caitanya said in the mood of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, “let Me describe some of the
characteristics of Your transcendental lips. They
agitate the mind and body of everyone, they increase
lusty desires for enjoyment, they destroy the burden of
material happiness and lamentation, and they make one
forget all material tastes. The whole world falls under
their control. They vanquish shame, religion and
patience, especially in women. Indeed, they inspire
madness in the minds of all women. Your lips increase
the greed of the tongue and thus attract it. Considering
all this, We see that the activities of Your
transcendental lips are always paradoxical.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Dhairya (patience) and lajja
(shame) are what obstructs a gopī from meeting Kṛṣṇa.
Being afraid of what others will say if she goes to Him,
or desiring to go to Him in such a way that no one will
know of it - both of these are vanquished when one takes
His remnants. Taking His prasādam remnants clears the
way and then one will not care for anything, whether it
is day or night or anything. These remnants have so much
potency.



Upon attaining Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s prasāda all sufferings are
dispelled

prasāde sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir asyopajāyate

prasanna-cetaso hy āśu buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate

SBG 2.65

prasāde—on attainment of mercy; hāniḥ—diminished,
dispelled; sarva duḥkhānām—all miseries; upajāyate—takes
place; buddhiḥ—(the) intelligence; asya—of such a man;
prasanna-cetasaḥ—whose mind is content; hi—certainly;
āśu—very soon; paryavatiṣṭhate—becomes fixed in all
respects, properly situated.

Upon attaining Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s prasāda remnants, all
sufferings are dispelled. As a result, one’s
consciousness becomes clear and enlivened, and one’s
intelligence becomes properly fixed (on attaining one’s
desired spiritual goal).



One who does not have sukṛti cannot relish mahā-prasādam

mahā-prasāde govinde nāma-brahmaṇi vaiṣṇave

svalpa-puṇyavatāṁ rājan viśvāso naiva jayate

Skanda-Purāṇa/JD Ch. 6/CC Antya 16.96 pt

Those who do not possess sufficient pious credit
(sukṛti) will not have faith in mahā-prasādam, in Śrī
Govinda, in the Holy Name, or in the Vaiṣṇavas.

Prasādam-sevā

                          739
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Gītāvalī

(bhāi-re!) śarīra avidyā-jāla, jaḍendriya tāhe kāla,

jīve phele viṣaya-sāgare

tāra madhye jihvā ati, lobhamaya sudurmati,

tāke jetā kaṭhina saṁsāre (1)



kṛṣṇa baḍa dayāmaya, karibāre jihvā jaya,

sva-prasāda-anna dila bhāi

sei annāmṛta pāo, rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-gāo,

preme ḍāko caitanya-nitāi (2)

O brothers! This material body is a place of ignorance,
and the senses are a network of paths leading to death.
The senses cast the soul into this ocean of material
sense-enjoyment, and of all the senses, the tongue is
most voracious and uncontrollable; it is very difficult
to conquer the tongue in this world. O brothers! Lord
Kṛṣṇa is very kind to us and has given us such nice
prasāda just to control the tongue. Now let us take this
prasāda to our full satisfaction and glorify Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and in love call for the help of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Nityānanda Prabhu.

Thus ends section 7) Mahā Prasāda




8) Tulasī-devī



Tulasī-praṇāma

(oṁ) vṛndāyai tulasī-devyai priyāyai keśavasya ca

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-prade devī satyavatyai namo namaḥ

Arcana-dīpikā p. 37

vṛndāyai—unto Vṛndā; tulasī-devyai—unto Tulasī Devī;
priyāyai— who is dear; keśavasya—to Lord Keśava; ca—and;
kṛṣṇa-bhakti— devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa; prade—
who bestows; devi—O goddess; satya-vatyai—unto Satyavatī
(or unto she who possesses the highest truth); namaḥ
namaḥ—repeated obeisances.

I offer praṇāma time and again unto Tulasī-devi, also
known as Vṛndā and Satyavatī, who is very dear to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and who bestows kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

Turning ordinary water into sacred, Gaṅgā water (for
bathing Tulasī, etc.)

                             740
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


gaṅge ca yamune caiva godāvarī sarasvatī

narmade sindho kāverī jale “smin sannidhim kuru

BR p. 411/Arcana-dīpikā pp. 20, 39

gaṅgā, yamunā, godāvarī, sarasvatī, narmadā, sindhuḥ,
kāverī rivers; jale—water; asmin—in this; sannidhim—your
residence; kuru—make.

O holy rivers, kindly come and reside in this water.



The mantra for bathing Tulasī devī

govinda-vallabhāṁ devīṁ bhakti-caitanya-kāriṇīṁ

snāpayāmi jagad-dhātrīṁ kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāyinīm

BRSB p. 65/Arcana-dīpikā p. 37

govinda vallabhāṁ—Govinda’s beloved; devīm—Vṛnda devī;
bhakti caitanya—the life of bhakti; kārinīm—(she) is the
cause; snāpayāmi—let me give bath; jagad-dhātrīm—mother,
nurse, one who nourishes; kṛṣṇa-prema—Kṛṣṇa prema;
prādayinīm—she who bestows.

O Devi, I am bathing you who are very dear to Govinda,
who gives life to the devotees [or who is the life of
bhakti], who are the mother of the entire world and who
bestows kṛṣṇa-prema.



The mantra for picking tulasī leaves and mañjarīs

tulasy amṛta-janmāsi sadā tvaṁ keśava-priyā

keśavārthe cinomi tvāṁ varadā bhava śobhane

BR p. 422/Arcana-dīpikā p. 38

O Tulasī born of nectar. You are always very dear to
Lord Keśava. I am picking your leaves only for the sake
of His worship. O bestower of benedictions, O beautiful
one, please bestow spiritual benedictions upon me.



After picking leaves, recite the following prayer
begging for forgiveness:

cayanodbhava-duḥkhaṁ ca yad hṛdi tava vartate

tat kṣamasva jagan-mātaḥ vṛndā-devi namo —stu te

Arcana-dīpikā p. 38

O mother of the universe, please forgive me if I have
caused you any pain by picking your leaves. O Vṛnda-
devī, I offer my humble obeisances unto you.


                          741
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017



Tulasi pūjā-mantra

nirmitā tvaṁ purā devair arcitā tvaṁ surāsuraiḥ

tulasi hara me —vidyāṁ pūjāṁ gṛhna namo —stu te

Śri Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 8.1.101/BR p. 422

pūjā—for worship; mantraḥ—the mantra; nirmitā—created;
tvam—you; purā—before; devaiḥ—by the demigods; arcitā—
worshiped; tvam—you; surāsuraiḥ—by the suras and asuras;
tulasi—O Tulasī; hara—please remove; me—of me; pāpam—the
sin; pūjām—worship; gṛhṇa—please accept; namaḥ—
obeisances; astu—are; te—unto you.

You were created in ancient times by the divinities and
are worshipped by demigods and demons alike. O Tulasī,
my obeisance unto you. Kindly dispel my ignorance and
accept my worship.



Tulasī-praṇāma

yā dṛṣṭā nikhilāgha-saṅgha-śamanī spṛṣtā vapuḥ pāvanī

rogānām abhivanditā nirasanī siktā —ntaka-trāsinī

pratyāsatti-vidhāyinī bhagavataḥ kṛṣṇasya saṁropitā

nyastā tac-caraṇe subhakti-phala-dā tasyai tulasyai
namaḥ

HBV 9.104/BR p.423

praṇāma-vākyam—words for bowing down; avantī-khaṇḍe—in
the Avanti-khaṇḍa; yā—who; dṛṣṭā—seen; nikhilāgha—all
sins; saṅgha—multitude; śamanī—pacifying; spṛṣṭā—
touched; vapuḥ-pāvanī—purifying the body; rogāṇām—of
diseases; abhivanditā—bowed down; nirasinī—expellling;
siktā—watered; antaka—death; trāsinī—terrifying;
pratyāsatti-vidhāyinī—giving nearness; bhagavataḥ—to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛṣṇasya—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
samropitā—planted; nyastā—placed; tāt-caraṇe—at His
feet; vimukti-phaladā—giving the fruit of liberation;
tasyai—to her; tulasyai—Tulasī-devī; namaḥ—obeisances.

O Tulasī, I offer my respectful obeisances unto you.
Simply by seeing you all sins are destroyed. Simply by
touching you one’s body is purified. By offering
obeisances unto you all diseases are driven away. By
offering water unto you the fear of death is dispelled.
By planting you one obtains proximity to the Lord. By
offering you unto the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one
obtains a special type of devotion, the rare fruit of
prema-bhakti.

9.1) Vedānta-sūtra ślokas



1. athāto brahma-jijñāsā — Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.1/BPKG p.

                            742
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

217

atha—now; ataḥ—therefore; brahma-jijñāsā—inquire into
the Absolute Truth.

Now (that you have a human body) you should inquire into
Brahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

2. janmādy asya yataḥ — Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.2/BPKG p.
217,282 etc.

janma-ādi—creation, maintenance and destruction; asya—of
the manifested universes (the material world); yataḥ—
from whom.

That Brahman (the Supreme Spirit) is He from whom the
creation, sustenance and destruction of the manifested
universes arise.

3. śāstra-yonitvāt sāmānvaya — Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.3/BPKG
p. 217

śāstra—the Vedic scriptures; yoni—source; tvat—on
account of; samanvaya—all conclusions.

To know the Absolute Truth one should study śāstra, but
without taking shelter of and hearing from a bona fide
Guru, śāstra will not help at all. Because Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the source of all knowledge in the form of the revealed
scriptures, He (and His direct representative, Śrī Guru)
is conversant with all their conclusions.

4. ānanda-mayo —bhyāsāt — Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12/BPKG pp.
47,85,195 etc.

ānandamaya—consisting of bliss; abhyāsāt—by nature.

By nature, the Supreme Lord is blissful.

5. api samrādhane pratyakṣānumānābhyām

Vedānta-sūtra 3.2.24/BPKG pp. 49, 85, 217 etc.

api—certainly; samrādhane—in worship; pratyakṣa—by the
Śruti-śāstra; anumānābhyām—by the Smṛti-śāstra.

Through worship one can have darśana in the heart as
well as direct darśana of the Supreme Truth.

6. arūpad eva hi tat-pradhānatvāt om

Vedānta-sūtra 3.2.14/BPKG p. 448, 508 etc.

Appearing as if not having a form.

7. na pratīkena hi saḥ - Vedānta-sūtra 4.1.4/BPKG p.
195,448,450

Śrī vigraha is not a symbol of Brahman, this vigraha is
Brahman Himself.

8. tarkāpratiṣṭhānāt — Vedānta-sūtra 2.1.11

The Absolute Truth can never be established through

                          743
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

argument and logic is not the basis for understanding
anything transcendental [JD ch. 13,19]

9. anāvṛttiḥ śabdād anāvṛttiḥ śabdāt - Vedānta-sūtra
4.4.22/BPKG pp. 48,85 etc.

One obtains liberation and prema through śabda. [śabda
here refers to śabda-brahma, transcendental sound
vibration; paramānanda-svarūpa Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name is that
very transcendental śabda-brahma]



9.2) Single-line Aphorisms

1. sarve sukhino bhavantu

sarve—everyone; sukhino—happy; bhavantu—become.

Let everyone be happy.

2. yasmin tuṣṭe jagat tuṣṭam

yasmin—to Him; tuṣṭe—satisfied; jagat—the whole world;
tuṣṭam—satisfied.

If Kṛṣṇa is satisfied, everyone is satisfied.

3. bhāva-grāhī janārdana

bhāva—spiritual mood or intention; grāhī—who is
influenced; janārdana—Lord Kṛṣṇa, the maintainer of all
people.

The Lord accepts the essence of a devotee’s attitude,
his inner mood rathet than his external actions.

4. tamasi mā jyotir gamaḥ

Don—t remain in this darkness of ignorance (or material
existence), go to the light (of spiritual life, of pure
bhakti).

5. ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛttiḥ

Ātyantika—ultimate; duḥkha—sufferings; nivṛttiḥ—
stopping.

The aim of human life should be to put an end to the
ultimate sufferings (janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi: birth,
death, old age, and disease).

6. maunaṁ sammati lakṣaṇam

Silence is the sign of agreement.

7. punar mūṣiko bhava

punar—again; mūṣikaḥ—a mouse; bhava—become.

“Again Become a Mouse.” (One who turns against his
Gurudeva, turns back into a mouse).

8. guṇa-grāhī — doṣam adarśi

                             744
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


guṇa-grāhī—accepting good qualities; doṣam adarśi—
overlooking faults.

The devotee, like a honeybee, focuses on the good
qualities of others and overlooks their faults. (See CC
Ādi 8.62)

9. ātmavan manyate jagat

ātmavan—just like himself; manyate— one thinks; jagat—
the whole world.

Everyone thinks of others according to his own position
or preconceived notions; one sees the world just as one
sees himself.

10. mitaṁ ca sāraṁ ca vaco hi vāgmitā iti

“Essential truth spoken concisely is true eloquence.”
(CC Ādi 1.106)

11. satyaṁ brūyāt priyaṁ brūyāt nā brūyāt satyam apriyam

satyam—truth; brūyāt—speak; priyam—pleasing; brūyāt—
speak; nā—do not; brūyāt—speak; satyam—truth; apriyam—
not pleasing.

If one speaks the truth, he should speak it palatably.
One should not speak unpalatable truth. The truth should
be spoken sweetly, not harshly.

- apriyaṁ satyaṁ brūyāt

BPKG rephrasing of the above




Even if the truth is unpalatable, still one (a Vaiṣṇava)
should speak it.

- satyaṁ śivaṁ sundaram

BV Vamana Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s reconciliation of the above
two

The truth is always auspicious and beautiful.

12. yāvad artha-prayojanam

yāvad—as much as; artha—economic conditions; prayojanam—
necessities.

One should accept only as much material necessities as
needed for attaining the supreme goal.

13. gavayā-dhanavān, dhānya-dhanavān

gavayā—cows; dhanavān—possessing wealth; dhānya—grains;
dhanavān—possessing wealth.

One who has cows and grains possesses real wealth.

                             745
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017




14. hariṁ vinā mṛtiṁ na taranti

harim—Śrī Hari; vinā—without His grace; mṛtim—death; na—
not able; taranti—to cross over.

No one can overcome cruel death without the mercy of Śrī
Hari.

15. ati bhakti corera lakṣaṇa - Too much devotion is a
symptom of a thief.



16. saralatā hi vaiṣṇavatā - Simplicity is Vaiṣṇavism

saralatā—simplicity (freedom from mental duplicity)



Thus end sections 9.1 & 9.2 - Vedānta-sūtras and
Aphorisms



10) Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā (1, 29 - 56)



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

paramaḥ īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Controller, that is to say
the controller of all other controllers, and the
original source of all incarnations; kṛṣṇaḥ — Vrajendra-
nandana Kṛṣṇa (is); sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ — His body
is endowed with the three potencies of existence,
knowledge and bliss (sandhinī, saṁvit and hlādinī);
anādiḥ — without a beginning; ādiḥ — the original form
of all else; govindaḥ — (He is) known as Govinda,
meaning He to whom service should be rendered through
the senses, and He is the presiding deity of the
practice or process of devotional service (abhidheya-
tattva); sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam — the cause of all causes,
or the original form.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, is the embodiment of eternity,
knowledge and bliss. He is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the controller of all lesser controllers, and
the source of all incarnations. He has no beginning or
origin, though He is the source of everything and the
primary cause of all causes.

cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-

lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhir abhipālayantam


                          746
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (29)

Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā 29/CC Ādi 5.22

cintāmaṇi — from wish-fulfilling gems; prakara —
constructed; sadmasu — in abodes; kalpa-vṛkṣa — of wish-
fulfilling trees; lakṣa — hundreds of thousands; āvrteṣu
—amidst; surabhīḥ — the wish-fulfilling cows;
abhipālayantam — who is tending with great care; laksmī-
sahasra-śata — by hundreds of thousands of goddesses of
fortune, i.e. the gopīs who are all Mahā-Lakṣmīs;
sambhrama — with special care and attention; sevyamānam
— He is served; govindam ādi-puruṣam — primeval person,
Śrī Govinda; tam — of that; aham bhajāmi — I perform
bhajana.

The transcendental realm is eternally adorned by
millions of wish-fulfilling trees, by pavilions made of
desire-fulfilling jewels and by innumerable wish-
fulfilling cows. There, thousands upon thousands of
lakṣmīs, or gopīs, are rendering services to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
with great affection. I worship that original Supreme
Personality, Śrī Govinda.

veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣam-

barhāvataṁsam asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam

kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobhaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (30)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — to that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — the primeval person, Śrī Govinda;
kvaṇantam — who is vibrating; veṇum — His flute; akṣam —
whose blooming eyes; āyata — are extended; aravinda-dala
— like the petals of a lotus; avataṁsam — who has a
crest; barha — of peacock feathers; sundara-aṅgam —
whose beautiful body; asita-ambu — has the hue of black
clouds, i.e. thunderclouds; viśeṣa-śobham — and whose
unique loveliness; kamanīya — enchants the hearts; koṭi
— of millions; kandarpa — of Cupids.

I worship the primeval personality, Śrī Govinda, who is
absorbed in playing upon His flute, whose long eyes
expand and bloom like lotus flowers, whose headdress is
adorned with peacock feathers, and whose unique bodily
complexion, which resembles the luster of a dark blue
raincloud, bewilders the minds of millions of Cupids.

ālola-candraka-lasad-vanamālya-vaṁśī-

ratnāṅgadaṁ praṇaya-keli-kalā-vilāsam

śyāmaṁ tri-bhaṅga-lalitaṁ niyata-prakāśaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (31)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original person, Śrī Govinda; ālola-
candraka-lasadvanamālya — who is beautified by an
effulgent garland of forest flowers and peacock

                          747
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

feathers, which swings to and fro; vaṁśī — who holds a
flute; ratna-aṅgadam — and whose arms are bedecked with
jeweled bangles; kalā-vilāsam — He is most expert in the
sixty-four pastime-arts; praṇaya-keli — of affectionate
loving affairs; śyāmam — His complexion is bluish like
the thundercloud of the rainy season; tri-bhaṅga-lalitam
— and whose graceful threefold bending form; niyata-
prakāśam — is eternally manifest.

I worship the original personality, Śrī Govinda, around
whose neck a garland of forest flowers and peacock
feathers swings gently, whose lotus hands hold a
captivating flute, whose arms are decorated with jeweled
ornaments, who is always madly absorbed in intimate
loving pastimes, and whose eternal natural aspect is His
graceful threefold bending Śyāmasundara form.

aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛtti-manti

paśyanti pānti kalayanti ciraṁ jaganti

ānanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (32)

aṅgāni—limbs; yasya—whose; sakala-indriya—of all His
organs; vṛttimanti—possess the functions; paśyanti—
behold; pānti—maintain; kalayanti—manifest; ciram—
eternally; jaganti—the universes; ānanda—bliss; cinmaya—
imbued with spirit; sat—substantiality; ujjvala—full of
dazzling splendor; vigrahasya—whose form (is); tam
govindam—of Him Govinda; ādi-puruṣam—the original
person; aham bhajāmi—I engage in the bhajana.

I worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda. His
divine form is composed of eternity, cognizance and
bliss, and is therefore exceptionally effulgent. Each
and every limb or sense of His transcendental body is
inherently endowed with all the functions of all the
other senses. He eternally sees, maintains and regulates
an infinite number of universes, both spiritual and
mundane.

advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam

ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca

vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (33)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — primeval person, Śrī Govinda;
advaitam — who has no second; acyutam — who is
infallible; anādim — who is beginningless; ananta-rūpam
— who possesses limitless forms; ādyam — who is the
origin; purāṇa-puruṣam — who is the primeval person;
navayauvanam ca — yet is ever-youthful; vedeṣu durlabham
— whose tattva is difficult to determine through a study
of the Vedas; adurlabham — but is easily understood;
ātma-bhaktau — by His own devotional service.

Although He is non-dual, infallible, beginningless,
possessed of unlimited forms and the oldest of all,

                          748
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

nevertheless, He is a beautiful person with everlasting,
fresh youthfulness. Although He is incomprehensible
through study of the Vedas, He is easily attained by
spontaneous devotion of the soul (śuddha-prema). I
worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda.

panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo

vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puṅgavānām

so —py asti yat-prapada-sīmny avicintya-tattve

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (34)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original person, Śrī Govinda; tu —
indeed; atha api — even; panthāḥ — the paths; vāyoḥ — of
controlling the breathing process; manasaḥ — and mental
speculation (neti neti — “not that, not that”);
sampragamyaḥ — practiced; muni-puṅgavānām — by powerful
sages; koṭi-śata — for hundreds of millions; vatsara —
of years; asti — is (only capable of approaching); saḥ
api — (that non-differentiated divine light, or
brahmajyoti), which is nothing but; sīmni — the tip;
yat-prapada — of the toenails; avicintya-tattve — of
that inconceivable Absolute Truth.

Some yogīs, desiring to attain the Supreme Absolute
Truth, who lies beyond the realm of contemplation,
follow the path of strictly regulating the breathing
process. The prominent sages who advocate the philosophy
of the formless absolute follow the path of
philosophical discussion to ascertain the formless,
impersonal Brahman by the process of gradually
eliminating the unreal. After pursuing these paths for
hundreds of millions of years, they may reach only as
far as the tips of the toes of His lotus feet. I worship
that original personality, Śrī Govinda.

eko —py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham-

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (35)

ekaḥ—in a single tattva; api—although; asau asti—He
exists; racayitum—in creating; jagad-aṇḍa—of universes;
koṭim—the tens of milllions; yat-śaktiḥ—by His self-
sufficient potency; jagad-aṇḍa—of universes; cayā—within
the host; yad-antaḥ—through His entrance; aṇḍa—
(simultaneously) in each universe; antara-stha—and
within; paramāṇu—of parama-aṇus (atoms); cayā—each of
the host; antara-stha—He becomes situated; ādi-puruṣam
govindam—primeval Person, Śrī Govinda; tam—to that; aham
bhajāmi—I render devotional service.

Potency (śakti) and the possessor of potency (śaktimān)
are one undifferentiated principle. The śakti by which
billions of universes are created is situated
inseparably within Bhagavān. All the universes are
situated within Bhagavān, and by His inconceivable
potency, Bhagavān is also fully present in every atom of

                          749
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

all the universes. I render devotional service to that
original personality (ādi-puruṣa), Śrī Govinda.

yad-bhāva-bhāvita-dhiyo manujās tathaiva

samprāpya rūpa-mahimāsana-yāna-bhūṣāḥ

sūktair yam eva nigama-prathitaiḥ stuvanti

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (36)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yad-bhāva-bhāvitadhiyaḥ — on account of being aborbed in
ecstatic consciousness of Him; manujāḥ — men; tathā eva
— in accordance with their respective moods and
perfections; samprāpya — attain; rūpa-mahimā-āsana-
yānabhūṣāḥ — beautiful forms, glories, seats,
conveyances and ornaments; yam eva — and whom; stuvanti
— they sing His praises; sūktaiḥ — by chanting mantras;
nigama-prathitaiḥ — renowned in the Vedas.

I worship the original personality, Śrī Govinda. Those
human beings whose hearts are enthused with ecstatic
devotion for Him attain their respective forms, seats,
conveyances and ornaments, in accordance with their
individual moods, and they glorify Him through the hymns
renowned in the Vedas.

ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis

tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ

goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (37)

ānanda—bliss; cit—and knowledge; maya—consisting of;
rasa—mellows; prati—at every second; bhāvitābhiḥ—who are
saturated with (love for Kṛṣṇa); tābhiḥ—with those; yaḥ—
who; eva—certainly; nija-rūpatayā—with His own form;
kalābhiḥ—who are portions of His supreme pleasure
potency; goloke—in Goloka Vṛndāvana; eva—certainly;
nivasati—resides; akhila-ātma—as the soul of all; bhūtaḥ
—who exists; govindam—Lord Govinda; ādi-puruṣam—the
original personality; tam—Him; aham—I; bhajāmi—worship.

Śrī Govinda, who is all-pervading and who exists within
the hearts of all, resides in His Goloka-dhāma along
with Śrī Rādhā, who is the embodiment of His pleasure
potency and the counterpart of His own spiritual form.
She is the epitome of transcendental rasa, and is expert
in the sixty-four arts. They are also accompanied by the
sakhīs, who are expansions of Śrī Rādhā’s own
transcendental body, and who are infused with blissful,
spiritual rasa. I worship that original personality, Śrī
Govinda.

premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ


                          750
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (38)

prema-añjana—with the salve of love; churita—tinged;
bhakti-vilocanena—with eyes of devotion; santaḥ—
exclusively devoted saints; sadā—at all times; eva—
certainly; hṛdayeṣu—within their purified hearts;
vilokayanti—certainly behold; yam—whose; śyāmasundaram—
as beautiful Śyāma; acintya-guṇa—which is possessed of
inconceivable transcendental qualities; svarūpam—
original form; ādi-puruṣam govindam—primeval Supreme
Person, Śrī Govinda; tam—to that; aham bhajāmi—I render
service.

The saintly personalities, whose eyes of bhakti are
smeared with the kājala of prema, always behold Śrī
Kṛṣṇa within their hearts as Śyāmasundara, the
embodiment of inconceivable qualities. I render service
to that ādi-puruṣa, Govinda.

rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan

nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu

kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (39)

rāmādi-mūrtiṣu—in the forms of Śrī Rāmacandra etc; kalā-
niyamena—through His forms of expanded plenary portions
(svāṁśa-kalā); tiṣṭhan—remaining; nānā-avatāram—many
descents; akarot—He performed; bhuvaneṣu—within the many
material universes; kintu—however; kṛṣṇaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
svayam—He Himself personally; samabhavat—has descended;
paramaḥ pumān—is the Supreme Person; yaḥ—who; govindam
ādi-puruṣam—original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda; tam—of
that; aham bhajāmi—I perform bhajana.

I worship the original Personality, Govinda, who
manifests Himself in the material world as Śrī
Rāmacandra and many other incarnations who are His
plenary portions and sub-portions, and who personally
appears in the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (40)

yasya prabhā—whose effulgence; prabhavataḥ —emanating
from His effulgent form, which is replete with all
potencies; jagad-aṇḍa-koṭikoṭiṣu—within the millions and
millions of universes; aśeṣa-vasudhā-ādi-vibhūti-bhinnam
—and which is distinct from the unlimited opulences of
the planets such as the Earth; tat brahma—is that divine
light (Brahman); niṣkalam—which is free from all
inebriety; anantam—without limitation; aśeṣa-bhūtam—and
in complete existence (the Brahman that the Upaniṣads
describe as impersonal and without qualities (nirviśeṣa)
is constitutionally situated upon the spiritual form of
Śrī Govinda, which has all transcendental qualities (sa-
viśeṣa)); ādi-puruṣam govindam—the original Supreme

                          751
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Person, Śrī Govinda; tam—of that; aham bhajāmi—I perform
bhajana.

I worship the original Personality, Śrī Govinda. The
nondifferentiated, impersonal Brahman that has been
described by the Upaniṣads has originated from the
radiance of His limbs. That effulgence is distinct from
the majestic opulence of billions of worlds such as the
Earth planet which comprise the mundane realm, and is
perceived as the indivisible, unlimited, endless
principle of truth.



māyā hi yasya jagad-aṇḍa-śatāni sūte

traiguṇya-tad-viṣaya-veda-vitāyamānā

sattvāvalambi-para-sattvaṁ viśuddha-sattvam-

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (41)

māyā—the deluding potency; hi—indeed (it is He); yasya—
whose; jagad-aṇḍa—of egg-like universes; śatāni—to
hundreds; sūte—gives birth; traiguṇya—the three binding
modes: goodness, passion and ignorance; tad-viṣaya—
topics related to Govinda; veda-vitāyamānā—and who
expands throughout the Vedas; sattva-avalambi—the
material mode of goodness, which is mixed with passion
and ignorance, is dependent; para-sattva—and upon whose
supreme existence; viśuddha-sattvam—whose pure existence
is free from any mixture of passion or ignorance; ādi-
puruṣam govindam—original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
tam—of that; aham bhajāmi—I perform bhajana.

Māyā consists of the three material qualities of
goodness, passion and ignorance, and is Bhagavān’s
inferior energy. She propagates the Vedic knowledge that
pertains to the material universe. I worship the
original Personality Śrī Govinda, who is the shelter of
that māyā, though His own existence is the embodiment of
pure goodness untinged by passion and ignorance.

ānanda-cinmaya-rasātmatayā manaḥsu

yaḥ prāṇināṁ pratiphalan smaratām upetya

līlāyitena bhuvanāni jayaty ajasram-

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (42)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yaḥ — who; ātmatayā — by the quality of His Being;
ānanda-cinmaya-rasa — which is surcharged with the
blissful mellows of the most resplendent amorous prema;
pratiphalan — reflects His presence (in a partial form);
manaḥsu — within the purified hearts; prāṇinām — of
living beings; smaratām upetya — attaining the nature of
a mind-enchanting Kāmadeva; ajasram — (He is)
incessantly; jayati — victorious; bhuvanāni — over the
universes; līlāyitena — by means of His aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā
(eightfold daily pastimes).


                          752
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

When living entities remember Śrī Govinda, He is
reflected in their pure hearts, appearing in His
original form, which is surcharged with blissful
transcendental mellows. This form is the embodiment of
the most resplendent, transcendental amorous rasa, which
churns the heart of the god of love, Cupid himself,
although he churns others— hearts. Through His pastimes,
Śrī Govinda is ever victorious over the three worlds. I
worship that original Personality, Śrī Govinda.



goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya

devi maheśa-hari-dhāmasu teṣu teṣu

te te prabhāva-nicayā vihitāś ca yena

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (43)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
ca yena — by whom; nija-dhāmni — (He who gracefully
resides) in His own abode; golokanāmni — named Goloka
(which is above all); te te — the respective; prabhāva-
nicayāḥ — volumes of power; vihitāḥ — are apportioned;
teṣu teṣu — in the respective; devī-maheśa-hari-dhāmasu
— abodes of Vaikuṇṭhanātha-Hari, Maheśa Śiva and lastly
Durgā-devī; tale — which are situated at the base; tasya
— of His abode.

Devī-dhāma, the material world, consists of fourteen
planetary systems. Above this lies Maheśa-dhāma, above
that Hari-dhāma, and above all lies Goloka, the abode of
Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Govinda. I worship the original
personality Govinda, who regulates the characteristic
influence pertaining to each individual abode.

sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā

chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā

icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (44)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yasya — whose; śaktiḥ — potency; durgā — Durgā-devī; iva
chāyā — who is like a shadow (of His transcendental
potency); bibharti — nurtures; bhuvanāni — all the
planetary systems; ca — and; api ceṣṭate — she also acts
(thus); yasya icchā-anurūpam — in accordance with His
will; ekā — she alone; sādhana — executes; sṛṣṭi-sthiti-
pralaya — the duties of creation, sustenance and
dissolution.

The shadow of the transcendental potency is that great
potency who creates, maintains and annihilates the
material universe. She is worshiped throughout the world
as Durgā. I worship the original personality, Śrī
Govinda, in accordance with whose desire Durgā conducts
her every endeavor.


                          753
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

kṣīraṁ yathā dadhi vikāra-viśeṣa-yogāt

sañjāyate na hi tataḥ pṛthag asti hetoḥ

yaḥ śambhutām api tathā samupaiti kāryād

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (45)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yaḥ — who; upaiti — takes on; śambhutām — the state of
Śambhu; kāryāt — on account of performing a special
duty; yathā tathā — in the same way that; kṣīram — milk;
sañjāyate — becomes; dadhi — yogurt; vikāra-viśeṣa-yogāt
— through contact with a transforming agent; asti — is;
hi — certainly; na — not; pṛthak — different; tataḥ —
than; hetoḥ — its cause (milk).

Śrī Govindadeva attains the condition of being Śambhu
for the sake of performing a specific function, just as
milk is transformed into yogurt by contact with a
particular transforming agent, although yogurt is not a
different substance, independent of milk, which is its
cause. I worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda.

dīpārcir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya

dīpāyate vivṛta-hetu-samāna-dharmā

yas tādṛg eva hi ca viṣṇutayā vibhāti

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (46)

(just like) dīpa-arciḥ—the flame of a lamp; eva hi—in
exactly; daśa-antaram—ten other lamps; abhyupetya—
expands; dīpāyate—lighting; vivṛta-hetu—as their
expanded cause; samāna-dharmā—equally powerful; yaḥ—who;
tādṛk—same way; eva hi—certainly; ca—also; viṣṇutayā—by
His expansion as Lord Viṣṇu; vibhāti—He illuminates; tam
govindam—Him, the charmer of cows and milkmaids; ādi-
puruṣam—the original person; aham bhajāmi—I engage in
the devotional service of.

I worship the original personality, Śrī Govinda. Just as
when the flame of one lamp is transmitted to another
lamp, the second lamp illuminates in the same manner as
the original flame, although it exists separately, so
does Govinda accept the form of Mahā-Viṣṇu reclining on
the Causal Ocean. That Mahā-Viṣṇu is the source of all
the Viṣṇu expansions and incarnations in this world.

yaḥ kāraṇārṇava-jale bhajati sma yoga-

nidrām ananta-jagad-aṇḍa-sa-roma-kūpaḥ

ādhāra-śaktim avalambya parāṁ sva-mūrtiṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (47)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yaḥ — who; bhajati sma — enjoys; yoga-nidrām — mystic
slumber (of His personal intrinsic potency); jale — in
the water; kāraṇa-arṇava — of the Causal Ocean; sa-roma-

                          754
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

kūpaḥ — within His hair follicles; ananta-jagad-aṇḍa —
(are) the limitless universes; avalambya — reposing
upon; parām — the most excellent; sva-mūrtim — His own
personal form (His expansion named Ananta); ādhāra-
śaktim — who is the embodiment of His allaccommodating
potency.

I worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda. Having
assumed His own most excellent form, Śeṣa, the
embodiment of the all-accommodating potency, He enjoys
mystic slumber while reclining in the Causal Ocean with
innumerable universes within every hair-pore of His
skin.

yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (48)

atha — thereafter; aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam
— of that; ādi-puruṣam govindam — original Supreme
Person, Śrī Govinda; yasya — whose; kalā-viśeśaḥ —
special plenary portion; saḥ mahān viṣṇuḥ — (is) Mahā-
Viṣṇu; jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ — the lords of the material
universes, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva; avalambya — taking
shelter (of Him); loma-bila-jāḥ — become manifest within
His hair-pores; jīvanti — they live; iha — in their
respective universes; yasya eka-niśvasita-kālam — for
the time-period of His one breath.

The lords of the universes, such as Brahmā, who emanate
from the hair-pores of Mahā-Viṣṇu’s skin, remain alive
only for the duration of His one exhalation. I worship
the original personality, Śrī Govinda, of whom Mahā-
Viṣṇu is a portion of a portion.

bhāsvān yathāśma-śakaleṣu nijeṣu tejaḥ

svīyam kiyat prakaṭayaty api tadvad atra

brahmā ya eṣa jagad-aṇḍa-vidhāna-kartā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (49)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yathā — just as; bhāsvān — the sun; prakaṭayati —
manifests; kiyat — a certain portion; svīyam — of his
own; tejaḥ — potency; aśma-śakaleṣu nijeṣu — within its
own gem-stones (which are celebrated by the sun’s names
such as sūrya-kānta, and enacts his duty of heating the
worlds); tadvad atra — similarly in the business of
creation within this universe, etc.; api — also; eṣaḥ
brahmā — Lord Brahmā; yaḥ — who; jagad-aṇḍa-vidhāna-
kartā — (is) the director of the universe (who is
empowered by Govinda).

Just as the sun manifests his potency to a minute degree
within jewels such as sūrya-kānta, and invests them with
the power to burn, similarly Śrī Govinda also infuses
His creative potency within the secondary creator of the

                          755
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

universe, Brahmā. I worship that original personality,
Śrī Govinda.



yat-pāda-pallava-yugaṁ vinidhāya kumbha-

dvandve praṇāma-samaye sa gaṇādhirājaḥ

vighnān vihantum alam asya jagat-trayasya

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (50)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
vinidhāya — by placing; yat-pāda-pallava-yugam — His two
delicate lotus feet; kumbha-dvandve — upon the pair of
cranial mounds on his elephant head; praṇāma-samaye — at
the time of offering obeisances; saḥ gaṇaadhirājaḥ —
that chief among the demigods; vihantum alam — is able
to remove easily; vighnān — the obstacles (on the path
of devotion); asya jagat-trayasya — of the three worlds.

In order to obtain the power required to remove all the
obstacles within the three worlds, Gaṇeśa, the bestower
of success, always holds the divine lotus feet of Śrī
Govinda upon the pair of cranial mounds protruding from
his elephant head. I worship that original personality,
Śrī Govinda.

agnir mahi gaganam ambu marud diśaś ca

kālas tathātma-manasīti jagat-trayāṇi

yasmād bhavanti vibhavanti viśanti yaṁ ca

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (51)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yasmāt — from whom; jagat-trayāṇi — the three worlds
(heavenly, middle and hellish planets); iti — which are
composed of; agniḥ — fire; mahī — earth; gaganam —
space; ambu — water; marut — air; diśaḥ — the (ten)
directions; kālaḥ — time; tathā — as well as; ātma-
manasī ca — soul and mind; bhavanti — emanate;
vibhavanti — are maintained; yam — (and) into whom;
viśanti — they enter.

The three worlds have been created from nine elements,
namely earth, water, fire, air, space, the directions,
time, the mind and soul. I worship the original
personality, Śrī Govinda, from whom the elements have
originated, in whom they are situated after their
manifestation, and into whom they enter at the time of
the cosmic annihilation.

yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ

rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ

yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (52)

                          756
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
eṣaḥ savitā — Sūryadeva (the sungod); yat-cakṣuḥ — who
functions as His eye (in other words he illuminates the
entire universe, thereby providing the power of sight);
rājā — (is) the king; sakala-grahānām — of all the
planets; samasta-sura-mūrtiḥ — regulator of all the
demigods; aśeṣa-tejaḥ — possessed of limitless potency;
yasya ājñayā — on account of Govinda’s order; bhramati —
he travels; sambhṛta — sustaining; kāla-cakraḥ — the
wheel of time.

Sūryadeva, the predominating deity of the sun, is the
king of all the planets, and is likened to the eye of
this world. I worship the original personality, Śrī
Govinda, upon whose order the sun travels in his regular
orbit, having mounted the wheel of time.

dharmo —tha pāpa-nicayaḥ śrutayas tapāṁsi

brahmādi-kīṭa-patagāvadhayaś ca jīvāḥ

yad-datta-mātra-vibhava-prakaṭa-prabhāvā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (53)

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yat-datta-mātravibhava — who merely by His power of
endowment; prakaṭaprabhāvāḥ — are manifest the
respective potencies; dharmaḥ — of pious activities i.e.
varṇa- and āśrama-dharmas as described in the Vedas;
atha — and; pāpa-nicayaḥ — the multitude of sins;
śrutayaḥ — the Ṛg, Sāma, Yajur and Atharva Vedas, as
well as the Upaniṣads, which are the crest-jewels of the
Vedas; tapāṁsi — the various austerities; ca jīvāḥ — and
the living beings; brahmā-ādi — beginning from the great
Brahmā; avadhayaḥ — down to; kīṭa-pataga — the
insignificant birds and insects.

I worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda, whose
power of endowment alone manifests the respective
potencies in the principles of religious conduct, sinful
activities, the Vedas, various austerities and all
living entities from Brahmā down to the most
insignificant insect.

yas tv indragopam athavendram aho sva-karma-

bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti

karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājāṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (54)

govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda; yaḥ —
who (in a disinterested manner); ātanoti — makes; indra-
gopam — the insignificant red insect named indragopa;
athavā — as well as; indram — Indra, the king of the
administrative demigods; phala-bhājanam — the recipient
of the fruits; anurūpa-bandha — in accordance with the
bondage; svakarma — generated by their respective
activities; kintu ca — however; aho — O how

                          757
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

astonishing!; bhakti-bhājām — for those dedicated in
śuddha-bhakti; nirdahati — He utterly consumes, i.e.
nullifies; karmāṇi — the results generated from their
activities performed in all of their previous lives.

Śrī Govinda impartially bestows the fruits of reaction
upon all living entities who are wandering on the path
of karma, from the insignificant indragopa insect to
Indradeva, the monarch of the demigods, according to the
bondage accrued from their respective individual
actions.

yaṁ krodha-kāma-sahaja-praṇayādi-bhīti-

vātsalya-moha-guru-gaurava-sevya-bhāvaiḥ

sañcintya tasya sadṛśīṁ tanum āpur ete

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi (55)

yam — whom; krodha — of anger (such as that shown by
Śiśupāla toward Kṛṣṇa out of enmity); kāma — of divine
lust felt by the vraja-gopīs, out of their desire to
give Kṛṣṇa pleasure (in other words mādhurya-rasa or
prema); sahajapraṇaya-ādi — of sakhya-bhāva, the
spontaneous friendly affection of the cowherd friends
(sakhās) such as Śrīdāmā, Subala, etc.; bhīti — of
incessant terror felt by persons such as Kaṁsa,
accompanied by the fearful thought, “I shall be slain by
Kṛṣṇa!”; vātsalya — of parental affection felt by
persons headed by Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā; moha — of
delusion felt by those of the Māyāvādī cult, i.e. a mood
of total forgetfulness in the contemplation of sāyujya-
mukti (liberation through merging one’s identity with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s impersonal aspect of the non-differentiated
divine light, known as nirbheda-brahma); guru-gaurava —
of śānta-bhāva, wherein one contemplates Him as a great
personage, worthy of respect; sevya — of dāsya-bhāva,
the mood of servitude rendered by those who contemplate
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the sole object worthy of their service;
bhāvaiḥ — through the moods; sañcintya — by full
contemplation; tasya — for His service; sadṛśīm — an
appropriate; tanum — body; āpuḥ — attain; ete — those
persons; ādi-puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person,
Śrī Govinda; tam — of that; aham bhajāmi — I engage in
bhajana.

Those who contemplate Him with feelings of lust, anger,
the natural intimacy of friendship, fear, parental
affection, bewilderment, reverence and servitude, attain
bodies (suitable for the eternal associates of Bhagavān)
with various degrees of beauty and qualities
corresponding to their individual meditations. I worship
that original personality, Govinda.

śriyaḥ kāntāḥ kāntaḥ parama-puruṣaḥ kalpa-taravo

drumā bhūmiś cintāmaṇi-gaṇa-mayi toyam amṛtam

kathā gānaṁ nāṭyaṁ gamanam api vaṁśī priya-sakhi

cid-ānandaṁ jyotiḥ param api tad āsvādyam api ca

sa yatra kṣīrābdhiḥ sravati surabhībhyaś ca su-mahān

                          758
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


nimeṣārdhākhyo vā vrajati na hi yatrāpi samayaḥ

bhaje śvetadvīpaṁ tam aham iha golokam iti yaṁ

vidantas te santaḥ kṣiti-virala-cārāḥ katipaye (56)

yatra — where; kāntāḥ — the beloveds; śriyaḥ — (are)
Mahā-Lakṣmīs (who are none other than Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
dearmost beautiful vraja-gopīs); kāntaḥ — (where) the
sole hero; parama-puruṣaḥ — (is) the primeval supreme
person, Śrī Govinda; drumā — (where) the trees;
kalpataravaḥ — fulfill all desires; bhūmiḥ — (where) the
land; cintāmaṇigaṇa-mayī — (is) wish-fulfilling stone;
toyam — (where) water; amṛtam — (is) immortal nectar;
kathā — (where) speech; gānam — (is) song; api — and;
gamanam — movement; nāṭyam — (is) dance; vaṁśī — (where)
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s bamboo flute; priya-sakhī — acts as a dear
friend; jyotiḥ — (where) the svarūpa of light; cid-
ānandam — is a substance of cognizance and bliss; param
api tat — in that place even ordinary items that are
usually illuminated from outside illuminate all other
objects like the sun and moon, because their nature is
supreme, meaning full of knowledge and bliss; āsvādyam
api ca — and they are also relishable, i.e. enjoyable;
ca — and; saḥ su-mahān — (where) a very great; kṣīra-
abdhiḥ — ocean of milk; surabhībhyaḥ — from the udders
of millions upon millions of Surabhī cows, who are
absorbed in ṭhe vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute; sravati —
incessantly flows; yatra api — where also; samayaḥ —
time; hi na vrajati — certainly does not pass away (i.e.
eternal spiritual time, which is free from the influence
of material time, is an eternal unbroken present without
past or future); vā — even; nimeṣaardha-ākhyaḥ — to the
extent of half a moment; aham bhaje — I render service;
tam — to that; śveta-dvīpam — white island of
Śvetadvīpa; yam — which; te — those; katipaye — very
few; santaḥ — saints whose faith (niṣṭhā) for Śrī
Bhagavān is firmly established; kṣiti-virala-cārāḥ —
wandering on the face of the earth; iha — in this world;
vidantaḥ — know; iti — as; golokam — Goloka.

I worship that supreme abode of Śvetadvīpa, where the
beloved heroines are a host of transcendental goddesses
of fortune, and the Supreme Personality Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
only lover; where all the trees are spiritual desire-
trees, and the earth is made of transcendental wish-
fulfilling cintāmaṇi jewels; where the water is nectar,
natural speaking is a melodious song, and walking to and
fro is an artful dance; where the flute is the dearmost
friend; where light is full of knowledge and bliss, and
the supreme spiritual substance that comprises all
things is relishable; where a vast transcendental ocean
of milk is always flowing from millions upon millions of
surabhī cows; and where time is not subject to passing
away, even for half the blink of an eye, because it is
not divided into past and future, but remains in the
undivided eternal present. That divine abode, which is
practically unknown in this world, is known by the name
of Goloka to only a few, rare sādhus.

[Editorial note: Due to our publication deadline we
could not complete putting all Sanskrit words into
italics.]

                          759
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


11.1) Śrī Sva-niyama-daśakam

Ten Self-imposed Vows by Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī



gurau mantre nāmni prabhuvara-śacī-garbha-ja-pade

svarūpe śrī-rūpe gaṇa-yuji tadīya-prathama-je

girīndre gāndharvā-sarasi madhu-puryām vraja-vane

vraje bhakte goṣthālayiṣu param āstām mama ratiḥ (1)

gurau—for my spiritual master; mantre—the Gāyatrī
mantra; nāmni—the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; prabhu-vara—
the best of Lords; śacī-garbha-ja—Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu; pade—the feet; svarūpe—Svarūpa Dāmodara;
śrī-rūpe—Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; gaṇa-yuji—with their
associates; tadīya-prathama-je—his elder brother (Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī); giri-indre—the king of hills,
Govardhana; gāndharvā-sarasi—Rādhā-kuṇḍa; madhu-puryām—
the city of Mathurā; vraja-vane—the forest of Vṛndāvana;
vraje—the land of Vraja; bhakte—the devotee;
goṣthālayiṣu—the Vrajavāsīs; param—greatly; āstām—may
be; mama—my; ratiḥ—deep love and attachment.

I vow I shall love my spiritual master, the Gāyatrī
mantra, the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Lord Caitanya
Mahāprabhu's feet, Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, his associates, his elder brother (Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī), Govardhana Hill, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Mathurā
City, Vṛndāvana Forest, the land of Vraja, the devotees
of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and the residents of Vraja.

na cānyatra-kṣetre hari-tanu-sanātho 'pi sujanād

rasāsvādam premṇā dadhad api vasāmi kṣaṇam api

samam tv etad grāmyāvalibhir abhitanvann api kathāṁ

vidhāsye saṁvāsaṁ vraja-bhuvana eva pratibhavam (2)

na—not; ca—and; anyatra—anywhere else; kṣetre—in a
place; hari—of Lord Hari; tanu—form; sa—with; nāthaḥ—the
Lord; api—even; sujanāt—because of the pious devotees;
rasa—nectar; āsvādam—tasting; premṇā—with love; dadhat—
placing; api—also; vasāmi—I reside; kṣaṇam—for a moment;
api—even; samam—with; tu—indeed; etat—this; grāmya-
avalibhiḥ—with a host of sense pleasures; abhitanvann—
extending; api—even; kathām—words; vidhāsye—I shall do;
saṁvāsam—residence; vraja-bhuvane—in the land of Vraja;
eva—indeed; pratibhavam—birth after birth.

I vow that I shall not live even for a moment in any
other place than Vraja, even if the Lord resides there
in His Deity form, and even if the great devotees fill
it with the nectar of transcendental love. Birth after
birth I shall reside in the land of Vraja, even if my
association consists simply in chatting about mundane
matters with the Vrajavāsīs.

sadā rādhā-kṛṣṇocchalad-atula-khelā-sthala-yujaṁ

                          760
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


vrajaṁ santyajyaitad yuga-virahito 'pi truṭim api

punar dvārāvatyāṁ yadu-patim api prauḍha-vibhavaiḥ

sphurantaṁ tad vācāpi ca na hi calāmīkṣitum api (3)

sadā—always; rādhā-kṛṣṇa—of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa;
ucchalat—rising; atula—incomparable; khelā—pastimes;
sthala—place; yujam—endowed; vrajam—Vraja; santyajya—
leaving; etat—this; yuga—for a yuga; virahitaḥ—because
of separation; api—even; truṭim—a moment; api—even;
punaḥ—again; dvārāvatyām—in Dvārakā; yadu-patim—the king
of the Yadus; api—even; prauḍha—great; vibhavaiḥ—with
opulences; sphurantam—manifesting; tat—that; vācā—with
words; api—even; ca—nd; na—not; hi—certainly; calāmi—I
go; īkṣitum—to see; api—even.

Even though I suffer in long separation from the divine
couple, I shall not, even for a moment, leave the land
of Vraja, where Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa eternally enjoy
unparalleled transcendental pastimes, and I shall not,
even if He Himself invites me, go to see the opulent
king of the Yadus in Dvārakā!

gatonmādai rādhā sphurati hariṇā śliṣṭa-hṛdayā

sphutaṁ dvārāvatyām iti yadi śṛṇomi śruti-taṭe

ahaṁ tatraivoddhata-matiḥ patāmi vraja-purāt

samuḍḍīya svāntādhika-gati-khagendrād api javāt (4)

gatā—gone; unmādaiḥ—madly; rādhā—Śrī Rādhā; sphurati—
manifested; hariṇā—by Śrī Kṛṣṇa; śliṣṭa—embraced; hṛdayā
—to the chest; sphutam—clearly; dvārāvatyām—in Dvārakā;
iti—thus; yadi—if; śṛṇomi—I hear; śruti-taṭe—on the
surface of the ears; tadā—then; aham—I; tatra—there; eva
—indeed; uddhata—excited; mati—at heart; patāmi—I fly;
vraja-purāt—from Vrajapura; samuḍḍīya—flying; svānta—
own; adhika—greater; gati—movement; khaga-indrāt—than
Garuḍa, the king of birds, Viṣṇu’s carrier; api—even;
javāt—with speed.

If with my own ears I heard, "Rādhā has gone to Dvārakā,
where Lord Hari passionately embraces Her to His chest,"
then with an excited heart I would leave Vrajapura and
fly there faster than Garuḍa.

anādi sādir vā paṭur ati-mṛdur vā pratipada-

pramīlat-kāruṇyaḥ praguṇa-karuṇā-hīna iti vā

mahā-vaikuṇṭheśādhika iha naro vā vraja-pater

ayam sūnur goṣṭhe pratijani mamāstām prabhu-varaḥ (5)

anādiḥ—begininngless; sādiḥ—with a beginning; vā—or;
paṭuḥ—harsh; ati-mṛduḥ—very gentle; vā—or; pratipada—at
every moment; pramīlat—expanding; kāruṇyaḥ—mercy;
praguṇa—extremely; karuṇā—mercy; hīna—without; iti—thus;
vā—or; mahā-vaikuṇṭha—of the great Vaikuṇṭha world; īśa—
the king; adhika—greater; iha—here; naraḥ—an ordinary
human being; vā—or; vraja-pateḥ—of the king of Vraja;

                          761
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

ayam—this; sūnuḥ—son; goṣṭhe—in Vraja; pratijani—in
every birth; mama—of me; āstām—may be; prabhu-varaḥ—the
supreme master.

Whether He is beginningless or with a beginning, cruel
or very gentle, merciful at every moment or merciless,
greater than the king of Mahā-Vaikuṇṭha or a mere human
being, may the son of Vraja's king be my Lord birth
after birth.

anādṛtyodgītām api muni-gaṇair vaiṇika-mukhaiḥ

pravīṇāṁ gāndharvām api ca nigamais tat-priyatamām

ya ekaṁ govindaṁ bhajati kapaṭī dāmbhikatayā

tad-abhyarṇe śīrṇe kṣaṇam api na yāmi vratam idam (6)

anādṛtya—not worshiping; udgītām—glorified; api—even;
muni-gaṇaiḥ—by the great sages; vaiṇika-mukhaiḥ—headed
by Nārada; pravīṇām—exalted; gāndharvām—Śrī Rādhikā; api
—also; ca—and; nigamaiḥ—by the vedas; tat-priyatamām—the
dearmost beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ya—who; ekam—alone;
govindam—Govinda; bhajati—worships; kapaṭī—cheater;
dāmbhikatayā—with hypocrisy; tad-abhyarṇe—near Him;
śīrṇe—at all; kṣaṇam—for a moment; api—even; na—not;
yāmi—I shall go; vratam—vow; idam—this.

Not for a moment shall I go near a hypocrite who
worships only Lord Govinda and does not worship exalted
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is glorified by the Vedas and the
great sages headed by Nārada, and who is most dear to
Lord Kṛṣṇa. This is my vow.

ajāṇḍe rādheti sphurad-abhidhayā sikta-janayā-

nayā sākaṁ kṛṣṇaṁ bhajati ya iha prema-namitaḥ

paraṁ prakṣālyaitāc caraṇa-kamale taj-jalam aho

mudā pītvā śaśvāc chirasi ca vahāmi pratidinam (7)

ajāṇḍe—in the universe; rādhā—Rādhā; iti—thus; sphurat—
manifested; abhidhayā—with the name; sikta—sprinkled;
janayā—person; anayā—by Her; sākam—accompanied; kṛṣṇam—
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhajati—worships; ya—who; iha—here; prema-
namitaḥ—bowed with love; param—greatly; prakṣālya—
washing; etat—of Her; caraṇa—feet; kamale—lotus; tat-
jalam—the water of that; ahaḥ-Ah!; mudā—with joy; pītvā—
drinking; śaśvat—continually; śirasi—on the head; ca—
and; vahāmi—I carry; pratidinam—every day.

I shall wash the lotus feet of anyone in this world who,
bowed down with love, worships Lord Kṛṣṇa and the nectar
person who bears the name Rādhā. I drink that water and
every day I carry that water on my head.

parityaktaḥ preyo-jana-samudayair bāḍham asudhīr

durandho nīrandhraṁ kadana-bhara-vārdhau nipatitaḥ

tṛṇaṁ dantair daṣṭvā caṭubhir abhiyāce 'dya kṛpayā

svayaṁ śrī-gāndharvā sva-pada-nalināntaṁ nayatu mām (8)

                          762
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


parityaktaḥ—abandoned; preyo-jana-samudayaiḥ—by friends;
bāḍham—certainly; asudhīḥ—unintelligent; durandhaḥ—
blind; nīrandhram—always; kadana-bhara-vārdhau—in an
ocean of sufferings; nipatitaḥ—fallen; tṛṇam—a blade of
grass; dantaiḥ—in the teeth; daṣṭvā—biting; caṭubhiḥ—
with sweet words; abhiyāce—I beg; adya—now; kṛpayā—
mercifully; svayam—personally; śrī-gāndharvā—O Śrīmatī
Rādhikā; sva-pada-nalināntam—to Your lotus feet; nayatu—
please lead; mām—me.

Abandoned by my dear friends, unintelligent, blind, and
drowning in an ocean of suffering, I bite a blade of
straw with my teeth and beg, "O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, please
lead me to Your lotus feet!"

vrajotpanna-kṣīrāśana-vasana-pātrādibhir ahaṁ

padārthair nirvāhya vyavahṛtim adambham- sa-niyamaḥ

vasānīśā-kuṇḍe giri-kula-vare caiva samaye

mariṣye tu preṣṭhe sarasi khalu jīvādi-purataḥ (9)

vraja—in Vraja; utpanna—produced; kṣīra—milk; āśana—
food; vasana—home; pātra—leaves; ādibhiḥ—beginning with;
aham—I; padārthaiḥ—with ingredients; nirvāhya—
maintaining my life; vyavahṛtim—action; adambham—honest;
sa-niyamaḥ—with austerity; vasāni—I must reside; īśā-
kuṇḍe—at Rādhā-kuṇḍa; giri-kula-vare—at the king of
mountains; ca—and; eva—indeed; samaye—at the appropriate
time; mariṣye—I will die; tu—certainly; preṣṭhe—at the
dear; sarasi—lake; khalu—indeed; jīva-ādi-purataḥ—in the
presence of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and the other devotees.

Let my food be a little of Vraja's buttermilk, my
clothing be but leaves, and my actions but honest
austerity and scriptural study. I shall live at Rādhā-
kuṇḍa by the best of mountains and I shall die at that
dear lake in the company of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and the
other devotees.

sphural-lakṣmī-lakṣmī-vraja-vijayi-lakṣmī-bhara-lasad-

vapuḥ-śrī-gāndharvā-smara-nikara-divyad-giribhṛtoḥ

vidhāsye kuñjādau vividha-varivasyāḥ sa-rabhasaṁ

rahaḥ śrī-rūpākhya-priyatama-janasyaiva caramaḥ (10)

sphural—splendid; lakṣmī—of the goddess of fortune;
lakṣmī—of beauty; vraja—abundance; vijayi—defeating;
lakṣmī—of beauty; bhara—abundance; lasat—splendid; vapuḥ
—form; śrī-gāndharvā—Śrīmatī Rādhikā; smara—of Cupids;
nikara—multitudes; divyat—splendid; giribhṛtoḥ—of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; vidhāsye—I shall perform; kuñja-ādau—in bowers
and leafy groves of Vṛndāvana; vividha—various;
varivasyāḥ—services; sa-rabhasam—earnestly; rahaḥ—in a
secluded place; śrī-rūpākhya—named Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī;
priyatama-janasya—of the dear friend; eva—indeed;
caramaḥ—follower.

In a secluded bower in a leafy Vṛndāvana forest,
following my dear friend Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, in many

                          763
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

ways I shall earnestly worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is more
splendid than many Cupids, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose
glorious beauty defeats many goddesses of fortune.

kṛtaṁ kenāpy etan nija-niyama-śaṁsi-stavam imaṁ

paṭhed yo viśrabdhaḥ priya-yugala-rūpe 'rpita-manāḥ

dṛḍhaṁ goṣṭhe hṛṣṭo vasati-vasatim- prāpya samaye

mudā rādhā-kṛṣṇau bhajati sa hi tenaiva sahitaḥ (11)

Phala-śruti - a concluding verse describing the benefits
attained by hearing and reciting this prayer)

kṛtam—done; kenāpi—by someone; etan—this; nija-niyama—
self-imposed regulations; śaṁsi-stavam—prayer
describing; imam—this; paṭhet—he may recite; yaḥ—one
who; viśrabdhaḥ—faithful; priya-yugala-rūpe—in the form
of the dear divine couple; arpita—placed; manāḥ—mind;
dṛḍham—firmly; goṣṭhe—in Vraja; hṛṣṭaḥ—jubilant; vasati-
vasatim—residence; prāpya—attaining; samaye—at the
proper time; mudā—happily; rādhā-kṛṣṇau—Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa;
bhajati—worships; sa—he; hi—indeed; tena—by him; eva—
certainly; sahitaḥ—with.

A faithful devotee who recites with faith this prayer
describing the self-inposed regulative principles
practiced by a certain person, and who firmly dedicates
his heart to the beloved youthful couple, jubilantly
attains residence in Vraja and happily serves and
worships Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in accordance with those very
principles described herein.

Thus ends section 11.1) Śrī Sva-niyama-daśakam

11.2) Śrī Śrī Sva-niyama-dvādaśakam

12 Verses of Self-imposed Regulative Principles

The final work of Śrīla Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura — 1907



The objects of devotion birth after birth

gurau śrī-gaurāṅge tad-udita-su-bhakti-prakaraṇe

śacī-sunor līlā-vikasita-su-tīrthe nija-manau

harer nāmni preṣṭhe hari-tithiṣu rupānuga-jane

śuka-prokte śāstre prati-jani mamāstāṁ khalu ratiḥ (1)

No matter whenever and wherever I happen to take birth,
let my loving affection and attachment remain unshaken
throughout each and every lifetime for the following
things: 1) for my divine spiritual master; 2) for Śrī
Gaurāṅga; 3) for the detailed topics of pure devotional
service (and the methods of its execution) as personally
instructed by Him; 4) for the holy places of pilgrimage
such as Śrī Navadvipa, Śrī Kṣetra, Śrī Vṛndāvana, etc.,
which are all blooming with divine sanctity due to His

                          764
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

performance of wonderful pastimes therein; 5) for the
dīkṣā-mantra bestowed upon me by the divine grace of my
spiritual master, which overfioods my mind at all times;
6) for the holy name of Sri Hari, my most dear
possession; 7) for the most beloved eternal associates
of the Lord; 8) for the sacred days of celebration
throughout the year such as Śrī Ekādaśī, Śrī Janmāṣṭamī,
Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī, and the appearance/disappearance days of
the great Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, etc.; 9) for the Lord’s
dearmost devotees who strictly follow in the sacred
footsteps of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; 10) for the holy
scriptures narrated by Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī such as
the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam.



The internal identity of Lord Caitanya, the eternal
guide

sadā vṛndāraṇye madhura-rasa-dhanye rasa-mayaḥ

parāṁ śaktiṁ rādhāṁ parama-rasa-mūrtiṁ ramayati

sa caivāyaṁ kṛṣṇo nija-bhajana-mudrām upadiśan

śacī-sūnur gauḍe prati-jani mamāstāṁ prabhu-varaḥ (2)

The Supreme Lord Śrī Krishna is the personified abode of
all divinely ecstatic mellow-tastes. And Śrī Rādhīkā is
the topmost abode of all His divinely potent energies.
Indeed, She is the personified form of the highest
mellow of love-in-separation. Within, the forest of
Vṛndā, which is gloriously rich in the all-pervading
treasure of the sweetest mādhurya-rasa, this Lord Śrī
Krishna is continuously enjoying as He makes Sri Rādhikā
happy by His loving service rendered to Her 24 hours a
day. This Lord Krishna is exactly identical to the Son
of Mother Śacī Who eternally lives simultaneously yet
separately in Gauḍa-deśa as the Instructor of the
process for rendering His own devotional service. May
this Śacī-nandana become my Supreme Master and Guide,
and may He always appear to me just to lead me on the
proper devotional path birth after birth after birth.

Rejection of things unfavorable for Rādhā’s service

na vairāgyaṁ grāhyaṁ bhavati na hi yad bhakti-janitaṁ

tathā jnanaṁ bhānaṁ citi yadi viśeṣaṁ na manute

spṛhā me nāṣṭaṅge hari-bhajana-saukhyaṁ na hi yatas

tato rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pracura-paricaryā bhavatu me (3)

Let no form of so-called renunciation or asceticism be
acceptable to me if it does not give rise to the
continual expansion of my eternal serving mood of loving
devotion. And let no form of so-called knowledge or
intellectual cultivation appeal to me at all if it does
not admit the reality of eternal individuality shared by
the Lord and JI devotees during their everlasting daily
pastimes. I have no desire for practicing any branch of
the eight-fold yoga process, for none of them contain
any scope for enjoying the daily pleasure of serving

                          765
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Lord Hari such as His confidential worship does. Rather,
may I render profuse, uninterrupted confidential service
24 hours a day to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Where to live, and where not to live

kuṭīre “pi kṣudre vraja-bhajana-yogye taru-tale

śacī-sūnos tīrthe bhavatu nitarāṁ me nivasatiḥ

na cānyatra kṣetre vibudha-gaṇa-sevye pulakito

vasāmi prāsāde vipula-dhana-rājyānvita iha (4)

May I continuously reside in a small, lonely cottage at
the base of a desire-tree in the most holy abode of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, sanctified by the lotus feet of Śrī
Śacī-nandana. Such a bhajan-kuṭīr is perfectly suitable
for constant remembrance of, and service to the divine
daily sports that are always present in Śrī Vraja-dhāma.
Furthermore, I would never live in any other place, even
if it were greatly frequentedby the most wise sages and
demigods. As far as all other places in this world are
concerned, whether opulent palaces or temples, whether
possessing enormous wealth or princely kingdoms and
property — such places cannot attract me as does my
modest bhajan-kuṭīr in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma.

The real principle of dharma that is devoid of
designations

na varṇe saktir me na khalu mamatā hy āśrama-vidhau

na dharme nādharme mama ratir ihāste kvacid api

paraṁ tat-tad-dharme mama jaḍa-śarīraṁ dhṛtam idam

ato dharmān sarvān su-bhajana-sahāyānn abhilaṣe (5)

I have no attachment to any of the caste divisions of
society such as brāhmana, ksatriya, vaisva or udra. And
I certainly do not identify with any order of life such
as brahmacarya, grhasrha, vanaprastha or sannyasa. I
have no fondness for the so-called piety of religiosity
or even for the so-called impiety of sinful life in this
world, not even the slightest regard. Instead, I truly
desire whatever is practically required to maintain this
material body in order to facilitate my performance of
pure devotional service. This is the actual
righteousness that I will hope for as long as this
material body continues to exist.

Favorable, authorized practices and devotional qualities

su-dainyaṁ sāralyaṁ sakala-sahanaṁ mānada-danaṁ

dayāṁ svīkṛtya śrī-hari-carana-sevā mama tapaḥ

sadācāro “sau me prabhu-pada-parair yaḥ samuditaḥ

prabhoś caitanyasyākṣaya-carita-pīyūṣa-kṛtiṣu (6)

My solemn vow is constant devotion to the lotus feet of
Śrī Hari. In order to execute that vow, I have

                          766
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

endeavored to develop the following qualifies: I
practice great humility in my dealings with everyone; I
try to keep simplicity and purity prominent in all of my
practical arrangements; I maintain extreme tolerance in
all types of favorable or unfavorable circumstances; I
offer all respect unto others, regard1ess of who they
are; I feel genuine compassion for all living entities
and act accordingly. There are many such transcendental
activities recommended by the great devotees who are
fixed-up in unalloyed devotional service to the lotus
feet of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, and these are found described
in the books that are full of the imperishable character
and pastimes of Mahāprabhu Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. Only such
transcendentally nectarean activities, being recommended
by great devotees and practiced by Lord Caitanya
Himself, are indeed my own.

Rejection of things that are disconnected from Śrī
Rādhīkā

na vaikuṇṭhe rājye na ca viṣaya-kārye mama ratir

na nirvāṇe mokṣe mama matir ihāste kṣaṇam api

vrajānandād anyad hari-vilasitaṁ pāvanam api

kathañcin māṁ rādhānvaya-virahitaṁ no sukhayati (7)

I have no attraction for living in Vaikuṇṭha, that part
of the spiritual sky presided over by Śrī Śrī Lakṣmī-
Nārāyana; nor do I desire the useless activities of
gross sense-gratification in this material world. I will
never cherish the desire for attaining the divine bliss
of impersonalistic liberation, even for a second.
Furthermore, there are many transcendental pastimes of
Sri Hari that may be very purifying for all conditioned
souls — yet such pastimes will never give me any real
happiness at all. This is because such pastimes are
quite different from the blissful ecstasies of Vraja-
consciousness, being completely devoid of any
relationship with Śrī Rādhīkā Who is the one and only
fountainhead of pure joy.

Renunciation of all kinds of bad association

na me patnī-kanyā-tanaya-jananī-bandhu-nicayā

harau bhakte bhaktau na khalu yadi teṣāṁ su-mamatā

abhaktānām anna-grahaṇam api doṣo viṣayiṇāṁ

kathaṁ teṣāṁ saṅgād hari-bhajana-siddhir bhavati me? (8)

I now disown my wife, my daughters, my sons, my mother,
and all my friends, if they have no genuine attachment
for Lord Hari, for His devotees, or for His devotional
service. It is definitely a great sin to accept
foodgrains prepared by such non-devotional,
materialistic sense-gratifiers. If I were to remain in
the company of these persons, then how will the eternal
perfection of my hari-bhajana ever come about?




                          767
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

Avoidance of so-called “devotees— who proudly neglect
Śrī Rādhīkā

asat-tarkair andhān jaḍa-sukha-parān kṛṣṇa-vimukhān

ku-nirvāṇāsaktān satatam ati-dūre pariharan

arādhāṁ govindaṁ bhajati nitarāṁ dāmbhikatayā

tad-abhyāse kintu kṣaṇam api na yāmi vratam idam (9)

There are certain persons who appear to be very advanced
in devotion. Indeed, to increase their service to the
Lord, they have long since rejected the evil company of:
those who are blinded by faulty arguments arising from
so-called intellectual logic, those who are addicted to
the fleeting pleasures of the dull material body, those
who are inimical to Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and those who are
fond of the inferior, distasteful concept of liberation
as it is cherished by the impersonalists. Such devotees
have thus favorably avoided all kinds of bad
association; yet it is seen that these persons may
worship Lord Govinda without Śrīmatī Rādhikā being
present. This just shows that they are actually puffed-
up with haughty insolence directed against Śrī Rādhīkā,
who is Herself the best worshipper of Govinda. Therefore
I will never ever go anywhere near such so-called
devotees — even for a second. This is my strict vow.



How to live simply and perform Vraja-bhajana until death

prasādānna-kṣīrāśana-vasana-pātrādibhir ahaṁ

padārthair nirvāhya vyavahṛtim asaṅgaḥ ku-viṣaye

vasann īśa-kṣetre yugala-bhajanānandita-manas

tanuṁ mokṣye kāle yuga-pada-parāṇāṁ pada-tale (10)

Passing my life in a simple, practical way — eating only
prasāda foodgrains and milk products that are the
remnants of the Supreme Lord, and are His mercy, wearing
only prasāda cloth that was offered to the Deity, using
only the pots and utensils sanctified by the Lord’s
exclusive service — I will thus remain completely aloof
from material sense-gratification. Living by the side of
Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa (Her very own abode), worshiping the
Divine Couple with a blissful mind, the time will come
for me to die. At the soles of the devotees— lotus feet,
who are themselves wholly absorbed in serving the lotus
feet of the Divine Couple, I will thus give up my body.

How to worship the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhīkā’s pure
devotee

śacī-sūnor ājñā-grahaṇa-caturo yo vraja-vane

parārādhyāṁ rādhāṁ bhajati nitarāṁ kṛṣṇa-rasikām

ahaṁ tv etat pādāmṛtam anudinaṁ naiṣṭhika-manā

vaheyaṁ vai pītvā śirasi ca mudā sannati-yutaḥ (11)

                          768
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


There is a class of pure devotee who is expert in
following all the instructions of Śrī Śacīnandana. Such
a devotee incessantly worships Śrīmati Rādhārānī
exclusively, who is indeed the most worshipable
Personality, and who is deeply absorbed every day in
relishing the divine mellows of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s association.
The pure devotee of this calibre definitely performs his
confidential worship whole-heartedly and with exclusive
surrender unto Śrī Rādhīkā, always living in Śrī Vraja-
maṇḍala. I shall take the nectarean water that has
washed the lotus feet of such a devotee and carry it on
my head. Drinking it with great joy, and with a devout
heart, I will then happily offer my full prostrations
upon the ground in the nicest, most perfect way that I
possibly can. This will indeed be my routine each and
every day.



Firm determination to transcend māyā by daily following
this stava

harer dāsyaṁ dharmo mama tu cira-kālaṁ prakṛtito

mahā-māyā-yogād abhinipatitaḥ duḥkha-jaladhau

ito yāsyāmy ūrddhvaṁ sva-niyama-su-ratyā prati-dinaṁ

sahāyo me mātraṁ vitatha-dalanī vaiṣṇava-krpā (12)

As a spirit soul, my natural tendency is to be eternally
situated in the loving devotional service of Lord Hari;
however, due to the powerful influence of the Lord’s
mahā-māyā, I have somehow plunged deep into the
fathomless ocean of material misery. I shall transcend
this world of māyā and go to the spiritual world only by
faithfully following these self-imposed vows every day.
And the only way I will get the strength to follow these
vows is by attaining the mercy of all the Vaiṣṇava
devotees of the Lord. May their causeless mercy, which
wards off all illusion, become my exclusive companion
for all of time everlasting.



Phala-śruti - the benediction of eternal service gained
by reading this prayer

kṛtaṁ kenāpy etat sva-bhajana-vidhau svaṁ niyamakāṁ

paṭhed yo viśraddhaḥ priya-yugala-rūpe “rpita manaḥ

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇau bhajati kila saṁprāpya nilayaṁ

sva-mañjaryāḥ paścād vividha-varivasyāṁ sa kurute
(Phala-śruti)

This prayer named Sva-Niyama-Dvādaśakam was written by
someone simply to regulate his own personal mode of
performing bhajana. If any other devotee happens to
chant this stava with a very special quality of resolute
faith, fully offering his mind unto: the supreme
beautiful forms of the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-

                          769
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Govinda, his most dear possession or to the divine
beauty of Their Deity form; or to the beauty or Deity of
Śrī Gaura-sundara, the combined form of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda; or to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the dearmost beloved
devotee of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda and Śrī Gaura-sundara —
then that fortunate reader definitely attains their own
place of eternal residence in Śrī Vraja-dhāma. Always
following behind their mañjarī-guru, in their own
spiritual body of a mañjarī also, they finally render
all kinds of variegated eternal services for the
exclusive worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.



Thus ends section 11.2) Śrī Sva-niyama-dvādaśakam



12) Vaiṣṇava Ke? Who is a Real Vaiṣṇava?

by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura



duṣṭa mana! tumi kiser vaiṣṇava?

pratiṣṭhār tare, nirjaner ghare,

tava “hari nāma— kevala “kaitava— (1)

duṣṭa mana—O wicked mind!; tumi—(are) you; kiser
vaiṣṇava—what kind of devotee?; pratiṣṭhār—of prestige;
tare—on account of; nirjaner ghare—in a solitary
dwelling; tava—your; hari-nāma—chanting of the holy name
of Lord Hari; kevala—only; kaitava—cheating.

O wicked mind! What kind of Vaiṣṇava do you think you
are? Your pretentious show of chanting Lord Hari’s holy
name in a solitary place is only for the sake of
attaining the false prestige of a worldly reputation—it
is nothing but pure hypocrisy.

jaḍer pratiṣṭhā, śukarer viṣṭhā,

jāno nā ki tāhā “māyār vaibhava—

kanaka kāminī, divasa-yāminī,

bhāviyā ki kāja, anitya se saba (2)

jaḍer—of the material realm; pratiṣṭhā—fame; śukarer—of
a pig; viṣṭhā—stool; jāno nā ki—do you not know?; tāhā—
that; māyār—of the illusory material world; vaibhava—
potency; kanaka—gold; kāminī—attractive women; divasa
yāminī—all day and night; bhāviyā—thinking; ki kāja—what
benefit; anitya—temporary; se saba—all those.

Such materialistic prestige is as disgusting as the
stool of a hog. Do you not know that it is only a mere
illusion cast by the potency of Māyā? What is the value
of contemplating day and night your plans for enjoying
wealth and women? All these things are only temporary.

tomār kanaka, bhoger janaka,

                          770
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


kanaker dvāre sevaho “mādhava—

kāminīr kāma, nahe tava dhāma,

tāhār—mālika kevala “yādava— (3)

tomār—your; kanaka—gold; bhoger—of enjoyment; janaka—the
producer; kanaker dvāre—by wealth; sevaho—please serve;
mādhava—Lord Mādhava; kāminīr kāma—lust for beautiful
women; nāhe—not; tava—your; dhāma—proper place; tāhār—
its; mālika—owner; kevala—is only; yādava—Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
Lord of the Yadu dynasty.

When you claim wealth as your own, it creates in you
ever-increasing desires for material enjoyment. Your
riches should be used for serving Mādhava, the Lord of
all wealth. Neither is it your proper place to indulge
in lust for women, whose only true proprietor is Lord
Yādava.

pratiṣṭhāśā-taru, jaḍa-māyā-maru,

nā pela “rāvaṇa— yujhiyā “rāghava—

vaiṣṇavī pratiṣṭhā, tāte koro niṣṭhā,

tāhā nā bhajile labhibe raurava (4)

pratiṣṭhā-āśā—desire for fame; taru—the tree; jaḍa-māyā—
of material illusion; maru—the desert; na—not; pela—
reached; rāvaṇa—the demon named Rāvaṇa; yujhiyā—
fighting; rāghava—with Lord Rāmachandra; vaiṣṇavī—the
position of being a vaiṣṇava; pratiṣṭhā—situation; tāte—
in that; koro niṣṭhā—become fixed; tāhā—that; nā—not;
bhajile—if one worships; labhibe—will obtain; raurava—
hell.

The demon Rāvaṇa (lust-incarnate) fought with Lord
Rāmachandra (love-incarnate) in order to gain the tree
of worldly reputation—but that oasis turned out to be
but a mirage cast in the desert wasteland of the Lord’s
illusory material potency. Please cultivate fixed
determination to attain only the steady and solid
platform whereupon a Vaiṣṇava ever stands. If you
neglect worshiping the Lord from this position, then you
will ultimately attain a hellish existence.

harijana-dveṣa, pratisthāśā-kleśa,

koro keno tabe tāhār gaurava

vaiṣṇaver pāche, pratisthāśā āche,

tā—te kabhu nāhe “anitya-vaibhava— (5)

hari-jana-dveṣa—hatred for the devotees of the Lord;
pratiṣṭhā-āśā—desire for fame and prestige; kleśa—
suffering; koro—you endeavor; keno—why?; tabe—then;
tāhār—its; gaurava—glory; vaiṣṇaver pāche—following
behind the devotees; pratiṣṭhā-āśā—desire for adoration
and distinction; āche—there is; tāte—in that; kabhu nāhe
—never; anitya—impermanent; vaibhava—wealth.


                          771
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Why do you needlessly suffer the torment of blaspheming
the devotees of Lord Hari, attempting to achieve their
eminence, thereby only proving your own fruitless
foolishness? The desire for spiritual eminence is easily
fulfilled when one becomes a devotee of the Lord, for
eternal fame automatically follows the heels of a
Vaiṣṇava. And that fame is never to be considered a
temporary worldly opulence.

se hari-sambandha, śūnya-māyā-gandha,

tāhā kabhu noy “jaḍer kaitava—

pratiṣṭhā-caṇḍālī, nirjanatā-jāli,

ubhaye jāniho māyika raurava (6)

se—that; hari-sambandha—relationship with Lord Hari;
śūnya—free from; māyā-gandha—a scent of illusion; tāhā—
that; kabhu noy—never; jaḍer—of materialism; kaitava—
cheating; pratiṣṭhā—worldy reputation; caṇḍālī—female
dog-eater; nirjanatā—solitary living; jāli—the net;
ubhaye—in both; jāniho—you should know; māyika—illusory;
raurava—hell.

The relationship between a devotee and Lord Hari is
devoid of even a trace of worldly illusion; it has
nothing to do with the materialistic cheating
propensity. The prestige of so-called popularity in the
material realm is compared to a treacherous dog-eating
witch, and the attempt to live in solitude to supposedly
engage in unalloyed bhajan is compared to an entangling
network of distraction. Please know that anyone striving
in either of these ways verily lives in the hell of
Māyā’s illusion.

kīrtana chāḍibo, pratiṣṭhā mākhibo,

ki kāja ḍhuḍiyā tādṛśa gaurava

mādhavendra purī, bhāva-ghare curi,

nā korilo kabhu sadāi jānabo (7)

kīrtana—chanting the Lord’s names; chāḍibo—I will give
up; pratiṣṭhā—worldly reputation; mākhibo—I will besmear
myself; ki kāja—what benefit; ḍhuḍiyā—seeking; tādṛśa—
that kind of; gaurava—grandeur; mādhavendra purī—
Mādhavendra Purī; bhāva-ghare—in the storehouse of
perception; curi—stealing; nā korilo—he did not do;
kabhu—ever; sadāi—always; jānabo—I will remind you.

“I shall give up chanting the Lord’s name publicly in
kīrtan and retire to solitude, thus smearing myself with
worldly honor.” Dear mind, what is the good of seeking
such so-called glory? I will always remind you that the
great soul Mādhavendra Purī never deceived himself in
that regard by committing theft in his own storehouse of
perception the way you do.

tomār pratiṣṭhā, “śukarer viṣṭhā—,

tār saha sama kabhu nā mānava


                          772
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

matsaratā-vaśe, tumi jaḍa-rase,

majecho chāḍiyā kīrtana-sauṣṭava (8)

tomār—your; pratiṣṭhā—popularity; śukarer viṣṭhā—the
stool of a hog; tār-saha—with that; sama—equal; kabhu nā
—never; mānava—an ordinary human being; matsaratā—envy,
pride; vaśe—under the control of; tumi—you; jaḍa-rase—in
the mellows of mundane sense pleasures; majecho—you are
sunk; chāḍiyā—having given up; kīrtana-sauṣṭava—the
excellence of the saṅkīrtana movement.

Your cheap reputation is like the stool of a hog. An
ordinary ambitious man like you can never be equated
with a devotee of Mādhavendra Purī’s eminence. Under the
sway of envy, you have drowned yourself in the filthy
waters of material enjoyment after having abandoned the
excellent perfection of congregational kīrtan.

tāi duṣṭa mana, “nirjana bhajan,—

pracāricho chale “kuyogī-vaibhava—

prabhu sanātane, parama jatane,

śikṣā dilo yāhā, cinto sei saba (9)

tāi—therefore; duṣṭa mana—O wicked mind!; nirjana bhajan
—solitary worship; pracāricho—you are preaching; chale—
by trick; ku-yogī-vaibhava—the opulence of a false yogī;
prabhu—Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu; sanātane—to Sanātana
Goswāmī; parama jatane—with great care; śikṣā dilo—gave
instructions; yāhā—which; cinto—please contemplate; sei
saba—all those.

Truly, O wicked mind, the glories of so-called solitary
worship are propagated only by false yogīs using
unscrupulous means to deceive others. To save yourself
from these pitfalls, please contemplate the instructions
that the Supreme Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu kindly
gave us while addressing Śrīla Sanātana Goswāmī with the
utmost care

sei du—ṭi kathā, bhulo— nā sarvathā,

uccaiḥ-svare koro “hari-nāma-rava—

“phalgu— ār “yukta,— “baddha— ār “mukta,—

kabhu nā bhāviho, ekākār saba (10)

sei—these; du—ṭi—two; kathā—topics; bhulo— nā—don—t
forget; sarvathā—in all circumstances; uccaiḥ-svare—in a
loud voice; koro—perform; hari-nāma-rava—the sound of
chanting the Lord’s holy names; phalgu—false; ār—and;
yukta—befitting (linked with Kṛṣṇa); baddha—bound in
māyā; ār—and; mukta—liberated; kabhu nā—never; bhāviho—
consider; ekākār—one in the same form; saba—all these.

Do not forget for a moment the two most valuable
concepts that He taught: 1) the rejection of dry,
apparent renunciation and acceptance real, appropriate
renunciation; and 2) the principle of a soul being
trapped in the bondage of matter as opposed to a soul

                          773
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

who is liberated. Don—t ever make the mistake of
thinking that these conflicting concepts are on the same
level. Please remember this while engaging yourself in
chanting the Lord’s holy names as loud as you possibly
can.

“kanaka-kāminī,— “pratiṣṭhā-bāghinī,—

chāḍiyāche jāre, sei to— vaiṣṇava

sei “anāsakta,— sei “śuddha-bhakta,—

saṁsār tathā pāy parābhava (11)

kanaka-kāminī—enjoyment of wealth and women; pratiṣṭhā-
bāghinī—the tigress of worldly reputation; chāḍiyāche—
has given up; jāre—who; sei—he; to——certainly; vaiṣṇava—
a devotee; sei—he; anāsakta—unattached; sei—he alone;
śuddha-bhakta—is a pure devotee; saṁsār—the material
world; tathā—in this manner; pāy—gets; parābhava—
defeated.

One is truly a Vaiṣṇava who has given up the habit of
falling victim to the ferocious tigress of wealth,
beauty, and fame. Such a soul is factually detached from
material life, and is known as a pure devotee. Someone
with this consciousness of detachment has thereby become
victorious over the mundane world of birth and death.

yathā-yogya bhoga, nāhi tathā roga,

“anāsakta— sei, ki ār kahabo

“āsakti-rohita,— “sambandha-sahita,—

viṣaya-samuha sakali “mādhava— (13)

yathā-yogya—whatever is necessary for survival; bhoga—
enjoyment; nāhi—is not; tathā—in that way; roga—the
disease (of materialism); anāsakta—detached; sei—he; ki
ār—what more; kahabo—shall I say; āsakti-rohita—devoid
of attachment; sambandha-sahita—endowed with a
relationship; viṣaya-samuha—the multitude of sense
objects; sakali—all; mādhava—Lord Mādhava.

One is indeed detached who moderately partakes of
worldly things that are necessary for practising in
devotional service; a devotee acting in that manner does
not fall prey to the disease of material infatuation.
Thus devoid of selfish attachment, and endowed with the
ability to see things in relation to the Lord, all sense
objects are then directly perceived as being Lord
Mādhava Himself.

se “yukta-vairāgya,— tāhā to— saubhāgya,

tāhā-i jaḍete harir vaibhava

kīrtane jāhār, “pratiṣṭhā-sambhār,—

tāhār sampatti kevala “kaitava— (14)

se—this; yukta-vairāgya—renunciation that is connected
with Kṛṣṇa’s enjoyment; tāhā—that; to——indeed; saubhāgya

                          774
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

—great fortune; tāhā-i—only that; jaḍete—in the material
world; harir—of Lord Hari; vaibhava—the opulence;
kīrtane—in chanting the Lord’s names; jāhār—whose;
pratiṣṭhā-sambhār—heaps of ambition for recognition;
tāhār—its; sampatti—opulence; kevala—only; kaitava—
cheating.

This is the standard of befitting renunciation, and one
who realises this is most fortunate indeed. Everything
involved in such a devotee’s life represents Lord Hari’s
personal spiritual opulence as manifest in the world of
matter. On the other hand, one who engages in chanting
the Lord’s name with hopes of enhancing his own material
reputation finds that all his activities and
paraphernalia represent only the riches of hypocrisy.

viṣaya-mumukṣu, “bhoger bubhukṣu,—

du—ye tyajo mana, dui “avaiṣṇava—

“kṛṣṇer sambandha,— aprākṛta-skandha,

kabhu nāhe tāhā jaḍer sambhava (15)

viṣaya-mumukṣu—one who desires liberation from the
material world; bhoger bubhukṣu—one who desires to enjoy
sense gratification; du—ye—both; tyajo—please reject;
mana—O mind!; dui—the two; avaiṣṇava—non-devotees;
kṛṣṇer—with Kṛṣṇa; sambandha—relationship; aprākṛta-
skandha—things belonging to the transcendental realm;
kabhu nāhe—never; tāhā—that; jaḍer sambhava—of material
origin.

O mind, please reject the company of two types of
persons—those desiring impersonal liberation from the
material world, and those who desire to enjoy the
pleasure of material sense objects. Both of these are
equally non-devotees. The things that are used in
relation to Lord Kṛṣṇa are objects belonging directly to
the transcendental realm, and thus having nothing to do
with matter they cannot be either owned or forsaken by
persons interested in mundane enjoyment or renunciation.

“māyāvādī jana,— kṛṣṇetara mana,

mukta abhimāne se ninde vaiṣṇava

vaiṣṇaver dās, tava bhakti-āś,

keno vā ḍākicho nirjana-āhava (16)

māyāvādī jana—the impersonalist; kṛṣṇetara—opposed to
Kṛṣṇa; mana—mentality; mukta abhimāne—proudly
considering himself liberated; se—he; ninde—blasphemes;
vaiṣṇava—the devotees; vaiṣṇaver dās—servant of the
devotees; tava—your; bhakti-āś—devotional desire; keno
vā—why then; ḍākicho—you call out; nirjana-āhava—
fighting for solitude.

An impersonal philospher is opposed to thinking of Kṛṣṇa
as an object of devotion, and thus being puffed up with
the false pride of imaginary liberation he dares to
criticize the true devotees of the Lord. O mind, you are
the servant of the Vaiṣṇavas, and you should always hope

                          775
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

for attaining devotion. Why then do you make such a loud
commotion by calling to me and trying to prove the
supposed supremacy of your practice of solitary worship?

je “phalgu-vairāgī,— kohe nije “tyāgī,—

se nā pāre kabhu hoite “vaiṣṇava—

hari-pada chāḍi—, “nirjanatā bāḍi,—

labhiyā ki phala, “phalgu— se vaibhava (17)

je—who; phalgu-vairāgī—false renunciant; kohe nije—calls
himself; tyāgī—an accomplished renunciant; se—he; nā
pāre—is not able; kabhu hoite—to ever be; vaiṣṇava—a
devotee; hari-pada—the lotus feet of the Lord; chāḍi——
rejecting; nirjanatā bāḍi—residence in solitude; labhiyā
—obtaining; ki phala—what result?; phalgu—false; se
vaibhava—that opulence.

One who falsely gives up things that could actually be
used in the Lord’s service proudly calls himself a
“renunciate,— but unfortunately he can never become a
Vaiṣṇava by such an attitude. Abandoning his
servitorship to the lotus feet of Lord Hari, and
resigning himself to his solitary home—whatever is
gained by that exercise can only be the worthless
treasure of deception.



rādhā-dāsye rohi—, chāḍi “bhoga-ahi,—

“pratiṣṭhāśā— nahe “kīrtana-gaurava—

“rādhā-nitya-jana,— tāhā chāḍi— mana,

keno vā nirjana-bhajana-kaitava (18)

rādhā-dāsye—in service to Śrī Rādhā; rohi——remaining;
chāḍi—giving up; bhoga-ahi—the snake of selfish
enjoyment; pratiṣṭhā-āśā—ambition for prestige; nahe—is
not; kīrtana-gaurava—the glory of congregational
chanting; rādhā-nitya-jana—being the eternal servant of
Rādhā; tāhā chāḍi——rejecting that; mana—O mind!; keno vā
—why then; nirjana-bhajana—solitary worship; kaitava—
cheating.

Ever engage yourself in the service of Śrī Rādhā, and
keep aloof from the vicious snake of materialistic sense
gratification. The glory of participating in the Lord’s
kīrtana is not meant to bolster anyone’s ambitions for
personal recognition. O mind, why then have you
abandoned the identity of being Rādhā’s eternal servant
in favour of retiring to a solitary place to practice
the cheating process of so-called bhajan?



vraja-vāsī-gaṇa, pracāraka-dhana,

pratiṣṭhā-bhikṣuka tā—rā nahe “śava—

prāṇa āche tā—r, se-hetu pracār,

                          776
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017


pratiṣṭhāśā-hīna-—kṛṣṇa-gāthā— saba (19)

vraja-vāsī-gaṇa—the residents of Vraja; pracāraka—
preachers; dhana—the treasure; pratiṣṭhā-bhikṣuka—
beggars for worldly fame; tā—rā—they; nahe—are not; śava
—a dead body; prāṇa āche—there is life; tā—r—theirs; se-
hetu—for that reason; pracār—preaching; pratiṣṭhā-āśā-
hīna—devoid of ambition for fame; kṛṣṇa-gāthā—songs
about Kṛṣṇa; saba—all.

The most valuable treasures amongst the Lord’s preachers
are the eternal personalities residing in Vraja-dhāma.
They never occupy themselves with begging for worthless
material reputation, which is cherished only by the
living dead. The Vraja-vāsīs are truly infused with
life, and therefore they preach in order to give life to
the walking corpses of the mundane world. All the songs
that the Vraja-vāsīs sing about the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
are devoid of any tinge of desire for fame.

śrī-dayita-dās, kīrtanete āś,

koro uccaiḥ-svare “hari-nāma-rava—

kīrtana-prabhāve, smaraṇa haibe,

se kāle bhajana-nirjana sambhava (20)

śrī-dayita-dās—the servant of Rādhā and Her beloved
Kṛṣṇa (Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī); kīrtanete—for
congregational chanting; āś—desirous; koro—please
perform; uccaiḥ-svare—in a loud voice; hari-nāma-rava—
the sound of Hari’s holy names; kīrtana-prabhāve—by the
power of the chanting; smaraṇa—remembering of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes; haibe—will be ; se kāle—at that time;
bhajana-nirjana—worship in solitude; sambhava—possible.

This humble servant of Rādhā and Her beloved Kṛṣṇa
always hopes for kīrtana, and he begs all to loudly sing
the names of Lord Hari. The transcendental power of
congregational chanting automatically awakens
remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His divine pastimes in
relation to one’s own eternal spiritual form. Only at
that time does it become possible to go off to a
solitary place and engage in the confidential worship of
Their Lordships.

Thus ends section 12) “Vaiṣṇava Ke? Who is a Real
Vaiṣṇava?—



13) Śrī Rādhā Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam

Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja explains
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa tattva and Gaura-tattva in this bhajana
(purports by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja)

rādhā-cintā-niveśena yasya kāntir vilopitā

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇaṁ vande rādhāliṅgita-vigraham (1)

Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam 1/BPKG pp. 495-522/

                          777
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

SGG p. 172

I worship the lotus feet of that form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa when,
due to being thoroughly immersed in separation from
Śrīmatī Rādhikā (who is displaying māna, Her mood of
jealous anger), His own dark complexion vanishes and He
assumes Her bright, golden luster; or, I worship the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as He is embraced by Śrīmatī
Rādhikā (after Her māna has broken).

rādhā viśleṣataḥ kṛṣṇaḥ hy ekadā prema-vihvalaḥ

rādhā-mantraṁ japan dhyāyan rādhā sarvatra paśyati

Vārāha-saṁhitā/BPKG p. 497

[After Śrī Rādhā disappeared from the rāsa dance, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa searched for Her everywhere and when He could not
find Her, He sat at Imli-tala,] Śrī Kṛṣṇa went on madly
chanting rādhā-mantra in deep separation from Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and meditating on Her. Gradually Rādhikā began
to manifest Herself to Him everywhere. As He started to
feel Her presence inwardly and outwardly, He became like
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and His bodily lustre also became like
that of Rādhikā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s commentary: The meaning of
rādhā-liṅgita above is as follows: Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
the crest jewel of the dynasty of rasika Vaiṣṇavas,
wrote the śloka, hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-
sandīpitaḥ. Here he indicates the form of Hari which is
effulgent with the radiance of gold, meaning the form of
Kṛṣṇa which is radiant with Rādhā’s golden splendour
when He is deeply absorbed in thoughts of Her. Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara, who is an intimate associate of Śrī
Gaurasundara and is also the rasa-śāstra guru, has
indicated the same mood in his kaḍacā (diary), rādhā-
bhāva-dyuti-suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa-svarūpam (4.3): “I
offer my obeisances again and again to that Kṛṣṇa who is
resplendent with the lustre and intrinsic mood of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.” (BPKG p. 498)



nā so ramaṇa, nā hāma ramaṇī

duṅhu-mana manobhava peṣala jāni—

e sakhi, se-saba prema-kāhinī

kānu-ṭhāme kahabi vichurala jāni—

CC Mad 8.194/BPKG pp. 499, 505

nā—not; so—He; ramaṇa—the enjoyer; nā—not; hāma—I;
ramaṇī—the enjoyed; duṅhu-mana—both the minds; manaḥ-
bhava—the mental situation; peṣala—pressed together;
jāni——knowing; e—this; sakhī—My dear friend; se-saba—all
those; prema-kāhinī—affairs of love; kānu-ṭhāme—before
Kṛṣṇa; kahabi—you will say; vichurala—He has forgotten;
jāni——knowing.

[In the madness of love in separation, virahinī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā says:] “Our prema attained its ultimate climax

                             778
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

in just the briefest blink of an eye. We have met each
other in such a way that We have become one; I have even
forgotten that I am the beloved and You are My lover.
Now I am separated from You and this loving vilāsa has
become like a mere story. Is this the path that virtuous
persons follow in their pursuit of love?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: This poem has disclosed the
ultimate stage of milana (meeting), in which Kṛṣṇa is
completely embraced by Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



Rāmānanda Rāya gets darśana of the confidential form of
Mahāprabhu

pahile dekhiluṅ tomāra sannyāsi-svarūpa

ebe tomā dekhi muñi śyāma-gopa-rūpa

tomāra sammukhe dekhi kāñcana-pañcālikā

tāṅra gaura-kāntye tomāra sarva aṅga ḍhākā

tāhāte prakaṭa dekhoṅ sa-vaṁśī vadana

nānā bhāve cañcala tāhe kamala-nayana

ei-mata tomā dekhi— haya camatkāra

akapaṭe kaha, prabhu, kāraṇa ihāra

CC Mad 8.268-271/BPKG p. 499

pahile—in the beginning; dekhiluṅ—I saw; tomāra—Your;
sannyāsi-svarūpa—form of a sannyasī; ebe—now; tomā—You;
dekhi—see; muñi—I; śyāma-gopa-rūpa—form of Śyāmasundara,
the cowherd boy; tomāra—of You; sammukhe—in front; dekhi
—I see; kāñcana-pañcālikā—a doll made of gold; tāṅra—of
it; gaura-kāntye—by a golden complexion; tomāra—Your;
sarva—all; aṅga—body; ḍhākā—covering; tāhāte—in that;
prakaṭa—manifested; dekhoṅ—I see; sa-vaṁśī—with the
flute; vadana—the face; nānā bhāve—in various modes;
cañcala—restless; tāhe—in that; kamala-nayana—the lotus
eyes; ei-mata—in this way; tomā—You; dekhi——seeing; haya
—there is; camatkāra—wonder; akapaṭe—without duplicity;
kaha—please tell; prabhu—my Lord; kāraṇa—the cause;
ihāra—of this.

[A doubt arose in Rāyā Rāmānanda Prabhu’s heart and he
enquired from Śrīman Mahāprabhu:] “Earlier I saw You in
the dress of a sannyāsī but now I see You in the form of
a bluish cowherd boy. At the same time I am witnessing
another most uncommon phenomenon. It is as if a
magnificently beautiful doll (the form of a gopī,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā) is standing in front of You, covering
all the limbs of Your body with Her golden lustre. I am
directly perceiving that in that form You are holding a
flute to Your lips, and Your lotus eyes are dancing here
and there, displaying a mood of deep hankering. Please
be merciful to me and tell me without duplicity what is
the reason for Your manifesting such a form.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: The deep and confidential

                          779
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

purport of these four ślokas is that Kṛṣṇa’s radiant
bluish lustre is covered by Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s radiant
golden lustre, because each and every limb of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is embraced by each and every limb of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
body. The body of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who carries the flute
remains unchanged; only His lustre becomes golden. It is
this very form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is embraced by Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, which is worshipped in all the temples of our
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Society.



Viṣaya and Āśraya Bhagavān, Sevya and Sevaka, Bhoktā and
Bhogya

sevya-sevaka-sambhoge dvayor bhedaḥ kuto bhavet

vipralambhe tu sarvasya bhedaḥ sadā vivarddhate (2)

Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam 2

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa (sevya — who always takes service from
sevaka) and Śrīmatī Rādhikā (sevaka — who is always
doing sevā to sevya) meet together and enjoy each other,
how can there be any distinction between Them? But in
vipralambha Their feelings of separateness perpetually
intensify. [Sevya is bhoktā Bhagavān — who is always
enjoying. Sevaka is bhogya — who is enjoyed. At time of
meeting there is no bheda, difference, between Them —
They are abheda, non-different. In separation, the bheda
mood especially increases.]

Acintya-bhedābheda

cil-līlā-mithunaṁ tattvaṁ bhedābhedam acintyakam

śakti-śaktimator aikyaṁ yugapad varttate sadā (3)

Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam 3

By the influence of acintya-śakti, the Divine Couple,
śakti (potency) and śaktimān (the possessor of potency)
who perform unlimited transcendental pastimes, are
forever simultaneously different and non-different.
[Para-tattva is never without śakti. When śakti-śaktimān
are one svarūpa, in one body, then Gaura-tattva is
manifest, and when They are separate in two bodies,
Kṛṣṇa as līlā-purusottama enjoys loving pastimes with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.]



Although the Supreme Truth is one, His pastimes appear
in two forms

tattvam ekaṁ paraṁ vidyāl līlayā tad dvidhā sthitam

gauraḥ kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ hy etad ubhāv ubhayam āpnutaḥ (4)

Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam 4

Although the Supreme Truth is one, in order to enjoy
loving pastimes He appears in two forms: that of
Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa and that of Śrī Gaurasundara, both of

                          780
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

whom are directly Svayam Bhagavān (and whose
contradictory qualities are fully harmonized by acintya-
śakti). [The usage of the word varṇa (complexion) in
verse 5 and the word guṇa (quality) in verse 6
establishes śrī-gaura-tattva to be as worshipable as
śrī-kṛṣṇa-tattva]

Gaura-kānti and Śyāma-kānti

sarve varṇāḥ yatrāviṣṭāḥ gaura-kāntir vikāśate

sarva-varṇena hīnas tu kṛṣṇa-varṇaḥ prakāśate (5)

Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam 5

Wherever all the colours are combined, a golden hue
(gaura-kānti) is manifest; for example, although all
colours are present in the sun, its hue is golden. On
the other hand, in the absence of all colour, black
(śyāma-kānti) is manifest (and according to the opinion
of modern scientists, black is actually devoid of
colour).

Saguṇa (Gaurasundara) and nirguṇa (Śyāmasundara) are
non-different

saguṇaṁ nirguṇaṁ tattvam ekam evādvitīyakam

sarva-nitya-guṇair gauraḥ kṛṣṇau rasas tu nirguṇaiḥ (6)

Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam 6

There is no difference between the Supreme Truth who is
one without a second, whether He manifests as saguṇa
(possessed of transcendental attributes — gaura-kānti)
or nirguṇa (devoid of material attributes — śyāma-
kānti). They are one and the same. Śrī Gaurasundara
possesses all eternal divine qualities and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the embodiment of rasa which is completely devoid of
mundane qualities.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaurāṅga are both the supreme Brahman

śrī kṛṣṇaṁ mithunaṁ brahma tyaktvā tu nirguṇaṁ hi tat

upāsate mṛṣā vijñāḥ yathā tuṣāvaghātinaḥ (7)

Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam 7

Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaurāṅga are both the supreme Brahman.
Those who abandon serving Them to worship the formless
Brahman never attain factual liberation and are
precisely like those who try to extract rice by beating
empty husks — all they obtain is their fruitless, hard
labour.



By the mercy of my Gurudeva I worship Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-
bihārī

śrī vinoda-bihārī yo rādhayā milito yadā

tadāhaṁ vandanaṁ kuryāṁ sarasvatī-prasādataḥ (8)

                          781
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam 8

By the mercy of my Gurudeva Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda,
I worship Śrī Vinoda-bihārī and Śrīmatī Rādhikā as They
meet and take Their darśana at that time.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Thus, in this prayer the poet
aspires to be eternally engaged in his siddha-svarūpa in
the permanent sevā of that Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is embraced by
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



Phala-Śruti

iti tattvāṣṭakaṁ nityaṁ yaḥ paṭhet śraddhayānvitaḥ

kṛṣṇa-tattvam abhijñāya gaura-pade bhaven matiḥ (9)

Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam 9

Whoever daily recites this aṣṭakam with faith will fully
comprehend kṛṣṇa-tattva and become immersed in
meditation upon the lotus feet of Śrī Gaurasundara.



Thus ends section 13) Śrī Rādhā Vinoda-bihārī
Tattvāṣṭakam




14) The Holy Dhāma



Śrī Mathurā-dhāma bestows liberation and devotion

jayati mathurā-devī śreṣṭhā purīṣu mano-ramā

parama-dayitā kaṁsārāter jani-sthiti-rañjitā

durita-haraṇān mukter bhakter api pratipādanāj

jagati mahitā tat-tat-krīḍā-kathāstu vidūrataḥ

Bṛhad Bhagavatāmṛtam 1.1.4

jayati—all glories; mathurā-devī—to goddess Mathurā-
devī; śreṣṭhā—the best; purīṣu—of holy cities; manaḥ-
ramā—attractive to the mind; parama-dayitā—most dear;
kaṁsa-arāteḥ—to Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Kaṁsa; jani-sthiti—
with His birthplace; rañjitā—adorned; durita—misfortune;
haraṇāt—due to dispelling; mukteḥ—of liberation; bhakteḥ
—and devotion; api—also; pratipādanāt—due to the
providing; jagati—throughout the world; mahitā—
acclaimed; tat-tat—various; krīḍā—of His pastimes; kathā
—the mentioning; astu—let it remain; vidūrataḥ—distant.

All glories to goddess Mathurā-devī, the best of holy
cities! She enchants the mind, she is most dear to the

                             782
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

enemy of Kaṁsa, and she is adorned with the Lord’s
birthplace. The city of Mathurā is acclaimed throughout
the world for dispelling misery and bestowing liberation
and devotion, not to mention the various pastimes the
Lord has played there.



Śrī Navavīpa-dhāma - where the original mellow of
mādhurya is bestowed

navīna-śrī-bhaktiṁ nava-kanaka-gaurākṛti-patiṁ

navāraṇya-śreṇī-nava-sura-sarid-vāta-valitam

navīna-śrī-rādhā-hari-rasamayotkīrtana-vidhiṁ

navadvīpaṁ vande nava-karuṇa-mādyan nava-rucim

Śrī Navadvīpa-Śataka, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī

I worship Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, where Kṛṣṇa appeared in a
golden form and bestowed that bhakti which had never
been given before; where the newly arisen forest is made
more beautiful by the flowing Gaṅgā with her gentle,
cool breezes; where Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī Hari
appeared in a unique, combined form to give a novel form
of loud kīrtana which is saturated with rasa; where an
ever-fresh, transcendental taste (of the original
devotional mellow, śṛṅgāra-rasa) is mercifully bestowed.



In Śrī Vṛndāvana Krsna increases the pleasure of the
gopis by sweetly playing on His flute, inviting them for
the rasa dance

jayati jayati vṛndāraṇyam etan murāreḥ

priyatamam ati-sādhusvānta-vaikuṇṭha-vāsāt

ramayati sa sadā gāḥ pālayan yatra gopīḥ

svarita-madhura-veṇur vardhayan prema rāse

Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛtm 1.1.5

jayati jayati—all glories, all glories; vṛnda-araṇyam—to
Vṛndāvana forest; etat—this; murāreḥ—of Lord Kṛṣṇa;
priya-tamam—most dear; ati—more; sādhu—of elevated
saints; sva-anta—in their hearts; vaikuṇṭha—in
Vaikuṇṭha; vāsāt—than residing; ramayati—gives pleasure;
saḥ—He (Kṛṣṇa); sadā—always; gāḥ—the cows; pālayan—while
tending; yatra—where; gopīḥ—to the gopīs; svarita—is
sounded; madhura—sweetly; veṇuḥ—whose flute; vardhayan—
increasing; prema—pure love; rāse—in the mood of the
rāsa dance.

All glories, all glories to this place where we are
living, Lord Murāri’s Vṛndāvana forest! He prefers
residing here to residing in Vaikuṇṭha or in the hearts
of elevated saints. In Vṛndāvana, while always tending
His cows, He gives pleasure to the gopīs, whose love for
Him in the mood of the rāsa dance He increases by

                            783
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

sweetly playing His flute.



The “purāṇa-puruṣa— Śrī Kṛṣṇa wanders in Vraja disguised
as a human being

puṇyā bata vraja-bhuvo yad ayaṁ nṛ-liṅga-

gūḍhaḥ purāṇa-puruṣo vana-citra-mālyaḥ

gāḥ pālayan saha-balaḥ kvaṇayaṁś ca veṇuṁ

vikrīdayāñcati giritra-ramārcitāṅghriḥ

SB 10.44.13/STB p. 84/BMP p. 380

puṇyāḥ—pious; bata—indeed; vraja-bhuvaḥ—the various
regions of the land of Vraja; yat—in which; ayam—this;
nṛ—human; liṅga—by characteristics; gūḍhaḥ—disguised;
purāṇa-puruṣaḥ—the primeval Personality of Godhead; vana
—composed of flowers and other items of the forest;
citra—of wonderful variety; mālyaḥ—whose garlands; gāḥ—
the cows; pālayan—herding; saha—together with; balaḥ—
Lord Balarāma; kvaṇayan—vibrating; ca—and; veṇum—His
flute; vikrīḍayā—with various pastimes; añcati—He moves
about; giritra—by Lord Śiva; ramā—and the goddess of
fortune; arcita—worshiped; aṅghriḥ—His feet.

Aho! how pious are the tracts of land in Vraja for there
the parama-purāṇa-puruṣa Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is worshipped by
Śiva and Lakṣmī, wanders disguised as a human being.
Adorned with an astonishing multi-colored garland of
flowers, He tends the cows accompanied by Baladeva and
His sakhās, vibrating His sweet flute and absorbed in
various kinds of krīḍā-vilāsa.



Taking shelter of Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma

śrī-vṛndāvana mama pāvanaṁ tvam eva

śrī-vṛndāvana mama jīvanaṁ tvam eva

śrī-vṛndāvana mama bhūṣaṇaṁ tvam eva

śrī-vṛndāvana mama sad-yaśas tvam eva

Śrī Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta,12.78, Prabhodanānda Sarasvati/
BRSB p.109

śrī-vṛndāvana—O Vṛndāvana, the abode of Śrī Rādhikā;
mama—my; pāvanaṁ—purifier; tvam—you; eva—indeed; mama—
my; jīvanaṁ—life; tvam—you; eva—indeed; mama—my;
bhūṣaṇaṁ—ornament; tvam—you; mama—my; sad-yaśaḥ—eternal
fame; tvam—you; eva—indeed.

O Śrī Vṛndāvana, Rādhikā’s abode, you are my purity, you
are my life and soul, you are my ornament and my eternal
fame.




                             784
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Śrī Yamunā - The Sweet River of Vraja

bhrātur antakasya pattane —bhipatti-hāriṇī

prekṣayāti-pāpino —pi pāpa-sindhu-tāriṇī

nīra-mādhurībhir apy aśeṣa-citta-bandhinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī

Śrī Yamunāṣṭakam 1, Stava-mālā

May Yamunā-devī, the daughter of the sun-god Sūrya,
always purify me. She saves those who touch her from
going to the realm of her brother Yamarāja, and merely
seeing her exonerates even greatly wicked people from
the ocean of their sinful deeds. The attractiveness of
her waters captivates everyone’s heart.



Śrī Yamunā - The Supreme Purifier

cidānanda-bhānoḥ sadā nanda-sūnoḥ

para-prema-pātrī drava-brahma-gātrī

aghānāṁ lavitrī jagat-kṣema-dhātrī

pavitrī-kriyān no vapur mitra-putrī

Padma Purāṇa/Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka 5.13/CC Mad
3.28/BMP p. 388

cit-ānanda-bhānoḥ—of the sun (direct manifestation) of
cognizance and bliss; sadā—always; nanda-sūnoḥ—of the
son of Mahārāja Nanda; para-prema-pātrī—the giver of the
highest love; drava-brahma-gātrī—composed of the water
of the spiritual world; aghānām—of all sins and
offenses; lavitrī—the destroyer; jagat-kṣema-dhātrī—the
mother who provides everything auspicious for the world;
pavitrī-kriyāt—kindly purify; naḥ—our; vapuḥ—existence;
mitra-putrī—the daughter of the sun-god.

May Yamunā-devī is the abode of the most exalted prema
for that son of Nanda who is the sun and embodiment of
spiritual cognizance and bliss. Her form is liquid
transcendence. She forgives sins and offences and she
nourishes the living beings of this world with motherly
affection. May that daughter of the Sun-god purify me.

Śrī Yamunā immerses everyone in the waters of nectarean
devotional ecstasy

gaṅgādi-tīrtha-pariṣevita-pāda-padmāṁ

goloka-saukhya-rasa-pūramahiṁ mahimnā

āplāvitākhila-sudhā-sujalāṁ sukhābdhau

rādhā-mukunda-muditāṁ yamunāṁ namāmi

Padma Purāṇa/BMP p.389


                          785
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

I offer praṇāmas time and again unto Śrī Yamunā-devī,
whose lotus feet are being served by the purifying holy
places headed by the Gaṅgā, who is glorious due to
possessing devotion for Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the mood of
mādhurya-rasa, who is the ocean which immerses everyone
in the waters of nectarean devotional ecstasy, and who
always provides Śrī Rādhā-Mukunda with great happiness.



Śrī Yamunā carries the nectar flowing from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet

jayati taraṇi-putrī dharma-rāja-svasā yā

kalayati mathurāyāḥ sakhyam atyeti gaṅgām

mura-hara-dayitā tat-pāda-padma-prasūtaṁ

vahati ca makarandaṁ nīra-pūra-cchalena

Śrī Bṛhad Bhagavatāmṛtam 1.1.6

jayati—all glories; taraṇi-putrī—to the daughter of the
sun-god; dharma-rāja—of the lord of death; svasā—the
sister; yā—who; kalayati—has established; mathurāyāḥ—
with Mathurā District; sakhyam—friendship; atyeti—who
exceeds; gaṅgām—the river Gaṅgā; mura-hara—to the killer
of Mura; dayitā—beloved; tat—from His; pāda-padma—lotus
feet; prasūtam—which is generated; vahati—she carries;
ca—and; makarandam—the nectar; nīra-pūra—a body of
water; chalena—on the pretext of being.

All glories to Śrī Yamunā, the daughter of the sun-god
and sister of Yamarāja. She is the beloved of Kṛṣṇa, the
killer of Mura, and has exceeded the greatness of
Gaṅgādevī in her friendhip with Him. Having made
intimate friendship with Mathurādevi she always embraces
her, and disguised as ordinary water, her waves flow
with the honey of the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Śrī Govardhana - The Sweet Hill of Mādhurya Pastimes

govardhano jayati śaila-kulādhirājo

yo gopikābhir udito hari-dāsa-varyaḥ

kṛṣṇena śakra-makha-bhaṅga-kṛtārcito yaḥ

saptāham asya kara-padma-tale —py avātsīt

Śrī Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛtam 1.1.7

govardhanaḥ—to Govardhana Hill; jayati—all glories;
śaila—of mountains; kula—of the community; adhirājaḥ—the
king; yaḥ—which; gopikābhiḥ—by the gopīs; uditaḥ—
proclaimed; hari—of Lord Hari; dāsa—of all the servants;
varyaḥ—the best; kṛṣṇena—by Lord Kṛṣṇa; śakra—of Indra;
makha—the sacrifice; bhaṅga—breaking; kṛta—done; arcitaḥ
—worshipped; yaḥ—which; sāpta—seven; aham—for days; asya
—of Him; kara—hand; padma—lotus; tale—on the surface;
api—also; avatsit—rested.

                          786
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Glory to Govardhan, the emperor of the race of mountains
(including Sumeru). The gopīs proclaim Govardhana to be
hari-dāsa-varyaḥ, the best servant of Śrī Hari, and thus
He was worshiped by Śrī Kṛṣṇa after that charming child
halted the Indra-yajña performed by the Vrajavāsīs.
Thereafter Govardhana was held in Kṛṣṇa’s lotus hand for
seven days.



Śrī Govardhana - who rested sweetly on Krsna’s hand for
seven days

saptāham evācyuta-hasta-paṅkaje

bhṛṅgāyamānaṁ phala-mūla-kandaraiḥ

saṁsevyamānaṁ harim ātma-vṛndakair

govardhanādriṁ śirasā namāmi

Śrī Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī

I bow my head and offer praṇāma unto Girirāja
Govardhana, who rested upon the lotus hand of Acyuta for
seven days, who is embellished with the humming of black
bees, and who expertly serves Hari and His dearest
devotees by providing caves and kuñjas which supply an
abundance of varieties of fruits, flowers, and roots for
their enjoyment.



Girirāja Govardhana manifested directly from the heart
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā

manasaḥ prakṛteḥ jāto giri-govardhano mahān

divyaṁ vṛndāvanaṁ dṛṣtvā paramānandam āpa saḥ

Bhaviṣya-Purāna/Veṇu-Gīta 18, p 142

manasaḥ—from the mind; prakṛteḥ—of Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa-
śakti, Śrīmatī Rādhikā; jāto—born; giri-govardhanḥ—
Girirāja Govardhana; mahān—the best, topmost; divyaṁ—
divine; vṛndāvanaṁ—Vṛndāvana; dṛṣtvā—seeing;
paramānandam—supreme bliss; āpa saḥ—he attained.

The topmost rasika Girirāja Govardhana manifested
directly from the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
svarūpa-śakti. He attained the topmost transcendental
bliss upon seeing Vṛndāvana.38

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: “go, gopa, gopīnāṁ
samvarddhayati— - “he who increases the joy of prema for
the cows, calves and all the Vrajavāsīs— is called
Govardhana. Śrī Girirāja Govardhana has the fortune of
doing many kinds of sevā and nourishing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
rāsa-līlā and other intimate pastimes. Śrī Girirāja has
two identities - bhakta-svarūpa and bhagavat-svarūpa.
The above śloka is pramāṇa that Govardhana is also
śakti-tattva. Which svarūpa should we worship? In our
Rūpānuga line we follow in the footsteps of Śrīmatī

                          787
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

Rādhikā and the gopīs, and worship Girirāja as bhakta-
svarūpa, hari-dāsa (or Rādhā-dāsī). Why? Because if we
worship him as Kṛṣṇa (Viṣṇu-tattva, Hari-deva) He may or
may not give us bhakti. But if we worship him as the
servant of Kṛṣṇa, in this form he is more merciful and
will surely give us bhakti, Vraja-prema.



O Govardhana, please grant me a dwelling near your side
so that I can easily serve the playful pastimes of the
youthful lovers Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa

pramada-madana-līlāḥ kandare kandare te

racayati nava-yūnor dvandvam asminn amandam

iti kila kalanārthaṁ lagnakas tad-dvayor me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam

Śrī Govardhana-Vāsa-Prārthanā-Daśakam, Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī/SGG p. 178/STB p. 82

pramada—passionate; madana—amorous; līlāḥ—pastimes;
kandare kandare—in every cave; te—of you; racayati—
performs; nava-yūnoḥ dvandvam—of the youthful divine
couple; asminn—in this; amandam—great; iti—thus; kila—
indeed; kalana—of seeing; artham—for the purpose;
lagnakaḥ—guarantee; tad—that; dvayoḥ—of the two; me—of
me; nija—own; nikaṭa—near; nivāsam—residence; dehi—
grant; govardhana—govardhana; tvam—your.

O Govardhana, please grant me a dwelling near your side
so that I can easily witness and serve the youthful
lovers Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa as They perform newer and newer
secret, amorous līlās within your many caves where They
become completely maddened from drinking prema. You are
present and making everything possible.

A sweet prema quarrel at Dān Ghāṭī

yatraiva kṛṣṇo vṛṣabhānu-putryā dānaṁ gṛhītuṁ kalahaṁ
vitene

śruteḥ spṛhā yatra mahaty ataḥ śrī-govardhano me diśatām
abhīṣṭam

Śrī Govardhanāṣṭakam, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura/SGG p. 180/STB p. 82

Demanding a road tax, Kṛṣṇa quarreled for several hours
at Dān Ghāṭī with the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahāraja.
Rasika-bhaktas visiting Govardhana are eager to listen
to that sweet prema quarrel. May that Govardhana fulfill
my desire that I can also hear that verbal battle.



Kṛṣṇa scares Rādhikā into an involuntary embrace at
Mānasī Gaṅgā

yatraiva gaṅgām anu nāvi rādhām ārohya madhye tu
nimagna-naukaṁ

                          788
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


kṛṣṇo hi rādhānugalo babhau sa govardhano me diśatām
abhīṣṭam

Śrī Govardhanāṣṭakam, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura/SGG p. 180

In the middle of Mānasī Gaṅgā, Śrī Rādhā was sitting in
Kṛṣṇa’s boat. When the boat began to sink, She tightly
clung to His neck. Together They looked very beautiful.
May that Govardhana (who provides the setting for this
secret līlā) fulfill my innermost desire.



The benefit of Kārtika in Vraja

bhuktiṁ muktiṁ harir dadyād arcito “nyatra-sevinām

bhaktiṁ ca na dadāty eṣa yato vaśya-karī hariḥ

sa tv añjasā harer bhaktir labhyate kārttike naraiḥ

mathurāyāṁ sakṛd api śrī-dāmodara-pūjanāt

BRS 1.2.222/HBV 16.157-8/BRSB p. 96

bhuktim—happiness; muktim—liberation; hariḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
dadyāt—gives; arcitaḥ—worshiped; anyatra—another place;
sevinām—of the servants; bhaktim—devotional service; ca—
and; na—not; dadāti—gives; eṣa—He; yataḥ—because; vaśya-
karī—brought under control; hariḥ—Śrī Harī; saḥ—He; tv—
indeed; añjasā—easily; hareḥ—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhaktiḥ—
devotional service; labhyate—is obtained; kārttike—in
Kārttika; naraiḥ—by people; mathurāyām—in Mathurā; sakṛt
—once; api—even; śrī-dāmodara-pūjanāt—by worshiping Śrī
Dāmodara.

To persons who perform bhajana and sādhana, without
strong attachment to Kṛṣṇa, in places outside of Vraja-
maṇḍala, Śrī Bhagavān certainly awards bhukti and mukti,
but He does not award bhakti, for by bhakti Śrī Kṛṣṇa
becomes bound to His devotees. But a person who is
otherwise devoid of sādhana worships Śrī Dāmodara even
once in Vraja-maṇḍala in the month of Kārtika, he very
easily obtains the most rare hari-bhakti.

Thus ends section 14) The Holy Dhāma



15) Prominent Ślokas used by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja



The definition of pure bhakti

1 — anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ 30, 482



Controlling the urges of the mind and senses


                          789
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

2 — vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ 34

Unflinching service despite all hardships/Seeing Kṛṣṇa
in every situation

3 — tat te —nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo 514

Remaining undisturbed in either happiness or distress

4 — duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ 515



Humility is the key to chanting (and, ultimately, to
prema)

5 — tṛṇād api sunīcena 424, 599, 744

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja three basic instructions for
practicing bhakti (“The Three C’s”):

-Never Criticize — vāco vegaṁ (Upadeśāmṛta 1)

-Never Complain — tat te “nukampam (SB 10.14.8) /

duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ (BG 2.56)

-Never stop Chanting — tṛṇād api sunīcena (Śikṣāṣṭaka 3)



Human life is meant for spiritual perfection

6 — labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte 336



The key śloka for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas

7 — jīvera “svarūpa— haya — kṛṣṇera “nitya-dāsa— 283,
833



Sādhu saṅga is the birth place of bhakti

8 — “sādhu-saṅga—, “sādhu-saṅga— — sarva-śāstre kaya 436

9 — kṛṣṇa-bhakti-janma-mūla haya “sādhu-saṅga— 436



Divine Greed (lobha) is the only qualification

10 — kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ 465



The essence of all instructions - perform bhajana under
guidance

11 — tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu 491



                          790
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


Accepting Śrī Guru as one’s life and soul (is the only
way to get out of māyā)

12 — bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād 43



Who is a real Guru?

13 — tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta 29



Give up the desire for knowledge and replace it with
bhakti

14 — jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva 350



The Bhāgavatam must be heard from a pure devotee

15 — yāha, bhāgavata paḍa vaiṣṇavera sthāne 148



The glories of hearing Hari-kathā from a pure devotee

16 — satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido 436, 551



Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-kathā is the remedy to conquer the disease
of the heart

17 — vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ 364,552



May Gauraṅga be situated in the innermost core of your
heart

18 — anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau 174



Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana cleanses the mirror of the heart

19 — ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ 587



Gaura-vāṇī - Mahāprabhu’s teachings in a nutshell (rasa-
vicāra)

20 — ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas 172



Gaura-vāṇī - expanded by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura (tattva-
vicāra)

21 — āmnāyaḥ prāha tattvaṁ harim 173, 250

                          791
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017




Satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi — Śrīmad Bhāgavatam in a nutshell

22 — janmādy asya yato —nvayād itarataś 134



The ocean of the Bhāgavatam in a single śloka

23 — jayati jana-nivāso devakī-janma-vādo 157, 750



Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā — Preaching to the mind

24 — gurau goṣṭhe goṣṭhālayiṣu sujane bhūsura-gaṇe 475



Bhagavad Gīta’s topmost instruction

25 — man-manā bhava mad-bhakto 500



The nectar of Your words give life to us who are
suffering

26 — tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanam 550



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja favourite (rasika) ślokas
(recited by him on a morning walk in Badger, California,
June 2006):

1 - hā devi kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vāca 14, 785

2 - bhajāmi rādhāṁ aravinda-netrāṁ 13, 786

3 - tavaivāsmi tavaivāsmi na jīvāmi 14, 787

4 - phullendīvara-kāntim indu-vadanaṁ 258

5 - kasturī-tilakaṁ lalāṭa-paṭale 257

6 - barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ 244

7 - veṇuṁ karān nipatitaṁ skhalitaṁ śikhaṇḍaṁ 783

8 - yat-kiṅkarīṣu bahuśaḥ khalu kāku-vāṇī 782

9 - pādābjayos tava vinā vara-dāsyam eva 782



The eight “Rūpa-Sanātana ślokas—, chosen by Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja to grace the walls of Śrī Rūpa-
Sanātana Gauḍīya Math in Vṛndāvana:

1 — hā devi kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vāca 14, 785


                          792
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

2 — tvaṁ rūpa-mañjari sakhi 802

3 — nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir 674

4 — anārādhya rādhā-padāmbhoja-reṇum 786

5 — śrī-vṛndāvana mama pāvanaṁ tvam eva 892

6 — ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas 172

7 — dīvyad-vṛndāraṇya-kalpa-drumādhaḥ 15

8 — yat-kiṅkarīṣu bahuśaḥ khalu kāku-vāṇī 782

The sevā-kuñja śloka inscription:

9 — smara-garala-khaṇḍanaṁ 770



Ślokas in the Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha mandir, Mathurā,
chosen by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:

1 — hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare 20

2 — harer nāma, harer nāma, harer nāma eva 563, 575

3 — tṛṇād api sunīcena 424, 599, 744

4 — hā devi kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vāca 14, 785

5 — ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas 172

6 — śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya prabhu nityānanada 19

7 — yasyāḥ kadāpī vasanāñcala 785

8 — pādābjayos tava vinā vara-dāsyam eva 782

9 — na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīm 375

10 — nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir 674

11 — yat-kiṅkarīṣu bahuśaḥ khalu kāku-vāṇī 782



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja often recites some of the
following maṅgalācaraṇa ślokas before class:

ïajñāna-timirāndhasya 2

ïvāñchā-kalpa-tarubyaś ca 7

ïgurave gauracandrāya 1

ïnamo mahā-vadānyāya 12

ïyaṁ pravrajantam 12

ïaṅga-śyāmalima-chaṭābhir 16

ïbhaktyā vihīnā aparādha 17


                          793
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

ïśyāmasundara śikhaṇḍa-śekhara 14, 784

ïhā devi kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vāca 14, 785

ï bhajāmi rādhāṁ aravinda-netrāṁ 13, 786

ïtavaivāsmi tavaivāsmi 14, 786



Thus ends Chapter 26 — Other Topics




Chapter 27 — Madhureṇa Samāpayet


All’s well that ends sweetly



madhureṇa samāpayet — All undertakings should be
completed sweetly. All is well that ends in
transcendental bliss (confidentially, this refers to the
culmination of the five primary rasas — mādhurya-rasa).



1. Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa -The Sweet Divine Couple 904

2. Mahāprabhu - The Sweet Bestower of Mādhurya-rasa 906

3. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of Sweetness 908

4. Sweet Words About Kṛṣṇa 912

5. Sweet Lalitā and Viśākhā 914

6. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Sweet Flute 915

7. The Sweet Bhāva of the Gopīs 919

8. Veṇu-gīta 923

9. Praṇaya-gīta 930

10. Gopī-gīta 932

11. Yugala-gīta 939

12. Bhramara-gīta 940



1) Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa -The Sweet Divine Couple



Śrī Yugala-Kiśora’s sweetness

kanaka-jalada-gātrau nīla-śoṇābja-netrau


                          794
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

mṛgamada-vara-bhālau mālatī-kunda-mālau

tarala-taruṇa-veśau nīla-pītāmbareśau

smara nibhṛta-nikuñje rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau

Śrī Nikuñja Rahasya Stava 16, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī

kanaka—gold; jalada—cloud; gātrau—limbs; nīla—blue; śoṇa
—and red; abja—lotus; netrau—eyes; mṛga-mada—musk; vara—
sweet; bhālau—foreheads; mālatī—mālatī flowers; kunda—
and kunda flowers; mālau—garlands; tarala—restless;
taruṇa—youth; veśau—nature; nīla—blue; pīta—and yellow;
ambara—garments; īśau—the divine couple; smara—remember;
nibhṛta-nikuñje—in the solitary pleasure grove; rādhikā-
kṛṣṇa-candrau—the two moons of Śrī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa.

O mind, exclusively meditate on Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
Kṛṣṇacandra — Her bodily complexion is like gold and His
is like a fresh monsoon cloud; Her eyes are like blue
lotus flowers and His like red lotuses; Their foreheads
are decorated with musk tilaka; She wears a garland of
mālatī flowers around Her neck and He of kuṇḍa flowers;
and They are wonderfully decorated in a charming and
youthful fashion, She wearing a blue dress and He a
yellow garment — as They enjoy Their pastimes in the
solitary nikuñjas of Vraja.



May the sweetness of the confidential pastimes of the
Divine Couple be victorious by manifesting in the hearts
of the devotees

meghair meduram ambaraṁ vana-bhuvaḥ śyāmās tamāla-
drumair

naktaṁ bhīrur ayaṁ tvam eva tad imaṁ rādhe gṛhaṁ prāpaya

itthaṁ nanda-nideśataś calitayoḥ praty-adhva-kuñja-
drumaṁ

rādhā-mādhavayor jayanti yamunā-kūle rahaḥ-kelayaḥ

Śrī Gīta-Govinda 1.1

“O Rādhe, all directions are covered by dense and
ominous clouds. The forest floor has been cast into
darkness by the shadows of blackish tamāla trees. Kṛṣṇa
is naturally timid. He cannot be alone at night, so take
Him home with you.” Śrī Rādhā turned her face towards
the bower of desire trees beside the forestpath and,
bewildered by intense joy, she honoured the words of her
sakhī. When she arrived on the bank of the Kālindī
river, She initiated Her love-play in a secret place.
May the sweetness of this confidential pastime of the
Divine Couple be victorious by manifesting in the hearts
of the devotees.



O Gāndharvikā! Be pleased with me and mercifully grant
me darśana of Your and Your beloved Kṛṣṇa’s sweet
ambrosial pastimes

                          795
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


vṛndāvane viharator iha keli-kuñje

matta-dvipa-pravara-kautuka-vibhrameṇa

sandarśayasva yuvayor vadanāravinda-

dvandvaṁ vidhehi mayi devi! kṛpāṁ prasīda

Śrī Gāndharvā-Samprārthanāṣṭakam 1, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī/
SGG p. 164

vṛndāvane—in Vṛndāvana; viharatoḥ—enjoying
transcendental pastimes; iha—here; keli-kuñje—in the
pastimegrove; matta—maddened; dvipa—elephant; pravara—
excellent; kautuka—enthusiastic; vibhrameṇa—with
pastimes; sandarśayasva—please reveal; yuvayoḥ—of the
youthful couple; vadana-aravinda—lotus face; dvandvam—
pair; videhi—please give; mayi—to me; devi—O queen;
kṛpām—mercy; prasīda—please be kind.

O Devi Rādhikā! You and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are constantly
enjoying Your ambrosial amorous pastimes in the leafy
pleasure-groves of Vṛndāvana, like the intoxicated king
of elephants sporting with his queen elephant.
Therefore, O Gāndharvikā! Be pleased with me and
mercifully grant me darśana of Your and Your beloved
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus-like faces.



The forest bower is permeated with the sweet kuhū sound
of the cuckoos

lalita lavaṅga latā pariśīlana komala malaya samīre

madhu karanikara karambita kokila kūjita kuñja kuṭīre

viharati harir iha sarasa vasante

nṛtyati yuvati janena samaṁ sakhi virahi janasya durante

Śrī Gīta-Govinda 1.27-1/GV p. 50

My dear friend Rādhā, alas! Springtime causes anguish
for the forlorn and lonely-hearted. Look how captivating
is the Malaya breeze as it arrives and impetuously
embraces the tender, charming creepers again and again.
The forest bower is permeated with the sweet kuhū sound
of the cuckoos and the humming of bees as they meander
to and fro. Moreover, Kṛṣṇa is dancing in this forest
bower. He is enjoying romantic pastimes with some
fortunate young lady while immersed in a festival of
love.

Thus ends section 1) Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa -The Sweet Divine
Couple



2) Mahāprabhu - The Sweet Bestower of Mādhurya-rasa

Mahāprabhu’s sweet pastimes of being absorbed in the
mood of Śrī Rādhikā

                          796
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


lalita-lavaṅga-latā pada gāoyāñā

nṛtya kari— bulena prabhu nija-gaṇa lañā

prati-vṛkṣa-vallī aiche bhramite bhramite

aśokera tale kṛṣṇe dekhena ācambite

kṛṣṇa dekhi— mahāprabhu dhāñā calilā

āge dekhi— hāsi— kṛṣṇa antardhāna ha-ilā

āge pāilā kṛṣṇe, tāṅre punaḥ hārāñā

bhūmete paḍilā prabhu mūrcchita hañā

CC Antya-līlā 19.84-87/GV p. 48

lalita-lavaṅga-latā—beginning with the words lalita-
lavaṅga-latā; pada—the verse; gāoyāñā—making sing; nṛtya
kari——dancing; bulena—wanders; prabhu—Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu; nija-gaṇa lañā—accompanied by His personal
associates; prati-vṛkṣa-vallī—around each and every tree
and creeper; aiche—in that way; bhramite bhramite—
wandering; aśokera tale—underneath an aśoka tree; kṛṣṇe—
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; dekhena—He sees; ācambite—suddenly; kṛṣṇa
dekhi——seeing Kṛṣṇa; mahāprabhu—Mahāprabhu; dhāñā calilā
—began to run very swiftly; āge—ahead; dekhi——seeing;
hāsi——smiling; kṛṣṇa—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; antardhāna ha-ilā—
disappeared; āge—in the beginning; pāilā—got; kṛṣṇe—Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; tāṅre—Him; punaḥ—again; hārāñā—losing; bhūmete—on
the ground; paḍilā—fell down; prabhu—Mahāprabhu;
mūrcchita—unconscious; hañā—becoming.

In this atmosphere, the Lord had His associates sing the
verse from the Gīta-govinda beginning with the words
“lalita-lavaṅga-latā” as He danced and wandered about
with them. As He thus wandered around every tree and
creeper, He came beneath an aśoka tree and suddenly saw
Lord Kṛṣṇa. When He saw Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
began running very swiftly, but Kṛṣṇa smiled and
disappeared. Having gotten Kṛṣṇa and then lost Him, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu fell to the ground unconscious.

Mahāprabhu is tasting and distributing mādhurya-rasa

mādhuryaiḥ madhubhiḥ sugambhi-bhajana svarṇam bhujānāṁ
vanam

kāruṇyāmṛta-nirjharair upacitah sat-prema hemacālaḥ

bhaktāmbodhara dharaṇī vijayanī niskampa-sampāvalī

daivo na kula-daivatāṁ vijayatāṁ caitanya-kṛṣṇa-hariḥ

Gaurāṅga-virudāvalī, Śrīla Raghunāndana Goswāmī

I worship the golden-hued Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu who is
absorbed in the enchanting mellows of mādhurya-rasa. May
that transcendental love of Kṛṣṇa that Mahāprabhu is
distributing pour down on this earth like a waterfall of
nectar. All glories to that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya.


                          797
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017



Mahāprbhu reveals the superexcellent sweetness of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-vilāsa-vaibhava-rasaṁ śrutvā rudan apy asau

tat-tad-rūpa-prakaṭana-paro mādhurī-dhuryya-sāram

vyaktī-kṛtya sa jagati punar goṣṭha-bhāvena pūrṇaḥ

sāndrānando vijayati paraṁ śrī-śacī-nandano 'yam

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Carita Mahā-kavya 4.10.23

rādhā-kṛṣṇa—Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; vilāsa—pastimes; vaibhava—
splendor; rasam—mellows; śrutvā—hearing; rudan—weeping;
api—very much; asau—He; tat tat—each and every; rūpa—
form; prakaṭana—manifesting; paraḥ—absorbed; mādhurī—
sweetness; dhurya— excellence; sāram—essence; vyaktī-
kṛtya—manifesting; saḥ—He; jagati—in the universe; punaḥ
—again; goṣṭha—of Vraja; bhāvena—the ecstasy; pūrṇaḥ—
filled; sāndra—concentrated; ānandaḥ—bliss; vijayati—all
glories!; param—supreme; śrī-śacī-nandanaḥ—the son of
Śacī; ayam—this.

Upon hearing of these splendrous rasa-laden pastimes
between Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa-candra, which are imbued
with the quintessential superexcellence of sweetness,
Mahāprabhu wept and became fully absorbed in the
appearance the beautiful forms of the Divine Couple.
Furthermore, He, the embodiment of intensely condensed
bliss, became filled with the moods of Vraja, and again
made those pastimes manifest within this material world.
May Śrī Śacī-nandana be supremely glorified!



Thus ends section 2) Mahāprabhu - The Sweet Bestower of
Mādhurya-rasa



3) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of Sweetness

Kṛṣṇa’s sweet body

madhuraṁ madhuraṁ vapur asya vibhor

madhuraṁ madhuraṁ vadanam madhuram

madhu-gandhi-mṛdu-smitam etad aho

madhuraṁ madhuraṁ madhuraṁ madhuram

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 92/CC Madhya 23.35

madhuram—sweet; madhuram—sweet; vapuḥ—the transcendental
form; asya—His; vibhoḥ—of the Lord; madhuram—sweet;
madhuram—sweet; vadanam—face; madhuram—sweet; madhu-
gandhi—the fragrance of honey; mṛdu-smitam—soft smiling;
etat—this; aho—Oh!; madhuram—sweet; madhuram—sweet;
madhuram—sweet; madhuram; sweet.


                          798
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

The transcendental body of Kṛṣṇa is sweeter than sweet,
and His face is even sweeter than His body. The soft
smile on His face, which is like the fragrance of honey,
is sweeter still.

adharaṁ madhuraṁ vadanaṁ madhuram

nayanaṁ madhuraṁ hasitaṁ madhuram

hṛdayaṁ madhuraṁ gamanaṁ madhuraṁ

madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuram

Śrī Madhurāṣṭakam 1, Śrīmad Vallabhācārya

His lips are sweet, His face is sweet, His eyes are
sweet, His smile is sweet, His heart is sweet, His gait
is sweet — everything is sweet about the original Lord
of Sweetness.



Kṛṣṇa’s sweet nature and character

sakala-sad-guṇa-vṛnda-ratna-ratnākara

vidagdha, catura, dhīra, rasika-śekhara

CC Madhya 15.140

sakala—all; sat-guṇa—transcendental qualities; vṛnda—
multitude; ratna—of gems; ratna-ākara—the mine; vidagdha
—clever in amorous affairs; catura—expert; dhīra—sober;
rasika-śekhara—supreme enjoyer of rasa.

Kṛṣṇa is the reservoir of all transcendental qualities.
He is like a mine of gems. He is expert at amorous
affairs, very intelligent and sober, and He is the
summit of all transcendental rasa.

madhura-caritra kṛṣṇera madhura-vilāsa

cāturya-vaidagdhya kare yāṅra līlā-rasa

CC Madhya 15.141

madhura-caritra—pleasing character; kṛṣṇera—of Lord
Kṛṣṇa; madhura-vilāsa—melodious pastimes; cāturya—
expertise; vaidagdhya—expert in amorous love; kare—
manifests; yāṅra—whose; līlā—of pastimes; rasa—mellows.

His character is very sweet, and His pastimes are
sweeter than sweet. He is expert in amorous affairs, and
thus He enjoys all His rasa-filled pastimes.

Kṛṣṇa—a Sweet Activities

karaṇaṁ madhuraṁ taraṇaṁ madhuraṁ

haraṇaṁ madhuraṁ ramaṇaṁ madhuram

vamitaṁ madhuraṁ śamitaṁ madhuraṁ

madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuram

                           799
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017


Śrī Madhurāṣṭakam 5, Śrīmad Vallabhācārya

His deeds are sweet, His acts of deliverance are sweet,
His stealing is sweet, His amorous play is sweet, His
yawning is sweet, and even His chastisements are sweet —
everything is sweet about the original Lord of
Sweetness.

Everything is sweet about the original Lord of Sweetness

gopī madhurā līlā madhurā

yuktaṁ madhuraṁ bhuktaṁ madhuram

hṛṣṭaṁ madhuraṁ śliṣṭaṁ madhuraṁ

madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuram

Śrī Madhurāṣṭakam 7, Śrīmad Vallabhācārya

His gopīs are sweet, His pastimes are sweet, His
paraphernalia and ornaments are sweet, His food is
sweet, His delight is sweet, His embrace is sweet —
everything is sweet about the original Lord of
Sweetness.

Kṛṣṇa’s sweet name

madhura-madhuram etan maṅgalāṁ maṅgalānāṁ

sakala-nigama-vallī sat-phalaṁ cit-svarūpam

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛgu-vara! nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇanāma

Skanḍa-Purāṇa/HBV 11.234/Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka p. 24/JD ch. 25/
BR 1.18

madhura—of all sweet things; madhuram—the most sweet;
etat—this; mangalam—the most aupicious; mangalānām—of
all auspicious things; sakala—all; nigama—of the Vedas;
vallī—the creepers; sat—the transcendental; phalam—
fruit; cit—with a spiritual; svarūpam—form; sakṛt—once;
api—even; parigītam—spoken; śraddhayā—with faith; helayā
—with mockery; vā—or; bhṛgu—of the Bhrgu dynasty; vara—
the most exalted; nara—a human being; mātram—even;
tarayet—delivers; kṛṣṇa—of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nāma—the name.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-nāma is the sweetest of all sweet things and
the most auspicious of all that is auspicious. He is the
fully-ripened fruit of the flourishing creeper of the
the Vedas, and the embodiment of divine knowledge, cit-
śakti. O best of the Bhṛgu dynasty! If someone chants
the holy name only once, be it with faith or contempt
(helā), he is immediately delivered from this ocean of
birth and death!



Kṛṣṇa is a sweet thief

Śrī Caurāgragaṇya-Puruṣāṣṭakam, Śrī Bilvamaṅgala

                            800
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

Ṭhākura/SGG p. 145

vraje prasiddhaṁ navanīta-cauraṁ gopāṅganānāṁ ca dukūla-
cauram

aneka-janmārjita-pāpa-cauraṁ caurāgragaṇyaṁ puruṣaṁ
namāmi

I offer praṇāma to that foremost of thieves — who is
famous in Vraja as the butter thief and He who steals
the gopīs— clothes, and who, for those who take shelter
of Him, steals the sins which have accrued over many
lifetimes.



Kṛṣṇa is the most expert thief who steals Śrīmatī
Rādhika’s heart

śrī rādhikāyā hṛdayasya cauraṁ navāmbuda-śyāmala-kānti-
cauram

padāśritānāṁ ca samasta-cauraṁ caurāgragaṅyaṁ puruṣaṁ
namāmi

I offer praṇāma to the king of thieves — who steals
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s heart, who steals the dark luster of a
fresh raincloud, and who steals all the sins and
sufferings of those who take shelter of His feet.



Rāma is He who takes pleasure in unlimited
transcendental amorous pastimes

ramante yogino —nante satyānande cid-ātmani

iti rāma-padenāsau paraṁ brahmābhidhīyate

Padma Purāṇa/CC Madhya 9.29

ramante—one who takes unlimited pleasure in amorous
pastimes; yoginaḥ—transcendentalists, those connected in
their hearts with Kṛṣṇa; anante—in the unlimited; satya-
ānande—real pleasure; cit-ātmani—in spiritual existence;
iti—thus; rāma—Rāma; padena—by the word; asau—He; param-
brahma—Supreme Absolute Truth; abhidhīyate—is called.

The Supreme Absolute Truth is called Rāma because the
transcendentalists take pleasure in the unlimited
blissful pastimes of His spiritual existence.



All glories to the Enjoyer of the Kuñjas, the Beloved of
the Gopīs

jaya rādhā mādhava (jaya) kuñja-bihārī

gopī-jana-vallabha (jaya) giri-vara-dhārī

yaśodā-nandana, vraja-jana-rañjana

yamunā-tīra-vanacārī

                          801
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura/SGG p. 71/GV p. 113

All glories to Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava! All glories to Kuñja-
Bihārī, who is the gopīs— dearmost beloved. He lifted
Govardhana Hill and is the darling son of Yaśodā Maiyā.
He wanders in the forests along the banks of the Yamunā,
where He enjoys with the many different gopīs in their
own groves.

Editorial note: Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda was
very fond of this song and sang it just before his
lectures. In Allahabad and Gorakhpur he fell into a
trance after singing the first two lines, and after some
time he came back into external consciousness and said,
"Now just chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Prabhupāda said that this song is “a picture of
Vṛndāvana. Everything is there—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī,
Vṛndāvana, Govardhana, Yaśodā, and all the cowherd boys.
—

Thus ends section 3) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of Sweetness



4) Sweet Words for Kṛṣṇa

Śrīmatī Rādhikā says, besides You there is nothing for
Me

premadaṁ ca me kāmadaṁ ca me

vedanaṁ ca me vaibhavaṁ ca me

jīvanaṁ ca me jīvitaṁ ca me

daivataṁ ca me deva nā 'param

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 104/Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ Nectar,
vol. 2.6

prema-dam—giver of His love; ca—and; me—for me; kāma-dam
—fulfiller of desire; ca—and; me—for me; vedanam—
knowledge; ca—and; me—my; vaibhavam—power, wealth; ca—
and; me—my; jīvanam—cause of life, vital energy; ca—and;
me—my; jīvitam—very life; ca—and; me—my; daivatam—God;
ca—and; me—for me; deva—Divine Lord; na—none; aparam—
other.

O Kṛṣṇa! You alone are the bestower of prema to Me, the
fulfiller of My heart’s desires, the giver of knowledge
and My only treasure. You are My life, the giver of My
life, and My worshipable Deity. Besides You there is
nothing for Me.



The Gopīs in separation glorify Uttama-śloka Śrī Kṛṣṇa,

divi bhuvi ca rasāyāṁ kāḥ striyas tad-durāpāḥ

kapaṭa-rucira-hāsa-bhrū-vijṛmbhasya yāḥ syuḥ

caraṇa-raja upāste yasya bhūtir vayaṁ kā

                           802
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


api ca kṛpaṇa-pakṣe hy uttama-śloka-śabdaḥ

SB 10.47.15 (Bhramara-gīta)

divi—in the heavenly region; bhuvi—on the earth; ca—and;
rasāyām—in the subterranean sphere; kāḥ—what; striyaḥ—
women; tat—by Him; durāpāḥ—unobtainable; kapaṭa—
deceptive; rucira—charming; hāsa—with smiles; bhrū—of
whose eyebrows; vijṛmbhasya—the arching; yāḥ—who; syuḥ—
become; caraṇa—of the feet; rajaḥ—the dust; upāste—
worships; yasya—whose; bhūtiḥ—Lakṣmī, the goddess of
fortune, wife of Lord Nārāyaṇa; vayam—we; kā—who; api ca
—nevertheless; kṛpaṇa-pakṣe—for those who are wretched;
hi—indeed; uttama-śloka—Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is glorified by
the most sublime prayers; śabdaḥ—the names.

In heaven, on earth or in the subterranean sphere, what
women are unavailable to Him? He simply arches His
eyebrows and smiles with deceptive charm, and they all
become His. The supreme goddess herself worships the
dust of His feet, so what is our position in comparison?
But at least those who feel themselves insignificant and
wretched can feelingly chant the names of that Uttama-
śloka (Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is glorified by the most sublime
ślokas).



The poetic ślokas recited by the ladies of Hastināpura
were sweeter and more attractive than the Vedas

anyonyam āsīt sañjalpa uttama-śloka-cetasām

kauravendra-pura-strīṇāṁ sarva-śruti-mano-haraḥ

SB 1.10.20

anyonyam—among each other; āsīt—there was; sañjalpaḥ—
talking; uttama-śloka—the Supreme, who is praised by
selected poetry; cetasām—of those whose hearts are
absorbed in that way; kaurava-indra—the king of the
Kurus; pura—capital; strīṇām—all the ladies; sarva—all;
śruti—the Vedas; manaḥ-haraḥ—attractive to the mind.

Absorbed in the thought of the transcendental qualities
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is glorified in poetic ślokas, the
ladies on the roofs of all the houses of Hastināpura
began to talk of Him. This talk was more attractive than
the hymns of the Vedas.



Sweetly relishing

vayaṁ tu na vitṛpyāma uttama-śloka-vikrame

yac-chṛṇvatāṁ rasa-jñānāṁ svādu svādu pade pade

SB 1.1.19

vayam—we; tu—but; na—not; vitṛpyāmaḥ—shall be satisfied;
uttama-śloka—Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is glorified by
transcendental ślokas (ut - beyond, tama - darkness);

                          803
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

vikrame—adventures; yat—which; śṛṇvatām—by continuous
hearing; rasa—humor; jñānām—those who are conversant
with rasa-tattva; svādu—relishing; svādu—palatable; pade
pade—at every step.

We never tire of hearing the transcendental pastimes of
Uttama-śloka Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is glorified by sublime
verses which enable one to transcend the material world
of darkness. Those who have developed a taste for
transcendental relationships with Him relish hearing of
His rasa-laden pastimes at every moment.

Thus ends section 4) Sweet Words About Kṛṣṇa




5) Sweet Lalitā and Viśākhā

Lalitā is endowed with many beautiful, sweet qualities
(sulalitā)

rādhā-mukunda-pada-sambhava-gharma-bindu

nirmañchanopakaraṇī-kṛta-deha-lakṣām

uttuṅga-sauhṛda-viśeṣa-vaśāt pragalbhāṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (1)

Śrī stava-mālā, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī/MS 9.3/SGG p. 188

rādhā—of Rādhā; mukunda—and Mukunda; pada—from the feet;
sambhava—produced; gharma—of perspiration; bindu—drops;
nirmañchana—for worship; upakaraṇī-kṛta—made an
instrument; deha—lakṣām—whose body; uttuṅga—exalted;
sauhṛda—friendship; viśeṣa—specific; vaśāt—because of
being controlled; pragalbhām—bold; devīm—Devī; guṇaiḥ—
with virtues; su—very; lalitām—charming; lalitām—to
Lalitā; namāmi—I offer my respectful obeisances.

I offer praṇāma unto the haughty Śrī Lalitā-devī who is
charmingly endowed with many beautiful, sweet qualities
(sulalitā). She has natural expertise in all arts
(lalitā), thus her sevā self-manifests. She funs away
the glittering drops of perspiration which appear upon
the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā and Mādhava when They meet;
and she is perpetually immersed in the most elevated
mellow of sauhṛda-rasa, or undivided absorption in
fulfilling the heart’s desire of her intimate friend
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



Viśākhā is the abode of Rādhikā’s loving playful
pastimes

kṣaṇam api tava saṅgaṁ na tyajed eva devī

tvam asi sama-vayastvān narma-bhūmir yad asyāḥ

iti sumukhi viśākhe darśayitvā mad-īśāṁ


                          804
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017

mama viraha-hatāyāḥ prāṇa-rakṣāṁ kuruṣva

Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ 99/MS 9.6

kṣaṇam—for a moment; api—even; tava—Your; saṅgam—
company; na—not; tyajed—will leave; eva—indeed; devī—
Queen; tvam—You; asi—are; samavayastvān—because of being
the same age; narma—of playful, joking pastimes; bhūmiḥ—
the realm; yad—which; asyāḥ—of her; iti—thus; sumukhi—O
girl with the beautiful face; viśākhe—O Viśākhā;
darśayitvā—revealing; mad—my; īśām—queen; mama—of me;
viraha—separation; hatāyāḥ—killed; prāṇa—of life; rakṣām
—protection; kuruṣva—please do.

O Sumukhi (beautiful-faced girl)! O Viśākhā! Because you
are precisely the same age as my mistress, Śrī Rādhikā,
you are the abode of Her playful pastimes. She cannot
give up your association even for a moment. I have
become extremely agitated and distressed due to
separation from Her. Kindly grant me darśana of Her
lotus feet and thus preserve my life.

Thus ends section 5) Sweet Lalitā and Viśākhā



6) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Sweet Flute

Kṛṣṇa’s flute

parāṁṛṣṭāṅguṣṭha-trayam asita-ratnair ubhayato

vahantī saṅkīrṇau maṇibhir arunais tat parisarau

tayor madhye hirojjvala-vimala-jāmbūnada-mayī

kare kalyāṇīyaṁ viharati hareḥ keli-muralī

Vidagdha-Mādhava 3.1/CC Antya 1.161

parāmṛṣṭā—measured; anguṣṭha-trayam—a length of three
fingers; asita-ratnaiḥ—with valuable indra-nila jewels;
ubhayātaḥ—from both ends; vahantī—having; saṅkīrnau—
bedecked; manibhiḥ—by gems; aruṇaih—rubies; tat-
parisarau—the two ends of the flute; tayoḥ madhye—
betweeen them; hīra—with diamonds; ujjvala—blazing;
vimala—pure; jāmbūnada-mayī—covered with gold plate;
kare—in the hand; kalyāni—very auspicious; iyam—this;
viharati—sports; hareḥ—of Kṛṣṇa; keli-muralī—the pastime
flute.

[Paurṇamāsī said to Lalitādevī:] “The flute of Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes measures three fingers in length, and it is
bedecked with indra-nīla gems. At the ends of the flute
are aruṇa gems (rubies), glittering beautifully, and in
between the flute is plated with pure gold, set ablaze
by diamonds. This auspicious flute, pleasing to Kṛṣṇa,
sports playfully in His hand with transcendental
brilliance.”



Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sweet chastising of the flute


                             805
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

sad-vaṁśatas tava janiḥ puruṣottamasya

pāṇau sthitir muralike saralāsi jātyā

kasmāt tvayā sakhi guror viṣamā gṛhītā

gopāṅganā-gaṇa-vimohana-mantra-dīkṣā

Vidagdha-mādhava 5.17/CC Antya 1.162

sat-vaṁśataḥ—very respectable family; tava—your; janiḥ—
birth; puruṣottamasya—of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; pāṇau—in the
hands; sthitiḥ—residence; muralike—O good flute; saralā—
simple; asi—you are; jātyā—by birth; kasmāt—why; tvayā—
by you; sakhi—O My dear friend; guroḥ—from the spiritual
master; viṣamā—dangerous; gṛhītā—taken; gopa-aṅganā-
gaṇa-vimohana—for bewildering the groups of the gopīs;
mantra-dīkṣā—initiation in the mantra.

[Śrīmatī Rādhikā said:] “My dear friend the flute, it
appears that you have been born of a very good family,
for your residence is in the hands of Puru;sottama Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. By birth you are simple and are not at all
crooked. Why then have you taken initiation into this
dangerous mantra that enchants the assembled gopīs?”

How is it that you, a bamboo stick, are being kissed and
embraced by Krsna?

sakhi murali viśāla-cchidra-jālena pūrṇā

laghur ati-kaṭhinā tvaṁ granthilā nīrasāsi

tad api bhajasi śaśvac cumbanānanda-sāndraṁ

hari-kara-parirambhaṁ kena puṇyodayena

Vidagdha-mādhava 4.7/CC Antya 1.163

sakhi murali—O dear friend the flute; viśāla-chidra-
jālena—with so many big holes in your body (in other
words, full of chidra, which also means “faults”); pūrṇā
—full; laghuḥ—very light; ati-kaṭhinā—very hard in
constitution; tvam—you; granthilā—full of knots; nīrasā—
without juice; asi—are; tat api—therefore; bhajasi—you
obtain through service; śaśvat—continuously; cumbana-
ānanda—the transcendental bliss of being kissed by the
Lord; sāndram—intense; hari-kara-parirambham—being
embraced by the hands of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; kena—by what; puṇya-
udayena—means of pious activities.

[Candrāvalī-sakhī said:] “My dear friend the flute, you
are actually full of many holes or faults. You are
light, hard, juiceless and full of knots. But what kind
of pious activities have engaged you in the service of
being kissed by the Lord and embraced by His hands?”



Krsna’s flute created wonder in the hearts of all

rundhann ambu-bhṛtaś camatkṛti-paraṁ kurvan muhus
tumburuṁ


                          806
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

dhyānād antarayan sanandana-mukhān vismāpayan vedhasam

autsukyāvalibhir baliṁ caṭulayan bhogīndram āghūrṇayan

bhindann aṇḍa-kaṭāha-bhittim abhito babhrāma vaṁśī-
dhvaniḥ

Vidagdha-mādhava 1.27/CC Antya 1.164

rundhan—blocking; ambu-bhṛtaḥ—the clouds bearing rain;
camatkṛti-param—full of wonder; kurvan—making; muhuḥ—at
every moment; tumburum—the King of the Gandharvas,
Tumburu; dhyānāt—from meditation; antarayan—disturbing;
sanandana-mukhān—the four Kaumaras headed by Sanandana;
vismāpayan—causing wonder; vedhasam—even to Lord Brahmā;
autsukya-āvalibhiḥ—with many thoughts of curiosity;
balim—King Bali; caṭulayan—agitating; bhogī-indram—the
King of the Nāgas; āghūrṇayan—whirling around; bhindan—
penetrating; aṇḍa-kaṭāha-bhittim—the strong coverings of
the universe; abhitaḥ—all around; babhrāma—wandered;
vaṁśī-dhvaniḥ—the transcendental vibration of the flute.

[Madhumaṅgala said:] “The transcendental vibration of
Kṛṣṇa’s flute blocked the movements of the rain clouds,
struck the Gandharvas full of wonder, and agitated the
meditation of great saintly persons like Sanaka and
Sanandana. It created wonder in Lord Brahmā, wrought
intense curiosity that agitated the mind of Bali
Mahārāja, who was otherwise firmly fixed, made Mahārāja
Ananta, the carrier of the planets, whirl around, and
penetrated the strong coverings of the universe. Thus
the sound of the flute in the hands of Kṛṣṇa created an
astonishing situation.”



The flute is drinking the nectar of Dāmodara's lips,
which belongs to us alone

gopyaḥ kim ācarad ayaṁ kuśalaṁ sma veṇur

dāmodarādhara-sudhām api gopikānām

bhuṅkte svayaṁ yad avaśiṣṭa-rasaṁ hradinyo

hṛṣyat-tvaco 'śru mumucus taravo yathāryaḥ

SB 10.21.9 (Veṇu-gīta)/VK nectar. vol. 1

gopyaḥ—O gopīs (one gopī is addressing another); kim—
what; ācarat—performed; ayam—this; kuśalam—sādhana and
bhajana performed in previous lives; sma—certainly;
veṇuḥ—the flute; dāmodara—of Kṛṣṇa; adhara-sudhām—the
nectar of the lips; api—even; gopikānām—which is the
rightful property of the gopīs alone; bhuṅkte—enjoys;
svayam—independently; yat—from which; avaśiṣṭa—(not even
a drop) remaining; rasam—the that rasa, the nectar of
Dāmodara’s lips; hradinyaḥ—the rivers; hṛṣyat—feeling
jubilant; tvacaḥ—on whose bodies; aśru—tears; mumucuḥ—
overflowing; taravaḥ—of the trees; yathā—exactly like;
āryāḥ—family elders.

[Śrīmatī Rādhikā said:] “O dear sakhīs! Although the
flute is male, we cannot imagine what sort of sādhana

                          807
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

and bhajana he must have performed in his previous
births that in our very presence he is drinking the
nectar of Dāmodara's lips, which rightfully belongs to
us alone. He is not even sparing a drop of that rasa for
us. On the pretext of their blossoming lotus flowers,
the rivers, which have nourished the flute with their
water (rasa), are exhibiting symptoms of ecstatic
horripilation. The trees, who are forefathers of the
flute, are equal to the best of men. Seeing their
descendant filled with such intense love for the Lord,
they have become overjoyed, and tears of ecstasy are
flowing from their eyes.”

Śrīla Gurudeva: Śrīmatī Rādhikā says, “Although the
flute is male, he desires to drink the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's
lips, and drinking more and more, he has left nothing
for us. The nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips is really meant
exclusively for us because we are of the same caste of
cowherds whereas this bamboo flute is only dull matter.
He consumes this nectar directly in front of us, and we
are helpless to do anything about it. He seems to be
very courageous, but really he is a hooligan. He is
looting our own property right in front of us.”



May the sweet sound of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s flute, His expert
messenger, be glorified

hriyam avagṛhya gṛhebhyaḥ karṣati rādhāṁ vanāya yā
nipuṇā

sā jayati nisṛṣṭārthā vara-vaṁśaja-kākalī dūtī

Lalita-mādhava 1.24/CC Antya 1.189

hriyam—bashfulness; avagṛhya—impeding; gṛhebhyaḥ—from
private houses; karṣati—attracts; rādhām—Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī; vanāya—to the forest; yā—which; nipuṇā—being
expert; sā—that; jayati—let it be glorified; nisṛṣṭa-
arthā—authorized; vara-vaṁśa-ja—of the bamboo flute;
kākalī—the sweet tone; dūtī—the messenger.

[Gārgī, the daughter of Garga Muni said:] “May the sweet
sound of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s flute, His expert messenger, be
glorified, for it expertly releases Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī
from Her shyness and attracts Her from Her home to the
forest.”

Thus ends section 6) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Sweet Flute



7) The Sweet Bhāva of the Gopīs

The gopīs always sing “Govinda, Dāmodara, Mādhava”

ulūkhale sambhṛta-taṇḍulāṁś ca

saṁghaṭṭayanto musalaiḥ pramugdhāḥ

gāyanti gopyo janitānurāgā

govinda-dāmodara-mādhaveti

                             808
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


Govinda-Dāmodara-stotram 4, Śrī Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura

saṅghaṭṭayantaḥ—as they crushed; sambhṛta-taṇḍulān—the
stored rice; musalaiḥ—with their pestles; ca—and;
ulūkhale—grinding mortars; pramugdhāḥ—the enchanted;
gopyaḥ—gopīs; anurāgāḥ—(in whose hearts) the state of
anurāga, in which one always thinks one is beholding Śrī
Kṛṣṇa for the first time; janita—was born; gāyanti—sang;
iti—thus; govinda-dāmodara-mādhava—O Govinda, Dāmodara,
Mādhava.

While threshing their stock of rice with their mortars
and pestles, the gopīs, whose hearts enchanted by
anurāga for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, always sing “O Govinda, Dāmodara,
Mādhava”.



By singing these names we are praying for gopī-bhāva,
the mood of the gopīs

sa nirajakṣim avalokya rādhāṁ

ruroda govinda-vīyoga-khinnam

sakhī praphullotpala-locanābhyam

govinda dāmodara mādhaveti

Govinda-Dāmodara-stotram 39, Śrī Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura

sā—she; niraja-akṣim—the lotus-eyed; avalokya—glancing;
rādhām—Śrī Rādhā; ruroda—she wept; govinda-viyoga—due to
separation from Govinda; khinnām—distressed; sakhī—the
girlfriend; praphulla-utpala—like blooming lotuses;
locanābhyām—with eyes; iti—thus; govinda dāmodara
mādhava—Govinda, Dāmodara , Mādhava.

Seeing Śrīmatī Rādhikā crying due to the pangs of
separation from Govinda , the blooming lotus eyes of
Rādhīkā’s sakhī also filled with tears, and she cried,
“Govinda, Dāmodara, Mādhava!”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Kṛṣṇa has many names; the name
Govinda means He who is very pleasing to the cows,
divine cowherd maidens (gopīs), and all those who reside
in Vraja. The name Dāmodara means that the all powerful
Supreme Lord can be bound and controlled only by love,
by the pure love of His mother Yaśoda and by the pure
love of Śrīmatī Rādhikā in particular. In essence,
Mādhava means “He who is always controlled by Rādhikā.”
So by singing these names we are praying for gopī-bhāva,
the mood of the gopīs.



I forever pray to the dust of the lotus feet of the
gopīs

vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ punāti bhuvana-trayam


                             809
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

SB 10.47.63/BMP p. 276/STB p. 34

vande—I offer my respects; nanda-vraja—of the cowherd
village of Nanda Mahārāja; strīṇām—of the women; pāda—of
the feet; reṇum—to the dust; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ—perpetually;
yāsām—whose; hari—of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kathā—about the topics;
udgītam—loud chanting; punāti—purifies; bhuvana-trayam—
the three worlds.

[Śrī Uddhava prayed:] “I forever pray to the dust of the
lotus feet of the gopīs in Nandagaon. The hari-kathā
emanating from their lotus lips in their separation from
Kṛṣṇa purifies the entire universe.”



Kṛṣṇa’s flute melody causes His dearmost vraja-gopīs to
release an unprecedented flow of nectar-talks instigated
by the rapture of prema. These gopīs are our one and
only shelter

veṇu-nāda-sudhā-vṛṣṭyā niṣkramayyokti mādhurīm

yāsāṁ naḥ pāyayāmāsa kṛṣṇas tā eva no gatiḥ

Veṇu-gīta, Introduction

sudhā-vṛṣṭyā—through the nectarean showers; veṇu-nāda—of
the bamboo flute’s vibrations; kṛṣṇaḥ—the all-attractive
person; pāyayām āsa naḥ—made us drink; mādhurīm—
sweetness; niṣkramayya—coming forth; ukti—in the form of
utterances; tāḥ—those (gopīs); yāsām—whose (utterances);
eva—(are) indeed; naḥ—our; gatiḥ—(lives) objective.

By the shower of nectar in the form of the melody of His
flute, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is adept at all kinds of playful
pastimes throughout Vraja, has caused His dearmost
vraja-gopīs to release an unprecedented flow of
loveliness in the form of their words instigated by the
rapture of prema. He has thus bestowed upon us the good
fortune of drinking the songs of those cowherd maidens,
who are our one and only shelter.



Love for Kṛṣṇa in the mood of the Gopīs of Vraja is the
supreme love

śyāmam eva paraṁ rūpaṁ

purī madhu-purī varā

vayaḥ kaiśorakaṁ dhyeyam

ādya eva paro rasaḥ

CC Mad 19.106/Padyāvalī 82

śyāmam—the form of Śyāmasundara; eva—certainly; param—
supreme; rūpam—form; purī—the place; madhu-purī—Mathurā,
Vraja mandala; varā—best; vayaḥ—the age; kaiśorakam—
fresh youth; dhyeyam—always to be meditated on; ādyaḥ—
the original transcendental mellow, mādhurya-rasa; eva—
certainly; paraḥ—the supreme; rasaḥ—mellow.

                             810
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017


The form of Śyāmasundara is the supreme form, Vraja-
maṇḍala is the supreme abode, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s fresh youth
should always be meditated upon, and love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa
in the mood of the gopīs of Vraja is the supreme
transcendental mellow and the sweetest form of pure
love.

Thus ends section 7) The Sweet Bhāva of the Gopīs



8) Veṇu-gīta (SB 10.21.1-20)

śrī-śuka uvāca

itthaṁ śarat-svaccha-jalaṁ padmākara-sugandhinā

nyaviśad vāyunā vātaṁ sa -go-gopālako “cyutaḥ (1)

śrī-śukaḥ uvāca—Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said (or śrīya
śuka, the very dear parrot of Śrīmatī Rādhikā) ; ittham—
in this way; śarat—of the beautifully decorated autumn
season; svaccha—clear; jalam—having water; padma-ākara—
from the lakes filled with lotus flowers (such as the
Yamunā, Kusuma-sarovara, Mānasī Gaṅgā, Govinda-kuṇḍa,
etc.); su-gandhinā—with the sweet fragrance; nyaviśat—He
entered; vāyunā—by the cool and fragrant breeze; vātam—
rfereshed; sa—with; go—the cows; gopālakaḥ—and the
cowherd boys; acyutaḥ—the infallible Lord.

Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: In this way, O Mahārāja
Parīkṣit, Śrī Vṛndāvana became extremely beautiful due
to the exquisitely decorated season of autumn. The
lakes, ponds and rivers were filled with clear, sweet
water. Gentle and fragrant breezes blew, carrying the
aroma of lotus flowers from the lakes. The infallible
Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa entered that enchanting
Vṛndāvana forest, accompanied by His cows and gopas.

kusumita-vanarāji-śuṣmi-bhṛṅga-

dvija-kula-ghuṣṭa-saraḥ-sarin-mahīdhram

madhupatir avagāhya cārayan gāḥ

saha-paśu-pāla-balaś cukūja veṇum (2)

kusumita—flowering; vanarāji—amidst the rows of trees of
the forest; śuṣmi—maddened; bhṛṅga—with bees; dvija—of
birds; kula—and flocks; ghuṣṭa—resounding; saraḥ-sarit—
its lakes, ponds and rivers; mahīdhram—Govardhana,
Nandagāon and all other hills; madhu-patiḥ—akhila-
rasāmṛta-sindhu Śrī Kṛṣṇa (here madhu means rasa;
therefore, madhu-patiḥ refers to rasika-śekhara Kṛṣṇa
who is the ocean of nectar in the form of complete rasa
and the topmost relisher of rasa); avagāhya—entering and
taking bath; cārayan—while tending (grazing); gāḥ—the
cows; saha-paśu-pāla-balaḥ—in the company of the cows
and calves, the cowherd boys and His elder brother,
Balarāma; cukūja—vibrated; veṇum—His flute.

Intoxicated bees were humming here and there amidst the
rows of lush green trees filled with beautiful fragrant

                          811
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

flowers. All the lakes, rivers and hills of the forest
resounded with the sweet and melodious cooing of the
flocks of various birds. Madhupati Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
accompanied by Baladeva and the gopas, entered that
forest and, while grazing the cows, vibrated a mellow,
sweet tune upon His alluring flute.

tad vraja-striya āśrutya veṇu-gītaṁ smarodayam

kāścit parokṣaṁ kṛṣṇasya sva-sakhībhyo “nvavarṇayan (3)

tat—that; vraja-striyaḥ—the young girls (kiśorīs) in the
cowherd villages of Vraja; āśrutya—hearing; veṇu-gītam—
the song of the flute; smara-udayam—instigating an
intense desire within the heart to meet with Kṛṣṇa;
kāścit—some of them; parokṣam—privately (The gopīs met
among themselves in a private place where Kṛṣṇa was not
present. No others were present such as the gopīs—
mothers-in-law or other family members. But they were
not alone, hundreds and thousands of gopīs were there);
kṛṣṇasya—the beloved gopīs of Kṛṣṇa; sva-sakhībhyaḥ—to
their intimate companions; anvavarṇayan—engaged in
describing (while in the state of tadātmā - being one at
heart with Śrī Kṛṣṇa)

The sound of the flute awakens feelings of love toward
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and an intense desire to meet with Him. When
the gopīs heard that sound, their hearts were
overwhelmed with prema. The gopīs became completely
infatuated and, in a secluded place, they began to
describe the form and qualities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the
powerful influence of His flute to their intimate
companions.



tad varṇayitum ārabdhāḥ smarantyaḥ kṛṣṇa-ceṣṭitam

nāśakan smara-vegena vikṣipta-manaso nṛpa (4)

tat—that (the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s flute); varṇayitum—to
describe; ārabdhāḥ—beginning; smarantyaḥ—remembering
(i.e., churning and turning over and over again within
their minds); kṛṣṇa-ceṣṭitam—the activities of Kṛṣṇa
(which attract the hearts of all); na aśakan—they were
incapable; smara-vegena—by the force of their prema
which is filled with intense desire to meet with Kṛṣṇa;
vikṣipta—agitated; manasaḥ—whose minds; nṛpa—O King
Parīkṣit.

The gopīs of Vraja began to describe the sweetness of
the sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute among themselves, but as
soon as they remembered the flute, they were overpowered
with strong feelings of affection for their beloved, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Thus they remembered His charming activities, His
artistically curved eyebrows, His compelling glance
filled with love, and His sweet, mild smiling. Their
hearts became filled with an intense desire to meet with
Śyāma. They completely lost control of their minds and
at once they arrived before Śrī Kṛṣṇa within their
hearts. Their voices became choked up with ecstasy and
thus they were unable to describe Him.

barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ

                          812
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām

randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopa-vṛndair

vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ (5)

(See Chapter 6, p. 244 for synonyms and translation)



iti veṇu-ravaṁ rājan sarva-bhūta-manoharam

śrutvā vraja-striyaḥ sarvā varṇayantyo “bhirebhire (6)

iti—thus; veṇu-ravam—the vibration of the flute; rājan—O
King Parīkṣit; sarva-bhūta—of all living beings; manaḥ-
haram—stealing the minds; śrutvā—hearing; vraja-striyaḥ—
the women of Vraja; sarvāḥ—all of them; varṇayantyaḥ—
engaged in describing; abhirebhire—embraced Kṛṣṇa, the
embodiment of supreme spiritual bliss.

O King, the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute steals the minds of
all living beings, both animate and inanimate. When the
young gopīs of Vraja heard that sound, they began to
describe it. As they went on describing the sound of the
flute, they entered a state of ecstatic trance and
became completely absorbed in thoughts of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Within their hearts, they began to embrace Śrī Kṛṣṇa who
is the embodiment of all rasa and the reservoir of
supreme spiritual bliss.

akṣaṇvatāṁ phalam idaṁ na paraṁ vidāmaḥ

sakhyaḥ paśūn anaviveśayator vayasyaiḥ

vaktraṁ vrajeśa-sutayor anuveṇu-juṣṭaṁ

yair vā nipītam anurakta-kaṭākṣa-mokṣam (7)

(See Chapter 19, p. 650 for synonyms and translation)



cūta-pravāla-barha-stabakotpalābja

mālānupṛkta-paridhāna-vicitra-veśau

madhye virejatur alaṁ paśu-pāla-goṣṭhyāṁ

raṅge yathā naṭa-varau kvaca gāyamānau (8)

cūta—of a mango tree; pravāla—with young sprouts; barha—
peacock feathers; stabaka—bunches of flowers; utpala—
water lilies (or blue lotuses); abja—and lotuses; mālā—
with garlands; anupṛkta—touched; paridhāna—their
garments; vicitra—with great variety; veśau—being
dressed; madhye—in the midst; virejatuḥ—the two of Them
shone forth; alam—magnificently; paśu-pāla—of the
cowherd boys; goṣṭhyām—within the assembly; raṅge—upon a
stage; yathā—just as; naṭa-varau—two most excellent
dancers; kvaca—sometimes; gāyamānau—themselves singing.

O sakhī! When dark-complexioned Śrī Kṛṣṇa, dressed in

                          813
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

yellow garments, and fair-complexioned Baladeva, dressed
in blue garments, decorate Themselves with newly grown
mango blossoms, peacock feathers, clusters of flowers,
and garlands of multicolored lotuses and lilies, Their
appearance becomes astonishing. They sit down right in
the middle of the assembly of cowherd boys and sing the
sweetest of songs. O priya sakhī! At such times, They
look just like two incomparably beautiful and expert
dancers performing on a dramatic stage. What am I to say
of the splendor of Their appearance at such times?

gopyaḥ kim ācarad ayaṁ kuśalaṁ sma veṇur

dāmodarādhara-sudhām api gopikānām

bhuṅkte svayaṁ yad avaśiṣṭa-rasaṁ hradinyo

hṛṣyat-tvaco 'śru mumucus taravo yathāryaḥ (9)

(See Chapter 28, p. 917 for synonyms and translation)



vṛndāvanaṁ sakhi bhuvo vitanoti kīṛtiṁ

yad devakī-suta-padāmbuja-labdha-lakṣmi

govinda-veṇum anu matta-mayūra-nṛtyaṁ

prekṣyādri-sānv-avaratānya-samasta-sattvam (10)

(See Chapter 21, p. 712 for synonyms and translation)



dhanyāḥ sma mūḍha-matayo —pi hariṇya etā

yā nanda-nandanam upātta-vicitra-veśam

ākarṇya veṇu-raṇitaṁ saha-kṛṣṇa-sārāḥ

pūjāṁ dadhur viracitāṁ praṇayāvalokaiḥ (11)

(See Chapter 22, p. 727 for synonyms and translation)



kṛṣṇaṁ nirīkṣya vanitotsava-rūpa-śīlaṁ

śrutvā ca tat-kvaṇita-veṇu-vivikta-gītam

devyo vimāna-gatayaḥ smara-nunna-sārā

bhraśyat-prasūna-kabarā mumuhur vinīvyaḥ (12)

(See Chapter 22, p. 728 for synonyms and translation)



gāvaś ca kṛṣṇa-mukha-nirgata-veṇu-gīta

pīyūṣam uttabhita-karṇa-puṭaiḥ pibantyaḥ

śāvāḥ snuta-stana-payaḥ-kavalāḥ sma tasthur

                          814
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


govindam ātmani dṛśāśru-kalāḥ spṛśantyaḥ (13)

(See Chapter 22, p. 728 for synonyms and translation)



prāyo batāmba vihagā munayo vane “smin

kṛṣṇekṣitaṁ tad-uditaṁ kala-veṇu-gītam

āruhya ye druma-bhujān rucira-pravālān

śṛṇvanti mīlita-dṛśo vigatānya-vācaḥ (14)

prāyaḥ—almost; bata—certainly; amba—O mother; vihagāḥ—
the birds; munayaḥ—great sages; vane—in the forest;
asmin—this; kṛṣṇa-īkṣitam—seeing Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful face;
tat-uditam—created by Him; kala-veṇu-gītam—sweet
vibrations made by playing the flute; āruhya—rising; ye—
who; druma-bhujān—to the branches of the trees (in the
form of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam); rucira-pravālān—having
beautiful creepers and twigs; śṛṇvanti—they hear;
mīlita-dṛśaḥ—with their vision withdrawn from all
phenomena and all knowledge related to the material body
(i.e., with wide open, unblinking eyes fixed exclusively
on the transcendental form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa); vigata-anya-
vācaḥ—stopping all other sounds (not related to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa).

O sakhi! Never mind this ordinary talk about cows and
calves. Have you not seen the birds of Vṛndāvana? To
call them birds is certainly a mistake. Truly speaking,
most of them are exalted ṛṣis and munis. They are
sitting quietly in the beautiful green trees of
Vṛndāvana, upon branches that are sprouting many
charming new blossoms. But these ṛṣis and munis do not
close their eyes. They gaze continuously with unblinking
eyes at the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s form, and taking in His
sidelong glances laden with love, they become delighted.
Ignoring all other types of sounds, they begin to hear
Kṛṣṇa’s captivating voice and the music of His flute
which enchants the three worlds. My dear sakhi! How
fortunate their life is. (Alas! How unfortunate we are.
Our birth has become spoiled, our eyes useless. Where
lies our fortune to behold the beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa?)

nadyas tadā tad-upadhārya mukunda-gītam

āvarta-lakṣita-manobhava-bhagna-vegāḥ

āliṅgana-sthagitam ūrmi-bhujair murārer

gṛhṇanti pāda-yugalaṁ kamalopahārāḥ (15)

(See Chapter 21, p. 714 for synonyms and translation)

dṛṣṭvātape vraja-paśūn saha rāma-gopaiḥ

sañcārayantam anu veṇum udīrayantam

prema-pravṛddha uditaḥ kusumāvalībhiḥ

sakhyur vyadhāt sva-vapuṣāmbuda ātapatram (16)

                          815
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


dṛṣṭvā—seeing; ātape—in the full heat of the sun; vraja-
paśūn—the domestic animals of Vraja (the cows, etc.);
saha—together with; rāma-gopaiḥ—Śrī Balarāma and the
cowherd boys; sañcārayantam—herding together; anu—
repeatedly; veṇum—His flute; udīrayantam—loudly playing;
prema—out of love; pravṛddhaḥ—expanded; uditaḥ—rising
high; kusuma-āvalībhiḥ—with droplets of water vapor,
which are like groups of flowers; sakhyuḥ—for his friend
(who is of the same colour, śyāma); vyadhāt—he
constructed; sva-vapuṣā—out of his own body; ambudaḥ—the
cloud; ātapatram—an umbrella (composed of drops of
water).

O sakhi! These rivers also belong to our Vṛndāvana.
Therefore, it is not very astonishing that they have
offered their everything at the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Please consider the clouds for a moment. When they see
the princes of Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Balarāma,
accompanied by the cowherd boys, herding the cows in the
heat of summer, and when they hear Kṛṣṇa playing very
sweetly on His flute, their hearts overflow with love.
The clouds begin to hover above them. By extending their
body, the new black clouds (śyāmaghana) become an
umbrella to give shelter to their friend Ghanaśyāma.
Moreover, when the clouds begin to rain tiny drops of
water upon them, it seems that they are showering them
with beautiful white flowers. Yet this is but a pretext;
for by doing so, they are, in fact, offering their life
and their everything unto Him.

pūrṇāḥ pulindya urugāya-padābja-rāga-

śrī-kuṅkumena dayitā-stana-maṇḍitena

tad-darśana-smara-rujas tṛṇa-rūṣitena

limpantya ānana-kuceṣu jahus tad-adhim (17)

(See Chapter 21, p. 714 for synonyms and translation)



hantāyam adrir abalā hari-dāsa-varyo

yad rāma-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa-sparaśa-pramodaḥ

mānaṁ tanoti saha-go-gaṇayos tayor yat

pānīya-sūyavasa-kandara-kandamūlaiḥ (18)

(See Chapter 21, p. 712 for synonyms and translation)



gā gopakair anu-vanaṁ nayator udāra-

veṇu-svanaiḥ kala-padais tanu-bhṛtsu sakhyaḥ

aspandanaṁ gati-matāṁ pulakas tarūṇāṁ

niryoga-pāśa-kṛta-lakṣaṇayor vicitram (19)

(See Chapter 22, p. 729 for synonyms and translation)

                          816
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017




evaṁ-vidhā bhagavato yā vṛndāvana-cāriṇaḥ

varṇayantyo mitho gopyaḥ krīḍās tan-mayatāṁ yayuḥ (20)

evam-vidhāḥ—of such a manner (pastimes of such a manner
which astonish the entire world); bhagavataḥ—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (who manifests His own
unlimited sweetness); yāḥ—which; vṛndāvana-cāriṇaḥ—who
was wandering in the Vṛndāvana forest; varṇayantyaḥ—(the
gopīs continuously) engaged in describing all these
pastimes of the Lord (and thus attained a state of
tadātmā with those pastimes; in other words, they
entered into those pastimes and experienced Kṛṣṇa’s
association directly); mithaḥ—among one another; gopyaḥ—
the gopīs; krīḍaḥ-tat-mayatām-yayuḥ—they attained
complete identification with those pastimes; in other
words, those pastimes became manifest in their hearts.

O Mahārāja Parīkṣit! Everyday the gopīs, being deeply
immersed in prema, discuss among themselves the
innumerable pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who plays in the
forests of Vṛndāvana. By doing so, they enter a state of
ecstatic trance of meditation upon Him. In this way, the
pastimes of the Lord continuously manifest within their
hearts.

Thus ends section 8) Veṇu-gīta



9) Praṇaya-gīta (SB 10.29-41)

cittaṁ sukhena bhavatāpahṛtaṁ gṛheṣu

yan nirviśaty uta karāv api gṛhya-kṛtye

pādau padaṁ na calatas tava pāda-mūlād

yāmaḥ kathaṁ vrajam atho karavāma kiṁ vā (34)

cittam—our minds; sukhena—easily; bhavatā—by You;
apahṛtam—were stolen; gṛheṣu—in our households; yat—
which; nirviśati—were absorbed; uta—moreover; karau—our
hands; api—as well; gṛhya-kṛtye—in household work; pādau
—our feet; padam—one step; na calataḥ—are not moving;
tava—Your; pāda-mūlāt—away from the feet; yāmaḥ—we shall
go; katham—how; vrajam—back to Vraja; atha u—and then;
karavāma—we shall do; kim—what; vā—furthermore.

Until today our minds were absorbed in    household
affairs, but You easily stole both our    minds and our
hands away from our housework. Now our    feet won—t move
one step from Your lotus feet. How can    we go back to
Vraja? What would we do there?



siñcāṅga nas tvad-adharāmṛta-pūrakeṇa

hāsāvaloka-kala-gīta-ja-hṛc-chayāgnim


                          817
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

no ced vayaṁ virahajāgny-upayukta-dehā

dhyānena yāma padayoḥ padavīṁ sakhe te (35)

siñca—please pour; aṅga—our dear Kṛṣṇa; naḥ—our; tvat—
Your; adhara—of the lips; amṛta—of the nectar; pūrakeṇa—
with the flood; hāsa—smiling; avaloka—by Your glances;
kala—melodious; gīta—and the song (of Your flute); ja—
generated; hṛt-śaya—situated within our hearts; agnim—
the fire; na u cet—if not; vayam—we; viraha—from
separation; ja—born; agni—within the fire; upayukta—
placing; dehāḥ—our bodies; dhyānena—by meditation; yāma—
we shall go; padayoḥ—of the feet; padavīm—to the place;
sakhe—O friend; te—Your.

Dear Kṛṣṇa, please pour the nectar of Your lips upon the
fire within our hearts—a fire You ignited with Your
smiling glances and the sweet song of Your flute. If You
do not, we will consign our bodies to the fire of
separation from You, O friend, and thus like yogīs
attain to the abode of Your lotus feet by meditation.

yarhy ambujākṣa tava pāda-talaṁ ramāyā

datta-kṣaṇaṁ kvacid araṇya-jana-priyasya

asprākṣma tat-prabhṛti nānya-samakṣam añjaḥ

sthātuṁs tvayābhiramitā bata pārayāmaḥ (36)

yarhi—when; ambuja—like lotuses; akṣa—O You whose eyes;
tava—Your; pāda—of the feet; talam—at the base; ramāyāḥ—
for the goddess of fortune, Śrīmatī Lakṣmīdevī; datta—
affording; kṣaṇam—a few moments; kvacit—sometimes;
araṇya—who dwell in the forest; jana—the people;
priyasya—who hold dear; asprākṣma—we shall touch; tat-
prabhṛti—from that moment forward; na—never; anya—of any
other man; samakṣam—in the presence; añjaḥ—directly;
sthātum—to stand; tvayā—by You; abhiramitāḥ—filled with
joy; bata—certainly; pārayāmaḥ—will we be able.

O lotus-eyed one, the goddess of fortune considers it a
festive occasion whenever she has the opportunity to
touch the soles of Your lotus feet. You are very dear to
the residents of the forest, and therefore we will also
touch those lotus feet. From that time on we will be
unable even to stand in the presence of any other man,
for we will have been fully satisfied by You.

śrīr yat padāmbuja-rajaś cakame tulasyā

labdhvāpi vakṣasi padaṁ kila bhṛtya-juṣṭam

yasyāḥ sva-vīkṣaṇa utānya-sura-prayāsas

tadvad vayaṁ ca tava pāda-rajaḥ prapannāḥ (37)

śrīḥ—the goddess of fortune, wife of Lord Nārāyaṇa; yat—
as; pada-ambuja—of the lotus feet; rajaḥ—the dust;
cakame—desired; tulasyā—together with Tulasī-devī;
labdhvā—having obtained; api—even; vakṣasi—upon His
chest; padam—her position; kila—indeed; bhṛtya—by
servants; juṣṭam—served; yasyāḥ—whose (Lakṣmī—s); sva—
upon themselves; vīkṣaṇe—for the sake of the glance; uta

                          818
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

—on the other hand; anya—of the other; sura—demigods;
prayāsaḥ—the endeavor; tadvat—in the same way; vayam—we;
ca—also; tava—Your; pāda—of the feet; rajaḥ—the dust;
prapannāḥ—have approached for shelter.

Goddess Lakṣmī, whose glance is sought after by the
demigods with great endeavor, has achieved the unique
position of always remaining on the chest of her Lord,
Nārāyaṇa. Still, she desires the dust of His lotus feet,
even though she has to share that dust with Tulasī-devī
and indeed with the Lord’s many other servants.
Similarly, we have approached the dust of Your lotus
feet for shelter.

Thus ends section 9) Praṇaya-gīta



10) Gopī-gīta (SB 10.31.1-19 & 10.32.1-2)



jayati te —dhikaṁ janmanā vrajaḥ śrayata indirā śaśvad
atra hi

dayita dṛśyatāṁ dikṣu tāvakās tvayi dhṛtāsavas tvāṁ
vicinvate (1)

gopyaḥ ūcuḥ—the gopīs said; jayati—is glorious; te—Your;
adhikam—exceedingly; janmanā—by the birth; vrajaḥ—the
land of Vraja; śrayate—is residing; indirā—Lakṣmī, the
goddess of fortune (referring to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the
mūla Lakṣmī); śaśvat—perpetually; atra—here; hi—indeed;
dayita—O beloved; dṛśyatām—may (You) be seen; dikṣu—in
all directions; tāvakāḥ—Your (devotees); tvayi—for Your
sake; dhṛta—sustained; asavaḥ—their life airs; tvām—for
You; vicinvate—they are searching.

The gopīs said: “O beloved, your birth in the land of
Vraja has made it exceedingly glorious, and thus Indirā,
the goddess of fortune, always resides here. It is only
for Your sake that we, who are yours, maintain our
lives. We have been searching everywhere for you, so
please show yourself to us.”

śarad-udāśaye sādhu-jāta-sat-sarasijodara-śrī-muṣā dṛśā

surata-nātha te —śulka-dāsikā vara-da nighnato neha kiṁ
vadhaḥ (2)

SB 10.31.2/Gopī-gīta 2/BRS 3.5.29

śarat—of the autumn season; uda-āśaye—in the reservoir
of water; sādhu—excellently; jāta—grown; sat—fine;
sarasi-ja—of the lotus flowers; udara—in the middle; śrī
—the beauty; muṣā—which excels; dṛśā—with Your glance;
surata-nātha—O Lord of love; te—Your; aśulka—acquired
without payment; dāsikāḥ—maidservants; vara-da—O giver
of benedictions; nighnataḥ—for You who are killing; na—
not; iha—in this world; kim—why; vadhaḥ—murder.

O Lord of love, in beauty Your glance excels the whorl
of the finest, most perfectly formed lotus within the
autumn pond. (And where did You get this beauty? You

                          819
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

have expertly stolen it from the lotus. At first You
have stolen our hearts with Your glance but then You
disappeared). O bestower of benedictions, You are
killing Your maidservants who have given themselves to
You freely, without any price. Isn—t this murder?

viṣa-jalāpyayād vyāla-rākṣasād varṣa-mārutād
vaidyutānalāt

vṛṣa-mayātmajād viśvato bhayād ṛṣabha te vayaṁ rakṣitā
muhuḥ (3)

viṣa—poisonous; jala—by the water (of the Yamunā,
contaminated by Kāliya); apyayāt—from destruction; vyāla
—fearsome; rākṣasāt—from the demon (Agha); varṣa—from
rain (sent by Indra); mārutāt—and the wind-storm
(created by Tṛṇāvarta); vaidyuta-analāt—from the
thunderbolt (of Indra); vṛṣa—from the bull, Ariṣṭāsura;
maya-ātmajāt—from the son of Maya (Vyomāsura); viśvataḥ—
from all; bhayāt—fear; ṛṣabha—O greatest of
personalities; te—by You; vayam—we; rakṣitāḥ—have been
protected; muhuḥ—repeatedly.

O greatest of personalities, You have repeatedly saved
us from all kinds of danger—from poisoned water, from
the terrible man-eater Agha, from the great rains, from
the wind demon, from the fiery thunderbolt of Indra,
from the bull demon and from the son of Maya Dānava.

na khalu gopīkā-nandano bhavān akhila-dehinām antarātma-
dṛk

vikhanasārthito viśva-guptaye sakha udeyivān sātvatāṁ
kule (4)

na—not; khalu—indeed; gopikā—of the gopī, Yaśodā;
nandanaḥ—the son; bhavān—Your good self; akhila—of all;
dehinām—embodied living entities; antaḥ-ātma—of the
inner consciousness; dṛk—the seer; vikhanasā—by Lord
Brahmā; arthitaḥ—prayed for; viśva—of the universe;
guptaye—for the protection; sakhe—O friend; udeyivān—You
arose; sātvatām—of the Sātvatas; kule—in the dynasty.

You are not actually the son of the gopī Yaśodā, O
friend, but rather the indwelling witness in the hearts
of all embodied souls. Because Lord Brahmā prayed for
You to come and protect the universe, You have now
appeared in the Sātvata dynasty.

viracitābhayaṁ vṛṣṇi-dhūrya te caraṇam īyuṣāṁ saṁsṛter
bhayāt

kara-saroruhaṁ kānta kāma-daṁ śirasi dhehi naḥ śrī-kara-
graham (5)

viracita—created; abhayam—fearlessness; vṛṣṇi—of the
Vṛṣṇi dynasty; dhūrya—O best; te—Your; caraṇam—feet;
īyuṣām—of those who approach; saṁsṛteḥ—of material
existence; bhayāt—out of fear; kara—Your hand; saraḥ-
ruham—like a lotus flower; kānta—O lover; kāma—desires;
dam—fulfilling; śirasi—on the heads; dhehi—please place;
naḥ—of us; śrī—of the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmīdevī;
kara—the hand; graham—taking.


                          820
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

O best of the Vṛṣṇis, Your   lotuslike hand, which holds
the hand of the goddess of   fortune, grants fearlessness
to those who approach Your   feet out of fear of material
existence. O lover, please   place that wish-fulfilling
lotus hand on our heads.

vraja-janārti-han vīra yoṣitāṁ nija-jana-smaya-
dhvaṁsana-smita

bhaja sakhe bhavat-kiṅkarīḥ sma no jalaruhānanaṁ cāru
darśaya (6)

vraja-jana—of the people of Vraja; ārti—of the
suffering; han—O destroyer; vīra—O hero; yoṣitām—of
women; nija—Your own; jana—of the people; smaya—the
pride; dhvaṁsana—destroying; smita—whose smile; bhaja—
please accept; sakhe—O friend; bhavat—Your; kiṅkarīḥ—
maidservants; sma—indeed; naḥ—us; jala-ruha—lotus;
ānanam—Your face; cāru—beautiful; darśaya—please show.

O You who destroy the suffering of Vraja’s people, O
hero of all women, Your smile shatters the false pride
of Your devotees. Please, dear friend, accept us as Your
maidservants and show us Your beautiful lotus face.

praṇata-dehināṁ pāpa-karṣaṇaṁ tṛṇa-carānugaṁ śrī-
niketanam

phaṇi-phaṇārpitaṁ te padāmbujaṁ kṛṇu kuceṣu naḥ kṛndhi
hṛc-chayam (7)

praṇata—who are surrendered to You; dehinām—of the
embodied living beings; pāpa—the sins; karṣaṇam—which
remove; tṛṇa—grass; cara—who graze (the cows); anugam—
following; śrī—of the goddess of fortune; niketanam—the
abode; phaṇi—of the serpent (Kāliya); phaṇā—on the
hoods; arpitam—placed; te—Your; pada-ambujam—lotus feet;
kṛṇu—please put; kuceṣu—on the breasts; naḥ—our; kṛndhi—
cut away; hṛt-śayam—the lust in our hearts.

Your lotus feet destroy the past sins of all embodied
souls who surrender to them. Those feet follow after the
cows in the pastures and are the eternal abode of the
goddess of fortune. Since You once put those feet on the
hoods of the great serpent Kāliya, please place them
upon our breasts and tear away the lust in our hearts.

madhurayā girā valgu-vākyayā budha-manojñayā
puṣkarekṣaṇa

vidhi-karīr imā vīra muhyatīr adhara-sīdhunāpyāyayasva
naḥ (8)

madhurayā—sweet; girā—by Your voice; valgu—charming;
vākyayā—by Your words; budha—to the intelligent; mano-
jñayā—attractive; puṣkara—lotus; īkṣaṇa—You whose eyes;
vidhi-karīḥ—maidservants; imāḥ—these; vīra—O hero;
muhyatīḥ—becoming bewildered; adhara—of Your lips;
sīdhunā—with the nectar; āpyāyayasva—please restore to
life; naḥ—us.

O lotus-eyed one, Your sweet voice and charming words,
which attract the minds of the intelligent, are
bewildering us more and more. Our dear hero, please

                             821
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

revive Your maidservants with the nectar of Your lips.

tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanaṁ kavibhir īḍitaṁ
kalmaṣāpaham

śravaṇa-maṅgalaṁ śrīmad ātataṁ bhuvi gṛṇanti ye bhūri-dā
janāḥ (9)

tava—Your; kathā-amṛtam—the nectar of words; tapta-
jīvanam—(is) life for those aggrieved; kavibhiḥ—by great
thinkers; īḍitam—described; kalmaṣa-apaham—removing
sinful reactions; śravaṇa-maṅgalam—auspicious to hear,
giving spiritual benefit; śṛīmat—spiritual opulence;
ātatam—spreading; bhuvi—within the world; gṛṇanti—chant,
glorify, propagate; ye—those who; bhūri-dāḥ—most
beneficent; janāḥ—persons.

O Kṛṣṇa, just hearing the nectar of Your words and the
narrations of Your pastimes gives life to us, who are
always suffering in this material world. These
narrations, coming from the lips of Your pure devotees,
eradicate one’s sinful reactions and bestow the ultimate
benediction of kṛṣṇa -prema upon whoever hears them with
faith. These narrations are broadcast all over the world
and are filled with spiritual beauty and opulence.
Certainly those who distribute this nectar are the most
munificent, most compassionate souls.

prahasitaṁ priya-prema-vīkṣaṇaṁ viharaṇaṁ ca te dhyāna-
maṅgalam

rahasi saṁvido yā hṛdi spṛśaḥ kuhaka no manaḥ
kṣobhayanti hi (10)

prahasitam—the smiling; priya—affectionate; prema—with
love; vīkṣaṇam—glances; viharaṇam—intimate pastimes; ca—
and; te—Your; dhyāna—by meditation; maṅgalam—auspicious;
rahasi—in solitary places; saṁvidaḥ—conversations; yāḥ—
which; hṛdi—the heart; spṛśaḥ—touching; kuhaka—O
cheater; naḥ—our; manaḥ—minds; kṣobhayanti—agitate; hi—
indeed.

Your smiles, Your sweet, loving glances, the intimate
pastimes and confidential talks we enjoyed with You—all
these are auspicious to meditate upon, and they touch
our hearts. But at the same time, O deceiver, they very
much agitate our minds.

calasi yad vrajāc cārayan paśūn nalina-sundaraṁ nātha te
padam

śila-tṛṇāṅkuraiḥ sīdatīti naḥ kalilatāṁ manaḥ kānta
gacchati (11)

calasi—You go; yat—when; vrajāt—from the cowherd
village; cārayan—herding; paśūn—the animals; nalina—than
a lotus flower; sundaram—more beautiful; nātha—O master;
te—Your; padam—feet; śila—by sharp edges of grain; tṛṇa—
grass; aṅkuraiḥ—and sprouting plants; sīdati—are
experiencing pain; iti—thus thinking; naḥ—us; kalilatām—
discomfort; manaḥ—our minds; kānta—O lover; gacchati—
feel.

Dear master, dear lover, when You leave the cowherd

                          822
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017

village to herd the cows, our minds are disturbed with
the thought that Your feet, more beautiful than a lotus,
will be pricked by the spiked husks of grain and the
rough grass and plants.

dina-parikṣaye nīla-kuntalair vanaruhānanaṁ bibhrad
āvṛtam

ghana-rajasvalaṁ darśayan muhur manasi naḥ smaraṁ vīra
yacchasi (12)

dina—of the day; parikṣaye—at the finish; nīla—dark
blue; kuntalaiḥ—with locks of hair; vana-ruha—lotus;
ānanam—face; bibhrat—exhibiting; āvṛtam—covered; ghana—
thick; rajaḥ-valam—smeared with dust; darśayan—showing;
muhuḥ—repeatedly; manasi—in the minds; naḥ—our; smaram—
Cupid; vīra—O hero; yacchasi—You are placing.

At the end of the day You repeatedly show us Your lotus
face, covered with dark blue locks of hair and thickly
powdered with dust. Thus, O hero, You arouse lusty
desires in our minds.

praṇata-kāma-daṁ padmajārcitaṁ dharaṇi-maṇḍanaṁ dhyeyam
āpadi

caraṇa-paṅkajaṁ śantamaṁ ca te ramaṇa naḥ staneṣv
arpayādhi-han

praṇata—of those who bow down; kāma—the desires; dam—
fulfilling; padma-ja—by Lord Brahmā; arcitam—worshiped;
dharaṇi—of the earth; maṇḍanam—the ornament; dhyeyam—the
proper object of meditation; āpadi—in time of distress;
caraṇa-paṅkajam—the lotus feet; śam-tamam—giving the
highest satisfaction; ca—and; te—Your; ramaṇa—O lover;
naḥ—our; staneṣu—on the breasts; arpaya—please place;
adhi-han—O destroyer of mental distress.

Your lotus feet, which are worshiped by Lord Brahmā,
fulfill the desires of all who bow down to them. They
are the ornament of the earth, they give the highest
satisfaction, and in times of danger they are the
appropriate object of meditation. O lover, O destroyer
of anxiety, please put those lotus feet upon our
breasts.

surata-vardhanaṁ śoka-nāśanaṁ svarita-veṇunā suṣṭhu
cumbitam

itara-rāga-vismāraṇaṁ nṛṇāṁ vitara vīra nas te
“dharāmṛtam (14)

surata—conjugal happiness; vardhanam—which increases;
śoka—grief; nāśanam—which destroys; svarita—vibrated;
veṇunā—by Your flute; suṣṭhu—abundantly; cumbitam—
kissed; itara—other; rāga—attachments; vismāraṇam—
causing to forget; nṛṇām—men; vitara—please spread; vīra
—O hero; naḥ—upon us; te—Your; adhara—of the lips;
amṛtam—the nectar.

O hero, kindly distribute to us the nectar of Your lips,
which enhances conjugal pleasure and vanquishes grief.
That nectar is thoroughly relished by Your vibrating
flute and makes people forget any other attachment.

                          823
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017


aṭati yad bhavān ahni kānanaṁ truṭi yugāyate tvām
apaśyatām

kuṭila-kuntalaṁ śrī-mukhaṁ ca te jaḍa udīkṣatāṁ pakṣma-
kṛd dṛśām

aṭati—travel; yat—when; bhavān—You; ahni—during the
daytime; kānanam—to the forest; truṭi—about 1/1700 of a
second; yugāyate—becomes like an entire millennium; tvām
—You; apaśyatām—for those who do not see; kuṭila—
curling; kuntalam—with locks of hair; śrī—beautiful;
mukham—face; ca—and; te—Your; jaḍaḥ—foolish; udīkṣatām—
for those who are eagerly looking; pakṣma—of lids; kṛt—
the creator; dṛśām—of the eyes.

When You go off to the forest during the day, a tiny
fraction of a second becomes like a millennium for us
because we cannot see You. And even when we can eagerly
look upon Your beautiful face, so lovely with its
adornment of curly locks, our pleasure is hindered by
our eyelids, which were fashioned by the foolish
creator.

pati-sutānvaya-bhrātṛ-bāndhavān ativilaṅghya te —nty
acyutāgatāḥ

gati-vidas tavodgīta-mohitāḥ kitava yoṣitaḥ kas tyajen
niśi (16)

pati—husbands; suta—children; anvaya—ancestors; bhrātṛ—
brothers; bāndhavān—and other relatives; ativilaṅghya—
completely neglecting; te—Your; anti—into the presence;
acyuta—O infallible one; āgatāḥ—having come; gati—of our
movements; vidaḥ—who understand the purpose; tava—Your;
udgīta—by the loud song (of the flute); mohitāḥ—
bewildered; kitava—O cheater; yoṣitaḥ—women; kaḥ—who;
tyajet—would abandon; niśi—in the night.

Dear Acyuta, You know very well why we have come here.
Who but a cheater like You would abandon young women who
come to see Him in the middle of the night, enchanted by
the loud song of His flute? Just to see You, we have
completely rejected our husbands, children, ancestors,
brothers and other relatives.

rahasi saṁvidaṁ hṛc-chayodayaṁ prahasitānanaṁ prema-
vīkṣaṇam

bṛhad-uraḥ śriyo vīkṣya dhāma te muhur ati-spṛhā muhyate
manaḥ

rahasi—in private; saṁvidam—confidential discussions;
hṛt-śaya—of lust in the heart; udayam—the rise;
prahasita—smiling; ānanam—face; prema—loving; vīkṣaṇam—
glances; bṛhat—broad; uraḥ—chest; śriyaḥ—of the goddess
of fortune; vīkṣya—seeing; dhāma—the abode; te—Your;
muhuḥ—repeatedly; ati—excessive; spṛhā—hankering;
muhyate—bewilders; manaḥ—the mind.

Our minds are repeatedly bewildered as we think of the
intimate conversations we had with You in secret, feel
the rise of lust in our hearts and remember Your smiling
face, Your loving glances and Your broad chest, the

                          824
Slokamrtam.txt                                 5/5/2017

resting place of the goddess of fortune. Thus we
experience the most severe hankering for You.

vraja-vanaukasāṁ vyaktir aṅga te vṛjina-hantry alaṁ
viśva-maṅgalam

tyaja manāk ca nas tvat-spṛhātmanāṁ sva-jana-hṛd-rujāṁ
yan niṣūdanam

vraja-vana—in the forests of Vraja; okasām—for those who
dwell; vyaktiḥ—the appearance; aṅga—dear one; te—Your;
vṛjina—of distress; hantrī—the agent of destruction;
alam—extremely so; viśva-maṅgalam—all-auspicious; tyaja—
please release; manāk—a little; ca—and; naḥ—to us; tvat—
for You; spṛhā—with hankering; ātmanām—whose minds are
filled; sva—Your own; jana—devotees; hṛt—in the hearts;
rujām—of the disease; yat—which is; niṣūdanam—that which
counteracts.

O beloved, Your all-auspicious appearance vanquishes the
distress of those living in Vraja’s forests. Our minds
long for Your association. Please give to us just a bit
of that medicine, which counteracts the disease in Your
devotees— hearts.

yat te sujāta-caraṇāmburuhaṁ staneṣu

bhītāḥ śanaiḥ priya dadhīmahi karkaśeṣu

tenāṭavīm aṭasi tad vyathate na kiṁ svit

kūrpādibhir bhramati dhīr bhavad-āyuṣāṁ naḥ (19)

yat—which; te—Your; su-jāta—very fine; caraṇa-ambu-ruham
—lotus feet; staneṣu—on the breasts; bhītāḥ—being
afraid; śanaiḥ—gently; priya—O dear one; dadhīmahi—we
place; karkaśeṣu—rough; tena—with them; aṭavīm—the
forest; aṭasi—You roam; tat—they; vyathate—are
distressed; na—not; kim svit—is it?; kūrpa-ādibhiḥ—by
sharp stones; bhramati—flutters; dhīḥ—the mind; bhavat-
āyuṣām—of those of whom Your Lordship is the very life;
naḥ—of us.

[The gopīs said:] “A fear has arisen in our minds that
Your very soft lotus feet may be pained by being placed
on our hard breasts. How much more so when You roam into
the forest where Your feet may be cut by sharp pebbles.
Our minds are agitated by such thoughts, as if tormented
by a stinging scorpion, because You are our very life.”

iti gopyaḥ pragāyantyaḥ pralapantyaś ca citradhā

ruruduḥ su-svaraṁ rājan kṛṣṇa-darśana-lālasāḥ (SB
10.32.1)

śrī-śukaḥ uvāca—Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti—thus, as
related above; gopyaḥ—the gopīs; pragāyantyaḥ—singing
forth; pralapantyaḥ—speaking forth; ca—and; citradhā—in
various charming ways; ruruduḥ—they cried; su-svaram—
loudly; rājan—O King; kṛṣṇa-darśana—for the sight of
Kṛṣṇa; lālasāḥ—hankering.

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, having thus sung and
spoken their hearts out in various charming ways, the

                          825
Slokamrtam.txt                                  5/5/2017

gopīs began to weep loudly. They were very eager to see
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

tāsām āvirabhūc chauriḥ smayamāna-mukhāmbujaḥ

pītāmbara-dharaḥ sragvī sākṣān manmatha-manmathaḥ (SB
10.32.2)

tāsām—before them; āvirabhūt—He appeared; śauriḥ—Lord
Kṛṣṇa; smayamāna—smiling; mukha—His face; ambujaḥ—
lotuslike; pīta—yellow; ambara—a garment; dharaḥ—
wearing; srak-vī—wearing a flower garland; sākṣāt—
directly; man-matha—of Cupid (who bewilders the mind);
man—of the mind; mathaḥ—the bewilderer.

Then Lord Kṛṣṇa, a smile on His lotus face, appeared
before the gopīs. Wearing a garland and a yellow
garment, He directly appeared as one who can bewilder
the mind of Cupid, who himself bewilders the minds of
ordinary people.

Thus ends section 10) Gopī-gīta

11) Yugala-gīta (SB 10.35.2-25)

śrī-gopya ūcuḥ

vāma-bāhu-kṛta-vāma-kapolo valgita-bhrur adharārpita-
veṇum

komalāṅgulibhir āśrita-mārgaṁ gopya īrayati yatra
mukundaḥ

vyoma-yāna-vanitāḥ saha siddhair vismitās tad upadhārya
sa-lajjāḥ

kāma-mārgaṇa-samarpita-cittāḥ kaśmalaṁ yayur apasmṛta-
nīvyaḥ

SB 10.35.2-3

śrī-gopyaḥ ūcuḥ—the gopīs said; vāma—left; bāhu—on His
arm; kṛta—putting; vāma—left; kapolaḥ—His cheek; valgita
—moving; bhruḥ—His eyebrows; adhara—upon His lips;
arpita—placed; veṇum—His flute; komala—tender;
aṅgulibhiḥ—with His fingers; āśrita-mārgam—its holes
stopped; gopyaḥ—O gopīs; īrayati—vibrates; yatra—where;
mukundaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa; vyoma—in the sky; yāna—traveling;
vanitāḥ—the ladies; saha—together with; siddhaiḥ—the
Siddha demigods; vismitāḥ—amazed; tat—to that; upadhārya
—listening; sa—with; lajjāḥ—embarrassment; kāma—of lust;
mārgaṇa—to the pursuit; samarpita—offered; cittāḥ—their
minds; kaśmalam—distress; yayuḥ—they experienced;
apasmṛta—forgetting; nīvyaḥ—the belts of their dresses.

The gopīs said: When Mukunda vibrates the flute He has
placed to His lips, stopping its holes with His tender
fingers, He rests His left cheek on His left arm and
makes His eyebrows dance. At that time the demigoddesses
traveling in the sky with their husbands, the Siddhas,
become amazed. As those ladies listen, they are
embarrassed to find their minds yielding to the pursuit
of lusty desires, and in their distress they are unaware
that the belts of their garments are loosening.

                          826
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


mada-vighūrṇita-locana īṣat māna-daḥ sva-suhṛdāṁ vana-
mālī

badara-pāṇḍu-vadano mṛdu-gaṇḍaṁ maṇḍayan kanaka-kuṇḍala-
lakṣmyā

yadu-patir dvirada-rāja-vihāro yāminī-patir ivaiṣa
dinānte

mudita-vaktra upayāti durantaṁ mocayan vraja-gavāṁ dina-
tāpam

SB 10.35.24-25

mada—by intoxication; vighūrṇita—rolling; locanaḥ—His
eyes; īṣat—slightly; māna-daḥ—showing honor; sva-suhṛdām
—to His well-wishing friends; vana-mālī—wearing a
garland of forest flowers; badara—like a badara fruit;
pāṇḍu—whitish; vadanaḥ—His face; mṛdu—soft; gaṇḍam—His
cheeks; maṇḍayan—ornamenting; kanaka—golden; kuṇḍala—of
His earrings; lakṣmyā—with the beauty; yadu-patiḥ—the
Lord of the Yadu dynasty; dvirada-rāja—like a kingly
elephant; vihāraḥ—His sporting; yāminī-patiḥ—the lord of
the night (the moon); iva—like; eṣaḥ—He; dina-ante—at
the end of the day; mudita—joyful; vaktraḥ—His face;
upayāti—is coming; durantam—insurmountable; mocayan—
driving away; vraja—of Vraja; gavām—of the cows, or of
those who are to be shown mercy; dina—of the daytime;
tāpam—the painful heat.

As Kṛṣṇa respectfully greets His well-wishing friends,
His eyes roll slightly as if from intoxication. He wears
a flower garland, and the beauty of His soft cheeks is
accentuated by the brilliance of His golden earrings and
the whiteness of His face, which has the color of a
badara berry. With His cheerful face resembling the
moon, lord of the night, the Lord of the Yadus moves
with the grace of u regal elephant. Thus He returns in
the evening, delivering the cows of Vraja from the heat
of the day.

Thus ends section 11) Yugala-gīta



12) Bhramara-gīta (SB 10.47.12-21)



gopy uvāca

madhupa kitava-bandho mā spṛśaṅghriṁ sapatnyāḥ

kuca-vilulita-mālā-kuṅkuma-śmaśrubhir naḥ

vahatu madhu-patis tan-māninīnāṁ prasādaṁ

yadu-sadasi viḍambyaṁ yasya dūtas tvam īdṛk (12)

SB 10.47.12

gopī uvāca—the gopī said; madhupa—O bumblebee; kitava—of
a cheater; bandho—O friend; mā spṛśa—please do not

                          827
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

touch; aṅghrim—the feet; sapatnyāḥ—of the lover who is
our rival; kuca—the breast; vilulita—fallen from; mālā—
from the garland; kuṅkuma—with the red cosmetic;
śmaśrubhiḥ—with the whiskers; naḥ—our; vahatu—let Him
bring; madhu-patiḥ—the Lord of the Madhu dynasty; tat—
His; māninīnām—to the women; prasādam—mercy or kindness;
yadu-sadasi—in the royal assembly of the Yadus;
viḍambyam—an object of ridicule or contempt; yasya—
whose; dūtaḥ—messenger; tvam—you; īdṛk—such.

The gopī said: O honeybee, O friend of a cheater, don—t
touch My feet with your whiskers, which are smeared with
the kuṅkuma that rubbed onto Kṛṣṇa’s garland when it was
crushed by the breasts of a rival lover! Let Kṛṣṇa
satisfy the women of Mathurā. One who sends a messenger
like you will certainly be ridiculed in the Yadus—
assembly.

sakṛd adhara-sudhāṁ svāṁ mohinīṁ pāyayitvā

sumanasa iva sadyas tatyaje —smān bhavādṛk

paricarati kathaṁ tat-pāda-padmaṁ nu padmā

hy api bata hṛta-cetā hy uttamaḥ-śloka-jalpaiḥ (13)

sakṛt—once; adhara—of the lips; sudhām—the nectar; svām—
His own; mohinīm—bewildering; pāyayitvā—making drink;
sumanasaḥ—flowers; iva—like; sadyaḥ—suddenly; tatyaje—He
abandoned; asmān—us; bhavādṛk—like you; paricarati—
serves; katham—why; tat—His; pada-padmam—lotus feet; nu—
I wonder; padmā—Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune; hi api—
indeed, because; bata—alas; hṛta—taken away; cetāḥ—her
mind; hi—certainly; uttamaḥ-śloka—of Kṛṣṇa; jalpaiḥ—by
the false speech.

After making us drink the enchanting nectar of His lips
only once, Kṛṣṇa suddenly abandoned us, just as you
might quickly abandon some flowers. How is it, then,
that Goddess Padmā willingly serves His lotus feet?
Alas! The answer must certainly be that her mind has
been stolen away by His deceitful words.

kim iha bahu ṣaḍ-aṅghre gāyasi tvaṁ yadūnām

adhipatim agṛhāṇām agrato naḥ purāṇam

vijaya-sakha-sakhīnāṁ gīyatāṁ tat-prasaṅgaḥ

kṣapita-kuca-rujas te kalpayantīṣṭam iṣṭāḥ (14)

kim—why; iha—here; bahu—much; ṣaṭ-aṅghre—O bee (six-
footed one); gāyasi—are singing; tvam—you; yadūnām—of
the Yadus; adhipatim—about the master; agṛhāṇām—who have
no home; agrataḥ—in front of; naḥ—us; purāṇam—old;
vijaya—of Arjuna; sakha—of the friend; sakhīnām—for the
friends; gīyatām—should be sung; tat—of Him; prasaṅgaḥ—
the topics; kṣapita—relieved; kuca—of whose breasts;
rujaḥ—the pain; te—they; kalpayanti—will provide; iṣṭam—
the charity you desire; iṣṭāḥ—His beloveds.

O bee, why do you sing here so much about the Lord of
the Yadus, in front of us homeless people? These topics
are old news to us. Better you sing about that friend of

                          828
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

Arjuna in front of His new girlfriends, the burning
desire in whose breasts He has now relieved. Those
ladies will surely give you the charity you are begging.

divi bhuvi ca rasāyāṁ kāḥ striyas tad-durāpāḥ

kapaṭa-rucira-hāsa-bhrū-vijṛmbhasya yāḥ syuḥ

caraṇa-raja upāste yasya bhūtir vayaṁ kā

api ca kṛpaṇa-pakṣe hy uttama-śloka-śabdaḥ (15)

SB 10.47.15 (See p. 912 for synonyms and translation)

visṛja śirasi pādaṁ vedmy ahaṁ cātu-kārair

anunaya-viduṣas te —bhyetya dautyair mukundāt

sva-kṛta iha viṣṛṣṭāpatya-paty-anya-lokā

vyasṛjad akṛta-cetāḥ kiṁ nu sandheyam asmin (16)

visṛja—let go of; śirasi—held on your head; pādam—My
foot; vedmi—know; aham—I; cāṭu-kāraiḥ—with flattering
words; anunaya—in the art of conciliation; viduṣaḥ—who
are expert; te—of you; abhyetya—having learned; dautyaiḥ
—by acting as a messenger; mukundāt—from Kṛṣṇa; sva—for
His own; kṛte—sake; iha—in this life; visṛṣṭa—who have
abandoned; apatya—children; patī—husbands; anya-lokāḥ—
and everyone else; vyasṛjat—He abandoned; akṛta-cetāḥ—
ungrateful; kim nu—why indeed; sandheyam—should I make
reconciliation; asmin—with Him.

Keep your head off My feet! I know what you—re doing.
You expertly learned diplomacy from Mukunda, and now you
come as His messenger with flattering words. But He
abandoned those who for His sake alone gave up their
children, husbands and all other relations. He’s simply
ungrateful. Why should I make up with Him now?

mṛgayur iva kapīndraṁ vivyadhe lubdha-dharmā

striyam akṛta-virūpāṁ strī-jitaḥ kāma-yānām

balim api balim attvāveṣṭayad dhvāṅkṣavad yas

tad alam asita-sakhyair dustyajas tat-kathārthaḥ (17)

(See Chapter 21, p. 717 for synonyms and translation)

yad-anucarita-līlā-karṇa-pīyūṣa-vipruṭ-

sakṛd-adana-vidhūta-dvandva-dharmā vinaṣṭāḥ

sapadi gṛha-kuṭumbaṁ dīnam utsṛjya dīnā

bahava iha vihaṅgā bhikṣu-caryāṁ caranti (18)

(See Chapter 21, p. 717 for synonyms and translation)

vayam ṛtam iva jihma-vyāhṛtaṁ śraddadhānāḥ

kulika-rutam ivājñāḥ kṛṣṇa-vadhvo hariṇyaḥ


                          829
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

dadṛśur asakṛd etat tan-nakha-sparśa-tīvra

smara-ruja upamantrin bhaṇyatām anya-vārtā (19)

vayam—we; ṛtam—true; iva—as if; jihma—deceptive;
vyāhṛtam—His speech; śraddadhānāḥ—trusting; kulika—of a
hunter; rutam—the song; iva—as if; ajñāḥ—foolish; kṛṣṇa—
of the black deer; vadhvaḥ—wives; hariṇyaḥ—the doe;
dadṛśuḥ—experienced; asakṛt—repeatedly; etat—this; tat—
His; nakha—of the fingernails; sparśa—by the touch;
tīvra—sharp; smara—of lust; rujaḥ—the pain; upamantrin—O
messenger; bhaṇyatām—please speak; anya—another; vārtā—
topic.

Faithfully taking His deceitful words as true, we became
just like the black deer’s foolish wives, who trust the
cruel hunter’s song. Thus we repeatedly felt the sharp
pain of lust caused by the touch of His nails. O
messenger, please talk about something besides Kṛṣṇa.

priya-sakha punar āgāḥ preyasā preṣitaḥ kiṁ

varaya kim anurundhe mānanīyo —si me —ṅga

nayasi katham ihāsmān dustyaja-dvandva-pārśvaṁ

satatam urasi saumya śrīr vadhūḥ sākam āste (20)

priya—of My beloved; sakha—O friend; punaḥ—once again;
āgāḥ—you have come; preyasā—by My beloved; preṣitaḥ—
sent; kim—whether; varaya—please choose; kim—what;
anurundhe—do you wish; mānanīyaḥ—to be honored; asi—you
are; me—by Me; aṅga—My dear one; nayasi—you are
bringing; katham—why; iha—here; asmān—us; dustyaja—
impossible to give up; dvandva—conjugal connection with
whom; pārśvam—to the side; satatam—always; urasi—on the
chest; saumya—O gentle one; śrīḥ—the goddess of fortune;
vadhūḥ—His consort; sākam—together with Him; āste—is
present.

O friend of My dear one, has My beloved sent you here
again? I should honor you, friend, so please choose
whatever boon you wish. But why have you come back here
to take us to Him, whose conjugal love is so difficult
to give up? After all, gentle bee, His consort is the
goddess Śrī, and she is always with Him, staying upon
His chest.

api bata madhu-puryām ārya-putro —dhunāste

smarati sa pitṛ-gehān saumya bandhūṁś ca gopān

kvacid api sa kathā naḥ kiṅkarīṇāṁ gṛṇīte

bhujam aguru-sugandhaṁ mūrdhny adhāsyat kadā nu (21)

api—certainly; bata—regrettable; madhu-puryām—in the
city of Mathurā; ārya-putraḥ—the son of Nanda Mahārāja;
adhunā—now; āste—resides; smarati—remembers; saḥ—He;
pitṛ-gehān—the household affairs of His father; saumya—O
great soul (Uddhava); bandhūn—His friends; ca—and; gopān
—the cowherd boys; kvacit—sometimes; api—or; saḥ—He;
kathāḥ—talks; naḥ—of us; kiṅkarīṇām—of the maidservants;
gṛṇīte—relates; bhujam—hand; aguru-su-gandham—having the

                          830
Slokamrtam.txt                                    5/5/2017

fragrance of aguru; mūrdhni—on the head; adhāsyat—will
keep; kadā—when; nu—maybe.

O Uddhava! It is indeed regrettable that Kṛṣṇa resides
in Mathurā. Does He remember His father’s household
affairs and His friends, the cowherd boys? O great soul!
Does He ever talk about us, His maidservants? When will
He lay on our heads His aguru-scented hand?

Thus ends section 12) Bhramara-gīta

Chapter 27 - Madhureṇa Samāpayet

and Śrī Ślokāmṛtam



Samāpta

Appendix - Abbreviations



BVNM — Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

BVSP - Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja (Prabhupāda)

BPKG - Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja

SSM - Śrīla Bhakti-rakṣaka Śrīdhara Gosvāmī Mahārāja

BSSP - Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda

BVT - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura

RDG - Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī



BB - Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī

BG - Bhagavad Gīta as it is (BBT), Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Prabhupāda

SBG - Śrīmad Bhagavad Gīta (GVP), Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

BMP - Śrī Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā book, BVNM

BR - Śrī Bhajana-rahasya, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
(BVNM)

BRS - Śri Bhakti-Rasāmṛita-Sindhu, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī

BRSB - Śrī Bhakti-Rasamṛta-Sindhu-Bindhu, Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

BS - Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā, BVNM

BTV- Bhakti-tattva-viveka, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
(BVNM)

BPKG - Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja's
Biography, BVNM

                           831
Slokamrtam.txt                                   5/5/2017


CB -Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Śrīla Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura

CC - Śrī Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī

(CC Ādi - Ādi-līlā, CC Mad - Madhya-līlā; CC Antya-
Antya-līlā)

GG - Śrī Gīta Govinda, Jayadeva Gosvāmī (BVNM)

GKH - Śrī Gauḍīya-Kaṇṭhahāra, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda

GKH (P) - GKH Pariśiṣṭa (appendix): Ślokas added by
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahāraja (in the GVP Hindi edition of Śrī
Gauḍīya-Kaṇṭhahāra)

GV - Gaura-vāṇī Pracāriṇe, BVNM

HBV - Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī

JD - Jaiva Dharma, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura (BVNM)

KSD - Kīrtanīyaḥ Sadā Hariḥ (Supplementary Songbook to
GGG)

MK - Śrī Mādhurya Kādambinī, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura (BVNM)

MS - Śrī Manaḥ-śīkṣā, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
(BVNM)

ORY - The Origin of Ratha-yātrā, BVNM

PJ - Śrī Prapanna Jīvanāmṛtaṁ, Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka
Śrīdhara Gosvāmī Mahārāja

PS - Śrī Prema Sampuṭa, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura (BVNM)

PP - Prabandha Pañcakam (Five Essential Essays), BVNM

RRSN - Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudha-nidhi, Śrīla Prabodhananda
Sarasvatī

SB - Śrīmad Bhāgavatam

SGG - Śrī Gauḍīya Gīti-guccha Songbook (GVP publ. 2003
ed.)

SS - Śrī Ślokāmṛtam, Gaura-vāṇī publ.

STB - Secret Truths of the Bhāgavatam, BVNM

VG - Śrī Veṇu-Gīta (1999 ed.), BVNM

VK - Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjaliḥ, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa\Rūpa
Gosvāmī (BVNM)

pt - Purport




                          832
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017



Table of Contents

Chapter 1 — Guru-tattva

Chapter 2 — Vaiṣṇava-tattva

Chapter 3 — Bhāgavata-tattva - Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

Chapter 4 — Gaura tattva

Chapter 5 — Nityānanda, Advaita, Gadādhara and Śiva
tattvas

Chapter 6 — Kṛṣṇa-tattva

Chapter 7 — Śakti-tattva

Chapter 8 — Jīva-tattva

Chapter 9 — Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva

Chapter 10 — Varṇāśrama-dharma-tattva

Chapter 11 — Abhidheya-tattva

Chapter 12 — Overcoming Impediments to Bhakti

Chapter 13 — Śraddhā, Śaranāgati, Humility

Chapter 14 - Sādhu-saṅga

Chapter 15 - Types of Bhakti

Chapter 16 - Sādhana-bhakti-tattva

Chapter 17 - Śravaṇa & Kīrtana

Chapter 18 — Nāma-tattva

Chapter 19 — Rasa-tattva

Chapter 20 — Bhāva-bhakti-tattva

Chapter 21 — Prema-bhakti-tattva

Chapter 22A — Vipralambha-rasa-tattva

Chapter 22B — Sambhoga-rasa-tattva

Chapter 23 — Rādhā-tattva

Chapter 24 — Rādhā-dāsyam

Additional Chapters

Chapter 25 — Pramāṇa-tattva

Chapter 26 — Other Topics

Chapter 27 — Madhureṇa Samāpayet



                            833
Slokamrtam.txt                                     5/5/2017




Table of Contents

Chapter 1 — Guru-tattva

Chapter 2 — Vaiṣṇava-tattva

Chapter 3 — Bhāgavata-tattva - Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

Chapter 4 — Gaura tattva

Chapter 5 — Nityānanda, Advaita, Gadādhara and Śiva
tattvas

Chapter 6 — Kṛṣṇa-tattva

Chapter 7 — Śakti-tattva

Chapter 8 — Jīva-tattva

Chapter 9 — Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva

Chapter 10 — Varṇāśrama-dharma-tattva

Chapter 11 — Abhidheya-tattva

Chapter 12 — Overcoming Impediments to Bhakti

Chapter 13 — Śraddhā, Śaranāgati, Humility

Chapter 14 - Sādhu-saṅga

Chapter 15 - Types of Bhakti

Chapter 16 - Sādhana-bhakti-tattva

Chapter 17 - Śravaṇa & Kīrtana

Chapter 18 — Nāma-tattva

Chapter 19 — Rasa-tattva

Chapter 20 — Bhāva-bhakti-tattva

Chapter 21 — Prema-bhakti-tattva

Chapter 22A — Vipralambha-rasa-tattva

Chapter 22B — Sambhoga-rasa-tattva

Chapter 23 — Rādhā-tattva

Chapter 24 — Rādhā-dāsyam

Additional Chapters

Chapter 25 — Pramāṇa-tattva

Chapter 26 — Other Topics

Chapter 27 — Madhureṇa Samāpayet


                            834
Slokamrtam.txt         5/5/2017




                 835
