Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

Pure Devotees




Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā


by Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā , Second edition is Published by
Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights Reserved.

Content in this book is licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-No Derivative Works 3.0 Unported
License.

To view a copy of this license, visit
http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/



Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

For further information, free downloads of all titles,
world tour lectures, and more, please visit:
www.purebhakti.com



, www.purebhakti.tv



or www.backtobhakti.com




Contents




Foreword by Śrī Śr īmad Bhaktived ānta Vāmana Gosv ām ī
Mah ār āja

graph-definition>




Introduction by Śrī Śr īmad Bhaktived ānta Nār āya ṇa
Gosv ām ī Mah ār āja

graph-definition>


                           1
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Prelude to the Mahābhārata War




Chapter Summaries by Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja



CHAPTER 1 – SAINYA-DARŚANA




Observing the Armies

Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā consists of eighteen chapters,
which culminate in the message of bhakti , or devotion
to the Supreme Lord. From Arjuna’s behaviour on the
battlefield, it seems that he is immersed in
lamentation. Kṛṣṇa then explains that the eternal
function of the soul has nothing to do with the function
of body, dynasty and caste, although those who falsely
identify the body as the real self cannot understand
this. As long as the living entity remains bound by
māyā, the deluding material energy, and misidentifies
his body as his self, he is forced to undergo the
miseries of lamentation, delusion, fear and so on. It is
therefore imperative that he accept the shelter of a
spiritual master who is conversant with the Truth.



Chapter 2 – Sāṅkhya-Yoga




Yoga Through Distinguishing the Soul From the Body



When the living entity accepts the shelter of a bona
fide guru, he realizes his own ignorant condition. He
then tries to become free from the illusory traps of the
deluding potency by giving up his own conceptions and
respecting the instructions of the spiritual master. The
bona fide guru is a seer of the Truth, a devotee who has
pure, exclusive love for the Lord. Therefore, he is free
from the four defects of illusion, error, imperfect
senses and deception. When a practitioner of bhakti
hears instructions from the lotus mouth of the all-
merciful spiritual master, he understands the difference
between the soul and the material body. He also realizes
the ill-effects of sense enjoyment and becomes attracted
to hearing the conceptions, characteristics and glories
of the sages, whose minds are fixed in transcendence.
Then, by the influence of saintly association, an

                             2
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

awareness sprouts within his heart of the need to attain
conclusive knowledge of the Absolute Truth.



Chapter 3 – Karma-Yoga




Yoga Through the Path of Action



When the living entity has heard Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
instructions, he understands that karma-yoga , the path
of spiritual advancement where the fruit of one’s pious
action is offered to the Lord, consists of endeavours in
service to Him that are performed without selfish
desire. If the heart is full of desires for sense
enjoyment, accepting the garb of a renunciant is not
actual renunciation but hypocrisy, and it can never
bring auspiciousness. The living entity should perform
his prescribed duty as service to Bhagav ān, because
performing that duty for sense enjoyment produces no
auspicious result. Performance of prescribed duty, such
as Vedic sacrifices, can award mundane sense pleasure,
but such pleasure is temporary and mixed with distress.
Offering the Lord the fruit of one’s actions, however,
purifies the heart. It is therefore auspicious to
abandon negligence of one’s prescribed duty as well as
abandon sinful acts and the selfishly motivated
performance of one’s duty, and instead selflessly
perform that duty, offering its result to Bhagav ān.



Chapter 4 – Jñāna-Yoga

graph-definition>




Yoga Through Transcendental Knowledge



The Fourth Chapter begins with instructions on jñāna-
yoga , the path of spiritual advancement through
transcendental knowledge. It first explains that one can
only obtain genuine knowledge of the Truth by receiving
the mercy of Śrī gurudeva , who has seen that Truth. The
process of receiving this mercy is to hear from a person
in a bona fide disciplic succession. That transcendental
knowledge cannot possibly be attained through mundane
learning, intelligence or knowledge. This chapter also
explains that an incarnation of the Supreme Lord appears
in every millennium. The birth and activities of the
Lord are divine, and it is foolish and offensive to
consider them mundane. One attains this knowledge of the
Absolute Truth in the association of a self-realized

                           3
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

spiritual master. One gradually hears from him about the
unique characteristics of communion with the Lord
through such knowledge and its superiority over linking
with Him by offering Him the fruit of one’s work. A
person can easily cross over the ocean of birth and
death by taking shelter of authentic knowledge. The
practitioner who doubts this cannot make progress. One
who lacks this conclusive knowledge of the Truth will
become fallen and deviate from the path. He will become
trapped again in the cycle of fruitive action.



Chapter 5 – Karma-Sannyāsa-Yoga




Yoga Through Renunciation of Action



Upon attaining knowledge of the Truth, the practitioner
becomes qualified to connect with the Supreme through
the renunciation of prescribed duty. At that time, he
realizes that real renunciation means to give up
attachment to prescribed action and its fruits. For one
whose heart is still impure, it is both proper and
beneficial to adopt the practice of offering the fruit
of one’s work to the Lord, remaining detached from both
the process and its result, rather than completely
renouncing the work itself. Selflessly offering of the
results of one’s prescribed duty to the Lord bestows the
qualification to attain the nature of brahma , or God;
and those who know God attain peace.



Chapter 6 – Dhyāna-Yoga




Yoga Through the Path of Meditation



The practitioner understands from the instructions of
the spiritual master who has seen the Truth that one can
only meditate on the Supreme Lord when the heart has
been purified. A genuine mystic (yogī) or renunciant is
devoid of mundane desire, because no one can attain
perfection in yoga as long as one still desires material
enjoyment. It is necessary to regulate eating and
recreational activities to attain perfection in yoga .
This perfection means (1) seeing the Supreme Lord as the
indwelling witness in the hearts of all living entities,
and (2) realizing that all living entities exist only
due to the support and shelter of the Lord. It is also
clearly stated in this chapter that a devotee of the
Lord is superior to a fruitive worker, an empiric
philosopher and a mystic.

                           4
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Chapter 7 – Vijñāna-Yoga




Yoga Through Realization of Transcendental Knowledge



Constant study of these instructions leads one to the
firm understanding and realization that Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa alone is the ultimate limit of the Supreme
Absolute Reality and that there is no Absolute Reality
other than Him. Only by surrendering exclusively to His
lotus feet can one become free from the bondage of the
deluding material energy. Four types of people have no
qualification to engage in worship of the Supreme Lord
because they perform impious acts: the foolish, the
lowest among mankind, those whose nature is demoniac,
and those whose knowledge is covered by illusion.
Conversely, four classes of people are endowed with
spiritual merit and can therefore engage in worship of
Him: the inquisitive, the distressed, those who desire
wealth, and those desirous of liberation. In this world,
the devotees of the Lord are most rare. One does not
attain one’s eternal welfare by worshipping various
demigods and goddesses.



Chapter 8 – Tāraka-Brahma-Yoga




The Yoga of Absolute Deliverance



Only those who are exclusively devoted to the Supreme
Lord can know tattvas, or fundamental spiritual
principles, in regard to the Lord’s featureless aspect
(brahma-tattva), fruitive action (karma-tattva) the
basis of this material manifestation (adhibhūta-tattva),
etc. One-pointed devotees can easily attain Kṛṣṇa (Gītā
8.14). Devotees of the Supreme Lord never take rebirth
(Gītā 8.16). One can only attain Him by exclusive
devotion (Gītā 8.22).



Chapter 9 – Rāja-guhya-Yoga




Yoga Through the Most Confidential Knowledge


                              5
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



The king of all knowledge, or the most confidential of
all secrets, refers to supremely pure devotional service
only. Material nature is not the original cause of the
cosmic creation, because its potency to create only
comes by the inspiration of the Supreme Lord. It is
foolish and offensive to think that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is a human being, or
that His body, composed of eternality, knowledge and
bliss, is made of five material elements like the body
of an ordinary conditioned soul. Genuine saints engage
in the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with exclusive devotional
moods, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa personally attends to their
necessities. It is against the prescribed rules to
worship different demigods, because Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is
the enjoyer and master of all Vedic sacrifices. The
Supreme Person accepts anything that is offered with
love by the pure devotee. In the last verse of this
chapter, it is concluded that pure devotion is the only
means to attain the Supreme Lord.



Chapter 10 – Vibhūti-Yoga




Yoga Through Appreciating the Opulences of the Supreme
Lord



By sincerely and constantly studying this chapter, one
will understand that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the basis of all
majesty and all potencies. The entire material universe
with all its opulences is just one quarter of His
opulence. When one attains knowledge of the Lord’s
majesty, one can easily understand that everything is
directly or indirectly related to Him. He bestows
buddhi-yoga, or pure intelligence, upon His devotees so
that they attain a sound understanding of tattva,
fundamental philosophical principles. In this way, their
ignorance is destroyed and they engage in worship with
pure love.



Chapter 11 – Viśvarūpa-Darśana-Yoga




Yoga Through Beholding the Lord’s Universal Form



This chapter reveals that the universal form of the
Supreme Lord is external. His personal form is
transcendental and human-like. Only devotees whose eyes
are anointed with pure love can see the form of the

                            6
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Lord, the supreme enjoyer of transcendental mellows. He
is only attained by the yoga of exclusive devotion.



Chapter 12 – Bhakti-Yoga




Yoga Through Pure Devotional Service



This chapter explains that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead who has no source other than
Himself, is the Supreme Reality, and that He is the
topmost object of the living entity’s exclusive worship.
One can easily attain Him by pure devotion. Devotees who
are endowed with single-pointed devotion are most dear
to Him. Those who adhere to the philosophy that the
Supreme Lord has no features and that the living entity
can become the Lord, receive only misery.



Chapter 13 – Prakṛti-Puruṣa-Vibhāga-Yoga




Yoga Through Understanding the Distinctions Between
Material Nature and the Enjoyer



This chapter gives deep insight into material nature and
the conscious living entity. Through this discussion,
the Supreme Lord bestows a lucid understanding of
absolute principles upon His surrendered devotees and
thus delivers them from the ocean of the material world.
When pure devotion arises in the heart, knowledge and
renunciation naturally appear there as a secondary
result. However, in order to strengthen one’s
understanding of the true nature of devotion to Him, it
is still necessary to deliberate upon knowledge to
attain realization of it. When a devotee attains a clear
understanding of absolute principles, he becomes
qualified to attain prema, or pure loving devotion to
the Supreme Lord.



Chapter 14 – Guṇa-Traya-Vibhāga-Yoga




Yoga Through Transcending the Three Modes of Material
Nature


                           7
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017



An analytical study of this chapter leads to the
understanding that this material world expands simply by
the action and interaction of the three modes of
material nature: goodness, passion and ignorance.
Practitioners of bhakti-yoga can easily cross over these
three modes and finally become qualified to attain the
Supreme Lord.



Chapter 15 – Puruṣottama-Yoga




Yoga Through Understanding the Supreme Person



This material world extends from the lower planetary
systems to the higher. Living entities are separated
parts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those who
are opposed to Him are bound by the result of their
actions and wander in various higher and lower species
of life. However, by great fortune, one may attain the
mercy of a bona fide spiritual master, and under his
direction completely engage in the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
knowing Him alone to be the Supreme Person. The
devotees’ absorption in their worship makes them aware
of everything. Consequently, they can easily cross over
the ocean of this material world.



Chapter 16 – Daivāsura Sampada-Yoga




Yoga Through Discerning Divine and Demoniac Qualities



This chapter explains the divine and demoniac natures.
The living entity who is bewildered by the external,
illusory potency of the Supreme Lord is controlled
either by divine or demoniac qualities. When one takes
shelter of a divine nature, he becomes inclined towards
the worship of the Supreme Lord. On the contrary, those
who adopt a demoniac nature and become averse to Him go
to hell. Those of a demoniac nature proselytize the
theory of m āyāvāda, that everything is illusory,
including the Supreme Lord Himself. It is essential to
become released from this demoniac tendency. This can be
achieved by worshipping the Lord with faith, in the
association of pure devotees.



Chapter 17 – Śraddhā-Traya-Vibhāga-Yoga

                           8
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Yoga Through Discerning the Three Types of Faith



This chapter explains the three types of faith.
According to the association he keeps and the nature
acquired from his previous impressions, a person
develops faith in that which is in the mode of goodness,
passion or ignorance. When the living entity completely
takes the association of pure devotees of Hari (the
Supreme Lord) then transcendental faith appears in his
heart. He can then worship the Lord, who is
transcendental. Such a devotee is an actual saint.



Chapter 18 – Mokṣa-Yoga




The Yoga of Liberation



This chapter presents the essence of the entire Gītā.
First, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is identified as the highest Truth
among all of His transcendental manifestations, and then
the most confidential instruction is given. It is
explained that one can attain service to Him, which is
full of transcendental mellows, in His supreme abode, by
following these practices in sequence: (1) Surrendering
to Him (2) Executing of the nine limbs of bhakti

(3) Accepting the shelter of bhāva-bhakti, or pure,



transcendental devotion




Foreword (to the Hindi edition)




PRAYING TO ŚRī GURU, the Vaiṣṇavas and Bhagavān and
begging for their merciful blessings, I proceed to write
the foreword to this present edition of Śrīmad Bhagavad-
gītā. In undertaking such an endeavour, the causeless
mercy and auspicious blessings of the disciplic
succession of spiritual masters in the line of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī and Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura are our
sole aid and shelter.


                           9
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti published its first edition
of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā on 6 September 1977, by the
auspicious desire and blessings of my Śrī Gurupāda-
padma, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. That
edition included the Gītā-bhūṣaṇa commentary of the
brilliant sun among vedānta-ācāryas , Śrī Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇapāda, as well as an elucidating translation
entitled Vidvad-rañjana by nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. Following
that, on 3 October 1990, Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti
published an abridged pocket edition, consisting of only
the Sanskrit verses and their Bengali translations.

Several editions of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā were published
under the editorship of jagad-guru nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa
oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. Some included Śrīla
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇapāda’s Gītā-bhūṣaṇa commentary,
some Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Sārārtha-
varṣiṇī commentary, and some Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s translations entitled Vidvad-rañjana and
Rasika-rañjana. Later, various editions were published
in Bengali by different maṭhas , temples and missions in
the line of Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. An
Assamese edition was published in Tejapura, Assam, and
some English editions were published in Calcutta and
Tamil Nadu. A Hindi edition of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā with
the commentaries of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura or Śrīla
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇapāda had not yet been made
available. Consequently, the Hindi-speaking populace
both in India and the whole world was therefore bereft
of such an edition of this jewel-like book.

It is for this reason that my Godbrother pūjyapāda Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, the vice-president and
general editor of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, is
publishing this present edition of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā
with its Sanskrit verses, an anvaya (word-for-word),
verse translations and the Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary
of the great preceptor, śrī-gauḍīya-vaiṣṇava-ācārya Śr ī
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. He is also
presenting a simple, comprehensible commentary known as
Sārārtha-varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti . Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti will remain eternally grateful and indebted to
him for this. By deeply studying this book, the
virtuous, intelligent readers will certainly receive
supreme benefit and bliss.

At the end of his preface to the Gītā, jagad-guru oṁ
viṣṇupāda Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura comments,


“Unfortunately, most of the commentaries and Bengali
translations of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā published to date
are written by the advocates of the doctrine that the
living entity and the Supreme Lord are non-different in
every respect (abheda-brahmavāda). Only a few
publications contain commentaries and translations that
are in line with pure devotion to Bhagavān, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The commentaries of Śaṅkarācārya
and Ānandagiri are full of absolute monism (abheda-
brahmavāda), or the doctrine that the living entity is
non-different from the Absolute Truth. The commentary of

                           10
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrīla Śrīdhāra Svāmī, though not full of brahmavāda,
consists of a scent of the Rudra sampradāya’s doctrine
of purified nondualism (sāmpradāyika śuddhādvaita ).
Some statements in the commentary of Śrī Madhusūdana
Sarasvatīpāda support bhakti, but its final instruction
and essence expound abheda-brahmavāda , or monistic
liberation. The commentary of Śrī Rāmānujācārya is
completely in accordance with bhakti, but those who
taste pure bhakti-rasa cannot derive ever-increasing
bliss from it.


“In our country, no commentary was available that
follows Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s philosophy of
inconceivable oneness and difference (acintya-
bhedābheda). Therefore, to facilitate the pure devotees’
relish of rasa and to benefit faithful people, I took
great pains to procure the commentary of Śrī Gaurāṅga
Mahāprabhu’s devout follower, the most erudite Śrī
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Mahāśaya, the crest jewel among
devotees.


“I have now published the Gītā with this commentary as
well as with a Bengali verse translation named Rasika-
rañjana. The commentary, written by Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu, which also follows the teachings of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu, consists mainly of philosophical
conceptions. Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s commentary,
however, is full of both philosophical conceptions and
the mellow of pure love (prīti-rasa ). I have published
the commentary of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura, because his
conceptions are simple to comprehend and his Sanskrit
language straightforward. The general reader will
therefore be able to understand it easily.”



Jagad-guru Śrīla Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda comments,


“Even though there are countless expositions,
commentaries, and translations of this book in many
languages, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura still
composed his Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary, which follows
the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava conceptions. He did this
especially for the rasika Gauḍīya devotees. Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is fourth in disciplic
succession from Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura and is the
guardian and preceptor of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava dharma in
its intermediate period. This verse about him is most
famous: viśvasya nātha-rūpo ’sau

bhakti-vartma-pradarśanāt

bhakta-cakre vartitatvāt

cakravarty ākhyayābhavat


He is known by the name Viśvanātha, the Lord of the
universe, because he indicates the path of bhakti, and
he is called Cakravartī (he around whom a circle, or
assembly, turns) because he always remains in the

                            11
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

assembly (cakra) of pure devotees.




“All Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas know something about Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura. In particular, those who study the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, discuss the Gītā and study, teach and
deliberate upon the Gauḍīya scriptures will surely, to
some extent, be aware of his transcendental brilliance.
Few authors have appeared among the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
preceptors who have written as extensive Sanskrit works
and commentaries as Śrīla Cakravartī Mahāśaya.

“In the year 1706, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
was very old. He sent his student, gauḍīya-vedāntācārya,
the highly erudite Śrīpāda Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, and
his disciple, Śrī Kṛṣṇadeva, to a philosophical assembly
in Jaipur. Great misfortune had befallen the members of
the Gauḍīya sampradāya there because they had forgotten
their sāmpradāyika identity and had disregarded Vaiṣṇava
Vedānta. To dissipate that misfortune, Śrīpāda Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa composed an independent treatise on the
Brahmasūtra in accordance with the thoughts of the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya. In this way he rendered a
most distinguished service to the sampradāya , which
greatly pleased Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura. This was the
second of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s great
accomplishments in preaching Vaiṣṇava dharma. It is also
a shining example of an approved rectification performed
by a non-seminal brāhmaṇa and Vaiṣṇava ācārya.”



Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā consists of eighteen chapters,
which comprise Chapters Twenty-five to Forty-two of the
Bhīṣma-parva of Mahābhārata . Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s friend Arjuna
is the listener, and Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the speaker.
Before reading Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, it is of utmost
importance to know the mutual relationship between
Arjuna and Bhagavān and to understand Arjuna’s
conception of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Lord. Śrīmad
Bhagavad-gītā is not a ‘scripture’ born of imagination,
so there is no need of any interpretation of it that is
rooted in mundane speculation. Śrī Arjuna, Sañjaya,
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Janamejaya and the sages headed by Śaunaka
never took the Gītā to be a metaphor. To say that
Sañjaya represents divine vision, that Dhṛtarāṣṭra
represents the blind mind, and that both are situated in
the one body is simply the result of a sprouting
imagination. Conversely, it is natural for a mind that
is controlled by the soul to have divine vision, for
that mind is capable of controlling the senses.

Generally, people understand ‘Gītā’ to refer to Śrīmad
Bhagavad-gītā, which was instructed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa to His
friend Arjuna. Modern-day bookstores, however, contain
titles such as Gītā-samanvaya and Gītā-granthāvalī,
promoting them as great works that embody the very
essence of scriptural knowledge. Why is there objection
to accepting the excellence and antiquity of Śrīmad
Bhagavad-gītā, which is spoken by Śrī Bhagavān and which
has been adorned with such superlative titles as sarva-
jñ āna-prayojikā (that which employs all knowledge),

                           12
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

sarva-śāstra-sārabhūtā (the essence of all scriptures)
and tattvārtha-ma ñjar ī (the flower bud of imports on
the Absolute Truth)? In the name of showing
individuality and liberality, impersonalists, monists,
polytheists and those who endeavour to synthesize spirit
and matter, use terms such as samanvaya (harmonization,
or synthesis) that shamelessly profess everything to be
equal. Such persons are forever busy demonstrating their
liberal morality through concocted commentaries that
endeavour to offer some speculative form of adjustment
on Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other
scriptures.

At present, the word samanvaya is misused and
misinterpreted. True harmony can only be found in
Bhagavān. Fabricated conceptions can never be equated
with harmony. Samanvaya-bhāṣyas (commentaries that claim
to present a harmonious conclusion) on the Gītā are now
found in shops and bookstores, but it is neither concord
(anvaya) nor synthesis (samanvaya ) to say that the
world is Parameśvara (the Supreme Lord) or that
Parameśvara is the world. This infectious disease of the
doctrine of ‘harmony’ is evident in many of the so-
called educated elite. It must be opposed and refuted.

Those who pride themselves on their Western education
avoid placing their faith in the scripture and
investigating true knowledge through it. Rather, they
resort to various types of mundane logic to satisfy
their tendency for inquiry. Atheistic historians and
researchers analyze a scripture using the latest
research methods in order to determine its time of
composition. Because they fail to accept its factual
substance, they are unable to reconcile aspects of the
scriptures that contradict their conclusions. Śrīmad
Bhagavad-gītā is a part of Mahābhārata, yet they say it
was added at a later date. This kind of research does
not spread the glories of the eternal distinguished
culture of sages who have seen the Truth (ārya-ṛṣis);
rather, it only confirms the researchers’ indifference
and disdain toward them. It is not a quest for immortal
nectar but the spitting of poison.

Modern educated people fill their speeches and writings
with the word ‘sectarian’ so as to boast their
liberality. They forget that the glory of ārya-dharma,
which is eternal, is sectarianism in its most pure
sense. The current of true conceptions that is received
through the guru-paramparā is termed sampradāya, or a
disciplic lineage that completely and properly bestows
the Supreme Truth. This current has been flowing since
time immemorial in the theistic society of India.

The ārya-ṛṣis firmly established the system of
sampradāya on a solid, scientific foundation. The
attempt to destroy it began with a fierce attack by
those who adhered to atheistic communism, which came
from the West. The root cause of such calamity is an
erroneous understanding of the word ‘sectarian’. Now,
many fabricated, narrow-minded sects loudly voice their
opposition to the bona fide sampradāyas. Unable to
pursue the Absolute Truth, they take shelter of
opportunism, thinking the frantic dance of their minds
to be liberality, or public opinion. Consequently, they

                           13
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

are forced to become impersonalists, worshipping brahma
, the featureless aspect of the Absolute Truth, which is
devoid of all potency. The plot to prove that Śrī
Bhagavān, the Supreme Absolute Truth, is featureless is
now termed non-sectarian, or asāmpradāyika.

It is fashionable to write so-called spiritual or non-
sectarian commentaries on the Gītā and other scriptures.
Regrettably, however, in today’s society, non-
sectarianism refers to willfulness, opportunism, and
lack of inhibition. One should understand that those who
reject the realized truths of the ārya-ṛṣis – who know
past, present and future – and the eternally perfect,
exalted personalities, and who assert that their
doctrines are spoiled by sectarianism, are in fact
attached to impersonalism and materialism. Such people
label as non-sectarian the commentaries of political
leaders, fruitive workers, empiric philosophers and
mystics.

To understand the actual conclusions of Śrīmad Bhagavad-
gītā and to philosophically deliberate upon them, one
must take shelter of the instructions of the previous
ācāryas and follow those instructions. One will then be
able to perceive and realize the inner intention of the
Gītā. A subject becomes easy to understand if the author
himself gives an explanation, or commentary, otherwise
one’s own understanding of the subject will naturally be
tainted by the four defects: error, illusion, imperfect
sense perception, and deception. Consequently, one
cannot possibly understand the intention of the Gītā
unless one takes shelter of the realized truth imparted
by the sages who know past, present and future, and the
previous ācāryas within the disciplic succession, who
are devoid of such faults. There is no other way.

I shall try to present some of the truths that my most
worshipful spiritual master, Śrī Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, spoke on the subject of the
Gītā.


“The purpose of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gīta is not to promote
diplomacy or the ethics of a kṣatriya but rather to
teach complete surren-der to the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the utmost Supreme Absolute Truth.”

“Arjuna, is the cause of   the Gītā’s appearance and he
can never be bewildered.   His bewilderment is an act,
solely to facilitate the   appearance of the Gītā, for he
is the eternal associate   and friend of Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.”

“Śrī Vyāsadeva says, pārtho vatsaḥ (Gītā-mahātmya 6).
From this we can understand that the milk of the Gītā
was not only intended for Arjuna, who is here compared
to a calf.”

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, ‘mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja – take
exclusive shelter of Me’ (Gītā18.66). Here, the word
ekam indicates that the sole intention of the Gītā is to
help one surrender to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the possessor of all
potency.”


                             14
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

“In the Gītā (9.31), we see that Bhagavān makes His
devotee, Arjuna, declare that His devoteenever perishes:
kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ pranaśyati. The
purport is that Bhagavān always protects the vows of His
devotees in every way, while He slackens His own vows
simply upon hearing His devotee’s prayers of distress.
Therefore, out of His bhakta-vātsalya (affection for His
devotee) Bhagavān proclaims His devotee’s victory.”

“In the Gītā (4.9) He says, ‘My birth and activities are
divine and full of inconceivable potency.’ ”

“The Vedas have emanated from Īśvara’s breathing, but
the words of ŚrīGītā have emanated from His lips. The
Gītā is therefore as transcendental as the Vedas. In
this regard, there is no scope for argument.”

“In the Gītā (9.11) Bhagavān tells Arjuna, ‘Foolish
people, who are bewildered by māyā, consider My
transcendental form of eternality, knowledge and bliss
to be ordinary, like a perishable human body, and thus
they slight Me.’ Something that is devoid of form or
features is never worshipable. Moreover, absence of
features does not constitute transcendence. The forms of
Bhagavān and the Vaiṣṇavas are eternal, all cognizant
and blissful. They cannot be perceived by the mundane
senses and are completely pure and transcendental. They
are nirguṇatattva, completely free from the material
modes of nature.”



Jagad-guru Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda
writes in the introduction to his commentary:


“Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which consists of eighteen
chapters, is celebrated as an Upaniṣad. There are
countless expositions, commentaries and translations of
this book in many languages. The commentaries of Śrīla
Śrīdhara, Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva, Śrī Viśvanātha and
Śrī Baladeva are most prominent. Those who have taken
shelter of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas’ most worshipful Śrī
Caitanyadeva are very attached to the commentaries that
are approved by His associates. Those who are born in a
seminal line of brāhmaṇas follow the smārta-dharma as
propounded by Manu and others. The Gītā, however,
delineates the system of determining caste according to
character, a system that opposes this doctrine. Bhagavān
Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, ‘Those whose intelligence is plundered
by the desire to be freed from distress worship the
demigods according to appropriate regulations, being
subject to their own natures.’ Why should we take
shelter of demigods and not of Adhokṣaja, Bhagavān, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is beyond the purview
of the material senses? If one abandons the worship of
the transcendental Cupid, Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu, and
worships others instead, one’s human intelligence is
both lost and destroyed. Until one is free from all
desires, one cannot worship Kāmadeva (the transcendental
ever-fresh Cupid).”




                           15
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

In his introduction to his Rasika-rañjana commentary on
the Gītā, jagad-guru Śrīla Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura writes,


“The most compassionate Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose words
always hold true, spoke Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which is
an investigation into the essential import of all the
Vedas, to His friend, Arjuna, to deliver the entire
world. These instructions of the Gītā are the only means
to deliver the world.

“The Gītā is therefore the crown jewel of all Upaniṣads.
TheUpaniṣads, the Brahmasūtra and Bhagavad-gītā are all
purely devotional scriptures (śuddha-bhakti-śāstras).
Those who possess atranscendental nature will certainly
take the renounced order upon hearing the Gītā, just as
Uddhava did. The deep import of the Gītā is that a
person’s eligibility follows in the wake of his nature.
Without the proper eligibility, the conditioned soul
cannot possibly attain Bhagavān. Fruitive action
(karma), knowledge ( jñāna) and devotion (bhakti) have
different natures, and thus their identities are also
different. For this reason, after due deliberation, the
Vedas have been divided into three divisions: karma-
kāṇḍa, jñāna-kāṇḍa and bhakti-kāṇḍa. One’s karma
transforms into bhakti once one surpasses the desire to
attain religiosity (dharma), wealth (artha), sense
gratification (kāma) and liberation (mokṣa) and instead
finds joy in the service of Bhagavān. Bhakti is
therefore the final aim of theliving entity’s prescribed
duty and also its fruit.

“Bhakti is a very profound principle; it is the very
life of jñāna and karma and it fulfils their purpose.
That is why the discussion on bhakti has been placed in
the middle six chapters. By this we see that supremely
pure bhakti is the final goal of the Gītā. The verse,
sarva-dharmān parityajya, found at the end of the Gītā
(18.66), establishes that surrender to Bhagavān is the
most confidential instruction.”


To understand the actual philosophical conclusions and
lessons of the Gītā, from its auspicious beginning until
its final conclusion, we must first surrender to a
spiritual master in the line of the foremost Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, because the pure words and
teachings of transcendental and eternally perfect
personalities are free from error, illusion and so on.
In fact, they are our only welfare. The neem, mango,
tamarind and bel (wood-apple) trees on the banks of the
pure Bhāgavatī Gaṅgā grow bitter, sweet and sour fruit,
even though they are nourished by the same water.
Similarly, due to their natures, the living entities who
are enchanted by māyā, the deluding material energy,
preach different conceptions after studying the same
scripture.

One may ask why Bhagavān instructs His dear friend
Arjuna to practise karma, jñāna, yoga and so forth if
they are not the best sādhana . The answer is that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa also states in the Gītā that without bhakti to Śrī
Bhagavān, all endeavours in karma, jñ āna and yoga are

                           16
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

fruitless and meaningless. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has
instructed that worship in anugatya of the gopīs of
Vraja (ie. following in their footsteps), is the highest
type of worship. “Aiśvarya śithila preme nahi mora prīta
– love that is enfeebled by aiśvarya-j ñ āna does not
satisfy Me” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 3.16).
This is Kṛṣṇa’s hidden intention. In the verse sarva-
dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja , Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the source of all divine incarnations, has revealed and
proclaimed His sovereignty over the material energy and
the demigods, and He has also proclaimed Himself to be
the supreme object of worship for all. He is the basis
and shelter of the empiric philosophers’ worshipful
brahma, the Lord’s featureless aspect. He is the nondual
Truth (advaya-jñ āna-tattva) and He is the one true
object (vāstava-vastu) – that is, He is one without

a second.

The first six chapters of the Gītā discuss karma-yoga,
the path of spiritual advancement where the fruit of
one’s pious action is offered to the Lord. The last six
discuss jñ āna -yoga, the path of spiritual advancement
through transcendental knowledge. And the middle six
discuss bhakti-yoga , the path of loving devotion to the
Supreme Lord (Bhagavān). From this we understand that
Bhakti Mahā-devī is the supreme shelter of karma and jñ
āna . Bhakti Mahā-devī was once established as one who
gives life to jñ āna, vairāgya and so on in a gathering
(in which Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was discussed) at Māyātīrtha
Haridvara, the best among the seven holy places. Without
the mercy of Bhakti-devī, neither karma, jñ āna, yoga
nor any other process can give the desired result. This
is specifically evidenced in the following verses:
bhaktyā mām abhijānanti (Gītā 18.55), bhaktyā labhyas tv
ananyayā (Gītā 8.22), bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 11.14.21), bhaktyā tuṣyati kevalam, bhaktir
evainaṁ nayati (Māthara Śruti), and na sādhayati māṁ
yogo (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.14.20).

In the authoritative scriptures, the performance of
supremely pure,

exclusive devotion (known as viśuddhā-, ananyā- or
kevalā-bhakti) is said to be the final instruction for
the living entity. From the verse, satataṁ kīrtayanto
mām (Gītā 9.14), we understand that worship of Bhagavān
is the performance of the nine kinds of devotion, headed
by

chanting the name, form, qualities and pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta states, “aprākṛta vastu
nahe prākṛta gocara – transcendental objects are beyond
mundane knowledge and the material senses” (Madhyalīlā
9.195). Pride and scholarship are defeated in such an
attempt. Bhagavān’s mercy can only be attained by
surrender to Him and by offering Him one’s very self.
Many people who are intoxicated by their mundane
scholarship and pride try to study and teach the meaning
of the scriptures, but they only cheat themselves and
others. Śr ī Kṛṣṇa spoke the verse teṣāṁ satata-yuktānām
(Gītā 10.10), for this reason.

The fundamental principle in regard to Śrī Bhagavān

                           17
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(bhagavat-tattva) is realized through buddhi-yoga (pure
intelligence directed towards the attainment of the
Lord), which is bestowed by Bhagavān. Those who try to
understand the import of scripture while faithfully
taking shelter of Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas, very
easily cross over the ocean of material existence and
attain transcendental devotion to the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Performance of such devotion is the qualification
for prema. Thus the words sarva-guhyatama (most
confidential), determine the supreme subject matter of
the Gītā, which is prema, the fifth goal of life and the
final stage of sādhana-bhajana.

Through this comparative discussion of the Gītā, Śrī
Bhagavān has established the supremacy of bhakti-yoga .
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu –

who delivers the people in the age of Kali – along with
His dear associates, has shown the path to search for
the most worshipful Absolute Truth. They have also shown
the pinnacle of sādhana-bhajana. In this way they have
bestowed incalculable benefit upon us. This is their
causeless, heartfelt compassion upon all living
entities. Throughout the entire world, their conception
is therefore supported by wise men and scholars alike.


Śrī Guru-Vaiṣṇava dāsānudāsa –




the servant of the servants




of Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas,




Tridaṇḍibhikṣu




Śrī Bhaktivedānta Vāmana




Vyāsa-pūjā of Śrī Śrī Gurupāda-padma




25 February 1997

                              18
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Introduction (to the Hindi edition)




ŚRīMAD BHAGAVAD-GīTā is composed by Śrī Śrīmad Kṛṣṇa
Dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa, the universal teacher and an
incarnation of

Bhagavān. It constitutes eighteen chapters of Bhīṣma-
parva (Chapters Twenty-five to Forty-two) of his vast
epic, Śrī Mah ābhārata .

Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has given very valuable and
fundamental instructions to His eternal associate and
dear friend Arjuna for the benefit of all human beings,
to help them cross the ocean of material existence and
attain His lotus feet. To enable deluded conditioned
souls like us to pass beyond the delusion of the
external, material energy (māyā), He made His eternal
associate, Arjuna, become as if enchanted by māyā so
that he would ask questions that correspond to the
various eligibilities of the deluded living entities.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa then answered those questions Himself, thereby
dispelling all kinds of doubts and defining the means by
which the living entities can be systematically freed
from the delusion of māyā.

Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā is also known as Gītopaniṣad. It is
the essence of all Vedic knowledge and the most
significant Upaniṣad in Vedic literature. Those who
constantly study this book with faith, under the shelter
of the spiritual master, saintly persons and Vaiṣṇavas
will be able to ascertain its true import easily. As a
result, they will transcend the ocean of material
existence and attain transcendental devotion to the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In this way, they will become
eligible to attain pure love for Him. Of this there is
not the slightest doubt.

Nowadays, it is observed that the great thinkers and
venerated gentlemen of India revere Śrīmad Bhagavad-
gītā. Members of all disciplic lineages (sampradāyas )
also show great honour and faith in the Gītā. Even many
celebrated politicians have shown faith in this monarch
of books, and philosophers from all countries of the
world have lauded it profusely.

Since ancient times, many commentaries have been written
on Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā. Famous among them are the
commentaries of prominent monists (advaitavādīs ), such
as Śrī Śaṅkarācārya, Śrīmad Ānandagiri and Śrī
Madhusūdana Sarasvatī. Most people study and lecture
from these commentaries alone. Some people conclude
their study of the Gītā with the following commentaries:
the principle of specialized monism by viśiṣṭādvaitavādī
Śrī Rāmānujācārya, the principle of purified monism by
śuddhādvaitavādī Śrīdhara Svāmī, or the principle of

                           19
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

pure dualism by śuddha-dvaitācārya Śrīman Madhvācārya.
Furthermore, at present some people also conclude their
study with the interpretations of political
personalities like Lokamānya Tilaka, Gāndhījī and Śrī
Aravinda. Most people, however, do not receive the good
fortune to deeply study the commentary of the proponent
of the devotional school of Vedānta established by Śrī
Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, śrī gauḍīya-vedāntācārya Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, who is proficient in acintya-
bhedābheda-siddhānta (the principle of inconceivable
difference and non-difference), nor the commentary of
Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, the crest jewel of
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava preceptors.

The Seventh Gosvāmī of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
sampradāya and the best among the followers of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, published in
Bengali two editions of the Gītā with two different elu
cidations on its translations, which are based on the
import of Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s and Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s commentaries. His explanations
are fundamental and full of beautiful conclusions that
follow the rūpānuga conception and that are conducive to
śuddha-bhakti . The transcendental benefit bestowed upon
mankind by these two great editions is indescribable.
Through his elucidations, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
establishes the eternality, universality and supremacy
of bhakti , thereby bestowing the greatest benefit upon
those journeying to the kingdom of śuddha-bhakti .

At present, various inauthentic persons are publishing
speculative commentaries on the Gītā, in which they
shamelessly present their imaginary, inconclusive
theories about the synthesis of spirit and matter (cit-
jaḍa-samanvayavāda ). They also try to prove that pure
devotion, which is eternal, is worthless. In most of
these commentaries, either prescribed duty or empiric
knowledge in the form of impersonal māyāvādism is
expounded as the sole import of the Gītā. By reading and
hearing such commentaries, people of delicate faith are
being deviated from the path.

The nigama-śāstras (Vedas) are very extensive. Some
portions of them contain instructions on mundane
religiosity (dharma ), others on prescribed duty (karma
), others on analytical knowledge (sāṅkhya-j ñ āna ) and
yet others on bhagavad-bhakti , loving devotion to
Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What is
the mutual relationship between these systems, and when
is it one’s duty to relinquish one to engage in another?
Although a description of such gradated eligibilities is
also found in those very scriptures, it is very
difficult for living entities born in the age of Kali,
whose lives are but short and whose intellects are
meagre, to completely study those vast scriptures and
ascertain their own qualification. For this reason, a
concise, straightforward and scientific investigation is
indispensable.

At the end of Dvāpara-yuga, most people became incapable
of understanding the true import of the Vedic scriptures
and thus began to propagate their own theories. Some
declared karma , or fruitive action, to be the sole
intention of the Vedas, while others declared material

                           20
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

enjoyment, analytical knowledge, logic or monism to be
its sole intent. In this way, the divergent opinions
that arose from their incomplete knowledge began to
create affliction in India, just as unchewed foodstuff
causes discomfort and pain to the stomach.

At that time the supremely compassionate Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇacandra gave the instructions of Śrīmad Bhagavad-
gītā to His dear associate and friend, Arjuna, for the
benefit of the living entities of the world. Śrīmad
Bhagavad-gītā, which is an investigation into the
essential import of all the Vedas, is therefore the
crest jewel of all Upaniṣads. It describes the mutual
relationship between the processes of karma-yoga , jñ
āna-yoga and so on and expounds pure hari-bhakti as the
supreme goal for the living entities. Karma-yoga (the
path of spiritual advancement where the fruit of one’s
pious action is offered to the Lord), jñ āna-yoga (the
path of spiritual advancement through transcendental
knowledge) and bhakti-yoga (the path of loving devotion
to the Supreme Lord) are not actually different systems;
they are simply the first, second and third steps of the
one yoga process. The first stage of that complete yoga
is called karma-yoga , the second, jñ āna-yoga and the
third, bhakti-yoga . The Upaniṣads, Brahmasūtra , and
Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā are completely devotional
literatures.

They elaborately describe karma , jñ āna , mukti and the
attainment of brahma , but then comparatively deliberate
on them and ultimately establish śuddha-bhakti as
supreme.

Readers of the Gītā can be divided in two categories:
those possessed of a gross, or superficial,
understanding (sthūla-darśīs ) and those possessed of
fine discrimination (sūkṣma-darśīs ). The first type
makes conclusions based exclusively on the external
meaning of the Gītā’s statements. The second type,
however, is not satisfied with only the external
meanings and enquires into the deep, fundamental
purport. The external sthūla-darśīs read the Gītā from
beginning to end and conclude that it establishes karma
, because after hearing the entire Gītā, Arjuna
understands that to fight is beneficial.

The sūkṣma-darśīs, however, are not satisfied with such
a shallow conclusion. They determine either knowledge of
the impersonal aspect of the Lord (brahma-jñ āna ) or
transcendental devotion (parā-bhakti ) to be the aim of
the Gītā and say that Arjuna’s engaging in battle is
simply an example of adhering to one’s own level of
eligibility.

But this is not the highest essence of the Gītā. A man’s
nature determines his qualification to engage in work
(prescribed duty). As he maintains his life accordingly,
he gradually obtains knowledge of the Truth. Unless he
performs some work, he will have difficulty maintaining
himself, and without maintaining himself, it will be
difficult for him to ponder the Truth. Therefore, in the
primary stage, it is necessary to properly execute one’s
prescribed duty that is in accordance with one’s varṇa
(caste) and station in life. It is important to know

                           21
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

here that of all virtuous action, the Gītā only accepts
selflessly performed action that is offered to Bhagavān.
Such karma gradually purifies the heart and bestows
knowledge of the Truth. Then, through the performance of
devotion, or bhakti , Bhagavān is finally attained.

In order to understand Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā’s purport
and ultimate subject, one must follow the instructions
of the person who spoke it – Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa –
who is referred to as Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, on every page. Out of His causeless mercy,
in many parts of the Gītā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa declares Himself to
be Bhagavān, the Supreme Absolute Truth:

ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

Gītā (10.8)

I am the source of both mundane and spiritual worlds.
Everything emanates from Me. The wise who know this well
engage in bhajana of Me, with ecstasy in their hearts.

mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya

mayi sarvam idaṁ protaṁ sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva

Gītā (7.7)

O conqueror of riches, Dhanañjaya, there is nothing
superior to Me. This whole creation is dependent on Me,
just as jewels are strung on a thread.

ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca

na tu mām abhijānanti tattvenātaś cyavanti te

Gītā (9.24)

I am the only master and enjoyer of all sacrifices, but
those who do not recognize My transcendental body fall
down and repeatedly wander in the cycle of birth and
death.

Many other scriptures also state Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be Svayam
Bhagavān:

ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28)

All avatāras begining with Rāma and Nṛsiṁha are the
parts, and parts of the parts, of the Supreme Person
Bhagavān. However, only Kṛṣṇa is the original Svayam
Bhagavān.

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

Brahmasūtra (5.1)

The Supreme Lord, Īśvara, is Kṛṣṇa; His form is eternal,
all-knowing and blissful.


                             22
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

aho bhāgyam aho bhāgyam nanda-gopa-vrajaukasām

yan mitraṁ paramānandaṁ pūrṇaṁ brahma sanātanam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.32)

How greatly fortunate are Nanda Mahārāja, the cowherd
men and all the other inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi! There
is no limit to their good fortune, because the Absolute
Truth, the source of transcendental bliss, the eternal
Supreme Brahman, has become their friend.*

It is important to know in this regard that of
Bhagavān’s various incarnations, none have revealed
Their Godliness, or bhagavattā. In the Gītā however,
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa clearly makes known Hi s position as
the Supreme Lord, and defines surrender and bhakti to
Him as the supreme spiritual practice (sādhana ) for all
living entities.

Through the principle of trisatya, or an oath thrice
affirmed, Śrī Kṛṣṇa establishes His own Godliness and
defines devotion to Him as the topmost spiritual
practice (sādhana ) and goal (sādhya ). He does this
with the words mām eva (to Me) in the verse “mām eva ye
prapadyante –

surrender only to Me” (Gītā 7.24); with the words mām
eva (to Me) in the verse “te ’pi mām ev a kaunteya –
they worship only Me” (Gītā 9.23); and with the words
mām ekam (to Me alone) in the verse mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ
vraja – surrender exclusively to Me” (Gītā 18.66).
Moreover, not only Śrī Kṛṣna, but even great sages and
perfected souls such as Devarṣi Nārada, Asita, Devala
and Vyāsa confirm this truth, and Arjuna too accepts it
from the very beginning. Therefore, anyone who reads or
listens to the Gītā will approach the Supreme Truth in a
mood of acceptance, free from the slightest doubt, that
the speaker of the Gītā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is the original
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Each and every one of
His teachings are completely true.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa has told Arjuna in the verse bhakto ’si me
sakhā ceti rahasyaṁ hy etad uttamam (Gītā 4.1–3), “This
Gītā is eter nal. At first, billions of years ago, I
gave these instructions to the sun-god, Vivasvān.
Vivasvān gave them to Manu, and Manu gave them to
Īkṣvāku. This system of yoga thus remained in the world
through the disciplic succession (guru-paramparā), but
that paramparā disappeared with the passing of time. You
are My exclusive devotee, My dear friend and My direct
disciple; I am therefore bestowing this supreme secret
upon you.”

It is impossible to comprehend the profound truths of
the Gītā without being a devotee, for throughout this
scripture it is declared that its import cannot be
grasped without bhakti : “bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya aham
evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna – it is only through exclusive
devotion that My form can be actually seen” (Gītā
11.54). The Gītā has bee n spoken only for the devotees
of Bhagavān. This is what is meant by the statement
“idaṁ te nātapaskāya nābhaktāya kadācana – you should
never explain this Bhagavad-gītā to anyone whose senses

                           23
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

are uncontrolled, who is a non-devotee, who is devoid of
a serving mood, or who is envious of Me” (Gītā 18.67).

The Gītā describes three kinds of sādhakas , or
practitioners of a particular discipline. They are the
jñ ānī, the yogī and the bhakta . In the Gītā, the words
jñ ānī and yogī do not refer to impersonalist māyāvādīs
who maintain that the Absolute Truth is unmanifest,
featureless, formless and devoid of potency. Rather,
they refer to jñ ānīs and yogīs who are endowed with
bhakti . In the Gītā (7.19), Śrī Kṛṣṇa clearly says,
“bahūnāṁ janmanām ante j ñ ānavān māṁ prapad yate – the
true jñ ānī is one who is surrendered unto Me and who
has pure devotion for Me. Such a great soul is very
rare.” His definition of a yogī in Gītā 6.47 is
similarly clear: “yogīnām api sarveṣāṁ mad-
gatenāntarātmanā –he who constantly worships Me with
full faith, always thinking exclusively of Me within,
is, in My opinion, the topmost of all yogīs .”

Therefore, a person who is devoid of bhakti is never
eligible to hear the Gītā. If he is not eligible even to
hear it, how can he understand its impo rt? It is
necessary to surrender to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet with
the knowledge that He is Svayam Bhagavān, and to hear
the truths of the Gītā from the mouth of a great devotee
in a true guru-paramparā who has seen the Truth. Unless
a person does this, he will not be able to understand
the Gītā’s import.

According to Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
possesses all majesty and sweetness (aiśvarya and
mādhurya ), is the supreme object of worship of the
living entities; and bhakti , which attracts Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
is the supreme process and goal. Nevertheless, because
ignorant people consider this gross body as ‘I’ and
objects related to it as ‘mine’, they remain cheated of
their true constitutional nature; they are therefore
incapable of correctly understanding the essential
truths of bhakti . Because of their gross intelligence,
they consider mundane fruitive activity (karma ) the
only reality, and because of their ignorance, they
remain engrossed in it. They consequently fall into the
clutches of monism or m āyāvāda . Śrī Kṛṣṇa inspired
Arjuna to raise the topics of these types of mundane
religiosity. He then established both their
insignificance and the supreme eminence of bhakti .

Of the eighteen chapters of the Gītā, the first six
establish the unique features of karma-yoga ; the last
six, the main features of jñ āna-yoga ; and the middle
six, the prominent features of bhakti-yoga . Thus bhakti
remains situated in the centre and gives shelter to
karma and jñ āna . This is because karma and jñ āna are
incapable of bes towing any result without the
assistance of Bhakti-devī.

KARMA: Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa personally instructs Arjuna
about the necessity of performing one’s prescribed duty
(karma ) for the pleasure of Bhagavān. If one does not
do so, it becomes the cause of bon dage, as stated in
Gītā 3.9: “yajñ ārthāt karmaṇo ’nyatra loko ’yaṁ karma-
bandhanaḥ… – O son of Kuntī, all actions other than the
selfless performance of one’s prescribed duty offered to

                           24
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrī Viṣṇu are a cause of bondage to this world.
Therefore, become free from all desires for the fruits
of your actions and perform appropriate action solely
for His satisfaction.” The word yajñ ārthāt in this
verse means ‘offered to Śrī Viṣṇu’. Therefore,
prescribed duties should be performed solely for the
pleasure of Viṣṇu, because Śrī Kṛṣṇa says in Gītā 5.29,
“bhoktāraṁ yaj ña-tapas ām ... – “He who knows Me to be
the enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities, the
Supreme Controller of all planets and the well-wisher of
all living entities attains liberation.” He also says in
Gītā 3.30, “mayi sarvāni karmāṇi sannyasya – all
prescribed duties should be performed as an offering to
Me.” Furthermore, in Gītā 9.27, He says, “yat karoṣi …
whatever you do, do it for My pleasure; offer it to Me.”
We thus see that Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructs liv ing entities
who are eligible to perform their prescribed duty, to
only perform niṣkāma-bhagavad-arpita-karma , selfless
work offered to the Supreme Lord. He does not give them
the instruction to merely perform their prescribed duty.

Karma usually only refers to prescribed duty that is
accompanied by devotion, or bhakti . Karma in which
bhakti predominates over karma is known as karma-miśrā-
bhakti or pradhānī-bhūtā-bhakti . Only when the
performance of one’s prescribed duty is solely for the
pleasure of Bhagav ān can it truly be termed karma , as
stated in the verse tat karma hari toṣaṇaṁ yat (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 4.29.49). For this reason, in Gītā 11.55,
Bhagavān also states, “mat karma kṛn... yaḥ sa mām eti
pāṇḍava – only he who performs karma for My pleasure
attains Me.”

JñāNA: Śrī Kṛṣṇa states that among the four kinds of
people who are surrendered to Him, namely, the
distressed (ārtta ), the inquisitive ( jijñ āsu ), the
seekers of wealth (arthārthīs ), and those in search of
knowledge ( jñ ānīs ), the jñ ānīs are best. What is the
nature of the jñ ānīs ? Gītā 7.17 states, “teṣāṁ j ñ ānī
nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir viśiṣyate – those jñ ānīs
possess exclusive devotion for Him and are always
absorbed in Him.”

Here, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not speaking of jñānīs who are
impersonalists devoid of bhakti . To clarify this, He
later says in Gītā 7.19, “bahūnāṁ janmanām ante j ñ
ānavān māṁ prapadyate… – after many births, the jñ ānī
who is endowed with knowledge that everything both
conscious and inert is related to Vāsudeva fully takes
shelter of Me. Such a great soul is extremely rare.”

The word jñāna refers to knowledge that is not
predominated by bhakti , whereas knowledge that is
inclined towards prema-bhakti is known as jñ āna-miśrā-
bhakti . When one has made some progress in his sādhana
and gives up jñ āna due to an abundance of divine love,
pure exclusive devotion, or prema-bhakti , manifests in
his heart.



YOGA: At the end of the Sixth Chapter, Bhagavān highly
praises the yogīs by stating that they are even superior
to the karmīs (those who perform their prescribed duty),

                           25
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

tapasvīs (performers of austerity) and jñ ānīs (those in
search of knowledge). He instructs Arjuna to become a
yogī: tapasvibhyo ’dhiko yogī (6.46). But in Gītā 6.47
Bhagavān defines what kind of yogī, “yoginām api
sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntarātmanā – among all kinds of yogīs
, the best are those who always faithfully perform
bhajana to Me with their hearts.” The word ‘Me’ in this
verse refers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. Therefore, when the
Gītā speaks of the yogī, it refers to the yogī who worsh
ips Śrī Kṛṣṇa in every way. In the Gītā, yoga does not
refer to pāta ñjala-yoga , nor does it refer to the
activities of karmīs , yogīs , or performers of dry
austerities who are devoid of bhakti .

BHAKTI: After bestowing vision of His universal form
upon His devotee Arjuna, Śrī Kṛṣṇa tells him, “bhaktyā
tv ananyayā śakya aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna – vision of
this form of Mine is only possible through exclusive
devotion. You are My exclusive premī-bhakta , and
therefore you have seen it” (Gītā 11.54). “Furthermore,
in Gītā 18.55, He says, “bhaktyā mām abhijānāti – only
through pure devotion can someone see Me, or know Me in
truth, and attain loving service to Me in My abode.”

At the end of the Gītā, after giving instructions on the
confidential knowledge of the featureless aspect of
Godhead (brahma-jñ āna ), the more confidential
paramātma-j ñ āna , or īśvara-j ñ āna (knowledge of the
localized aspect of the Supreme Lord, Paramātmā) and
finally the most confidential bhagavad-jñ āna (knowledge
of the Supreme Personality of Go dhead), Śrī Kṛṣṇa says,
“sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja –
abandon all varieties of religion and surrender
exclusively to Me” (Gītā 18.66). In this verse, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa instructs Arjuna to surrender to Him, giving up
all worldly religion. By this, He establishes that
bhakti is the only means to attain His complete form.
Such bhakti is of two types: exclusive (kevala ) and
mixed with another process, predomdinating over it
(pradhānī-bhūta ).

Exclusive devotion (kevalā-bhakti) is devoid of the
slightest scent of reward-seeking action (karma ),
empiric knowledge ( jñ āna ) and so forth, and is
completely independent. Devotion that is mixed with
another process and predominating over it (pradhānī-
bhūtā-bhakti ) is of three kinds: karma-pradhānī-bhūta
(in which devotion predominates over one’s prescribed
duty), jñ āna-pradhānī-bhūta (in which devotion
predominates over knowledge) and karma-jñ āna-pradhānī-
bhūta (in which devotion predominates over a mixture of
prescribed duties and knowledge). When karma and jñ āna
are devoid of the inclination to perform bhakti . they
are simply called karma and jñ āna respectively.

Although in some places the Gītā gives instructions on
devotion that predominates over another process, those
same places, also, certainly indicate exclusive
devotion. To know Bhagavān through pradhānī-bhūtā-bhakti
or to attain Him by it is very difficult. Therefore, in
the Gītā (8.14) Śrī Kṛṣṇa clearly states that He is
easily attained through exclusive devotion (ananyā-
bhakti or kevalā-bhakti ): “ana nya-cetāḥ satataṁ yo māṁ
smarati nityaśaḥ, tasyāhaṁ sulabhaḥ pārtha nitya-

                           26
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

yuktasya yoginaḥ – I am easily attained by those eternal
yogīs who, being endowed with exclusive devotion, always
remember Me and worship Me.”

Furthermore, in Gītā 9.22, Śrī Kṛṣṇa a lso states how He
is controlled by the exclusive loving service of His
devotees who are endowed with ananyā-bhakti : “ananyāś
cintayanto māṁ ye janāḥ paryupāsate, teṣāṁ
nityābhiyuktānāṁ yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham – I Myself
provide and maintain the needs of devotees who
exclusively worship Me and who are always engaged in
bhakti .”

In various places throughout the Gītā, Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa states that He can be attained only through
exclusive devotion: bhaktyā labhyas tv ananyayā (Gītā
8.22), bhajanty ananya-manaso (Gītā 9.13), bhaktyā tv
ananyayā śakya (Gītā 11.54), and finally, sarva-dharmān
parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja , ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-
pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ (Gītā 18.66). It is thus
verified that viśuddhā-bhakti , ananyā-bhakti , or
kevalā-bhakti is the ultimate goal of the living
entities.

How should one practise this ananyā-bhakti? Śrī Kṛṣṇa
instructs Arjuna as follows: “satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ
yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ, namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā
nitya-yuktā upāsate –

constantly chanting the glories of My names, qualities,
form and pastimes, endeavouring with determined vows,
and offering obeisances with devotion, they engage in My
worship, remaining always connected with Me” (Gītā
9.14).

By this verse, Śrī Kṛṣṇa teaches that saṅkīrtana is the
best method to worship Him. Here, saṅkīrtana means the
loud singing of Bhagavān’s names, form, qualities and
pastimes. It also alludes to the other limbs of bhakti .

Many insolently try to understand the Gītā with their
material knowledge, and they also instruct others in
this way. They do not know, however, that the Gītā is
transcendental, beyond mundane knowledge, logic and
intellect. It is beyond the reach of pride, valour,
heroism and erudition. It can be understood only by the
mercy of Bhagavān and bestowed u pon one who is
surrendered. Therefore, the Śrutis state, “nāyam ātmā
pravacanena labhyo – the Supreme Lord is not obtained by
expert explanations, by vast intelligence, or even by
much hearing; he is obtained only by one to whom He
Himself gives mercy” (Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 2.3.3) and “teṣāṁ
satata-yuktānām ...dadāmi buddhi-yogam – upon those who
lovingly perform bhajana of Me and yearn for My eternal
association, I bestow that transcendental knowledge by
which they attain Me” (Gītā 10.10).

In order to ascertain the meaning of a book, it is
necessary to consider six things: (1) its opening
statements (upakrama ), (2) its closing statements
(upasaṁhāra ), (3) its repetition of a subject (abhyāsa
), (4) its extraordinary result of reading it (apūrvatā
phala ), (5) its praise of a subject (arthavāda ) and
(6) its logical arguments that establish a conclusion

                           27
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(upapatti ). Unless one considers all six elements, a
book’s true import remains elusive. Those who deliberate
on the Gītā, keeping these six limbs of analysis in
mind, will easily understand that pristinely pure
devotion is its final import. At present, however,
ordinary people make conclusions on the meaning of the
scriptures according to their own whims to fulfil
selfish desires. They do not deliberate on these six
limbs of analysis and therefore remain incapable of
grasping the author’s real intent.

Nowadays, there is a trend for writers and speakers to
make a comparative analysis in the areas of acquired
knowledge, the application of that knowledge, science,
politics and so on, but all hesitate to compare various
religions. They conclude that such a study, which marks
one religion as superior and another as inferior, would
lead to tension or dispute between communities, throwing
society into unrest. Moreover, social and global
development would be obstructed. They conclude that to
successfully engender harmony it is essential to
establish equality and friendship between all people
rather than to discuss religious distinctions, and that
only when all religions are harmonized is it possible to
establish peace and mutual friendship among all. In the
field of politics, the comparative study of the
differences in doctrine between heads of state is the
only reason for inauspiciousness for a country and
society. These people think that a comparative study of
religion would similarly lead to communal dispute.

Our comment on this is as follows: Just as a comparative
study of knowledge and religion is necessary, so is a
study of true harmony. What does this mean? Say we place
on both sides of a scale, virtue and evil, sentience and
insentience, diamond and coal, a thief and a saint, and
justice and injustice, and then conclude that they are
equal. Where is the deliberation? To declare equality in
such cases is nothing less than ignorance and is
incapable of causing real harmony. The word samanvaya
(harmony) is derived from samyak (complete) and anvaya
(sequence). In other words, anvaya – the syntax of a
sentence, especially in terms of grammar – is known as
samanvaya . If a sentence is to have samanvaya (proper
harmony) then the subject, object and verb must be
properly placed. The syntax will not be proper if we put
the verb in place of the subject, the object in place of
the verb, and any other component of the sentence in
place of the object. Consequently, if there is no anvaya
(analysis, or syntax) how will there be any samanvaya
(harmony)? Proper harmony, or order, leads to coherence,
unity and the absence of impediments. Conversely,
artificially making everything equal without considering
virtue and fault or qualification and disqualification
cannot be called harmony. It is not true harmony to try
to please everybody in every way by saying that all are
equal. To try to please everybody means to please
nobody.

At present, certain persons who adhere to the so-called
doctrine of harmonization, claim that fruitive action
(karma ), knowledge ( jñ āna ), mysticism ( yoga ) and
devotion (bhakti ) – which are all taught in the Gītā –
are the same. But therein, Bhagavān distinctly

                           28
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

establishes the superiority of jñ āna over karma , yoga
over jñ āna , and bhakti over yoga . For living entities
deluded by the external energy, the performance of one’s
prescribed duty with a desire for the fruit (sakāma -
karma ) is described as the best. For those who are more
developed, the selfless performance of one’s prescribed
duty in which the fruit of that duty is offered to the
Supreme Lord (niṣkāma-bhagavad-arpita -karma ) is said
to be the best. For sādhakas who are even more
developed, knowledge of the Truth is described as
superior. And ultimately, pure devotion (śuddha-bhakti )
is described as most excellent of all.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself establishes bhakti as the final
subject expounded by the Gītā. To know this is to
properly understand the Gītā. It is foolish to depend on
one’s limited intelligence to seek a harmony in the Gītā
other than the scientific, comparative one spok en by
Bhagavān. In regard to ascertaining the Absolute Truth,
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa describes knowledge of His impersonal
feature (brahma-jñ āna ) as confidential, knowledge of
His localized expansion (paramātma-j ñ āna ) as more
confidential and transcendental devotion to Him (parā-
bhakti ) as most confidential. This is the true
samanvaya of Gītā.

Some modern commentators consider worship of various
demigods and goddesses to be equal to the worship of
Bhagavān. However, the verse ye ’py anya-devatā (Gītā
9.23) sta tes that worship of various demigods is
unauthorized. Those who worship the demigods attain the
planets of the demigods, and after enjoying there, they
again return to this world. But those who worship
Bhagavān attain loving service to Him in His abode. They
never fall from there. This is clearly mentioned in the
Vedic scriptures: “yas tu nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ brahma-
rudrādi-daivataiḥ viṣṇau sarveśvareśe tad-itara-sama-
dhīr yasya vā nārakī saḥ – those who consider Śrī Nār
āyaṇa and the demigods headed by Rudra, to be equal are
atheists and go to hell.”

Some people incorrectly interpret the verse, “ye yathā
māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham – In
whichever way a person serves Me I in turn serve him in
that very same way. Everyone follows My path in all
respects” (Gītā 4.11). They quote this to prove that all
people ultimately attain the same abode, regardless of
their type of worship. “There are many paths, but their
destinations are one.”

But if we carefully deliberate on this verse, we see
that this is not what it actually means. Bhagavān is
actually saying that He rewards a person according to
his surrender to Him: “In accordance with his acts, I
shall reward him.” How, then, is it possible for
everyone to be the same? The Gītā does not state in this
or a ny other verse that one who is surrendered achieves
the same result as one who is not. Furthermore, the aim
of those who take shelter of Bhagavān is not the same.
The fruitive worker takes shelter of Him with a desire
to enjoy, the empiric philosopher with a desire for
liberation, the mystic with a desire to attain mystic
perfections, and devotees with a desire to achieve
exclusive loving service to Him. Their desires,

                           29
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

practices and aims are all different; therefore, it is
not possible that they will achieve the same result.

Most people read this verse’s second line, mama
vartmānuvartante manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ, and wrongly
conjecture that all people are progressing in all ways
on the path to Bhagavān. By such thinking, they must
also conclude that thieves, dacoits, ruffians and
adulterers are all progressing on the same path, but is
this correct? No, never. The true meaning of this verse
is that karma , jñ āna , yoga and bhakti are all paths
delineated by Bhagavān. People receive a result
appropriate to the path they follow, in accordance with
their qualification. One must accept that different
paths lead to different results.

There is a clear distinction between the thoughts and
practices of Buddhists, māyāvādīs, Jains, Śaivites,
Śāktas and Vaiṣṇavas. It is illogical to say that they
all attain the same result and destination, for they all
resort to different practices to fulfil their different
desires. Śūnyavādī Buddhists desire to merge into
nirvāṇa (the void). Advaitavādīs aspire for brahma-
sāyujya (merging into the effulgence of the Supreme),
and Śāktas desire material enjoy ment. Śaivites chant
“so ’ham – I am Him” or “śivo ’ham – I am Śīva” to
attain liberation. Buddhists do not accept the Vedas,
whereas advaitavādīs do and consider them to be of
supramundane origin (apauruṣeya ). Śāktas consider mahā-
māyā to be the primeval potency (ādya -śakti ), whereas
Śaivites hold that it is Umāpati Śiva who is the para -
tattva (the Supreme Absolute Truth). Their conceptions,
practices, aims and objects of worship vary; so is it
anything but sheer foolishness to say that they all
attain the same result? The Gītā certainly does not
approve of such an opinion.




A Brief Life Sketch of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura



The crown jewel of Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas and the
highly exalted preceptor Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura is the a uthor of the famous Sārārtha-varṣinī
commentary on Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā. He appeared in a
family of brāhmaṇas from the Rāḍhīya community of the
Nadiyā district in West Bengal. He was celebrated by the
name Hari-vallabha, and he had two older brothers,
Rāmabhadra and Raghunātha. During his childhood, he
completed his study of grammar in Devagrāma village. He
then studied devotional scripture at the home of his
spiritual master in the Śaiyadābāda village of the
Murśidābād district. While living in Śaiyadābāda , he
wrote Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu , Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-
kiraṇa and Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā. Soon after, he renounced
household life and went to Vṛndāvana, where he wrote
many other books and commentaries.

In his commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, named Sārārtha-
darśinī, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written

                           30
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the following verse at the beginning of the five
chapters describing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa dance (Śrī Rāsa-pa
ñc ādhyāyī):

śrī-rāma-kṛṣṇa-gaṇgā-caraṇānnatvā gurūnuru-premnaḥ

śrīla-narottama-nātha śrī-gaurāṅga-prabhuṁ naumi

Here, the name ‘Śrī Rāma’ refers to Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s spiritual master, Śrī Rādhāramaṇa;
‘Kṛṣṇa’ refers to his grand spiritual master, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
caraṇa; ‘Gaṅgā-caraṇa’ refers to his great grand
spiritual master, Śrī Gaṅgā-caraṇa; ‘Narottama’ refers
to his great-great grand spiritual master, Śrīla
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura; and the word nātha refers to
Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura’s spiritual master, Śrī
Lokanātha Gosvāmī. In this way, he offers obeisances to
all those in his disciplic succession up to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu.




Distinguished Service to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya



In his old age, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
spent most of his time in a semi-conscious or internal
state, deeply absorbed in bhajana . During that time, a
debate broke out in Jaipur between the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
and Vaiṣṇavas who supported the doctrine of svakīyāvāda
, or the Lord’s pastimes of wedded love. The Vaiṣṇavas
from the antago-

nistic camp [of the Śrī Rāmānuja line] had led King Jaya
Singh II of Jaipur to believe that the worship of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā with Śrī Govindadeva is not supported by
the scriptures. Their contention was that Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s name is neither mentioned in the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam nor in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa , and that She was
nev er married to Śrī Kṛṣṇa according to Vedic ritual.

The antagonistic Vaiṣṇavas further objected that the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas did not belong to a recognized
sampradāya , or line of disciplic succession. From time
immemorial, there have been four Vaiṣṇava sampra dāyas :
the Śrī sampradāya , the Brahma sampradāya , the Rudra
sampradāya and the Sanaka (Kumāra) sampradāya . In this
age of Kali, the principal ācāryas of these four
sampradāyas are, respectively, Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva,
Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī and Śrī Nimbāditya. The Rāmānuja
Vaiṣṇavas said that Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas were outside these
four sampradāyas and therefore without pure lineage.
Further, they argued that because Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas did
not have their own commentary on Brahmasūtra (also known
as Vedānta-sūtra ), they could not be following a
genuine Vaiṣṇava disciplic succession.

Mahārāja Jaya Singh knew that the prominent Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas of Vṛndāvana were followers of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, and he summoned them to Jaipur to take up
the challenge of the Śrī Rāmānuja Vaiṣṇavas. The elderly
Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura was fully absorbed in the

                           31
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

transcendental bliss of bhajana , so he sent his student
Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa to address the Jaipur
assembly. Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava vedānta-ācārya Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, the crown of the assembly of learned
scholars and the greatest among exalted teachers of
Vedānta, left for Jaipur accompanied by Śrīla Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s disciple Śrī Kṛṣṇadeva.

The caste gosvāmīs had forgotten their own connection
with the Madhva samp radāya and disrespected the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas’ doctrinal view, saying it has no connection
with Vedānta. This caused considerable disturbance to
the true Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. But Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa used irrefutable logic combined with
powerful scriptural evidence to prove the Gauḍīya
sampradāya to be a pure Vaiṣṇava sampradāya , called the
Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava sampradāya , coming
in the line of Śrī Madhvācārya. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī,
Śrīla Kavi Karṇapūra and other previous ācāryas also
acce pted this as fact. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas accept
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as the genuine commentary on Vedānta-
sūtra . For this reason, no one in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
sampradāya had written a separate commentary on Vedānta-
sūtra .

The name of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the personification of the
pleasure-giving potency (hlādinī-śakti ) and the eternal
beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is mentioned in various Purāṇas.
Throughout Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , particularly the Tenth
Canto in connection with the description of the Lord’s
Vṛndāvana pastimes, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is referred to
indirectly and discreetly. Only rasika and bhāvuka
devotees conversant with the conclusions of scriptures
can understand this confidential mystery.

In the learned assembly in Jaipur, Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa refuted the arguments and doubts of the
opposing party, and they were silenced by his
presentation. He established that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
are in the disciplic succession from Śrī Madhvācārya.
Despite his victory, however, the contesting party did
not accept the Gauḍīya sampradāya to be of pure Vaiṣṇava
lineage because the Gauḍīyas had no commentary on
Vedānta-sūtra . Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa therefore
composed the famous Gauḍīya commentary, Śrī Govinda-
bhāṣya . Once again the worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda
commenced in the temple of Śrī Govindadeva, and the
validity of the Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya sampradāya was
firmly established.

It was only on the authority of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was
able to write Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya and prove the
connection of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas with the Madhva
sampradāya . There should be no doubt in this regard.
This accomplishment of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, performed on behalf of the sampradāya , will be
recorded in golden script in the history of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism.




Re-establishing the Doctrine of Parakīyā

                           32
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




When a slight decline in the influence of the six
Gosvāmīs took place in Śrī Vṛndāvana, a controversy
arose around the doctrines of wedded love (svakīyāvāda )
versus paramour love (parakīyāvāda ). To dispel
misconceptions regarding svakīyāvāda , Śrīla Cakravartī
Ṭhākura wrote Rāga-vartma-candrikā and Gopī-premāmṛta ,
both of which are replete with scriptural philosophical
conclusions. Thereafter, in his Ānanda-candrikā
commentary on the verse laghutvam atra yat proktam , of
Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (1.21), he showed that the theory
of svakīyāvāda was fallacious, and he established the
conception of parakīyā, with scriptural evidence and
irrefutable arguments. Further, in his Sārārtha-darśinī
commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , he gave strong support
to parakīyā-bhāva .

Certain scholars opposed the conclusions of Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura on worship in the mood of parakīyā.
When he defeated them with superior erudition and sound
reasoning they res olved out of envy to kill him. They
knew that Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura used to circumambulate
Śrī Vṛndāvana early each morning, so they hid in a dark,
dense grove and waited for him to walk by. As his
adversaries watched him approach, he suddenly
disappeared , and in his place, a beautiful young girl
of Vraja appeared, picking flowers with some of her
friends.

The scholars asked the girl, “Dear child, just a moment
ago a great devotee was coming this way. Did you see
where he went?” The girl replied that she had seen him,
but that she did not know where he had gone. Her
astonishing beauty, gentle smile, graceful manner and
sidelong glances captivated the scholars. Their hearts
melted, and all the impurities in their minds were
vanquished. They asked the girl wh o she was, and she
replied, “I am a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is
presently at Her in-laws’ house at Yāvaṭa, and She sent
me here to pick flowers.” Having spoken thus, the girl
disappeared, and in her place the scholars saw Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura once again. They fell at his feet and
prayed for forgiveness, and he forgave them all. There
are many such astonishing occurrences in the life of
Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

In this way, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura refuted the theory
of svakīyā and established the truth of pure parakīyā –
an achievement of great import for the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura not only protected
the integrity of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava dharma, but he
also re-established its influence in Śrī Vṛndāvana.
Anyone who evaluates this accomplishment will be struck
with wonder at his uncommon genius. Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas have composed the following verse in praise of
his extraordinary work:

viśvasya nātharūpo ’sau

bhakti-vartma-pradarśanāt

                            33
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


bhakta-cakre vartitatvāt

cakravarty ākhyayābhavat

He is known by the name Viśvanātha, lord of the
universe, because he indicates the path of bhakti ; and
he is known as Cakravartī, or he around whom the circle
or assembly turns, because he always remains within the
assemb ly (cakra ) of pure devotees. Therefore, his name
is Viśvanātha Cakravartī.

In about 1754, on the fifth day of the light phase of
the moon in the month of Māgha (January–February), when
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was around a hundred
years old, he left this material world in Vṛndāvana,
deeply absorbed in internal consciousness. His samādhi
stands today next to the temple of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Gokulānanda in Śrī Dhāma Vṛndāvana.

Below is a list of his books, commentaries and prayers,
which comprise a storehouse of incomparable wealth of
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava devotional literature:

(1) Vraja-rīti-cintāmaṇi;

(2) Camatkāra-candrikā;

(3) Prema-sampuṭa (Khaṇda -kāvya –a poetic work which
displays only partial characteristics or ornamentation
or poetry);

(4) Gītāvalī;

(5) Subodhinī (Alaṅkāra-kaustubha ṭīkā); (6) Ānanda-
candrikā (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi ṭīkā); (7) ṭīkā on Śrī
Gopāla-tāpanī;

(8) Stavāmṛta-laharī (‘Waves of Nectarean Prayers’,
included in which are the following:

(1) Śrī Guru-tattvāṣṭaka, (16) ŚRĪ RĀDHĀ-KUṆḌĀṢṬAKA ,
(2) Mantra-dātṛ-guror-aṣṭaka, (17) JAGAN-MOHANĀṢṬAKA ,
(3) Parama-guror-aṣṭaka, (18) ANURĀGA-VALLĪ, (4)
Parātpara-guror-aṣṭaka, (19) ŚRĪ VṚNDĀ-DEVYAṢṬAKAM , (5)
Parama-parātpara-guror-aṣṭaka, (20) ŚRĪ RĀDHIKĀ-
DHYĀNĀMṚTA , (6) Śrī Lokanāthāṣṭaka, (21) Śrī Rūpa-
cintāmaṇi , (7) Śrī Śacīnandanāṣṭaka, (22) ŚRĪ
NANDĪŚVARĀṢṬAKA , (8) Śrī Svarūpa-caritāmṛta, (23) ŚRĪ
VṚNDĀVANĀṢṬAKA , (9) Śrī Svapna-vilāsāmṛta, (24) ŚRĪ
GOVARDHANĀṢṬAKA , (10) Śrī Gopāla-devāṣṭaka, (25) ŚRĪ
SAṄKALPA-KALPA-DRUMA , (11) Śrī Madana-mohanāṣṭaka, (26)
ŚRĪ NIKU ÑJA-VIRUD ĀVALĪ

(12) Śrī Govindāṣṭaka, (Virut-kāvya, laudatory poetry),
(13) Śrī Gopināthāṣṭaka, (27) SURATA-KATHĀMṚTA , (14)
Śrī Gokulānandāṣṭaka, (28) ŚRĪ ŚYĀMA-KUṆḌĀṢṬAKA ) (15)
Svayaṁ-bhagavad-aṣṭaka,

(9) Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta-mahākāvya;

(10) Śrī Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā;

(11) Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇī-kiraṇa;

                            34
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017


(12) Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu;

(13) Rāga-vartma-candrikā;

(14) Aiśvarya-kādambinī (unavailable);

(15) Śrī Mādhurya-kādambinī;

(16) Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu ṭīkā;

(17) Dāna-keli-kaumudī ṭīkā;

(18) Śrī Lalita-mādhava-naṭaka ṭīkā;

(19) Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta ṭīkā (incomplete);

(20) Brahma-saṁhitā ṭīkā;

(21) Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā Sārārtha-varṣiṇī-ṭīkā;

(22) Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Sārārtha-darśinī-ṭīkā.

The present [Hindi] edition of Bhagavad-gītā includes
the following features: the original devanāgarī verse,
the transliteration, the anvaya (word-for-word), the
verse translation, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Sārārtha-
varṣiṇī commentary, its bhāvānuvāda (a translation that
takes into consideration specific subtleties) and the
Sārārtha-varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti , which has been
written by this poor and lowly servant.

The Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary is not simple or easy to
understand, unless one has some knowledge of Sanskrit. I
have written Sārārtha-varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti in line
with the thoughts of the Śrī Rupānuga Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas in order to make Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s
Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary simpler and easier to
understand. May the merciful readers forgive me for my
impudent act.

My worshipful Godbrother, parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja, is the present ācārya and
president of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, and he is a
dear and intimate servant of Śrī Gurupāda -padma. He is
very attached to the topmost knowledge (bhakti ). By his
mercy, he has repeatedly encouraged and directed this
worthless servant to fulfil the innermost intentions of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s associates by publishing a
natural, easy and compr ehensive edition of Śrīmad
Bhagavad-gītā, along with the commentaries of Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura. I humbly pray at his lotus feet that
he bestow his blessings upon me. In this way, I may
fulfil Śrīla Gurudeva’s inner desire, offering this
Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā into his lotus hands, which
includes his dear Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary.

I am specifically indebted to aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Viveka Bhārati Mahārāja and aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Śrī Rūpa Siddhāntī Mahārāja. Both were
surrendered a t the lotus feet of nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa-
jagad -guru aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda, and they have benefitted the world
unlimitedly by translating and publishing a Bengali

                             35
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

edition of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s commentary and t
he Rasika-rañjana bh āṣya of the Seventh Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. I have systematically studied this
edition and have quoted some portions from it herein. I
offer my prostrated obeisances at the lotus feet of
these two ś ikṣā-gurus of mine, time and again. May they
be pleased with me.

I am completely confident that readers who are hankering
for bhakti will receive this book well and with all
honour, and that faithful readers will enter into the
realm of śuddha-bhakti after studying it. We hope that
our spiritually astute readers will mercifully forgive
any mistakes and discrepancies that may have occurred in
the course of compiling this book in a short time, and
that they will oblige us by accepting its very essence.

Finally, in a mood of distress, I pray at the lotus feet
of my most worshipful śrī guru-pāda-padma, nitya-līlā-
praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Praj ñ āna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who is the
concentrated embodiment of Bhagavān’s compassion. May he
shower profuse mercy and blessings upon me, so that this
poor, lowl y servant will attain increasing
qualification to serve his innermost desire.

Praying for a particle of the mercy




of Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas,




the humble and insignificant,




Tridaṇḍībhikṣu




Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa




Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha, Mathurā

Vyāsa-pūjā of Śrī Śrī Gurupāda-padma




                             36
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

25 February 1997




Prelude to the Mahābhārata War




KING ŚāNTANU was a famous and influential emperor in the
Kuru dynasty and he was most chivalrous and religious.
His wife, Gaṅgā-devī, gave birth to a son named Bhīṣma,
who was a personal expansion of the eighth Vasu.
However, she disappeared after the birth of the child
due to particular circumstances. Later, while the king
was on a hunting expedition, he saw an incomparably
beautiful princess named Satyavatī at the home of
Dāsarāja, the king of the Niṣādas. This princess had
actually been born of the semen of Uparicara Vasu from
the womb of a fish, and the king of Niṣāda had nourished
and nurtured her as if she were his own daughter.

Mahārāja Śāntanu asked the king for permission to marry
Princess Satyavatī, and Dāsarāja consented on the
condition that the child born from her womb would be the
sole heir to Śāntanu’s kingdom. Mahārāja Śāntanu,
however, did not accept this condition and returned to
his capital. When Prince Bhīṣma heard about this, he
wanted to fulfil his father’s desire. He therefore took
a great vow to remain a lifelong brahmacārī, to ensure
that Satyavatī’s son would indeed succeed the kingdom.
Śāntanu was thus able to marry Satyavatī. In return he
gave Bhīṣma the boon that he could die according to his
own desire. Satyavatī bore Mahārāja Śāntanu two sons,
Citrāṅgada and Vicitravīrya.

After Mahārāja Śāntanu’s death, Bhīṣma made Citrāṅgada
successor to the throne, but Citrāṅgada died untimely,
and Vicitravīrya ascended the throne. Vicitravīrya, had
two wives – Ambikā and Ambālikā – yet he died at a young
age, without fathering any children. Mother Satyavatī
was doubly distressed, because the death of her sons
left the dynasty with no heir. She summoned her first
son, the great sage Vedavyāsa, simply by remembering
him. To protect the dynasty, on her instruction and with
Bhīṣma’s approval, Vedavyāsa begot sons by
Vicitravīrya’s wives. Ambikā bore Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Ambālikā
bore Pāṇḍu, and the maidservant of Vicitravīrya bore the
saintly Śrī Vidura.

Dhṛtarāṣṭra was blind from birth, so his younger brother
Pāṇḍu was crowned king. Mahārāja Pāṇḍu was a chivalrous
and influential emperor, endowed with all good
qualities. He had five sons, of whom Yudhiṣṭhira was the
eldest. Of Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s one hundred sons, Duryodhana
was the eldest. By the influence of time, King Pāṇḍu
died while all the princes were quite young, so
Grandfather Bhīṣma enthroned Dhṛtarāṣṭra and made him
responsible for protecting the kingdom until the princes
grew older.


                           37
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

When the five Pāṇḍavas and the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra
headed by Duryodhana reached maturity, a great conflict
arose concerning who would succeed the royal throne.
King Dhṛtarāṣṭra favoured his sons and wanted Duryodhana
to be king by fair means or foul. However, the highly
religious Grandsire Bhīṣma could not allow this, being
pressured from other respected personalities and
citizens. Duryodhana, who was born from a portion of
Kali, was extremely wicked and irreligious by nature,
and he wanted to be the sole monarch, without
opposition. To this end, he made various conspiracies to
kill the Pāṇḍavas, all with the secret consent of King
Dhṛtarāṣṭra.

Despite repeated requests by Maharṣi Vedavyāsa,
Grandsire Bhīṣma, Guru Droṇācārya, the saintly Vidura
and others, Dhṛtarāṣṭra did not give the Pāṇḍavas their
due half of the kingdom. However, for external show, he
crowned Yudhiṣṭhira crown-prince of Hastināpura and sent
him to Vāraṇāvat, where Duryodhana planned to kill all
the Pāṇḍavas by setting fire to a newly-built palace.
Dhṛtarāṣṭra approved of this heinous plan but, by the
will of the Supreme Lord, the Pāṇḍavas were somehow
saved.

In due course of time, the Pāṇḍavas married Draupadī.
When Duryodhana discovered that they were still alive,
he consulted his father again and invited them to
Hastināpura. On the order of Grandsire Bhīṣma and other
elders, and at the request of the subjects, the Pāṇḍavas
were given sovereignty of Khāṇḍavaprastha
(Indraprastha). There, with the assistance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and the demon named Maya, the Pāṇḍavas constructed a
wonderful palace and city. Within a short time they
conquered all the mighty kings of India and performed a
great rājasūya-yajña.

King Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Duryodhana became extremely jealous
of the Pāṇḍavas as a result of the opulence and success
of this yajña , and they conspired to defeat them in a
gambling match. They took the Pāṇḍavas’ entire kingdom,
and forced them into twelve years of exile, and then for
one more year, they had to live incognito. After this
prolonged ordeal, Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Duryodhana still did
not return the Pāṇḍavas their kingdom. As the Pāṇḍava’s
ambassador, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself went to Hastināpura and
conveyed their request that Duryodhana should at least
give them five villages. Duryodhana, however, remained
unmoved and would not compromise. He told Kṛṣṇa, “What
to speak of five villages, I will not even give the
Pāṇḍavas enough land to hold the tip of a needle, unless
they defeat me in battle.”

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared in order to establish
religion, to protect the saintly persons and to
annihilate the demons. In the course of the Mahābhārata
Battle, He used Arjuna and Bhīma as instruments to
assist Him in His plan to relieve the enormous burden
weighing heavily upon the Earth.




                           38
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Chapter One


Sainya-Darśana



Observing the Armies




Śloka 1




dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca —

. dharma-kṣetre kurukṣetre

. samavetā yuyutsavaḥ

. māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva

. kim akurvata sañjaya

dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca—King Dhṛtarāṣṭra said; sañjaya—O
Sañjaya; kim—what?; eva—indeed; akurvata—did they do;
māmakāḥ—my sons (headed by Duryodhana); ca—and; pāṇḍavāḥ
—the sons of Pāṇḍu (headed by Yudhiṣṭhira); samavetāḥ—
assembled; dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre—in the land of
dharma named Kurukṣetra; yuyutsavaḥ—desiring to fight.



Translation

Dhṛtarāṣṭra said: O Sañjaya, what did my sons and the
sons of Pāṇḍu do, having assembled at the sacred land of
Kurukṣetra, desiring to fight?




The Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā

The Innermost Intention of The Shower of Essential
Meanings



by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura




. gaurāṁśukaḥ sat-kumuda-pramodī

. svābhikhyayā gos tamaso nihantā

. śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-sudhā-nidhir me


                             39
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

. mano ‘dhitiṣṭhan sva-ratiṁ karotu

. prācīna-vācaḥ suvicārya so ‘ham

. ajño ‘pi gītāmṛta-leśa-lipsuḥ

. yateḥ prabhor eva mate tad atra

. santaḥ kṣamadhvaṁ śaraṇāgatasya

May Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who dispelled the
darkness of the earth by distributing His own name; who
is increasing the bliss of the lotus-like bhaktas; who
is the storehouse of the nectar of prema; and who is the
bestower of unnatojjvala-rasa, which is the most
elevated relationship of divine conjugal love, perform
His playful pastimes in my heart. Although I am
ignorant, by following the conclusions of Śrī Gaurāṅga-
sundara, the crest-jewel of all sannyāsīs, and by
deliberating on the thoughts expressed by the previous
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, I have become greedy to taste a drop
of nectar in the form of the Gītā. Therefore, saintly
persons should forgive this surrendered soul.

The Supreme Absolute Truth, parabrahma Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose
lotus feet are the ultimate objective of all devotion
and śāstra , appeared in His original human-like form as
Śrī Vasudeva-nandana, the son of Śrī Vasudeva, in Śrī
Gopāla-purī. Althou gh He is adhokṣaja , supremely
inconceivable, beyond the cognition of material senses,
He nevertheless became visible to the eyes of common men
through the medium of His yogamāyā potency. He imparted
the instructions of Bhagavad-gītā, thus delivering the
jīvas of this world who were drowning in the ocean of
birth and death. He submerged them in the great ocean of
prema by bestowing upon them a taste of the sweetness of
His beauty (saundarya-mādhurya ) and other qualities. He
appeared in this world, being bound by His promise to
protect the saintly persons and annihilate the asuras .
But on the pretext of removing the burden of the earth,
He in fact awarded supreme protection in the form of
mukti (liberation) to miscreants, to those who were
antagonistic towards Him and to all those j īvas
drowning in this vast ocean of material existence which
is compared to Kumbhīpāka-naraka, a hellish planet where
sinful persons are cooked in boiling oil.

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructed Bhagavad-gītā so that even
after His disappearance, baddha-jīvas , conditioned
souls, who have been influenced by ignorance since time
immemorial and completely bound by lamentation, illusion
and so forth, could be delivered. Another purpose was to
uphold His glories which are found in the śāstra and
sung by the munis. He directed these instructions of
Bhagavad-gītā to His very dear associate Arjuna, who had
voluntarily accepted a veil of lamentation and illusion.

This Gītā has three divisions: karma-yoga, jñ āna-yoga
and bhakti-yoga . The eighteen chapters of Bhagavad-gītā
are blessed with the purport of the entire Vedas which
manifest as eighteen types of knowledge. Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa
reveals the parama-puruṣārtha or supreme objective.
Niṣkāma-karma-yoga , working without attachment to the
fruits of one’s prescribed duties, is described in the

                           40
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

first six chapters, and jñ āna-yoga (acquiring union
through knowledge) in the last six chapters. The six
chapters placed between them are more confidential,
describing bhakti-yoga , which is more rarely attained
than either karma-yoga or jñ āna-yoga. Bhakti is the
very life of karma and jñ āna . Without bhakti , karma
and jñ āna are fruitless. Therefore, they are partially
successful only when they are mixed with bhakti .

Bhakti is of two types: kevalā (exclusive) and pradhānī-
bhūtā (with bhakti predominating). Kevala-bhakti , being
independent and supremely powerful, does not need any
assistance from karma and jñ āna . Therefore, it is
known as parama-prabalā (supremely powerful), akiñcan ā
(whereby Kṛṣṇa is one’s only possession), ananyā
(unalloyed), and so on. On the other hand, pradhānī-
bhūta-bhakti remains mixed with karma and jñ āna. This
will be examined later in more detail.

To explain the nature of Arjuna’s lamentation and
illusion, the speaker of the Mahābhārata, Śrī
Vaiśampāyana, a disciple of Vyāsadeva, recited the
Bhīṣma-parva section to his listener, Janamejaya, by
beginning with dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca . Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked Sa
ñjaya, “O Sañjaya, what did my sons and the sons of
Pāṇḍu do, having assembled at Kurukṣetra, desiring to
fight?” Here a question arises. Dhṛtarāṣṭra has
mentioned that his sons and the Pāṇḍavas have assembled
with the sole purpose of fighting, so it is certain that
they will fight. What, then, is his intention in asking,
“What did they do?” In response to this, Dhṛtarāṣṭra has
u sed the words dharma-kṣetre , the land of dharma . In
the śruti it is said: kurukṣetraṁ deva-yajanam.
“Kurukṣetra is the sacrificial arena of the devas.”
Therefore, this land is famous as that which nourishes
dharma . Thus, by the influence of association with this
land, the anger of adharmika (irreligious) persons like
Duryodhana and others can be subdued and they may become
inclined to follow and accept dharma . The Pāṇḍavas are
already dharmika by nature. The influence of Kurukṣetra
may arouse the faculty of discrimination when they take
into consideration that the massacre of one’s own
relatives is improper. Thus both parties may agree to a
peaceful settlement. Outwardly Dhṛtarāṣṭra is pretending
that he will be happy with a peace treaty, but
internally he is feeling great dissatisfaction. He
considers that, if they negotiate a truce, the presence
of the Pāṇḍavas will continue to remain an impediment
for his sons. Dhṛtarāṣṭra thinks, “The warriors on my
side, like Bhīṣma, Droṇa and others cannot be conquered,
even by Arjuna. Therefore, since our victory is certain,
it will be beneficial to fight.” These internal
sentiments of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, however, are indiscernible to
others.

Here, by the component kṣetra in the word dharma-kṣetre
, Sarasvatī-devī is indicating a special meaning for
dharma ; Yudhiṣṭhira, the incarnation of dharma , and
his associates are like plants of rice, and their
maintainer, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is like a farmer. The
various kinds of assistance given by Kṛṣṇa to the
Pāṇḍavas are likened to wat ering the crop and making a
causeway around the field. The Kauravas, headed by
Duryodhana, are like the blackish weeds which grow in

                           41
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

the rice field. This indicates that as the weeds are
uprooted from the rice field, similarly Duryodhana,
along with the other Kauravas, will be uprooted from
this dharma-kṣetra , land of dharma .




The Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti

The Commentary which Illuminates The Shower of Essential
Meanings

by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja




oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ

I offer my most humble obeisances unto Śrī Gurudeva, who
with the torchlight of transcendental knowledge has
opened my eyes which were blinded by the darkness of
ignorance.

nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale

śrī-śrīmad-bhakti-prajñāna-keśava iti nāmine

ati-martya-caritrāya svāśritānāṁ ca pāline

jīva-duḥkhe sadārttāya śrī-nāma-prema-dāyine

I offer my obeisances unto the lotus feet of oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti-Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who is so dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
this world. He is a completely divine personality who
nurtures with great affection those who have taken
shelter of him. Aggrieved upon seeing the suffering of
those jīvas who are averse to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he bestows upon
them śri-nāma along with prema.

nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale

śrīmate bhaktisiddhānta sarasvatīti nāmine


I offer my obeisances unto oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda, who is so dear to
Śri Kṛṣṇa having taken shelter at His lotus feet.


namo bhaktivinodāya sac-cid-ānanda nāmine

gaura-śakti-sva-rūpāya rūpānuga-varāya te

I offer my obeisances unto Saccidānanda Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who is the foremost of rūpānuga
devotees and the embodiment of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
śakti.

viśvasya nātha-rūpo ‘sau bhakti-vartma-pradarśanāt

                           42
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


bhakta-cakre varttitvāt cakravarty-ākhyayābhavat

Because he illuminates the path of bhakti for everyone
(viśva), he is known as Viśvanātha. And because he has
attained the foremost position among the community of
devotees, he is known as Cakravartī. Hence his name has
become significant as Viśvanātha Cakravartī.

The great preceptor, mahā-mahopādhyāya Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura, an eminent ācārya and great scholar
of Vedānta in the Śrī Gauḍīya sampradāy a and the crest-
jewel of rasika-bhaktas , has compiled an invaluable
commentary on Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā named Sārārtha-
Varṣiṇī, a shower of essential meanings. This commentary
was written in Sanskrit and was previously only
available in Bengali translations. Consequently, the
Hindi and English-speaking audience have been completely
deprived of reading this invaluable treasure. Thus, for
the comprehensive welfare of faithful persons, I am
translating the commentary into Hindi and English. The
style and bhāva of the commentary are extremely deep and
enriched with exalted philosophical conclusions
(siddhānta ). To make the translation simple and
comprehensive, I found it necessary to write a Sārārtha-
Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti , a further explanation to
illuminate th e commentary. This arduous task is not
possible without the mercy of Śrī Guru, Vaiṣṇavas and
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura himself. Therefore,
first of all, in a mood of great distress, I pray at
their lotus feet for their mercy and blessings.

Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā is the essence of all śrutis,
Upaniṣads and Purāṇas . Based on the sound evidence of
Vedic literature received through guru-paramparā, it is
concluded that Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, the
son of the King of Vraja, is Svayam Bhagavān, the
Original Personality of Godhead. He is the embodiment of
all nectarean mellows (akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrti ) and He is
the omnipotent (sarva-śaktimān ), nondual Absolute
Reality (advaya-jñ āna-para-tattva ). Among His
unlimited potencies three are prominent: c it-śakti (the
internal potency), jīva-śakti (the marginal potency) and
acit-śakti (the external potency). By the will of Svayam
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Vaikuṇṭha, Goloka and Vṛndāvana are
transformations of His cit-śakti . All jīvas are a
transformation of His jīva-śakti and the material
creation is the transformation of His māyā-śakti . The
jīvas are of two types: mukta (liberated) and baddha
(bound). The mukta-jīvas are eternally engaged in
relishing the bliss derived from serving Bhagavān in
Vaikuṇṭha, Goloka and various other dhāmas . They never
become bound in this material world, the prison-house of
māyā, and hence they are called nitya-mukta , eternally
liberated. Sometimes, by the will of Bhagavān, they
appear in this illusory world as His associates for the
sole purpose of bestowing welfare to the people. The
other type of jīva is called anādi-baddha , or bound by
māyā since time immemorial. As a result of being bound,
the jīva is being burnt by the three types of miseries
while wandering in the cycle of birth and death.

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is an ocean of compassion, seems
to have created ignorance in the heart of His eternally

                           43
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

liberated associate Arjuna by the influence of His
acintya-śakti (inconceivable potency). Thus, on the
pretext of dispelling this illusion, He spoke Bhagavad-
gītā, which establishes ātma-tattva for the deliverance
of all jīvas under the grip of māyā. The subject
ultimately established in Bhagavad-gītā is viśuddha-
bhagavad-bhakti , supremely pure devotional service to
Bhagavān. The jīv as under the influence of māyā become
situated in their pure constitutional position
(viśuddha-svarūpa ) only by taking shelter of śuddha-
bhakti , as described in the Gītā, and can thus render
service to Śrī Bhagavān. Aside from this, there is no
beneficial path for the baddha-jīvas .

On the basis of concrete evidence from śāstra and
invincible arguments, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura and other prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas
have clearly established that the speaker of Bhagavad-
gītā is not niḥśaktika (devoid of potency), nirviśeṣa
(devoid of variety), or nirākāra (formless), nor is He
nirguṇa (devoid of transcendental qualities such as
aprākṛta-dayā, transcendental mercy). The jīva is never
parabrahma , and even in the liberated stage can never
become parabrahma . Even after attaining mukti , the
jīva will remain a pure atomic spiritual particle.
However, at that time he is said to be a bhagavat-
parikāra , an eternal associate of Bhagavān.

In Vedic mantras (śruti), it is proven that both
Parameśvara, the Supreme Controller, and the jīvātmā are
qualified as having knowledge (jñ āna-svarūpa ), as
being the knower (jñ ātṛ-svarūpa ), the enjoyer (bhoktṛ-
svarūpa ), the doer (kartṛ-svarūpa ) and possessed of a
pure spiritual ego (cinmaya-ahaṅkāra ). Therefore,
regarding their constitions, there is no difference
between them from the perspective of tattva. However,
because the jīva is an atomic spirit, his knowledge is
limited and he can be overpowered by māyā. Parameśvara
is the master of māyā. Although there is no diff erence
between Īśvara and the jīva on the basis of tattva , the
perception of a difference is real. This perception of
difference is called vaiśiṣṭya , meaning speciality or
having a uniquely distinguishing characteristic. Just as
the sun and the sun’s rays are simultaneously one yet
different, being the possessor of attributes and the
attribute respectively, similarly, the relationship
between Parameśvara and the jīva , which is that of
being one and different, is firmly proven in the Vedas .
Since this relationship of simultaneous oneness and
difference is beyond intellect and is only intelligible
with the help of śāstra , it is therefore called acintya
, inconceivable. Thus the subject matter of Bhagavad-
gītā is the nitya acintya-bhedābheda-rūpa para-tattva ,
the eternal Supreme Reality, who is inconceivably one
with and different from His potencies.

Although it is accepted that para-tattva Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
simultaneously one with and different from the jīva and
the material world, which are both transformations of
His śakti , it is the perception of difference which is
eternal and predominant, not the perception of oneness.
Knowledge of the jīvātmā, Paramātmā, the abode of
Paramātmā and the means to attain Paramātmā have been
delineated in appropriate places in this Bhagavad-gītā.

                           44
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Although karma, jñāna and bhakti have been explained as
the three means to attain brahma , bhakti-yoga is the
only means to achieve Bhagavān. The preliminary stage of
bhakti-yoga is called karma-yoga . When there is further
progress, the intermediate stage is called jñ āna-yoga
and in its mature and elevated stage it is called
bhakti-yoga . Karma in itself is not a direct sādhana
(practice) to attain Bhagavān, but only a means to
attain that direct sādhana . When the heart becomes
purified by following karma-yoga mixed with bhakti ,
which is bhagavad-arpita-karma (offering the fruits of
one’s activities to Bhagavān) as described in the Vedas
, tattvajñ āna (the true knowledge of spirit and non-
spirit) appears there. Both jñ āna and karma which are
devoid of a sense of bhagavat-tattva are futile.

Along with the appearance of tattvajñāna, kevala-bhakti
manifests in the heart. When this kevala-bhakti attains
its mature stage, then prema manifests in the heart of
the jīva . This prema is the only means of attaining and
having direct realisation of Bhagavān. This is the
concealed mystery of the Bhagavad-gītā. One cannot
achieve mukti merely by nirviśeṣa-j ñ āna (knowledge of
Bhagavān’s impersonal feature). Only when jñ āna is
mixed with bhakti-bhāva , can one obtain mukti in the
form of sālokya , sārūpya and so on, as an extraneous
result. One can attain premamayī sevā to Svayam Bhagavān
Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His supreme abode, Goloka-Vṛndāvana by
performing kevala-bhakti as described in the Gītā. When
one attains this abode, there is no possibility of
coming back to the material world. For the jīvas ,
achievement of this prema-sevā is the prayojana , the
ultimate goal.

Bhakti is of two types: kevalā (exclusive) and pradhānī-
bhūtā (principally inherent). Kevala-bhakti is also
called ananyā, akiñcan ā, viśuddhā and nirguṇā bhakti.
Pradhānī-bhūta-bhakti is also of two types: karma-
pradhānī-bhūtā, where bhakti predominates over karma ,
and jñ āna-pradhānī-bhūtā, where bhakti predominates
over jñ āna . By performance of karma -pradhānī-bhūta -
bhakti , which gradually purifies the heart, tattvajñ
āna is achieved. The result of performing jñ āna-
pradhānī-bhūta-bhakti is mukti . Only that karma -
pradhānī- bhūta-bhakti which aims at tattvajñ āna and
that jñ āna -pradhānī-bhūta-bhakti which aims at
obtaining kevala-bhakti are to be known as karma -yoga
and jñ āna-yoga respectively. These are only steps to
bhakti . Otherwise, without bhakti both jñ āna and karma
are futile.

This Gītopaniṣad is composed of eighteen chapters,
beginning from Chapter Twenty-five of the Mahābhārata’s
Bhīṣma-parva to Chapter Forty-two. It has three
divisions, each consisting of six chapters. The first
division explains that the jīvātmā is an aṁśa (part) of
Īśvara, and that his svarūpa (constitution) is such that
he can acquire the eligibility to render service to
Bhagavān, the aṁśī (whole). Śuddha-bhakti-tattva , the
principle of pure devotional service, has been explained
in the middle six chapters. It is this type of bhakti
that is the topmost means of attaining bhagavat-prema ,
which is the supreme object to be achieved. In the third

                           45
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

and final part, tattvajñ āna is defined. The subject
matter of the Gītā is kevala-bhakti , which is like
cintāmaṇi , a wish-fulfilling jewel. This cintāmaṇi has
been safely kept inside Bhagavad-gītā, which is likened
to a treasure chest. The base of this chest is niṣkāma -
karma -yoga , the lid is jñ āna-yoga and the treasure is
bhakti . Only those who have staunch faith, who are
fixed in dharmika principles, who have good character
and who are self-controlled are qualified to study this
conversation.

For the proper flow of the book, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana
Vedavyāsa has included in the first twenty-seven ślokas
phrases such as: dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca or sañjaya uv āca.
They should be accepted as the introductory part of the
Gītā. Just as a piece of salt when mixed with the salty
ocean completely dissolves to become one with the ocean,
these introductory words composed by Śrī Vedavyāsa have
similarly become one with the great ocean of Bhagavad-
gītā spoken by Śrī Kṛṣṇa .

Arjuna: Arjuna is an eternal associate of Bhagavān Śr ī
Kṛṣṇa. It is completely impossible for him to fall into
a state of lamentation and delusion. In Śr īmad-Bh
āgavatam (1.7.7) it is said: yasy ām vai ś r ūyam āṇāy
ām. “Bhakti unto the lotus feet of Puru ṣottama Bhagav
ān Śr ī Kṛṣṇa, who is transcendental to the modes of
material nature, at once appears in the hearts of those
who with great faith hear Śr īmad-Bh āgavatam , which is
filled with the topics of His sweet pastimes, and thus
destroys lamentation, illusion and fear.” How then, is
it possible that bhakta-pravara (the greatest devotee)
Arjuna, who is an eternal associate of Śr ī Kṛṣṇa
serving in sakhya-rasa (divine friendship), can be in a
state of illusion and lamentation? Bhagav ān Śr ī Kṛṣṇa,
having arranged Arjuna’s illusion for the sake of the j
īvas afflicted with grief and delusion, says: te ṣām aha
ṁ samuddhart ā m ṛtyu-sa ṁs āra-s āgar āt. “I deliver
them from the ocean of material existence” (Gīt ā 12.7).

Through the medium of questions and answers, He defines
the svarūpa (true nature) of His own tattva , as well as
that of the jīva , dhāma , māyā, bhakti and so forth.

While commenting on the śloka: sarva-dharmān parityajya
(Gītā 18.66), Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes
Kṛṣṇa as saying: tvām avalambyaiva śāstram idaṁ loka-
mātram evopadeṣṭāmi. “Having made you the instrument, I
am delivering this message of Bhagavad-gītā for the
benefit of every jīva .” Apart from this, in his
commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam called Sārārtha-darśinī-
ṭīkā, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhāk ura explains the śloka ,
yogīndrāya namaḥ (12.13.21), to mean that the
description of Arjuna’s bewilderment in Bhagavad-gītā is
just a statement of words. In fact, Arjuna is an eternal
associate of Bhagavān. There is not even a tinge of this
illusory world in him, what to speak of his being
overwhelmed by lamentation and delusion. But beneficial
instructions are given through the medium of famous
personalities among perfected saints who are very
merciful and highly expert in performing activities for
the welfare of the j īvas . This is seen throughout the
śāstras and such is the position of Arjuna .


                           46
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

Aṣṭādaśa-vidy ā (Eighteen Types of Knowledge): There are
four Vedas —Ṛg , Yajur , Sāma and Atharva — and six Ved
āṅgas (limbs of the Vedas ) —ś ik ṣā, kalpa , vy ākara
ṇa , nirukta , jyoti ṣa and chanda ḥ. Then there are m
īm āṁs ā, ny āya , dharma-śāstra , pur āṇa , āyur-veda ,
dhanur-veda , g āndharva-veda and artha-śāstra . These
are the eighteen vidy ās , or types of knowledge, as
mentioned in Vi ṣṇu Pur āṇa : aṅgāni vedaś catvāro
mīmāṁsā nyāya-vistaraḥ

dharma-śāstraṁ purāṇaṁ ca vidyā hy etāṁ caturdaśaḥ

āyur-vedo dhanur-vedo gāndharvāś ceti te trayaḥ

artha-śāstraṁ caturthaṁ ca vidyā hy aṣṭādaśaiva tāḥ

Kurukṣetra: Śrīla Vy āsadeva has referred to the
battlefield of Kuruk ṣetra as dharma-k ṣetra . This has
a hidden meaning. According to Śr īmad-Bh āgavatam
(9.22.4), this land is named Kuruk ṣetra after King
Kuru. The Śalya-parva of the Mah ābh ārata relates the
following story: Once, when Kuru Mahārāja was ploughing
this land, Devarāja Indra appeared and asked him, “For
what purpose are you doing this?” Kuru Mahārāja
answered, “I am ploughing this land so that those people
who give up their bodies here may attain Svarga -loka
(the heavenly planets).” Hearing this, Devarāja
ridiculed him and returned to Svarga-loka. The king
again began ploughing with great enthusiasm. Although
Devarāja returned again and again to deride and
deliberately disturb the king, Kuru Mahārāja remained
unperturbed and continued his work. Finally, on the
insistence of other devatās , Indra became pleased with
Kuru Mahārāja and gave him the benediction that whoever
gives up his body or is killed in battle on this land
certainly attains Svarga. Hence, this land, known as
dharma-kṣetra , was chosen for the battle.

Also in the Jāvālopaniṣad (1.2), Kurukṣetra is described
as a yajña-sthal ī (place of sacrifice) for the devatās
and all living entities. One attains Svarga-loka by the
performance of yajña at this place.

Also in the Sat-Patha Brāhmaṇa, it is written:
kurukṣetraṁ deva-yajanam āsa. tasmād āhuḥ kurukṣetraṁ
deva-yajanam. “The devas performed worship of the Lord
in Kurukṣetra. Therefore, sages have named this place
deva-yajanam .” The phrase dharma-kṣetra is composed of
two words: dharma and kṣetra . The word kṣetra indicates
land for cultivation. When a farmer waters the rice
field, a type of weed called śyāmā grass also grows
along with the rice plants. This grass looks exactly
like the rice plants, and grows by taking the water used
for the rice field, thereby covering the rice plants .
Eventually, the rice plants dry up. Therefore, an expert
farmer uproots these weeds because they are harmful to
the rice crop. In the same way, in this land of
Kurukṣetra, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa maintained and nourished
Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, the personificat ion of dharma ,
along with his associates by annihilating those who are
anti-religious, pseudo-religious and non-religious, like
Duryodhana and others.

The land between the rivers Sarasvatī and Dṛṣadvatī is

                           47
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

known as Kurukṣetra. At this place, both the great sage
Mudgala and Pṛthu Mahārāja performed austerities. Śrī
Paraśurāmajī performed yajñas at five different places
in this land after annihilating the kṣatriyas .
Therefore, previously this kṣetra was known as Samanta
Pañcaka. It later became famous as Kuru kṣetra,
following the activities of Mahārāja Kuru.

Sañjaya: Sañjaya was the son of a charioteer named
Gavalgama. He was śāstra-jña (a knower of the
conclusions of śāstra ), generous and dharm ātm ā
(dedicated to religious principles). Because of these
virtuous qualities, Grandsire Bh īṣma appointed him and
Vidura as Dh ṛtar āṣṭra’s royal ministers. Sañjaya was
considered to be a second Vidura and was also an
intimate friend of Arjuna. Due to receiving divine
vision by the mercy of Śr ī Vy āsadeva, he was able to
narrate all the events of the war to Dh ṛtar āṣṭra. This
enabled him to view the battle of Kuruk ṣetra from
within the distant royal palace in Hastin āpura. Mah ār
āja Yudhi ṣṭhira also described Sañjaya as a sweet-
speaking well-wisher of everyone, who had a peaceful
temperament, and was always satisfied and impartial. He
was fixed in the bounds of morality (mary ād ā) and was
never agitated by others’ ill behaviour. Always
remaining unbiased and fearless, his speech was fully
consistent with dharmika principles.




Śloka 2




.

sañjaya uvāca —

dṛṣṭvā tu pāṇḍavānīkaṁ

vyūḍhaṁ duryodhanas tadā

ācāryam upasaṅgamya

rājā vacanam abravīt

sañjayaḥ uvāca—Sañjaya said; dṛṣṭvā—after surveying;
pāṇḍava-anīkam—the army of the Pāṇḍavas; vyūḍham—arrayed
in military formation; rājā—king; duryodhanaḥ—
Duryodhana; tadā—then; upasaṅgamya—approached; ācāryam—
Droṇācārya (the teacher); tu—and; abravīt—spoke; (these)
vacanam —words.

Sañjaya said: O King, after surveying the Pāṇḍava army
arrayed in military formation, Duryodhana then
approached Droṇācārya and spoke the following words.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī

                           48
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




After understanding the internal intention of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sañjaya confirmed that there would
definitely be a war. But knowing that the result would
be contrary to Dhṛtar āṣṭra’s expectations, Sa ñjaya is
speaking these words beginning with dṛṣtvā etc. Here,
the word vyūḍham means the arrangement of the Pāṇḍava
army into a strategic formation. Thus King Duryodhana,
who felt fear within himself, spoke nine ślokas
beginning with paśyaitām in the next śloka .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Unfortunately, apart from being blind since birth, at
the time of the Mahābhārata war, Dhṛtarāṣṭra was also
bereft of both dharmika and spiritual vision. Thus he
became overwhelmed with lamentation and illusion. Due to
the influence of the dharma-kṣetra , his son Duryodhana
might return half of the kingdom to the Pāṇḍavas.
Fearing this, he became dejected. Sa ñjaya, being highly
dharmika and a visionary (dūradarśī), could sense the
internal feelings of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Al though Sañjaya knew
that the result of this battle would not be in Dhṛtar
āṣṭra’s favour, he very intelligently hid this
information and, while pacifying Dhṛtarāṣṭra, said,
“Duryodhana is not going to compromise with the
Pāṇḍavas. Rather, after seeing the extremely strong
arrangement of the Pāṇḍava army, he is personally
approaching Droṇācārya, his guru in military science, to
inform him of the actual situation.” Duryodhana had two
motives for approaching the ācārya . First, he was
fearful after seeing the fo rmidable arrangement of the
Pāṇḍava army. Second, on the pretext of giving his guru
due respect, he wanted to display his political
expertise. Due to his expertise in politics, he was
certainly qualified in all respects for the post of
king. This is verified here by his diplomatic behaviour.
This is the meaning of the śloka : sañjaya uv āca etc.

Duryodhana: Among the one hundred sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra
and Gāndh ār ī, Duryodhana was the eldest. At the time
of his birth, there were various bad omens which caused
many saintly persons such as Vidura to fear that he
would be the cause of the destruction of the Kuru
dynasty. According to the Mah ābh ārata , Duryodhana
took birth from an a ṁś a (a part) of Kali. He was
sinful, cruel and a disgrace to the Kuru dynasty. At the
time of his name-giving ceremony, the family priests and
other learned astrologers, seeing the indications of his
future, gave him the name Duryodhana. Finally, after a
hint from Śr ī Kṛṣṇa, Bh īma killed him in such a
horrific way that even to think of it would make one’s
hair stand on end.

Vyūha: It is said in Śabda-ratn āval ī: samagrasya tu

                           49
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

sainyasya viny āsa ḥ sth āna-bhedata ḥ sa vyspan>ūha iti
vikhy āto yuddhe ṣu p ṛthiv ī-bhuj ām. “A vy ūha is the
formation of a military phalanx, arranged by an expert
king in such a way that it is impenetrable by opponents
from any direction, thereby assuring victory in battle.”

Droṇācārya: Dro ṇāc ārya taught astra-ś astra , the
science of weaponry, to the sons of both Pāṇḍu and Dh
ṛtar āṣṭra. He was the son of Mahar ṣi Bharadv āja.
Because he was born from a dro ṇa , a wooden water-pot,
he became famous by the name Dro ṇa. Just as he was a
great teacher of astra-ś astra , he was similarly expert
in the knowledge of Veda and Ved āṅga (auxiliary
portions of the Vedas ). After pleasing Mahar ṣi Para ś
ur āma, he learned from him the secrets of dhanur-veda
(the science of archery) and other sciences. Since he
had the benediction that he could die at the time of his
own choosing, no one could kill him. After being
insulted by his childhood friend, King Drupada of Pāñc
āla, Dro ṇāc ārya went to Hastin āpura to earn a
livelihood. Impressed by Dro ṇa’s qualifications,
Grandsire Bh īṣma appointed him the āc ārya to instruct
and train Duryodhana, Yudhi ṣṭhira and the other
princes. Arjuna was his dearmost disciple. In the battle
of Kuruk ṣetra, King Duryodhana, by polite persuasion
and diplomacy, appointed him as commander-in-chief of
the Kaurava army, second-in-command to Bh īṣma.




Śloka 3




. paśyaitāṁ pāṇḍu-putrāṇām

. ācārya mahatīṁ camūm

. vyūḍhāṁ drupada-putreṇa

. tava śiṣyeṇa dhīmatā

ācārya—O teacher; paśya—behold; etām—this; mahatīm—
great; camūm—army; pāṇḍu-putrāṇām—of the sons of Pāṇḍu
(the Pāṇḍavas); vyūḍhām—arranged in a military phalanx;
tava dhī-matā—by your intelligent; śiṣyeṇa—disciple;
drupada-putreṇa—Dhṛṣṭadyumna, the son of Drupada.

O Ācārya! Behold this great army of the Pāṇḍavas,
arranged in a military phalanx by your intelligent
disciple Dhṛṣṭadyumna, son of Drupada.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




With these words Duryodhana is implying, “Dhṛṣṭadyumna,

                             50
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the son of Drupada, is indeed your disciple. He has
taken birth only to kill you. Although you knew this,
you continued to give him śikṣā (military training).
This certainly exposes your dull intelligence.” Here,
Duryodhana has used the word dhīmatā, intellige nt, for
Dhṛṣṭadyumna. This has a deep meaning. Duryodhana wants
Droṇācārya to realise that, although Dhṛṣṭadyumna is
Droṇācārya’s enemy, he learned from Droṇācārya
personally how to kill him. Thus he is very intelligent.
Just to arouse the anger of his tea cher, Duryodhana
diplomatically remarks, “Now see his great intelligence
at the time of employing the fruits of his training.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Dhṛṣṭadyumna: Drupada, The King of Pāñc āla, performed a
yajña with the desire to beget a son who would kill Dro
ṇāc ārya. From the fire of the yajña a boy appeared
holding armour and weapons. At the same time a voice
from the sky predicted that this son of Drupada would
kill Dro ṇa. The br āhma ṇas named this heroic looking
boy Dh ṛṣṭadyumna. He learned the dhanur-veda from Dro
ṇāc ārya, who was extremely benevolent. Although he knew
that one day Dh ṛṣṭadyumna would kill him, still, with
great effort he trained him in astra-ś astra. Thus Āc
ārya Dro ṇa was killed by his own disciple in the Mah
ābh ārata war.




Ślokas 4— 6




. atra śūrā maheṣvāsā

. bhīmārjuna-samā yudhi

. yuyudhāno virāṭaś ca

. drupadaś ca mahā-rathaḥ

. dhṛṣṭaketuś cekitānaḥ

. kāśirājaś ca vīryavān

. purujit kuntibhojaś ca

. śaibyaś ca nara-puṅgavaḥ

. yudhāmanyuś ca vikrānta

. uttamaujāś ca vīryavān

. saubhadro draupadeyāś ca

                             51
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


. sarva eva mahā-rathāḥ

atra—present (here); (are) śūrāḥ—mighty; mahā-iṣu-āsāḥ—
great bowmen (lit. great arrow-throwers); samāḥ—equal;
yudhi—in battle; bhīma-arjuna—to Bhīma and Arjuna;
yuyudhānaḥ—Sātyaki; virāṭaḥ—Virāṭa; ca—and; mahā-rathaḥ—
the great chariot fighter; drupadaḥ—Drupada; ca—also;
dhṛṣṭaketuḥ—Dhṛṣṭaketu; cekitānaḥ—Cekitāna; kāśirājaḥ—
Kāśirāja, the King of Kāśī (Vārāṇasī); ca—and; vīrya-vān
—heroic; purujit—Purujit; kuntibhojaḥ—Kuntibhoja; ca—
and; śaibyaḥ—Śaibhya; ca—and; nara-puṅgavaḥ—the best of
men; yudhāmanyuḥ—Yudhāmanyu; ca —and; vikrāntaḥ—achiever
of victory; uttamaujāḥ—Uttamaujā; ca—and; vīrya-vān—
heroic; saubhadraḥ—Abhimanyu, son of Subhadrā; draupadey
āḥ—the sons of Draupadī; ca —and; sarve—all; eva—these;
mahā-rathāḥ—great chariot fighters.

Present in this army are mighty bowmen, equal in combat
to Arjuna and Bhīma, such as Sātyaki, King Virāṭa and
the great warrior Drupada. Also present are Dhṛṣṭaketu
and Cekitāna, heroic Kāśirāja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja, the
most valiant Śaibya, and other noble men such as the
victorious Yudhāmanyu, the powerful Uttamaujā,
Abhimanyu, as well as Pratibindhya and the other sons of
Draupadī. All of these are mahārathīs.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here the word maheṣvāsāḥ means that all these great
warriors carry strong bows which cannot be broken by the
enemy. The word yuyudhāna refers to Sātyaki. Saubhadraḥ
refers to Abhimanyu, and draupadeyāḥ indicates the sons
of the five Pāṇḍavas born from Draupadī, headed by
Pratibindhya. The characteristics of a mahārathī are now
described here. Among a group of great warriors who are
expert in astra-śastra , one who can fight against ten
thousand warriors single-handedly is called a mahārathī.
One who can fight alone against unlimited warriors is
known as an atirathī. One who can only fight with a
single person is known as a yoddhā, and one who requires
assistance to defeat a single opponent is called an
ardharathī.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Yuyudhāna: Yuyudhāna is another name for the heroic
Sātyaki. He was a very dear servant of Śr ī Kṛṣṇa,
extremely valiant and an atirath ī among the commanders-
in-chief of the Yādava army. He learned the secrets of
astra-ś astra from Arjuna. In the Mah ābh ārata conflict
he fought on the side of the Pāṇḍavas.

                           52
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017


Virāṭa: Virāṭa was   the pious king of the land of Matsya.
The Pāṇḍavas spent   one year incognito under his shelter.
His daughter Uttar   ā later married Abhimanyu, the famous
son of Arjuna. Vir   āṭa was killed in the Mah ābh ārata
war along with his   sons Uttara, Sveta and Śa ṅkha.

Drupada: Drupada was the son of Pṛṣata, the king of Pāñc
āla. Since Mah ār āja Pṛṣata and Mahar ṣi Bharadv āja,
the father of Dro ṇāc ārya were friends, Drupada and Dro
ṇāc ārya were also friends in their childhood. Later,
when Drupada became king, Dro ṇāc ārya approached him
for financial help, but Drupada insulted him. Dro ṇāc
ārya did not forget this disrespect. When Arjuna
completed his education in astra-ś astra , Dro ṇāc ārya
asked Arjuna to capture Drupada and offer him at Dro
ṇa’s feet as guru-dak ṣi ṇā. Arjuna followed his order.
Dro ṇāc ārya took half of Drupada’s kingdom and then
released him. To avenge this insult, Drupada performed a
yajña in which Draupad ī and Dh ṛṣṭadyumna appeared from
the fire.

Cekitāna: Cekitāna was a Yādava in   the dynasty of Vṛṣṇi.
He was a very chivalrous mah ārath   ī and was one of the
commanders-in-chief of the Pāṇḍava   army. In the Mah ābh
ārata war, he met his death at the   hands of Duryodhana.

Kāśirāja: Kāś ir āja was the king of Kāśī. He was born
from a part of the asura Dīrghajihva. A valiant and
courageous hero, he fought on the side of the Pāṇḍavas.

Purujit and Kuntibhoja: Purujit and Kuntibhoja were
brothers of Kuntī, the mother of the Pāṇḍavas, and were
thus the maternal uncles of the Pāṇḍavas. In the Mah ābh
ārata war they were killed by Dro ṇāc ārya.

Śaibya: Śaibya was the fatherin-law of Mahār āja Yudhi
ṣṭhira. His daughter Devik ā was married to Yudhi ṣṭhira
Mah ār āja. He is known as nara-pu ṅgava , the best of
men, and was recognised as a powerful, heroic warrior.

Yudhāmanyu and Uttamaujā: The valiant, powerful blood
brothers Yudh āmanyu and Uttamauj ā were princes of the
Pāñc āla kingdom. At the end of the Mah ābh ārata war,
they were killed by A ś vatth ām ā.

Saubhadra: Bhagavān Śr ī Kṛṣṇa’s sister, Subhadr ā, was
married to Arjuna. The heroic Abhimanyu was born from
the womb of Subhadr ā, and therefore he is also known as
Saubhadra. He received training in astra-ś astra from
his father, Arjuna, and from Śr ī Balar āma. He was an
exceptionally chivalrous hero and a mah ārath ī. At the
time of the Mah ābh ārata war he was sixteen years old.
In the absence of Arjuna, Abhimanyu alone was able to
penetrate the cakra-vy ūha , a special military
formation which had been arranged by Dro ṇāc ārya.
Trapped in the vy ūha , he was unjustly killed by the
combined efforts of seven mah ārath īs , including Dro
ṇa, Kṛp āc ārya and Kar ṇa.

Draupadeya: Draupadī gave birth to a son from each of
the five Pāṇḍavas. Their names were Pratibindhya,
Sutasoma, Śrutakarm ā, Śat ān īka and Śrutasena.
Collectively, they were known as Draupadeya. Their

                             53
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

fathers were Yudhi ṣṭhira, Bh īma, Arjuna, Nakula and
Sahadeva respectively. At the end of the Mah ābh ārata
war A ś vatth ām ā, desiring to please his friend
Duryodhana, murdered these five princes at night as they
slept.

In addition to the names of the warriors mentioned by
Duryodhana, there were many other mahārathīs in the army
of the Pāṇḍavas. Duryodhana has referred to all of them
by using the words sarva eva .




Śloka 7




.asmākan tu viśiṣṭā ye

. tān nibodha dvijottama

.nāyakā mama sainyasya

. saṁjñārthaṁ tān bravīmi te

dvija-uttama—O best of the twice-born; saṁjña-artham—for
your information; nibodha—be informed; bravīmi—I am
mentioning; te—to you; tān —the names; ye —who; (are) tu
—indeed; viśiṣṭāḥ—outstanding warriors; nāyakāḥ—
commanders; mama sainyasya—of the soldiers; asmākam—of
our army.

O Dvija-uttama, best of the brāhmaṇas, for your
information I am also mentioning the names of those who
are particularly talented in the art of military
strategy.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, the word nibodha means ‘please understand’, and
saṁjñ ārtham means ‘for your precise knowledge’.




Ślokas 8— 9




. bhavān bhīṣmaś ca karṇaś ca

. kṛpaś ca samitiñjayaḥ


                           54
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

. aśvatthāmā vikarṇaś ca

. saumadattir jayadrathaḥ

. anye ca bahavaḥ śūrā

. mad-arthe tyakta-jīvitāḥ

. nānā-śastra-praharaṇāḥ

. sarve yuddha-viśāradāḥ

bhavān—your good self; bhīṣmah—Grandsire Bhīṣma; ca —
and; karṇaḥ—Karṇa; ca—and; kṛpaḥ—Kṛpācārya; (are)
samitiñjayaḥ—always victorious in battle; ca —and;
aśvatthāmā—Aśvatthāmā; vikarṇaḥ—Vikarṇa; ca —also;
saumadattiḥ—Bhūriśravā, the son of Somadatta;
jayadrathaḥ—the king of Sindhu, Jayadratha; anye—other
than those mentioned before; (there are) ca—also;
bahavaḥ—many other; śūrāḥ—heroes; tyakta-jīvitāḥ—bound
by a vow to give up their life; mat-arthe—for my sake;
praharaṇāḥ—equipped with; nānā—many; śastra—weapons;
sarve—all of them; (are) yuddha-viśāradāḥ—expert in
warfare.

In my army there are heroes like your good self
(Droṇācārya), Grandsire Bhīṣma, Karṇa, Kṛpācārya who is
ever-victorious in battle, Aśvatthāmā, Vikarṇa,
Bhūriśravā, the son of Somadatta, and Jayadratha, the
King of Sindhu. There are many other heroes who are
prepared to give up their lives for my sake. All are
equipped with varieties of astra-śastra and are expert
in warfare.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here the word saumadattiḥ refers to Bhūriśravā. Tyakta-
jīvitāḥ denotes a person who is determined to do
whatever is required of him, having properly realised
that he will be greatly benefited whether he survives or
not. In Gītā (11.33) Bhagavān says, “O Arjuna! All these
persons have already been killed by Me; you need only
become an instrument.” In accordance with this
statement, Sarasvatī-devī made the word tyakta-jīvitāḥ
come from the mouth of Duryodhana, indicating that his
army had already been destroyed.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Kṛpācārya: In the lineage of Gautama, there was a ṛṣi by
the name of Śaradv ān. Once, after seeing the apsar ā
Jānapad ī, his semen spontaneously fell on a clump of

                             55
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

forest grass. This semen became divided in two parts,
from which a boy and a girl were born. The girl was
named Kṛp ī and the boy, Kṛpa. Kṛpa later became
renowned as a great warrior. Śaradv ān Ṛṣi personally
endowed Kṛpa with expertise in dhanur-veda and other
arts. Kṛpa was exceedingly valiant and pious. In the
battle of Mah ābh ārata he fought on the side of the
Kauravas. After the battle, Mah ār āja Yudhi ṣṭhira
appointed him to train Prince Par īk ṣit.

Aśvatthām ā: Kṛp ī, the sister of Kṛp āc ārya, was
married to Dro ṇāc ārya. From her womb A ś vatth ām ā
was born, being a combination of the portions of Lord
Śiva, Yama, k āma (lust) and krodha (anger). He learned
the śāstras and astra-ś astra (science of weaponry) from
his father Dro ṇāc ārya. He also accepted the
responsibility of being the last commander-in-chief of
the Kauravas in the battle of Mah ābh ārata. He murdered
the five sons of Draupad ī while they were in deep
sleep, having mistaken them for the five Pāṇḍavas. In
retalia-tion, the Pāṇḍavas insulted him severely and
forcibly removed a jewel which was a part of his
forehead. After this insult, he burnt with anger and
attempted to kill the unborn Par īk ṣit Mah ār āja, who
was the sole heir to the Pāṇḍava dynasty, by targeting
his brahm āstra at the child in the womb of Uttar ā, the
wife of Abhimanyu. However, Bhagav ān Śr ī Kṛṣṇa, who is
bhakta-vatsala , affectionate to His devotees, invoked
His sudar ś ana-cakra to protect Mah ār āja Par īk ṣit
in the womb.

Vikarṇa: Vikarṇa was one of the one hundred sons of Dh
ṛtar āṣṭra. He was killed by Bh īmasena in the Mah ābh
ārata war.

Somadatta: Somadatta was the son of Bāhlīka and the
grandson of King Prat īka of the Kuru dynasty. In the
battle of Mah ābh ārata he was killed by Sātyaki.

Bhūriśravā: Bhūriśravā was the son of King Somadatta in
the Candra-vaṁśa (Moon-dynasty). He was a highly
courageous and famous king. In the Mahābhārata conflict
he was killed by Sātyakī.

Śastra: A weapon such as a sword or sabre that is used
to kill others in hand-to-hand combat, is called a ś
astra .

Astra: A weapon such as an arrow that is thrown at the
enemy is known as an astra .




Śloka 10




.aparyāptaṁ tad asmākaṁ

. balaṁ bhīṣmābhirakṣitam


                            56
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

.paryāptaṁ tv idam eteṣāṁ

. balaṁ bhīmābhirakṣitam

asmākam—our; tat balam—military strength; abhirakṣitam—
well protected; bhīṣma—by Grandsire Bhīṣma; (is)
aparyāptam—incompetent; tu—but; idam—this; balam—
strength; eteṣām—of the Pāṇḍavas; abhirakṣitam—well
protected; bhīma—by Bhīma; (is) paryāptam—competent.

Our forces, though protected by Bhīṣma, are not
sufficient. On the other hand the army of the Pāṇḍavas,
under the careful protection of Bhīma, is fully
competent.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, the word aparyāptam means incompetent or
insufficient. That is, the Kauravas are not competent
and are of insufficient strength to f ight with the
Pāṇḍavas. Bhīṣmābhirakṣitam means, “Although our army is
well-protected by Grandsire Bhīṣma, who is endowed with
extremely fine intelligence and expertise both in śastra
(weaponry) and śāstra (knowledge), the strength of this
force is still i nsufficient because Bhīṣma is favouring
both sides.” Paryāptaṁ bhīmābhirakṣitam means, “But the
army of the Pāṇḍavas, though protected by Bhīma, who is
less expert in śāstra and śastra , is competent to fight
with us.” It is indicated by these statements that
Duryodhana is feeling deeply apprehensive.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Grandsire Bhīṣma is an unparalleled hero. He received a
boon from his father that he could die at the time of
his own choosing. He is unconquerable. Although he is
fighting on the side of Duryodhana, he is fully
affectionate toward the Pāṇḍavas and does not want them
to be destroyed. Because he is concerned for the welfare
of both sides, the army led by him will not be able to
fight with expertise in the battle. Moreover, Bhīṣma
cannot use his full ability to fight against the
Pāṇḍavas. Therefore, the army headed by him is described
as aparyāpta , incompetent or insufficient. On the other
side, Bhīma, who is not as great a hero as Bhīṣma, will
use his full ability to gain victory f or his side. Thus
the army under his leadership has been described as
paryāpta , competent or sufficient.




                            57
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Śloka 11



.ayaneṣu ca sarveṣu

. yathā-bhāgam avasthitāḥ

.bhīṣmam evābhirakṣantu

. bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi

eva—surely; bhavantaḥ—you; sarve—all; (being) avasthitāḥ
—situated; yathā-bhāgam—in the assigned positions;
ayaneṣu—at the entry points; ca—and; bhīṣmam—unto
Grandsire Bhīṣma; eva hi—certainly; sarveṣu—all;
abhirakṣantu—protect in every respect.

Therefore, you must all remain in your strategically
assigned positions at the entry points and give
protection to Grandsire Bhīṣma in every respect.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Duryodhana is saying, “Therefore all of you (Droṇa and
others) have to be careful.” For this purpose only he
tells them, “Divide yourselves among all the phalanx
entrances and do not leave your assigned areas in the
battle. In this way, Bhīṣma will not be killed from
behind while fighting the enemy. Right now, Bhīṣma’s
strength is our very life.”




Śloka 12




.tasya sañjanayan harṣaṁ

. kuru-vṛddhaḥ pitāmahaḥ

.siṁha-nādaṁ vinadyoccaiḥ

. śaṅkhaṁ dadhmau pratāpavān

pitāmahaḥ—the Grandsire (Bhīṣma); pratāpavān—the
valiant; kuru-vṛddhaḥ—elder Kuru; dadhmau—blew; tasya—
his; śaṅkham—conch-shell; vinadya —vibrating; uccaiḥ—
very loudly; siṁha-nāda m—with a sound like a lion’s
roar; sañjanayan—giving (Duryodhana); harṣam—joy.

Then Grandsire Bhīṣma, the valiant elder of the Kuru
dynasty, loudly blew his conch-shell making a sound like

                            58
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the roar of a lion and thus delighted the heart of
Duryodhana.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Grandsire Bhīṣma became very pleased to hear
Duryodhana’s glorification of him in front of
Droṇācārya. Producing a sound like the roar of a lion,
the elderly Kuru Bhīṣma blew his conch-shell to remove
Duryodhana’s fear and make him cheerful.




Śloka 13




.tataḥ śaṅkhāś ca bheryaś ca

. paṇavānaka-gomukhāḥ

.sahasaivābhyahanyanta

. sa śabdas tumulo ‘bhavat

tataḥ—thereafter; śaṅkhāḥ—conch-shells; ca—and; bheryaḥ—
kettledrums; ca—and; paṇava-ānaka—small drums and
mṛdaṅgas ; gomukhāḥ—horns and trumpets; sahasā—suddenly;
abhy-ahanyanta—were sounded; eva—indeed; saḥ—that;
śabdaḥ—sound; abhavat—was; tumulaḥ—tumultuous.

Thereafter, conch-shells, kettledrums, small drums,
mṛdaṅgas, horns, trumpets and various other instruments
were suddenly sounded, creating a tumultuous, fearsome
sound.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The purpose of this śloka beginning with the word tataḥ,
is simply to express that both sides displayed their
enthusiasm for war immediately thereafter. Here, paṇava
, ānaka and gomukhāḥ refer to the small drum, mṛdaṅga ,
and various horns and trumpets respectively.




Śloka 14

                             59
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017




. tataḥ śvetair hayair yukte

. mahati syandane sthitau

.mādhavaḥ pāṇḍavaś caiva

. divyau śaṅkhau pradadhmatuḥ

tataḥ—thereafter; mādhavaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ca—and;   eva—
certainly; pāṇḍavaḥ—Arjuna; sthitau—situated;   mahati—on
a great; syandane—chariot; yukte—being yoked;   śvetaiḥ—
with white; hayaiḥ—horses; pradadhmatuḥ—blew;   divyau—
divine; śaṅkhau—conch-shells.

Then Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, stationed on a great chariot
drawn by white horses, blew their divine conch-shells.




Śloka 15




.pāñcajanyaṁ hṛṣīkeśo

. devadattaṁ dhanañjayaḥ

.pauṇḍṛaṁ dadhmau mahā-śaṅkhaṁ

. bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ

hṛṣīka-īśaḥ—Hṛṣīkeśa (Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the master of the
senses); dadhmau—blew; pāñcajanyam—the conch-shell named
Pāñcajanya; dhanañjayaḥ—Arjuna; (blew) devadattam—the
conch-shell named Devadatta; vṛka-udaraḥ—Bhīmasena;
bhīma-karmā—the performer of Herculean tasks; mahā-
śaṅkham—(blew) the great conch-shell; pauṇḍṛam—named
Pauṇḍra.

Hṛṣīkeśa Śrī Kṛṣṇa blew His conch-shell known as
Pāñcajanya; Dhanañjaya blew his conch known as
Devadatta; and Bhīma, the performer of Herculean tasks,
blew his great conch known as Pauṇḍra.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Pāñcajanya: After completing His education in the āś
rama of His guru , Śr ī Kṛṣṇa requested His guru and his
wife to accept some guru-dak ṣi ṇā. As their guru-dak ṣi
ṇā, they asked that their son, who had drowned in the
ocean, be returned to them alive and well. Inquiring

                            60
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

from Varu ṇa, the presiding deity of the ocean, Śr ī
Kṛṣṇa discovered that His guru’s son had been swallowed
by an ocean-dwelling asura named Pāñcajanya. However,
after killing Pāñcajanya, Śr ī Kṛṣṇa did not find the
boy inside his belly. From there Śr ī Kṛṣṇa went to Mah
āk ālapur ī, brought back His guru’s son and presented
the boy to His guru as dak ṣi ṇā. Since Śr ī Kṛṣṇa
accepted the external limb (the shell) from the body of
the asura Pāñcajanya as His conch, it is known as
Pāñcajanya.




Śloka 16




.anantavijayaṁ rājā

. kuntī-putro yudhiṣṭhiraḥ

.nakulaḥ sahadevaś ca

. sughoṣa-maṇipuṣpakau

rājā—the king; yudhiṣṭhiraḥ—Yudhiṣṭhira; kuntī-putraḥ—
the son of Kuntī; (blew) ananta-vijayam—the conch named
Anantavijaya (meaning limitless victory); nakulaḥ—
Nakula; ca —and; sahadevaḥ—Sahadeva; (blew) sughoṣa-
maṇipuṣpakau—the conches named Sughoṣa and Maṇipuṣpaka.

Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuntī, blew the conch
named Anantavijaya; Nakula blew the Sughoṣa conch and
Sahadeva blew the conch known as Maṇipuṣpaka.




Ślokas 17— 18




.kāśyaś ca parameṣvāsaḥ

. śikhaṇḍī ca mahā-rathaḥ

.dhṛṣṭadyumno virāṭaś ca

. sātyakiś cāparājitaḥ

.drupado draupadeyāś ca

. sarvaśaḥ pṛthivī-pate

.saubhadraś ca mahā-bāhuḥ

. śaṅkhān dadhmuḥ pṛthak pṛthak

pṛthivī-pate—O lord of the earth; parama-iṣu-āsaḥ—the

                             61
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

excellent wielder of arrows; kāśyaḥ—the king of Kāśī; ca
—and; śikhaṇḍī—Śikhaṇḍī; mahā-rathaḥ—the great chariot
fighter; ca—also; dhṛṣṭadyumnaḥ—Dhṛṣṭadyumna; virāṭaḥ—
Virāṭa; ca—and; aparājitaḥ—the unconquerable; sātyakiḥ—
Sātyaki; ca—and; drupadaḥ—Drupada; ca—and; draupadeyāḥ—
the sons of Draupadī; ca—also; mahā-bāhuḥ—mighty-armed;
saubhadraḥ—Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadrā; dadhmuḥ—blew;
pṛthak pṛthak—respective; śaṅkhān—conch-shells; sarvaśaḥ
—on all sides.

O King of the earth, Dhṛtarāṣṭra! That great archer the
King of Kāśī, the mahārathī Sikhaṇḍī, Dhṛṣṭadyumna,
Virāṭa-rāja, the unconquerable Sātyaki, King Drupada,
the sons of Draupadī, and Abhimanyu the son of Subhadrā,
then loudly resounded their respective conch-shells on
all sides.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Pāñcajanya and others are the names of conches belonging
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and various warriors on the battlefield.
Aparājitaḥ means one who cannot be defeated by anyone,
or one who is adorned with a bow.




Śloka 19




. sa ghoṣo dhārtarāṣṭrāṇāṁ

. hṛdayāni vyadārayat

. nabhaś ca pṛthivīṁ caiva

. tumulo ‘bhyanunādayan

abhi-anunādayan—reverberating; pṛthivīm—on the earth; ca
—and also; nabhaḥ—in the sky; saḥ—that; tumulaḥ—
tumultuous; ghoṣaḥ—sound; eva—indeed; vyadārayat—
shattered; hṛdayāni—the hearts; dhārtarāṣṭrāṇām—of
Dhṛtārāṣṭra’s sons.

Reverberating between the earth and sky, the tumultuous
sound of those conches shattered the hearts of the sons
of Dhṛtarāṣṭra.




Śloka 20



                             62
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



.atha vyavasthitān dṛṣṭvā

. dhārtarāṣṭrān kapi-dhvajaḥ

.pravṛtte śastra-sampāte

. dhanur udyamya pāṇḍavaḥ

.hṛṣīkeśaṁ tadā vākyam

. idam āha mahī-pate

mahī-pate—O lord of the earth; atha—thereupon; dṛṣṭvā—
seeing; dhārtarāṣṭrān—the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra;
vyavasthitān—situated; kapi-dhvajaḥ—(Arjuna) whose flag
was marked wit h Kapi (Hanumān); pāṇḍavaḥ—Arjuna, the
son of Pāṇḍu; udyamya—taking up; (his) dhanuḥ—bow;
pravṛtte—while about to embark; śastra-sampāte—in
releasing his arrows; tadā—then; āha—spoke; idam—these;
vākyam—words; hṛṣīkeśam—unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the master of
the se nses.

O King, after seeing your sons in military array, Kapi-
dhvaja Arjuna raised his bow and prepared to shoot his
arrows. He then spoke the following words to Śrī
Hṛṣīkeśa.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Kapi-dhvaja: Kapi-dhvaja is a name for Arjuna that
denotes the presence of the mighty Hanumān on the flag
of his chariot. Arjuna was very proud of his skill in
archery. Once, he was strolling on the bank of a river
carrying his Gāṇḍīva bow. There he saw an old monkey.
Paying obeisances to him, Arjuna asked, “Who are you?”

The monkey politely replied, “I am Hanumān, servant of
Śrī Rāma.”

Arjuna then asked, “Are you the servant of the same
Rāma, who, unable to make a bridge of arrows over the
ocean, employed monkeys to build a bridge of stones? It
was only then that His army could cross the ocean. If I
had been there at that time, I would have built such a
strong bridge of arrows that the entire army could have
easily crossed over.”

Hanumān replied very politely, “But your bridge would
not have endured the weight of even the weakest monkey
in Śrī Rāma’s army.”

Arjuna said, “I am going to make a bridge of arrows over
this river and you may cross it with as heavy a load as
you can carry.”

Hanumān then expanded himself into a huge form and

                            63
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

jumped towards the Himalayan mountains. He returned with
heavy stones tied to every hair on his body. As soon as
he placed one foot on the bridge, it started to quiver
but, surprisingly enough, did not break. Arjuna trembled
in fear. Remembering his worshipable Deity, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
he prayed, “O Lord! The honour of the Pāṇḍavas is in
Your hands.”

When Hanumān put the full weight of both his feet on the
bridge, he was astonished to find that it did not break.
If the bridge did not break, it would be a matter of
great shame for him. Within his heart, Hanumān
remembered his worshipable Lord, Śrī Rāmacandra.
Meanwhile, his glance fell upon the water below the
bridge, where he saw streams of blood flowing. Hanumān
immediately jumped off and peered below the bridge. “Oh!
What is this? My worshipable Lord, Śrī Rāmacandra, is
personally supporting the bridge of sharp arrows on His
back!” He at once fell at the lotus feet of Śrī
Rāmacandra.

At the same time, Arjuna saw the Lord not as Śrī Rāma
but as Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Both Hanumān and Arjuna lowered their
heads in shame before their worshipable Lord, who said,
“There is no difference between these two forms of Mine.
I, Kṛṣṇa, in the form of Śrī Rāma, come to establish the
bounds of morality and proper dharmika conduct (maryādā)
and, in this very form of līlā-puruṣottama Kṛṣṇa, I am
akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrti , the personi fication of the
nectar of all rasas . From today onwards, you, who are
both My servants, should become friends. In a battle in
the near future, the mighty Hanumān, situated on the
flag of Arjuna’s chariot, will give him protection in
all respects.”

For this reason, Hanumān graced the flag of Arjuna’s
chariot in the battle of Mahābhārata. Arjuna thus
received the name Kapi-dhvaja, or one who has a monkey
on his flag.




Ślokas 21-23



arjuna uvāca —

senayor ubhayor madhye

rathaṁ sthāpaya me ‘cyuta

yāvad etān nirīkṣe ‘haṁ

yoddhu-kāmān avasthitān

kair mayā saha yoddhavyam

asmin raṇa-samudyame

yotsyamānān avekṣe ‘haṁ


                            64
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ya ete ‘tra samāgatāḥ

dhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher

yuddhe priya-cikīrṣavaḥ


arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; acyuta—O infallible one;
sthāpaya—please place; me—my; ratham—chariot; madhye—in
the midst; ubhayoḥ—of the two; senayoḥ—armies; aham—I;
nirīkṣe—wish to examine; yāvat—as many as (they are);
etān—all these; avasthit ān—arrayed on the battlefield;
yoddhu-kāmān—desiring battle; kaiḥ—with which fighters;
saha—together; mayā—with me; yoddhavyam—there should be
a fight; asmin—in this; samudyame—strenuous; raṇa—
battle; aham avekṣe—I wish to see; yotsyamānān—those who
wish to fight; ete—those; ye—who; cikīrṣavaḥ—desire;
priya—well being; yuddhe—in the fight; durbuddheḥ—for
the evil-minded; dhārtarāṣṭrasya—son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra;
samāgatāḥ—assembled; atra—here.

Arjuna said: O Acyuta! Please place my chariot between
the two armies so that I may observe all who desire to
fight in this great battle. I want to see all those
warriors, the well-wishers of the evil-minded son of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who have assembled here.




Ślokas 24-25




sañjaya uvāca —

evam ukto hṛṣīkeśo

guḍākeśena bhārata

senayor ubhayor madhye

sthāpayitvā rathottamam

bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ

sarveṣāṁ ca mahīkṣitām

uvāca pārtha paśyaitān

samavetān kurūn iti


sañjayaḥ uvāca—Sañjaya said; bhārata—O descendent of
Bharata; hṛṣīkeśaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa; evam—thus; uktaḥ—
addressed; guḍākeśena—by the conqueror of sleep
(Arjuna); sthāpayitvā—situating; ratha-uttamam—celestial
chariot; madhye—in the midst; ubhayoḥ—of the two;
senayoḥ—armies; ca—also; pramukhataḥ—in the presence;
sarveṣām—of all; mahī-kṣitām—the kings of the earth;
(headed by) bhīṣma—Grandsire Bhīṣma; droṇa—Droṇācārya;
uvāca—He said; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā (Arjuna); paśya—

                             65
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

behold; etān—these; samavetān—assembled; kurūn—Kurus;
iti—thus.

Sañjaya said: O Bhārata, having thus been addressed by
Guḍākeśa (Arjuna), Hṛṣīkeśa drew the excellent chariot
into the midst of both armies in the presence of all the
kings and prominent personalities like Bhīṣma, Droṇa and
others. He then said: O Pārtha, just behold this
assembly of Kurus.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Hṛṣīkeśa means the controller of all senses. Although
Kṛṣṇa is Hṛṣīkeśa, when He received orders from Arjuna,
He became controlled by Arjuna’s sense of speech alone.
Aho ! Bhagavān is controlled only by prema . Guḍākeśa
consists of two words, guḍā and akeśā. Guḍā refers to
guḍ, very sweet, unrefined sugar. Just as guḍā exhibits
all sweetness, similarly akeśā exhibits the sweet taste
of the rasa of their affection. Akeśā refers to the
guṇa-avatāras ; Viṣṇu, Brahmā and Maheśa. ‘A ’ indicates
Viṣṇu, ‘ka ’ Brahmā, and ‘īśa ’ indicates Mahādeva
(Śiva). How can these parts, or guṇa-avatāras , manifest
their aiśvarya (superiority of opulence) before a person
whose order was followed, out of prema , by Svayam
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the crest-jewel of all avatāras ?
Instead, they consider their lives to be successful by
manifesting the sweet mellow of their affection towards
Arjuna, who is therefore known as Guḍākeśa (one who
receives sweet affection from the three guṇa-avatāras ).
Indeed, Bhagavān Mahāviṣṇu, Paravyoma-nātha (Lord of the
transcendental sky), once admitted to Arjuna, “I only
brought the sons of the brāhmaṇa here with a desire to
see both you and Kṛṣṇa.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.89.58)
Guḍākā also means sleep, and one who has control over
sleep is called Guḍākeśa. It is not surprising that the
same Arjuna by whose prema even Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
controller of māyā, becomes controlled, conquered just
one ordinary function of māyā called sleep. This is its
hidden meaning.

Bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ means ‘in front of Bhīṣma and
Droṇa’, and sarveṣāṁ mahīkṣitām means ‘in front of all
the other kings also’.




Śloka 26




tatrāpaśyat sthitān pārthaḥ

pitṝn atha pitāmahān


                              66
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ācāryān mātulān bhrātṝn

putrān pautrān sakhīṁs tathā

śvaśurān suhṛdaś caiva

senayor ubhayor api


atha—thereafter; tatra—there; api—even; ubhayoḥ—between
the two; senayoḥ—armies; pārthaḥ—Arjuna, son of Pṛthā
(Kuntī); apaśyat—saw; sthitān—situated; pitṝn—the
parental uncles; pitāmahān—grandfathers; ācāryān—
teachers; mātulān—maternal uncles; bhrātṝn—cousins;
putrān—sons; pautrān—grandsons; sa khīn—friends; tathā—
also; śvaśurān—fathers-in-law; ca—and; eva—certainly;
suhṛdaḥ—well-wishers.

There, in the midst of both armies, Arjuna saw his
paternal uncles, grandfathers, teachers, maternal
uncles, cousins, nephews, grandsons, friends, fathers-
in-law, sons and well-wishers.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna saw the sons and grandsons of Duryodhana and many
others.




Śloka 27




tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ

sarvān bandhūn avasthitān

kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo

viṣīdann idam abravīt


samīkṣya—after seeing; sarvān—all; (of) tān—those;
bandhūn—relatives and friends; avasthitān—standing near;
saḥ—he; kaunteyaḥ—Arjuna, the son of Kuntī; viṣīdan—
lamenting; āviṣṭaḥ—overcome; parayā—by great; kṛpayā—by
compassion; abravīt—spoke; idam—thus.

Seeing all his friends and relatives standing near him
on the battlefield, Kaunteya, lamenting and overwhelmed
with compassion for them, spoke thus.




                            67
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 28




arjuna uvāca —

dṛṣṭvemān svajanān kṛṣṇa

yuyutsūn samavasthitān

sīdanti mama gātrāṇi

mukhañ ca pariśuṣyati


arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; dṛṣṭvā—after
seeing; imān—all these; sva-janān—kinsmen; samavasthitān
—assembled (here); yuyutsūn—desiring battle; mama—my;
gātrāṇi—limbs; sīdanti—are slackening; ca—and; (my)
mukham—mouth; pariśuṣyati—is drying up.

Arjuna said: O Kṛṣṇa, seeing all my kinsmen assembled
here with a desire to fight, I feel my limbs weakening
and my mouth becoming dry.




Śloka 29




vepathuś ca śarīre me

roma-harṣaś ca jāyate

gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt

tvak caiva paridahyate


jāyate—there is; vepathuḥ— trembling; me śarīre—in my
body; ca—and; roma-harṣaḥ—hairs standing on end; ca—and;
gāṇḍīvam—my bow called Gāṇḍiva; sraṁsate—is slipping;
hastāt—from the hand; ca—also; eva—certainly; (my) tvak—
skin; paridahyate—is burning.

My body is trembling and my hair is standing on end. My
Gāṇḍīva bow is slipping from my hand and my skin is
burning.




Śloka 30




                           68
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


na ca śaknomy avasthātuṁ

bhramatīva ca me manaḥ

nimittāni ca paśyāmi

viparītāni keśava


keśava—O Keśava; na śaknomi—I am unable; avasthātum—to
remain standing; ca—and; me—my; manaḥ—mind; iva—appears;
bhramati—to reel; ca—and; paśyāmi—I see; viparītāni—
inauspicious; nimittāni—portents; ca—also.

O Keśava, I am unable to remain standing. My mind
appears to be reeling and I detect only inauspicious
omens.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“I am living here for the purpose (nimitta) of gaining
wealth.” Just as in this statement, the word nimitta
indicates purpose, similarly in this śloka , the word
nimitta is also indicative of purpose. Arjuna is saying,
“Thereafter, in spite of winning the battle, attainment
of the kingdom will not bring us happiness. Rather, it
will be a cause of distress and sorrow.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Keśava: Here the bhakta Arjuna is revealing the feelings
within his heart by addressing Bhagav ān as Ke ś ava.
“Despite killing prominent asuras such as Ke śī and
others, You always maintain Your devotees. In the same
way, please remove the lamentation and delusion from my
heart and maintain me.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam gives a further, confidential meaning
of the word Keśava which is only for rasika-vaiṣṇavas .
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has explained that
the word Keśava means: keśān vayate saṁskārotīti.
“Because He arranges the hair of His beloved, Kṛṣṇa is
called Keśava.”




Śloka 31



                           69
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


na ca śreyo ‘nupaśyāmi

hatvā svajanam āhave

na kāṅkṣe vijayaṁ kṛṣṇa

na ca rājyaṁ sukhāni ca


kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; ca—also; na anupaśyāmi—I do not see;
śreyaḥ—auspiciousness; hatvā—by killing; (my) svajanam—
own relatives; āhave—in battle; na—nor; kāṅkṣe—do I
desire; vijayam—victory; na—nor; ca—as well; rājyam—
kingdom; ca—also; sukhāni—pleasures.

O Kṛṣṇa, I do not see how anything auspicious can arise
from killing my own kinsmen in battle. Nor do I desire
victory, the resulting kingdom, or even happiness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śreyo na paśyāmīti means ‘I do not see anything
auspicious’. The sannyāsīs who have attained perfection
in yoga , and the warriors who are killed in battle both
attain the celestial sun planet. From this statement it
appears that a person who is killed in battle attains
auspiciousness, but one who kills receives no such
sukṛti (pious result). One may question this by saying
that a person who kills and is victorious in battle will
certainly receive both fame and the pleasure of
sovereignty over a kingdom, therefore it is beneficial
for Arjuna to fight. In answer to this, Arjuna says: na
kāṅkṣe. “I do not desire this.”




Ślokas 32-34



kiṁ no rājyena govinda

kiṁ bhogair jīvitena vā

yeṣām arthe kāṅkṣitaṁ no

rājyaṁ bhogāḥ sukhāni ca

ta ime ‘vasthitā yuddhe

prāṇāṁs tyaktvā dhanāni ca

ācāryāḥ pitaraḥ putrās

tathaiva ca pitāmahāḥ

                             70
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


mātulāḥ śvaśurāḥ pautrāḥ

śyālāḥ sambandhinas tathā

etān na hantum icchāmi

ghnato ‘pi madhusūdana


govinda—O Govinda; naḥ—for us; kim—what use; (is there)
rājyena—by (having) a kingdom; kim—what use; (is there)
bhogaiḥ—by (experiencing) pleasures; vā—or even;
jīvitena—by having life; te—they; yeṣām—for whose; arthe
—sake; rājyam—kingdom; bhogāḥ—enjoyment; sukhāni—all
pleasures; kāṅkṣitam—are desired; naḥ—by us; ca—also;
ime—they; ācāryāḥ—teachers; pitaraḥ—fathers; putrāḥ—
sons; tathā—as well; eva—certainly; ca—also; pitāmahāḥ—
grandfathers; mātulāḥ—maternal uncles; śvaśurāḥ—fathers-
in-law; pautrāḥ—grandsons; śyālāḥ—brothers-in-law;
sambandhinaḥ—relatives; avasthitāḥ—present here; tyaktvā
—giving up; prāṇān—lives; ca—and; tathā—as well; dhanāni
—riches; yuddhe—in warfare; madhusūdana—O slayer of the
asura Madhu; api—even; (if I am) ghnataḥ—slain; na
icchāmi—I do not wish; hantum—to kill; etān—these
people.

O Govinda! Of what use to us is a kingdom, enjoyment or
even life itself, when those for whom we desire them;
teachers, uncles, sons, grandfathers, maternal uncles,
fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and other
relatives, are all standing before us in battle array,
ready to give up their lives and wealth? Therefore, O
Madhusūdana, even if they kill me, I still do not wish
to kill them.




Śloka 35



api trailokya-rājyasya

hetoḥ kiṁ nu mahī-kṛte

nihatya dhārtarāṣṭrān naḥ

kā prītiḥ syāj janārdana


janārdana—O Janārdana; nihatya—by killing; dhārtarāṣṭrān
—the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; api—even; hetoḥ—for the sake
of; rājyasya—the kingdom; trailokya—of the three worlds;
kim nu—what to speak of; mahī-kṛte—the earth; kā—what;
prītiḥ—satisfaction; syāt—will there be; naḥ—for us.

O Janārdana, if we kill the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, even
for the sake of sovereignty over the three worlds, what
to speak of this earth, what satisfaction will we
derive?


                            71
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 36



pāpam evāśrayed asmān

hatvaitān ātatāyinaḥ


tasmān nārhā vayaṁ hantuṁ


dhārtarāṣṭrān sa-bāndhavān

svajanaṁ hi kathaṁ hatvā

sukhinaḥ syāma mādhava


mādhava—O Mādhava; pāpam—sin; eva—certainly; āśrayet—
will cling; asmān—to us; hatvā—by killing; etān—these;
ātatāyinaḥ—aggressors; tasmāt—therefore; (it is) na—not;
arhāḥ—befitting; vayam—for us; hantum—to slay;
dhārtarāṣṭrān—the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; sa-bāndhavān—
along with relatives; hi—indeed; katham—how; syāma—will
we be; sukhinaḥ—happy; hatvā—by killing; svajanam—our
kinsmen.

O Mādhava, we will only incur sin by killing all these
aggressors. Therefore, it is improper to kill Duryodhana
and our other relatives. How could we be happy by
slaying our own kinsmen?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




According to śruti, there are six types of aggressors
(ātatāyī): those who set fire to the house, give poison,
attack with deadly weapons, steal one’s we alth, usurp
one’s land or abduct one’s wife. Arjuna argues. “If you
say ‘O Bhārata, immediately upon seeing these six types
of aggressors one should kill them without consideration
because, according to the injunctions of śāstra , such
killing is proper and no sin is incurred’, then in reply
I would say ‘by killing those assembled here, we will
certainly incur sin’.”

There is a reason behind Arjuna’s logic. According to
artha-śāstra, the science of economics, to kill an
aggressor is proper. The injunctions of artha-śāstra ,
however, are less important than those of dharma-śāstra
. As Yāj ñavalkya Ṛṣi has said, “Know dharma-śāstra to
be superior to artha-śāstra .” Hence, Arjuna said,
“According to dharma-śāstra , by killing ācāryas and
others we will certainly incur sin. Not only that, we

                             72
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

will not even derive any mundane pleasure from it.” For
this reason, Arjuna uses phrases such as svajanam .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




According to smṛti-śāstra, no sin is incurred by killing
six types of aggressors. But by the statement of śruti :
mā hiṁsyāt sarva-bhūtāni , the injunction not to kill
any living entity is established. Whenever there seems
to be a contradiction between śruti and smṛti , the
statements of śruti are accepted as superior. This is
the instruction of the śāstras . Similarly, in
comparison to artha-śāstra , the path provided by
dharma-śāstra should be considered superior. Following
this logic, Arjuna feels that although the sons of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra are the aggressors, sin will be incurred by
killing them.

Here, we also see another speciality in the character of
Arjuna. At the end of the battle of Mahābhārata, Arjuna
tied Aśvatthāmā as one would tie up an animal and
brought him to the feet of Draupadī for the offence of
killing the sons of the Pāṇḍavas. At that time Draupadī
was crying. Being generous and liberal, she said that
Aśvatthāmā, the son of their guru , should be forgiven.
Bhīma, on the other hand, said that he should be killed
immediately. Arjuna, finding himself in a dilemma,
looked towards Kṛṣṇa, who s aid, “A brāhmaṇa is not
deserving of the death sentence even if he has fallen
from his status. On the other hand, a person who comes
to make a lethal attack with weapons must certainly be
killed.” Understanding Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s inner intention,
Arjuna cut the h air of that unqualified brāhmaṇa
Aśvatthāmā, forcibly removed the gem from his forehead
and expelled him from the camp. The internal feeling of
Arjuna is that whatever the situation may be, no one can
be happy by engaging in sin. Such a person cannot even
receive worldly happiness, what to speak of
transcendental pleasure. Adherence to the Vedas , smṛti
, sadācāra (the injunctions of saintly behaviour) and
self-satisfaction are the four symptoms of dharma .
Fighting against one’s kinsmen is an activity which is
contrary to both the Vedas and sadācāra , and brings
with it feelings of repentance.




Ślokas 37— 38




yadyapy ete na paśyanti

lobhopahata-cetasaḥ


                           73
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ

mitra-drohe ca pātakam

kathaṁ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ

pāpād asmān nivarttitum

kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ

prapaśyadbhir janārdana


janārdana—O Janārdana; yady api—even though; ete—they;
cetasaḥ—whose hearts; upahata—are afflicted; lobha—by
greed; na paśyanti—do not see; doṣam—the fault; kṛtam—
incurred; kula-kṣaya—in the destruction of the dynasty;
ca—and; pātakam—the sin; mitra-drohe—in treachery to
friends; katham—why; asmābhiḥ—we; prapaśyadbhiḥ—who can
see; doṣam—the crime; kṛtam—in performing; kula-kṣaya—
the destruction of the dynasty; na jñeyam—should not
consider; nivarttitum—to desist; asmāt pāpāt—from this
sin.

O Janārdana, the intelligence of Duryodhana and others
has been polluted by greed to attain the kingdom. Thus,
they are unable to conceive of the lawlessness that
arises from destroying the dynasty, or the sin incurred
by betraying their friends. But why should we, who have
such knowledge, engage in such improper acts as these?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna asks, “Aho! Why are we still engaged in this
battle?” To answer his own question he speaks this śloka
beginning with the words yady apy.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Arjuna considers that in this battle there are teachers
such as Droṇācārya and Kṛpācārya, maternal uncles such
as Śalya and Śakuni, family elders such as Bhīṣma, the
sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and relatives and k insmen such as
Jayadratha. Śāstra forbids turning against such persons:
ṛtvik-purohitācārya-mātulātithi-saṁśriteḥ bāla-
vṛddhāturair vaidya-jspan>ñ āti-sambandhi- bāndhavaiḥ.
“One should not quarrel with one who performs yajña , a
family priest, a teacher, maternal uncle, a guest, those
who are dependents, young children, elderly persons and
relatives.”

“But I have to fight with these very persons.” Thus,

                            74
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Arjuna expressed his unwillingness to fight with his own
kinsmen, who now stood before him. “But why are they all
determined to fight with us?” Contemplating this, Arjuna
concludes that they have become overpowered by their
petty, selfish interests and have thus lost their
ability to discriminate between what is beneficial and
what is not beneficial, between dharma and adharma . As
a result, they have forgotten what sinful reactions are
incurred by destroying one’s own dynasty. “We do not
have any selfish motives, so why should we engage in
such an abominable and sinful act?”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the First
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Śloka 39




kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti

kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ

dharme naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam

adharmo ‘bhibhavaty uta


kula-kṣaye—when a dynasty is destroyed; sanātanāḥ—the
ancient; kula-dharmāḥ—religious traditions of the
family; praṇaśyanti—perish; (and when) dharme—virtue;
(is) naṣṭe—lost; (that which is) adharmaḥ—sin;
abhibhavati—overpowers; kṛtsnam—the whole; kulam—the
family; uta—also.

When a dynasty is destroyed, the ancient dharmika
traditions of the family handed down through that
dynasty are also destroyed. Upon the destruction of
dharma, the entire dynasty becomes overpowered by
adharma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Sanātanāḥ refers to those principles which have
descended through the dynasty from a remote time.




Śloka 40


                             75
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



adharmābhibhavāt kṛṣṇa

praduṣyanti kula-striyaḥ

strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya

jāyate varṇa-saṅkaraḥ


kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; adharma—irreligion; abhibhavāt—having
become predominant; kula-striyaḥ—ladies of the family;
praduṣyanti—are polluted; vārṣṇeya—O descendent of
Vṛṣṇi; strīṣu—when the womanhood; duṣṭāsu—is so
corrupted; varṇa-saṅkaraḥ—mixed or impure progeny;
jāyate—are born.

O Kṛṣṇa, when a dynasty is overpowered by adharma, the
women of that dynasty become degraded. O descendant of
Vṛṣṇi, when women become degraded and unchaste, varṇa-
saṅkaraḥ (unwanted progeny) are born.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




It is adharma which causes them to engage in unchaste
activities.




Śloka 41



saṅkaro narakāyaiva

kula-ghnānāṁ kulasya ca

patanti pitaro hy eṣāṁ

lupta-piṇḍodaka-kriyāḥ


saṅkaraḥ—such unwanted children; narakāya—make for
hellish life; kulasya—for the dynasty; eva—certainly;
eṣām kula-ghnānām—for those who are destroyers of the
dynasty; ca—also; hi—indeed; pitaraḥ—the ancestors;
(since) piṇḍa-udaka-kriyāḥ—their offerings of sanctified
food and water; lupta—are given up; patanti—also fall
down.

Such unwanted progeny certainly force hellish conditions
upon both the family and the destroyers of the dynasty.
Indeed, their forefathers, bereft of oblations of
sanctified food and water, must also suffer the same
fate.

                           76
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 42




doṣair etaiḥ kula-ghnānāṁ

varṇa-saṅkara-kārakaiḥ

utsādyante jāti-dharmāḥ

kula-dharmāś ca śāśvatāḥ


etaiḥ doṣaiḥ—by these faults; kula-ghnānām—of the
destroyers of the family; kārakaiḥ—causing; varṇa-
saṅkara—impure progeny; jāti-dharmāḥ—the dharmika
occupation according to birth; ca—and; śāśvatāḥ—the
eternal; kula-dharmāḥ—family tradition; utsādyante—sink
into oblivion.

Due to the evil deeds of these destroyers of the
dynasty, the teachings of dharma in accordance with
timeless family tradition, are sunk into oblivion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Utsādyante means they become lost.




Śloka 43




utsanna-kula-dharmāṇāṁ

manuṣyāṇāṁ janārdana

narake niyataṁ vāso

bhavatīty anuśuśruma


utsanna—devoid of; kula-dharmāṇām—those who have the
family traditions; manuṣyāṇām—of such men; janārdana—O
Janārdana; narake—in hell; niyatam—always; vāsaḥ—
residence; bhavati—becomes; iti—thus; anuśuśruma—I have
heard from authorities.


                            77
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

O Janārdana, I have heard that those who abolish their
dynasty’s dharma suffer in hell for an unlimited period
of time.




Śloka 44




aho bata mahat-pāpaṁ

kartuṁ vyavasitā vayam

yad rājya-sukha-lobhena

hantuṁ svajanam udyatāḥ


aho—alas; bata—how lamentable; vayam—we; vyavasitāḥ—
being determined; kartum—to do; mahat—great; pāpam—sin;
yat rājya-sukha-lobhena—on account of greed for royal
happiness; udyatāḥ—are prepared; hantum—to slay;
svajanam—our own kinsmen.

Alas! How regrettable it is that we are determined to
engage in this great sin. Driven by greed for royal
happiness, we are prepared to slay our own kinsmen.




Śloka 45




yadi mām apratīkāram

aśastraṁ śastra-pāṇayaḥ

dhārtarāṣṭrā raṇe hanyus

tan me kṣemataraṁ bhavet


yadi—if; śastra-pāṇayaḥ—those with weapons in hand;
dhārtar-āṣṭrāḥ—the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; hanyuḥ—may kill;
mām—me; apratīkāram—not countering, unresisting;
aśastram—unarmed; raṇe—on the battlefield; tat—that; me—
for me; bhavet—would be; kṣemataram—more beneficial.

Even if the fully-armed sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra were to kill
me unarmed and unresisting on the battlefield, that
would be more auspicious for me.




                           78
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śloka 46




sañjaya uvāca —

evam uktvārjunaḥ saṅkhye

rathopastha upāviśat

visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ

śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ


sañjayaḥ uvāca—Sañjaya said; evam uktvā—having thus
spoken; saṅkhye—in the midst of the battlefield; arjunaḥ
—Arjuna; mānasaḥ—his mind; saṁvigna—distressed; śoka—by
lamentation; ratha-upasthe—standing on the chariot;
upāviśat—sat down; visṛjya—throwing aside; cāpam—his
bow; sa-śaram—along with his quivers of arrows.

Sañjaya said: Having spoken these words in the midst of
the battlefield, Arjuna, his mind distracted by
lamentation cast aside his bow and arrows and sat down
on the chariot.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Saṅkhye means in the battle and rathopasthe means on the
chariot.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the First
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Chapter Two




Sāṅkhya-Yoga



Yoga Through the Principle of Analysis




Śloka 1

                           79
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




sañjaya uvāca —

taṁ tathā kṛpayāviṣṭam

aśru-pūrṇākulekṣaṇam

viṣīdantam idaṁ vākyam

uvāca madhusūdanaḥ

sañjayaḥ uvāca—Sañjaya said; madhusūdanaḥ—Śrī
Madhusūdana; tathā—thus; uvāca—spoke; idam—these; vākyam
—words; tam—unto him (Arjuna); viṣīdantam—the lamenting;
āviṣṭam—overwhelmed; kṛpayā—with compassion; (and whose)
ākula—restless; īkṣaṇam—eyes; (were) aśru-pūrṇa —full of
tears.

Sañjaya said: Śrī Madhusūdana thus spoke these words to
the lamenting Arjuna, who was overwhelmed with
compassion and whose restless eyes were full of tears.




Śloka 2




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

kutas tvā kaśmalam idaṁ

viṣame samupasthitam

anārya-juṣṭam asvargyam

akīrtti-karam arjuna

śrī-bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said; arjuna—O Arjuna;
kutaḥ—whence?; (has) idam—this; kaśmalam—delusion;
samupasthitam—come; tvā—to you; viṣame—in these adverse
circumstances; (it is) juṣṭam—practiced; anārya—by the
non-Āry ans; (it is) karam—the cause of; akīrtti—infamy;
(it) asvargyam—does not lead to Svarga.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Arjuna, what is the cause of your
delusion at this crucial hour? This is not at all proper
for an Āryan. It will neither enhance your reputation
nor lead you to Svarga-loka.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           80
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

In this Second Chapter, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra
delineates the symptoms of liberated persons. He removes
the darkness caused by lamentation and delusion by first
giving the wisdom to discriminate between matte r and
spirit (the self).

Kaśmalam means delusion, viṣame means at this crucial
moment or at the crisis of battle, kutaḥ means what is
the cause? And upasthitaṁ means it has taken shelter in
you. The word anārya-juṣṭam implies that this action
would not be appreciated by noble or respectable
persons, and asvargyam akīrti-karam means that this
action is unfavourable for the attainment of both
mundane and transcendental happiness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Dhṛtarāṣṭra was pleased to know that even before the
battle began, a religious feeling (dharma-pravṛtti ) had
suddenly awakened within Arjuna’s heart. Arjuna was
expressing aversion to facing the battle by adhering to
the principle of non-violence, considering it to be the
supreme dharma (ahiṁsā paramo dharmaḥ). Dhṛtarāṣṭra
deliberated as follows: “It would be fortuitous for us
if this battle did not take place, because my sons could
then be permanent sovereigns of the kingdom, without any
obstacle.” However, he still inquired as to what
happened next.

Sañjaya, who was endowed with fine intelligence, could
understand Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s inner motive; thus he very
expertly detected the inference, and crushed the hopes
of the blind king. He said, “Even after seeing Arjuna in
such a condition, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa h as not neglected
him. Rather, He will instil that same natural propensity
into the heart of Arjuna with which He annihilated Madhu
and other asuras . Through Arjuna, He will arrange the
death of all your sons. Therefore, do not harbour any
hope of attaining the kingdom without a battle.”

Sañjaya continued describing to Dhṛtarāṣṭra the
statements of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. “To fight is the svadharma
(prescribed duty) of kṣatriyas . Why, at this time of
battle, are you becoming averse to your svadharma ? To
lose interest in this dharma-yuddha (righteous battle)
is unfavourable for any higher attainment (anārya-juṣṭa
) that will give you mokṣa , Svarga and fame. Such loss
of interest destroys reputation and happiness in this
material world (akīrti-kara ).”




Śloka 3




                           81
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

klaibyaṁ mā sma gamaḥ pārtha

naitat tvayy upapadyate

kṣudraṁ hṛdaya-daurbalyaṁ

tyaktvottiṣṭha parantapa


pārtha—O Pārtha; mā sma gamaḥ—do not take to; klaibyam—
cowardice; etat—this; (is) na—not; upapadyate—befitting;
tvayi—unto you; tyaktvā—giving up; kṣudram—petty;
daurbalyam—weakness; hṛdaya—of heart; parantapa—O
chastiser of the enemy; uttiṣṭha—arise.

O Pārtha, do not yield to such cowardice; it does not
befit you. Abandon this petty weakness of heart, O
Parantapa, and arise to do battle.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here the word klaibyam means unworthiness or impotence
in the form of cowardice. Kṛṣṇa is saying, “O Pārtha, in
spite of being the son of Pṛthā, you are behaving like a
coward.” For this purpose, Śrī Bhagavān uses the words:
mā sma gamaḥ. “Do not be a coward.” He is saying, “Such
apparent cowardice befits a low-class kṣatriya. But you
are My friend. Therefore in no way does it befit you.”
Arjuna may say, “O Kṛṣṇa, do not doubt my lack of
courage. I am enthusiastic to fight. Rather, please
understand that from a dharmika point of view my
decision not to fight is a sign of discrimination, to
show respect to my gurus such as Bhīṣma and Droṇa; and
it is a symptom of my compassion for the sons of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who are weak and about to die from wounds
caused by my weapons.” Kṛṣṇa replies, “My answer to this
is kṣudram ; this is not discrimination and compassion,
but lamentation and delusion. Both reveal the weakness
of your mind. Therefore, O Parantapa, abandon this
weakness of heart and stand up and fight.” Para refers
to enemies and tapa to the act of chastising them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān said, “For kṣatriyas who are brave and
situated in their svadharma , to be cowardly in battle
is not befitting or glorious. Having been born of Pṛthā
from the portion of Devarāja Indra, you are as brilliant
and powerful as he. Besides this, since I am mahā-
maheśvara , the Supreme Controller, and you are My
friend, you are therefore very influential; so it is not
befitting for you to be cowardly. If you claim that such

                            82
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

behaviour is not cowardice but wisdom and compassion,
then My reply is that this is not true. This is not
wisdom and compassion; it is lamentation and delusion
born from weakness of mind. Wisdom and compassion do not
give rise to confusion and delusion. From your previous
statement, na ca śaknomy avasthātuṁ bhramatīva ca me
manaḥ (Gītā 1.30), it is clear that your mind is
reeling.”

It is appropriate to mention here that, once being
pleased by the service of Kuntī, the sage Durvāsā gave
her a boon in the form of a mantra by which she could
summon any devatā to a ppear before her and fulfil her
desires. On the order of Mahārāja Pāṇḍu, Kuntī chanted
that mantra to call Dharma (Yamarāja), Vāyu and Indra.
As a result, Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma and Arjuna,
respectively, were born. Through the twin Aśvinī
Kumāras, Pāṇḍu’s second wife, Mādrī, gave birth to
Nakula and Sahadeva.




Śloka 4




arjuna uvāca —

kathaṁ bhīṣmam ahaṁ saṅkhye

droṇañ ca madhusūdana

iṣubhiḥ pratiyotsyāmi

pūjārhāv arisūdana


arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; madhusūdana—O Madhusūdana;
arisūdana—O slayer of the enemies; katham—how?; aham
pratiyotsyāmi—shall I counter-attack; iṣubhiḥ—with
arrows; saṅkhye—in battle; bhīṣmam—Grandsire Bhīṣma; ca—
and; droṇam—Droṇācārya; pūjā-arhāu—who are worthy of my
worship.

Arjuna said: O Madhusūdana! O Arisūdana, slayer of
enemies! How can I fight with arrows in battle Grandsire
Bhīṣma and Droṇācārya, who are my worshipable superiors?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In answering the question as to why he is not fighting,
Arjuna claims that, according to dharma-śāstra,
violating the honour of a worshipable personality brings
inauspiciousness. “Therefore I shall not fight.” To
support his action he speaks this śloka , beginning with

                              83
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

katham . If Kṛṣṇa says, “Bhīṣma and Droṇa are fighting
against you, so how can you not fight back?” then Arjuna
may a nswer, “Because I consider them to be pūjā-arhau ,
worshipable, it is therefore right that I not fight
them. Is it proper for me to angrily pierce with sharp
arrows those persons at whose feet I should offer
flowers with devotion? No, it is not proper.”

By addressing Śrī Kṛṣṇa as Madhusūdana, Arjuna is
presenting this logic: “O dear friend, You have also
killed enemies in battle, but You have not killed Your
guru , Sāndīpani Muni, nor Your relatives, the Yadus. O
You who are known as Madhusūdana (killer of Madhu), are
Madhus (enemies) Yadus (Your relatives)? No, this is not
so. Madhu was Your enemy (ari ), therefore have
addressed You as Arisūdana, the killer of enemies.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Sāndīpani Muni was a famous sage belonging to the
Kaśyapa dynasty, who lived in the city of Avanti, the
present-day Ujjain. While enacting Their human-like
pastimes in order to set an example for others, jagad-
guru Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva accepted him as Their śikṣā-
guru . While living in his āśrama , They performed the
pastime of learning the sixty-four arts in sixty-four
days. In his Dig-darśinī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has indicated that
Sāndīpani Muni was a Śaivite, a follower of Lord Śiva.
Why, then, did Kṛṣṇa and Ba ladeva accept him as Their
guru ? In answer to this, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
writes that if They had accepted a Vaiṣṇava guru , he
would have immediately recognised Śrī Kṛṣṇa as Svayam
Bhagavān, and the pastime of learning would not have
taken place. Therefore, these two brothers intentionally
went to the Śaivite Sāndīpani Muni, son of the renowned
Yogamāyā-Paurṇamāsī of Vraja. The famous friends of
Kṛṣṇa, Madhumaṅgala and Nāndīmukhī, are the son and
daughter of Sāndīpani Muni.




Śloka 5



gurūn ahatvā hi mahānubhāvān

śreyo bhoktuṁ bhaikṣyam apīha loke

hatvārtha-kāmāṁs tu gurūn ihaiva

bhuñjīya bhogān rudhira-pradigdhān


hi—certainly; (it is) śreyaḥ—better; bhoktum—to maintain

                           84
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

my life; iha loke—in this world; bhaikṣyam—by begging;
ahatvā—by not killing; mahā-anubhāvān—great
personalities; (who are my) gurūn—gurus ; api—even
though; artha-kāmān—motivated by wealth; (they are) eva—
certainly; gurūn—superiors; tu—but; hatvā—by killing;
iha—in this world; bhuñj īya—one has to enjoy; bhogān—
sense enjoyments; pradigdhān—tainted; rudhira—with
blood.

It would be better to maintain my life in this world by
begging than to kill these great personalities who are
my gurus. Even though motivated by material gain, they
remain my superiors. After killing them, any worldly
enjoyment I might attain would certainly be tainted by
their blood.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna is saying to Kṛṣṇa, “If You ask how I will
maintain my life if I do not desire to accept the
kingdom, my answer is that it is better for me to eat
food acquired by begging, an act condemned for kṣatriyas
, than to kill my gurus . Even though I may be defamed
in this world for such an act, inauspiciousness will not
fall upon me. It is not proper to abandon my gurus
simply because they are following the proud and
adharmika Duryodhana, who is unable to discriminate
between what is just and what is not. If You say that it
is recommended in dharma-śāstra (Mahābhārata Udyoga
Parva ) to reject the guru if he is proud, unable to
discriminate between good and bad actions and engaged in
abominable activities, then my reply is, mahānubhāvān ,
‘Where is the possibility of these defects in such
personalities as Bhīṣma and Droṇa, who have conquered
lust, time and so forth?’ It may then be argued:
although a man is a servant of wealth, wealth is not the
servant of anyone. This is confirmed in Bhīṣma’s
statement to Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja: ‘O Mahārāja, it is
true that I am bound by the wealth of the Kauravas.’
Thus, if You say that his reputation as a mahānubhāvān
(great personality) has already been ruined by the word
artha-kāmī (one desirous of wealth), then I must reply,
‘Yes, this is true.’ Still, if I kill them, I will only
feel distress. For that reason I am using the word
artha-kāmān (desirous of wealth). How can I enjoy the
objects of the senses if I kill all of the Kauravas, who
are very greedy for wealth, when such sense objects will
be tainted with their blood? In other words, despite
their greed for wealth, they will always be my gurus . I
will become a traitor by killing them, and any pleasure
derived will be adulterated with sinful deeds.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti



                           85
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017



As though inattentive to Kṛṣṇa’s words, due to being
overpowered by grief and delusion, Arjuna once more
asserted, “I consider it extremely inauspicious and
sinful to kill my gurus , Droṇācārya, Kṛpācārya and my
most worshipable Grandsire Bhīṣma, who are standing
before me in this battle array, what to speak of my own
family members and relatives, just for the sake of this
petty material kingdom. The chance of a place in the
higher planets is completely lost for one who kills such
gurus . Therefore, I consider it better to maintain my
life in this world by begging.”

It is stated in the Kūrma Purāṇa:


upādhyāyaḥ pitā jyeṣṭha-bhrātā caiva mahī-patiḥ

mātulaḥ śvasuras trātā mātāmaha-pitāmahau

bandhur jyeṣṭhaḥ pitṛvyaś ca puṁśyete guravaḥ smṛtāḥ


He who instructs the Vedas, the father, elder brother,
king, maternal uncle, fatherin-law, protector, maternal
grandparents, paternal grandparents, relatives and those
who are elderly all are considered one’s gurus.

Śrī Droṇācārya and Kṛpācārya were born in high-class
brāhmaṇa families. Besides knowledge of dhanur-veda (the
science of archery), they were also scholars of the
Vedas and dharma-śāstras and were dharmika by nature.
Even on the battlefield, Arjuna saw them as his gurus .
Droṇācārya, who had foreseen the possibility of war,
made Arjuna take a vow that, if for any reason they came
face to face in battle, Arjuna must fight with him.

Grandsire Bhīṣma, the son of King Śāntanu and Gaṅgā
devī, remained a lifelong celibate. According to Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (9.22.19), he was a bhakta of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
extremely chivalrous, in control of his senses,
generous, a knower of the Absolute Truth and, by vow,
bound to speak the truth. Even death was under his
control. He is prominent among the twelve mahājan as :


svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ

kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ

prahlādo janako bhīṣmo

balir vaiyāsakir vayam


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.3.20

Thus Bhīṣma, the knower of the Absolute Truth and the
spiritual master of the whole world, was Arjuna’s
teacher in the same category as Droṇācārya. Even though
he supported the Kauravas in their fight against the
Pāṇḍavas, who were devotees of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he is Kṛṣṇa’s
very dear bhakta and he acts only for His pleasure.

                             86
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhīṣma is counted among the jñ ānī-bhaktas . He said to
Yu dhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, “What can I do? I am completely
bound by the wealth (salary) of the Kauravas. Although
it is not my desire, I have to fight on their side. But
I give you this boon: you will be victorious in the
battle.”

Here, Grandsire Bhīṣma externally appears to be greedy
for wealth and dependent on others, but in fact he is
the master of his senses and supremely independent.
Therefore, to glorify him in the present śloka , Śuddha
-Sarasvatī has combined the two words hi and
mahānubhāvān into himahānubhāvān. Hima indicates ice or
snow. That which destroys hima is called himahā, sun or
fire, and anubhāvān means one who has the capability.
Therefore, a person who is extremely powerful like the
sun or fire is himahānubhāvān . The powerful sun and
fire can bu rn all impure objects without becoming
contaminated themselves. They always remain pure.
Similarly, Bhīṣma is himahānubhāvān , a greatly powerful
person. It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.29) that
fire can burn all pure and impure objects and is thus
known as sarva-bhuk , that which can consume everything
without becoming impure itself. Similarly, even if a
pure and powerful person appears to transgress the
principles or etiquette of dharma , he remains
completely free from all defects.

Someone may say that the powerful Bhīṣma committed no
injustice by taking the side of the Kauravas and
fighting the Pāṇḍavas. One may question, however, how
Kṛṣṇa’s parama-bhakta could pierce the body of his
worshipable Lord with sharp arrows? Is this a symptom of
his bhakti ? In answer it is said: 1) To allure the
asuras , Śrī Kṛṣṇa made His great devotee Mahādeva,
ŚaṅkaraÇ preach māyāvāda which is nothing but covered
Buddhism and is against the principles of the Vedas .
From an external perspective this does not seem to be
bhakti , but from the transcendental perspective it is
bhakti , because Mahādeva simply carried out the order
of Bhagavān to bewilder the asuras .

2) Mahādeva, being a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa, assisted
Him in relieving the earth of āsurika forces by
instigating and supporting Bāṇāsura’s fight against the
Lord. Alone, Bāṇāsura would never have dared to fight
with Kṛṣṇa, and thereby would not have been eliminated.
Just as Mahādeva, taking the side of his own devotee,
Bāṇāsura, personally fought with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, similarly
Grandsire Bhīṣma is siding with the Kauravas and
fighting against his Lord. Where, then, is the question
of his bhakti being lost?

3) To relieve Mother Earth from the burden of āsurika
forces, Śrī Kṛṣṇa wanted to annihilate them in the
Mahābhārata conflict and thus re -establish dharma . If
Grandsire Bhīṣma and gurus like Droṇācārya and others
had not assisted the opposing āsurika side, then the
battle at Kurukṣetra would never have been possible.
Therefore, by omniscient Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own will, yogamāyā
inspired Bhīṣma to fight on the side of the opposing
party. Thus, Bhīṣma performed this act for the pleasure
of Kṛṣṇa.


                           87
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

4) In his commentary on a śloka from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam ,
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains that in the Mahābhārata war,
by the will of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, an āsurika mood entered
Grandsire Bhīṣma’s heart. Imbued with that mood, he
aimed sharp arrows at Kṛṣṇa, otherwise, it would have
been impossible for a śuddha-bhakta like Bhīṣma to act
in such a way.

5) The parama-bhakta Grandsire Bhīṣma teaches ordinary
sādhakas that even if a person of his exalted status
accepts the food or association of materialistic
persons, his mind will become contaminated and his
discrimination lost.

6) Śrī Bhagavān understood that Jaya and Vijaya wanted
to satisfy Him by fulfilling His desire to fight. He
therefore inspired the four Kumāras to visit Him and, in
order to infuse inimical thoughts into the hearts of
Jaya and Vijaya, He intentionally had the four Kumaras
curse them. This curse was just a pretence, because
there is no possibility of any anger existing in
Vaikuṇṭha, what to speak of a curse. In fact, for the
satisfaction and pleasure of Śrī Bhagavān, Jaya and
Vijaya personally begged to have an inimical mood and by
doing so there was no diminution in their bhakti .

Had Grandsire Bhīṣma shown any symptom of desiring to
kill Kṛṣṇa instead of pleasing Him, he would have fallen
from his position as a bhakta forever. Grandsire Bhīṣma
offered the following prayer glorifying Śrī Kṛṣṇa on the
battlefield at Kurukṣetra:


yudhi turaga-rajo-vidhūmra-viṣvak-

kaca-lulita-śramavāry-alaṅkṛtāsye

mama niśita-śarair vibhidyamāna—

tvaci vilasat-kavace ‘stu kṛṣṇa ātmā


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.9.34

While commenting on this śloka, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives a very rasika description of
Grandsi re Bhīṣma’s bhakti-bhāva by saying that Bhīṣma
perceives that, just as the dust raised from the hooves
of the cows in Vraja decorates the charming face of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and increases His beauty and sweetness, in the
same way the dust raised from the hooves of the horses
on the battlefield also increases Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty and
sweetness. There is nothing ugly in a beautiful object.
Although dust in itself is not beautiful, when it falls
on the soft, lotus-like face of Śrī Kṛṣṇa it enhances
His beauty and charm. When Kṛṣṇa ran towards Bhīṣma
carrying the wheel of a chariot, His hair was
dishevelled. Bhīṣma was then reminded of how Kṛṣṇa’s
hair looks when, upon returning from cow-grazing, He
runs behind the lowing cows as they quickly move toward
their sheds. Śrama -vāri means that, due to the forceful
exertion of Kṛṣṇa running towards Bhīṣma on the
battlefield, drops of perspiration fell from His lotus-
like face and beautiful limbs. To Bhīṣma they appeared

                           88
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

to be like the perspiration drops caused by Kṛṣṇa’s
exertion in kandarpa-yuddha , amorous war of cupid.
Kṛṣṇa’s running at Bhīṣma is also a manifestation of His
mood of bhakta-vātsalya. Kṛṣṇa broke His own vow not to
fight in order to keep Bhīṣma’s vow that he would make
Śrī Kṛṣṇa take up weapons against him. Grandsire Bhīṣma
observes, “The reddish marks appearing on the limbs of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which are bruised and cut by my sharp arrows,
look like the love-bites made by the teeth of a
passionate lover absorbed in kandarpa-rasa with her
beloved.” Although a young belove d may behave haughtily
with her lover, whom she loves millions of times more
than her own life, by marking him with her nails and
teeth, she cannot be said to be devoid of love.
Similarly, Bhīṣma’s madness in vīra-rasa (the chivalrous
mellow) is not an indication that he is devoid of kṛṣṇa-
prema .

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is raso vai saḥ (Taittirīya Upaniṣad
2.7.2), meaning that He embodies the nectar of all
mellows (akhila-rasāmṛṭa-mūrti ). In order to fulfil the
desire of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to taste vīra-rasa , Bhīṣma, on e of
His prominent bhaktas , took the side of the Kauravas
and wounded the limbs of Śrī Bhagavān. Bhīṣma thus
pleased Him by fulfilling His desire.

In Śrī Mahābhārata, it is seen that Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
took a vow not to use any weapon in the battle. On the
other hand, Bhīṣma, His bhakta , took a vow that if he
could not make Kṛṣṇa use weapons, he would not be
considered the son of Mahārāja Śāntanu. Bhagavān, who is
affectionate to His bhaktas (bhakta-vatsala ), broke His
own vow and protected the vow of Bhīṣm a.


sva-nigamam apahāya mat-pratijñām

ṛtam adhikartum avapluto rathasthaḥ

dhṛta-ratha-caraṇo ‘bhyayāc caladgur

harir iva hantum ibham gatottariyaḥ


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.9.37

Grandsire Bhīṣma says, “I   offer my praṇāmas again and
again unto bhakta-vatsala   Śrī Bhagavān who, in order to
protect my vow, broke His   own promise. He jumped from
the chariot, took a wheel   in His hand and ran towards me
with great speed.”

In spite of taking the side of the opposing party,
Grandsire Bhīṣma is a parama-bhakta. Of this there is no
doubt. From the character of Bhīṣmadeva, we learn that
whatever he does is favourable; it is for the pleasure
of Kṛṣṇa and it assists Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-vilāsa . His
profound character is beyond any mundane reasoning.
However, if a conditioned soul (māyā-baddha-jīva )
imitates Bhīṣma and engages in illicit activities or
commits aparādha while making a show of being a guru ,
he can never be considered a sad-guru . Bhagavān
Ṛṣabhadeva has said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.5.18):


                             89
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


gurur na sa syāt sva-jano na sa syāt

pitā na sa syāj jananī na sā syāt

daivaṁ na tat syān na patiṣ ca sa syān

na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum


A guru who cannot deliver a disciple from the imminent
cycle of birth and death (mṛtyu-saṁsāra) by giving him
instructions on bhakti is not qualified to be a guru.

Only a mahā-puruṣa who is śāstra-jña (thoroughly expert
in the imports of the śāstra) , who is endowed with
realisation of parabrahma and who is detached from this
material world is qualified to be a guru . For this
reason, Bali Mahārāja rejected Śukrācārya, who was
opposed to the principles of bhakti . Thus, it is the
injunction of the śāstra to reject such a guru. There is
no sin or fault in not surrendering to or not following
an unqualified guru , nor indeed in rejecting him.

Lifelong celibate Bhīṣma, after winning the svayaṁvara
of the three daughters of the king of Kāśī —Ambā, Ambikā
and Ambālikā —had Ambikā and Ambālikā married to his
brother Vicitravīrya. The first girl, Ambā, insisted on
marrying Bhīṣma, but he had taken a vow of lifelong
celibacy, and thus rejected her request. Not finding any
other solution, Ambā approached Paraśurāma, Bhīṣma’s
astra-śastra-guru . Paraśurāma called Bhīṣma and ordered
him to marry Ambā, but Bhīṣma remained resolute. At
this, Paraśurāma told him either to marry her or fight
with him. Bhīṣma accepted the fight while speaking the
following words:


guror apy avaliptasya kāryākāryam ajānataḥ

utpatha-pratipannasya parityāgo vidhīyate


Mahābhārata Udyoga Parva 179.25

A guru who is engrossed in sense gratification, who is a
fool with no ability to discriminate between proper and
improper behaviour, and who is following a different
path, devoid of śuddha-bhakti, is a false guru. One
should immediately reject him.

Such a parama-bhakta as Bhīṣma cannot perform any
activity which is against the principles of bhakti .
Paraśurāma is an avatāra of Bhagavān. Considering that
the vow of Bhīṣma to be righteous, Paraśurāma accepted
defeat in this fight, which would have continued
indefinitely because th ey were evenly matched.




Śloka 6


                           90
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




na caitad vidmaḥ kataran no garīyo

yad vā jayema yadi vā no jayeyuḥ

yān eva hatvā na jijīviṣāmas

te ‘vasthitāḥ pramukhe dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ


ca—and; na vidmaḥ—I do not know; etat—this; katarat—
which; garīyaḥ—is better; naḥ—for us; yad vā—whether;
jayema—we may conquer; vā—or; yadi—whether; jayeyuḥ—they
may conquer; naḥ—us; eva—certainly; yān—those persons
whom; hatvā—by killing; na jijīviṣāmaḥ—we can not desire
to live; te—they; dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ—those who are on the
side of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; avasthitāḥ—are arrayed; pramukhe—in
the battlefront.

I am unable to decide what is better for us, to conquer
them or be conquered by them. Even after killing them we
will not desire to live. Yet they have taken the side of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and now stand before us on the battlefield.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna is speaking the śloka beginning with na caitad
while considering, “By fighting against our gurus , I do
not know whether we will be victorious or defeated.
Moreover, I do not even know whether it is better for us
to win or lose.” Here Arjuna, considering two
perspectives, is speaking about the possibility of both
his victory and his defeat. Arjuna is saying, “For us,
the result of victory is equal to defeat.” Thus he is
using the words yān eva , etc.




Śloka 7




kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥ

pṛcchāmi tvāṁ dharma-sammūḍha-cetāḥ

yac chreyaḥ syān niścitaṁ brūhi tan me

śiṣyas te ‘haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam


upahata—being overpowered; doṣa—by the fault; kārpaṇya—
of cowardliness; (I am) sammūḍha —bewildered; cetāḥ—in

                           91
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

heart; dharma—about virtue; (I have given up) sva-bhāvaḥ
—my chivalrous nature; (I) pṛcchāmi —am asking; tvām—
You; yat—what; syāt—may be; (the) niścitam—certain;
śreyaḥ—auspicious path; brūhi—tell; tat—that; me—to me;
aham—I (am); te—Your; śiṣyaḥ—disciple; (and) prapannam—
surrendered; tvām—unto You; śādhi—please instruct; mām—
me.

Having become overpowered by weakness of heart and
bewildered about how to ascertain dharma, I have given
up my natural quality of chivalry. I implore You to tell
me what is actually auspicious for me. I am Your
disciple and surrendered unto You. Please instruct me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa may ridicule Arjuna by saying, “Although you
are a kṣatriya, you have decided to wander here and
there and beg on the basis of your own deductive
understanding of the imports of śāstra . What then, is
the use of My speaking?” In anticipation of this, Arjuna
begins this śloka with kārpaṇya . “To give up the
natural characteristic of chivalry is kārpaṇya ,
cowardly behaviour. The principles of dharma are very
subtle and therefore bewildering to me, so please tell
me with certainty what is auspicious for me.” Arjuna
tells Kṛṣṇa “If You are proud of Your scholarship and
You refute my statements, therefore how can I instruct
you? Then I assure you that I am Your disciple and from
now on I will not refute Your statements unnecessarily.”




Śloka 8




na hi prapaśyāmi mamāpanudyād

yac chokam ucchoṣaṇam indriyāṇām

avāpya bhūmāv asapatnam ṛddhaṁ

rājyaṁ surāṇām api cādhipatyam


api—even; avāpya—after attaining; (an) asapatnam —
unrivalled; ṛddham—prosperous; rājyam—kingdom; bhūmau—on
the earth; ca—also; ādhipatyam—sovereignty; surāṇām—over
the devas ; hi—certainly; na prapaśyāmi—I do not see;
(how) apanudyāt—it can drive away; mama—my; śok am—
lamentation; yat—which; ucchoṣaṇam—is drying up;
indriyāṇām—my senses.

Even if we attain an unrivalled and prosperous kingdom

                           92
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

on earth with sovereignty over the devas, I do not see
any way to dispel this lamentation which is drying up my
senses.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa may say, “You do not have a reverential
attitude towards Me, rather you have a friendly mood.
How will I accept you as My disciple? You should take
shelter of personalities such as Dvaipāyana Vyāsa, for
whom you have a reverential atti tude.” In anticipation
of this, Arjuna is speaking the present śloka beginning
with the words na hi. “In the three worlds, I do not
find anyone other than You who can dispel my
lamentation. I do not consider even Bṛhaspati to be more
intelligent than You. Therefore, being overwhelmed with
grief, whose shelter other than Yours can I take? Just
as the intense heat of the summer season dries up small
ponds, similarly this grief is drying up my senses.”
Kṛṣṇa may also say, “Despite being overwhelmed with
grief, you should still fight. When you win the battle,
you will become absorbed in enjoying the pleasure of
your kingdom and be freed from this grief.” Arjuna
therefore replies with the expression beginning with
avāpya. “Even if I attain the unrivalled kingdom of the
earth or sovereignty over the devatās in Svarga, my
senses will remain as dry as they are now.”




Śloka 9




sañjaya uvāca —

evam uktvā hṛṣīkeśaṁ

guḍākeśaḥ parantapaḥ



na yotsya iti govindam

uktvā tūṣṇīṁ babhūva ha

sañjayaḥ uvāca—Sañjaya said; evam—thus; uktvā—having
spoken; hṛṣīkeśam—to Kṛṣṇa; guḍākeśaḥ—Arjuna; parantapaḥ
—slayer of the enemies; uktvā—saying; govindam—unto
Govinda; na yotsye—I shall not fight; iti—thus; babhūva
ha—he became; tūṣṇīm—silent.

Sañjaya said: After speaking these words, Guḍākeśa, the
chastiser of enemies, said to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “O Govinda, I
shall not fight,” and fell silent.

                           93
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 10




tam uvāca hṛṣīkeśaḥ

prahasann iva bhārata



senayor ubhayor madhye

viṣīdantam idaṁ vacaḥ

bhārata—O descendant of Bhārata; hṛṣīkeśaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
iva—as if; prahasan—smiling; madhye—in the midst;
ubhayoḥ—of both; senayoḥ—of the armies; uvāca—spoke;
idam—these; vacaḥ—words; tam viṣīdantam—unto the
grieving one.

O descendant of Bhārata (Dhṛtarāṣṭra), at that time,
Hṛṣīkeśa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, smiling in the midst of both
armies, spoke the following words to the grieving
Arjuna.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




To ridicule His friend Arjuna, who is in sakhya-bhāva,
Kṛṣṇa shows him that it is improper to be aggrieved in
this way, thus drowning him in an ocean of em
barrassment. Śrī Kṛṣṇa remarks, “O, you are devoid of
discrimination.” Arjuna has accepted the position of
Kṛṣṇa’s disciple (śiṣya ) however, and it is improper to
immerse a disciple in an ocean of shame in this way.
Therefore, Kṛṣṇa is pursing His lips and trying to hide
His smile. Here, the import of the word ‘Hṛṣīkeśa’ is
that, although Kṛṣṇa was previously controlled by the
loving statements of Arjuna, now, for Arjuna’s own
welfare, Kṛṣṇa is controlling his mind, out of love.

Senayor ubhayor madhye indicates that Arjuna’s grief and
the instructions and assurances given by Śrī Bhagavān
were equally visible to both armies. In other words,
this message of Bhagavad-gītā was manifest before all
present. It was not kept secret from anyone.




Śloka 11


                           94
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ

prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase

gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca

nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ

śrī bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said; bhāṣase—you are
speaking; prajñ ā-vādān—learned words; ca—but; tvam—you;
anvaśocaḥ—are lamenting; aśocyān—for what is not worthy
of grief; ca —yet; paṇḍitāḥ—the wise; na anuśocanti—do
not lament; g ata—lost; asūn—life; (or) agata—not lost;
asūn—life.

Śrī Bhagavān said: While speaking learned words you are
mourning for what is not worthy of grief. Those who are
wise do not lament, either for the living or the dead.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “O Arjuna, your grief which is born from
the pain of killing your relatives is illusory. Your
question, ‘How shall I fight with Bhīṣma?’ shows that
your reasoning is based on ignorance.” To explain why
the above statement is true, Śrī Bhagavān says: aśocyān
anvaśocaḥ, “You are grieving for that which is not
worthy of grief.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa further says, “Even after
being reassured by Me, you are speaking statements such
as: kat haṁ bhīṣmam ahaṁ saṅkhye (Gītā 2.4), thereby
presenting yourself as a paṇḍita. In other words,
although you have knowledge, you are arguing. This
proves that actually you do not have knowledge, because
the wise do not lament for gross bodies from which the
life air (prāṇa ) has gone (gata-āsūn ), as such gross
bodies are temporary.

“Agatāsūn means from whom the prāṇa has not gone. The
learned or wise do not lament, even for the subtle
bodies of such persons, because the subtle body is
indestructible before the stage of mukti . In both
conditions, gatāsūn (without life) and agatāsūn (with
life), both the svabhāva (nature) of the gross and
subtle bodies is unchangeable. Foolish people lament,
however, for the gross body of their father or relatives
when the prāṇa leaves it. They do not lament for the
subtle body, because generally they do not have
knowledge of it.

“Bhīṣma and others are also ātmā, with coverings of
gross and subtle bodies. Since the ātmā is eternal, to
lament for it is improper. Thus, earlier you were saying
that dharma-śāstra is superior to artha-śāstra , but My

                           95
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

response is that jñ āna -śāstra (from where this
understanding comes) is superior even to dharma-śāstra
.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




That portion of sac-cid-ānanda para-tattva (the Supreme
Absolute Reality, composed of eternality, consciousness
and bliss), which is endowed only with the taṭastha-
śakti , is called the jīvātmā or the jīva . The jīvas
are atomic particles of consciousness by constitutional
nature. Their eternal and natural characteristic is
bhagavat-sevā. Jīvas are of two types, mukta and baddha
. The mukta-jīvas are eternally engaged in the service
of Śrī Bhagavān in His abode. They never fall down. The
baddha-jīvas have forgotten the service of Śrī Bhagavān
since time immemo rial, and thus being covered by the
two types of material bodies, gross and subtle, are
suffering three types of miseries as punishment in this
material world.

The gross body of the baddha-jīva is made of the five
material elements — earth, water, fire, air and sky —
and is temporary and perishable. After death, the jīva
changes his gross body. Where there is birth, death will
always follow. Today, tomorrow, or after some years,
death is certain.


mṛtyur janmavatāṁ vīra dehena saha jāyate

adya vābda-śatānte vā mṛtyur vai prāṇināṁ dhruvaḥ


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.1.38

In Gītā (2.27), it is said: jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyuḥ.
“For one who has taken birth, death is a certainty.”

The jīva’s immediate designation, which is made up of
mind, intelligence and false ego, and which covers his
pure nature, is called sūkṣma-śarīra (the subtle body).
One is granted a new gross body in each birth, and at
the time of death it is destroyed, but such is not the
case with the subtle body. Due to the jīva’s
forgetfulness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa , the subtle body
has been covering his svarūpa since time immemorial.
This subtle body cannot be dissolved even after
remembering Bhagavān through such processes as jñ āna ,
yoga , tapasya , dhyāna or study of the Vedas . It can
only be dissolved by remembering Him through the medium
of bhagavad-bhakti . At that time the jīva becomes
situated in his pure nature (śuddha-svarūpa ).


prītir na yāvan mayi vāsudeve

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 5.5.6

                            96
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


sa liṅgena vimucyate

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.29.83

bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syāt

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.37

yadā ratir brahmaṇi nai ṣṭhik ī pum ān Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
4.22.26

mām upetya tu kaunteya

Śrīmad Bhagavad-Gītā 8.16


When we study these ślokas, it is quite clear that
although the subtle body has no beginning, it is a
cquired by forgetfulness of Bhagavān (bhagavad-vismṛti )
and destroyed by remembrance of Him (bhagavat-smṛti ).

Therefore, those who are ātma-tattva-vit, who know the
nature of the ātmā to be immutable, imperishable and
eternal, do not lament or become disturbed at the loss
of the gross body. They grieve neither for a gross body
without an ātmā (gatāsun ), nor for a gross body with an
ātmā (agatāsun ) which will be destroyed in the future.
On the other hand, those who consider their gross body
to be their self are ignorant. Such persons are not even
aware of the subtle body, what to speak of the ātmā.
They consider the gross body (containing the ātmā) to be
their mother, father, brother, or relative. When the
ātmā leaves that body, they consider their mother,
father, brother or relative to be dead, and they lament
for that body.




Śloka 12




na tv evāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ

na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥ

na caiva na bhaviṣyāmaḥ

sarve vayam ataḥ param

tu eva—most certainly; na—never; jātu—at any time; aham
na āsam—did I not exist; na—nor; tvam—you; na—nor; ime—
these; jana-adhipāḥ—kings; ca—also; na—nor; ataḥ param—
hereafter; sarve vayam—all of us; eva—certainly; na
bhaviṣyāmaḥ—shall not exist.

There was never a time when I did not exist, nor you,
nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us
ever cease to be.


                            97
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Kṛṣṇa asks the question, “O My friend, Arjuna, when one
grieves over the death of a dear person, what is the
object of his love, the body or the ātmā?” In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.14.50) it is said:


sarveṣām api bhūtānāṁ nṛpa svātmaiva vallabhaḥ


O king, for all jīvas, the ātmā is certainly dearmost.

According to this statement of Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, it
is the ātmā that is the only object of love. Although
there is a difference between Īśvara a nd the jīva ,
both types of ātmā are eternal and free from death.
Thus, it is not the ātmā that is the object of grief.
For this reason only, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is speaking this śloka
beginning with na tv evāham. “It is not true that I,
Paramātmā, did not exist in t he past. Certainly I was
existing. In the same way, you, the jīva , also existed
in the past, as did the jīvas who are all these kings.
The possibility of the soul not existing prior to his
existence in his present body is refuted by this
statement. Similarly, it is also not true that you,
these kings and I, will not continue to exist in the
future. We will all continue to exist.” Thus, it has
been proven that the soul is indestructible. In this
regard, the Katha Upaniṣad (2.2.13) states: nityo
nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān


He who is the supreme eternal amongst all eternal
entities, the supreme conscious being among all
conscious beings, is fulfilling the desires of all
living beings.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The jīva’s contact with the gross body is called birth,
and separation from it is called death. When the jīvātmā
is situated in the gross body, people have loving
dealings with each other. But, such ignorant persons,
who consider the gross body to be the ātmā, do not
realise that the real self is not material, and thus,
when a jīva disappears from a body, they become absorbed
in grief.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Parīkṣit Mahārāja asked Śrīla

                           98
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

Śukadeva Gosvāmī, “O brāhmaṇa , Śrī Kṛṣṇa was not born
to the same parents as t he other cowherd boys. How was
it possible for those parents to have such unparalleled
prema for Him, that they did not even have for their own
children?” In response to this Śrīla Sukadeva Gosvāmī
says, “O King, for all living entities, one’s own self
(ātmā) is the most dear. Although entities who are
separate from one’s self, such as a son, wealth, house
and other objects, are dear to the self, they are not as
dear as the self itself. It is secondary to the
affection one has towards one’s own self. O King, the
affection an embodied soul has for that for which he
feels possessiveness, such as a son, wealth and house,
is not the same as the affection he feels for his own
self.” In other words, there is a difference between ‘I’
and ‘mine’. The amount of prīti (affection) one has for
objects which are possessed by him is not the same as
the prīti that one has for one’s own self. Those who
consider the body to be the self do not feel that which
is related to the body, such as a house, a wife, or a
son, is as dear to them as their own body. And even
though a person’s body is the object of his affection,
it is not as dear to him as the self, because when the
body becomes old, the desire for survival still remains
strong. This is due to the excessive attachment one has
for the self. Because Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the very Self of the
self, He is the most dear object (priyatama ) for every
ātmā. The world, which is related to Kṛṣṇa, is also dear
but not dearmost. Kṛṣṇa is the object of the word ‘I’,
because He is the ātmā of all ātmās. And that which is
related to Kṛṣṇa, such as the universe, is the object of
the word ‘mine’. That is why Kṛṣṇa is so dear to the
cowherd boys.

The above statements are also verified by the dialogue
between Yājñavalkya and Maitreyī in Bṛhad-āraṇyaka
Upaniṣad (2.4.5) where it is said:


sa hovāca na vā are patyuḥ kāmāya priyo

bhavaty ātmanas tu kāmāya patiḥ priyo bhavati na

vā are sarvasya kāmāya sarvaṁ priyaṁ

bhavaty ātmanas tu kāmāya sarvaṁ priyaṁ bhavati


The great sage Yājñavalkya said to Maitreyī, ‘No living
entity loves another for the other’s satisfaction. Only
for one’s own satisfaction does the husband love his
wife, the wife love her husband, the father love his son
and the son love his father. A person is dear, not for
someone else’s satisfaction, but for the happiness and
satisfaction of one’s own self (ātmā)’.




Śloka 13




                           99
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

dehino ‘smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati

yathā—just as; asmin—in this; dehe—body; dehinaḥ—
belonging to the embodied soul; (passing from) kaumāram—
boyhood; yauvanam—to youth; j arā—to old age; tathā—in
the same way; (when there is) prāptiḥ—achievement;
dehāntara—of a change of body; tatra—then; dhīraḥ—a
thoughtful person; na muhyati—is not confused.

Just as the embodied ātmā passes from boyhood to youth
to old age, similarly, after death, he passes into
another body. An intelligent person is not bewildered by
the birth and death of the body.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The following point may be raised: Since the ātmā is
associated with the body, the body will also be an
object of our love. Furthermore, those who are related
to the body, such as sons, brothers, relatives,
grandsons and so on, will also be the objects of our
love, so when they die, we will certainly feel grief.
Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with dehinaḥ,
in answer to this. “The jīva in the body attains
boyhood; at the end of boyhood he attains youth, and at
the end of youth he attains old age. Similarly, at the
loss of the body he attains another body. Just as one
does not grieve at the end of boyhood and youth, which
are objects of love due to their relationship with the
ātmā, similarly, one should not grieve for the loss of
the body itself, which is also an object of love due to
its relationship with the ātmā, when it is lost. If a
person grieves when he attains ol d age at the loss of
youth, then he also feels happy when he attains youth at
the loss of boyhood. Therefore, you should feel happy
because when Bhīṣma and Droṇa lose their old bodies they
will attain new ones. Or you should consider that, just
as in one b ody various stages of growth are reached,
the same jīva attains various types of bodies.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The word dehī means the ātmā or jīva , which is
unchangeable, whereas the body is subject to
transformation. Even when the body undergoes changes
from boyhood to youth to old age and to death, the

                           100
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

embodied ātmā does not undergo any change. It always
remains the same. Therefore, it is not proper to lament
for the loss of the body. Just as when one leaves
boyhood and attains youth, one feels happiness instead
of grief, similarly, after death one attains a new, able
and beautiful body. Therefore, why should one feel
distress? Rather, one should only feel happiness.

King Yayāti became old in his youth because he was
cursed by his fatherin-law, Śukrācārya. In great
distress, he humbly begged forgiveness at the feet of
Śukrācārya. To please his daughter who was married to
the king, Śukrācārya gave him the boon that he could
exchange his old age for the youth of any of his young
sons. His elde st son, Yadu, refused because he wanted
to perform bhagavad-bhajana , but his youngest son,
Puru, gave his youth and accepted the old age of his
father. In this way, Yayāti again became young and
enjoyed with his queens (Devayānī and others). In the
company of his sons and grandsons, he considered himself
very happy. Finally, however, he understood that all
these pleasures were temporary and the cause of
unlimited misery. Thus, he returned his son’s youth to
him and went to the forest to perform bhajana of Bhagav
ān (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 9.18.1-51). Therefore, it is
appropriate to feel happy, knowing that, at the loss of
an old, weak and withered body, one will achieve a
healthy, strong and beautiful new body.




Śloka 14



mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ

āgamāpāyino ‘nityās

tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata

kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; sparśāḥ—sense perceptions;
mātrā—(are) momentary; tu—only; dāḥ—they give; (the
sensations of) śīta—cold; (and) uṣṇa—heat; sukha—
happiness; (and) duḥkha—distress; (they are) a nityāḥ—
flickering; (and) āgama-apāyinaḥ—come and go; bhārata—O
Bhārata; titikṣasva—you must tolerate; tān—them.

O Kaunteya, when the senses come in contact with the
sense objects, one experiences cold, heat, happiness and
distress. Such experiences are flickering and temporary,
and therefore, O Bhārata, you must learn to tolerate
them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                            101
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Arjuna may tell Kṛṣṇa, “What You have said is true. Yet,
the troublesome mind of an indiscriminate person like
myself, which is covered by grief and lamentation, is a
source of misery. It is not only the mind which causes
trouble. Through the impressions of the mind, the senses
experience their respective sense objects. Thus the
senses, such as the sense of touch, also become the
cause of trouble.” For this reason, Kṛṣṇa says mātrā,
indicating the sense objects that are accepted by the
senses. The experience of such sense objects is called
sparśāḥ. Śrī Bhagavān explains śītoṣṇaḥ āgamāpāyinaḥ.
“Although cool water gives pleasure in the summer, that
same water is the cause of distress in winter.
Therefore, knowing them to be temporary and flickering,
one should tolerate the experience of these sense
objects.” To tolerate them is an obligation prescribed
in the śāstra . Taking bath is troublesome in the month
of Māgha (the winter month of January). In spite of
this, one is not supposed to give up the obligatory
routine of bathing as enjoined in the śāstra .
Similarly, those same persons (one’s brother, son, etc.)
who give happiness both when they are born and when they
earn wealth, give pain at the time of their death.
Knowing this happiness and distress to be temporary and
flickering, you should tolerate it. You cannot give up
your svadharma of fighting in the battle on the plea of
affection for such relatives. It is definitely a cause
of great disturbance to give up one’s svadharma that has
been recommended in śāstra .




Śloka 15



yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete

puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha

sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ

so ‘mṛtatvāya kalpate

puruṣa-ṛṣabha—O best among men; dhīram—the sober;
puruṣam—person; yam—whom; ete—these (contacts of the
senses with the sense objects); na vyathayanti—do not
disturb; (and for whom) duḥkha—distress; sukham—and
happiness; sama—are the same; saḥ—he; hi—indeed; kalpate
—is qualified; amṛtatvāya—for liberation.

O best among men, that sober person for whom happiness,
distress and the experience of various sense objects are
the same, and who is not disturbed by them, is certainly
qualified to attain liberation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī

                            102
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




If one properly deliberates on the influence of the
sense objects and practices tolerance of them, they will
not be the cause of misery when one experiences them.
When the sense objects are no longer a cause of misery,
one will naturally become closer to attaining mukti .
Therefore, the śloka beginning with yaṁ hi na is being
spoken. Here the word amṛtatvāya means mokṣa .




Śloka 16



nāsato vidyate bhāvo

nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ

ubhayor api dṛṣṭo ‘ntas

tv anayos tattva-darśibhiḥ

asataḥ—of the temporary; vidyate—there is; tu—indeed; na
—no; bhāvaḥ—existence; sataḥ—of the eternal; vidyate—
there is; na—no; abhāvaḥ—destruction; darśibhiḥ—by the
knowers; tattva—of the truth; (this) api—very; antaḥ—
conclusion; (was) dṛṣṭaḥ—observed; anayoḥ—of these;
ubhayoḥ—two.

Of the temporary, such as winter or summer, there is no
permanent existence, and of the eternal, such as the
jīvātmā, there is no destruction. Those who are knowers
of the truth have reached this conclusion by
deliberating on these subject matters.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




These words are spoken for persons who have not yet
attained discrimination. According to the śruti
statement, asaṅgo hy ayaṁ puruṣaḥ, the jīvātmā does not
factually have a relationship with either the subtle or
gross body, nor with the characteristics of the body
such as lamentation and delusion, which are imagined
only due to ignorance (avidyā). For this reason, the
present śloka beginning with the word nāsataḥ is spoken.
The word asataḥ means that due to their non-spiritual
nature, lamentation and delusion which appear to be in
both the jīva (who is spiritual by nature) and his
shelter, the gross body, have no real existence.
Similarly, the word sataḥ means that, the jīvātmā, whose
nature is sat (eternal), is never destroyed. In this way
the fundamental principle of sat and asat is understood.

                             103
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

“Thus you and Bhīṣma are eternal. Knowing that bodily
identificatio n, lamentation and delusion do not exist
in relationship to the imperishable ātmā, how can Bhīṣma
and the others be annihilated, and why should you grieve
for them?”




Śloka 17



avināśi tu tad viddhi

yena sarvam idaṁ tatam

vināśam avyayasyāsya

na kaścit kartum arhati

tat—that; yena—by which; idam—this; sarvam—entire body;
(is) tatam—pervaded; viddhi—know; (is) tu avināśi—indeed
indestructible; na kaścit—no one; arhati—is able; kartum
—to effect; vināśam—the destruction; asya avyayasya—of
the imperishable (soul).

That by which the entire body is pervaded, you should
know to be indestructible. No one is able to destroy the
imperishable ātmā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Nā bhāvo vidyate sataḥ. That which is sat (eternal
truth), cannot be destroyed. Śrī Bhagavān is speaking
this śloka beginning with avināśi to clarify this
statement. The fundamental nature (svarūpa ) of the jīva
is such that it pervades the whole body. One may
question, that if the consciousness of the jīva only
pervades the individual body and is the refore limited
in size, will it not be temporary? In response, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa says, “No, it is not so.” There is evidence of
this in the śruti and in smṛti also: sūkṣmānām apy ahaṁ
jīvaḥ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.16.11). “Among that which is
subtle I am the jīva .” Also in the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad
(3.1.9) it is stated: eṣo ‘ṇur ātmā cetasā veditavyo
yasmin prāṇaṁ pa ñcadh ā saṁviveśa . “The ātmā is very
minute. It can only be realised in a pure heart which is
free from the three modes. The life air, divided into
prāṇa , apān a , vyāna , samāna and udāna , remains
situated in the body.” In the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
(5.9) it is said:


bālāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca

bhāgo jīvaḥ sa vijñeyaḥ sa cānantyāya kalpate

                           104
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



One should know that the jīvātmā is the size of one ten-
thousandth the tip of a hair.

Also in the Aitareya Upaniṣad (5.8): ārāgra-mātro hy
avaro ‘pi drṣṭaḥ. “The jīva has an extremely subtle
form.”

The above statements of śruti prove that the jīvātmā is
atomic in size; it is very subtle. Just as the entire
body can be nourished by the application to the head or
chest, of a potent herb or a precious gem set in lac,
similarly the jīvātmā is able to pervade the entire body
although it is situated in one place. There is no
difficulty in reconciling this. Being bound by material
designations, the jīva enters various species and
wanders in different heavens and hells. Dattātreya has
also verified this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.9.20): yena
saṁsarate pumān. “The jīvātmā wanders in the material
world.”

In the present śloka, it has been described that the
jīvātmā pervades the whole body. The jīvātmā is called
avyayasya , or eternal. This is also verified in the
śrutis : nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān


Katha Upaniṣad 2.2.13

He who is the supreme eternal (nitya) amongst all
eternal entities (nitya-jīvas), the supreme conscious
being among all conscious beings, fulfils the desires of
all living entities.

If we view this śloka from a different angle, we can say
that all three: the body, the jīvātmā and Paramātmā, are
seen in all human beings, birds, animals and so forth.
The natures of the body and the jīvātmā have been
explained in the previous śloka : nāsato vidyate bhāvo
(Gītā 2.16), so what is the nature of the third entity,
Paramātmā? To answer this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with the word avināśī. The word tu is
used to indicate a different context. This material
world has come into existence only because māyā and the
jīvātmā are by nature fundamentally different from
Paramātmā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




There are two indestructible truths. One is the atomic
conscious jīva, aṇu-caitanya-jīvātmā, and the other is
the manifesting source and controller of all jīvātmās ,
Paramātmā. The same Paramātmā is present as a witness in
that which is both inert and conscious. The jīvas are
unlimited. An individual ātmā exists in each gross body.

                           105
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

The jīva in each body individually experiences happiness
and misery. The Supreme Absolute Truth, Paramātmā, is
situated only as a witness and is untouc hed by the jīva
’s happiness and distress. In this śloka , the nature of
the indestructible jīva has been described. How is it
that the atomic jīvātmā, being situated in one part of
the body, is experienced throughout the entire body? Śrī
Kṛṣṇa answers this question in the present śloka . His
statement above is verified by Vedānta-sūtra (2.3.22):
avirodhaś candanavat Just as a single drop of hari-
candana applied to one place makes the whole body cool,
similarly, the jīvātmā, situated in one part of the
body, is experienced throughout the entire body.

This is also verified in the smṛti-śāstra: aṇumātro ‘py
ayaṁ jīvāḥ

sva-dehe vyāpya tiṣṭhati

yathā vyāpya śarīrāṇi

hari-candana-vipruṣaḥ

Just as a drop of hari-candana applied to one part of
the body gives pleasure to the whole body, similarly,
the jīvātmā, being situated in one part of the body,
pervades the whole body.

If the question is asked, ‘In which part of the body
does the jīvātmā reside?’ the answer is, ‘Within the
heart.’ Hṛdi hy eṣa ātmeti (Ṣaṭ-Praśnī-śruti ). This is
also stated in the Vedānta-sūtra : gunād vālokavat
(Brahmasūtra 2.3.24). Like light, the jīvātmā, by its
quality, pervades the whole body. Although the jīvātmā
is atomic, by its quality of consciousness it pervades
the entire body. Just as the sun, situated in one part
of the sky, illuminates the whole universe, similarly,
the jīvātmā also pervades the whole body. This has been
stated by Śrī Bhagavān Himself in Gītā (13.33).




Śloka 18




antavanta ime dehā

nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥ

anāśino ‘prameyasya

tasmād yudhyasva bhārata

ime—these; dehāḥ—material bodies; nityasya—of the
eternal; anāśinaḥ—indestructible; aprameyasya—
immeasurable; śarīriṇaḥ—embodied soul; uktāḥ—are said;
(to be) antavantaḥ—perishable; tasmāt—therefore; bhārat
a—O Arjuna; yudhyasva—fight.

The material bodies of the jīvātmā, who is eternal,

                           106
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

indestructible and immeasurable, are known to be
perishable. Therefore, O Arjuna, fight.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




To clarify the meaning of nāsato vidyate bhāvaḥ, Śrī
Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with antavantaḥ.
The word śarīriṇaḥ has been used to describe the
embodied jīva . Aprameyasya means that the jīvātmā is
very difficult to understand because he is extremely
subtle. Tasmād yudhyasva means ‘therefore fight’. Based
on these arguments, Kṛṣṇa concludes that it is
completely improper to give up one’s svadharma which is
prescribed in śāstra .




Śloka 19




ya enaṁ vetti hantāraṁ

yaś cainaṁ manyate hatam

ubhau tau na vijānīto

nāyaṁ hanti na hanyate

yaḥ—he who; vetti—knows; enam—this (soul); (to be)
hantāram—the killer; ca—and; yaḥ—who; manyate—considers;
enam—this soul; hatam—to be killed; na vijānītaḥ—is not
in knowledge; tau ubhau—of the two; ayam—this ātmā; na
hanti—does not kill; na—nor; hanyate—is killed.

He who considers the jīvātmā to be either the killer or
the killed is ignorant, for the self neither slays nor
is he slain by anyone.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Kṛṣṇa says, “O friend, Arjuna, you are an ātmā and
therefore you are neither the subject nor the object of
the act of killing.” To explain this, Śrī Bhagavān is
speaking this śloka beginning with ya enam . “One who
thinks that the jīvātmā kills (e.g. Arjuna kills
Bhīṣma), or the jīvātmā is killed (Arjuna is killed by
Bhīṣma), is ignorant. Therefore, O sakhā, why do you
fear achieving infamy just because ignorant people will

                           107
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

call you the killer of your superiors?”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Kṛṣṇa is instructing Arjuna, “You are an ātmā, and
therefore you are neither the subject nor the object of
the verb ‘to k ill’.” Here, He is explaining that Arjuna
is not the subject, the killer of heroes such as Bhīṣma
on the opposite side, nor is he the object of the
killing done by them. On the other hand, ignorant people
who identify the self with the body consider only t he
gross body to be the subject and object of killing.
Kṛṣṇa concludes, “Therefore, becoming fully aware of
this truth, give up your identification with the gross
body and become situated in the nature of the self.
Surrendering unto Me, fearlessly engage in your
svadharma for My pleasure. You should not be in
ignorance about this.” The same concept is also stated
in śruti : hantā cen manyate hataṁ

hataś cen manyate hatam

ubhau tau na vijānīto

nāyaṁ hanti na hanyāte

Katha Upaniṣad 1.2.19

If one who identifies the   self with the body thinks that
he will kill someone, and   one whose body is being killed
thinks that he is killed,   both are ignorant because the
ātmā neither kills anyone   nor is killed.




Śloka 20




na jāyate mriyate vā kadācin

nāyaṁ bhūtvā bhavitā vā na bhūyaḥ

ajo nityaḥ śāśvato ‘yaṁ purāṇo

na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre


ayam—this (soul); na jāyate—does not take birth; vā—or;
mriyate—die; kadācit—at any time; na bhūtvā—he has not
come into being; vā—nor; bhavitā—will he come into
being; na—nor; bhūyaḥ—repeatedly (accept material
bodies); ayam—he; (is) ajaḥ—unborn; nityaḥ—eternal;
śāśvataḥ—ever-existing; (and) purāṇaḥ—primeval; śarīre—
when the body; hanyamāne—is destroyed; na hanyate—he is

                            108
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

not killed.

The jīvātmā neither takes birth nor dies, nor does he
experience repeated creation or growth. He is unborn,
eternal and ever-existing. Though primeval, he remains
ever-youthful. When the body is destroyed, the jīvātmā
is not destroyed.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




To establish the eternality of the jīvātmā, Śrī Bhagavān
is speaking this śloka beginning with the words na
jāyate mriyate , in which it is proven that there is
never any time when the jīvātmā is born or dies. That
there was no birth or death for the jīvātmā in the past
nor will there be in the future is proven by the words
nāyaṁ bhūtvā bhavitā. Śrī Bhagavān is further
explaining, by the use of the word ajaḥ, that the
jīvātmā does not take birth in either the past, present
or future. Thus He establishes that the jīva also
existed in the past. The word śāśvataḥ means that which
is ever-existing, which is not destroyed in the past,
present, or future. Therefore the jīvātmā is eternal. If
one still raises a doubt that because the soul exists
for a long time, he may be overpowered by old age, Śrī
Bhagavān says in response, “No, that is not true because
he is purāṇaḥ. Although he is primeval, he is ever-fresh
and free from the six types of transformations,
including birth and death.” If someone then raises the
question, “Will the soul not die, even f iguratively, at
the death of the body?” Śrī Kṛṣṇa answers, “No, the soul
has no relationship at all with the body.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The eternal nature of the jīvātmā has been established
in this śloka . He is beyond birth and death, and is
eternal and ever-existing. He is not destroyed when the
body is destroyed. Consequently, the jīvātmā is devoid
of the six types of transformations: birth, duration of
existence, growth, procreation, diminution and death. In
the Katha Upaniṣad (1.2.18) a similar conclusion is
given: na jāyate mriyate vā vipaścin

nāyaṁ kutaścin na vibhūva kaścit

ajo nityaḥ śāśvato ‘yaṁ purāṇo

na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre


The meaning of this śloka is the same as Gītā 2.20, but

                           109
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

in this śloka there is one special word, vipaścit ,
which means one who knows the self. Bṛhad-āraṇyaka
Upaniṣad (4.4.25) also verifies this conclusion: sa vā
eṣa mahān aja ātmājaro ‘maro ‘mṛto ‘bhayaḥ. “The ātmā is
indisputably great, unborn, deathless, free from old
age, immortal and fearless.”




Śloka 21




vedāvināśinaṁ nityaṁ



ya enam ajam avyayam

kathaṁ sa puruṣaḥ pārtha

kaṁ ghātayati hanti kam

pārtha—O Pārtha; katham—how; yaḥ—one who; veda—knows;
enam—this (soul); (to be) avināśinam—indestructible;
nityam—eternally; ajam—unborn; avyayam—immutable; kam—
whom? hanti—can he kill; kam—whom? (can) saḥ—that;
puruṣaḥ—person; ghātayati—cause to kill.

O Pārtha, how can a person who knows the ātmā to be
eternally birthless, immutable and indestructible kill
anyone or cause anyone to be killed?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa is answering Arjuna, “O Pārtha, after
acquiring this knowledge, you will not be guilty of
committing sin even after engaging in battle, and I will
also not be guilty of inspiring you to fight.” For this
purpose, the present śloka beginning with vedāvināśinam
is being spoken. Here the word nityam is an adverb. The
use of the words avināśi (indestructible), aja (unborn)
and avyayam (immutable) denies that the ātmā can be
diminished at all by acts of destruction. Śrī Bhagavān
says, “Wi th this knowledge, how can a person like Me
kill anyone or be killed by any means? In the same way,
how can a person like you kill someone or cause someone
to be killed?”




Śloka 22


                           110
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya

navāni gṛhṇāti naro ‘parāṇi

tathā śarīrāṇi vihāya jīrṇāny

anyāni saṁyāti navāni dehī


yathā—just as; naraḥ—a person; vihāya—giving up; jīrṇāni
—old and worn out; vāsāṁsi—clothes; gṛhṇāti—accepts;
aparāṇi—other; navāni—new ones; tathā—in the same way;
dehī—the embodied soul, jīvātmā; vihāya—giving up;
jīrṇāni—old; śarīrāṇi—bodies; saṁyāti—accepts; anyāni—
other; navāni—new ones.

Just as a person discards his old garments and acquires
new ones, the jīvātmā similarly gives up old, useless
bodies and accepts new ones.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this śloka beginning with vāsāṁsi, Śrī Kṛṣṇa tells
Arjuna, “Is there any harm in giving up old clothes to
accept new ones? If you say, ‘By fighting against
Bhīṣma, You and I will be the cause of the jīvātmā named
Bhīṣma giving up his body,’ I reply that Bhīṣma will
simply give up his old and useless body and take a new
body. How can you or I be blamed for this?”




Śloka 23




nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi

nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ

na cainaṁ kledayanty āpo

na śoṣayati mārutaḥ

śastrāṇi—various weapons; chindanti—do not pierce; enam—
him (the jīvātmā); pāvakaḥ—fire; na dahati—does not
burn; enam—him; āpaḥ—waters; na kledayanti—do not
moisten; enam—him; ca—and; mārutaḥ—the wind; na śoṣayati
—does not dry (him).

The jīvātmā can never be pierced by any weapon, burned
by fire, moistened by water nor dried by the wind.

                             111
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“O Arjuna, the weapons used by you in battle cannot
cause any pain or misery to the ātmā.” To explain this,
Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning with
nainam . Here the word śastrāṇi means swords (or any
earthly weapons), pāvakaḥ means the fire weapon, āpaḥ
the water weapon and mārutaḥ the air weapon. “O Arjuna,
even if you use all these weapons, they will not cause
any pain to the ātmā.”




Ślokas 24—25




acchedyo ‘yam adāhyo ‘yam

akledyo ‘śoṣya eva ca

nityaḥ sarvagataḥ sthāṇur

acalo ‘yaṁ sanātanaḥ

avyakto ‘yam acintyo ‘yam

avikāryo ‘yam ucyate

tasmād evaṁ viditvainaṁ

nānuśocitum arhasi

ucyate—it is said (that); ayam—this (soul); (is)
acchedyaḥ—indivisible; akledyaḥ—insoluble; ca—and;
adāhyaḥ—cannot be burned; ayam—this (soul); eva—
certainly; aśoṣyaḥ—cannot be dried; (he is) nityaḥ—
eternal; sarvagataḥ—all-pervasive; sthāṇuḥ—fixed; acalaḥ
—non-moving; ayam—this (soul); (is) sanātanaḥ—ever-
existing; ayam—this (soul); (is) avyaktaḥ—imperceptible;
ayam—this (soul); (is) acintyaḥ—inconceivable; ayam—this
(soul); (is) vikāryaḥ—immutable; tasmāt—therefore;
viditvā—knowing; evam—like this; na arhasi—it is not
befitting; anuśocitum—to lament; enam—for this (soul).

The jīvātmā is indivisible, insoluble and cannot be
burned or dried. He is eternal, all-pervasive,
permanent, non-moving and ever-existing. He is
imperceptible, inconceivable and, being free from the
six types of transformations such as birth and death, is
immutable. After understanding the ātmā in this way, it
is not proper for you to lament.



                            112
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The ātmā has been described as indivisible, etc.
Repetition of this indicates the eternality of the
jīvātmā and removes the doubts of those who are
uncertain of its nature. If one says three or four times
that there is dharma in Kali-yuga, the repetitive use of
the words will stress the fact that, without a doubt,
there is dharma in Kali-yuga. Similarly, the jīvātmā’s
qualities have been repeated to confirm the eternality
of his nature. Here, the word sarvagataḥ (all-pervasive)
indicates that due to his own actions the jīva
transmigrates through all species of life such as devas
, human beings, animals and birds. The words sthāṇuḥ
(fixed) and acalaḥ (immovable) have been repeated in
order to give a clear conception of the stable nature of
the jīvātmā. The jīvātmā is called avyaktaḥ
(imperceptible) because he is very subtle. He is called
acintya (inconceivable, beyond reasoning) because he
pervades the whole body as consciousness. He is called
avikāryaḥ (immutable) because he is free from the six
types of transformations, such as birth and duration of
existence.




Śloka 26




atha cainaṁ nitya-jātaṁ

nityaṁ vā manyase mṛtam

tathāpi tvaṁ mahā-bāho

nainaṁ śocitum arhasi

ca—also; atha—if however; manyase—you think; enam—this
soul; nitya-jātam—always takes birth; vā—or; nityam—
always; mṛtam—dies; tathāpi—still; tvam na arhasi—you
should not; śocitum—grieve; enam—for this (soul); mahā-
bāho—O mighty-armed one.

If, however, you think that the ātmā is always born and
always dies, there is still no reason for you to grieve,
O Mahā-bāho.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           113
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

Śrī Bhagavān is saying, “O Arjuna, what I have explained
to you so far has been based on śāstra, but now I will
help you to understand from the point of view of
ordinary experience. Please listen very attentively. If
you consider that the self is always born, and if you
think that when the body perishes, the soul dies, even
then, O Mahā-bāho, as a valiant kṣatriya it is your duty
to fight.” Regarding one’s svadharma , it is said in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.54.40): kṣatriyāṇām ayaṁ dharmaḥ
prajāpati-vinirmitaḥ

bhrātāpi bhrātaraṁ hanyād yena ghorataras tataḥ


According to the svadharma of kṣatriyas who were created
by Prajāpati, one brother can even kill another brother.
Therefore, kṣatriya-dharma is said to be very fearsome.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa stops trying to make Arjuna
understand from the perspective of śāstra and is here
making him understand from a common sense point of view
by telling him that if he understands the ātmā to be
eternal, as explained in the śruti and other śāstras ,
then there is no reason for grief. But even from a
practical point of view, there is also no reason to
grieve. Atheists like Cārvaka consider the ātmā to be
temporary like the gross body and say that it does not
exist after death. Also, according to the philosophy of
vaibhāṣika Buddhists, if one considers the ātmā to be
always taking birth and dying there is still no reason
to grieve for it.




Śloka 27



jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyur

dhruvaṁ janma mṛtasya ca

tasmād aparihārye ‘rthe

na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi

jātasya—for one who is born; hi—certainly; mṛtyuḥ—death;
(is) dhruvaḥ—certain; ca—and; mṛtasya—for one who dies;
janma—birth; dhruvam—is certain; tasmāt—therefore; tvam—
you; arhasi—should; na śocitum—not grieve; aparihārye
arthe—in this inevitable situation.

For one who is born death is certain and for one who has
died birth is certain. Therefore you should not grieve

                           114
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

for that which is unavoidable.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




When someone’s prārabdha-karma is exhausted, his death
is certain. After death, he will inevitably take birth
again so that he can enjoy the fruits of the actions
performed in his previous body. It is not possible for
anyone to escape the inevitability of birth and death.




Śloka 28



avyaktādīni bhūtāni

vyakta-madhyāni bhārata

avyakta-nidhanāny eva

tatra kā paridevanā

bhārata—O Bhārata; eva—certainly; (all) bhūtāni—beings;
(are) avyakta-ādīni—unmanifest in the beginning; vyakta—
manifest; madhyāni—in the interim; nidhanāni—and after
death; (they become) avyakta—unmanifest; tatra—
therefore; kā—why? paridevanā—lament.

O Bhārata, all beings are unmanifest before their birth,
they become manifest in the interim, and after death
they once again become unmanifest. So what cause can
there be for lamentation?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this way, having dispelled lamentation in respect to
the ātmā by the śloka : na jāyate mriyate vā kadācit
(Gītā 2.20), and in respect to the body by the śloka :
jāt asya hi dhruvo mṛtyuḥ (Gītā 2.27), Śrī Bhagavān now
dispels the cause of lamentation for both the jīvātmā
and the body by speaking this śloka , beginning with the
word avyaktaḥ. Before birth, devas , human beings,
animals, birds and so on remain unmanifest. Even at that
time, the subtle and gross bodies also exist in their
causal state in the form of matter, such as earth, but
they are in an unmanifest stage. They become manifest in
the middle period and after death they again become
unmanifest. In the period of dissolution and devastation

                           115
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(mah ā-pralaya ), the jīvātmā also remains in his subtle
form because of the existence of his karma and mātrā
(tendency to accept sense objects). Therefore, all jīvas
remain unmanifest in the beginning and again become
unmanifest at the end. They only become manifest in the
middle period. The śruti also states: sthira-cara-
jātayaḥ syur ajayottha-nimitta-yujaḥ. “All the moving
and non-moving jīvas become manifest due to karma.
Therefore, why should one cry out of grief?” (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 10.87.29).

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.13.44) Śrī Nārada Muni says:


yan manyase dhruvaṁ lokam

adhruvaṁ vā na cobhayam

sarvathā na hi śocyās te

snehād anyatra mohajāt


Whether you consider the human to be an eternal jīvātmā
or a temporary body, or even if you accept an
indescribable opinion that he is both eternal and
temporary, you do not have to lament in any way. There
is no cause for lamentation other than the affection
which has arisen out of delusion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




All living entities are born from the unmanifest stage,
remain manifest for some time and again become situated
in an unmanifest state. Just to explain this point, the
present śloka has been spoken. In his explanation of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.87.29) cited in the above
commentary, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes
that, because all jīvātmās are manifest from
Parameśvara, they are under His control. Parameśvara is
beyond material nature, remaining detached from it. When
He performs His pastime of glancing over the material
nature, the m oving and non-moving jīvas become manifest
with their past impressions of karma. Wherever the word
utpanna (created) is used it means to become manifest.
If one asks how the jīvas , being merged in Parameśvara,
can take birth, the answer is given that it is by His
glance and the inspiration of His will (icchā-śakti ).
Past karma then becomes active, after which the jīvātmā
appears along with his subtle body. Then, becoming
united with the gross body, the jīvātmā takes birth. In
other words, when the designations born from the effect
of material nature are dissolved, the jīvas are
considered to have died; and when the jīvātmā appears
with his past karma , impressions, and gross and subtle
bodies in various species of life in this material
world, he is said to have taken his birth. This is
stated in Bṛhad-āraṇyaka-śruti : yathāgneḥ kṣudrā

                            116
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

visphuliṅgā

vyuccaranty evam evāsmād ātmanaḥ

sarve prāṇāḥ sarve lokāḥ sarve

devāḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni vyuccaranti


Just as sparks appear from a fire, so the senses (such
as the power to speak), the results of karma (such as
happiness and distress), all the devas and all the
living entities from Brahmā down to the ant appear from
Me, Paramātmā.

Mahābhāgavata Śrī Yamarāja also says: yatrāgatas tatra
gataṁ manuṣyam. “The living entity goes back to the same
unknown place from whence he came.”




Śloka 29




āścaryavat paśyati kaścid enam

āścaryavad vadati tathaiva cānyaḥ

āścaryavac cainam anyaḥ śṛṇoti

śrutvāpy enaṁ veda na caiva kaścit


kaścit—some person; paśyati—sees; enam—this (soul);
āścaryavat—as amazing; ca—also; anyaḥ—another; vadati—
speaks of (him); āścaryavat—as amazing; tathā—in the
same way; eva—indeed; anyaḥ—another; śṛṇoti—hears (of
him); ca—and; eva—certainly; kaścit—some person; api—
even; śrutvā—having heard; enam—of this (soul); na veda—
does not understand.

Some look upon the ātmā as amazing, some speak of him as
amazing and some hear of him and accept him as amazing.
Others, however, even after hearing about him, cannot
understand him at all.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa is saying, “O Arjuna, if you ask what this
amazing subject is that I am speaking about, then
listen. It is indeed a matter of wonder that even after
receiving this knowledge, your wisdom has not been
awakened. In this regard it is true; this subj ect is a
matter of wonder.” Only for this reason is this śloka ,

                           117
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

beginning with the word āścaryavat , being spoken. This
whole material world, in the form of the combination of
the body and the ātmā, is indeed a wonder.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Since the truth about the science of the ātmā is very
difficult to understand, the ātmā, the person who
instructs about the ātmā, the instruction itself and the
audience are all amazing. In other words, only some very
rare, great persons look upon the ātmā as amazing, and
some very rare persons hear about the ātmā and accept
him as amazing. That most of the audience, even after
hearing these instructions from one who is tattvavit (a
knower of the Absolute Reality), cannot realise the ātmā
is most amazing. This is also explained in Katha
Upaniṣad (1.2.7): śravaṇayāpi bahubhir yo na labhyaḥ

śṛṇvanto ‘pi bahavo yaṁ na vidyuḥ

āścaryo ‘sya vaktā kuśalo ‘sya labdhā

āścaryo ‘sya jñātā kuśalānuśiṣṭaḥ


The opportunity to hear instructions about the science
of the self (ātma-tattva) is very rare. Even after
hearing them, most cannot realise the instructions
because a master who is self-realised (ātma-tattva-vit)
is very rare. If, by great fortune, such a teacher is
available, the students themselves who are willing to
hear this topic are also extremely rare.

For this reason, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has instructed
the jīvātmās in Kali-yuga to perform śrī hari-nāma-
saṅkīrtana . If even faithless persons chant the name of
Śrī Hari while talking, walking, sitting, s tanding,
eating, drinking, crying, laughing, or in any other way,
they will still benefit from it. Gradually, they attain
the association of śuddha-bhaktas. By such association
they can even attain bhagavat-prema , and they easily
attain knowledge of ātma-t attva as a secondary result.


madhura-madhuram etan maṅgalaṁ maṅgalānāṁ

sakala-nigama-vallī-sat-phalaṁ cit-svarūpam

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛguvara nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma


Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 11.234

Kṛṣṇa-nāma is the sweetest of the sweet and the most
auspicious of all that is auspicious. It is the
flourishing creeper, the eternal, fully-ripened fruit of

                            118
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the Bhāgavata and the embodiment of knowledge, cit-
śakti. O Bhṛgu Muni! Even if someone chants the holy
name only once, either with faith or indifference, he is
immediately delivered from this ocean of birth and
death!

sāṅketyaṁ pārihāsyaṁ vā

stobhaṁ helanam eva vā

vaikuṇṭha-nāma-grahaṇam

aśeṣāgha-haraṁ viduḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.2.14

“One who chants the holy name of the Lord is immediately
freed from the reactions of unlimited sins, even if he
chants indirectly (to indicate something else),
jokingly, for musical entertainment, or even
neglectfully. This is accepted by all learned scholars
of the śāstra.”




Śloka 30




dehī nityam avadhyo ‘yaṁ

dehe sarvasya bhārata

tasmāt sarvāṇi bhūtāni

na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi

bhārata—O Bhārata (Arjuna); ayam—this; dehī—the embodied
soul; nityam—is eternal; (he resides) dehe—within the
body; sarvasya—of all beings; (he) avadhyaḥ—cannot be
killed; tasmāt—therefore; tvam—you; arhasi—should; na
śocitum—not grieve; sarvāṇi—for all; bhūtāni—living
beings.

O Bhārata, the eternal jīvātmā who resides within the
body of all living beings, can never be slain.
Therefore, you need not grieve for anyone.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If Arjuna asks, “What should I do now? Please instruct
me definitively,” Kṛṣṇa’s answer is, “Give up your
lamentation and fight.” For this purpose, the two lines
of this śloka beginning with dehī and dehe are being
spoken.

                           119
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017




Śloka 31




svadharmam api cāvekṣya



na vikampitum arhasi

dharmyād dhi yuddhāc chreyo ‘nyat

kṣatriyasya na vidyate

ca—and; api—also; avekṣya—considering; svadharmam—your
own dharmika duty; arhasi—you should; na—not; vikampitum
—hesitate; hi—indeed; kṣatriyasya—for the kṣatriya ; na
vidyate—there does not exist; anyat—another; (more)
śreyaḥ—auspicious engagement; yuddhāt—than fighting;
dharmyāt—for dharma .

Considering your duty as a kṣatriya you should not
hesitate, as there is no better engagement for you than
to fight for dharma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Since   the ātmā is indestructible, it is not proper for
you to   be disturbed by thinking that he can be killed.
And if   you consider your own svadharma , it is also not
proper   for you to be perturbed.”




Śloka 32




yadṛcchayā copapannaṁ

svarga-dvāram apāvṛtam

sukhinaḥ kṣatriyāḥ pārtha

labhante yuddham īdṛśam

pārtha—O Pārtha; sukhinaḥ—fortunate; kṣatriyāḥ—kings;
labhante—achieve; yuddham—a battle; īdṛśam—like this; ca
—and; upapannam—arrived; yadṛcchayā—of its own accord;

                            120
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(it) apāvṛtam—is a wide open; dvāram—door; svarga—to the
higher planets.

O Pārtha, fortunate are those kṣatriyas for whom such an
opportunity to fight comes of its own accord and thus
opens wide the doorway to Svarga.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān says, “In a dharmika battle, those who are
killed by the conquerors attain more happiness than
those who kill them. Therefore, to give more pleasure to
Bhīṣma and others than to yourself, you should kill
them.” To support this statement, Śrī Bhagavān is
speaking the present śloka , beginning with the word
yadṛcchayā. Yadṛcchayā means to attain Svarga without
performing karma-yoga . Apāvṛtam means uncovered or
unveiled, in this case the celestial kingdom which is
unveiled for the fortunate kṣatriya who dies in battle.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Arjuna asked in Gītā (1.36), “O Mādhava, what happiness
will come by killing our relatives?” In answer to this,
Śrī Bhagavān is instructing Arjuna that a kṣatriya’s
svadharma is to fight in battle, which is an open door
to Svarga. “If you win this battle, you will attain
great fame and the pleasure of a kingdom. On the other
hand, because this is a battle for justice, if you die
you will definitely attain Svarga. Even the aggressors
and those fighting on the side of adharma will attain
Svarga if they are killed in this battle.” Dharma-śāstra
states:


āhaveṣu mitho ‘nyonyaṁ

jighāṁsanto mahī-kṣitaḥ

yuddhamānāḥ paraṁ śaktyā

svargaṁ yānty aparāṅ-mukhāḥ


Śrī Kṛṣṇa is telling Arjuna, “Therefore, it is not
proper for you to become averse to this battle which
will be fought for the sake of justice.”




                           121
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śloka 33




atha cet tvam imaṁ dharmyaṁ

saṅgrāmaṁ na kariṣyasi

tataḥ svadharmaṁ kīrtiṁ ca

hitvā pāpam avāpsyasi


atha—on the other hand; cet—if; tvam—you; na—do not;
kariṣyasi—perform; imam—this; dharmyam—dharmika duty;
saṅgrāmam—of war; tataḥ—then; hitvā—losing; svadharmam—
personal duty; ca—and; kīrtim—fame; avāpsyasi—you will
gain; pāpam—sinful reaction.

However, if you do not perform your svadharma of
fighting this dharmika battle, you will not only lose
your status as a kṣatriya, but your only gain will be
sinful reaction.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the present śloka beginning with atha and the
following three ślokas , Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the
defects in taking the stance of not fighting.




Śloka 34




akīrtiṁ cāpi bhūtāni

kathayiṣyanti te ‘vyayām

sambhāvitasya cākīrtir

maraṇād atiricyate

ca—and; bhūtāni—people; kathayiṣyanti—will speak; te—of
your; avyayām—unending; akīrtim—infamy; ca—and; api—
also; sambhāvitasya—for an honourable person; akīrtiḥ—
dishonour; atiricyate—becomes more (powerful); maraṇāt—
than death.

People will speak of your infamy for all time, and for
an honourable person, dishonour is more painful than
death.


                             122
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here the word avyayām means indestructible, and
sambhāvitasya indicates one `who is very well-
established, or a very honourable person.




Śloka 35




bhayād raṇād uparataṁ

maṁsyante tvāṁ mahā-rathāḥ

yeṣāṁ ca tvaṁ bahu-mato

bhūtvā yāsyasi lāghavam

mahā-rathāḥ—the great warriors; maṁsyante—they will
think; tvām—you; (have) uparatam—retired; raṇāt—from the
battle; bhayāt—out of fear; ca—and; yeṣām—for those for
whom; tvam—you; bhūtvā—were; bahu-mataḥ—greatly
honoured; yāsyasi—you will become; lāghavam—
insignificant.

Great warriors such as Duryodhana and others will think
that you have left the battlefield out of fear. Those
who have always honoured you so highly will consider you
to be insignificant.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Your opponents are of the opinion, ‘Our enemy, Arjuna,
is extremely valiant.’ If you run away from the battle,
after being the object of such honour, you will be
deemed a coward in their eyes. Mahārathīs such as
Duryodhana and others will think that you have fled the
battlefield out of fear. ‘It must be due to fear, not
affection for his relatives, that a kṣatriya becomes
averse to fighting while on the battlefield.’ They will
only consider your position in this way.”




Śloka 36

                             123
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




avācya-vādāṁś ca bahūn

vadiṣyanti tavāhitāḥ

nindantas tava sāmarthyaṁ

tato duḥkhataraṁ nu kim

tava—your; ahitāḥ—enemies; vadiṣyanti—will say; bahūn—
many; avācya—harsh; vādān—words; ca—also; nindantaḥ—
criticising; tava—your; sāmarthyam—ability; kim—what? nu
—indeed; (is) duḥkha-taram—more painful; tataḥ—than
this.

Your enemies will scorn you with many harsh words, while
criticising your ability. What could be more painful for
you than this?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Avācya-vādān implies the use of harsh words, such as
‘eunuch’.




Śloka 37




hato vā prāpsyasi svargaṁ

jitvā vā bhokṣyase mahīm

tasmād uttiṣṭha kaunteya

yuddhāya kṛta-niścayaḥ

vā—either; hataḥ—being killed; prāpsyasi—you will
attain; svargam—the celestial kingdom; vā—or; jitvā—by
achieving victory; bhokṣyase—you shall enjoy; mahīm—the
earthly kingdom; tasmāt—therefore; uttiṣṭha—arise;
kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; kṛta-niścayaḥ—with
determination; yuddhāya—for battle.

O Kaunteya, if you are killed in the battle you will
attain Svarga, and if you are victorious you will enjoy
this earthly kingdom. Therefore, stand up and fight with
determination.




                            124
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If a question arises in the mind of Arjuna as to why he
should engage in battle when it is not certain that he
will win, Śrī Bhagavān responds by speaking this śloka
beginning with hataḥ.




Śloka 38




sukha-duḥkhe same kṛtvā

lābhālābhau jayājayau

tato yuddhāya yujyasva

naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi

kṛtvā—having made; sukha—happiness; duḥkhe—and distress;
lābha-alābhau—both gain and loss; jaya-ajayau—both
victory and defeat; same—to be equal; tataḥ—then;
yujyasva—fight; yuddhāya—for the sake of fighting; evam—
in this way; na avāpsyasi —you will not gain; pāpam—
sinful reaction.

Considering happiness and distress, gain and loss, and
victory and defeat to be equal, you should fight. In
this way you will not incur any sin.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “O Arjuna, fighting is your only
svadharma. If you doubt this and think that by fighting
you will incur sin, you should still accept My
instructions and fight. Through victory or defeat you
will either gain or lose a kingdom, and as a consequence
you will experience either happiness or distress.
Therefore, O Arjuna, deliberate with proper wisdom, and
fight, knowing both of them to be equal. You will not
incur sin as long as you are endowed with this
equanimity.” This subject is also described later in
Gītā (5.10): lipyate na sa pāpena padma-patram ivāmbhasā

Just as a lotus leaf remains in water but never becomes
wet, similarly, though engaged in battle, you will not
incur sin.




                           125
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In Gītā (1.36) Arjuna is thinking, “I will incur sin by
killing them.” In speaking this śloka , Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
refuting Arjuna’s argument as baseless. The question of
incurring sin by killing one’s relatives in battle
arises only because of attachment to happiness and
distress. “I am explaining t o you the means by which
you can become free from sin. Sin will not touch you if
you perform your svadharma of fighting as per My
instructions, considering happiness, distress, gain,
loss, victory and defeat as equal.” One becomes sinful
or bound by action (karma ) if he is attached to the
fruits of his actions. Therefore, it is certainly
necessary to renounce attachment to karma . This
conclusion has been established in Gītā (5.10): brahmaṇy
ādhāya karmāṇi saṅgaṁ tyaktvā karoti yaḥ

lipyate na sa pāpena

padma-patram ivāmbhasā

Those who give up all attachments to karma (work), and
surrender all the results of their karma unto Me,
Parameśvara, do not become affected by sin, just as a
lotus leaf remains untouched by water.




Śloka 39



eṣā te ‘bhihitā sāṅkhye

buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛṇu

buddhyā yukto yayā pārtha

karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi

pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; (I have) abhihitā—explained; te—
to you; eṣā—this; buddhiḥ—knowledge; sāṅkhye—regarding
sāṅkhya-yoga ; tu—but; śṛṇu—now hear; imām—this
(knowledge); yuktaḥ—connected; yoge—in bhakti-yoga ;
yayā buddhyā—with which knowledge; prahāsyasi—you shall
be freed from; karma-bandham—bondage of the material
world.

O Pārtha, thus far I have explained this knowledge of
sāṅkhya-yoga, but now I will impart to you the science
of bhakti-yoga, by which you will become freed from the
bondage of this material world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī

                            126
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




At this point Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “Until now I have
instructed you in jñāna-yoga. I am concluding My
instructions on jñ āna-yoga with this śloka beginning
with the word eṣā. That which properly illuminates the
tattva of an object is called sāṅkhya (complete
knowledge). That intelligence with which you must act
has been explained here by the word eṣā. Now hear about
the intelligence required to act for bhakti-yoga.” Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s statement in which yayā is used explains that
when a person is endowed with intelligence related to
bhakti , he will become freed from bondage to this
material world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is concluding His explanation of
sāṅkhya-yoga and beginning His instructions on buddhi-
yoga , or bhakti-yoga . Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura defines
sāṅkhya-yoga as follows: samyak khyāyate prakāśyate
vastu tattvam aneneti sāṅkhyaṁ samyaj j ñ ānam. “That
which properly illuminates the tattva of an object is
called sāṅkhya-yoga . Sāṅkhya-yoga gives complete
knowledge about the tattva of the ātmā and anātmā (an
inert object).” From the śloka , na tv evāham (Gītā
2.12) to dehī nityam (Gītā 2.30), various facets of
ātma-tattva have been explained, and from svadharmam api
cāvekṣya (Gītā 2.31) to sukha-duḥkhe (Gītā 2.38),
knowledge other than ātma-tattva (anātma-tattva ), that
is, knowledge of svadharma , has been explained. When
one performs niṣkāma-karma (selfless activities) with
buddhi-yoga related to bhakti , he becomes free from the
bondage of karma , that is, his bondage to the material
world is destroyed. This conclusion is verified in Śrī
Īśopaniṣad (1.1): īśāvāsyam idam sarvaṁ

yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat

tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā

mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam

Everything moving and non-moving in the entire universe
is pervaded or enjoyed by Parameśvara, the Supreme
Controller.

All moving and non-moving objects in this world are to
be enjoyed only by Parameśvara, the sole enjoyer of this
world. Jīvas are servants of Bhagavān. They should
engage in service to Him using this universe as an
instrument, and should maintain their lives accepting
His remnants. The supreme duty of the jīvas is to render
loving service to Śrī Bhagavān (bhagavat-sevā) with His
property, without desiring to accept that property as
the object of their own enjoyment. In this way, the

                           127
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

jīvas do not become bound by their karma (actions).

kurvann eveha karmāṇi

jijīviṣec chataṁ samāḥ

evaṁ tvayi nānyatheto ‘sti



na karma lipyate nare

Śrī Īśopaniṣad 1.2

One may aspire to live for hundreds of years if he
continuously goes on working in that way, for that sort
of work will not bind him to the law of karma. There is
no alternative to this for mankind.




Śloka 40



nehābhikrama-nāśo ‘sti

pratyavāyo na vidyate



svalpam apy asya dharmasya

trāyate mahato bhayāt

abhikrama—endeavours; iha—in this bhakti-yoga ; asti—
there is; na—no; nāśaḥ—destruction; vidyate—there is; na
—no; pratyavāyaḥ—diminution; api—even; su-alpam—a very
little; asya dharmasya—of this yoga ; trāyate—frees
(one); mahataḥ—from great; bhayāt—fear.

Endeavours on the path of bhakti-yoga are neither
fruitless nor subject to loss. Even a little progress
frees one from great fear in the form of this material
world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Yoga (buddhi-yoga) is of two types: (1) bhakti-yoga in
the form of hearing and chanting; and (2) bhagavad-
arpita-niṣkāma-kar ma-yoga which entails surrendering
the fruits of one’s selfless actions to Śrī Bhagavān. In
Gītā (2.47), Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “O Arjuna, you have the
qualification only to perform action (karma ).” Now,
before karma-yoga , bhakti-yoga is being delineated.
Gītā (2.45) states, “O Arjuna, situate yourself beyond

                             128
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the three modes of material nature.” This statement
certainly refers to bhakti as being beyond the three
modes because only by bhakti can a person transcend the
modes of nature. This is well known from the Eleventh
Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam . Jñ āna and karma are
described as sāttvika and rājasika respectively, which
proves that they are not beyond the three modes of
nature.

Bhagavad-arpita-niṣkāma-karma-yoga is bhakti which is
characterised by offering the fruits of one’s karma to
Śrī Bhagavān. It does not allow the karma to go in vain,
as is the case with the performance of karma that is not
offered to Bhagavān. However, due to the lack of
bhakti’s predominance in such activities, they are not
accepted as actual bhakti . If karma , in which the
fruits are offered to Śrī Bhagavān, were also described
as bhakti , then what would constitute karma ? If one
says that karma is only action, that is not offered to
Śrī Bhagavān, it is not correct. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(1.5.12) states that one of the characteristics of
brahma (the effulgence of Śrī Bhagavān) is that it is
niṣkarma (inactive) and, being identical with the mood
of inactivity, is called naiṣkarmya. When even brahma-jñ
āna , knowledge of brahma which is niṣkāma (without any
material motive) and nirdoṣa (faultless), is not
praiseworthy, being devoid of bhakti , then how can
sakāma and niṣkāma-karma , if not offered to Bhagavān,
be praiseworthy, since they are troublesome in the
stages of both sādhana (practice) and sādhya (the goal)?

According to the above-mentioned statement spoken by Śrī
Nārada (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.12), karma which is not
offered to Śrī Bhagavān is useless. Therefore, only that
bhakti characterised by hearing and chanting has been
accepted as the sādhana to attain th e sweetness of the
lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān. Nevertheless, niṣkāma-karma-
yoga which is offered to Śrī Bhagavān is also worthy of
consideration. Both types of yoga (bhakti-yoga and
niṣkāma-karma-yoga ) are to be understood by the word
buddhi-yoga . This is evident from the statements of
Bhagavad-gītā such as, “I bestow upon them that buddhi-
yoga by which they can attain Me,” (Gītā 10.10) and, “O
Dhanañjaya, compared to buddhi-yoga , sakāma-karma
(action with fruitive desire) is very insignificant”
(Gītā 2.49).

Now, in this śloka beginning with neha, the glory of
nirguṇa-bhakti (bhakti free from the modes), which is
characterised by śravaṇam and kīrtanam , is being
explained. Śrī Bhagavān says, “The benefit that comes
from even the initial steps of bhakti-yoga can never be
destroyed, and thus it does not have the adverse effect
of becoming lost. Conversely, if one starts to perform
karma-yoga but does not complete it, the result of
whatever karma has been performed is lost, and the fault
of irregularity is incurred.”

The question may be raised, “Can the result of bhakti be
attained by those who have the desire to follow the
process, but are unable to perform it properly?” Śrī
Kṛṣṇa responds to this by saying svalpam , which means
that even if the practice of bhakti has only just begun,
the result is never lost and it will deliver one from

                           129
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the danger of this material world. The life histories of
Ajāmila and others are evidenc e of this. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (6.16.44) also states that just by once
hearing Śrī Bhagavān’s name, even a caṇḍāla is freed
from the great fear caused by material existence.
Moreover in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.29.20) it is stated:
na hy aṅgopakrame dhvaṁso

mad-dharmasyoddhavāṇv api

mayā vyavasitaḥ samyaṅ

nirguṇatvād anāśiṣaḥ

O Uddhava, because I have deliberately determined the
transcendental nature of this process, even if niṣkāma-
dharma or pure bhakti in the form of hearing and
chanting is improperly performed, there is no
possibility of the slightest loss.

The purport of these statements of Bhagavad-gītā and
Bhāgavatam seems to be the same, but the above statement
of Bhāgavatam has a special characteristic: since a
transcendental object or activity is nirguṇa , it is
never lost. This is the only point which is worthy of
deliberation in this context. One may argue that
niṣkāma-karma-yoga , if offered to Śrī Bhagavān, can
also become nirguṇa by His grace. But it is not a fact.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.15.23) gives evidence of this:
“Nitya and naimittika (obligatory and occasional)
activities which are performed without any fruitive
desire and offered to Me are considered sāttvika .” In
other words, they are not transcendental to the three
modes.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here, buddhi-yoga is described as being of two types.
The first is bhakti-yoga , in the form of hearing and
chanting, and the second is niṣkāma-karma-yoga wherein
the results of karma are offered to Śrī Bhagavān. Of
these two, the first is mukhya (primary) and the second
is gauṇa (secondary and related to the guṇas ) bhakti-
yoga. In fact, bhakti-yoga is completely nirguṇa ,
transcendental to the modes. No irregularities, faults
or unwanted reactions can occur at the beginning or in
the course of one’s practice of bhakti-yoga , even if
for some reason, one is unable to complete it. Rather, a
little performance of bhakti-yoga delivers the performer
from the terrible dangers of the material world and
makes his life successful by giving him the service of
Śrī Bhagavān.

The following example can be cited. Because Bharata
Mahārāja became attached to a deer, he was not able to
complete the full process of bhakti in that life. In his
next birth, although he took the body of a deer, the
influence of his previous life’s performance of bhakti

                            130
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

enabled him to associate with śuddha-bhaktas of
Bhagavān. Taking birth again, he became an uttama-
bhāgavata and performed service to Śrī Bhagavān.
Therefore, Bhagavān says in Gītā (6.40): pārtha naiveha
nāmutra vināśas tasya v idyate. “A person who has fallen
from the path of bhakti is never lost in this world or
in the next, nor does he obtain a miserable condition.”

On the other hand, in bhagavad-arpita-niṣkāma-karma-yoga
, even if niṣkāma-karma-yoga is offered to Bhagavān, it
is still referred to as karma-yoga , not bhakti-yoga .
By first performing karma-yoga , the heart becomes
purified and eventually one attains bhakti-yoga .
Therefore, this karma-yoga only aims indirectly at
bhakti from far away. Unlike pure bhakti , however,
karma-yoga is not nirguṇa (free from the guṇas ).
Rather, it is called karma in sattva-guṇa . Moreover, if
this karma is not performed perfectly or, if it is left
incomplete, it may become lost and some unwanted
reactions will be incurred. However, as stated in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.23): mad-arpaṇaṁ niṣphalaṁ vā
sāttvikaṁ nija-karma tat.span> If a sādhaka even begins
to perform this bhakti-yoga slightly, but due to his own
incapability leaves the path, or his practices cease due
to his sudden, untimely death, either in the beginning
or intermediate stage, his endeavours in bhakti will
never go in vain. In other words, neither do his
endeavours become faulty nor does he incur any sin even
if he is unable to complete the process. In his next
life, the sādhaka will continue from that same point
where his performance of bhakti-yoga was obstructed. The
presiding Deity of bhakti-yoga , Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or Bhakti-
devī herself, make all these arrangements. In this
context, there is one important point to note. Although
a sādhaka has faith, if there are some irregularities in
his performance due to ignorance of the process, the
results of bhakti-yoga will never be lost nor does he
incur sin. However, if someone offends guru , Vaiṣṇavas
or tadīya-vastu (that which belongs or is related to Śrī
Bhagavān such as Tulasī, Yamunā or the dhāma ), his
bhakti-yoga can be completely ruined.




Śloka 41



vyavasāyātmikā buddhir

ekeha kuru-nandana

bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca

buddhayo ‘vyavasāyinām

kuru-nandana—O beloved child of the Kurus; buddhiḥ—
intelligence; iha—on this path of bhakti ; (is)
vyavasāya-ātmikā—resolute; (and) ekā—one-pointed; hi—
certainly; buddhayaḥ—the intelligence; avyavasāyinām—of
the irresolute; (is) bahu-śākhāḥ—many-branched; ca—and;
anantāḥ—without a conclusion.

                           131
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


O Kuru-nandana, the intelligence of those who are on
this path of bhakti is resolute and one-pointed, but the
intelligence of those who are averse to bhakti is many-
branched and inconclusive.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




When compared to all other types of intelligence, that
intelligence whose aim and object is bhakti-yoga is
supreme. Bhagavān explains this by speaking the above
śloka beginning with the word vyavasāya : “Resolute
intelligence in bhakti-yoga is one-pointed.” He
describes the characteristic mood of one who possesses
such intelligence as follows: “The instructions that my
Gurudeva has given me about śravaṇam , kīrtanam ,
smaraṇam , pāda-sevanam , etc.

of Śrī Bhagavān are my very sādhana , my very sādhya and
my very life. I am unable to relinquish them in either
the sādhana stage or in sād hya . My single desire and
only engagement is to follow them. Besides this, I have
no other desire or engagement, even in my dreams. There
is no loss for me, whether by following these
instructions I attain happiness or misery, or whether my
material life is destroyed or not.” This type of
resolute intelligence is possible only in pure bhakti
which is free from hypocrisy and cheating. It is said in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.28): tato bhajeta māṁ bhaktyā
śraddhālur dṛḍha-niścayaḥspan>


Knowing that all perfection is achieved through My
bhakti alone, a man of resolute faith will perform My
bhajana with devotion.

Only by bhakti can intelligence become one-pointed. Śrī
Bhagavān further explains this by also referring to
bahu-śākhāḥ, that which has many branches. Because there
are unlimited types of desires in karma-yoga ,
intelligence applied to it is also of unlimited types.
Similarly, because there are unlimited varieties of
sādhana in karma-yoga , it has unlimited branches. In
the initial stage of jñ āna-yoga one fixes one’s
intelligence in niṣkāma-karma to purify the heart. When
the heart is purified, the sādhaka fixes his
intelligence in karma-sannyāsa , the renunciation of
fruitive karma . Having attained this stage, one fixes
one’s intelligence in jñ āna . When one realises that
even jñ āna is unsuccessful and unable to grant service
to the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān, one fixes one’s
intelligence in bhakti . In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.19.1)
it is said: jñ ānaṁ ca mayi sannyaset. “Jñ āna must also
be renounced to attain Me.”

According to the above statement of Śrī Bhagavān, after
attaining the stage of jñāna , one has to fix one’s
intelligence in jñ āna-sannyāsa (the renunciation of jñ

                           132
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

āna ). Thus, intelligence is of unlimited varieties.
Since karma , jñ āna and bhakti all ought to be
performed, their branches are also unlimited.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Of the three types of buddhi-yoga: karma, jñ āna and
bhakti , only that buddhi (intelligence) which is
related to pure bhakti-yoga is supreme. The exclusive
aim and object of mukhya-bhakti-yoga is Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and that intelligence which is
related only to Him is called aikāntikī or ananyā (one-
pointed or exclusive). The sādhakas of such aikāntika-
bhakti are free from the desires for mundane enjoyment,
mokṣa and from duplicity, therefore their intelligence
is resolute. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
comments on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.28). “They
resolutely think, ‘Even if there are millions of
obstacles in the performance of my bhajana , even if I
lose my life, or if I have to go to hell because of
offenses or if lust overpowers me, I can never give up
bhakti , whatever the circumstance may be. I will not
perform jñ āna and karma , even if Brahmā himself orders
me to. Under no circumstances can I give up bhakti .’
Only this type of determination can be called
niścayātmikā buddhi .”

Due to lack of such exclusive niṣṭhā in Bhagavān, a
person’s intelligence remains engaged in karma-yoga and
jñana-yoga. His intelligence is called many-branched
because of a variety of aims and objectives, such as the
pleasures in this world or the next related to profit
(lābha ), adoration (pūjā) and distinction (pratiṣṭhā).
His intelligence is filled with unlimited desires.

According to the Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, Bhagavān Himself is
the nondual, conscious Supreme Absolute Reality. He is
called nirguṇa , being simultaneously beyond the
material qualities of sattva , rajas and tamas , and
endowed with all transcendental qualities such as
aiśvarya (opulence), mādhurya (sweetness), dayā
(compassion) and bhakta-vātsalya (affection for His
bhaktas ). However, modern people who are uneducated,
bereft of tattvajñ āna , whose intelligence is covered
by illusion and who consider brahma to be without
transformations (nirvikāra ), without variety (nirviśeṣa
) and untainted (nirañjana ), accept Him as nirguṇa in
only a mundane sense .

They consider the līlā-avatāras of Bhagavān to be brahma
but covered by māyā, and that His svarūpa and qualities,
such as compassion, are therefore material like their
own. They say that by worshipping saguṇabrahma (brahma
full of material qualities) their hearts will gradually
become purified and they will become one with
nirguṇabrahma (brahma devoid of material qualities). The
establishment of such conclusions is as useless as
trying to hit the sky because śāstras such as the

                           133
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhagavad-gītā, which describe the transcendental form
and characteristics of Śrī Bhagavān, refute this
despicable concept in all cases. Therefore, pure
devotion for nirguṇabrahma (Kṛṣṇa), who is endowed with
all transcendental qualities, is called nirguṇa-bhakti .
In Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī’s commentary on Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (3.29.11), he explains nirguṇa-bhakti to be
of one kind only, aikāntika (one-pointed). Śrīla
Śukadeva Gosvāmī has stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.29.7-10) that because sakāma-bhakti is performed with
various material desires, it has unlimited branches such
as tāmasika-sakāma-bhakti .




Śloka 42




yām imāṁ puṣpitāṁ vācaṁ

pravadanty avipaścitaḥ

veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha

nānyad astīti vādinaḥ

pārtha—O Pārtha; avipaścitaḥ—the unwise; (who are) veda-
vāda-ratāḥ—attached to the statements of the Vedas ;
pravadanti—proclaim; yām imām—all these; puṣpitām—
flowery; vācam—statements; vādinaḥ—they say; iti—thus;
asti—there is; na anyat—nothing else.

O Pārtha, those who are foolish reject the real meanings
of the Vedas out of attachment to those ornamental
statements which glorify the pursuit of celestial
pleasures, but which yield only poisonous effects. They
say there is no higher truth (īśvara-tattva) than these.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The irresolute sakāma-karmīs (persons with material
desires) are extremely dull-witted. To explain this, Śrī
Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with yām imām . The
phrase puṣpitāṁ vācaḥ implies that these statements of
the Vedas are only temporarily pleasing, just like
flowery creepers that are ultimately poisonous.
Pravadanti refers to those who in all respects accept
such Vedic statements as the summum bonum. Those whose
hearts have been captivated by such statements have no
resolute intelligence. This śloka is in natural sequence
with Gītā 2.44: bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānām. It is
impossible for such people to have resolute
intelligence, s o it is not for them that this
instruction is given. What to speak of not having

                           134
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

resolute intelligence, Śrī Bhagavān even says that they
are fools, avipaścitaḥ. This is because they accept as
the ultimate objective of the Vedas the declaration of
flowery statements such as, “By performing the
cāturmāsya-vrata one will attain imperishable results,”
or, “After drinking soma-rasa one becomes immortal.”
They also speculate that beyond this there is no truth,
such as īśvara-tattva .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The prime objective established in the Vedas is Svayam
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His prema-bhakti . If one does
not understand this prime objective of the Vedas , one’s
transcendental faith and intelligence will be
inappropriately placed in their apparent, e xterior
meanings which initially appear very attractive and
sweet to the ear but which deliver a fearsome result.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa has further clarified in Gītā 2.45: traiguṇya-
viṣayā vedāḥ. Also in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.47) one is
warned to be careful of the assertions of the Vedas :
tasmāt karmasu barhiṣmann

ajñānād artha-kāśiṣu

mārtha-dṛṣṭiṁ kṛthāḥ śrotra—

sparśiṣv aspṛṣṭa-vastuṣu


O Prācīnabarhiṣat, to ignorant vision, the ritualistic
activities mentioned in the Vedas appear as the ultimate
objective. Though their accounts are alluring to the
ear, in fact they are devoid of any connection with the
Absolute Truth. Therefore, disregard them.




Śloka 43




kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parā

janma-karma-phala-pradām

kriyā-viśeṣa-bahulāṁ

bhogaiśvarya-gatiṁ prati

kāma-ātmānaḥ—having lusty natures; (they perform)
bahulām—many; kriyā-viśeṣa—pompous Vedic rituals;
svarga-parāḥ—dedicated to entering heaven; prati—
towards; gatim—the goal; bhoga—of sense enjoyment;
aiśvarya—and opulence; (which) pradām—result; janma-

                           135
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

karma-phala —in good birth and fruitive results.

Those whose hearts are contaminated by lust perform many
pompous ceremonies to attain Svarga-loka, thinking these
to be the highest objective of the Vedas. Though leading
to enjoyment and opulence, such rituals bind their
followers in the cycle of birth and death.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




What type of statements do these people follow? In
response, it is said that by analysing the profit and
loss of such Vedic rituals, they establish how to
increase those activities which will give them bhoga
(enjoyment) and aiśvarya , even though such activities
result in birth and death.




Śloka 44




bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ

tayāpahṛta-cetasām

vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ

samādhau na vidhīyate

prasaktānām—for those who are attached; bhoga—to
enjoyment; aiśvarya—and opulence; apahṛta-cetas ām—whose
minds are captivated; tayā—by those (words of the Vedas
); na vidhīyate—there does not take place; vyavasāya-
ātmikā—the resolute; buddhiḥ—intelligence; samādhau—in
trance on the Supreme.

Those who are attached to enjoyment and opulence, whose
minds have been captivated by celestial happiness, do
not attain the resolute intelligence for exclusive
absorption in Bhagavān.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those whose minds have been captivated by such flowery
statements become attached to enjoyment and opulence.
Such persons are not able to attain samādhi or
concentration of the mind; they lack that resolute

                           136
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

intelligence which reposes only in Parameśvara.




Śloka 45




traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā

nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna

nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho

niryoga-kṣema ātmavān

arjuna—O Arjuna; vedāḥ—the Vedic; viṣayāḥ—subject
matter; (is) trai-guṇya—pertaining to the modes of
material nature; bhava—be; nistraiguṇyaḥ—beyond the
three modes; nirdvandvaḥ—be free from duality; (and)
nitya-sattva-sthaḥ—situated in pure goodness or
spiritual existence; (be) niryoga-kṣemaḥ—detached from
the tendency to preserve and acquire; ātma-vān—and be
endowed with intelligence given by Me.

O Arjuna, rise above the modes described in the Vedas
and become established in nirguṇatattva. Be free from
all dualities such as honour and dishonour, and do not
worry about profit and loss. Become situated in śuddha-
sattva by using the intelligence awarded by Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Becoming detached from the means to attain catur-varga
(dharma , artha , kāma and mokṣa ), only take shelter of
bhakti-yoga .” Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka
beginning with the word traiguṇya , because the
predominant subject matters of the Vedas illuminate
karma , jñ āna , etc., which are under the guṇas . The
meaning of the word traiguṇya is formed with the suffix
‘ṣyañ ’. Since, in the Vedas , there are excessive
descriptions of karma and jñ āna , according to the
logic of bhūmnā vyapadeśā bhavanti (wherein the title is
based on the predominating composition), the Vedas are
called traiguṇya (pertaining to the three modes of
nature). Only bhakti , however, can take one to Śrī
Bhagavān. This is the verdict of the Māṭhara-śruti . The
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad states: yasya deve parā bhaktir
yathā deve tathā gurau. “The meaning of the Vedas can
only be revealed to one who has the same transcendental
bhakti to both Śrī Bhagavān and his gurudeva .”

Nirguṇa-bhakti is the only subject matter of the smṛtis,
such as the Pañcar ātra and the Upaniṣads , including
the Gītopaniṣad and Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad . If it is

                           137
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

accepted that bhakti is not described in the Vedas ,
bhakti will become unauthoritative. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa
directs Arjuna to become free from the Vedic injunctions
of jñ āna and karma , which are under the influence of
the guṇas . He tells him not to perform them, but to
always follow the process for achieving bhakti as stated
in the Vedas . It is mentioned in Brahma-yāmala Purāṇa ,
“The pretentious display of exclusive hari-bhakti ,
neglecting the process of pañcar ātra recommended in
śruti , smṛti and the Purāṇas , etc., results only in
eventual disturbance.” This mistake or fault is
inexcusable.

Those subject matters of the Vedas, that pertain to the
guṇas (saguṇa ) and those that are beyond the guṇas
(guṇātīta ) are called respectively traiguṇya (with the
three guṇas ) and nistraiguṇya (free from the three
guṇas ). Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “Of the two, pursue only
nistraiguṇya . Become free from the three guṇas by the
influence of My nirguṇa-bhakti . Only then will you
become free from dualities such as honour and dishonour.
Therefore, remain exclusively in the association of My
bhaktas who are always situated in nitya-sattva .”

Here, the explanation of how to become situated in
viśuddha (nitya ) sattva-guṇa will contradict the
explanation on becoming free from the guṇas . To achieve
that which is lacking is called yoga , and to protect
that which one possesses is called kṣema . By the word
niryoga-kṣema , Śrī Bhagavān is telling Arjuna to become
free from the concern for both yoga and kṣema . “Upon
becoming overpowered by the taste for My bhakti-rasa ,
yoga and kṣema will not be a cause for concern.” When
Śrī Bhagavān states in Gītā (9.22), “I personally carry
yoga and kṣema ,” He is displaying His affection for His
bhaktas by stating, “Because I carry their burden of
maintenance there is no need for them to separately
endeavour for it.” Ātmavān means ‘become a person
endowed with intelligence granted by Me.’

Now the words nistraiguṇya and traiguṇya are being
discussed. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.23-29) it is
said: mad-arpaṇaṁ niṣphalaṁ vā

sāttvikaṁ nija-karma tat

rājasaṁ phala-saṅkalpaṁ

hiṁsā-prāyādi-tāmasam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.23

Know that niṣkāma-karma offered to Śrī Bhagavān is in
sattva-guṇa. That action which is performed with a
desire for the fruit is in rajo-guṇa, while action
performed with violence or envy is in tamo-guṇa.

In the above śloka (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.23)
niṣphalaṁ vā implies naimittika-karma (work which is
occasional), performed without fruitive desires.


kaivalyaṁ sāttvikaṁ jñānaṁ


                             138
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

rajo vaikalpikaṁ ca yat

prākṛtaṁ tāmasaṁ jñānaṁ

man-niṣṭhaṁ nirguṇaṁ smṛtam


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.24

Jñāna related to the self (kaivalyam) which is beyond
the conception of the body, is sāttvika. Jñ āna related
to the body (the false conception of ‘I’ and ‘mine’,
considering oneself to be the doer and the enjoyer) is
rājasika. Jñ āna of inert matter, the mundane world or
the body is tāmasika, while jñ āna related to Me is
nirguṇa.

vanaṁ tu sāttviko vāso

grāmo rājasa ucyate

tāmasaṁ dyūta-sadanaṁ

man-niketaṁ tu nirguṇam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.25

To live in the forest is in sattva-guṇa, to live in the
village is in rajo-guṇa, to live in a gambling house
(city) is in tamo-guṇa and to live where I live (the
temple) is nirguṇa.

sāttvikaḥ kārako ‘saṅgī

rāgāndho rājasaḥ smṛtaḥ

tāmasaḥ smṛti-vibhraṣṭo

nirguṇo mad-apāśrayaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.26

The doer who is not attached to the result is in sattva-
guṇa, the doer who is blinded by attachment is in rajo-
guṇa, the doer who has lost his memory is in tamo-guṇa
and the doer who has taken complete shelter of Me is
nirguṇa.


sāttviky ādhyātmikī śraddhā

karma-śraddhā tu rājasī

tāmasy adharme yā śraddhā

mat-sevāyāṁ tu nirguṇā


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.27

Faith related to the self is in sattva-guṇa, faith
related to karma (action) is in rajo-guṇa, faith related
to irreligious activities is in tamo-guṇa and faith
related to My service is nirguṇa.

                             139
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


pathyaṁ pūtam anāyas tam

āhāryaṁ sāttvikaṁ smṛtam

rājasaṁ cendriya-preṣṭhaṁ

tāmasaṁ cārtidāśuci

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.28

Food which is wholesome, pure and easily available is in
sattva-guṇa. Food which is pungent, sour and gives
pleasure to the senses is in rajo-guṇa. Food which is
impure and the cause of misery is in tamo-guṇa and that
food which is offered to Me is nirguṇa.

According to Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī, the word ca in the
above mentioned śloka (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.28) means
that that which is offered to Śrī Bhagavān is nirguṇa .

sāttvikaṁ sukham ātmotthaṁ

viṣayotthaṁ tu rājasam

tāmasaṁ moha-dainyotthaṁ

nirguṇaṁ mad-apāśrayam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.29

Happiness which comes from the self is in sattva-guṇa,
that which comes from sense objects is in rajo-guṇa,
that which comes from delusion and depravity is in tamo-
guṇa and that happiness which comes in relation to Me is
nirguṇa.

After explaining objects which exemplify the three guṇas
in the above-mentioned Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam ślokas
(11.25.23- 29), Śrī Bhagavān further explains how to
attain perfection in realising the nature (nis
traiguṇya-bhāva ) of an object which is beyond the three
guṇas (nirguṇa-vastu ). He says that only by performing
nirguṇa-bhakti can one conquer the influence of the
guṇas that exist within oneself. This is stated in the
following ślokas :


dravyaṁ deśaḥ phalaṁ kālo

jñānaṁ karma ca kārakaḥ

śraddhāvasthākṛtir niṣṭhā

traiguṇyaḥ sarva eva hi


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.30

Everything material such as the substance, place,
results, time, knowledge, action, the agent, faith,
situation, form and determination are all traiguṇya.

sarve guṇamayā bhāvāḥ

                             140
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


puruṣāvyakta-dhiṣṭhitāḥ

dṛṣṭaṁ śrutaṁ anudhyātaṁ

buddhyā vā puruṣarṣabha

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.31

O best of human beings, whatever states of being that
are heard, seen or conceived, which exist between the
puruṣa (the enjoying self) and prakṛti (material
nature), are comprised of the three modes of nature.

etāḥ saṁsṛtayaḥ puṁso

guṇa-karma-nibandhanāḥ

yeneme nirjitāḥ saumya

guṇā jīvena citta-jāḥ

bhakti-yogena man-niṣṭho

mad-bhāvāya prapadyate

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.32

O gentle one, all material conditions of the living
entity (puruṣa) are born from action performed in the
three guṇas. Only those jīvas who, by practising bhakti-
yoga, have conquered these modes manifested in the citta
become endowed with niṣṭhā and are able to attain Me.

Therefore, only by nirguṇa-bhakti can one conquer the
three guṇas and not by any other means. In response to
the question asked in Gītā (14.21): kathaṁ caitāṁs trīn
guṇān ativartate , “How can one conquer the guṇas of
material nature?” Then it is said later in Gītā (14.26):
māṁ ca yo ‘vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahmabhūyāya kalpate

Only those who render service to Me with aikāntika-
bhakti-yoga can transcend the three gunas and become
qualified to realise brahma.

In his commentary on this śloka (Gītā 14.26) Śrīla
Śrīdhara Svāmī says, “Ca is an emphatic. That is, those
who exclusively perform aikāntika-bhakti (unflinching
devotional service) to Me, Parameśvara, can conqu er all
the guṇas .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa are called catur-varga

                             141
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(the four goals of human life). Bhakti is the fifth goal
(pañcama-puruṣārtha ). Although in śāstras such as the
Vedas the paths of karma , jñ āna and bhakti have been
instructed as the sādhana for the jīvas , one can only
attain Śrī Bhagavān by giving up all other paths and
engaging exclusively in viśuddha-bhakti . This is also
made clear by studying these two ślokas from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam : bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ

śraddhayātmā priyaḥ satām

bhaktiḥ punāti man-niṣṭhā

śva-pākān api sambhavāt

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.14.21

I can only be attained through bhakti performed with
full faith. I am naturally dear to My bhaktas who take
Me as the exclusive goal of their bhajana. Even the dog-
eaters can purify themselves of their lower birth by
performing bhajana to Me.

na sādhayati māṁ yogo

na sāṅkhyaṁ dharma uddhava

na svādhyāyas tapas tyāgo

yathā bhaktir mamorjitā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.14.20

O Uddhava! Yoga, sāṅkhya, study of the Vedas, tapasya
and dāna (charity) cannot overpower Me as does intense
bhakti performed solely to attain Me.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “In śāstra there are
two types of subjects: uddiṣṭa and nirdiṣṭa . The
subject which is the highest objective of any śāstra is
called uddiṣṭa-viṣaya . That instruction which indicates
uddiṣṭa-viṣaya is called nirdiṣṭa-viṣaya . For example,
because it is so dim, it is very difficult to see the
Arundhatī star in the sky without assistance. If
someone’s objective is to see it, he must first take an
indication from the biggest star closest to it. So, if
Arundhatī is the uddiṣṭa-viṣaya , the biggest star
closest to it is the nirdiṣṭa-viṣaya . All the Vedas
indicate nirguṇatattva to be the uddiṣṭa-viṣaya .
Because nirguṇatattva cannot be understood immediately,
the Vedas first describe saguṇatattva (reality with the
guṇas ) which is the nirdiṣṭa-viṣaya . Thus, māyā,
consisting of the three modes, sattva , rajas and tamas
, initially appears to be the subject matter of the
Vedas . ‘O Arjuna, do not remain entangled in this
nirdiṣṭa-viṣaya . Rather, attain nirguṇatattva , or that
which is indicated to be the uddiṣṭatattva , and become
free from the guṇas . Some parts of the Vedic
literatures describe karma in rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa.
Other parts describe jñ āna in sattva-guṇa , and in
specific places there is a description of nirguṇa-bhakti
. You should attain nitya-sattva (pure spiritual
existence) by becoming free from dualities such as
honour and dishonour. In other words, by associating

                             142
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

with My bhaktas , renounce the endeavour for yoga
(acquisition) and kṣema (preservation) sought after by
the processes of jñ āna and karma and, by the process of
buddhi-yoga , become free from the modes of nature.’”




Śloka 46



yāvān artha udapāne

sarvataḥ samplutodake

tāvān sarveṣu vedeṣu

brāhmaṇasya vijānataḥ

yāvān—whatever; arthaḥ—purpose; (is served) uda-pāne—by
wells; (are) sarvataḥ—in all respects; sampluta-udake—
served by a large lake; tāvān—similarly; arthaḥ—the
purpose; sarveṣu—within all; vedeṣu—the Vedas ;
vijānataḥ brāhmaṇasya—is known by the learned brāhmaṇa .

All the purposes served by a variety of wells can easily
be fulfilled by a large lake. Similarly, whatever
results are attained by the worship of various devas as
described in the Vedas can easily be attained through
the worship of Bhagavān by a brāhmaṇa endowed with
bhakti.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa continues, “O, what more can I say about the
glories of that bhakti-yoga which is nirguṇa and niṣkāma
. Even initial endeavours in bhakti are neither lost nor
adverse in their effect.” Also in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.29.20) Śrī Kṛṣṇa has told Uddhava: na hy aṅgopakrame
dhvaṁso

mad-dharmasyoddhavāṇv api

mayā vyavasitaḥ samyaṅ

nirguṇatvād anāśiṣaḥ


O Uddhava, I have established the transcendental nature
of this dharma. If one engages in this selfless dharma
for My sake, there is not the least possibility that it
may lead to loss by fault or degradation.

However, in this context vyavasāyātmikā buddhi (resolute
intelligence) also indicates sakāma-bhakti-yoga . Śrī
Bhagavān uses an example to prove this when He speaks

                            143
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the śloka beginning with the word yāvān . Since udapāne
is a singular noun, it has been used here in a similar
case. Here, the word udapāne indicates a group of wells.
Many purposes are fulfilled by different wells. One well
is used for the purpose of cleaning after evacuation,
one for brushing teeth, one for washing cloth, one for
cleaning hair, one for bathing and one for drinking
water. These different purposes which are fulfilled by
various wells can all be fulfilled at one and the same
time by a large reservoir of water. It is laborious to
go to different wells for various purposes, but there is
no labour in going to one reservoir. Moreover, a small
well often has salty water, but water from a large lake
is sweet. One should deliberate on this difference
between a well and a lake. Similarly, the different
fruits one attains through worshipping various devas ,
by the procedures described in the Vedas can all be
attained simply by the worship of Śrī Bhagavān. The word
brāhmaṇasya means those who know brahma (Veda ). Only a
brāhmaṇa knows the Vedas but, beyond such knowledge, the
real brāhmaṇas are those who specifically know bhakti as
the ultimate meaning of the Vedas . In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.3.2) it is also said: brahma-varcasa-kāmas tu

yajeta brahmaṇaḥ patim

indram indriya-kāmas tu

prajā-kāmaḥ prajāpatīn

A person desiring the brahma effulgence should worship
Brahmā, the master of the Vedas. One desiring
satisfaction of the senses should worship Indra. A
person desiring progeny should worship the Prajāpatis,
while a person desiring wealth should worship Durgā.

After this it is said:

akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.10

Whether one is free from desires, full of desires or
desirous of mokṣa, one should, having attained a higher
intelligence, worship parama-puruṣa (Bhagavān) with
intense bhakti-yoga.

Just as the rays of the sun are very intense when the
sky is free from clouds, similarly bhakti-yoga, which is
devoid of jñ āna and karma , is also very intense. One’s
intelligence becomes many-branched by worshipping a
number of devas to fulfil various desires. Śrī Bhagavān,
however, can fulfil all of one’s desires . When even a
particle of such intelligence is engaged in worship, it
is considered to be one-pointed because of the
superlative nature of the object of worship.



                           144
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The various activities that can be performed by the use
of separate wells can all be performed by using a large
reservoir of water, such as a lake. Similarly, the
various desires which can be fulfilled by worshipping
different devas as directed in the Vedas can all be
fulfilled simply by worshipping Bhagavān. If the heart
is filled with many material desires, various devas are
worshipped to fulfil those desires. The resulting
intelligence, which is many-branched, is called
avyavasāyātmikā buddhi . In contrast to this, the
aikāntika (one-pointed) worship of Śrī Bhagavān is only
achieved by focused, resolute intelligence. For this
reason, knowers of the Vedas explain bhakti to be the
sole essence of the Vedas . Therefore, bhakti-yoga alone
is vyavasāyātmikā buddhi .




Śloka 47



karmaṇy evādhikāras te

mā phaleṣu kadācana

mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr

mā te saṅgo ‘stv akarmaṇi

eva—certainly; te—you have; adhikāraḥ—a right; karmaṇi—
to your prescribed duty; (you have) mā—no (right);
kadācana—at any time; phaleṣu—to the fruits of work;
(do) mā—not; bhūḥ—be; hetuḥ—motivated; karma-phala—
towards the results of work; te mā astu—you should not
have; saṅgaḥ—attachment; akarmaṇi—to not doing
prescribed duties.

You are eligible only to perform your prescribed work,
but you have no right to the fruits. You should not
consider yourself to be the cause of the result of your
actions, nor should you become attached to neglecting
your duties.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān, the instructor of jñāna-yoga, bhakti-yoga
and karma-yoga , has so far aimed His instructions about
jñ āna-yoga and bhakti-yoga towards His dear friend

                            145
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Arjuna. Now, having considered Arjuna’s anādhikāra
(ineligibility) to perform these two processes, He
explains niṣkāma-karma-yoga in two ślokas , the first
beginning with karmaṇi .

By the words mā phaleṣu, Kṛṣṇa intends to say that those
who desire the fruits of their actions have extremely
impure hearts. “Your heart, however, is almost pure. I
know this, and that is why I am speaking in this way.”
If one points out that any action one performs will bear
fruit, Śrī Bhagavān resp onds: mā karma-phala-hetur
bhūḥ. “A person becomes the cause of the fruit only when
he acts with a desire for it. You should not act like
that. I bless you not to fall into this category. Akarma
means neglecting prescribed duties and vikarma means
performing sinful activities. You should not become
attached to either of these. Rather, you should despise
them. I again bless you that you will be able to do
this.”

In Gītā (3.2), Arjuna says: vyāmiśreṇeva vākyena buddhiṁ
mohayasīva me. “My intelligence is bewil dered by Your
apparently ambiguous instructions.” From this it should
be understood that the previous statements of this
chapter are not entirely consistent with later
statements. But here, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s inner feelings (mano-
bhāva ) towards Arjuna are worth considering. “Just as I
have become your subordinate by acting as your chariot
driver, similarly you should also become a follower of
My order.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, gives instruction on niṣkāma-karma-
yoga for those who do not have the adhikāra
(eligibility) to follow the paths of jñ āna-yoga and
bhakti-yoga . In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.43) it is
stated: karmākarma vikarmeti veda-vādo na laukikaḥ. “An
understanding of karma , akarma , and vikarma can only
come from the Vedic literature, not from the words of
mundane persons.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“There are three types of karma to consider: karma ,
akarma and vikarma . Of these, two — namely vikarma
(engaging in sin-ful activities) and akarma (not
performing one’s svadharma ) — are extremely
inauspicious. You should not desire these. Give up
vikarma and akarma , and carefully follow the path of
karma . Karma is of three types: nitya-karma (daily
duties), naimittika-karma (occasional duties) and kāmya-
karma (fruitive activities). Of these three, kāmya-karma
is inauspicious. Those who perform kāmya-karma become
the cause of the fruit of their activities. So it is for
your benefit that I am telling you not to adopt kāmya-
karma , because if you do, you will become the cause of
the results of your actions. You have the right to
perform your prescribed duties, but you do not have the

                           146
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

right   to the fruits of any action. It is acceptable for
those   who take shelter of bhakti-yoga to perform nitya-
karma   and naimittika-karma solely in order to maintain
their   lives.”




Śloka 48




yoga-sthaḥ kuru karmāṇi

saṅgaṁ tyaktvā dhanañjaya

siddhy-asiddhyoḥ samo bhūtvā

samatvaṁ yoga ucyate

dhanañjaya—O Dhanañjaya; yoga-sthaḥ—being situated in
bhakti-yoga ; tyaktvā—abandoning; saṅgam—attachment;
kuru—perform; karmāṇi—prescribed duties; bhūtvā—
becoming; samaḥ—equipoised; siddhi-asiddhyoḥ—in success
and failure; samatvam—(such) equanimity; ucyate—is
called; yogaḥ—yoga.

O Dhanañjaya, in a devotional mood, give up attachment
to the fruits of karma, perform your prescribed duties
and become equipoised in success and failure. Such
equanimity is called yoga.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this śloka beginning with yoga-sthaḥ, Śrī Bhagavān
gives instructions on niṣkāma-karma . He says, “Become
equipoised in victory and defeat, and just perform your
prescribed duty of engaging in this battle.” The result
of this niṣkāma-karma-yoga is that it culminates in jñ
āna-yoga , and thus jñ āna-yoga is the purport of the
previous śloka and the following śloka .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Intelligence which is equipoised in the face of the
success or failure of one’s actions is called yoga.




                            147
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Śloka 49



dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma

buddhi-yogād dhanañjaya

buddhau śaraṇam anviccha

kṛpaṇāḥ phala-hetavaḥ

dhanañjaya—O Dhanañjaya; dūreṇa—(throw) far away; avaram
—inferior; karma—fruitive activity; hi—certainly;
buddhi-yogāt—by the yoga of intelligence; anviccha —
accept; śaraṇam—shelter; buddhau—of intelligence
(niṣkāma-karma ); phala-hetavaḥ—those desiring the
fruits of their activities; (are) kṛpaṇāḥ—misers.

O Dhanañjaya, because kāmya-karma is very much inferior,
take shelter of niṣkāma-karma-yoga that is offered to
the Lord. Those who desire the fruits of their karma are
misers.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In speaking this śloka beginning with the word dūreṇa ,
Śrī Bhagavān is criticising sakāma-karma or kāmya-karma
(fruitive activities). Kāmya-karma is avara (very
inferior) to niṣkāma -karma-yoga , which is offered to
Parameśvara and which is also called buddhi-yoga . Here,
the word buddhau implies niṣkāma-karma , while buddhi-
yoga implies niṣkāma-karma-yoga .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Kṛpaṇāḥ refers to those who are unable to understand the
meaning of niṣkāma-karma-yoga. Such people are attached
to the fruits of their activities, and consequently,
they are sometimes happy and sometimes distressed. This
topic has been explained at length in Bṛhad-āraṇyaka
Upaniṣad .

Once, there was a great assembly of realised sages,
mahārṣis and brahmarṣis in the royal court of Janaka
Mahārāja. Janaka Mahārāja, assisted by his royal servant
s, brought hundreds of milk-giving cows along with their
beautiful calves to that assembly. The horns of the cows
were encased in gold and their hooves in silver.
Beautiful cloth decorated with golden ornaments graced
their backs. Folding his hands, Janaka Mah ārāja

                           148
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

addressed the sages with great humility. “Whoever among
you is brahma-vettā (a knower of brahma ), I beg you to
come and accept these cows.”

All assembled there began to whisper amongst themselves.
No one dared come forward to establish himself as
brahma-vettā and take the cows. Again, Janaka Mahārāja
looked towards them, with all seriousness. This time the
mahārṣi Yāj ñavalkya got up and told his students, “O
brahmacārīs , take these cows to my āśrama .”

Hearing this, the other mahārṣis objected, saying, “Are
you brahma-vettā?”

Mahārṣi Yājñavalkya said, “I offer my obeisances at the
feet of those who are brahma-vettā. If you want to
examine me or ask any question, please do so.”

The various sages asked different questions and
Yājñavalkya Mahārṣi gave them befitting answers. At
last, the greatly learned Gārgī humbly inquired, “Who is
a kṛpaṇa and who is a brāhmaṇa ?”

Yājñavalkya Mahārṣi’s response to this was: yo vā etad
akṣaraṁ gārgy aviditvāsmāl lokāt praiti sa kṛpaṇaḥ
(Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 3.8.10). “O Gārgī, that person
is a kṛpaṇa (miser) who leaves this world without
knowing Śrī Bhagavān, who is Acyuta, the Infallible
Absolute Reality.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.9.49) it is said: na veda
kṛpaṇaḥ śreya ātmano guṇa-vastu-dṛk.span> “Kṛpaṇas are
those who consider that the ultimate reality consists
only of sense objects produced from the material modes.”
Furthermore, it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.19.44): kṛpaṇo yo ‘jitendriyaḥ. “A kṛpaṇa is a
person who has no control over his senses.”




Śloka 50




buddhi-yukto jahātīha

ubhe sukṛta-duṣkṛte

tasmād yogāya yujyasva

yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam

buddhi-yuktaḥ—a person endowed with intelligence; jahāti
—gives up; ubhe—both; sukṛta-duṣkṛte—pious and impious
actions; iha—in this birth; tasmāt—therefore; yujyasva—
strive; yogāya—for niṣkāma-karma-yoga ; (this) yogaḥ—
yoga ; (is) kauśalam—the art; karmasu—in (all)
activities.

One who practises buddhi-yoga gives up both pious and
impious actions in this very life. Therefore, strive for

                           149
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

niṣkāma-karma-yoga. Working under the shelter of buddhi-
yoga with equanimity is the art of work.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, the word yogāya refers to that yoga which
possesses the characteristics defined in Gītā 2.48.
Yujyasva means ‘make an endeavour’. It is niṣkāma-karma-
yoga (performing karma without personal motivation),
which is the essence of yoga , not sakāma-yoga .




Śloka 51



karma-jaṁ buddhi-yuktā hi

phalaṁ tyaktvā manīṣiṇaḥ

janma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ

padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam


hi—indeed; manīṣiṇaḥ—sages; buddhi-yuktāḥ—endowed with
buddhi ; tyaktvā—giving up; phalam—results; karma-jam—
born of fruitive activities; (are) vinirmuktāḥ—
liberated; janma-bandha—from the bondage of birth and
death; gacchanti—they attain; padam—the place; anāmayam—
without misery.

Sages endowed with buddhi-yoga give up the results born
of karma. Thus becoming freed from the cycle of birth
and death, they eventually attain Vaikuṇṭha, the state
beyond all mundane miseries.




Śloka 52




yadā te moha-kalilaṁ

buddhir vyatitariṣyati

tadā gantāsi nirvedaṁ

śrotavyasya śrutasya ca

yadā—when; te—your; buddhiḥ—intelligence; vyatitariṣyati

                            150
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

—has crossed beyond; kalilam—the dense forest; moha—of
illusion; tadā—at that time; gantāsi—you shall become;
nirvedam—indifferent; śrotavyasya—to that which is to be
heard; ca—and; śrutasya—to all that is already heard.

When your intelligence has crossed beyond the dense
forest of illusion, you will become indifferent to all
that has been heard and all that is to be heard.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with yadā to
explain that one becomes situated in yoga by practising
niṣkāma-karma offered to Parameśvara. “When your heart
completely transcends the deep forest of delusion, you
will become indifferent to all the topics which have
already been heard and th e various topics yet to be
heard.” If one raises the question, “I have already
become free from doubt, and I no longer have the fault
of an adverse attitude, so what need is there for me to
hear the instructions of śāstra ?” then Bhagavān
responds, “Even so , at present it is appropriate for
you to practise at every moment this process which has
been explained by Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Nirveda means that the jīvas are attached to this world
because of their identification with the body. This is
the root cause of material existence. As long as this
material attachment remains, the jīvātmā cannot attain
tattvajñ āna , nor can he become detached from the
material world. Nirveda means to become detached from
the material world . It is not an easy achievement.
Through the practice of niṣkāma-karma offered to
Bhagavān, one gradually becomes free from the false
conception that the body is the ātmā (self). One then
achieves nirveda (renunciation) of all types of
activities about which one has heard or will hear, and
which originate from material desires described in the
śāstra . Eventually, he engages in aikāntika-bhajana .
This instruction is also in the Vedas : parīkṣya lokān
karma-cittān brāhmaṇo

nirvedam āyān nāsty akṛtaḥ kṛtena


Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12

A tattva-vettā brāhmaṇa (a knower of the Absolute truth)
attains nirveda after understanding that the happiness
and pleasure one attains by karma in this world or the

                           151
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

next are temporary and distressful.

Prahlāda Mahārāja has given a similar instruction:


ādy-antavanta urugāya vidanti hi tvām

evaṁ vimṛśya sudhiyo viramanti śabdāt


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.9.49

O Urukrama, those who realise with discrimination that
all objects have a beginning and an end give up the
study of the Vedas and exclusively engage in bhajana to
You.




Śloka 53



śruti-vipratipannā te

yadā sthāsyati niścalā

samādhāv acalā buddhis

tadā yogam avāpsyasi

yadā—when; te—your; buddhiḥ—intelligence; sthāsyati—
becomes situated; śruti-vipratipannā—detached from the
various interpretations of the Vedas ; niścalā—non-
moving; acalā—steadfast; samādhau—in trance; tadā—at
that time; avāpsyasi—you shall achieve; yogam—(the
fruit) of yoga .

When your intelligence becomes detached from hearing
various interpretations of the Vedas, and when it
becomes free from all other attachments while remaining
steadfast in Parameśvara, then you will attain the fruit
of yoga.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa is saying, “You will become detached from
hearing about mundane subject matters, and also Vedic
instructions, and as you do so, you will become
steadfast; your mind will not be deceived by the
apparent attraction of such topics.” In the Sixth
Chapter also, samādhi is described as acalā (fixed or
undisturbed). Śrī Bhagavān assures Arjuna, “Then, by
having direct experience of transcendence through yoga ,
you will attain freedom from material bondage.”


                           152
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 54




arjuna uvāca —

sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā

samādhi-sthasya keśava

sthita-dhīḥ kiṁ prabhāṣeta

kim āsīta vrajeta kim

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; keśava—O Keśava; sthita-
prajñasya—for one whose intelligence is fixed; samādhi-
sthasya—and situated in trance; kā—what? bhāṣā—(are his)
symptoms; kim—in what way? sthita-dhīḥ—one with fixed
intelligence; prabhāṣeta—does speak; kim—how? āsīta—does
he sit; kim—how? vrajeta—does he walk.

Arjuna said: O Keśava! What are the symptoms of a person
whose intelligence is fixed in samādhi? How does he
speak? How does he sit? And how does he walk?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the previous śloka, Arjuna heard about intelligence
fixed in trance (samādhāv acalā). Arjuna now inquires
about the symptoms of a true yogī. “How do those who are
sthita-prajña (of undisturbed, fixed intelligence)
speak? What is the symptom of their bhāṣā (language)?
How do those in samādhi remain situated in trance? The
designations sthita-prajña and samādhi-stha (situated in
trance) apply to liberated persons. How do they speak
when they face a situation of pleasure or misery, honour
or dishonour, glorification or criticism, affection or
envy and so on? Do they speak clearly or do they just
contemplate within themselves? How do they sit? How do
they engage their senses in external objects? How do
they walk? In other words, how do their senses behave in
relationship to external sense objects?”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Beginning from this śloka, Arjuna asks Śrī Kṛṣṇa sixteen
questions. In response, Śrī Kṛṣṇa illuminates the deep

                             153
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

secrets of karma , karma-yoga , jñ āna , jñ āna-yoga ,
dhyāna , tapasya , karma-miśra -bhakti , jñ āna-miśra-
bhakti and śuddha-bhakti . In this regard, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
given indications in the Eighteenth Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gītā regarding prema-bhakti , which is the most
confidential knowledge. In His conclusion to the
Bhagavad-gītā, He explains that one can have entrance
into this prema-bhakti through the gateway of śaraṇāgati
(surrender) to Him.

The sixteen questions asked by Arjuna are as follows:

1) sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā (2.54). “What are the
symptoms of one who is sthita-prajña ?”

2) jyāyasī cet karma ṇas te (3.1). “Why engage me in
this ghastly warfare?”

3) atha kena prayukto ‘yaṁ (3.36). “By what is one
impelled to perform sinful acts?”

4) aparaṁ bhavato janma (4.4). “How am I to understand
that You previously instructed this science to Vivasv
ān?”

5) sannyāsaṁ karma ṇāṁ k ṛṣṇa (5.1). “Which path is
better, renunciation or selfless action?”

6) yo ‘yaṁ yogas tvayā prokta ḥ (6.33). “This path of
yoga appears impractical due to the unsteady nature of
the mind.”

7) ayatiḥ śraddhayopeto (6.37). “What is the destination
of the unsuccessful transcendentalist?”

8) kiṁ tad brahma kim adhyātmam (8.1-2). “What are
brahma , karma , adhy ātma , adhibh ūta , adhidaiva and
adhiyajña , and how can You be known at the time of
death?”

9) vaktum arhasy aśeṣe ṇa (10.16). “Please tell me in
detail about Your vibh ūtis .”

10) evam etad yathāttha tvam (11.3). “I wish to see how
You have entered this cosmic manifestation.”

11) ākhyāhi me ko bhav ān ugra-r ūpo (11.31). “O Ugra-
Rūpa (fierce one)! Please tell me who You are.”

12) teṣām ke yoga-vittamāḥ (12.1). “Who is more perfect,
he who performs bhajana or the impersonalist?”

13) prakṛtiṁ puru ṣa ṁ caiva (13.1). “I wish to know
about prak ṛti , puru ṣa , k ṣetra , k ṣetrajña , jñ āna
and jñeya .”

14) kair liṅgais trīn gu ṇān et ān (14.21). “By what
symptoms can one identify a person who has transcended
the gu ṇas ?”

15) teṣām niṣṭh ā tu k ā k ṛṣṇa (17.1). “What is the
situation of one who does not follow the principles of
śāstra ?”


                           154
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

16) sannyāsasya mahā-b āho (18.1). “O Mah ā-b āho! What
is the purpose of sanny āsa ?”




Śloka 55




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

prajahāti yadā kāmān

sarvān pārtha mano-gatān

ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ

sthita-prajñas tadocyate

śrī bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said; pārtha—O Pārtha;
yadā—when; prajahāti—he gives up; sarvān—types of; kāmān
—of material desires; manaḥ-gatān—arising from the mind;
(and) eva—indeed; ātmani—within his (controlled) mind;
tuṣṭaḥ—he is satisfied; ātmanā—by his (blissful) soul;
tadā—at that time; ucyate—he is called; sthita-prajñaḥ—a
person of steady intelligence.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Pārtha, when the jīvātmā gives up
all material desires arising from the mind and when,
with his mind thus controlled, he becomes satisfied by
the blissful nature of the self alone, then he is to be
known as sthita-prajña, a person of steady intelligence.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now, Śrī Bhagavān, from this śloka beginning with
prajahāti until the end of the chapter, answers four of
Arjuna’s questions in sequence. Sarvān denotes one who
does not have a scent of material desire. The word mano-
gatān indicates the ability to give up material desires
born of a non-spiritual nature which are opposed to the
dharma of the soul. If the nature of these desires were
spiritual, it would not be possible to give them up,
just as fire cannot give up heat. This is because a
controlled mind, after realising the ātmā, which is
blissful by nature, becomes satisfied by the ātmā alone.
The śrutis confirm this: yadā sarve pramucyante kāmā ye
‘sya hṛdi sthitāḥ

atha martyo ‘mṛto bhavaty

atra brahma samaśnute

Katha Upaniṣad 2.3.14


                            155
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

When all desires are removed from the heart, the mortal
(bound) jīvātmā attains realisation of brahma and
immortality.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




One should also study the śloka: ātmany eva ca santuṣṭaḥ
(Gītā 3.17). The great bhakta Prahlāda Mahārāja has
given a similar instructi on in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(7.10.9): vimuñcati yadā kāmān mānavo manasi sthitān

tarhy eva puṇḍarīkākṣa

bhagavattvāya kalpate

O lotus-eyed Lord, when a man gives up all the material
desires situated in his heart, he becomes eligible to
attain opulence equal to Your own.




Śloka 56




duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ

sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ

vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ

sthita-dhīr munir ucyate

anudvigna-manāḥ—one whose mind is unagitated; duḥkheṣu—
in the (presence of the threefold) miseries; vigata-
spṛhaḥ—and remains free from hankering; sukheṣu—in the
presence of sense-pleasures; (one who is) vīta—free
from; rāga—attachment; bhaya—fear; krodhaḥ—and anger;
ucyate—is called; muniḥ—a sage; sthita-dhīḥ—of fixed
intelligence.

One who is not disturbed by the three types of miseries
(adhyātmika, adhibhautika and adhidaivika), who remains
free from desires in the presence of happiness, and who
is free from attachment, fear and anger, is called a
steady-minded sage.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           156
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

“How does one who is sthita-prajña speak?” To answer
this question, Śrī Bhagavān speaks the present śloka
beginning with duḥkheṣu , and also the next śloka .
Duḥkheṣu means the threefold miseries: adhyātmika ,
adhibhautika and adhidaivika . Hunger, thirst, fever,
headache and so on (coming from one’s own body and mind)
are adhyātmika miseries. Adhibhautika miseries are those
caused by other living entities, such as a snake or a
tiger, and miseries such as excessive rain or natural
disasters caused by the devas are called adhidaivika .
Anudvigna-manāḥ refers to a person who, when faced by
such miseries thinks, “I have attained these miseries
due to my prārabdha-karma (past actions) and I have to
suffer them.” Knowing this, he either deliberates upon
this within himself, understanding this misery to be due
to his prārabdha-karma , or he speaks openly and without
duplicity when questioned by others. In any case, his
face shows no agitation, even in the presence of these
miseries. This absence of disturbance is evident to
those who are expert in reading such symptoms. However,
it is obvious when an imitator artificially manifests
symptoms of tolerance. Those who are expert call him
corrupted. Similarly, those who remain free from desires
when a happy situation appears, knowing it to be
prārabdha-bhoga (enjoyment resulting from past actions),
either contemplate this within themselves or enlighten
others. This response is also understood by learned men.
In clarifying these symptoms, the present śloka
describes such persons as: 1) vīta-rāga —they remain
detached from happiness; 2) vīta-bhaya —they remain free
from the fear that entities such as tigers may eat them;
3) vīta-krodha —they do not feel anger, even towards a
person who comes to attack or kill them. For example, no
fear or anger arose in Ja ḍa Bharata when the dacoit
king Vṛṣala took him to the deity of Dev ī Kāl ī as a
human sacrifice.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




A person whose heart is not disturbed by the threefold
miseries: adhyātmika, adhibhautika and adhidaivika , who
is devoid of the desire to attain happiness, and who
does not become elated when happiness comes to him, is
called sthita-prajña .

na prahṛṣyet priyaṁ prāpya

nodvijet prāpya cāpriyam

sthira-buddhir asammūḍho

brahma-vid brahmaṇi sthitaḥ

Gītā 5.20

A person who does not become elated when attaining that
which is favourable or dear is called sthita-prajña.


                             157
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

The example of this is the life history of Bharata
Mahārāja as described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Bharata Mahārāja was worshipping Bhagavān alone in a
remote forest, after renouncing his entire kingdom. In
the last part of his life, he became attached to an
infant deer and, due to the state of his mind when he
left his body, he then took birth as a deer. However,
because he remembered his previous birth, he remained
separate from the association of family and friends, and
spent his time in the hermitages of the sages, hearing
topics of Śrī Bhagavān. As a result of his worship of
Bhagavān in his previous life, he took his next birth in
the house of a religiously devoted brāhmaṇa . Internally
he always remembered Śrī Bhagavān, but externally he
kept himself completely aloof by pretending to be a
dullard, even though his father tried to make him learn
the Vedas . Jaḍa Bharata tolerated ill-treatment and
taunts by his step-mother, step-brothers and relatives,
while remaining ecstatically absorbed in the worship of
Bhagavān.

Once, Vṛṣalarāja, the king of thieves, desired a son,
and he wanted to offer to his iṣṭadevī (worshipable
goddess), Bhadra Kālī, a human being who was free from
bodily flaws. He had previously captured a suitable
person for sacrifice, but somehow the man had escaped.
While th e dacoit king was wandering in search of
another suitable person to sacrifice, he saw the mahā-
bhāgavata Jaḍa Bharata protecting his family’s fields.
The king became happy when he saw that Jaḍa Bharata was
blessed with a body appropriate for the sacrifice.
According to the rules for sacrificing a human, he fed
Jaḍa Bharata nicely, decorated him with turmeric powder,
garlands and candana , and eventually presented him in
front of Kālī Devī as an offering. Even after seeing,
hearing and being aware of all this , parama-bhāgavata
Jaḍa Bharata was neither fearful nor angry. Rather,
fixed in remembrance of Bhagavān, he remained free from
anxiety.

Just as the dacoits were ready to sever Jaḍa Bharata’s
head, Kālī Devī herself appeared in a ferocious form,
making a loud noise. She snatched the sword from the
hand of King Vṛṣala, and beheaded him and his servants.
After drinking their blood, she danced and played with
their heads as if they were balls. Finally, with great
affection, she sent the mahā-bhāgavata Jaḍa Bhar ata on
his way. This deity of Bhadra Kālī is still present in
Kurukṣetra.

While describing this history of Jaḍa Bharata in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (5.9.20), Śukadeva Gosvāmī says to Parīkṣit
Mahārāja: “Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu, who carries the
sudarśana-cakra , is death to death personified, and is
always anxious to look after His bhaktas. O Viṣṇurāta,
He completely protects such parama-bhāgavata-
paramahaṁsas , who have become free from falsely
identifying the body as the self, who have performed the
very difficult task of severing the knot of mundane
attachment, whose hearts are anxiously absorbed in
thoughts of doing welfare to all living entities, and
who neither harm others nor feel enmity towards them.
Such paramahaṁsas who accept the shelter of Śrī

                           158
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhagavān’s fearle ss lotus feet are never disturbed,
even at the time of their own execution. There is
nothing surprising about this.”




Śloka 57



yaḥ sarvatrānabhisnehas

tat tat prāpya śubhāśubham

nābhinandati na dveṣṭi

tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

yaḥ—he who; (is) anabhisnehaḥ—without excessive
attachment; sarvatra—in all situations; tat tat—
whatever; (whether) prāpya—achieving; śubha—favourable;
(or) aśubham—unfavourable; (and) na abhinandati—he does
not rejoice; na—nor; dveṣṭi—hate; tasya—his; prajñ ā—
intelligence; pra tiṣṭhitā—is well fixed.

One who is devoid of mundane affection, and who neither
rejoices in gain nor despairs in loss, is known to have
fixed intelligence.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, the word anabhisnehaḥ means free from all
affection arising from material designations. Such
persons certainly feel some affection because of
compassion, but their affection is free from material
designations. They do not welcome pleasing situations
such as being honoured or offered palatable food, nor do
they glorify those from whom they receive them by
saying, “You are a highly dharmika personality who has
been rendering service to great paramahaṁsas . May you
be happy.” Conversely, when they are faced with an
unpleasant situation such as being dishonoured or
attacked, they do not feel any aversion, nor do they
curse their adversary, saying, “You sinful person! May
you go to hell!” The intelligence of such a person is
completely fixed, or situated in samādhi . This is,
indeed, called sthita-prajña .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




                             159
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Affection is of two types: (1) related with the body,
sopādhika-sneha and (2) related with Śrī Bhagavān,
nirupādhika-sneh a . Sopādhika-sneha can be seen in
ordinary persons who identify themselves with their
bodies. Those who are sthita-prajña are free from
identification with their bodies, and are, therefore,
devoid of sopādhika-sneha. They are endowed with
nirupādhika-sneha , and are the well-wishers of all
living entities. This sneha is ever-existing and
continuously flowing within their hearts, but it rarely
manifests externally. It is seen in some special
circumstances, although an ordinary person cannot detect
it.




Śloka 58




yadā saṁharate cāyaṁ

kūrmo ‘ṅgānīva sarvaśaḥ

indriyāṇīndriyārthebhyas

tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

ca—and; yadā—when; saṁharate—withdraws; indriyāṇi—his
senses; indriya-arthebhyaḥ—from the sense objects;
sarvaśaḥ—completely; iva—as; ayam—a; kūrmaḥ—tortoise;
tasya—his; aṅgāni—limbs; prajñ ā—his intelligence; (is)
pratiṣṭhitā—well fixed.

When a person can completely withdraw his senses from
the sense objects at will, just as a tortoise withdraws
its limbs into its shell, his intelligence is firmly
fixed.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān responds to Arjuna’s question, kim āsīta,
“How does he sit?” with this śloka beginning with yadā.
Indriyārthebhyaḥ means that, just as a person can
withdraw his senses, such as the sense of hearing, from
its sense object, sound, similarly the āsana (seat,
situation) of he who is sthita-prajña is to be able to
withdraw his subordinate senses from the external sense
objects, and to fix them in his undisturbed mind. The
example of a tortoise is given to illustrate this point.
Just as a tortoise can withdraw his eyes, face and so
forth inside his shell at will, similarly, a person who
is sthita-prajña can withdraw his senses from the sense
objects.


                           160
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 59




viṣayā vinivartante

nirāhārasya dehinaḥ

rasa-varjaṁ raso ‘py asya

paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate

dehinaḥ—for an embodied person; nirāhārasya—who
practices sense-restraint; viṣayāḥ—the sense objects;
vinivartante—are forcibly restrained; asya—for such a
person; (there is) rasaḥ—a taste; api—however; dṛṣṭvā—
having realised; param—the paramātmā (Supersoul); (there
is) rasa-varjam—no taste for sense objects; (they)
nivartate—cease automatically.

He who identifies himself with his body may artificially
restrict his enjoyment by withdrawing the senses from
their objects, but his taste for sense-pleasure still
remains. This is not genuine detachment. However, for
one who is sthita-prajña , having realised Paramātmā,
his taste for sense objects automatically ceases.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If one raises a doubt that even foolish or less
intelligent persons may become detached from the objects
of their senses by fasting or through sickness, Śrī
Bhagavān clarifies His point in this śloka beginning
with viṣayāḥ. The word rasa-varjam implies that such
persons do not become free from the desire for sense
objects. Rather, their taste for sense objects still
persists. One who is sthita-prajña , however, ceases to
desire sense objects because he has direct realisation
of Paramātmā. There is no flaw in this definition. Those
who are able to realise t he self are still sādhakas .
They are not siddhas (perfected souls).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Sometimes an ordinary person restricts his senses
because of disease, or by practising haṭha-yoga or
fasting. Still the desire to enjoy the sense objects

                            161
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

remains in his heart. It is impossible to eliminate this
desire without bhakti to Śrī Bhagavān.

In this regard, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes as
follows: “The practice of ceasing to indulge in the
objects of the senses through the process of nirāhāra
(forcibly keeping aloof from sense objects) is only for
extremely unintelligent people. This practice is
followed by jīvas who identify the self with the body.
Aṣṭāṅga-yoga also provides an opportunity for those who
are less intelligent to become renounced from sense
objects, by engaging in yama , niyama , āsana ,
prāṇāyāma and pratyāhara . This process is not
acceptable for one who is sthita-prajña . After directly
seeing the beauty of parama-tattva Bhagavān, one who is
sthita-prajña becomes attracted to Him and gives up all
attachments to ordinary sense objects. Even though there
is provision for extremely unintelligent persons to
withdraw their senses from sense objects by the process
of nirāhāra , still jīvas cannot attain eternal
auspiciousness without the process of rāga-mārga . When
a person reaches the stage of rāga (attachment to
Kṛṣṇa), he realises a superior sense object and, thus,
naturally gives up inferior pleasures.”




Śloka 60




yatato hy api kaunteya

puruṣasya vipaścitaḥ

indriyāṇi pramāthīni

haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ

kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; pramāthīni—restless; indriyāṇi—
senses; hi—indeed; prasabham—forcibly; haranti—steal
away; manaḥ—the mind; api —even; puruṣasya—of a man;
vipaścitaḥ—who possesses knowledge and discrimination;
yatataḥ—who is endeavouring for liberation.

O Kaunteya, the restless senses can forcibly steal away
the mind of even a man of discrimination who is
endeavouring to achieve liberation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




It is beyond the capacity of the sādhaka to have
complete control over his senses in the stage of sādhana
, but the endeavour alone is commendable. Śrī Bhagavān

                           162
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

speaks the present śloka , beginning with the word
yatataḥ, to explain this. Here the word pramāthīni means
those things which cause agitation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The duty of a sādhaka is to endeavour very carefully to
achieve control over his senses. One cannot become
sthita-prajña without sense control. It is as difficult
to have complete control over the flickering senses,
which are always agitated, as it is to control the wind.
However, according to the instructions of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, even this difficult task becomes very easy
when one engages all his senses in the service of Śrī
Bhagavān.

One can learn how to engage his controlled senses in the
service of Śrī Bhagavān from the daily activities of
King Ambarīṣa, which are described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
:


sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor

vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane

karau harer mandira-mārjanādiṣu

śrutiṁ cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane dṛśau

tad-bhṛtya-gātra-sparśe ‘ṅga-saṅgamam

ghrāṇaṁ ca tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe

śrīmat-tulasyā rasanāṁ tad-arpite

pādau hareḥ kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe

śiro hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane

kāmaṁ ca dāsye na tu kāma-kāmyayā

yathottamaśloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 9.4.18-20

Ambarīṣa Mahārāja always engaged in the worship of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa by fixing his mind in remembering His lotus feet,
by engaging his tongue in describing the name, form,
qualities and pastimes of Śrī Bhagavān, his ears in
hearing the topics of Bhagavān, his eyes in seeing His
beautiful Deity form, his sense of touch in experiencing
the happiness of serving the feet of the bhaktas of
Bhagavān, his nostrils in smelling the fragrant objects
such as tulasī and candana which had been offered at the

                           163
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

lotus feet of Bhagavān, his feet in circumambulating His
abode, and his head in paying obeisances to Bhagavān and
His bhaktas . In this way, he controlled all his senses,
and engaged them in the service of Bhagavān.

It is very beneficial and auspicious for sādhakas to
follow this path.




Śloka 61



tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya

yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

vaśe hi yasyendriyāṇi

tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

āsīta—he should be situated; saṁyamya—keeping under
control; tāni sarvāṇi—all the senses; yuktaḥ—connected
in devotion; mat-paraḥ—devoted unto Me; hi—because;
yasya—one whose; indriyāṇi—senses; vaśe—are in control;
tasya—his; prajñ ā—intelligence; pratiṣṭhitā—is
completely fixed.

Therefore, one should subdue the senses by surrendering
to Me in bhakti-yoga and living under My shelter. Only
one whose senses are controlled is fixed in
intelligence. He alone is sthita-prajña.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Here, the word mat-paraḥ means ‘My bhakta’, because
there is no other way of conquering the senses than by
performing bhakti unto Me.” This fact is apparent
everywhere in the later sections of Bhagavad-gītā. As
Uddhava says in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.29.2-3): prāyaśaḥ
puṇdarīkākṣa

yuñjanto yogino manaḥ

viṣīdanty asamādhānān

mano-nigraha-karśitāḥ


athāta ānanda-dughaṁ padāmbujaṁ

haṁsāḥ śrayerann aravinda-locana

sukhaṁ nu viśveśvara yoga-karmabhis


                           164
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

tvan-māyayāmī vihatā na māninaḥ


O lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa, yogīs are generally unsuccessful in
controlling their minds and so, after endeavouring for a
short time, they become tired and frustrated. Therefore,
those who are expert in discerning between what is
substantial and what is insubstantial take exclusive
shelter of Your lotus feet, which give unlimited
pleasure to everyone, as the foundation of their
happiness.

To show the difference between a sādhaka and one who is
sthita-prajña , Śrī Kṛṣṇa says vaśe hi , which indicates
that the senses of one who is sthita-prajña are under
control.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




One can escape the disturbance of a gang of dacoits by
taking shelter of a valiant king. When the dacoits
become aware of the shelter this person has taken, they
become subordinate to him. Similarly, the senses of a
jīvātmā are compared to a gang of dacoits, and they
automatically become controlled when he accepts the
shelter of Antaryāmī Bhagavān, Śrī Hṛṣīkeśa. Therefore,
one should control one’s senses in a simple, natural way
by bhakti alone. It is said in śāstra : hṛṣīkeśe
hṛṣīkāṇi

yasya sthairya-gatāni hi

sa eva dhairyam āpnoti

saṁsāre jīva-cañcale

Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhyalīlā 24.184

It is very difficult to control the agitated senses in
this world, but for those who engage all their senses in
the service of Bhagavān Śrī Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the
senses, their senses naturally become stable and
controlled.




Śloka 62




dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ

saṅgas teṣūpajāyate

saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ

                           165
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


kāmāt krodho ‘bhijāyate

puṁsaḥ—for a person; dhyāyataḥ—one who contemplates;
viṣayān—sense objects such as sound; saṅgaḥ—attachment;
upajāyate—becomes manifest; teṣu—towards them; saṅgāt—
from attachment; kāmaḥ—desire; sañj āyate—develops;
kāmāt—from desire; krodhaḥ—anger; abhijāyate—develops.

By meditating on the sense objects, one develops
attachment. Attachment gives rise to desire, which in
turn leads to anger.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “Control of the mind is the
fundamental means by which those who are sthita-prajña
control their external senses. Hear from Me, O Arjuna,
what happens when one is unable to fully control his
mind.” The present śloka beginning with d hyāyataḥ is
spoken to explain this topic. By meditation on sense
objects, one develops saṅga , attachment, from which
comes kāma , excessive desire for those objects. Anger
(krodha ), then arises if the fulfilment of this desire
is obstructed for some reason.




Śloka 63




krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ

sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥ

smṛti-bhraṁśād buddhi-nāśo

buddhi-nāśāt praṇaśyati

krodhāt—from anger; bhavati—comes; sammohaḥ—utter
confusion; sammohāt—from such confusion; (there is)
vibhramaḥ—disorder; smṛti—of memory; smṛti-bhraṁśāt—from
disorder of memory; buddhi-nāśaḥ—intelligence is
destroyed; buddhi-nāśāt—from loss of intelligence;
praṇaśyati—one is completely ruined.

Anger gives rise to delusion, and from delusion comes
loss of memory, forgetting the instructions of śāstra.
Loss of memory destroys intelligence, and when the
intelligence is destroyed, everything is lost and one
again becomes fallen in the ocean of material existence.




                             166
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




From anger comes delusion (sammoha), in which there is a
loss of discrimination between what is to be done and
what is not to be done. When the jīva is in a deluded
condition, he forgets the instructions of śāstra (smṛti-
vibhramaḥ), which are the cause of auspiciousness for
him. When his memory is lost, proper conduct of the
intelligence is lost (buddhi-nāśaḥ). After that, the
sādhaka again falls into the well of material life.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The mind indeed is the king, the ruler and the impelling
cause of the senses. Therefore, by controlling the mind
the external senses are automatically controlled. Thus,
in the Vedas it is said:


yadā pancāvatiṣṭhante jñānāni manasā saha

buddhiś ca na viceṣṭati tām āhuḥ paramāṁ gatim


Katha Upaniṣad 2.3.10

If one can control his pañca-jñānendriya (five
knowledge-acquiring senses), his mind and his
intelligence, he attains the supreme destination.
Otherwise, if the mind and other senses are not subdued,
one has to wander in the cycle of birth and death.

This is also stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.21.19-21):

viṣayeṣu guṇādhyāsāt

puṁsaḥ saṅgas tato bhavet

saṅgāt tatra bhavet kāmaḥ

kāmād eva kalir nṛṇām

When one contemplates the qualities of sense objects,
attachment arises. From attachment, desires ensue, and
unfulfilled desires lead to quarrel.

kaler durviṣahaḥ krodhas



tamas tam anuvartate

tamasā grasyate puṁsaś


                            167
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

cetanā vyāpinī drutam

From quarrel, unrestrained anger arises, anger causes
delusion, and when one is in delusion, the wisdom to
discriminate between right and wrong vanishes.

tayā virahitaḥ sādho

jantuḥ śūnyāya kalpate

tato ‘sya svārtha-vibhraṁśo

mūrcchitasya mṛtasya ca

O gentle one, due to his loss of discrimination, a man
becomes like inert matter, and from that condition, he
slides down to states of unconsciousness (inertness) and
becomes almost dead. Thus the supreme purpose of life is
defeated.

If someone forcibly tries to subdue his external senses
without controlling his mindÇ the results are extremely
unpleasant. In order to control the mind, it is
imperative to direct it to worshipping Bhagav ān by
following specific practices. Consequently, Śrī
Bhagavān’s statement in Gītā (2.61): tāni sarvāṇi
saṁyamya , is completely logical.




Śloka 64




rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu

viṣayān indriyaiś caran

ātma-vaśyair vidheyātmā

prasādam adhigacchati

vidheya-ātmā—a man of controlled senses; tu—however;
vimuktaiḥ—(who is) free; (from) rāga—attachment; dveṣa—
and aversion; adhigacchati—attains; prasādam—joyfulness;
caran—even while enjoying; viṣayān—sense objects;
indriyaiḥ—by the senses; ātma-vaśyaiḥ—which are under
his control.

A man of controlled senses, however, who is free from
attachment and aversion, attains happiness of mind even
while enjoying various objects through his senses.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           168
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Previously Arjuna asked, “How does one who is sthita-
prajña behave?” In response to this question, Śrī
Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with rāga . Since
the mind cannot directly accept sense objects, there is
no fault in accepting sense objects with controlled
senses. Vidheyātmā means one whose ātmā (mind) is fixed
in the instructions of Bhagavān. Prasādam adhigacchati
implies that there is no fault if such qualified persons
accept sense objects. Rather, it is specifically to
their credit, because they see that everything is
related to Bhagavān. One who is sthita-prajña may or may
not give up sense objects, and may or may not be
motivated to attain them. In any case, everything is
auspicious for him.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Even when the external senses are controlled by keeping
them aloof from the sense objects, the mind does not
stop thinking of them. Such renunciation is called
phalgu (useless) or markaṭa-vairāgya (monkey
renunciation). This is stated in Gītā 3.6: karmendriyāṇi
saṁyamya . When a sādhaka practises appropriate
renunciation (yukta-vair āgya ) and worships Śrī
Bhagavān, he can control his mind and absorb it in
thinking of his worshipable deity. When he has reached
such a stage, there is no fault in accepting those sense
objects which are favourable to his practice, and
rejecting those whic h are unfavourable.




Śloka 65




prasāde sarva-duḥkhānāṁ

hānir asyopajāyate

prasanna-cetaso hy āśu

buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate

prasāde—on attainment of mercy; hāniḥ—diminution; sarva-
duḥkhānām—of all miseries; upajāyate—takes place;
buddhiḥ—(the) intelligence; asya—of such a man;
prasanna-cetasaḥ—whose mind is content; hi—certainly;
āśu—very soon; paryavatiṣṭhate—becomes fixed in all
respects.

When one who is self-controlled achieves happiness all
his miseries are dispelled. As a result, the
intelligence of such a contented person soon becomes
fixed in attaining his desired goal.

                           169
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate means that, in all respects his
intelligence becomes stable and fixed on the desired
goal. Thus, he remains happy whether he accepts sense
objects or not. Prasanna-cetasaḥ indicates that it
should be understood that internal happiness will come
only from bhakti , because without bhakti the heart
cannot become pleased. This has been explained vividly
in the First Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , which
describes how Vyāsadeva’s mind was not happy, even after
he had compiled Vedānta-sūtra . However, after he
followed the instructions of Śrī Nārada, his heart
became blissful through the exclusive practice of bhakti
.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The heart can be pleased only by bhakti, rendering
loving devotional service to Śrī Bhagavān. Bhakti
removes all miseries, and in a very short period a
person who practices bhakti easily becomes fully fixed
at the lotus feet of his iṣṭadeva . This is also des
cribed in the dialogue between Vyāsa and Nārada in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from dhṛta-vratena hi mayā (1.4.28) to
yamādibhir yoga-pathaiḥ kāma-lobha-hato muhuḥ (1.6.35).
“When the sādhaka practises yama and niyama on the path
of aṣṭāṅga-yoga (the eight stages of yoga ), the mind,
which is always under the control of lust and greed,
attains a certain level of happiness and peace. However,
there is no comparison between this and the immediate
and immense pleasure attained by service to Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.6.35) In this regard, it is
worth deliberating on the examples of Saubhari Ṛṣi,
Yayāti Mahārāja, Viśvāmitra Muni and others. Saubhari
Ṛṣi was still unable to control his mind even after
performing austerities within the water of the Yamunā
for ten thousand years. His mind became agitated by
seeing fish engaging in sex life. He emerged from the
water to marry the fifty daughters of Māndhātā Mahārāja,
but his lust still remained unsatiated even after
enjoying with them by expanding himself into fifty
forms. Eventually, he attained his desired goal by
controlling his senses through the worship of Śrī
Bhagavān.

Yayāti Mahārāja was not able to control his mind,
despite various endeavours. He exchanged his old age for
the youth of his son Puru, and enjoyed for many years,
but his lusty desires increased, just as ghee nourishes
fire. He could only attain peace when he had finally

                           170
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

fixed his mind in the worship of Bhagavān.

Although Viśvāmitra Muni engaged in severe austerities
by practising śama (mind control) and dama (sense
control) and subduing his senses, he still abandoned his
austerities just upon hearing Menakā’s ankle bells and
became absorbed in lustful activity. His agitated mind
eventually found peace only in the worship of Bhagavān.

This conclusion is specifically verified in the dialogue
between Vyāsa and Nārada in the First Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam . Vedavyāsa had already divided the Vedas
into four parts and had compiled Mahābhārata , the
Purāṇas and Vedānta-sūtra and although he had described
knowledge of dharma and other such topics for the
information of people in general, his mind remained
unsatisfied. Unable to understand why, he inquired from
his spiritual master, Devarṣi Nārada. Śrī Nārada
answered: śrī nārada uvāca —bhavatānudita-prāyaṁ

yaśo bhagavato ‘malam

yenaivāsau na tuṣyeta

manye tad darśanaṁ khilam

yathā dharmādayaś cārthā

muni-varyānukīrtitāḥ

na tathā vāsudevasya

mahimā hy anuvarṇitaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.8-9

O great sage, you have described the processes of dharma
and jñāna, which I consider to be incomplete and
insignificant, but you have not clearly described the
topics of Śrī Bhagavān’s most purifying pastimes and
their glories. Śrī Bhagavān cannot be pleased unless one
glorifies such pastimes, which manifest themselves in
the purified mind by the performance of bhakti.

Following the instructions of Nārada Muni, by performing
bhakti-yoga, Vyāsa was able to see in his pure heart all
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful pastimes, full of aiśvarya
(opulence) and mādh urya (sweetness). Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
consists of the activities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa which Vyāsa
realised in samādhi .

yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ

kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ

śoka-moha-bhayāpahā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.7

By the culture of hearing and following this Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, bhakti to Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa
immediately manifests in the heart, dispelling

                            171
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

lamentation, delusion and fear. Only then is Śrī Kṛṣṇa
captured in the heart of such a bhakta.




Śloka 66




nāsti buddhir ayuktasya

na cāyuktasya bhāvanā

na cābhāvayataḥ śāntir

aśāntasya kutaḥ sukham

ayuktasya—for one whose mind is uncontrolled; na asti—
there is no; buddhiḥ—spiritual intelligence; ca—and;
ayuktasya—for one disconnected; na bhāvanā—there cannot
be meditation on Parameśvara; ca—and; abhāvayataḥ—for
the non-meditative; (there is) na—no; śāntiḥ—peace; (and
for) aśāntasya—the non-peaceful; kutaḥ—where? sukham—is
happiness.

One whose mind is uncontrolled, and who is bereft of
intelligence related to the ātmā, is unable to meditate
on Parameśvara. A person devoid of meditation does not
attain peace, and without peace, where is the
possibility of happiness?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa is speaking this śloka beginning with nāsti to
indirectly strengthen the previous ś loka’s conclusion.
The intelligence of a person whose mind is uncontrolled
will not become fixed in the self. Such a person is
ayukta (devoid of intelligence) and is unable to
meditate on Parameśvara. Abhāvayataḥ means that one who
does not meditate cannot have peace. In other words, he
cannot become detached from the objects of the senses. A
disturbed person can find neither happiness nor pleasure
in the self.




Śloka 67




indriyāṇāṁ hi caratāṁ


                           172
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

yan mano ‘nuvidhīyate

tad asya harati prajñāṁ

vāyur nāvam ivāmbhasi

hi—certainly; vāyuḥ—the wind; harati—carries away; nāvam
—a boat; ambhasi—on the water; iva—similarly; tat manaḥ—
the mind; asya—of a person; yat—which; anuvidhīyate—
follows; caratām—while wandering (to the objects);
indriyāṇām—of the senses; harati—carries away; prajñ ām—
his intelligence.

Just as the wind sweeps away a boat on the water, the
mind of an unrestrained person runs after any one of the
senses that wanders toward its sense object.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




A person with an uncontrolled mind does not have
intelligence. Śrī Bhagavān establishes this point by
speaking this śloka beginning with the word indriyāṇām.
“When the mind follows one of the senses as it wanders
amongst its respective sense objects, a person is forced
to follow all of the senses by mind. In such a state,
the mind is likened to an unfavourable wind sweeping
away a boat on water, because it carries away a person’s
intelligence.”




Śloka 68



tasmād yasya mahā-bāho

nigṛhītāni sarvaśaḥ

indriyāṇīndriyārthebhyas

tasya prajñā pratiṣḥitā

tasmāt—therefore; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; (he)
yasya—whose; indriyāṇi—senses; nigṛhītāni—are
restrained; sarvaśaḥ—in every respect; indriya-
arthebhyaḥ—from the sense objects; tasya—his; prajñ ā—
intelligence; (is) pratiṣḥitā—fixed.

Therefore, O Mahā-bāho, one whose senses are completely
restrained from their respective sense objects is
sthita-prajña, fixed in intelligence.




                           173
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Yasya means that those whose minds are already under
control are sthita-prajña . Kṛṣṇa is telling Arjuna , “O
Mahā-bāho, just as you conquer your enemies, you should
also conquer your mind.”




Śloka 69




yā niśā sarva-bhūtānāṁ

tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamī

yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni

sā niśā paśyato muneḥ

tasyām—in that (state); yā—which; (is) niśā—night;
sarva-bh ūtānām—for all beings; saṁyamī—a man of fixed
intelligence; jāgarti—is awake; yasyām—in which (state);
bhūtāni—ordinary beings; jāgrati—are awake; sā—that;
(is) niśā—night; paśyataḥ—for the enlightened; muneḥ—
thinker.

That intelligence which is related to consciousness is
like night for the materialistic common people. However,
a sthita-prajña remains awake in that intelligence. The
intelligence which is engaged in sense objects in which
the common living entity remains awake is like night for
the great thinker who knows the absolute reality. In
other words such a person accepts sense objects in an
appropriate way without being attached to them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




It is natural for one who is sthita-prajña to control
the senses. For this reason, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking
this śloka beginning with yā. Intelligence is of two
types: ātma-pravaṇā, intelligence inclined towards the
self or conscious reality, and viṣaya-pravaṇā,
intelligence inclined towards material sense objects.
Intelligence which is ātma-pravaṇā is like night for all
conditioned jīvātmās . Just as a sleeping person does
not know what happens at night, similarly the bewildered
jīvas do not know what one attains by ātma-pravaṇā
buddhi . But one who is sthita-prajña remains awake in
such a night, so he directly experiences the bliss
related to intelligence fixed in the conscious reality.

                           174
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


The conditioned jīvas remain awake in viṣaya-pravaṇā
buddhi and they experience lamentation, bewilderment and
so on, according to their respective absorption. They
are not asleep to it. Sthita-prajña munis , however, do
not experience anything in such a night. They remain
indifferent to the sense objects that give happiness and
distress to materialistic persons and, remaining
detached, only accept those sense objects which are
needed for their maintenance.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




Those who are sthita-prajña naturally achieve perfection
in controlling all the senses. They are jñ āni-puruṣas
(knowledgeable persons) in the real sense. On the other
hand, the intelligence of ignorant people who identify
the body with the ātmā remains absorbed in sense
objects. Such persons who are attached to sense objects
are called materialistic, or ignorant. Ajñ ānaṁ tu niśā
proktā divā j ñ ānam udīryate. “Knowledge is like day
and ignorance is like night” (Skanda Purāṇa ).

Everything in the kingdom of that most wonderful Śrī
Bhagavān is wonderful. What is night for one person is
day for another. For an owl, night is like day, while
for a crow it is night. An owl sees only at night, not
during the day. Similarly, a man blinde d by ignorance
cannot have vision of the illumination of tattvajñ āna .
Knowers of the Absolute, however, always see Śrī
Bhagavān, the radiant personification of tattvajñ āna.
They never contemplate objects of the senses. Just as a
lotus leaf never becomes wet even though it remains in
water, similarly, one who is sthita-prajña never becomes
attached to sense objects, even while he is living in
contact with them.




Śloka 70




āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ

samudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvat

tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve

sa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī


yadvat—just as; āpaḥ—waters; praviśanti—enter; (the)
samudram — ocean; āpūryamāṇam—which although being
filled; (is) acala-pratiṣṭham—fixed and unmoved; tadvat—

                           175
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

similarly; yam—(he) within whom; sarve—all; kāmāḥ—the
agitations of the senses; praviśanti—forcibly enter;
(remains) acala-pratiṣṭham—fixed and unmoved; saḥ—he;
āpnoti—attains; śāntim—peace; na—not; kāma-kāmī—he who
is intent on fulfilling his desires.

Just as countless rivers flow into the ocean, which
never floods, various desires flow into the mind of one
who is sthita-prajña, yet his equilibrium is never
disturbed. Such persons alone can attain peace, not
those who strive always to fulfil their desires.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Nirleptā, or remaining unattached to sense objects,
indicates that one does not become disturbed even after
coming in contact with a sense object. Śrī Bhagavān
explains this idea by speaking this śloka beginning with
āpūryamāṇam . Although different rivers pour so much
water into the ocean during the rainy season, they
cannot cause it to overflow. Acala-pratiṣṭham means
whose boundary is not crossed. Similarly, various sense
objects also present themselves to one who is sthita-
prajña . But, just as water pouring into or flowing out
of the ocean makes no difference to the ocean,
similarly, those who remain unaffected both while they
are utilising sense objects, and when they are bereft of
them, are called sthita-prajña . Only they attain śānti
, that is, jñ āna.




Śloka 71




vihāya kāmān yaḥ sarvān

pumāṁś carati niḥspṛhaḥ

nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ

sa śāntim adhigacchati

yaḥ—who; pumān—the person; vihāya—giving up; sarvān—all;
kāmān—material desires; carati—wanders; niḥ-spṛhaḥ—free
from hankering; nirmamaḥ—without a sense of
possessiveness; nir-ahaṅkāraḥ—without false ego; saḥ—
that person; adhigacchati—attains; śāntim—peace.

It is only those who give up all desires and wander free
from hankering, false ego and possessiveness who attain
peace.



                           176
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Some people lose faith in their material desires and no
longer enjoy them. Śrī Bhagavān is explaining this by
speaking this śloka beginning with the word vihāya .
Nirahaṅkāra nirmamaḥ means that only they attain peace
who remain freed from the false ego and possessiveness
towards the body and objects related to the body.




Śloka 72



eṣā brāhmī sthitiḥ pārtha

naināṁ prāpya vimuhyati

sthitvāsyām anta-kāle ‘pi

brahma-nirvāṇam ṛcchati

pārtha—O Pārtha; eṣā—this; (is) sthitiḥ—the situation;
brāhmī—of one who has attained brahma ; na prāpya —not
attaining; enām—this state; vimuhyati—one is confused
(by duality); api—and; sthitvā—being situated; asyām—in
this (state); anta-kāle—at the time of death; ṛcchati—
one attains; brahma-nirvāṇam—spiritual emancipation.

O Pārtha, attaining brahma in this way is called brāhmī
sthitiḥ. After attaining this state, one is no longer
deluded. If, at the time of death, one is situated in
this consciousness even for a moment, he attains brahma-
nirvāṇa.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is now concluding the chapter with this
śloka beginning with the word eṣā. Attaining the state
of brahma is called brāhmī. If brahma-nirvāṇa (spiritual
emancipation) is achieved at the time of death by
attaining the state of brahma for a moment, then what
can be said of the result if the practice to attain this
state has been performed since childhood?

Jñāna and karma are specifically explained in this
chapter and bhakti is explained indirectly. Therefore,
this chapter is called the summary of Śrī Gītā.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,

                            177
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Second
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas

and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “That tattva which is
contrary to inert matter is called brahma . One can
attain aprākṛta-rasa (supramundane mellows) only by
establishing oneself in that tattva . The state of jaḍa-
mukti (liberation from inert consciousness) which leads
to the attainment of brahma is called brahma-nirvāṇa .
Like Khaṭvāṅga Mahārāja, if one is able to attain this
state at the time of death, he will attain brahma-
nirvāṇa .

“This chapter is the summary of Bhagavad-gītā. Ślokas
one to ten introduce the nature of the person who is
asking questions. Ślokas twelve to thirty give a
description of the tattva of ātmā (spirit) and anātmā
(non-spirit). Ślokas thirty-one to thirty-eight, is an
explanation of piety and sin within svadharma-rūpa-karma
(duties). Ślokas thirty-nine to the end of the chapter
there is a description of niṣkāma-karma-yoga , by which
self-knowledge is attained, which is the goal of the
aforementioned jñ āna and karma. There is also a
description of the behaviour of a person who is situated
in this yoga.”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Second
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Three


Karma-Yoga

Yoga Through the Principle of Action




Śloka 1




arjuna uvāca—

jyāyasī cet karmaṇas te

                           178
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


matā buddhir janārdana

tat kiṁ karmaṇi ghore māṁ

niyojayasi keśava

arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; janārdana—O Janārdana; cet—if;
te—Your; matā—consideration; (is that) buddhiḥ—
intelligence; (is) jyāyasī—better; karmaṇaḥ—than
fruitive work; tat—then; kim—why; keśava—O Keśav a;
niyojayasi—are You engaging; mām—me; ghore—in this
ghastly; karmaṇi—work.

Arjuna said: O Janārdana, if You consider that
intelligence related to bhakti, which is beyond the
modes, is superior to action, then why, O Keśava, are
You engaging me in this ghastly activity of fighting?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




This Third Chapter gives a detailed explanation of
action (karma) offered to Śrī Bhagavān without expecting
any material return (niṣkāma-bhāva ). It also describes
the wisdom of a person who is willing to conquer lust,
anger and so forth.

From the ślokas in the previous chapter, Arjuna has
understood that guṇātīta-bhakti-yoga , which bestows
freedom from the guṇas (nistraiguṇya ), is superior both
to jñ āna-yoga and to niṣkāma-karma-yoga . Now, in the
mood of a friend (sakhya-bhāva ), he reproaches Śrī
Bhagavān, who is eager to engage him in his prescribed
duty of fighting, with the following words. “If that
intelligence which is resolute (vyavasāyātmikā) and free
from the guṇas (guṇātītā) is superior, then why, O Jan
ārdana, are You engaging me in this ghastly warfare?”
Jana means to Your own people and ārdana means giving
pain, so Janārdana means by Your order You give pain to
Your own people.

Arjuna also addresses Kṛṣṇa as Keśava. “No one can
transgress Your order, because You are Keśava, the
controller of both Brahmā and Mahādeva (ka means Brahmā,
īśa means Mahādeva and va means controller).”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka there is a mysterious secret behind
Arjuna’s addressing Śrī Kṛṣṇa by the names Keśava and
Janārdana. Arjuna inquired, “O Janārdana, first You said
that resolute intelligence (vyavasāyātmikā buddhi ),

                            179
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

which is beyond the modes (guṇātītā) and fixed in bhakti
, is superior to karma (action). Why, then, are You
engaging me in this ghastl y warfare? Learned men are
right in calling You Janārdana, for by Your order You
give pain to Your own people who are dear to You and
dependent on You. Janārdana is a very befitting name for
You because You killed the asura named Jana, which is
another ind ication of Your cruel nature. Keśava is
another appropriate name, because You killed the asura
Keśī. Moreover, ka means Brahmā, īśa means Mahādeva and
va means controller. Since You control them, You are
called Keśava. How, then, can an insignificant perso n
such as I transgress Your order? O Prabhu, be merciful
to me!”

In Śrī Harivaṁśa Śrī Rudra (Śaṅkara) says in relation to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His name, Keśava: ka iti brahmaṇo nāma

īśo ‘haṁ sarva-dehinām

āvāṁ tavāṅga-sambhūtau

tasmāt keśava-nāma-bhāk

Ka is Brahmā and I am Īśa (Śaṅkara), the controller of
all living entities. Since both of us were born from
Your limbs, You are called Keśava.




Śloka 2



vyāmiśreṇeva vākyena


buddhiṁ mohayasīva me

tad ekaṁ vada niścitya

yena śreyo ‘ham āpnuyām

mohayasi iva—You seem to bewilder; me—my; buddhim—
intelligence; iva vyāmiśreṇa—by (Your) apparently
equivocal; vākyena—statements; tat—therefore; vada—
please tell; ekam—one path; yena—by which; niścitya—
ascertaining; aham—I; āpnuyām—may have; śreyaḥ—welfare.

My intelligence is somewhat bewildered by Your
apparently ambiguous statements. Please, therefore, tell
me decisively which path will be most beneficial for me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is telling His friend, “O sakhā Arjuna! It

                           180
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

is a fact that guṇātīta-bhakti is the most superior
process because it is transcendental. But such bhakti
can only be attained by the mercy of My mahā-bhakta who
is independent (transcendental to the guṇas ) and
aikāntika (one-pointed). It can never be attained by
one’s own endeavour. Therefore, become nistraiguṇya
(free from the guṇas ). I bless you that you will become
nistraiguṇya by performing transcendental bhakti
(guṇātīta-bhakti ) to Me. When this blessing fructifies,
you will achieve guṇātīta-bhakti by the mercy of an
independent and aikāntika mahā-bhāgavat , but, as I have
already said, at present your eligibility (adhikāra ) is
to perform karma only.”

Arjuna then says, “If this is so, why don’t You
definitively tell me to engage only in karma? Why are
You drowning me in an ocean of doubts?” This is why
Arjuna is speaking this śloka beginning with
vyāmiśreṇeva , which has various implications. He is
saying, “By such statements You are bewildering my
intelligence. Moreover, initially You said: karmaṇy
evādhikāras te (Gītā 2.47). ‘You only have the adhikāra
to perform karma , your prescribed duty.’ Then You said:
siddhy-asiddhyoḥ samo bhūtvā samatvaṁ yoga ucyate (Gītā
2.48). ‘That equanimity in which one remains equipoised
in success and failure is called yoga .’ Then again, You
said: buddhi-yukto jahātīha ubhe sukṛta-duṣkṛte tasmād
yogāya yujyasva yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam (Gītā 2.50).
‘Intelligent persons abandon both pious and impious
activities and, because buddhi -yoga is the highest goal
of karma , they endeavour for niṣkāma-karma .’ Here, by
the word yoga , You are also referring to jñ āna . Then
You say: yadā te moha-kalilaṁ buddhir vyatitariṣyati
(Gītā 2.52). ‘When your intelligence crosses beyond the
dense forest of delusion.’ Here again, You are simply
speaking about jñ āna.

“In fact, the word iva (‘like that’ or ‘it seems’)
implies that Your statement is not ambiguous. Since You
are merciful, it is not Your desire to bewilder me.
Besides, since I am not ignorant of these matters, it is
appropriate for You to speak directly.” The deep purport
is that karma (action) in sattva-guṇa is superior to
karma in rajo-guṇa . Jñ āna is also in sattva-guṇa , but
it is superior to karma in sattva-guṇa , and nirguṇa-
bhakti is far superior to jñ āna . “If You think that it
is impossible for me to engage in nirguṇa-bhakti , then
please simply instruct me on sāttvika-j ñ āna , by which
I will become free from bondage to this miserable
material world.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Action (karma) in sattva-guṇa is superior to action in
rajo-guṇa . Jñ āna is superior to karma in sattva-guṇa ,
although it is also in sattva-guṇa . Sattvāt saṅjāyate j
ñ ānam. “From sattva-guṇa real jñ āna develops” (Gītā
14.17).

                           181
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Superior to jñāna in sattva-guṇa is nirguṇa-bhakti ,
which is defined as follows in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.29.11-12): mad-guṇa-śruti-mātreṇa

mayi sarva-guhāśaye

mano-gatir avicchinnā

yathā gaṅgāmbhaso ‘mbudhau

lakṣaṇaṁ bhakti-yogasya

nirguṇasya hy udāhṛtam

ahaituky avyavahitā

yā bhaktiḥ puruṣottame

While Kapiladeva was instructing His mother, Devahūti in
nirgu ṇa-bhakti , He said, “Just as the water of the Ga
ṅg ā flows naturally and without cessation towards the
ocean, similarly that natural unbroken flow of the ātm ā
towards Me, who am situated within the cave of the heart
of the living entity, merely hearing about My pastimes
and qualities, which are blessed with extraordinary
potency, is called nirgu ṇa-bhakti -yoga . Nirgu ṇa-
bhakti is any ābhil āṣa-śūnya , devoid of the duality of
the material world which arises from dvit īya-abhinive ś
a (forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa), and it absorbs the performer
favourably in continuous service to Me, Puru ṣottama.”

To forget Kṛṣṇa and become absorbed in māyā is called
dvitīya-abhiniveśa , absorption in the second or false
object (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.37). This gives rise to
various separate interests, such as ‘I,’ ‘mine,’ ‘you’
and ‘yours’.




Śloka 3




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

loke ‘smin dvi-vidhā niṣṭhā

purā proktā mayānagha

jñāna-yogena sāṅkhyānāṁ

karma-yogena yoginām

śrī bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said; anagha—O sinless
one; purā—previously; proktā—it was clearly said; mayā—
by Me; (that) asmin—this; loke—in the world; (there are)
dvi-vidhā—two types of; niṣṭhā—strong faith; (that)
sāṅkhyānām—of the analytical philosophers; jñ āna-yogena
—through the linking process of philosophical
speculation; (and that) yoginām—of the yogīs ; karma-

                             182
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

yogena—through the yoga of niṣkāma-karma .

Śrī Bhagavān said, “O sinless Arjuna, I have already
explained clearly that there are two types of firm faith
in this world. The faith of the sāṅkhya-vādī j ñ ānīs is
in the path of jñ āna-yoga and that of the yogīs is in
niṣkāma-karma-yoga.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In response to Arjuna’s question, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
says, “If I say that niṣkāma-karma-yoga and jñ āna-yoga
, which are the sādhana performed to attain mokṣa , are
independent of each other, you will again ask Me to
speak decisively on one of them. But as I have
explained, the two types of niṣṭhā (staunch faith),
karma-niṣṭhā and jñ āna-niṣṭhā, are actually two
consecutive stages on the same path. In fact, I have not
said that there are two types of people who are eligible
to achieve mokṣa.”

The two ślokas beginning with the present śloka , loke
‘smin , are being spoken for this reason. As explained
in the previous chapter, dvi-vidhā indicates two types
of niṣṭhā. Regarding this niṣṭhā, Kṛṣṇa is saying that,
since in the stage of jñ āna the heart of the jñ ānī is
pure, maryādā (regulated discipline) can be established
by the practice of jñ āna-yoga . Only such persons who
accept maryādā are well known in this world as jñ ānīs .

In Gītā (2.61) Śrī Kṛṣṇa says:

tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya

yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

vaśe hi yasyendriyāṇi

tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

Therefore, after controlling all of their senses, the
yogīs should remain under My shelter and devote
themselves to Me. Only a person in control of his senses
has fixed intelligence. Only he is sthita-prajña.

“On the other hand, there are those who lack the purity
of heart to situate themselves on the path of jñāna ,
but are searching for the means to attain that path. The
maryādā of such yogīs is established by following the
path of niṣkāma-karma-yoga which is offered unto Me.
They are known as karmīs. In Gītā 2.31 it is said ‘For a
kṣatriya there is no better engagement than to fight for
religion.’ Therefore the terms ‘karmī’ and ‘jñ ānī’ are
only two appellations. However, generally when karmīs
begin to purify their hearts by the process of niṣkāma-
karma-yoga they, too, become jñ ānīs who can in turn
become liberated by the process of bhakti . This is the
import of My statements.”

                           183
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The various processes of karma, yoga, jñ āna and tapasya
cannot give their own results independently. They are
only able to produce beneficial results by taking the
support of bhakti . Nirguṇa-bhakti , however, can give
kṛṣṇa-prema independently without the help of these
other processes. Bhakti-yoga mixed with jñ āna or karma
is the sādhana for achieving mokṣa . There are two types
of niṣṭhā (staunch faith) related to this sādhana . The
first is possessed by those with pure hearts, who ascend
the path of bhakti-yoga through their steady faith in
sāṅkhya or jñ āna-yoga . The second is the faith of
those whose hearts are impure, but who, by performing
niṣkāma-karma offered to Śrī Bhagavān, can also ascend
the path of jñ āna-yoga and ultimately achieve bhakti .




Śloka 4



na karmaṇām anārambhān

naiṣkarmyaṁ puruṣo ‘śnute

na ca sannyasanād eva

siddhiṁ samadhigacchati

(it is) na anārambhāt—not by refraining from; karmaṇām—
prescribed duties; (that) puruṣaḥ—a person; aśnute—
attains; naiṣkarmyam—freedom from reaction; ca—and; (it
is) na—not; eva—only; sannyasanāt—by renouncing
prescribed duties; (that a person whose heart is impure)
samadhigacchati—attains; siddhim—perfection.

Without performing karma as prescribed in śāstra, a
person cannot attain knowledge in the form of
naiṣkarmya, nor can a person with an impure heart attain
perfection merely by renouncing action (sannyāsa).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this śloka beginning with the word na, Śrī Bhagavān
is explaining that jñ āna will not appear in an impure
heart. One cannot attain naiṣkarmya (freedom from karma
and its reaction), without performing the karma (action)

                            184
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

prescribed in śāstra and consequently one cannot attain
jñ āna . Those persons whose hearts are impure cannot
attain perfection merely by accepting sannyāsa , the
renunciation of prescribed karma .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Jñāna does not appear unless the heart is pure, and
without jñ āna one cannot perfect sannyāsa , which is a
limb of the process of attaining mokṣa . Therefore,
until one attains jñ āna by purity of heart one should,
as stated in śāstra , continue performing prescribed
duties related to varṇāśrama-dharma .




Śloka 5



na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api

jātu tiṣṭhaty akarma-kṛt

kāryate hy avaśaḥ karma

sarvaḥ prakṛti-jair guṇaiḥ

hi—certainly; na kaścit—no one; jātu—at any time;
tiṣṭhati—can remain; akarma-kṛt—inactive; api—even;
kṣaṇam—for a moment; sarvaḥ—everyone; hi—certainly;
kāryate—is engaged; avaśaḥ—helplessly; karma—in action;
guṇaiḥ—through the modes; prakṛti-jaiḥ—born of one’s
nature.

No one can remain without performing action, even for a
moment. Everyone is impelled to act under the influence
of such qualities such as attachment, envy and so on
which are born of his nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those who have accepted sannyāsa while their hearts are
still impure become absorbed in mundane activities, and
give up the karma prescribed to them in śāstra . It is
for this reason only that Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka
beginning with na hi . Anticipating Arjuna’s question,
“By the acceptance of sannyāsa does a person cease
performing activities prescribed in the Vedas or
activities which are related to the material world?” Śrī

                             185
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhagavān responds by saying, kāryate. “Being forcibly
bound by his own nature, he must act.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here, the word sannyāsa means detachment from the fruits
of karma . It does not mean completely giving up karma
or becoming inactive, because it is not possible for the
embodied soul to completely renounce activity. It is
stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.1.44), dehav ān na hy
akarma-kṛt. “Those whose hearts are pure and who control
their senses, remain engaged in that karma prescribed in
śāstra . However, persons whose hearts are impure and
whose senses are uncontrolled remain attached to akarma
(neglect of duty) and kukarma (sinful actions). It is
therefore impossible for such persons to achieve
sannyāsa .”




Śloka 6



karmendriyāṇi saṁyamya

ya āste manasā smaran

indriyārthān vimūḍhātmā

mithyācāraḥ sa ucyate

saḥ vimūḍha-ātmā—a foolish person; yaḥ—who; saṁyamya—
controls; karma-indriyāṇi—the working senses; (yet) āste
—remains; smaran—meditating; indriya-arthān—on sense
objects; manasā—by means of the mind; ucyate—is called;
mithya-ācāraḥ—one whose behaviour is false, a hypocrite.

A deluded person who forcibly controls his working
senses while internally meditating on sense objects is
to be known as a hypocrite.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




One may argue, “It seems that, like the hypocrite, some
sannyāsīs are seen with their eyes closed and devoid of
bodily movements.” In response Śrī Bhagavān says, “One
who controls his working senses (karmendriyas ) such as
speech and hands, but who thinks of sense objects on the
pretext of meditation, is a hypocrite and an imposter.”

                           186
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti



tvaṁ-padārtha-vivekāya sannyāsaḥ sarva-karmaṇām

śrutyeha vihito yasmāt tat-tyāgī patito bhavet


This Vedic injunction from the dharma-śāstra states that
it is absolutely essential to renounce all fruitive
actions in order to attain knowledge of the self (tvaṁ-
padārtha ). Those who do not follow this injunction are
fallen. Therefore, a man with an impure heart who
accepts the dress of a sannyāsī and who makes a display
of sitting in an āsana to meditate on Bhagavān is a
pretender and is adharmika . To exhibit oneself in
society as a devotee while being devoid of bhakti is
pretentious. Such people are not only hypocritical but
also arrogant.




Śloka 7




yas tv indriyāṇi manasā

niyamyārabhate ‘rjuna

karmendriyaiḥ karma-yogam

asaktaḥ sa viśiṣyate

tu—however; arjuna—O Arjuna; saḥ yaḥ—he who; asaktaḥ—
without attachment; niyamya—controls; indriyāṇi—the
senses; manasā—through the mind; (and) ārabhate—begins;
karma-yogam—the process of niṣkāma-karma-yoga ; karma-
indriyaiḥ—through the medium of the working senses;
viśiṣyate—is superior.

O Arjuna, a person who performs action with his working
senses (karmendriyas), according to the injunctions of
śāstra, but who has controlled his senses by his mind,
and who is free from all fruitive desires, is superior
to the hypocrite who refrains from activity.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




It is indicated here that, even a gṛhastha who acts

                            187
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

according to śāstra is recognised as superior to the
false renunciant described in the previous śloka . Śrī
Bhagavān explains this by speaking this śloka beginning
with yas tu . Here, karma-yoga refers to action
prescribed in śāstra , and asaktaḥ means without desire
for the fruits of one’s activity. This means that the
person who acts according to the instructions of śāstra
with no desire for the fruits of his activities attains
a superi or condition. Śrī Rāmānujācārya says:
asambhāvita-pramādatvena j ñ āna-niṣṭhād api puruṣād
viśiṣṭaḥ. “A householder who has controlled his
knowledge-acquiring senses (jñ ānendriyas ) and his
working senses (karmendriyas ), is better than a so-
called transcendentalist who makes a display of his
knowledge. The pseudo-transcendentalist may deviate
because his senses are uncontrolled, but there is no
possibility that a householder who has controlled his
knowledge-acquiring senses will deviate or be careless
while performing his prescribed duties with his working
senses.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




In order to purify the heart, it is imperative to
perform actions prescribed in śāstra without attachment.
Those sādhakas who, after controlling their jñ
ānendriyas (such as the eyes, ears and tongue), perform
karma -yoga with their karmendriyas (such as the legs,
hands and speech) without desiring the fruits, and who
are always careful and attentive, are qualified to
attain puruṣārtha , the supreme goal of human life. Such
sādhakas who aspire for the transcendental goal are
superior to those sādhakas who accept sannyāsa
impetuously and who forcibly control their working
senses while enjoying sense objects through their
knowledge-acquiring senses.




Śloka 8




niyataṁ kuru karma tvaṁ

karma jyāyo hy akarmaṇaḥ

śarīra-yātrāpi ca te

na prasidhyed akarmaṇaḥ

tvam—you; kuru—must perform; karma—duties; niyatam—under
regulation of śāstra (sandhyā and upāsanā); hi—
certainly; karma—action; jyāyaḥ—is better; akarmaṇah—
than inaction; ca—and; api—even; te—your; śarīra—bodily;

                           188
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

yātrā—maintenance; na prasidhyet—can not be effected;
akarmaṇaḥ—without work.

Perform your prescribed duties such as sandhyā-upāsanā,
because action (karma) is better than inaction (akarma).
If you refrain from action, you will not even be able to
maintain your body.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Therefore, O Arjuna, perform your nitya-karma
(regulated duties) such as sandhyā (morning, noon and
evening prayers) and upāsanā (worship). It is better to
do so than to renounce karma (akarmaṇaḥ). If you give up
all karma , you will not even be able to maintain your
body.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The above statement is verified in Chāndogya Upaniṣad
(7.26.2):


āhāra-śuddhau sattva-śuddhiḥ

sattva-śuddhau dhruvā smṛtiḥ

smṛti-lambhe sarvagranthīnāṁ vipramokṣaḥ


It is by the purity of food that one’s mind becomes
purified and sāttvika. When the mind is purified, one
attains a stable memory. When the memory is stable, all
the knots of the heart are untied.

Furthermore it is stated in Gītā (3.13):

bhuñjate te tv aghaṁ pāpā

ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt

It is understood from this and other statements that for
the perfection of one’s sādhana, it is necessary to
maintain and protect the body, which is essential for
the performance of one’s svadharma (prescribed duties).
However, those who impetuously give up all action by
taking sannyāsa do not see the light of knowledge in
their impure hearts. Moreover, if they perform no work
at all, they can even leave their bodies due to lack of
maintenance.



                            189
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 9



yajñārthāt karmaṇo ‘nyatra

loko ‘yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ

tad-arthaṁ karma kaunteya

mukta-saṅgaḥ samācara

kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; anyatra—other; karmaṇah—than
niṣkāma-karma ; yajña-arth āt—for the sake of Śrī Viṣṇu;
ayam—this; lokaḥ—humanity; karma-bandhanaḥ—has bondage
through their work; (being) mukta-saṅgaḥ—free from
attachment; samācara—nicely perform; karma—work; tad-
artham—for His sake.

O Kaunteya, all actions other than niṣkāma-karma offered
to Śrī Viṣṇu are a cause of bondage to this world.
Therefore, become free from all desires for the fruits
of your actions, and perform appropriate action solely
for His satisfaction.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān says, “O Arjuna, if you quote karmaṇā
badhyate jantuḥ from the smṛti-śāstra as evidence that a
jīvātmā is bound by performing action, and if you think
that you will also become bound, then listen carefully.
This is not always the case. Karma offered to
Parameśvara is not a cause of bondage.” The present
śloka beginning with yajñ ārthāt is spoken to explain
this. Niṣkāma-dharma , performan ce of one’s prescribed
duties wherein the fruits are offered to Śrī Viṣṇu, is
called yajña . All karma (action), except for that
performed for the satisfaction of Viṣṇu, binds a person
to the material world. Therefore, to attain perfection
in dharma , one must perform such karma properly for the
satisfaction of Śrī Viṣṇu. If Arjuna again asks, “Will
it be a cause of bondage to make an offering which is
materially motivated, even though I am offering the
results of my prescribed duties to Śrī Viṣṇu?” Śrī Kṛṣṇa
answers, mukta-saṅgaḥ. “Perform action without any
desire for the fruits.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructed Uddhava in
the same way: svadharma-stho yajan yajñair

anāśīḥ-kāma uddhava

na yāti svarga-narakau

yady anyan na samācaret

asmi˚ loke vartamānaḥ

                             190
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


svadharma-stho ‘naghaḥ śuciḥ

jñānaṁ viśuddham āpnoti

mad-bhaktiṁ vā yadṛcchayā


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.20.10-11

O Uddhava, a person who performs his svadharma without
desiring the fruits and who worships Śrī Bhagavān by
yajña, not engaging in the pursuit of any desirable
sense object or any forbidden activity, attains neither
heaven nor hell. Such a person, who is situated in his
svadharma, who has given up all forbidden activities and
who is free from all attachment and envy, attains
viśuddha jñ āna, pure knowledge, even in his present
condition in this world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The Vedas say: yajño vai viṣṇuḥ. “Yajña is indeed
Viṣṇu.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa also tells Uddhava in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.19.39): yajño ‘ham bhagavattamaḥ. “I, the
son of Vasudeva, am yajña .” The Tantra-sāra also states
yajña to be Śrī Hari Himself: yajño yajña-pumāṁś caiva
yajñaśo yajña-bhāvanaḥ

yajña-bhuk ceti pañcātmā yajñeṣv ijyo hariḥ svayam


In the two ślokas of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.10-11),
which Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has cited in
his commentary on the present śloka , the word
svadharma-stha (situated in one’s prescribed duties) has
been used twice. While commenting on these two ślokas ,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says: 1) One does
not go to hell if he is situated in his svadharma and
does not transgress the activities prescribed in śāstra
, that is, he does not engage in forbidden activities.
And, since he has no desire for the fruits of his
activities, he does not go to Svarga (heaven) either.

2) A person who engages in niṣkāma-karma is called
svadharma-stha .

When karma is performed in accordance with śāstra ,
without any selfish motive and for the pleasure of Śrī
Viṣṇu, it purifies the heart. Sādhu-saṅga then causes
bhagavat-tattva to appear in the heart, allowing one to
enter the path of nirguṇa-bhakti .

Devarṣi Nārada has also said this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(1.5.32):

etat saṁsūcitaṁ brahmaṁs


                            191
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

tāpa-traya-cikitsitam

yad īśvare bhagavati

karma brahmaṇi bhāvitam

O knower of brahma, that karma which is dedicated to the
lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān, the controller and master of
everyone, removes the three types of miseries.

Śrī Bhagavān also told the Pracetās:

gṛheṣv āviśatāṁ cāpi

puṁsāṁ kuśala-karmaṇām

mad-vārtā yāta-yāmānāṁ

na bandhāya gṛhā matāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.30.19

Those who know Me to be the enjoyer of the fruits of all
activities offer all of their karma to Me alone. Such
expert performers of action, as well as those who spend
their time hearing and reciting My pastimes, do not
become bound by their actions, even though remaining in
household life.




Śloka 10




saha-yajñāḥ prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā

purovāca prajāpatiḥ

anena prasaviṣyadhvam

eṣa vo ‘stv iṣṭa-kāma-dhuk

purā—in ancient times; sṛṣṭvā—having created; prajāḥ—
progeny; saha-yajñ āḥ—together with brāhmaṇas qualified
to perform yajña ; prajā-patiḥ—Prajāpati Brahmā; uvāca—
said; anena—by this yajña ; prasaviṣyadhvam—be more and
more prosperous; astu—let; eṣaḥ—this yajña ; (be) vaḥ—
your; iṣṭa-kāmadhuk—fulfiller of cherished desires.

In the beginning of creation, Prajāpati Brahmā   created
brāhmaṇas who were qualified to perform yajña,   and also
men, devas and all the other subjects. He then   blessed
them, saying, “May you prosper by this yajñ ā,   and may
it fulfil all your desires.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                             192
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śrī Bhagavān says, “A person with an impure heart should
exclusively engage in niṣkāma-karma and not take
sannyāsa , but if in his present state he cannot become
niṣkāma , then let him perform sakāma-karma (fruitive
action) and offer the results to Śrī Viṣṇu.” To explain
this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa speaks seven ślokas , the first of which
begins here with the word saha. Saha-yajña means along
with sacrifice. In accordance with the sūtra, vikalpe-
upasarjana , saha has not been replaced with sa.

Purā implies that in the beginning of creation, Brahmā
produced progeny who would perform yajña in the form of
dharmika activities offered to Śrī Viṣṇu, and then
blessed them, saying, anena dharmeṇa prasaviṣyadhvam.
“By this dharma may you become increasingly prosperous
in terms of progeny and opulence.” Keeping in mind the
tendency of the progeny to enjoy, Lord Brahmā said, “Let
this yajña fulfil all your desired ends.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Offering kāmya-karma, fruitive action, to Śrī Viṣṇu is
better than akarma (non-action).




Śloka 11




devān bhāvayatānena

te devā bhāvayantu vaḥ

parasparaṁ bhāvayantaḥ

śreyaḥ param avāpsyatha

bhāvayatā—by pleasing; devān—the devas ; anena—through
this yajña ; te—those; devāḥ—devas ; bhāvayantu—must
please; vaḥ—you; bhāvaya ntaḥ—may please (by bestowing
the results); parasparam—one another; avāpsyatha—you
shall attain; param—supreme; śreyaḥ—good fortune.

May you please the devas by this yajña, and may they
please you in turn by granting you your desired fruits.
Satisfying one another in this way, you will attain
supreme auspiciousness.




                           193
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this śloka beginning with devān, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
explaining how yajña can grant all the heart’s desires.
He says, “May you please the devas by this yajña and may
those devas also please you.” In this context the word
bhāva means prīti , pleasing.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka, Bhagavān instructs that, to please the
devas , oblations of ghee are to be offered to them.
This has a hidden meaning. Bhagavān is not inst ructing
us to give up our devotional service and make
sacrificial offerings to worship the devas , as if they
are independent lords. They are not independent. Śrī
Viṣṇu empowers qualified jīvātmās and, giving them the
post of protectors of the directions, He maintains the
universe through them. Thus, these devas are like the
limbs of Śrī Bhagavān. It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(1.11.26): bāhavo loka-pālānām. “The arms of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
are the shelter for all of the administrative devas of
the world.” Again it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.1.29): indrādayo bāhava āhur usrāḥ. “Devas such as
Indra are the arms of the virāṭ-puruṣa , the Lord’s
universal form.”

Regarding Indra-pūjā, it is seen in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
that the residents of Vraja used to worship him eve ry
year, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa asked them to worship the mountain
Giri Govardhana instead. When Indra’s arrogance was
crushed, he accepted that it was due to pride in his
aiśvarya (opulence) that he considered himself an
independent lord. Śrī Bhagavān showed him g reat mercy
by removing his false ego. Indra said, “Now, having
realised that I am the servant of the servant of Your
servants, I surrender to You.” From this context it is
evident that the devas who protect the various
directions are the limbs of the virāṭ-puruṣa (universal
form) .




Śloka 12




iṣṭān bhogān hi vo devā

dāsyante yajña-bhāvitāḥ

tair dattān apradāyaibhyo

                            194
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


yo bhuṅkte stena eva saḥ

yajña-bhāvitāḥ—being pleased by the performance of
sacrifices; hi—indeed; devāḥ—the devas ; dāsyante—will
award; vaḥ—unto you; iṣṭān—the desired; bhogān—
pleasures; yaḥ—he who; bhuṅkte—enjoys; dattān—
ingredients given; taiḥ—by them; apradāya—without
offering; ebhyaḥ—unto the devas ; saḥ—he; (is) eva—
certainly; stenaḥ—a thief.

Being pleased by your yajña, the devas will award your
desired goals. Therefore, a person who enjoys the
ingredients given by the devas, without first offering
them to the devas, is certainly a thief.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Failure to perform karma is certainly a defect. Śrī
Bhagavān is speaking this śl oka beginning with the word
iṣṭān to clarify this point. Grains and other products
grow due to rain which is caused by the devas . After
producing grains and other items, a person who enjoys
them, without first offering them to the devas by
performing pañca -mahā-yaj ña , is a thief.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In regard to pañca-mahā-yajña, it is stated in the
Garuḍa Purāṇa : adhyāpanaṁ brahma-yajñaḥ

pitṛ-yajñas tu tarpaṇam



homo daivo balir bhauto

nṛ-yajño ‘tithi-pūjanam

1) Adhyāpana, to give instructions from śāstra to the
disciple is brahma-yajña. 2) To offer oblations to the
forefathers is pitṛ-yajña. 3) To perform homa-yajña
(fire sacrifice) is deva-yajña. 4) To give in charity
offerings of fruits, flowers, grains and so on to the
living entities is bali or bhūta-yaj ña. 5) To receive
guests warm-heartedly is called nṛ-yajña.

Many persons think that the word bali in this śloka
means to offer a yajña by killing animals and humans,
but this is not the opinion of śāstra.



                           195
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā

nityā hi jantor na hi tatra codanā

vyavasthitis teṣu vivāha-yajña

surā-grahair āsu nivṛttir iṣṭā


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.5.11

The true meaning of bali is to give grains, water,
fruits, flowers and animals in charity for the
satisfaction of the devas.




Śloka 13



yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo

mucyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ

bhuñjate te tv aghaṁ pāpā

ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt

santaḥ—saintly persons; (are) aśinaḥ—eaters; yajña-śiṣṭa
—of the remnants of food of yajña ; mucyante—they are
freed; sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ—from all sins; tu—but; te—those;
pāpāḥ—sinners; ye—who; bhuñjate—eat; ātma-kāraṇāt—for
their own sake; pacanti—digest; agham—sin.

Saintly persons who accept the remnants of yajña become
free from all sins, but those who cook grains and other
foodstuffs for their own sake are sinful, and certainly
partake of sin.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those who accept the grain remnants of yajñas, such as
vaiśvadeva (a type of deva-yajña ), become free from the
sins incurred due to pañca-s ūnā. According to smṛti-
śāstra , the five objects known to the householder as
pañca-s ūnā are: the cooking fire, the grinding
instrument, the mortar and pestle, the water-pot and the
broom. The word sūnā means the place where animals are
slaughtered. These five household objects are called
pañca-s ūnā because they may inflict violence upon
living entities. It is only because of pañca-s ūnā that
householders do not attain Svarga.




                            196
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Yajñas related with the worship of the devatās are
called vaiśvadeva .

vasu-sato kratu-dakṣau

kāla-kāmau dhṛtiḥ kuruḥ

purūravā mādravāś ca

viśvadevāḥ prakīrtitāḥ



Bharata Muni

Violence is caused unknowingly to living entities by the
householders’ use of the pestle, fire, grinding
instrument, water-pot, and broom.

Those who cook food for themselves become implicated in
such sins. Even if they properly perform their
prescribed duties, they do not attain Svarga. Therefore,
the smṛti-śāstras have prescribed the pañca-yajña to
nullify the sins from pañca-s ūnā: pañca-s ūnā kṛtaṁ
pāpaṁ pa ñca-yajñair vyapohati .




Śloka 14



annād bhavanti bhūtāni

parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ

yajñād bhavati parjanyo

yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ

bhūtāni—living beings; bhavanti—develop; annāt—from
grains; parjanyāt—from rains; anna—food grains;
sambhavaḥ—are produced; yajñ āt—from the performance of
sacrifice; parjanyaḥ—rain; bhavati—is produced; yajñaḥ—
sacrifice; samudbhavaḥ—is born of; karma—prescribed
duties.

All living beings are born from food grains, which are
produced from rain. Rains are produced from yajña, and
yajña is born of prescribed duties.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                           197
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śrī Bhagavān says, “It is still desirable to perform
yajña, because it maintains the cycle of action in this
material world.” To express this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks
the śloka beginning with the word annāt . Living
entities take birth from food grains, thus food grains
are the cause of living entities. Grain is transformed
into blood which then turns into semen, which in turn
forms the body of the living entity. Clouds are the
source of food grains, which are produced from rain.
Yajña is the cause of the clouds, because when yajña is
performed, sufficient rain clouds are produced. The
cause of the yajña is karma (action), because a yajña is
perfectly executed when the ṛtvik (priest) of the yajña
and the yajamāna (he on whose behalf the yajña is
performed) both fulfil the prescribed karma .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Ṛtvik—Priests who perform yajña in different seasons are
called ṛtvik :


āgnedheyaṁ pāka-yajñān agniṣṭomādikān makhān

yaḥ karoti vṛto yasya sa tasyartvig ihocyate


There are four prominent ṛtviks in the performance of
yajña. They are known as: 1) hot ā, one who chants the
Ṛg Veda mantras ; 2) adhvaryu , one who chants the Yajur
Veda mantras ; 3) brahm ā, one who chants the Atharva
Veda mantras , and 4) udg āt ā, one who chants the Sāma
Veda mantras .




Śloka 15



karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi

brahmākṣara-samudbhavam

tasmāt sarvagataṁ brahma

nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam

viddhi—you should know that; karma—prescribed duties;
udbhavam—originate; brahma—from the Vedas ; (and that)
brahma—the Vedas ; samudbhavam—originate; akṣara—from
Acyuta, the immutable Supreme Lord; tasmāt—for this
reason; s arva-gatam—the all-pervading; brahma—supreme

                             198
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

brahma ; (is) nityam—always; pratiṣṭhitam—situated;
yajñe—in sacrifice.

Know that prescribed duties are inspired by the Vedas
and that the Vedas originate from Acyuta. The all-
pervading brahma is therefore always situated in yajña.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The Vedas are the cause of that karma (yajña ), because
yajña is performed only after hearing Vedic injunctions.
Akṣarabrahma , or Acyuta, the imperishable Absolute
Reality, is the cause of the Vedas , because they
originated from brahma . In this regard it is said in
the Vedas (śrutis ):


asya mahato bhūtasya niḥśvasitam etad

ṛg-vedo yajur-vedaḥ sāmavedo ‘tharvāṅgirasaḥ


Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.5.11

The Ṛg-veda, Yajur-veda, Sāma-veda and Atharva-veda are
the breath of the Mahāpuruṣa. Therefore, sarva-gatam,
the all-pervading brahma, is situated in yajña.

This statement also establishes that one can attain
brahma by yajña . Although a connection of cause and
effect has been shown here by linking food grains to
brahma , in śāstra , only yajña is described as the
governing factor and only yajña is glorified. Manu-smṛti
also says: “Oblations offered in the fire reach
Sūryadeva, the sun-god. From the sun comes rain, from
rain comes food grains, and from food grains progeny are
born.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Udyama-sthā sadā laksmīḥ. “Wealth always resides in
endeavour.” Similarly, the all-pervading brahma is
always situated in yajña . By engaging in yajña and
righteous acts, the jīva not only becomes free from sin
but can also attain brahma .




Śloka 16


                           199
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




evaṁ pravartitaṁ cakraṁ

nānuvartayatīha yaḥ

aghāyur indriyārāmo

moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati

pārtha—O Pārtha; iha—in this world; yaḥ—one who; na
anuvartayati—does not follow; cakram—the cycle; evam—
thus; pravartitam—set into motion; (is) indriya-ārāmaḥ—
attached to the senses; (and) aghāyuḥ—a life of sin; saḥ
—he; jīvati—lives; mogham—in vain.

O Pārtha, in this world one who does not follow this
cycle of karma, which is established by the Vedas,
becomes attached to his senses and engaged in sinful
activity. Thus he lives in vain.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




By not engaging in this cycle, the fault of irregularity
arises. The present śloka beginning with evam is spoken
to give an understanding of this point. Cakra , or
cycle, means an ordered series of events. For example,
clouds and rain come from yajña , food grains come from
rains, and from food grains come the living beings (men)
who again perform yajña , which produces rain clouds and
so on. One who does not engage in yajña to continue this
cycle is aghāyuḥ, a sinful person. Who does not go to
hell? Only one who performs yajña does not go to hell.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Parameśvara has established the cycle of karma to fulfil
the desires of the jīvas . Consequently, one who does
not perform yajña , which perpetuates the cycle of the
universe, becomes implicated in sin and goes to hell.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “O Pārtha, those who
are qualified to engage in kāmya-karma (action with
fruitive desires), but who do not perform yajña to
perpetuate the cycle of the universe, become servants of
their senses, which engage them in sinful life. Thus
they live in vain.” The significance is that there is no
consideration of sin or piety in niṣkāma-karma-yoga
which is offered to Śrī Bhagavān, because śāstra has
established this as the most suitable path to attain
nirguṇa-bhakti of Bhagavān. A person following this path

                           200
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

easily becomes pure at heart and free from material
contamination. Those who have not acquired the adhikāra
to offer this niṣkāma-karma-yoga to Śrī Bhagavān are
always swayed by material desires and s ensual urges and
thus engage in sinful acts. The only way to reduce this
sinful tendency is to perform puṇya-karma. Those who
have acted sinfully should only take shelter of
atonement. The provision of yajña is certainly dharma ,
pious activity. That which is auspicious for all jīvas
and conducive for the harmonious development of the
cycle of the universe, is called puṇya , or pious deeds.
The performance of puṇya destroys the unavoidable sins
that are born of pañca-s ūnā. So long as the performer
of yajña protects the interests and welfare of the
universe, whatever can be accepted for his happiness and
personal enjoyment becomes part of the yajña , and is
counted as piety.

The unseen controllers who cause auspiciousness for the
universe are the specific devas born from the śakti of
Śrī Bhagavān. By satisfying them with the offerings they
desire and gaining their favour, one pleases these devas
and all sins are destroyed. This is called the karma-
cakra . Thus, karma , which is accepted in the form of
worship of these devas , is called bhagavad-arpita-
kāmya-karma , or sakāma-upāsanā (worship with fruitive
desires). Some people falsely believe that they are
righteous and religious, even though they do not offer
their karma to Śrī Viṣṇu, and are not devotionally
inclined. They perf orm action, but disregard any form
of deva worship, because they think that it is mundane.
Such people are themselves simply following mundane
morality. It is therefore auspicious for the jīvas of
the world who are thus eligible not to follow these
deluded religionists, but to perform bhagavad-arpita-
kāmya-karma .




Śloka 17



yas tv ātma-ratir eva syād

ātma-tṛptaś ca mānavaḥ

ātmany eva ca santuṣṭas

tasya kāryaṁ na vidyate

tu—however; eva—certainly; mānavaḥ—the man; yaḥ—one who;
ātma-ratiḥ—delighting in the self; ca—and; syāt—is;
ātma-tṛptah—self-satisfied; ca—and; santuṣṭaḥ—satisfied;
ātmani—in the self; eva—certainly; tasya—for him; kāryam
—duties; na—do not; vidyate—exist.

However, a person who delights in the self, and who
remains contented and satisfied in the self, has no
duties to perform.



                             201
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




So far, it has been explained that those who are unable
to perform niṣkāma-karma should perform sakāma-karma .
Those who are situated on the platform of jñ āna ,
realised knowledge, never engage in the routine of
kāmya-karma (sakāma karma ), because their hearts are
pure . The next two ślokas , beginning here with yas tu
, are spoken to explain this. Ātma-ratiḥ means ātmārāma
, taking pleasure in the self. Ātma-tṛptaḥ refers to
those who remain satisfied simply by realising the
pleasure of the self. If one is satisfied within the
ātmā itself, would he be even slightly satisfied with
external sense objects? In response Śrī Bhagavān says,
“One who is satisfied within has no need for external
sense pleasure s, and is therefore not obliged to
perform prescribed duties.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Living entities who exist in the cycle of karma, which
has been described above, perform karma , knowing it to
be obligatory. However, those who can discriminate
between the self and inert objects engage solely in the
cultivation of the self. They remain content within the
self, because they are ātmārāma (able to take pleasure
in the self) and āptakāma (able to satisfy all their
desires in the self). Such mahā-pur uṣas are of two
types: 1) the jñ ānī-yogīs who search for the ātmā and
2) the bhakti -yogīs who cultivate the path of bhagavat-
prema . Personalities like the four Kumāras (Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanātana and Sanat-Kumāra) are considered to
be in the first category, while personalities like
Devarṣi Nārada fall in the second. They do not perform
karma , although they know it is their obligatory duty,
but perform actions which are favourable to bhakti
simply to maintain their lives. Becoming free from the
cycle of karma , they search for peace through bhagavat-
prīti (affection for Bhagavān) . Although they perform
all sorts of karma , they do nothing. Therefore, their
karma is not called karma . Their karma (activity) is
called jñ āna or bhakti , depending on their adhikār a .
It is also said in Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (3.1.4): ātma-krīḍa
ātma-ratiḥ kriyāvān eṣa brahma-vidāṁ variṣṭhaḥ. “Those
who take pleasure in the self, whose attachment is in
the self, and who are active only in the self, are the
best among the knowers of the Vedas .”




Śloka 18

                           202
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




naiva tasya kṛtenārtho

nākṛteneha kaścana

na cāsya sarva-bhūteṣu

kaścid artha-vyapāśrayaḥ

tasya—for him; (there is) na—no; arthaḥ—purpose to be
attained; kaścana—whatsoever; iha—in this world; kṛtena—
by acting; ca—and; na—nor; eva—indeed; akṛtena—by not
acting; asya—he has; na—not; kaścit—any; artha—
necessity; vyapāśrayaḥ—to take shelter; sarva-bhūteṣu—of
any of the living beings.

One who is ātmārāma does not attain any virtue by
performing action in this world, nor does he incur any
fault through not acting, and nor does he need to depend
on any jīva in the universe for attaining his purpose.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Kṛta refers to a person who neither has interest in
performing actions nor has any desires to be fulfilled
by such actions. Akṛta means that he is not at fault by
not performing action. To attain his purpose, there is
no jīva in the universe, either moving or non-moving,
who can act as a suitable shelter for him. The word
vyapāśrayaḥ has been described in the Purāṇas as
follows: vāsudeve bhagavati bhaktim udvahatāṁ nṛṇām

jñāna-vairāgya-vīryāṇāṁ

na hi kaścid vyapāśrayaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.17.31

A person endowed with bhakti for Bhagavān Vāsudeva does
not take shelter of jñāna, vairāgya or vīrya (powerful
strength), nor is he interested in them.

Moreover, it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.4.18):
yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ śuddhyanti. “A living entity becomes
purified merely by taking shelter of those who are
surrendered to Śrī Bhagavān.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




A person who derives pleasure only within the self

                            203
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(ātmārāma) neither achieves piety by performing his
prescribed duties, nor does he become implicated in sin
by not performing them. Every jīva , both moving and
non-moving, beginning with Brahmā, remains absorbed in
enjo ying material happiness due to his misconception of
identifying the body with the self. His every action is
performed for sense enjoyment. He does not even care for
jñ āna and vairāgya , which are the shelter of the
tyagīs. This is because he has taken shelter of bhakti ,
the natural function of the self. Jñ āna and vairāgya ,
which are both subordinate to bhakti , manifest in him
as a matter of course.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.42), Śrī Kavi speaks to
Mahārāja Nimi:


bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir

anyatra caiṣa trika eka-kālaḥ

prapadyamānasya yathāśnataḥ syus

tuṣṭiḥ puṣṭiḥ kṣud-apāyo ‘nu-ghāsam


With each mouthful of food that a hungry person takes,
three effects are simultaneously accomplished: he
obtains satisfaction, he is nourished and his hunger
ceases. Similarly, surrendered souls who are engaged in
the performance of bhajana simultaneously experience
three effects: the awakening of bhakti which ultimately
develops into prema , direct manifestation of Bhagavān’s
beloved form, and detachment from material objects.

One may raise the following question: In the Vedas it is
said: tasmād eṣāṁ tan na priyaṁ yad etan manuṣyā viduḥ.
“The devas do not want human beings to attain knowledge
of brahma .” (Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4.10) It is also
seen in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.18.14): viprasya vai
sannyasato

devā dārādi-rūpiṇaḥ

vighnān kurvanty ayaṁ hy asmān

ākramya samiyāt param

Knowing that brāhmaṇas will surpass them by taking
sannyāsa and obtaining brahma-tattva, the devas take
birth to become their wives or children and to create
obstacles in their path.

Thus, is it proper to worship the devas to eliminate
these obstacles?

In this regard, the śrutis state that, even though the
devas present these obstacles, they are, in fact, unable
to harm the spiritual aspirants, because the ātmā itself
protects them. This ātmā is the ātmā of all ātmās ,
Paramātmā.

vāsudeva-parā vedā


                           204
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

vāsudeva-parā makhāḥ

vāsudeva-parā yogā

vāsudeva-parāḥ kriyāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.28

According to this statement, Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa is the
original ātmā of all other ātmās . By performing bhajana
to Him one can gain the affection of everyone. All the
devas are ultimately compelled to show affection and
respect to those who have kṛṣṇa-bhakti .

In addition it is stated: bhaktis tu bhagavad-bhakta-
saṅgena parijāyate. “One attains bhakti only by the
association of bhaktas .” According to this statement of
śāstra , just as Śrī Bhagavān is the only suitable
shelter for the bhaktas , it is similarly necessary to
take shelter of His bhaktas if one desires bhakti . For
this reason, Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.23) states: yasya
deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

All the essential purports of śāstra are revealed only
in the heart of a mahātmā who has parā bhakti to Śrī
Bhagavān and as he has devotion for Bhagavān similarly
he has śuddha-bhakti for Śrī Gurudeva.




Śloka 19




tasmād asaktaḥ satataṁ

kāryaṁ karma samācara

asakto hy ācaran karma

param āpnoti pūruṣaḥ

tasmāt—therefore; asaktaḥ—without attachment; satatam—
always; samācara—perform nicely; karma—work; kāryam—
which ought to be done; hi—certainly; ācaran—performing;
karma—prescribed duties; asaktaḥ—without attachment;
pūruṣaḥ—a man; āpnoti—attains; param—mokṣa .

Therefore, always perform your prescribed duties without
attachment. By working in this way, a person attains
mokṣa.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                             205
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




“O Arjuna, you are not qualified to be on the platform
of jñāna. But since you are a man of proper wisdom, your
adhikāra has surpassed the level of performing kāmya-
karma . Therefore, only perform niṣkāma-karma .” This
śloka beginning with tasmāt is spoken for this reason.
Kāryam means that which is prescribed as an obligatory
duty. After performing that prescribed duty, one attains
mokṣa , supreme liberation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




By always performing niṣkāma-karma, the heart becomes
purified. When the heart is purified, one attains jñ āna
by which the sādhaka can attain mokṣa . Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “That while engag ing in
karma , the transcendental bhakti which one attains as
the mature state of karma yoga has been called
liberation here.”




Śloka 20



karmaṇaiva hi saṁsiddhim

āsthitā janakādayaḥ

loka-saṅgraham evāpi

sampaśyan kartum arhasi

janaka-ādayaḥ—Janaka and other kings; hi eva—most
assuredly; āsthitāḥ—became situated; saṁsiddhim—in
supreme perfection; karmaṇā—by performance of prescribed
duties; eva—certainly; sampaśyan—considering; loka-
saṅgraham—the protection of the people; arhasi—you
ought; api—also; kartum—to do (your prescribed duties).

Saintly kings such as Janaka attained supreme perfection
by performing karma (prescribed duties). Therefore, in
consideration of setting an ideal for people in general,
you should perform your prescribed duty.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           206
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

This śloka beginning with karmaṇaiva presents evidence
about the importance of sadācāra (proper conduct). Śrī
Bhagavān says, “Even if you consider yourself to have
the adhikāra to follow the path of jñ āna , you should
still perform your prescri bed duties with the purpose
of instructing the people in general.” For this purpose,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa says: loka-saṅgraham , ‘the people in
general’.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī comments that Śrī Bhagavān
instructs Arjuna, “In order to engage people in their
respective prescribed duties and to restrain them from
their tendency to follow a degraded path, the
performance of karma is necessary for you.”




Śloka 21



yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhas

tat tad evetaro janaḥ

sa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute



lokas tad anuvartate

eva—surely; yat yat—however; śreṣṭhaḥ—an exalted person;
ācarati—acts; tat tat—that very thing; itaraḥ—a common;
janaḥ—person; saḥ—he; (follows) yat—whatever; pramāṇam—
standard; kurute—he sets; tat—that; lokaḥ—the people;
anuvartate —follow.

Common people will follow the behaviour of a great man,
and the whole world will emulate the standards that he
sets.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this śloka beginning with the words yad yad , Śrī
Bhagavān is explaining how ideals are established for
the commo n people.



                           207
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In order to establish an ideal for the people in
general, great persons should perform their karma
(prescribed duties). This siddhānta of Bhagavad-gītā is
also verified in many parts of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam :
(2.8.25), (3.16.23), (5.4.14) and (6.2.4).




Śloka 22




na me pārthāsti kartavyaṁ

triṣu lokeṣu kiñcana

nānavāptam avāptavyaṁ

varta eva ca karmaṇi

pārtha—O Pārtha; me—for Me; asti—there is; na—not;
kiñcana—any; kartavyam—prescribed duty; triṣu—in the
three; lokeṣu—planetary systems; (there is) na—nothing;
anavāptam—unattainable; (nor) avāptavyam—needed to be
obtained; eva—still; varte—I am engaged; ca—also;
karmaṇi—in prescribed duties.

O Pārtha, I have no need to perform prescribed duties
(karma), because there is nothing within the three
worlds that I cannot attain, nor is there anything that
I desire to attain. Even so, I am always engaged in
performing prescribed duties.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this and the next two ślokas, Śrī Bhagavān presents
Himself as an example in order to instruct the common
people of the world.




Śloka 23




                            208
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

yadi hy ahaṁ na varteyaṁ

jātu karmaṇy atandritaḥ

mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

pārtha—O Pārtha; hi—certainly; yadi—if; jātu—at any
time; aham—did I; varteyam na—not engage; karmaṇi—in
prescribed duties; atandritaḥ—with great care; manuṣyāḥ—
all men; anuvartante—would follow; mama—My; vartma—path;
sarvaśaḥ—in all respects.

O Pārtha, if I ever failed to engage vigilantly in My
prescribed duties, common people would certainly imitate
Me in all respects.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word anuvartante means they will imitate.




Śloka 24




utsīdeyur ime lokā

na kuryāṁ karma ced aham

saṅkarasya ca kartā syām

upahanyām imāḥ prajāḥ

cet—if; na kuryām—I did not perform; karma—prescribed
duties; ime—all these; lokāḥ—people; utsīdeyuḥ—would
become degraded; aham—I; syām—would be; kartā—the
creator; saṅkarasya—of unwanted population; ca—and;
upahanyām—I would destroy; imāḥ—all these; prajāḥ—
people.

If I did not perform karma, then everyone would become
degraded and I would become the cause of promoting
varṇa-saṅkara. In this way, I would be instrumental in
the destruction of the entire population.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           209
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Utsīdeyuḥ means they will become degraded. “By following
My example and not engaging in their prescribed duties,
common people would become fallen. Consequently, I would
be the cause of varṇa-saṅkara (unwanted population). By
making humanity impure, I would be its destroyer.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān is saying, “If I did not perform duties as
prescribed in the Vedas, people would imitate Me. In
this way, I would be the cause of their deviating from
the path of dharma and going to hell.” Therefore, it is
appropriate for the leaders of society to engage in that
karma which is prescribed in the Vedas , and which
promotes the people’s welfare. At the present time, most
of the so-called religious, social, national and world
leaders have fallen from the path of dharma , and
consequently common men are also deviating from the
proper path. This root problem of immorality, violence,
envy and so forth is present everywhere. The only
solution to this problem is the chanting of hari-n āma
and the cultivation of bhakti in the association of
genuine sādhus .




Śloka 25



saktāḥ karmaṇy avidvāṁso

yathā kurvanti bhārata

kuryād vidvāṁs tathāsaktaś

cikīrṣur loka-saṅgraham

bhārata—O Bhārata; yathā—just as; avidvāṁsaḥ—the
ignorant; saktāḥ—being attached; karmaṇi—to their
prescribed duties; kurvanti—perform (them); tathā—in the
same way; vidvān—the learned; kuryāt—should act; asaktaḥ
—without attachment; cikīrṣuḥ—desiring to effect; loka-
saṅgraham—the protection of the people.

O descendant of Bhārata, ignorant people perform karma
with attachment. Those who are wise should also work,
but without attachment, to set an ideal for the people
in general.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                             210
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Thus, even a person who is firmly situated on the
platform of jñāna must perform karma . Śrī Kṛṣṇa
concludes this topic with this śloka beginning with the
word saktāḥ.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The ignorant perform karma with attachment both to the
work and its fruits, but one who knows tattva performs
karma without attachment. The activities performed by
these two types of people appear to be the same, but
there is a difference like heaven and hell between them.
The difference lies in the niṣṭhā (staunch faith) of
those who are performing karma ; one is attached while
the other is detached.




Śloka 26



na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed

ajñānāṁ karma-saṅginām

yojayet sarva-karmāṇi

vidvān yuktaḥ samācaran

vidvān—the learned person; na janayet—should not create;
buddhi-bhedam—confusion in the intelligence; ajñ ānām—of
the ignorant; karma-saṅginām—who are attached to
fruitive work; (rather) yuktaḥ—with a composed mind;
samācaran—while acting nicely; yojayet—he should
encourage (them) to engage; (in) sarva—all; karmāṇi—
actions.

One who is learned and experienced in jñāna-yoga should
not bewilder the intelligence of ignorant people by
inducing them to give up their prescribed duties (karma)
to engage in the culture of jñ āna. Rather, by properly
performing all his own actions in a composed and
detached state of mind, he should encourage them to
engage in their own prescribed duties.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           211
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


“O Arjuna, a man of knowledge should not bewilder the
ignorant who are karma-saṅgī (attached to their actions)
by saying, ‘There is no purpose in performing mundane
activities, so become perfect like me by renouncing
karma and cultivating jñ āna .’ The karma-saṅgī is
especially attached to karma because his heart is
impure. Although you may be perfect, by performing
niṣkāma-karma you can encourage people to engage in
their prescribed duties. You yourself become an ideal
example by performing karma properly. If you say to Me,
‘In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.9.50) You have said: svayaṁ
niḥśreyasaṁ vidvān na vakty ajñāya karma hi

na rāti rogiṇo ‘pathyaṁ

vāñchato ‘pi bhiṣaktamaḥ

“A good physician does not prescribe a diet that is
indigestible, even though the patient may desire it.
Similarly, a person knowing the highest welfare does not
instruct an ignorant person to engage in karma ,” so You
therefore contradict Your own statements,’ then My
response is, “This is correct, but I gave that
instruction in relation to bhakti when the subject of
instruction was bhakti itself. Now I am giving the
instruction in relation to jñ āna , so there is no
contradiction. Jñ āna depends on purity of heart, which
in turn depends on ni ṣk āma-karma . But since bhakti is
independently powerful, she does not depend upon purity
of heart. If one is able to arouse ś raddh ā in bhakti ,
then it is considerate to disturb the intelligence of a
person who is attached to karma . Those who have
developed faith in bhakti have surpassed the necessity
to perform karma . It is said in Śr īmad-Bh āgavatam
(11.20.9): tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta

na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā

śraddhā yāvan na jāyate

One should perform karma as long as he has not developed
renunciation (from karma) or śraddhā in hearing and
reciting topics about Me.

Furthermore:

dharmān santyajya yaḥ sarvān

māṁ bhajeta sa tu sattamaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.11.32

Those who give up all varieties of varṇāśrama and
perform My bhajana are indeed the most elevated sādhus.

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo


                             212
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

Gītā 18.66

Give up all varieties of dharma and just surrender unto
Me.


tyaktvā svadharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer

bhajann apakvo ‘tha patet tato yadi


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.17

One who gives up his svadharma because he is engaged in
the service of Śrī Hari’s lotus feet can never be
unsuccessful, even if he falls down while in the
immature stage.

One should deliberate upon all these statements.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The purpose of karma, action, is to attain that jñ āna
which leads to bhakti . Those who do not know this fact
are ajña (ignorant), and those who are attached to karma
because of this ignorance are called karma-saṅgī. A jñ
ānī should only engage such karma-saṅgīs in the karma
prescribed in śāstra , because, if the intelligence of
such ignorant persons is bewildered, they will lose
faith in karma . Under such circumstances even jñ āna
will not be able to manifest in their hearts and thus
they will deviate from the paths of karma and jñ āna .
However, this does not apply to instructions on bhakti ,
because according to ś āstra , instructions on bhakti
are auspicious for everyone under all circumstances.
Therefore, by instructing bhakti , such a preacher of
bhakti will make everyone perfect.


putrāṁś ca śiṣyāṁś ca nṛpo gurur vā

mal-loka-kāmo mad-anugrahārthaḥ

itthaṁ vimanyur anuśiṣyād ataj-jñān

na yojayet karmasu karma-mūḍhān

kaṁ yojayan manujo ‘rthaṁ labheta

nipātayan naṣṭa-dṛśaṁ hi garte


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 5.5.15

Ṛṣabhadeva said, “Only My abode and My mercy are worth
praying for. Instructions on bhakti unto Me should be

                           213
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

given by fathers to their sons, teachers to their
disciples and kings to their subjects. One should not
become angry with a person who receives instructions,
but does not follow them. Even those who are ignorant of
tattvajñ āna and who are bewildered about the
performance of proper duty should not be engaged in
karma. What puruṣārtha (destination) will be attained by
engaging a person blinded by delusion in kāmya-karma
(fruitive activities), thus throwing him further into
the dark well of this material world? Nothing will be
achieved.”

While commenting on this śloka of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam ,
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī says, “If, instead of giving
instruction on bhakti , someone instructs others about
engaging in karma , he incurs sin.”

According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, the
present śloka, (Gītā 3.26): yojayet sarva-karmāṇi , is
not for those who are preaching the message of bhakti ,
but it is for the consideration of those who give
instructions on jñ āna .




Śloka 27



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

sarvaśaḥ—in every respect; karmāṇi—activities;
kriyamāṇāni—are performed; guṇaiḥ—by the modes; prakṛteḥ
—of material nature; ahaṅkāra-vimūḍha-ātmā—a person
bewildered by false ego; manyate—thinks; iti—thus; aham—
I; (am) kartā—the doer.

All aspects of material activity are performed by the
modes of material nature but a person whose intelligence
is bewildered by false ego thinks himself to be the
doer.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If a learned man also has to perform karma, what is the
difference between his work and that of an ignorant man?
This doubt is being addressed. The difference is shown
in two ślokas beginning with the present one, prakṛteḥ
kriyamāṇāni . Ignorant people believe that they
themselves perform all activity (karma ), but in reality

                           214
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

it is performed by the senses, which are impelled by the
modes of material nature.




Śloka 28



tattvavit tu mahā-bāho

guṇa-karma-vibhāgayoḥ

guṇā guṇeṣu vartanta

iti matvā na sajjate

mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; tu—but; tattvavit—a knower
of the science; vibhāgayoḥ—of the distinctions; (between
the ātmā) guṇa-karma—and the material modes and the laws
of karma ; matvā—considering; iti—that; guṇāḥ—the
senses; vartante—are engaged; guṇeṣu—in their sense
objects, like form etc.; na sajjate—does not become
attached.

O Mahā-bāho Arjuna, one who is tattvavit, who knows that
the soul is aloof from the guṇas and also knows the laws
of karma (actions), does not falsely identify himself as
the doer. Because he understands that the senses are
engaged in their respective sense objects, he is aloof
from them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those who know the distinctive characteristics of guṇa
and karma are called tattvavit , knowers of the truth.
There are three categories of guṇa : sattva , rajas and
tamas . The respective categories of karma are the
different types of activities which are influenced by
the guṇas , the devas , the various prominent senses,
and the objects of the senses. One who is tattvavit
knows the truth about both guṇa and karma . The devas or
the guṇas preside over the respective senses, such as
sight, and also the sense objects, such as form.
However, a learned person knows that he is not the guṇas
, nor is he the effect or activity of any guṇa . He has
nothing to do with the guṇas or their activities.
Understanding this, a wise and learned person does not
become attached to them.




Śloka 29


                           215
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




prakṛter guṇa-sammūḍhāḥ

sajjante guṇa-karmasu

tān akṛtsna-vido mandān

kṛtsna-vin na vicālayet

(persons) sammūḍhāḥ—bewildered; guṇa—by the modes;
prakṛteḥ—of material nature; sajjante—become attached;
guṇa-karmasu—to the modes and karma ; kṛtsna-vit—one who
is in complete knowledge; na vicālayet—should not
agitate; tān—those; mandān—less intelligent persons;
akṛtsna-vidaḥ—of incomplete knowledge.

Those absorbed in the three guṇas become attached to
sense objects, but those who are complete in knowledge
should not unsettle such uninformed and less intelligent
persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




One may raise the question, “If all jīvas are distinct
from the guṇas and have no relationship with them and
their activities, why are they seen to be attached to
sense objects?” Śrī Kṛṣṇa answers with this śloka
beginning with prakṛteḥ. “They become bewildered by the
guṇas . In other words, they become deluded because of
their absorption in the guṇas . Just as a man haunted by
a ghost considers himself a ghost, so the jīvas absorbed
in the guṇas identify themselves as the guṇas . Thus
influenced by the effect of the modes, they become
attached to sense objects. One who is kṛtsna-vit (a man
of complete knowledge) should not unsettle those who are
akṛtsna-vit (of incomplete knowledge). This means that a
man of complete knowledge should not try to force these
thoughts on ignorant persons by saying, ‘You are a jīva
distinct from the guṇas . You are not the modes.’ Just
as a person who is haunted by a ghost will never
understand that he is actually not a ghost but a human
being, even if he is told hundreds of times. His
conviction can only be removed by the medicine of
mantras . Similarly, no amount of verbal instruction
will help a bewildered jīva to stop identifying himself
with the modes of material nature. Such people should
simply be engaged in niṣkāma-karma , which automatically
frees them from their absorption in the guṇas.”




Śloka 30



                           216
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi

sannyasyādhyātma-cetasā

nirāśīr nirmamo bhūtvā

yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ

adhyātma-cetasā—with the mind fixed in the self;
sannyasya—giving up completely; sarvāṇi—all; karmāṇi—
activities; mayi—unto Me; bhūtvā—being; nirāśīḥ—free
from desire; nirmamaḥ—without a sense of possessiveness;
(and) vigata-jvaraḥ—without lamentation; yudhyasva—
fight.

With your mind fixed in the self and offering all your
activities to Me, being freed from desire,
possessiveness and lamentation, fight.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Therefore, O Arjuna, fight with your mind fixed in the
self (adhyātma-cetaḥ), offering all karma (actions) unto
Me, and being free from all material hopes and desires.
Do not let your mind dwell on the sense objects, and
give up any sense of possessiveness towards them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān makes Arjuna the instrument through which
He instructs common men to perform their prescribed
karma, free from the false ego of being the doer, and
the desire for the fruits of their actions. Here the
word karma refers to all types of karma , both laukika
(mundane) and Vedic (as prescribed in the Vedas ).
Nirmamaḥ indicates that one should perform action
without any sense of possessiveness towards sense
objects such as the body, house, son, wife and brother.
Here yudhyasva (a fight) means one should engage in
prescribed actions.




Śloka 31



ye me matam idaṁ nityam


                           217
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

anutiṣṭhanti mānavāḥ

śraddhāvanto ‘nasūyanto

mucyante te ‘pi karmabhiḥ

te—those; mānavāḥ—human beings; ye—who; (are)
anasūyantaḥ—free from enmity or fault-finding; śraddhā-
vantaḥ—who have complete faith; (and who) nityam—always;
anutiṣṭhanti—abide by; idam—this; matam—teaching,
opinion; me—of Mine; mucyante—are liberated; api—also;
karmabhiḥ—from the bondage of fruitive actions.

Those who are free from fault finding, who have complete
faith in Me, and who always abide by this desire of Mine
(to perform niṣkāma-karma-yoga), are liberated from the
bondage of karma (fruitive activities).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is speaking the present śloka beginning
with ye me , in order to engage people in following His
instructions .




Śloka 32



ye tv etad abhyasūyanto

nānutiṣṭhanti me matam

sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān

viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

tu—but; ye—those; abhyasūyantaḥ—while fault finding;
(who do) na anutiṣṭhanti—not follow; etat—this; matam—
teaching; me—of Mine; viddhi—know; tān—them; acetasaḥ—
devoid of sense of discrimination; vimūḍhān—befooled;
sarva-jñ āna—in all sorts of knowledge; (and) na ṣṭān—
ruined.

But know that those envious persons who do not follow
these instructions of Mine are bereft of discrimination,
devoid of all true jñāna, and are ruined in all their
endeavours for perfection.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                            218
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



In speaking this śloka beginning with the words ye tu ,
Bhagavān is explaining the ill-effect of not following
His instructions.




Śloka 33




sadṛśaṁ ceṣṭate svasyāḥ

prakṛter jñānavān api

prakṛtiṁ yānti bhūtāni

nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati

api—even; jñāna-vān—a wise man; ceṣṭate—endeavours;
sadṛśam—in accordance; svasyāḥ—with his own; prakṛteḥ—
disposition; bhūtāni—all beings; yānti—follow; prakṛtim—
(their) nature; kim—what; nigrahaḥ—suppression;
kariṣyati—can do.

Even a wise man acts according to his own acquired
disposition, for all beings follow their respective
natures. What can be achieved by repression?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




One may raise the following question: “A person who does
not obey the order of a king is punished, so if one does
not follow the order of Parameśvara, is he not punished
as well? Should he not fear punishment from Him?” In
response, Parameśvara says, “Yes, this is true. However,
those who are engaged only in satisfying their senses
are unable to follow the order of the king or of
Parameśvara, even though they have discri mination.
Their nature has become like this.” The present śloka
beginning with sadṛśam is spoken to explain this.

“People may know that sinful activity will lead to
punishment from the royal court, or even going to hell,
and may understand that this will bring infamy and
criticism. Still, because of the nature that they have
acquired over a prolonged period, they endeavour
according to the temperament resulting from their sinful
deeds, which brings only misery. Such people only follow
their own disposition. They can, however, be restrained
by My discipline or that of a king. Sa ṁskāras
(purifying impressions) can be made in a person with an
impure heart by niṣkāma -karma-yoga and in a person of
pure heart through jñ āna-yoga . Both types of people

                           219
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

can be enlightened. It is true that neither of these
processes can help a person whose heart is extremely
impure, but bhakti , which appears by My mercy, can
easily deliver even sinful people.”

As it is said in the Skanda Purāṇa:


aho dhanyo ‘si devarṣe kṛpayā yasya te kṣaṇāt

nīco ‘py utpulako lebhe lubdhako ratim acyute


O Devarṣi, all glories to you. Because of your mercy,
this low-class hunter has, in just one moment, attained
rati for the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān, and is
manifesting the symptom of pulaka in which one’s bodily
hairs stand on end.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




A person with uncontrolled senses may have
discrimination, but cannot restrain his senses by
knowledge of śāstra.


stambhayann ātmanātmānaṁ

yāvat sattvaṁ yathā-śrutam

na śaśāka samādhātuṁ

mano madana-vepitam


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.1.62

After seeing the prostitute, the mind of Ajāmila became
agitated. He tried hard to control his mind by fortitude
and knowledge of śāstra but, being agitated by Cupid, he
was unable to do so.

All uncontrolled, degraded desires can be removed by the
powerful influence of sādhu-saṅga .

tato duḥsaṅgam utsṛjya

satsu sajjeta buddhimān

santa evāsya cchindanti

mano-vyāsaṅgam uktibhiḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.26.26

Saintly people can, by their powerful speech, completely
cut asunder all the unfavourable attachments of the
mind.

                             220
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Vyāsaṅga means attachments which make one averse to Śrī
Bhagavān. Here, the word eva implies the powerful speech
of saintly persons alone. Pious actions, holy places,
devas and knowledge of śāstra are by themselves not able
to destroy unfavourable attachments. This should be
understood.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, don’t think that a man of knowledge will attain
auspiciousness (liberation from bondage) if he simply
deliberates on spirit and matter, and accepts the
shelter of sannyāsa-dharma by impetuously giving up
material guṇa and karma. Even after the baddha-jīva has
become enriched with jñ āna , he should still endeavour
according to his long-acquired disposition. It is not
true that one can give up one’s nature by suddenly
restraining it. All baddha-jīvas should continue to
endeavour according to the disposition they have
naturally acquired over a prolonged period. The proper
way to give up this nature is to carefully perform all
karma (action) in accordance with that nature, while
being situated in it. As long as vairāgya enriched with
the symptoms of bhakti-yoga does not appear in the
heart, then the only means to attain self-auspiciousness
is niṣkāma-karma-yoga offered to Śrī Bhagavān. By this
practice, a person can perfo rm his prescribed duties
(svadharma ), and also benefit from the saṁskāras
generated by them. Renunciation of one’s svadharma will
ultimately result in deviation from the path of
perfection.

When, by My mercy or by the mercy of My bhakta, bhakti -
yoga appears in the heart, there is no need to follow
one’s svadharma , because this path of bhakti is
superior to niṣkāma-karma -yoga . Otherwise, if bhakti-
yoga has not awakened, to follow niṣkāma-karma -yoga
offered to Me is auspicious in all cases.”




Śloka 34



indriyasyendriyasyārthe

rāga-dveṣau vyavasthitau

tayor na vaśam āgacchet



tau hy asya paripanthinau

indriyasya arthe—within (each sense object); indriyasya—
of (each) sense; rāga—attachment; (and) dveṣau—
detachment; vyavasthitau—are situated; na āgacche t—one
should not become; vaśam—controlled; tayoḥ—by them; tau—
they (attachment and aversion); hi paripanthinau—are
certainly obstacles; asya—for him (the spiritual
practitioner).

                            221
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


All the senses are invariably controlled by attachment
and aversion to their respective objects. Therefore, one
should never come under their sway because such
attachment and aversion impede auspiciousness for the
sādhaka.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Since it is beyond the control of śāstra to enforce
injunctions on a person who has an extre mely wicked
nature, one should not allow his senses to wander
wilfully. By regularly engaging in sinful activities, a
person becomes depraved. Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this
śloka beginning with the word indriyasya to explain
this. The repetition of the word indriya here indicates
the sense objects of each respective sense. Although to
look at another’s wife, touch her, or allure her by
giving her gifts is forbidden in śāstra , still an
immoral man is attracted to such behaviour. On the other
hand, although it is prescribed in śāstra to see, touch,
serve and offer charity to the guru , brāhmaṇas , holy
places and guests, an impious man is averse to such
behaviour. To come under the influence of either of
these mentalities is not proper. In other words, it is
not proper either to develop attachment to a woman by
seeing her, or to be malicious to someone who obstructs
that attachment. Similarly, a sādhaka on the path of
self-realisation should neither be attached to rich and
palatable foodstuffs which are to his taste, nor averse
to dry, unpalatable food items and objects which are not
to his taste. In the same way, he should not be attached
to seeing and hearing about his own son, nor should he
be averse to seeing and hearing about his enemy’s son.
It is inappropriate to come under the influence of such
attachments and aversions. This has been explained.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




The senses are of two types: jñānendriya (knowledge-
acquiring senses) and karmendriya (working senses).
There are five jñ ānendriyas : the eyes, ears, nose,
tongue and skin, which accept form, sound, smell, taste
and touch as their respective objects of
gratification.There are also five karmendriyas : speech,
hands, legs, anus and genitals, which perform the
actions of speaking, accepting, moving, evacuating and
procreating. The sādhaka of bhakti engages these eleven
senses, i ncluding the mind, in various types of service
for the pleasure of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, instead of
enjoying the various sense objects himself. In this way,
he can easily overpower the uncontrolled senses and, by

                           222
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the use of his controlled senses, he can atta in the
supreme goal of life.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, if you think that the jīvas’ acceptance of sense
objects will make most of them more addicted to
worldliness and that liberation from the bondage of
karma will thus become impossible, then listen to My
words. It is not true that all objects are detrimental
to the spiritual progress of the jīvas . It is only the
attachment and aversion to the sense objects which are
the greatest enemies of the jīva . As long as you have
this material body, you have to accept sense objects.
For this reason, you should accept sense objects, and at
the same time control attachment and aversion towards
them. If you act in this way, you can deal with sense
objects without becoming bound to them. You will become
detached from sense objects by gradually eliminating the
attachment and aversion which develops when one falsely
identifies the body with the self. In brief, you will
develop yukta-vair āgya . I have not instructed you to
subdue attachment to objects and activities related to
Me, Śrī Bhagavān, which stimulate one’s bhakti . Nor
have I instructed you not to be averse to objects or
activities which are obstacles to bhakti . Rather, I
have only instructed you to control that attachment and
aversion which is related to selfish pleasure and which
promotes a temperament that is opposed to bhakti . This
should be understood.”




Śloka 35




para-dharmāt svanuṣṭhitāt

sva-dharme nidhanaṁ śreyaḥ

para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ

śreyān—better; (to perform) svadharmaḥ—one’s prescribed
duties; viguṇaḥ—defectively; para-dharmāt—than another’s
duties; su-anuṣṭhitāt—perfectly performed; nidhanam—
death; śreyaḥ—is better; sva-dharme—in (discharging)
one’s prescribed duties; para-dharmaḥ—duties prescribed
for others; bhaya-āvahaḥ—bring danger.

It is far better to execute one’s svadharma, even though
imperfectly, than to perform another’s duty perfectly.
It is better to die discharging one’s own duty in
accordance with the varṇāśrama system than to engage in
another’s duty, for it is dangerous to follow another’s
path.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                             223
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śrī Bhagavān sees that due to attachment and aversion,
Arjuna is becoming unable to engage in his own
prescribed duty of fighting. Instead, he considers it
easier to engage in ahiṁsā (non-violence) which is para-
dharma (the duty of others). Therefore, Śrī Bhagavān is
speaking this śloka beginning with the word śreyān . The
word viguṇa means that, although one’s svadharma may
have some defects and one may be unable to execute it
properly, it is still superior to performing para-dharma
, which may contain all good qualities and be executed
correctly (sv-anuṣṭhitāt ). For this reason, this sloka
, śreyān svadharmaḥ, is spoken.

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.15.12):

vidharmaḥ para-dharmaś ca

ābhāsa upamā cchalaḥ

adharma-śākhāḥ pañcemā

dharma-jño ‘dharmavat tyajet

The tree of adharma has five branches—vidharma
(activities opposed to dharma), para-dharma (following
another’s dharmika principles), ābhāsa (making a show of
dharmika principles), upamā or upa-dharma (practising
principles that only appear to be dharmika) and chala-
dharma (cheating dharma). A knower of dharma (dharma-
jña) will abandon all of them as forbidden acts.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Activities such as non-violence are prescribed for
brāhmaṇas situated in sattva-guṇa . For kṣatriyas in
rajo-guṇa , the prescribed duty is fighting. Therefore,
the svadharma for kṣatriyas is to engage in battle. Even
if a kṣatriya dies in battle he attains Svarga;
therefore, it is better for him to fight.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “One who follows
svadharma may die before attaining a more elevated state
of dharma (a higher adhikāra ). Still it is auspicious,
because to perform para-dharma is always fearful and
dangerous in any circumstance. This consideration,
however, does not apply to nirguṇa-bhakti . When the
stage of nirguṇa-bhakti is attained, one can give up
svadharma without hesitation because at that time his
nitya-dharma or svarūpa-dharma (constitutional nature)
manifests as his svadharma . Here sva means the real
self and dharma means the jīva’s eternal function. In
that stage the svadharma which one previously accepted
in relation to the body and mind becomes para-dharma ,
that is, secondary to the duties of the awakened self.”


                            224
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.5.41

Those who have taken exclusive shelter of Śrī Mukunda,
who is the only shelter, and who have renounced all
varieties of karma, no longer remain indebted to the
devas, sages, living entities, perfected persons and
forefathers.

tāvat karmāni kurvīta

na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā

śraddhā yāvan na jāyate

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.20.9

One who has not become fully detached from enjoying the
fruits of his activities (karma), and whose faith in the
process of bhakti and the hearing of My pastimes is not
yet sufficiently developed, must certainly engage in
karma (prescribed duties). Tyāgīs or bhaktas of
Bhagavān, on the other hand, have no purpose to achieve
by engaging in karma.




Śloka 36




arjuna uvāca —

atha kena prayukto ‘yaṁ

pāpaṁ carati pūruṣaḥ

anicchann api vārṣṇeya

balād iva niyojitaḥ

arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; vārṣṇeya—O descendant of
Vṛṣṇi; atha—then; kena—by whom; ayam pūruṣaḥ—a person;
prayuktaḥ—is engaged; api—even; anicchann—unwillingly;
(so that) carati—he performs; pāpam—sin; iva—as if;
niyojitaḥ—engaged; balāt—by force.

Arjuna said: O descendant of Vṛṣṇi, what is it that
forcibly impels a person to engage in sinful activities,
although he is unwilling to do so?

                            225
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Earlier (in Gītā 3.34) it was said: rāga-dveṣau
vyavasthitau. “Even a man of discrimination can develop
attachment to sensual activities such as the desire to
enjoy another’s wife, which are forbidden in śāstra .”
In this connection, Arjuna asks this question beginning
with atha. “What is it that impels a man to engage in
sinful activities as if by force, even though he
performs such activities unwillingly, well aware of the
regulations as well as the injunctions of śāstra ? In
other words, by whom is a person impelled to desire to
engage in sinful activities?”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




In this śloka Arjuna has addressed Śrī Bhagavān, ‘O
Vārṣṇeya.’ Kṛṣṇa appeared in the Vṛṣṇi-vaṁśa (dynasty)
of Arjuna’s maternal grandfather and grandmother.
Śūrasena was also born in the Vṛṣṇi-vaṁśa. His son was
Vasudeva (Kṛṣṇa’s father) and his daughter, Pṛthā, was
Arjuna’s mother. The hidden indication in Arjuna’s
prayer to Kṛṣṇa is, “Since I belong to the same dynasty
as You, You should not neglect me. At present I have
fallen into a pit of doubts. You have just said that the
ātmā is completely distinct from inert qualities or
mundane relationships (Gītā 2.13-31). Who, then, impels
the jīvas to engage in sinful acts, if such action is
not their constitutional nature?”




Śloka 37




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

kāma eṣa krodha eṣa

rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ

mahāśano mahā-pāpmā

viddhy enam iha vairiṇam

śrī bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said; (it is) eṣaḥ kāmaḥ
—this desire to enjoy sense objects; (and) eṣaḥ krodhaḥ—

                           226
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

this wrath; samudbhavaḥ—which is born of; rajaḥ-guṇa—the
mode of passion; (it is) mahā-āśanaḥ—all devouring;
(and) mahā-pāpmā—extremely envious; viddhi—know; enam—
this; (to be) vairiṇam—the enemy; iha—in this world.

Śrī Bhagavān said: This    desire to enjoy sense objects,
which indeed transforms    into wrath, is born of passion.
It is all-devouring and    extremely formidable. Know it to
be the primary enemy of    the jīvas in this world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Kāma, the desire for sense objects, invariably engages a
person in sinful actions; impelled by it, he acts
sinfully. Kāma also appears differently and is seen
directly as anger (krodha ). When the desire for sense
objects is obstructed, it transforms into krodha . Kāma
, which is born from rajo-guṇa , gives rise to anger
which is in tamo-guṇa . If one asks, “Once a person’s
expectations are fulfilled, will the desire for sense
objects be satiated?” then Śrī Bhagavān responds by
saying: mahā-śanah , “It is all-devouring.” In smṛti it
is said: yat pṛthivyāṁ vrīhi-yavaṁ

hiraṇyaṁ paśavaḥ striyaḥ

nālam ekasya tat sarvam

iti matvā śamaṁ vrajet

All the grains, barley, gold, animals and women on earth
cannot satisfy the kāma of even one man. It is best to
understand this and become content.

According to the above statement of smṛti, it is beyond
a person’s ability to satisfy his kāma . Again, if the
qu estion is raised, “If there is no possibility of
controlling this lust by offering its desired ends as a
truce, then do we have to control it by pacifying it?”
then in response, Śrī Bhagavān says, mahā-pāpmā. “It is
extremely formidable and difficult to control.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Kāma and krodha have been described as the prime enemies
of the jīvas on the path of liberation. Kāma , the
desire to enjoy sense objects, is specifically the
original enemy; krodha , anger, is just its
transformation. Kāma has been described as mahat , or an
enemy whose belly is never filled. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(9.19.14) this is seen in the life history of Yayāti
Mahārāja: na jātu kāmaḥ kāmānām

                             227
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


upabhogena śāṁyati

haviṣā kṛṣṇa-vartmeva

bhūya evābhivardhate

By adding ghee to a fire, the fire becomes intensified.
Similarly, by the fulfillment of kāma, one’s desires are
intensified. They do not disappear.

yat pṛthivyāṁ vrīhi-yavaṁ

hiraṇyaṁ paśavaḥ striyaḥ

na duhyanti manaḥ-prītiṁ

puṁsaḥ kāma-hatasya te

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 9.19.13

All the grains, gold, animals, and women on earth cannot
satisfy the kāma of a lusty man.

An enemy is controlled by the four principles of sāma
(appeasement), dāma (bribe), bheda (division) and daṇḍa
(punishment). Here Śrī Bhagavān is explaining that this
formidable enemy, kāma , cannot be controlled by the
principles of sāma , dāma and bheda . He is thus
indicating that one should use the principle of daṇḍa (a
rod of chastisement) to control the desire for sense
objects. This will be further clarified in the next
śloka . The enemy, kāma , can be destroyed when one
acquires the weapon of ātma-j ñ āna , self-knowledge.




Śloka 38



dhūmenāvriyate vahnir

yathādarśo malena ca

yatholbenāvṛto garbhas

tathā tenedam āvṛtam

yathā—just as; vahniḥ—fire; āvriyate—is covered; dhūmena
—by smoke; ādarśaḥ—a mirror; malena —by dust; ca—and;
yathā—just as; garbhaḥ—an embryo; āvṛtaḥ—is covered;
ulbena—by the womb; tathā—in the same way; idam—this
(knowledge); āvṛtam—is covered; tena—by that (lust).

Just as fire is covered by smoke, a mirror by dust, and
an embryo by the womb, true knowledge of the jīva
remains covered by degrees of lust.




                            228
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Kāma is the enemy of everyone, not just a particular
person. This is explained through these examples.
Although fire may be dirty and covered by smoke, it can
still perform its function of burning; but when a mirror
is covered by dust, it loses the characteristic of
cleanliness and cannot perform its function of
reflecting the image of the object in front of it.
However, it is still accepted as a mirror. An embryo
covered by the womb cannot move its hands and feet nor
can it be recognised as a baby. One can remember the
supreme goal only when k āma is not very deep. When kāma
becomes intense, such remembrance is impossible and when
it is very intense, the world itself appears to be
devoid of consciousness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The knowledge of those jīvas averse to self-realisation
is covered by three degrees of kāma : mṛdu (mild),
madhya (moderate) and tīvra (intense). A person whose jñ
āna is covered by mṛdu-kāma can accept instruction on
ātma-tattva to a certain extent. When a person’s jñ āna
is covered by mādhya-kāma , it is completely impossible
for him to understand even a little tattvajñ āna , and
when jñ āna is covered by tīvra-kāma , jñ āna is not
perceived at all.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “This
whole world is covered by that very kāma, in some places
mildly, in some places deeply and in some places very
deeply. I will illustrate this with an example. Please
listen. A conscious jīva who is mildly covered by kāma ,
just as a fire is covered by smoke, can perform
activities such as bhāgavat-smaraṇa. This is the
situation of jīvas who have taken shelter of niṣkāma-
karma -yoga and whose consciousness is mukulita-cetana ,
a little open, as in the budding stage of a flower. Even
if the conscious jīva has a human body, when his
consciousness is deeply covered by kāma , like a mirror
covered by dust, it is not possible for him to remember
Parameśvara. This is the condition of the extreme
moralist and atheist, that is, a jīva whose
consciousness is saṅkucita-cetana , shrunken or
contracted. They are like animals and birds. A jīva
whose consciousness is covered by intense kāma , like
the embryo covered by the womb, has a consciousness like
creepers, stones and trees and is ācchādita-cetana ,
completely covered.”




                           229
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śloka 39



āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena

jñānino nitya-vairiṇā

kāma-rūpeṇa kaunteya

duṣpūreṇānalena ca

kaunteya—O Arjuna; jñānam—discrimination; jñ āninaḥ—of
the wise (ātmā); (is) āvṛtam—covered; etena nitya-
vairiṇā—by this eternal enemy; kāma-rūpeṇa—in the form
of lust; ca—also; duṣpūreṇa—never to be satisfied;
analena—like fire.

O Kaunteya, the true knowledge of the wise is covered by
the eternal enemy in the form of kāma, which burns like
fire and can never be satiated.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Kāma is indeed ignorance for all jīvas, as Śrī Bhagavān
is explaining in this śloka beginning with āvṛtam . This
desire to enjoy the sense objects has been described as
the eternal enemy; therefore, it must be destroyed by
all means. Kāma-rūpa means in the form of kāma. It is
indeed ignorance which envelops the real nature of the
jīva . Here the word ca has been used to mean ‘like’.
Just as fire cannot be satiated by pouring ghee into it,
similarly, kāma cannot be fulfilled by enjoying the
sense objects.

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (9.19.14):

na jātu kāmaḥ kāmānām

upabhogena śāṁyati

haviṣā kṛṣṇa-vartmeva

bhūya evābhivardhate

Fire is not satiated by ghee, rather it increases.
Similarly by enjoying sense objects, the thirst for
sense enjoyment increases more and more. It does not
become pacified.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




                           230
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Kāma is the root cause of lamentation and distress, and
has been compared to fire.


kāmānalaṁ madhu-lavaiḥ śamayan durāpaiḥ


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.9.25

Kāma can never be satisfied by enjoying the sense
objects. It is like a fire which cannot be extinguished
by drops of honey in the form of momentary satisfaction.

evaṁ gṛheṣv abhirato

viṣayān vividhaiḥ sukhaiḥ

sevamāno na cātuṣyad

ājya-stokair ivānalaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 9.6.48

The sage Saubhari Muni was not able to attain peace by
profusely enjoying sense objects, just as fire is not
pacified when drops of ghee are poured into it.

sevato varṣa-pūgān me

urvaśyā adharāśavam

na tṛpyaty ātma-bhūḥ kāmo

vahnir āhutibhir yathā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.26.14

Even after I had served the so-called nectar of the lips
of Urvaśī for many years, my lusty desires kept rising
again and again within my heart and were never
satisfied, just like a fire that can never be
extinguished by the oblations of ghee poured into its
flames.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “This
kāma is indeed avidyā for the jīvas and it is their only
eternal enemy. It covers the conscious jīvas like an
irresistable fire. Just as I, Śrī Bhagavān, am a
conscious being, similarly the jīva is also a conscious
entity. The difference between My nature and that of the
jīva is that I am infinitely conscious and omnipotent,
whereas the jīva is atomically conscious and can only
act by the energy given by Me. The nitya-dharma ,
eternal occupation, of the jīva is to be My eternal
servant. This is called prema or niṣkāma-jaiva-dharma ,
the eternal function of the jīva whose motivation is
unalloyed. Every conscious being is, by his
constitutional nature, endowed with free will, thus he
is My eternal servant by his own free will. According to
the degree to which he properly uses this free will, he
can act as My eternal servant. The misuse of that pure
free will is called avidyā or kāma . Those jīvas who do
not serve Me by correctly using their free will have to
accept kāma , an enjoying mood, which is the perverted

                             231
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

form of the jīvas’ pure state, prema . Their svarūpa
becomes ācchādita-cetana (covered consciousness) as they
are covered more and more by kāma . This is called
karma-bandhana , the bondage of the jīva , or saṁsāra-
yātanā, the sufferings of birth and death.”




Śloka 40



indriyāṇi mano buddhir

asyādhiṣṭhānam ucyate

etair vimohayaty eṣa

jñānam āvṛtya dehinam

ucyate—it is said (that); indriyāṇi—the senses; manaḥ—
mind; (and) buddhiḥ—intelligence; (are) adhiṣṭhānam—the
residences; asya—of this lust; etaiḥ—by these; eṣaḥ—this
lust; āvṛtya—covering; jñ ānam—his knowledge; vimohayati
—bewilders; dehinam—the embodied being.

The senses, mind and intelligence are said to be the
dwelling places of this desire to enjoy. With their
help, this lust covers the knowledge of the jīva and
completely bewilders him.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Where does this kāma reside? In response to this
question, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning
with indriyāṇi . The senses, mind and intelligence,
which are like a great fort or capital city, are the
abode of this enemy, kāma . The sense objects, such as
sound, are like the kingdom of the king. The embodied
soul, dehī, is bewildered by all of them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




One can easily conquer one’s enemy when one has
discovered his hiding-place and destroyed it. The senses
are the shelter or hiding place of kāma . Therefore, by
subduing the senses kāma can be easily defeated.
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has compared kāma to a very powerful
king, the senses to his capital which is protected by
the great fort of the mind, intelligence and false ego,

                           232
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

and the various sense objects to the kingdom and the
subjects of the king.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “When the pure
cognisant jīva accepts a body, he is known as dehī
(embodied). Kāma keeps the jñ āna of the jīva covered as
long as it dwells in the senses, mind and intelligence.
The subtle state of kāma is avidyā (ignorance). It is
this avidyā only which originally offers the initial
veil of ignorance in the form of material ahaṅkāra
(false ego) to the jīva , who is an atomic conscious
entity with pure ego. Material intelligence acts as a
shelter for this kāma or avidyā. Later, when the
ahaṅkāra develops, the material intelligence provides
the mind as a second shelter. The mind, which runs after
sense objects, then provides the senses as the third
place of shelter for kāma . Taking shelter of these
three places, kāma casts the jīva into worldy enjoyment.
When a jīva turns towards Śrī Bhagavān by his own will,
it is called vidyā, and when he wilfully becomes averse
to Śrī Bhagavān, it is called avidyā.”




Śloka 41



tasmāt tvam indriyāṇy ādau

niyamya bharatarṣabha

pāpmānaṁ prajahi hy enaṁ

jñāna-vijñāna-nāśanam

tasmāt—therefore; bharata-ṛṣabha—O best of the
descendants of Bharata; ādau—first of all; niyamya—by
regulating; indriyāṇi—the senses; hi—certainly; tvam
prajahi—you must destroy; enam—this; pāpmānam—evil;
nāśanam—destroyer; jñ āna—of knowledge; (and) vijñ āna—
of realisation of Me.

Therefore, O best of the descendants of Bharata, first
control your senses in order to completely slay this
evil kāma, which is the destroyer of both jñ āna
(wisdom) and vijñ āna (realisation of Me).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




By conquering the enemy’s place of shelter, the enemy is
conquered. This is the strategy. It is progressively
more difficult to control the senses, the mind and the
intelligence, which are the seats of kāma (the desire to
enjoy). It is very difficult to control the senses, but
they are easier to control than the mind and intell

                             233
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

igence. “Therefore, first conquer your senses.” Śrī
Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the word
tasmāt just to explain this point. Although the mind,
which is very difficult to control, runs after enjoying
another’s wife and wealth, you should understand what is
happening; this is only the work of the senses, such as
the eyes, ears, hands and legs. One should control these
senses by not allowing them to pursue their respective
objects. Pāpmānam means to give up this ferocious desire
to enjoy. In this way, if a person gradually controls
his senses, his mind will also become free from kāma in
due course of time.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Assisted by the senses, this powerful kāma uses the
ropes of delusion to bind jīvas who are averse to Śrī
Bhagavān. Therefore, it is imperative from the outset to
control the senses such as the eyes. When the external
senses are thus controlled, the mind, whose function is
saṅkalpa (the determination to accept) and vikalpa (the
choice to reject), will also be controlled.

Śrī Bhagavān also spoke thus to Uddhava:

viṣayendriya-saṁyogān

manaḥ kṣubhyati nānyathā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.26.22

The mind becomes restless only when the senses come in
contact with the sense objects, otherwise not.

asamprayuñjataḥ prāṇān

śāmyati stimitaṁ manaḥ

Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 11.26.23

Therefore, the mind of a person who has control over his
senses becomes stable and peaceful.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Therefore, best of the Bharatas, by first controlling
the senses and mind, conquer this extremely formidable
kāma which destroys jñ āna and vijñ āna , devotion to
Me. Destroying its distorted nature (lust), reinstate
its own constitutional nature, prema. Thus take shelter
of the inherent nature of prema . The first commendable
duty of a baddha-jīva is to follow the principles of
yukta-vairāgya , genuine renunciation, and to pursue
svadharma , prescribed duties. Thus, by gradually
attaining sādhana-bhakti , he should perform sādhana to
attain prema-bhakti . Nirapekṣa-bhakti unalloyed bhakti
independent of jñ āna , karma or personal endeavour, is
attained by My mercy or by the mercy of My bhakta .
Although it is very rare, in some cases it manifests

                             234
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

without any cause.”




Śloka 42



indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur

indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ

manasas tu parā buddhir

buddher yaḥ paratas tu saḥ

āhuḥ—they (the sages) say that; indriyāṇi—the senses;
parāṇi—are higher than dull matter; manaḥ—the mind;
param—is higher; indriyebhyaḥ—than the senses; buddhiḥ—
intelligence; tu parā—is indeed higher; manasaḥ—than the
mind; tu—but; (it is) saḥ—he (the soul); yaḥ—who; (is)
parataḥ—still higher; buddheḥ—than intelligence.

The senses are said to be superior to inert matter, and
the mind is superior to the senses. The intelligence is
superior to the mind, and he, the ātmā, is superior even
to the intelligence.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




It is impractical to try to control the mind and
intelligence in the initial stages; to do so is
impossible. But to explain the process, Śrī Bhagavān is
speaking this śloka beginning with the words indriyāṇi
parāṇī. He is saying, “The senses are more powerful than
a courageous warrior who has conquered the ten
directions. Indeed, they are superior to him, for even
he cannot have control over his senses. The mind is more
powerful than the senses, and superior to them, for it
remains active even during dreams when the senses are
dissolved. Intelligence which is endowed with
realisation is still more powerful than and superior to
the mind because resolute intelligence remains active
even during deep sleep, when the mind is dissolved. Over
and above this, the ātma is more powerful than the
intelligence and superior to it, for it continues to
exist even when the intelligence is destroyed. It is
this glorious soul alone that can conquer kāma . This
jīvātmā, which is more powerful than everything else,
can definitely control kāma , once it has controlled the
senses, mind and intelligence. Of this you should have
no doubt.”




                             235
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In śrutis it is also said:

indriyebhyaḥ parā hy arthā

arthebhyaś ca paraṁ manaḥ

manasas tu parā buddhir

buddher ātmā mahan paraḥ

Katha Upaniṣad 1.3.10

Certainly, reason is superior to the senses, and mind is
higher than reason. Higher than the mind is
intelligence, and the great one, the ātmā (soul) is
highest of all.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I am
explaining the gradation to you in brief. Your real
identity is that you are a jīva. You have a
constitutional function of rendering loving service to
Me, but you have accidentally become bound by inert
matter, so that you now identify yourself with the
senses, mind and intelligence. This is delusion, and it
is created by ignorance. The senses are superior to and
more subtle than inert objects. Superior and more subtle
than the senses is the mind. The intelligence is
superior to and more subtle than the mind, and the ātmā,
which is the jīva , is superior even to the
intelligence.”




Śloka 43




evaṁ buddheḥ paraṁ buddhvā

saṁstabhyātmānam ātmanā

jahi śatruṁ mahā-bāho

kāma-rūpaṁ durāsadam

mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; evam—in this way; buddhvā—
knowing; (the soul to be) param—superior; buddheḥ—to
intelligence; saṁstabhya—by firmly establishing; atmānam
—the mind; ātmanā—through intelligence; jahi—destroy;
durāsadam—this difficult-to-vanquish; śatrum—enemy;
kāma-rūpam—in the form of the desire to enjoy.

O Mahā-bāho, in this way, knowing the jīvātmā to be
superior to the intelligence, control the mind with the
pure intelligence that is related to the true self, and
destroy this insatiable enemy in the form of kāma, the

                             236
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

desire to enjoy.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is concluding this chapter with this śloka
beginning with evam . “Knowing the jīva to be superior
to the intelligence and distinct from all mundane
designations, and making the ātmā steady with the ātmā
himself, destroy this kāma which is very difficult to
conquer.”

In this chapter, the sādhana of niṣkāma-karma-yoga and
the merits of jñ āna , which is its aim, have been
described.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,

by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Third
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas

and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Śrī Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“In this way, with the help of transcendental knowledge
of the jīvātmā, know yourself to be aprākṛta-tattva ,
superior to all mundane identification with the senses,
body, mind and intelligence, and also know yourself to
be My eternal servant. Thus, become steady by the grace
of My cit-śakti , and destroy this formidable kāma by
following the gradual steps of devotional practice .”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Third
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Four


Jñāna-yoga



Yoga through Transcendental Knowledge



                           237
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 1




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave ‘bravīt

śrī bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said; aham—I; proktavān—
instructed; imam—this; avyayam—imperishable; yogam—
science of yoga ; vivasvān—unto the sun-god Vivasvān;
(he) prāha—told it; manave—unto Manu (the father of
mankind); manuḥ—Manu; abravīt—spoke (it); ikṣvākave—unto
Ikṣvāku.

Śrī Bhagavān said: I instructed this imperishable
science of yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvān, who instructed
it to Manu. Manu then instructed it to Ikṣvāku.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the Fourth Chapter, Śrī Bhagavān explains the reason
for His appearance, the eternal nature of His birth and
activities, the superiority of jñ āna in the form of
brahma-yajña and so on. Jñ āna-yoga , which is the
objective of niṣkāma-karma , is glorified in this śloka
beginning with the word imam , as well as in the next
chapter .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




An incarnation of Manu appears in every manvantara, the
first being Svāyambhuva Manu. In the current Vaivasvata-
manvantara, it was Manu’s father, Vivasvān, who was the
first to receive instructions on jñ āna-yoga . In this
śloka , Śrī Bhagavān has introduced the concept of
sāmpradāyika-dhārā, the bona fide succession of self-
realised spiritual masters. Without sāmpradāyika-dhārā,
also known as āmnāya-paramparā, neither the principles
of jñ āna-tattva nor bhakti-tattva can manifest in their
pure form in the material world. Only by sāmpradāyika-
dhārā is the gravity, antiquity and significance of the
subject specifically proven. It is seen that in India,

                           238
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

even the common people have faith in the ancient
sāmpradāyika-dhārā, and are devoted to it. That guru-
paramparā, which bestows complete knowledge of bhagavat-
tattva , is called āmnāya or sampradāya . Mantras that
are not received from a bona fide sampradāya are
fruitless. In Kali-yuga there are four Vaiṣṇava
sampradāyas : Śrī, Brahmā, Rudra and Sanaka or Kumāra
sampradāyas . Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original source of all
sampradāyas . Only from Śrī Kṛṣṇa does knowl edge of
bhagavat-tattva flow into this material world: dharmaṁ
tu sākṣād bhāgavat-praṇītam. “Real dharma comes directly
from Śrī Bhagavān” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.3.19).

As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa first
instructed this jñ āna-yoga to Sūryadeva, Vivasvān, who
then instructed Manu, who in turn gave these divine
instructions to Ikṣvāku. Thus the system of guru-
paramparā is an ancient and reliable tradition that
ensures the sāmpradāyika-dhārā (lineage) in which divya-
jñ āna (divine knowledge) has been preserved up to the
present day. Whenever this dhārā is broken, Śrī Bhagavān
again arranges for divya-jñ āna to manifest in the
material world. Mahā-bhāgavatas such as Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa and
others in th e guru-paramparā of the Brahma-Mādhva-
Gauḍīya sampradāya realised divya-jñ āna and instructed
the common people through their realised commentaries.
Even a person who is highly qualified in material
knowledge can never understand the real import of
Bhagavad -gītā unless he is properly situated in the
paramparā.

It is important to protect oneself from self-made
commentators, otherwise, realisation of the true meaning
of the Bhagavad-gītā will not be possible. Although milk
is pure and nourishing, when it has been touched by the
lips of a serpent, it acts like poison. Similarly,
topics of Śrī Hari are supremely purifying for the
material world, but hearing such topics becomes the
cause of one’s destruction when they are recited by non-
devotees such as impersonalists, or those who consider
the body to be the self. In this connection, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu has also said: māyāvādī-bhāṣya
śunile haya sarva-nāśa. “If one hears the commentary of
the impersonalists, everything is destroyed ” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhyalīlā 6.169).




Śloka 2



evaṁ paramparā-prāptam

imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ

sa kāleneha mahatā

yogo naṣṭaḥ parantapa

parantapa—O Arjuna; imam—this science of yoga ; prāptam—

                           239
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

was received; paramparā—by disciplic succession;
rājarṣayaḥ—(and) the saintly kings; viduḥ—understood it;
evam—thus; mahatā—by the powerful; kālena—influence of
time; saḥ—that; yogaḥ—science of one’s relationship with
the Supreme Lord; (is) naṣṭaḥ—lost; iha—in this world.

O Arjuna, this yoga was thus received in paramparā and
the rājarṣis (saintly kings) understood it in that way,
but due to a prolonged lapse of time, it has almost
become lost to this world.




Śloka 3



sa evāyaṁ mayā te ‘dya


yogaḥ proktaḥ purātanaḥ

bhakto ‘si me sakhā ceti

rahasyaṁ hy etad uttamam

adya—today; hi—certainly; iti —thus; proktaḥ—spoken;
mayā—by Me; te—to you; etad—this; uttamam—most; rahasyam
—confidential (knowledge); saḥ eva ayam—of that very
same; purātanaḥ—ancient; yogaḥ—science of connection
with the Supreme; asi—because you are; me—My; bhaktaḥ—
devotee; ca—and; sakhā—friend.

Today I am explaining to you this supremely confidential
knowledge of that same ancient yoga, because you are My
bhakta as well as My friend.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “I am telling you this because of two
sentiments which are inherent within our relationship.
In the first place, you are My bhakta , which means you
are My servant; and secondly, you are My sakhā, My
friend. It is not appropriate to disclose this knowledge
to anyone who does not possess these attributes. That is
why it is confidential.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




A sad-guru instructs highly confidential principles,

                           240
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

such as jñ āna -tattva and bhakti-tattva , only to a
disciple who is affectionate, surrendered and endowed
with a service attitude. Those bereft of these qualities
are unable to retain or realise such jñ āna. Here,
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa tells Arjuna, “You are My
affectionate servant and dear friend, therefore I am
explaining this mysterious secret of karma-yoga to you.”




Śloka 4



arjuna uvāca

aparaṁ bhavato janma

paraṁ janma vivasvataḥ

katham etad vijānīyāṁ

tvam ādau proktavān iti

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; bhavataḥ—Your; janma—birth;
(is) aparam—recent; (whereas) janma—the birth;
vivasvataḥ—of Sūrya, the sun-god; (is) param—ancient;
katham—how; vijānīyām—may I understand; iti—that; tvam—
You; proktavān—spoke; etat—this; ādau—in the beginning.

Arjuna said: Your birth is recent, whereas Sūrya was
born in ancient times. How am I to understand that You
spoke this yoga to him in a previous age?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Considering Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s previous statement to be
impossible, Arjuna is questioning Him. “You were born
recently (aparam ), and Sūrya was born long ago (param
), so how can I believe Your statement that You
instructed this yoga to Sūrya in a ncient times?”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Arjuna is Bhagavān’s great bhakta and eternal friend
(nitya -sakhā). For this reason, he is also referred to
as a parikara of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and as such he knows
bhagavat-tattva completely. Ignorant people general ly
think that Bhagavān Vāsudeva, the controller of all
controllers, is an ordinary human being. Instead of

                           241
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

accepting that He is omniscient and ever-existing, they
consider Him to be a man of limited knowledge who is
subject to death. They also think that the birth and
activities of Bhagavān are temporary, not knowing that
they are transcendental.

It is said in Bhagavad-gītā (10.12):

paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma

pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān

puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam

ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum

Contrary to the meaning of this śloka, ignorant persons
do not accept that Śrī Bhagavān is the Supreme Absolute
Truth (paraṁ brahma ), possessed of a spiritual form
(paraṁ dhāma ), and supremely pure (paraṁ pavitra ).
They also do not believe that He is an eternal person
(śāśva ta-puruṣa ), and the original God (ādi-deva ),
who is unborn (aja ) and all-pervading (sarva-vyāpaka ),
and who is endowed with transcendental opulence (divya-
aiśvarya ). Although Arjuna is highly learned, for the
welfare of humanity, he is inquiring from Bhaga vān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa as if he were an ignorant person, so that Bhagavān
may deliver these tattvas from His own lotus mouth.




Śloka 5



śrī bhagavān uvāca

bahūni me vyatītāni

janmāni tava cārjuna

tāny ahaṁ veda sarvāṇi

na tvaṁ vettha parantapa

śrī bhagavān—the Lord, complete in six opulences; uvāca—
said; arjuna parantapa—O Arjuna, chastiser of the enemy;
tava—you have; ca—and; me—I have; vyatītāni—passed;
bahūni—many; janmāni—births; aham—I; veda—remember; tāni
—them; sarvāṇi—all; tvam—you; na vettha—do not remember.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Parantapa, chastiser of the enemy,
you and I have experienced many births. I remember all
of them, whereas you do not.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           242
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017


In this śloka beginning with bahūni, Śrī Bhagavān says,
“I have also instructed this scie nce in My other
avatāras .” Tava ca means, “You have also appeared as My
associate whenever I have descended and I, being
omniscient (sarva-jña ) and omnipotent (sarveśvara ),
remember all My appearances. For the fulfilment of My
līlā, I have covered your knowledge, that is why you do
not remember your previous births. Now, with the
abhimāna (identity) of a son of Kuntī, you are giving
tapa (pain) to para (the enemy), O Parantapa.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here, Śrī Kṛṣṇa informs Arjuna, “Even prior to this
present appearance, I have descended in many other
avatāras , manifesting many different names, forms and
pastimes. I remember all of them fully. You also
appeared with Me, but because you are in the category of
jīva-tattva (an atomic conscious particle), you do not
remember them.”

At the time of Kṛṣṇa’s name-giving ceremony, Śrī
Gargācārya also confirmed that He has many names, forms
and pastimes.

bahūni santi nāmāni

rūpāṇi ca sutasya te

guṇa-karmāṇi rūpāṇi

tāny ahaṁ veda no janāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.8.15

According to His qualities (guṇas) and activities
(karma), your son has many names and forms. I am aware
of them, but others are not.

Similarly Bhagavān told Mucukunda:


janma-karmābhidhānāni santi me ‘ṅga sahasraśaḥ


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.51.36

My dear Mucukunda, My name, births, activities and other
characteristics are unlimited.




Śloka 6



                             243
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



ajo ‘pi sann avyayātmā

bhūtānām īśvaro ‘pi san

prakṛtiṁ svām adhiṣṭhāya

sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā

api—although; san—being; ajaḥ—unborn; avyaya-ātmā—(and
having) an imperishable body; api—although; san—being;
īśvaraḥ—the Lord; bhūtānām—of (all) beings; sambhavāmi—I
fully manifest; ātma-māyayā—by My yogamāyā; adhiṣṭhāya—
situated; (in) svām—My original; prakṛtim—nature.

Although I am unborn, imperishable and the controller of
all living entities, I appear by My yogamāyā potency in
My original sac-cid-ānanda-svarūpa.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the principle behind His
birth (janma-tattva). “Although I am unborn, I manifest
in various species such as the devas , humans and
animals.” One may ask, “What is so wonderful about this?
In reality, the jīva is also unborn, and when his gross
body is destroyed, he also accepts another birth.” In
response, Śrī Bhagavān says, avyayātmā. “My body is
imperishable, whereas the body of the jīva is
perishable. Moreover, the unborn nature of the jīva is
of a different type. His birth is due to his identifying
with the body which has arisen out of ignorance. As
Īśvara, I am non-different from My body. Consequ ently,
My quality of being both born and unborn is perfectly
natural. Such a nature, which is impossible to find
elsewhere, is wonderful and beyond the scope of logic
and reason. Thus there is no possibility of comparing My
birth to that of the jīva , who t akes birth in high and
low species as a result of his piety and sin.” To
clarify this further, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “Even
though I am the Īśvara of the jīvas , which means that I
am free from the control of karma , still I accept
birth.”

The following doubt may be raised: “The jīva also takes
bodies in various species such as devas , humans and
animals, due to the activities of his subtle body
(liṅga-śarīra ) which cause his bondage. You,
Parameśvara, do not have a subtle body. You are all-
pervading and the controller of all principles,
including kāla (time) and karma (action). It is said in
the śrutis that You desired to become many, bahu syām ,
‘I can become many.’ According to this statement of
śruti , You are everything in the entire universe.
However, You specifically express in the śrutis : evam-
bhūto ‘py ahaṁ sambhavāmi. ‘Although I appear to be
everything in the universe, still I personally manifest

                           244
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Myself.’ From this it is understood that You take birth
only to manifest Your eternal form, which is
categorically distinct from the whole universe.”

This being the case, one may inquire, “What is the
nature of these bodies of Yours?” In response to this,
Śrī Bhagavān says in the second half of this śloka :
prakṛtiṁ svām adhiṣṭhāya sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā. If the
word prakṛti is taken to indicate the external māyā-
śakti , the meaning here becomes ‘Parameśvara, the
presiding controller of prakṛti , who becomes the
universe with the help of this śakti ’. However, this
does not describe the specific nature of Śrī Bhagavān.
In the Sanskrit dictionary it is said: saṁsiddhi-
prakṛtis tv ime svarūpaṁ ca svabhāvaś ca . Svarūpa
(natural form) and svabhāva (intrinsic nature) are
synonyms for saṁsiddhi or prakṛti . For this reason, the
word prakṛti mentioned in this śloka indicates svarūpa.
The nature of this svarūpa is sac-cid-ānanda .

Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmīpāda says, “Your svarūpa is not
composed of māyā-śakti , but is sac-cid-ānanda .
Therefore, Your prakṛti is by nature śuddha-sattva ,
pure goodness.”

According to Śrī Rāmānujācārya, prakṛti means svabhāva .
“Remaining situated in Your svabhāva , that is,
retaining Your entire divinity, You manifest Your own
svarūpa only by Your independent will.” If we accept
prakṛti as svabhāva , then the use of these qualifying
adjectives, that is, s ac-cid-ānanda-ghana eka-rasa
(uniformly concentrated eternity, knowledge and bliss),
distinguishes between Śrī Bhagavān’s form and māyā. Svām
means one’s own rūpa . It is said in the śruti: sa
bhagavataḥ kasmin pratiṣṭhitaḥ sva-mahimni. “Śrī
Bhagavān is situated in full possession of all His
divine glory.” According to Śrī Madhusūdana Sarasvatī,
when Bhagavān appears, He still remains situated in His
svarūpa . He behaves like an embodied living entity,
although there is no difference between His body and His
actual self.

If one raises the question, “Since You are eternal, when
You accept indestructible forms such as Matsya and
Kūrma, are Your past and present forms also
simultaneously perceptible?” then in response Bhagavān
says: ātma-māyayā. “This act is performed by My ātma-
bhūta-māyā (internal potency or yogamāyā). My svarūpa is
both concealed and manifested by yogamāyā, which is the
function of cit-śakti . I appear only with the help of
this yogamāyā, who is manifesting My present svarūpa and
who has concealed My previous forms.”

Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī writes in his commentary, “I appear
only by My ātma-māyā, the potency of complete and
infallible knowledge, strength, prowess, and so on.”

Śrī Rāmānujācārya writes in his commentary, “Śrī
Bhagavān appears by His ātma-māyā, or through the
potency of His own knowledge. Māyā vayunaṁ j ñ ānam. In
this context the word māyā is a synonym for jñ āna .
This is also confirmed by the Sanskrit dictionary. Śrī
Bhagavān knows the pious and impious karma of the
eternal jīvas only by the help of this potency.”

                           245
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


According to Madhusūdana Sarasvatī, “It is simply
illusion to apply the conception of the body and the
embodied to Me, Bhagavān Vāsudeva, for I am
transcendental to all such duality.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the Kūrma Purāṇa it is stated: deha-dehī-vibhāgaś ca
neśvare vidyate kvacit. “In regard to Śrī Bhagavān,
there is no distinction between the body and the
embodied.”

Regarding the jīva, however, the body is different from
the embodied soul, meaning that his gross and subtle
bodies are different from him, the jīvātmā. This is
further clarified in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhyalīlā
17.132):


deha-dehīra, nāma-nāmīra kṛṣṇe nāhi ‘bheda’

jīvera dharma—nāma-deha-svarūpe ‘vibheda’


In Kṛṣṇa there is no distinction between nāma and nāmī
(the name and the possessor of the name), or between
deha and dehī (the body and the embodied). The embodied
jīva’s dharma (character or nature), name and body,
however, are different from his svarūpa (spiritual
constitution).

Bhagavān is aja, unborn. By His own will He accepts the
shelter of His cit-śakti in the form of yogamāyā, and by
manifesting His eternal body in this material world, He
performs simple and natural pastimes as though He is an
ordinary boy. Still, His body, consisting of sac-cid-
ānanda , is not covered by a gross or subtle body. The
atomic jīva , on the other hand, being overpowered by
the influence of Bhagavān’s māyā-śakti , accepts a
subtle and a gross body according to his saṁskāras ,
impressions created by his previous karma , and in this
way again takes birth.

In conclusion, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has commented
that here Kṛṣṇa is explaining to Arjuna, “Although you
and I appear in this world again and again, there is a
specific difference between your descent and Mine. I am
Īśvara, the controller of all jīvas ; I am aja , without
birth, and My form is immutable. I appear through the
agency of My cit-śakti , whereas the jīvas take birth in
this world under the influence of My māyā-śakti , which
deprives them of the memory of their past lives. Jīvas
have to accept a subtle body as a result of their
previous karma , and as a result of taking shelter of
that subtle body, they have to repeatedly take birth. My
appearance, however, in the deva , animal and other
forms, occurs solely by My own will. Unlike the jīvas ,

                           246
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

My supremely pure conscious body is not covered by a
subtle and a gross body. In this mundane plane I
manifest that very same eternal body which exists
naturally in Vaikuṇṭha.”

“Someone may inquire, ‘How is it possible for cit-
tattva, the transcendental Personality, to manifest in
the material world along with His realm?’ Now hear My
response. My yogamāyā-śakti is inconceivable, and
consequently cannot be comprehended. No amount of
reasoning, however clever, is able to comprehend and
measure the acts performed by yogamāyā. You must
understand, by naturally acquired knowledge that I,
Bhagavān, with My inconceivable potency, am not bound by
any rules governing the mundane plane. By My mere will,
all the entities of Vaikuṇṭh a can easily manifest their
supremely pure forms in this material world. In other
words, I can transform the complete phenomenal
manifestation into cit-svarūpa . My sac-cid-ānanda
vigraha , which is beyond all material laws, is indeed
completely pure, even when it manifests in the material
world. What doubt can there be of this? That māyā, which
controls the jīva , is also My prakṛti , energy, but
understand that when I use the phrase ‘My prakṛti ’, it
only refers to the cit-śakti . Although My potency is
one without a second, in My presence it is cit-śakti ;
however, for the jīvas bound by karma , it is māyā-śakti
, endowed with its respective influences and various
types of majestic, mystic powers, which forces them to
rotate in the cycle of birth and death.”




Śloka 7



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

bhārata—decendent of Bhārata; hi—assuredly; yadā yadā—
whenever; bhavati—there is; glāniḥ—a decline; dharmasya—
of dharma ; (and) abhyutthānam —an increase; adharmasya—
of adharma ; tadā—then; aham—I; sṛjāmi—manifest; ātmānam
—My own Self.

O Bhārata! Whenever there is a decline of dharma and an
increase in adharma, at that time I manifest My
eternally perfect form in this mundane world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           247
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


When does Śrī Bhagavān appear? To answer this question,
Bhagavān replies with this śloka beginning with the word
yadā. “Being unable to tolerate the decline of dharma
and the increase of adharma , I appear for the purpose
of changing or reversing the situation.”

According to Śrīpāda Madhusūdana Sarasvatī, ātmānaṁ
sṛjāmi means I create the body. “With the help of
yogamāyā, I exhibit My nitya-siddha-deha , My eternally
perfect body, as if it were created by material nature.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In each birth, a jīva who is bound by the result of his
karma takes a new body that is made from inert matter.
But Śrī Bhagavān, by His own will and through the agency
of His māyā-śakti , deludes the asuras in such a way
that they consider His body to be an objec t of the
material creation. Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī has confirmed
this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (9.24.56):


yadā yadā hi dharmasya kṣayo vṛddhiś ca pāpmanaḥ

tadā tu bhagavān īśa ātmānaṁ sṛjate hariḥ


Whenever there is a decline of dharma and an increase of
sin, Bhagavān Śrī Hari manifests Himself in this world.

Various ācāryas have explained the word dharma used in
this śloka in different ways. Śrī Rāmānujācārya has
accepted the word dharma to mean the worship of
Bhagavān. Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has explained dharma
as śuddha-bhakti-yoga , characterised by the performance
of arcana (worship) of Bhagavān, dhyāna (meditation) and
other such practices as well as varṇāśrama-dharma
prescribed in the Vedas .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has quoted Kṛṣṇa as follows:
“The only reason for My appearance is that I desire it;
I descend of My own free will. Whenever there is a
decline in dharma and a prevalence of adharma , I appear
of My own accord. My laws, which govern the activities
of this material world, are unconquerable. However, when
in due course of time, these rules become ineffective
for some undefinable and indescribable reason, adharma
becomes prominent. No one except Me can put an end to
this disorder. I thus appear in this mundane plane with
the assistance of My cit -śakti and dispel the decline
of dharma .

“It is not true that I only appear in the land of
Bhārata, India. According to necessity I appear, by My
will, among devas , animals, birds and all other
species. Therefore, do not think that I do not appear
among mleccha , antyaja and other outcastes. All those

                           248
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

pitiable people also accept a certain degree of dharma
as their svadharma (natural religion). When their
religion declines, I also appear among them as a
śaktyāveśa-avatāra and protect their religion. In India
people regularly perform their svadharma in the form of
varṇāśrama-dharma. Because of this, I make a special
endeavour to establish this system of dharma among them.
For this reason, all the charming avatāras , such as the
yuga-avātaras and the aṁśa-av atāras (partial avatāras )
can be seen to manifest only in India. In places where
there is no varṇāśrama-dharma , people cannot properly
practise niṣkāma-karma -yoga , or its goals, jñ āna -
yoga , and its highest fruit, bhakti-yoga . Still, any
tinge of bhakti which manifests among the outcastes
(antyaja ), can be attributed to the sudden devotional
faith generated by the mercy of My bhakta .”




Śloka 8




paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge

paritrāṇāya—for the protection; sādhūnām—of good men;
vināśāya—for the destruction; duṣkṛtām—of evil-doers; ca
—and; arthāya—for the purpose; dharma-saṁsthāpana—of
establishing dharma ; sambhavāmi—I appear; yuge yuge—in
every age.

To protect My unalloyed bhaktas, annihilate the wicked
and re-establish dharma, I appear in every age.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“O Arjuna, a question may arise in your heart regarding
the necessity of My appearance when the rājarṣis,
brahmarṣis and My bhaktas are capable of rectifying the
decline of dharma and the increase of adharma. Listen to
My answer. Although it is true that they can do this
work, I appear in order to perform acts which are
impossible for others. To explain this, I have spoken
this śloka beginning with paritrāṇāya. Paritrāṇāya
(protecting the sādhus) refers to protecting the acutely
eager hearts of My aikāntika-bhaktas who are suffering
from intense hankering to have My darśana . Just to
remove that suffering I manifest Myself. Duṣkṛtām means
that I appear to annihilate Rāvaṇa, Kaṁsa, Keśī and the

                           249
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

other asuras who give pain to My bhaktas , and who
cannot be killed by anyone else. Dharma-
saṁsthāpanārthāya means that I advent in order to
perfectly establish parama-dharma (the eternal dharma ),
which is endowed with such characteristics as bhajana ,
dhyāna , paricaryā (service) to Me and saṅkīrtana . It
is not possible for others to do this. Yuge yuge means
that I appear in every yuga or kalpa (day of Brahmā).
Although I punish the miscreants, one should not suspect
that I am guilty of being biased. By killing these
miscreants with My own hands, I protect them from going
to hell as a result of their sinful deeds, and I deliver
them from material existence. You should consider this
punishment to be My mercy.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān establishes varṇāśrama-dharma by
transmitting śakti into the hearts of His prominent
saintly bhaktas in the royal and brahminical orders.
However, Bhagavān Himself descends for three reasons: to
pacify the afflictions of those bhaktas who are
suffering in separation from Him, to kill asuras like
Kaṁsa who strongly oppose the sādhus and who cannot be
killed by others, and to propagate the message of
śuddha-bhakti .

While defining the word avatāra, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmīpāda
writes: avatāraś ca prākṛta -vaibhave ‘vataraṇam iti.
“The descent of Śrī Bhagavān into this material creation
is called avatāra .”

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has elucidated on the same
point in different words: aprapañcāt prapa ñce
‘vataraṇaṁ khalv avat āraḥ. “The descent of Bhagavān fr
om His unmanifested eternal abode into the mundane plane
is called avatāra .”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is avatārī, the origin of unlimited avatāras .
He is therefore called Svayam Bhagavān. His avatāras are
of six types: (1) puruṣa-avatāra , (2) guṇa-avatāra ,
(3) līlā-avatāra , (4) manvantara-avatāra , (5) yuga-
avatāra and (6) śaktyāveśa-avatāra .

There are four yugas: Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali. In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.20), it is stated that Kṛṣṇa
appears in all of them:


kṛtaṁ tretā dvāparaṁ ca kalir ity eṣu keśavaḥ

nānā-varṇābhidhākāro nānaiva vidhinejyate


One day of Brahmā’s life span is called a kalpa. There
are fourteen manvantaras in one kalpa . There are one
thousand catur-yugas (complete cycles of the four ages)
in one day of Brahmā. According to the calculations of

                           250
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

human solar years, one day of Brahmā equals
4,320,000,000 years. Three hundred and sixty such days
make one year of Brahmā, and Brahmā lives for one
hundred such years.

Although Bhagavān kills the wicked asuras, He remains
aloof from their faults. In other words, He is free from
the imperfection of being biased; His killing them is
only an exhibition of His mercy towards them. Commenting
on the śloka : ajasya janmotpatha-nāśanāya (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 3.1.44), Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
writes, “Although Bhagavān is aja (unborn), He descends
to annihilate and liberate the asuras who impede the
path of truth.”

Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has also commented in a similar
manner:


lālane tāḍane mātur nākāruṇya yathārbhake

tadvad eva maheśasya niyantur guṇa-doṣayoḥ


Just as an affectionate mother is not considered hard-
hearted or harsh if she chastises her child in the
course of raising and caring for him, Parameśvara is
also not cruel when He disciplines the jīvas to bring
out their good qualities and diminish their bad ones.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has quoted Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
follows: “I establish varṇāśrama-dharma by infusing My
śakti into the royal and brahminical saints who are
devoted to Me. However, in order to protect My pure
bhaktas from non-devotees, there is a need for Me to
appear. Thus, appearing as the yuga-avatāras , I protect
the sādhus . By eliminating the wicked asuras , I
redress the decline in dharma , and by preaching the
limbs of bhakti , such as śravaṇa and kīrtana , I
establish the eternal dharma of the jīvas .

“I descend in every yuga. From this statement, one
should understand that I also descend in Kali-yuga. My
avatāra in Kali-yuga, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, will
establish that most rarely attained prema , the eternal
dharma , solely by the process of nāma-saṅkīrtana . This
avatāra has no other purpose, and as the greatest of all
avatāras I will remain concealed from the common man. My
pure bhaktas will be naturally attracted to Me, and you,
Arjuna, will realise this when you appear with Me in
that age. The most wonderful feature of this hidden
avatāra , who delivers the people of Kali-yuga, is that
I reform the miscreants’ wicked natures by blessing them
with divine love through the chanting of nāma-saṅkīrtana
, instead of completely annihilating them in the manner
of My previous avatāras .”




Śloka 9



                           251
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so ‘rjuna

arjuna—O Arjuna; me—My; janma—birth; ca—and; karma—
activities; (are) divyam—transcendental; (one) yaḥ—who;
vetti—knows; evam—thus; tattvataḥ—in truth; tyaktvā—
having given up; deham—the body; na eti—does not accept;
punaḥ—again; janma—(re) birth; saḥ—he; eti—comes; mām—to
Me.

O Arjuna! My birth and activities are transcendental.
One who knows this in truth does not take another birth
after giving up the present body. He certainly attains
Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“One will only become perfect when he has understood the
essence of the transcendental nature of My birth (janma)
and activities (karma ), which are endowed with the
characteristics described in the previous ślokas .” This
śloka , beginning with the word janma , is spoken to
explain this. Śrīpāda Rāmānujācārya and Śrīpāda
Madhusūdana Sarasvatī explain that the word divya means
aprākṛta , transcendental, and Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has
translated it as alaukika , not of this material world.
The material world is created by prakṛti (material
nature), thus by the word alaukika Śrīla Śrīdhara
Svāmīpāda also implies aprākṛta . Consequently, because
the birth and a ctivities of Śrī Bhagavān are aprākṛta
and beyond the modes, they are nitya (eternal).

In the Bhagavat-sandarbha, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī refers to
this present subject in his explanation of the śloka :
na vidyate yasya ca janma karma vā (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
8.3.8). He explains that, although this matter cannot be
comprehended by logic, on the strength of statements
from the Vedas and Smṛti it must be accepted as being
beyond reason.

In this regard, it is also said in the Puruṣa-bodhinī
śruti of Pipalāda-śākhā: eko devo nitya-līlānurakto

bhakta-hṛdy antar-ātmā

Eternally engaged in His pastimes, the one Lord in His
form of Antaryāmī enters within the hearts of His
bhaktas.

Regarding the eternality of Śrī Bhagavān’s birth and

                            252
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

activities (janma and karma ), detailed descriptions
have been given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

“After hearing My statements such as: yo vetti tattvataḥ
(Gītā 4.9), ajo ‘pi sann avyayātmā (Gītā 4.6) and janma
karma ca me divyam (Gītā 4.9), one who understands the
eternal nature of My birth and activities with theistic
intelligence —that is, who is not dependent on
empiricism to accept it —does not have to take birth
again in this material world.”

“Those who in truth understand the word tat in the
statement of Gītā (17.23)-oṁ tat sad iti nirdeśo bra
hmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥ to mean brahma do not have to
take birth again after giving up their present body.
Rather, it is assured that they attain Me.” Here
Bhagavān gives a superior meaning to the phrase “giving
up the body”. “Such a person does not take another birth
after giving up the body. Rather, he attains Me even
without giving it up.”

Śrīpāda Rāmānujācārya writes paraphrasing Kṛṣṇa, “All
sins that impede one on the path to attain My full
shelter are completely destroyed by true knowledge of My
tran scendental birth and activities. Only those dear
devotees who have taken shelter of Me, attain Me even in
this very life.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Those who, by the grace of guru and the Vaiṣṇavas,
realise that Śrī Bhagavān accepts a transcendenta l
birth and performs transcendental activities through the
medium of His acintya-śakti attain eternal service to
Him in this very life by the mercy of His hlādinī-śakti
. On the contrary, those who consider the birth and
activities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be mundan e are overpowered
by ignorance and wander in the cycle of birth and death,
afflicted by the threefold miseries.

Lord Brahmā has also said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.7.29):
tat karma divyam iva , “The activities of Śrī Bhagavān
are indeed suprahuman.” Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura has clarified this point in his Bhāgavatam
commentary on this śloka. “In reality, all of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s activities are transcendental.” Furthermore, it
is stated: na vidyate yasya ca janma karma vā

na nāma-rūpe guṇa-doṣa eva vā

tathāpi lokāpyaya-sambhavāya yaḥ

sva-māyayā tāny anukālam ṛcchati


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 8.3.8

For the Lord there is no janma, karma, nāma, rūpa, guṇa,

                           253
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

doṣa (fault), etc., yet He always accepts these
attributes by His potency for the creation and
destruction of the material world.

The explanation of the above śloka by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
is significant and can be referred to in his Bhāgavat-
sandarbha and Krama-sandarbha.

The Śrutis have described Bhagavān as niṣphala
(ineffective), niṣkriya (inactive), nirañjana
(faultless), nirākāra (formless), aśabdam
(indescribable), avyaya (imperishable), and so forth.
This is only because He is beyond material qualities.
Thus, in specific Śrutis such as Chāndogya Upaniṣad
(3.14.4), He is called sarva-karmā, the performer of all
activities, sarva-kāma , the possessor of all types of
desires, sarva-gandha , the possessor of all fragrances,
sarva-rasa , the possessor of all mellows, and so on.
This is corroborated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.4.33): yo
‘nugrahārthaṁ bhajatāṁ pāda-mūlam

anāma-rūpo bhagavān anantaḥ

nāmāni rūpāṇi ca janma-karmabhir

bheje sa mahyaṁ paramaḥ prasīdatu


To bestow mercy upon those who worship His lotus feet,
Bhagavān—although free from material names, forms and
other attributes—accepts various transcendental forms
and names through His different avatāras and activities.
May that unlimited Bhagavān, whose opulence is
inconceivable, be pleased with me.

Those who are bhaktas achieve Bhagavān even while living
within this body. Kṛṣṇa says: yānti mām eva nirguṇāḥ.
“Those who are free from the modes attain Me” (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 11.25.22). While commenting on this śloka ,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes that the word
laya (dissolution) is not mentioned here. This clarifies
Kṛṣṇa’s point: “Upon becoming nirguṇa , My bhaktas
attain Me even in their present body.”




Śloka 10




vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā

man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ

bahavo jñāna-tapasā

pūtā mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ

vīta—being freed; rāga—from attachment; bhaya—fear;
krodhāḥ—and anger; (being) mat-mayāḥ—absorbed in Me;
(and) upāśritāḥ—surrendered; mām—to Me; bahavaḥ—many

                           254
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

persons; jñ āna-tapasā—qualities in the form of
knowledge; (became) pūtāḥ—purified; (and) āgatāḥ—came;
(to have) mad-bhāvam —love for Me .

Freed from attachment, fear and anger, with their
concentration fixed on Me, being completely surrendered,
and purified by austerity in the form of knowledge, many
persons have attained prema-bhakti for Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān says, “O Arjuna, not only do those having
full knowledge of My birth and activities, who are now
present during My current avatāra attain Me, but even in
ancient times those endowed with this transcendental
knowledge of My birth and activities of My previous
avatāras also attained Me.” To explain this, the present
śloka , beginning with the word vīta-rāga , is being
spoken. Jñ āna-tapasā means purified by austerity in the
form of knowledge. In the opinion of Śrī Rāmānujācārya,
Kṛṣṇa is saying, “This knowledge is realisation of the
absolute knowledge of My bir th and activities. People
attain Me when they have been purified by realising My
birth and activities in terms of the characteristics
described earlier.” In other words, “While trying with
determination to realise the eternal nature of My birth
and activities, they attain My prema-bhakti. However,
they are first purified by the fire of transcendental
knowledge and the austerity of tolerating the burning
poison of the serpents of various types of wrong
opinions, misguided logic and fallacious arguments.”

In Śrī Rāmānujācārya’s commentary he cites the Śruti
statement: tasya dhīrāḥ parijānanti yonim. “One who is
dhīra (intelligent) completely knows the nature of Śrī
Bhagavān’s birth.”

Vīta-rāga refers to those who have given up attachment
to persons who engage in mundane talk and who advocate
bogus opinions. “My bhaktas do not become angry with
them nor do they fear them. If one asks why, the answer
is that they are intensely absorbed in deliberating and
meditating on My birth and activities, and hearing and
chanting about them.” Mad-bh āvam means ‘prema for Me’.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“There are three reasons why foolish people are not
inclined to deliberate on the transcendental and
supremely pure nature of My birth, activities and form.
They are: 1) attachment to worldly objects, 2) fear and

                           255
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

3) anger. Those whose intelligence is tightly bound by
mundane thoughts are so deeply absorbed in and attached
to materialism, that they do not accept or even consider
the existence of an eternal entity known as cit-tattva .
According to such persons, svabh āva (nature itself) is
the Absolute Truth . Some of them maintain that inert
matter is the eternal cause and the source of cit-tattva
. The jaḍa-vādīs (empiricists), the svabhāva-vādīs
(nature theorists), and the caitanya-hīna-vidhi-vādīs,
who advocate a system of ethics which is based on the
conception that the Absolute is unconscious, have no
understanding of consciousness. These three classes of
philosophers are all impelled by an attachment to
materialism and contend that inert matter is the all-in-
all (ja ḍa-vādīs ), that nature is a law unto itself
(svabhāva-vādīs ) and that one can deny the principle of
consciousness (caitanya-hīna-vidhi-vādīs ). They
gradually become bereft of any transcendental attachment
to the Supreme Absolute Reality.

“Although some thinkers do accept cit-tattva (spiritual
principles) as eternal, because they reject the
principles of transcendental knowledge and perpetually
take shelter of mundane logic and reasoning, they can
actually have no realisation of cit-tattva . Whatever
attributes and activities they see in inert matter they
designate as asat (unreal) and very carefully abandon
them. Thus, in the name of identifying that which is
uncontaminated by inert matter, they imagine an Absolute
Reality (brahma ) which is beyond definition. However,
that is nothing more than an indirect manifestation of
My māyā; it is not My eternal form. Later they give up
meditating on My svarūpa and worshipping My deity form,
fearing that by this meditation and way of thinking they
may come under the influence of material conceptions.
Because of this fear, they lose the opportunity to
realise the svarūpa of the Absolute Truth (parama-tattva
) and are deprived of My prema . There are others who,
being unable to discern any substance beyond matter,
become possessed by anger. Impelled by such anger they
maintain that the Absolute Reality is just nirvāṇa , a
void, nothingness and the complete annihilation of all
existence. The doctrine of the Buddhists and Jains has
appeared from this principle of nirvāṇa .

“Many wise men, however, do become free from attachment,
fear and anger and see nothing but Myself everywhere.
Genuinely surrendered to Me, they are purified by the
fire of transcendental knowledge, and by the penance of
tolerating the burning poison of false reasoning. Thus
they have attained pure, sublime love for Me.”




Śloka 11




ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

                             256
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; yathā—as; ye—they; prapadyante—as
they serve; (to) mām —Me; tathā—so; eva—certainly; aham
bhajāmi—I love and serve; (with) tān—them; manuṣyāḥ—men;
anuvartante—follow; mama vartma—My path; sarvaśaḥ—in all
respects.

O Pārtha! In whichever way a person renders service to
Me I serve him in that very same way. Everyone follows
My path in all respects.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




One may ask the following question: “Only Your
aikāntika-bhaktas understand Your birth and activities
to be eternal. Others, who have an inclination toward jñ
āna and other processes, take shelter of You to perfect
their particular process, but they do not acce pt the
eternality of Your birth and activities. What will
happen to them?” In response, Śrī Kṛṣṇa speaks this
śloka beginning with the words ye yathā. “Those who take
shelter of Me perform bhajana , and I reciprocate by
granting them the result of that bhajana . I am the
supreme master, and My birth and activities (pastimes)
are eternal. To those with this understanding, who also
perform My bhajana by rendering service to My pastimes
with the specific intention of giving pleasure to Me, I
as Īśvara, being ind ependent to act or not act as I
choose, also make their birth and activities eternal. I
make them My parikaras (associates) and in due course of
time I become manifest and unmanifest in this material
world along with them. In this way, I bestow My mercy
upon them at every moment by giving them prema as the
fruit of their bhajana (sev ā). There are others, such
as the jñ ānīs , who take shelter of Me, considering My
birth and activities to be temporary and My deity form
to be a product of the external energy. In turn, I
repeatedly throw them into the cycle of birth and
activities which are subject to destruction. There, in
the snare of māyā, I give them misery in the form of
birth and death. However, those jñ ānīs who consider My
birth and activities to be eternal and My deity to be
sac-cid-ānanda take shelter of Me to perfect their
knowledge. For such mumukṣus , who desire mukti through
the dissolution of their gross and subtle bodies, I
destroy their implication in the cycle of birth and
death which is born of ignorance, and grant them
brahmānanda (the bliss of liberation) as the fruit of
their bhajana . Thus, not only My bhaktas take shelter
of Me, but jñ ānīs , karmīs , yogīs , tyāgīs ,
worshippers of the devatās and all others follow My
path. Since I am sarva-svarūpa , the form of
omnipotence, all paths including those of jñ āna and

                           257
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

karma are My paths.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




tāṁs tān kāmān harir dadyād yān yān kāmayate janaḥ

ārādhito yathaivaiṣa tathā puṁsāṁ phalodayaḥ


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.13.34

It is understood from this śloka that according to the
intention with which people worship o r take shelter of
Bhagavān Śrī Hari, He rewards them in accordance with
their desires. The śuddha-bhaktas worship Him to attain
eternal service to His sac-cid-ānanda deity. Making such
prema-bhaktas His nitya-parikaras , Bhagavān Śrī Hari
fulfils their desi re to attain His loving service
(premamayī sevā). In accordance with the desire of the
nirviśeṣa-vādī jñ ānīs , Bhagavān grants them mukti in
the form of nirvāṇa in the featureless nirviśeṣabrahma ,
which is the unvariegated manifestation of His
personality . Bhagavān appears to sakāma-karmīs as the
bestower of the fruits of their karma. He appears to the
yogīs as Īśvara, giving them vibhūti (mystic powers) or
kaivalya (liberation). However, of all the various
achieve-ments, attaining the service of Vrajendr
anandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Goloka Vraja is the ultimate.

It should be clearly understood from the present śloka
of Bhagavad-gītā that the results of different types of
bhajana depend on the desires of the practitioners. The
results of various types of worship are not the same.
Some explain the words manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ to mean
that everyone is following the path of service to
Bhagavān and, whatever action they may perform, they
will all attain the same result. This conception is
completely incorrect. The i dea that the miscreants, the
jñ ānīs , the bhaktas and the prema-bhaktas ultimately
achieve the exact same destination has been refuted in
śāstras such as Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam .
This is stated later in the Gītā (9.25): yānti deva-
vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino ‘pi mām

Those who worship the devas go to the planets of the
devas, those who worship the forefathers go to their
planet, those who worship the spirits go to the planet
of the spirits and those who worship Me attain Me.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as follows,
“When people accept My shelter by worshipping Me, I
reciprocate with whatever intention or faith they have
in relation to Me. Everyone can certainly attain Me,
becau se I am the ultimate objective of all paths. Those

                            258
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

who are śuddha-bhaktas attain paramānanda
(transcendental bliss) by eternally rendering
confidential eternal to My sac-cid-ānanda deity in the
Supreme Abode. To the worshippers of My featureless
aspect (n irviśeṣa-vādīs ), I award nirvāṇa-mukti ,
total absorption in the nirviśeṣabrahma , by way of
self-annihilation. Since they do not accept the
eternality of My sac-cid-ānanda deity, they consequently
lose their eternal, blissful svarūpa .

“According to their degree of conviction, I cast some of
them into the cycle of birth and death. I appear as
śūnya (void) to the śūnyavādīs , merging their existence
with the void. I cover the ātmā, consciousness
(ācchādita-cetana ), of the empiricists as well as the
nature thei sts who identify themselves as being born of
nature, by making their consciousness almost inert. I am
only attainable to them in the form of inert nature. I
appear as Īśvara to the yogīs , rewarding them with
vibhūtis (mystic powers) or kaivalya (impersonal
liberation). In this way, as sarva-svarūpa , the
intrinsic form of everything, I am the object of
achievement for all types of beliefs. Among them all,
only attainment of My transcendental service should be
considered supreme. All human beings follow one of My
various paths.”




Śloka 12




kāṅkṣantaḥ karmaṇāṁ siddhiṁ

yajanta iha devatāḥ

kṣipraṁ hi mānuṣe loke

siddhir bhavati karmajā


kāṅkṣantaḥ—those desiring; siddhim—perfection; karmaṇām—
in fruitive acts; iha—in this world; yajante—worship;
devatāḥ—the devas ; hi—certainly; loke mānuṣe—in this
world of men; karmajā—fruitive work; bhavati—becomes;
kṣipram—speedily; siddhiḥ—fruitful.

Those who desire the fruits of their activities in this
world worship the devatās. Thus the results of their
fruitive work are quickly achieved.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Among all such persons with whom I reciprocate, those

                           259
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

desiring material success give up the path of My bhakti,
which is non-different from Me, and follow the path of
karma , which quickly bears fruit.” To explain thi s
point, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the
word kāṅkṣantaḥ. The word karmajā means born of karma
and refers to perfections such as the attainment of
Svarga .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Karma is of three types: nitya, routine; naimittika ,
occasional and kāmya , with fruitive desire. Actions
prescribed in the Vedas , such as sandhya , reciting
prayers at the three junctions of the day, are nitya-
karma , daily religious duties. Activities such as pitṛ-
śrāddha , offering oblations to the forefathers, are
known as naimittika-karma or occasional duties and those
actions performed with a fruitive desire are called
kāmya-karma or sakāma . Kāmya-karma is superior to both
akarma , abstaining from prescribed duties and vikarma ,
prohibited, sinful action.

kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ

prapadyante ‘nya-devatāḥ

Gītā 7.20

People who desire the fruits of their actions give up
the worship of Bhagavān Śrī Vāsudeva and worship the
different devatās.

labhate ca tataḥ kāmān

mayaiva vihitān hi tān

Gītā 7.22

By the arrangements of Bhagavān, they receive their
desired results from those devatās.

Those who, by the association of śuddha-bhaktas, realise
the insignificance of karma and its fruits, adopt the
path of nirguṇa-bhakti. Very quickly, they become
successful and attain bhagavat-sevā. According to śāstra
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.14.21), this is because Śrī
Bhagavān is achieved only by bhakti : bhaktyāham ekayā
grāhyaḥ. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.20) also says: na
sādhayati māṁ yogaḥ. “Bhagavān is not achieve d by such
processes as yoga or tapasya .”




Śloka 13



                           260
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ

guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ

tasya kartāram api māṁ

viddhy akartāram avyayam


cātur-varṇyam—the system of the four social orders;
sṛṣṭam—was created; mayā—by Me; vibhāgaśaḥ—according to
divisions; guṇa—of quality; (and) karma—work; api—
although; (I am) kartāram—the creator; tasya—of this
(system); viddhi—you should know; mām—Me; avyayam—(to
be) the unchanging; akartāram—non-doer.

The fourfold system of varṇas (brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya,
vaiśya and śūdra) was created by Me according to
divisions of quality (guṇa) and work (karma). Although I
am the creator of this system, you should know that I am
immutable and the non-doer (akartā), and that I am not
the direct instigator.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




One may ask, “The paths of bhakti and jñāna give mukti
as their fruit, yet the path of karma gives bondage.
You, Parameśvara, have introduced all these paths, so
how is it that this biased feature exists in You?” In
response, Śrī Bhagavān says, “No, no, it is not like
this.” To justify this, He has spoken this śloka
beginning with the word cātur-varṇyam , which indicates
the four varṇas.

The qualities of four varṇas are as follows: brāhmaṇas
possess a predominance of sattva-guṇa , and their
activity (karma ) is to control the mind and senses.
Kṣatriyas are predominated by sattva-guṇa mixed with
rajas , and their karma is to be chivalrous and to
engage in warfare. Vaiśyas are predominated by rajo-guṇa
mixed with tamas , and their karma is farming and
protecting cows, etc. Śūdras are predominated by tamo-
guṇa , and their karma is to perform menial service.

“I have created the four varṇas, guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ,
according to divisions based on guṇa (quality) and karma
(work) which is supported by karma -mārga (the path of
fruitive work). Although I am the doer and the creator
of this system, you should know that I am not the doer
or the creator, for I am not directly concerned with
this system. Material nature (prakṛti ) is My potency,
but I am transcendental to the modes of material nature
. Hence, although I am the creator, I am also not the
creator, because I am free from the false ego of being
the doer. It is My prakṛti which, as the material cause,
is the direct agent concerned with establishing this

                            261
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

system. I am therefore immutable. In other words, I
remain unchanged, unbound and unconcerned with the
introduction of the varṇa system.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān alone is the creator and direct initiator
(kartā) of the whole universe. According to this
siddhānta , He alone is the creator (kartā) of varṇa and
the fourfold system of varṇadharma . By His
constitutional nature, the jīva is nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa .
Bhagavān has bestowed upon him an invaluable treasure in
the form of free will. When the jīva misuses his
independence by deciding not to serve Kṛṣṇa, Bhagavān’s
māyā immediately covers his svarūpa with gross and
subtle bodies, and throws him into the cycle of saṁsāra.
To deliver such jīvas , Śrī Bhagavān, being causelessly
merciful, creates the pa th of karma-mārga (varṇāśrama-
dharma ) through the agency of His māyā-śakti . At the
same time, He is eternally engaged in enjoying with His
cit-śakti , and so remains avyaya (unchangeable) and
akartā (the non-doer).

For further details about the four varṇas, one should
read Bhagavad-gītā (18.41-4) and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(7.11.21-4), (11.17.16-19).




Śloka 14



na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti

na me karma-phale spṛhā

iti māṁ yo ‘bhijānāti

karmabhir na sa badhyate


karmāṇi—actions; na limpanti—do not bind; mām—Me; me—for
Me; (there is) na—no; spṛhā—hankering; karma-phale—for
the results of action; saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; abhijānāti—
thoroughly understands; mām—Me; iti—in this way; na
badhyate —is not bound; karmabhiḥ—by actions.

Karma can never bind Me, because I have no desire for
its fruits. Those who know this truth about Me are also
never bound by their activities.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī

                           262
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Even if the arguments from the previous śloka are
accepted, Arjuna may still say to Bhagavān, “But now You
have appeared in a kṣatriya dynasty and every day You
perform the activities of a kṣatriya , so how can I
accept You as akartā, the non-doer?” In answer to this,
Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with na mām.
“This karma does not bind Me as it does the jīvas .
Although the jīva desires the fruits of his karma in the
form of residence in Svarga and so on, I have no such
desire. As Parameśvara, I am complete in My own bliss;
yet simply to set an example, I perform work. Those who
do not know Me as such become bound by karma .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān is pūrṇatattva (the complete Absolute
Reality) composed of sat , cit and ānanda . The jīva is
an atomic, conscious reality (aṇu-cit ). Bhagavān is
replete with six types of opulence, but the jīva who is
averse to the sevā o f Bhagavān is bereft of oppulence.
Bhagavān is the master of māyā, while the jīva is
subject to māyā’s control. These are the differences
between the two. The jīva can never, under any
circumstance, become brahma or Bhagavān. However, when
the jīva performs bhagavad-bhakti , knowing that Śrī
Bhagavān is all-powerful, independent, imperishable and
desireless, he becomes freed from the bondage of karma ,
and attains the service of Bhagavān in his svarūpa. This
is the jīva’s eternal position (nitya-dharma ) .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “The
path of karma which is created due to adṛṣṭa (the jīva’s
previous abuse of free will) does not affect Me. Nor do
I desire to enjoy the petty fruits of karma because I,
Bhagavān, am full in six opulences. Those who keep in
mind My absolute free nature by understanding My avyaya-
tattva (imperishable nature) and by deliberating on the
path of karma (varṇāśrama system), are, like Me, never
bound by karma . By performing śuddha-bhakti , they
attain only Me.”




Śloka 15



evaṁ jñātvā kṛtaṁ karma

pūrvair api mumukṣubhiḥ

kuru karmaiva tasmāt tvaṁ

                            263
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


pūrvaiḥ pūrvataraṁ kṛtam

evam—thus; jñātvā—knowing; api—even; pūrvaiḥ—the
ancients; mumukṣubhiḥ—who desired liberation; kṛtam—
performed; karma—work; eva—certainly; tas māt—therefore;
tvam—you; kuru—must perform; karma—the action; kṛtam—
performed; pūrvataram—previously; pūrvaiḥ—by those
ancients .

Even the mumukṣus (seekers of liberation) in ancient
times, who understood My tattva in this way, performed
their prescribed duties simply to set the standard for
common men. Therefore, you should also perform your
karma, following the example of these predecessor
authorities.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Previous authorities such as Janaka, knowing Me in this
way, have also performed karma to set an ideal for
humanity.”




Śloka 16



kiṁ karma kim akarmeti

kavayo ‘py atra mohitāḥ

tat te karma pravakṣyāmi

yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ‘śubhāt

api—even; kavayaḥ—the wise; mohitāḥ—are confused; atra—
on this point; iti—that is to say; kim—what; (is) karma—
action; (is) kim—what; akarma—inaction; pravakṣyāmi—I
shall explain; tat—that; karma—action; te—to you; jñ
ātvā—having understood; yat—which; mokṣyase—you shall be
freed; aśubhāt—from inauspiciousness.

Even men of discrimination become bewildered in their
efforts to determine what is karma and what is akarma. I
shall therefore explain karma-tattva to you, knowing
which you will become liberated from the bondage of
karma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                           264
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Even the wise should not perform karma simply by
imitating the previous ācāryas. Rather, they should act
only when they have understood the specific nature of
karma (action). For this reason, the difficult topic of
karma-tattva is being explained.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s commentary, the
word gatānugatika-nyāya means working by imitating the
actions of others without trying to deeply understand
the subject matter concerning the purpose of the action.




Śloka 17




karmaṇo hy api boddhavyaṁ

boddhavyaṁ ca vikarmaṇaḥ

akarmaṇaś ca boddhavyaṁ

gahanā karmaṇo gatiḥ


hi—certainly; (the principle) karmaṇaḥ—of action;
boddhavyam—should be understood; api—also; (the
principle) vikarmaṇaḥ—of prohibited action; boddhavyam—
should be understood; (the principle) akarmaṇaḥ—of
inaction; ca—and; boddhavyam—should be understood; ca—
and; gatiḥ—the principle; karmaṇaḥ—of action; (is)
gahanā—profound .

Karma, vikarma and akarma should be distinctly
understood, for the principle of karma is profound.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Vikarma, forbidden action, leads to a miserable
destination. This is the principle. Akarma means not to
perform one’s prescribed action (karma ). Why is it
auspicious for sannyāsīs to refrain from karma ? In
other words, how will they attain the highest welfare
without performing action? The tattva of karma is

                            265
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

extremely deep and difficult to understand. The word
karma indicates all three aspects: karma , akarma and
vikarma .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




It is difficult to understand the tattva of karma . Only
the karma prescribed in śāstra is the cause of mokṣa .
Vikarma , forbidden action which is contrary to
prescribed karma , leads the jīvas to a miserable
destination. Not performing the karma prescribed in
śāstra is called akarma (inaction). There are three
levels of akarma : 1. The ignorant do not perform the
karma which is prescribed in the Vedas , due to
laziness.

2. Those who know the result of karma to be perishable
and miserable become resentful. Being disgusted with
karma , they act for mok ṣa .

3. After hearing hari-kathā, some persons abandon
prescribed karma and cultivate bhakti .

tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta

na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā

śraddhā yāvan na jāyate

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.20.9

In this current śloka of Gītā, the word karmaṇo in the
phrase gahanā karmaṇo gatiḥ implies all three aspects:
karma , akarma and vikarma .




Śloka 18



karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed

akarmaṇi ca karma yaḥ

sa buddhimān manuṣyeṣu

sa yuktaḥ kṛtsna-karma-kṛt


saḥ—that; buddhimān—intelligent person; manuṣyeṣu—among
mankind; yaḥ—who; paśyet—can see; akarma—inaction;
karmaṇi—within action; ca—and; yaḥ—who (sees); karma—
action; akarmaṇi—within inaction; (is) yuktaḥ—

                             266
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

transcendentally situated; (although) kṛt—the performer;
kṛtsna-karma—of all activities.

One who sees action in non-action and non-action in
action is truly wise among men and transcendentally
situated, even though he performs all sorts of actions.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Of the three types of karma, the tattva of karma and
akarma is explained in this śloka beginning with the
word karmaṇi . Personalities such as Janaka Mahārāja,
who were pure in heart, did not take sannyāsa although
they were endowed with jñ āna . Instead, they performed
akarma by following niṣkāma -karma -yoga . Those who can
see that such actions are not karma are themselves not
bound by karma . A karma-sannyāsī whose heart is impure,
who lacks tattvajñ āna , and who possesses mere
intellectual knowledge of śāstra , can only deliver
exalted speeches. But, those who can see karma in the
akarma of such sannyāsīs , and who realise that bondage
to karma leads only to a miserable destination, are
actually wise.

The pure-hearted person mentioned above performs all
types of karma but does not accept karma-sannyāsa. On
the other hand, there are so-called karma-sannyāsīs who
consider themselves to be knowledgeable, but who are
actually proud and garrulous. They do not seek higher
association or follow instructions, and they only praise
themselves. Those impure-hearted persons suffer
miserably.

Śrī Bhagavān has also said:

yas tv asaṁyata-ṣaḍ-vargaḥ

pracaṇḍendriyasārathiḥ

jñāna-vairāgya-rahitas

tri-daṇḍam upajīvati

surān ātmānam ātma-sthaṁ

nihnute māṁ ca dharma-hā

avipakva-kaṣāyo ‘smād

amuṣmāc ca vihīyate

Śrimad Bhāgavatam 11.18.40-1

Sometimes, a person who is bereft of jñāna and vairāgya
makes a show of accepting tridaṇḍa, the symbol of
sannyāsa, to maintain his life. This is condemned if his
intelligence, which should direct the senses, is instead
controlled by the fiercely strong senses and by the six

                             267
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

invincible enemies (lust, anger, greed, illusion, pride
and envy). Such a person is the killer of his own soul.
Completely immersed in endless material desires, he
denies the worshipable devas, his own self and even Me,
who am situated within his heart. Thus he is ruined both
in this world and in the next.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




All karma performed by a niṣkāma-karma -yogī is akarma
(inaction) in the form of karma-sannyāsa. Renunciation
of the fruits of action (karmatyāga ) constitutes his
performance of niṣkāma -karma . Although niṣkāma-karma-
yogīs perform all types of actions, they are not
considered to be karmīs (fruitive workers). For them
karma and akarma are the same. On the other hand, so-
called jñ ānīs who have artificially renounced their
prescribed duties (karma-sannyāsa ), but whose conduct
is poor (durācārī) due to their impure hearts, who are
proud, and who praise themselves, suffer miserable
consequences.




Śloka 19




yasya sarve samārambhāḥ

kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥ

jñānāgni-dagdha-karmāṇaṁ

tam āhuḥ paṇḍitaṁ budhāḥ

(he) yasya—whose; sarve—every; samārambhāḥ—endeavour;
(is) varjitāḥ—devoid; kāma-saṅkalpa—of selfish desire;
(his) karmāṇam—action; dagdha—is burned up; jñ āna-agni—
by the fire of knowledge; budhāḥ—the wise; āhuḥ—call;
tam—him; paṇḍitam—a learned person .

He whose every action is free from hankering for
pleasure, having burnt all fruitive desires in the fire
of pure knowledge, is called a paṇḍita by the wise.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The subject of karma is now being explained in detail in

                           268
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

five ślokas (Gītā 4.19-24), the first beginning with the
word yasya. Kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥ means devoid of the
desire for the fruits of action, and samārambhāḥ refers
to all actions which are properly instigated. Jñ ānāgni-
dagdha-karmāṇam indicates those in whom the reactions to
previous karma or vikarma , have all been burnt by the
fire of jñ āna. The fate of those who perform vikarma ,
as described in Gītā 4.17, should be understood in this
way. Just as for a wise person, who was described in the
previous śloka , it is proper to see his karma as akarma
, similarly it is also proper to see his vikarma as
akarma . This is in saṅgati (harmony) with the previous
śloka and will be explained in later ślokas (Gītā
4.36-7).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Those who perform prescribed duties, and at the same
time become free from fruitive desires, burn up all the
results of their prescribed karma , as well as their
vikarma in jñ ānāgni , the fire of transcendental
knowledge, which results from their performance of
niṣkāma-karma-yoga . Such mahātmās are called jñ ānāgni-
dagdha-karmā, those who have burnt all their karma in
the fire of transcendental knowledge.




Śloka 20




tyaktvā karma-phalāsaṅgaṁ

nitya-tṛpto nirāśrayaḥ

karmaṇy abhipravṛtto ‘pi

naiva kiñcit karoti saḥ

tyaktvā—having given up; asaṅgam—attachment; karma-phala
—to the fruits of action; nitya-tṛptaḥ—he is always
blissful; nirāśrayaḥ—and without dependence; eva—
certainly; saḥ na karoti—he does not do; kiñcit—
anything; api —although; abhipravṛttaḥ—engaged; karmaṇi—
in work .

One who has renounced attachment to the fruits of karma,
who is always blissful within, and who is not dependent
on anyone for his maintenance does not act, though fully
engaged in all types of karma.




                            269
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-`varṣiṇī




Nitya-tṛptaḥ means that internally such a person remains
blissfully content. Nirāśrayaḥ means not depending on
anyone for one’s maintenance (yoga-kṣema ).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The word yoga, cited in the Sārārtha-varṣiṇī, means to
attain or to acquire that which one lacks. The word
kṣema means to protect what one possesses.




Śloka 21




nirāśīr yata-cittātmā

tyakta-sarva-parigrahaḥ

śārīraṁ kevalaṁ karma

kurvan nāpnoti kilbiṣam

ātmā—the soul; citta—whose mind; yata —is controlled;
nirāśīḥ—who does not hanker; tyakta—who has abandoned;
sarva-parigrahaḥ—all ingredients for sense pleasure;
karma—his work; (is) kevalam—solely; śārīram—for bodily
maintenance; kurvan—so doing; (he) na āpnoti—does not
acquire; kilbiṣam—sinful reaction .

One who can control his mind and senses, who is devoid
of fruitive desires, who has given up all variety of
sense pleasure, and who performs karma only for bodily
maintenance, does not become affected by sinful
reactions resulting from his karma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here the word ātmā refers to the gross body. Śārīram
refers to performing actions such as accepting donations
from dishonest persons to maintain the body (asat-
pratigraha ). Such people do not incur sin even if they
act like this. This further describes the phrase of Gītā

                           270
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(4.17), vikarmaṇaḥ boddhavyam. “One should understand
the tattva of vikarma.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Nirāśīḥ means those who are devoid of fruitive desires.
Although such people may accept charity from dishonest
persons to maintain the body, still they do not incur
sin; nor do they incur piety by accepting charity
through the proper means. This is because they control
the mind and gross body, and are free from any effort to
accumulate objects meant for sense enjoyment.




Śloka 22



yadṛcchā-lābha-santuṣṭo

dvandvātīto vimatsaraḥ

samaḥ siddhāv asiddhau ca

kṛtvāpi na nibadhyate

(he is) santuṣṭaḥ—satisfied; lābha—with gain; yad-ṛcchā—
which comes (of its own accord); (and) atītaḥ—has left
behind; dvandva—tolerating duality such as heat and
cold; (he is) vimatsaraḥ—free from envy; samaḥ—
equipoised; siddhau—in success; ca—and; asiddhau—
failure; api—although; kṛtvā—acting; na nibadhyate—he is
not bound .

He who is satisfied with objects that come of their own
accord, and who tolerates dualities such as heat and
cold or happiness and distress, is free from envy and
remains equipoised in success and failure. Although he
performs karma, he does not become bound.




Śloka 23



gata-saṅgasya muktasya

jñānāvasthita-cetasaḥ

yajñāyācarataḥ karma

samagraṁ pravilīyate

                            271
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



(he who) gata-saṅgasya—has given up attachment (for
external things); muktasya—is liberated; cetasaḥ—whose
consciousness; (is) avasthita—situated; jñ āna—in
knowledge; ācarataḥ—by performing action; yajñ āya—for
the sake of Viṣṇu; karma pravilīyate—his fruitive action
vanishes; samagram—completely .

One who is devoid of material attachments, and whose
mind is situated in true knowledge, is liberated. All
the fruitive action of such a person, who performs his
every action for the worship of Parameśvara, is
completely dissolved. Thus he attains the state of
akarma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The characteristics of yajña will be explained later.
Karma performed for the sake of yajña is dissolved, and
this results in a state of akarma (inaction).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Karma (work) performed for the pleasure of Śrī Bhagavān
(yajñ ārtha ) never becomes a cause of bondage to the
material world. Such action for the pleasure of Bhagavān
is described here as akarma-bhāva , the state of
inaction.

Mere performance of dharmika activities (karma as
prescribed in the Vedas ) does not in itself lead to the
higher planets, nor do sinful activities in the form of
vikarma (actions forbidden in the Vedas ) lead to the
lower planets. Knowers of karma who accept the principle
of pūrva-mīmāṁsa , claim that actions produce an unseen
subtle potency called apūrva , which causes the karma to
give its results life after life. Their conception that
this fruit can be later shared by others is meant to
establish the eternality of karma. This consideration,
however, does not apply to a niṣkāma -karma -yogī.




Śloka 24



brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir


                            272
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutam

brahmaiva tena gantavyaṁ

brahma-karma-samādhinā


brahma—the spiritual reality; eva gantavyam—is certainly
achieved; tena brahmaṇā—by that brāhmaṇa ; samādhinā—who
is absorbed; brahma-karma—spiritual action; arpaṇam—his
sacrificial spoons and other paraphernalia; brahma—are
spiritualised; haviḥ—his ghee and other ingredients for
offering; brahma—are spiritualised; (and) hutam —his
offering of foods; agnau—into the fire; brahma—are
spiritualised .

Brahma can be attained by one who performs yajña in
which the sacrificial instruments, the ghee, the fire,
the offerings and the priest (agent) are all brahma.
Such a person is qualified to attain brahma because he
is fully absorbed in karma which is of the same nature
as brahma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The previous śloka states that one should perform karma
for yajña . What is the nature of yajña ? In
anticipation of this question, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with the word brahmārpaṇam . Arpaṇam
refers to the instrument with which the offering is
made. The ladle used in the sacrifice and other such
instruments are brahma . Haviḥ (the ghee, etc.) which is
offered is also brahma . Brahmāgnau means the resting
place of the recipient of the offering or fire is brahma
. The brāhmaṇa who performs the yajña is also brahma .
Thus, brahma is the only desirable object for a wise
man. There is no other result. If one asks why, the
answer is that activity, which is identical to, or in
oneness with brahma , leads to samādhi , exclusive
concentration of the mind. Thus, no other fruit is
obtained.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In sacrificial acts, the specific instrument used to
offer ghee in the fire is called sruva. The ingredients
offered to the devas in the yajña are called haviḥ.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “Now,
hear how work in the form of yajña gives rise to
knowledge. I will explain various types of yajña later.
Now, I will explain the fundamental principle behind

                            273
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

them. Material actions are compulsory for the jīva bound
to material consciousness. In such mundane activities,
the faithful discharge of prescribed duties in which one
can deliberate on cit-tattva (the conscious reality) is
called yajña . When conscious reality manifests in
matter, it is called brahma . That brahma is merely My
bodily effulgence. Cit-tattva is quite distinct from the
whole material universe. Yajña is perfect when its five
constituents, namely arpaṇam (the instrument for
offering), haviḥ (the ingredients), agni (the fire),
hotā (the doer) and phala (the fruit), are the resting
place of brahma , that is, when they are meant for the
revelation of brahma . A person’s activity is known as
brahma-yajña when he seeks revelation of brahma in his
karma with concentrated meditation. The instruments of
offering, the ingredients, the fire, the doer (that is,
his own existence) and the fruits are all brahma . Thus
their ultimate destination is also brahma .”




Śloka 25




daivam evāpare yajñaṁ

yoginaḥ paryupāsate

brahmāgnāv apare yajñaṁ

yajñenaivopajuhvati

eva—indeed; apare—other; yoginaḥ—karma-yogīs ; pari-
upāsate—worship; daivam—the devas ; (through) yajñam—
sacrifice; eva—indeed; apare—others (jñ āna-yogīs );
upajuhvati—offer; yajñam—sacrifice; yajñena—through
sacrifice; brahma-agnau—in the fire of the Absolute
Truth.

Some karma-yogīs perfectly perform deva-yajña in the
form of worship of the devatās, while jñ āna-yogīs offer
all their activities as oblations in the yajña of
brahma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is saying, “There are various types of
yajña according to the varieties of desired goals. Now
hear of them all.” Śrī Bhagavān speaks eight ślokas
beginning with the present one, daivam eva , to explain
these different types of yajña . Yajña in which the
worship of devas such as Indra and Varuna is performed
is called daivam . The performers of such yajña do not
consider devas like Indra and others to be brahma . This

                           274
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

is being explained here. According to the sūt ra :
sāsya-devatetyaṇa , the devas are the only worshipable
deities for those performers of the deva-yajña ; brahma
is not mentioned here. In this śloka , yoginaḥ means
karma-yogīs , while apare implies jñ āna -yogīs .
Brahmāgnau means that brahma or Paramātmā is the
sacrificial fire. In that sacrificial fire or tat-
padārtha (the Absolute Truth) the yajñam (haviḥ,
oblation) in the form of tvaṁ-padārtha (the jīva ) is
the yajñena , which is offered by chanting the prāṇava-
mantra , oṁ. This very jñ āna -yajña will be glorified
later. Here, the words yajñam and yajñena have been used
for the object which is offered (such as ghee) and the
instrument of the offering (the ladle) respectively. In
other words, it is understood that the śuddha-jīva and
praṇava are indicated by a superior understanding of
yajña and yajñena .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura expresses Kṛṣṇa’s mood as
follows, “Those who take the vow to perform yajña are
called yogīs . There are various types of yajña
according to the different aptitudes of the yogīs . In
fact, there are as many varieties of yajñas as there are
types of yogī. All yajñas can be divided into two
general divisions based on vijñ āna , scientific
understanding: 1) karma -yajña , consisting of
sacrificial offerings and 2) jñ āna -yajña , sacrifice
in the form of deliberation on cit-tattva . This will be
explained further on. Now, please hear as I explain some
varieties of yajñas . The karma -yogīs perform their
worship through deva-yajña , the worship of My
authorised representatives such as Indra and Varuṇa who,
by My external potency, are gifted with specific powers.
By such worship, these karma-yogīs gradually attain the
stage of niṣkāma -karma -yoga . The yajña of the jñ āna
-yogīs consists of offering themselves (tvaṁ-padārtha )
as the ghee in the fire of brahma (tat-padārtha ) by
reciting the praṇava-mantra , oṁ, or having taken
shelter of the mahā-vākya (great axiom), tat-tvaṁ asi
(you are His servant). The superiority of this jñ āna-
yaj ña will be explained later on.”




Śloka 26



śrotrādīnīndriyāṇy anye

saṁyamāgniṣu juhvati

śabdādīn viṣayān anya


                           275
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

indriyāgniṣu juhvati

anye—others; juhvati—offer; indriyāṇi—the senses;
śrotra-ādīni—beginning with the ear; agniṣu—into the
fire; saṁyama—of the controlled mind; anye—others;
juhvati—offer; viṣayān—the sense objects; śabda-ādīn—
beginning with sound; indriya-agniṣu—into the fire of
the senses .

The naiṣṭhika-brahmacārīs offer their hearing and other
senses into the fire of the controlled mind, while the
gṛhasthas offer sense objects, such as sound, into the
fire of the senses.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The resolute brahmacārīs offer indriyāṇi, the hearing
and other sense processes, into the fire of the
controlled mind. In this way, they completely dissolve
the senses into the pure mind. The irresolute
brahmacārīs (gṛhasthas ) offer the objects of the
senses, such as sound, into the fire of the senses.




Śloka 27



sarvāṇīndriya-karmāṇi

prāṇa-karmāṇi cāpare

ātma-saṁyama-yogāgnau

juhvati jñāna-dīpite

ca—and; apare—others (yogīs ); juhvati—offer; karmāṇi—
the functions; sarvāṇi—of all; indriya—the senses; (and)
prāṇa-karmāṇi —the functions of breath; yoga-agnau—in
the fire of connection; ātma-saṁyama—with the pure soul;
jñ āna-dīpite—which is illuminated by transcendental
knowledge.

Other yogīs offer the activities of all their senses and
life airs into the fire of the controlled self, which is
illuminated by knowledge.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           276
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

Apare means the knower of pure tvaṁ-padārtha, namely the
pure self (the jīva ). These yogīs offer all of their
senses, the activities of the senses such as hearing and
seeing, the ten types of life airs (prāṇa ), and the
actions of the life airs into the fire of the controlled
self, or the fire of the purified existence of tvaṁ-
padārtha (the jīva ). In other words, they completely
dissolve the mind, the intelligence, the senses and the
ten life airs in the pure self. Their understanding is
that the pratyag-ātmā (pure soul) is all that exists,
and that the mind and so on do not have any real
existence.

The ten types of life airs and their actions are as
follows:




Name Action

prāṇa out-going

apāna incoming

samāna to adjust the equilibrium of all objects

.eaten or drunk

udāna to take up

vyāna to move everywhere



Name Action

nāga to belch

kūrma to open the eyes

kṛkara to cough

devadatta to yawn

dhanañjaya to remain in the body even after death.


Sloka 28

dravya-yajñās tapo-yajñā

yoga-yajñās tathāpare

svādhyāya-jñāna-yajñāś ca

yatayaḥ saṁśita-vratāḥ

apare—others; dravya-yajñāḥ—sacrifice of possessions;
tapo-yajñ āḥ—sacrifice of austerities; yoga-yajñ āḥ—
sacrifice of aṣṭāṅga-yoga ; tathā—and; svādhyāya-j ñ
āna-yaj ñ āḥ—sacrifice of study of transcendental
knowledge from the Vedas ; ca—and; yatayaḥ—these
ascetics; saṁśita-vratāḥ—follow strict vows.

                            277
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017


Some perform dravya-yajña by giving their possessions in
charity, some perform tapo-yajña by performing
austerities, and some perform yoga-yajña by practising
the yoga of eightfold mysticism. Others perform
svādhyāya-yaj ña by studying the Vedas and acquiring
transcendental knowledge. All who make such endeavours
follow strict vows.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those who perform yajña by offering their material
possessions in charity are called dravya-yajñ āḥ. Those
who perform yajña with austerity such as the difficult
cāndrāyaṇa-vrata are called tapo-yajñ āḥ. Those who
perform yajña by aṣṭāṅga-yoga are called yoga-yajñ āḥ,
and those whose yajña is only to study the Vedas in
order to acquire knowledge are called svādhyāya-j ñ āna-
yaj ñ āḥ. All those who make such endeavours are
described as saṁśi ta-vratāḥ (performers of strict
vows).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā vṛtti




Here Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is describing various types of
yajña. Karma -yogīs give food, cloth and so on in
charity, which is their dravya-yajña . They perform
welfare activities that are described in smṛti-śāstra ,
such as digging wells and ponds, establishing temples,
giving food in charity and making parks and gardens.
There are others who perform activities such as
protecting their dependents and taking a vow of non-
violence towards all j īvas . Their activity is called
datta-karma , charitable acts. There are others who
perform yajña for the purpose of pleasing the devas .
Such activity is called iṣṭa-yajña . Some perform
painfully austere vratas (vows), such as cāndrāyaṇa ,
which are explained in Manu-saṁhitā: Kṛcchra-vrata:


ekaikam grāsam aśnīyāt try-ahāni trīṇi pūrvavat

try-ahañ copavased antyam atikṛcchṛaṁ caran dvijaḥ


Manu-saṁhitā 11.214

For the first three days a person eats one mouthful of
food during the day. For the next three days he eats one
mouthful daily in the evening, and for the following
three days he takes one morsel of food a day without
begging. For the last three days he fasts completely.

                           278
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

This austere vow is called kṛcchra-vrata.

Cāndrāya ṇa-vrata:


ekaikaṁ hrasayet piṇḍaṁ kṛṣṇe śukle ca vardhayet

upaspṛśaṁś tri-ṣavaṇam etac cāndrāyaṇaṁ smṛtam


Manu-saṁhitā 11.217

On the full moon day, a person should take only fifteen
mouthfuls of food per day and take morning, midday and
evening bath. From the first day of the lunar month
onwards, he should reduce his food by one mouthful each
day, and on the fourteenth day he should eat only one
mouthful. He has to fast completely on the dark moon
day. From the first day of the bright fortnight onwards,
he increases his meal by one mouthful each day, eating
fifteen mouthfuls on the full moon day. This is called c
āndrāyaṇa-vrata.

There are others who perform yajña by devoting
themselves to yoga . Their yajña is to perform aṣṭāṅga -
yoga while residing in a pious place or holy place.
Patañjali has said: Yogaś citta-vṛtti-nirodha. “Yoga
means to control the various activities of the mind.”
The eight limbs of yoga are yama , niyama , āsana ,
prāṇāyāma , pratyāhāra , dhāraṇā, dhyāna and samādhi ,
the performance of which is called aṣṭāṅga-yoga . Other
karma -yogīs call the study of the Vedas jñ āna -yajña ,
and they only perform this yajña .




Śloka 29




apāne juhvati prāṇaṁ

prāṇe ‘pānaṁ tathāpare

prāṇāpāna-gatī ruddhvā

prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥ

apare niyatāhārāḥ

prāṇān prāṇeṣu juhvati

apare—others; juhvati—offer; prāṇam—the out-going
breath; apāne—into the incoming; tathā—and; a pānam—the
incoming breath; prāṇe—into the out-going; ruddhvā—
blocking; prāṇa-apāna-gatī—the movement of these two
airs; prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥ—they become absorbed in a
trance of breath-control; apare—others; niyata-āhārāḥ—
restraining eating; juhvati—offer; prāṇān—their out-
going breaths; prāṇeṣu—into the out-going breaths
themselves.

                           279
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Others, who are devoted to prāṇāyāma (controlling the
life force), offer prāṇa (the out-going breath) into
apāna (the incoming breath) and vice versa. By gradually
stopping both prāṇa and apāna, they become fixed in
prāṇāyāma. Others, while checking the eating process,
offer their prāṇa into the fire of prāṇa (life) itself.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Some yogīs, who are devoted to the control of their life
airs, sacrifice prāṇa into apān a. This means that at
the time of pūraka (inhalation) they combine the prāṇa
and apāna. Similarly, during the time of recaka
(exhalation), they offer apāna into prāṇa , and at the
time of kumbhaka (holding the breath) they stop the
movement of both prāṇa and apāna and become fixed in
prāṇāyāma .

Others, who want to control the senses, sacrifice their
senses into prāṇa, the life airs, by moderating their
food intake. The senses are under the control of prāṇa .
When the life air becomes weak, naturally the senses
also become weak and unable to enjoy their sense
objects. In this way, they offer the disabled senses
into their life airs, living only on their life airs
(prāṇa ).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Aṣṭāṅga-yoga (the eightfold path of yoga) is being
explained in more detail. Yogīs sacrifice prāṇa into
apāna through pūraka (inhalation). In other words, at
the time of pūraka , they combine the prāṇa and apāna .
Similarly, while exhaling (recaka ), they offer apāna
into prāṇa and at the time of kumbhaka (holding the
breath), they stop the movements of both prāṇa and
apāna.

The word prāṇāyāma has two components. Prāṇa means a
special type of air and āyāma means expansion. Here,
expansion means to control the prāṇa from the tip of the
toenails to the hair on top of the head. In Garuḍa
Purāṇa it is said: prāṇāyāmo maruj-jayaḥ. “To control
the prāṇa air is called prāṇāyāma .” Therefore,
prāṇāyāma means expanding prāṇa for the purpose of
controlling the activities of the senses.

Similarly, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.15.1) explains, “When a
person controls his senses and his breathing process,
and fully absorbs his mind in Me, all the siddhis
naturally come under his control.” For more information

                           280
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

on this subject, readers should study Prema-Pradīpa by
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhāk ura.

The smṛti-śāstra describes yajña such as dravya-yajña ,
tapo-yajña , yoga -yajña and svādhyāya -jñ āna - yajña ,
while the tantra-śāstra describes haṭha-yoga and various
other types of vows for controlling the senses. However,
the best type of yajña in this Kali-yuga, when people
have short life spans and very little intelligence, is
the natural and easily-perfected saṅkīrtana-yaj ña. Not
only every human but every living entity has the right
to perform saṅkīrtana-yaj ña : harer nāma, harer nāma,
harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva, nāsty eva, nāsty eva, gatir anyathā


Bṛhad-Nāradīya Purāṇa

This is also explained in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.32):

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ

By performing the saṅkīrtana-yajña, intelligent persons
worship that Personality in whose mouth the two
syllables ‘Kṛ’ and ‘ṣṇa’ are dancing, whose bodily
colour is like brilliant gold, and who is surrounded by
His associates, servitors, weapons and confidential
companions.




Śloka 30



sarve ‘py ete yajña-vido

yajña-kṣapita-kalmaṣāḥ

yajña-śiṣṭāmṛta-bhujo

yānti brahma sanātanam

api—also; sarve—all; ete—those; yajña-vidaḥ—who are
conversant with the principle of yajña ; (become)
kṣapita—cleansed; kalmaṣāḥ—of sins; (through) yajña—
sacrifice; amṛta-bhujaḥ—they enjoy the immortal; yajña-
śiṣṭa—remnants of yajña ; (and) yānti—they attain;
sanātanam—eternal; brahma—spirit .

All those who know the principle of yajña become free
from sin by performing that yajña. Having tasted amṛta,
the remnants of yajña, they eventually attain the
eternal brahma.


                             281
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




All who know the principles of yajña, and who perform
yajñas as described above, gradually advance in jñ āna ,
by which they can attain brahma . Here, the secondary
result of such yajña is explained; they also taste the
nectarean remnants of yajña , such as mundane enjoyment,
opulence and mystic perfections. SimilarlyÇ the primary
fruit is described as brahma yānti (they attain brahma
).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The primary fruit of yajña is the attainment of brahma ,
and the secondary fruit is to achieve mundane or worldly
enjoyment and mystic perfections, such as aṇimā-siddhi
(becoming atomic in size).




Śloka 31



nāyaṁ loko ‘sty ayajñasya

kuto ‘nyaḥ kuru-sattama

kuru-sattama—O best of the Kurus; ayajñasya—for one who
does not perform yajña ; (the benefits of) ayam lokaḥ—
this world; na asti—are not (available); kutaḥ—what
then; anyaḥ—of the other world.

O best of the Kurus! A person who does not perform yajña
cannot even attain this earthly planet with its meagre
happiness. How then, can he attain the planets of the
devas and others?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




By not performing yajña, fault (sin) is incurred.To
explain this, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is speaking this śloka
beginning with nāyam . If one cannot even attain the
earth planet, which provides very little happiness, how

                            282
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

can one attain the higher planets such as those of the
devas ?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura expresses Kṛṣṇa’s mood as
follows, “Therefore, Arjuna, O best of the Kurus, one
who does not perform yajña cannot even attain this
world, what to speak of the next. Therefore, yajña is
certainly an obligatory duty. From this you should
understand that smārta-varṇāśrama (the caste-rules
enjoined in the smṛtis ), aṣṭāṅga -yoga , Vedic
sacrifices and so on are all part of yajña . Even
brahma-jñ āna is a special type of yajña . There is no
karma (prescribed duty) in this world other than yajña .
Everything else is vikarma .”




Śloka 32




evaṁ bahu-vidhā yajñā

vitatā brahmaṇo mukhe

karma-jān viddhi tān sarvān

evaṁ jñātvā vimokṣyase

evam—thus; bahu-vidhāḥ—many kinds; yajñ āḥ—of
sacrifices; vitatāḥ—are diffused; mukhe—from the mouth;
brahmaṇaḥ—of the Vedas ; viddhi—you should know; tān—
them; sa rvān—all; (to be) karma-jān—born from action;
evam—thus; jñ ātvā—knowing; vimokṣyase—you shall be
liberated.

The various types of yajña are elaborately explained in
the Vedas. Knowing all of them to be born of karma you
will attain mokṣa.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Brahmaṇaḥ means of the Vedas and mukhena means from the
mouth. Vedena means ‘clearly spoken from My own mouth’.
Karma -jān means ‘born of the action of speech, mind and
body’.


                           283
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The yajñas described in the Vedas are performed by the
activities of the body, mind and speech; therefore, they
have no relationship with the ātma-svarūpa (true nature
of the self). The soul (ātmā) remains indifferent and
detached from all of these processes. Attainment of this
jñ āna frees one from bondage to this material world.




Śloka 33



śreyān dravyamayād yajñāj

jñāna-yajñaḥ parantapa

sarvaṁ karmākhilaṁ pārtha

jñāne parisamāpyate

parantapa—O chastiser of the foe; śreyān—better; yajñ āt
—than the sacrifice; dravyamayāt—of material
possessions; (is) jñ āna-yaj ñaḥ—the sacrifice of
knowledge; pārtha—O Pārtha; sarvam—all; karma-akhilam—
complete action; parisamāpyate—culminates; jñ āne—in
transcendental knowledge .

O Parantapa, jñāna-yajña is superior to dravyamaya-yajña
(the renunciation of material possessions) because, O
Pārtha, the performance of all prescribed actions
culminates in transcendental knowledge.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Jñāna-yajña (as described in Gītā 4.25, brahmāgnau ), is
superior to karma-yajña or dravyamaya-yajña which
consists of renouncing material possessions as described
in Gītā 4.24: brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma haviḥ. One may ask
why. The answer is that the culmination of all actions
bears fruit upon attaining jñ āna . In other words,
karma ceases to exist after one attains jñ āna .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti


                            284
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




In his commentary on this śloka, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura quotes Śrī Kṛṣṇa as saying, “Although all these
yajñas gradually lead to jñ āna , śānti and finally to
bhakti unto Me, which is extremely auspicious for the
jīva , still there is something to be considered in this
regard . From the above group of yajñas , a person may
sometimes perform either dravyamaya-yajña or karma-yajña
(ceremonial rites). At other times, depending on his
niṣṭhā, he may perform jñ ānamaya-yaj ña (a sacrifice
performed in knowledge). Jñ ānamaya-yaj ña is far
superior to dravyamaya-yajña , because, O Pārtha, all
karma culminates in jñ āna . When the performance of any
yajña does not involve deliberation on the
transcendental, then the whole activity is simply
ritualistic (dravyamaya ). However, when the goal is
spiritual progress, the karma-yajñas lose their fruitive
materialism and become transcendental. The dravyamaya
stage of yajña , which consists only of material
rituals, is called karma-kāṇḍa . One must remain very
conscious of this distinction while performing yajña .”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has also said, “Only those who
perform bhajana to Śrī Kṛṣṇa by saṅkīrtana-yaj ña make
their lives successful, and they are most intelligent.
All others are foolish slayers of the self.” Kṛṣṇa-nāma-
yaj ña is supreme among all types of yajña . Performance
of millions of aśvamedha-yaj ñas cannot be equated with
once chanting the name of Kṛṣṇa. Those who make such
comparisons are pāṣaṇḍī, religious impostors, and
Yamarāja punishes them in vari ous ways. This is
emphasised in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi līlā 3.77-79).

Moreover, one’s bondage to the material world is easily
untied by chanting the hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, and by
chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma one attains Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s premamayī
sevā. Thus, in the age of Kali, all yajñas except the
chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s name are useless, because they do
not fall into the category of svarūpa-dharma , the
eternal occupation of the soul. This is further
clarified in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 7.73-74).




Śloka 34



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

viddhi—you must understand; tat—this knowledge;
praṇipātena—by offering prostrated obeisances to the
guru who gives instructions about jñ āna ; paripraśnena—
by relevant inquiries on every aspect; sevayā—by

                           285
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

rendering devotional service; jñ āninaḥ—those in
knowledge; tattva-darśinaḥ—who have seen the Absolute
Truth; upadekṣyanti—will reveal; jñ ānam—that knowledge;
te—unto you.

Acquire this jñāna by offering prostrated obeisances to
a guru who imparts transcendental knowledge, by asking
relevant questions from him and by rendering service to
him. The tattva darśīs, who are expert in the imports of
śāstra, and the jñ ānīs, who have realised the Absolute
Reality, will enlighten you with that jñ āna.




Sārārtha-varṣiṇī




How can this knowledge be attained? Śrī Bhagavān speaks
this śloka beginning with tad-viddhi to give this
information. After offering daṇḍavat-praṇāmas unto a
guru who gives instructions in transcendental knowledge,
one should inquire as follows: “Aho Bhagavān! (Gurudeva
is addressed as Bhagavān here because he is āśraya
Bhagavān, the supreme receptacle of love for Bhagavān,
and because the sad-guru has qualities of Bhagavān), Why
am I in this material condition? Ho w can I become free
from it?” One must satisfy him by sevā and by paricaryā,
attending to his personal needs. It is also said in the
śrutis : tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham


Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12

To acquire jñāna of Śrī Bhagavān, one should approach a
guru who knows the real import of the Vedas by carrying
samidh (the fuel wood of sublime faith) as an offering
to him.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here, Śrī Kṛṣṇa describes bhagavat-tattva-jñāna as
extremely rare and difficult to understand. It can only
be understood by the mercy of a mahā-puruṣa who is a
tattvajñ ānī, one who knows the Truth, and more
specifically a tattva-darśī, one who has realised the
Truth. Sincere sādhakas should inquire from such a mahā-
puruṣa about this tattva and please him by offering
prostrated obeisances, by asking relevant questions and
by rendering service to him.

Praṇipātena means to affectionately offer praṇāmas with
either eight or five limbs of the body. Praṇāma or
namaskāra means to give up one’s false ego and bow down.

                           286
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

Here sevā means to render favourable service for the
pleasure of the guru . This śloka describes two symptoms
of a guru who bestows transcendental knowledge; he is
both a jñ ānī and a tattva-darśī. One who has studied
śāstra and understood the knowledge in it is called a jñ
ānī, while a tattva-darśī is a mahā-puruṣa who has
direct realisation of tattva .

Persons possessing incomplete knowledge do not have
direct realisation of tattva and tat-padārtha . The
instructions of such unrealised persons are not
fruitful. Only the instructions of a mahā-puruṣa are
fruitful. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.21) also says: tasmād
guruṁ prapadyeta jij ñ āsuḥ. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura comments on this śloka as follows: “To know
supreme auspiciousness and eternal well-being, sādhakas
should accept the shelter of a guru who is expert in
śabda-brahma (the imports of Vedic śāstra ), who has
realised parabrahma , and who has no material
attachments. If he is not expert in or knowledgeable of
śabda-brahma , he will not be able to dispel the doubts
of his disciples and they will lose faith in him. If a
guru has no direct realisation of parabrahma , his mercy
does not fructify to the fullest extent, nor yield the
highest result. Here the word upasamāśraya (11.3.21)
refers to the guru who is endowed with realisation of
parabrahma . This means that he does not fall under the
sway of lust, anger, greed, etc.

because he has no material attachments.”

This is further clarified in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.11.18):

śabda-brahmaṇi niṣṇāto

na niṣṇāyāt pare yadi

śramas tasya śrama-phalo

hy adhenum iva rakṣataḥ

Taking shelter of a guru who is expert in knowledge of
śabda-brahma, but is bereft of parabrahma realisation,
is like protecting a barren cow. It is useless labour
and one does not achieve any transcendental result.

Bhagavad-gītā states that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Transcendental Reality. There are those who say that the
word tat in this śloka refers to the jīvātmā, but such
understanding is completely incorrect because it
contradicts the next śloka . In Vedānta-darśana it is
also said: anyārthaś ca parāmarśaḥ (Brahmasūtra 1.3.20).
The word tat refers to paramātma-tattva-j ñ āna .




Śloka 35



yaj jñātvā na punar moham

                            287
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


evaṁ yāsyasi pāṇḍava

yena bhūtāny aśeṣāṇi

drakṣyasy ātmany atho mayi

pāṇḍava—O son of Pāṇḍu; jñātvā—after understanding (that
knowledge); yat—which (was taught by the tattva-darśīs
); na evam yāsyasi—consequently you shall never enter;
punaḥ—again; moham—into illusion; yena—by which
(knowledge); drakṣyasi—you shall perceive; aśeṣāṇi—all;
bhūtāni—beings; ātmani—within Paramātmā; atho—that is to
say; mayi—in Me.

O Pāṇḍava, after acquiring such jñāna you will never
again be deluded. By that knowledge you will see all
living beings as jīvātmas , and you will see them in Me,
Paramātmā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the next three and a half ślokas beginning here with
the words yaj jñ ātvā, Śrī Bhagavān explains the fruit
of jñ āna . “After you have attained jñ āna , by which
one knows the ātmā to be different from the body, your
mind will not become deluded again. By attaining
svābhāvika nitya-siddha-ātma-j ñ āna (natural and
eternally perfect knowledge of the self) delusion is
removed and you will see all living beings: humans,
animals, birds, etc.

as jīvātmās appearing separately due to their external
covering or designations (upādhis ). In addition, you
will see all of them in Me, parama-kāraṇa (the ultimate
cause), situated as My effect (the jīva-śakti ).”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura expresses Kṛṣṇa’s mood. “Now,
due to delusion, you are trying to give up your
svadharma (prescribed duty) which is to participate in
battle, but after attaining tattvajñ āna as instructed
by your guru , you will no longer fall prey to delusion.
By that tattvajñ āna you will be able to understand that
all entities: human beings, animals, birds, etc., are
situated in the same jīva-tattva . The various levels of
gross existence have occurred due to their external
bodily designations. All jīvas are situated in Me,
bhagavat-svarūpa , who am the parama-kāraṇa (ultimate
cause), as the effect of My śakti .”


                             288
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 36




api ced asi pāpebhyaḥ

sarvebhyaḥ pāpa-kṛttamaḥ

sarvaṁ jñāna-plavenaiva

vṛjinaṁ santariṣyasi

api—even; cet—if; asi—you are; pāpakṛttamaḥ—the most
sinful; sarvebhyaḥ—of all; pāpebhyaḥ—sinners; eva—
certainly; santariṣyasi—you will cross over completely;
sarvam—all; vṛjinam—sin; jñ āna-plavena—by the boat of
transcendental knowledge .

Even if you are the most sinful of sinners, you will be
able to completely cross over the ocean of all sins by
taking shelter of this boat of transcendental jñ āna.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now by speaking this śloka beginning with api cet , Śrī
Bhagavān describes the glories of jñ āna . The word
pāpebhyaḥ indicates, “Even if you are the worst of
sinners, this tattvajñ āna will liberate you from all
past sins.” Here, a question arises. “How is it possible
that the mind will become purified when so many sins
exist in it? And if the mind is not pure, how will jñ
āna manifest? There is no possibility that a person in
whom jñana has appeared will misbehave or commit any
sin.”

Here, Śrīpāda Madhusūdana Sarasvatī explains, “The words
api cet are spoken to indicate the possibility of the
impossible, by going against the rule. Although this
meaning is not possible, it has been spoken of as a
promise, in order to explain the fruit (glory) of jñ āna
. In other words, the impossible has also been mentioned
as a possibility.”




Śloka 37



yathaidhāṁsi samiddho ‘gnir


                           289
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

bhasmasāt kurute ‘rjuna

jñānāgniḥ sarva-karmāṇi

bhasmasāt kurute tathā

arjuna—O Arjuna; yathā—as; samiddhaḥ—a blazing; agni—
fire; kurute—turns; edhāṁsi—firewood; bhasmasāt—to
ashes; tathā—similarly; jñ āna-agniḥ—the fire of
transcendental knowledge; kurute—turns; sarva-karmāṇi—
all reactions of fruitive work; bhasmasāt—to ashes .

O Arjuna, just as a blazing fire burns firewood to
ashes, in the same way, the fire of transcendental
knowledge burns all karmic reactions to ashes.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




When jñāna manifests in a pure mind, it burns up all
karma (reactions) except for prārabdha-karma . This is
explained with an example in this śloka beginning with
the word yathā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Jñāna destroys the reactions of all sorts of karma such
as nitya , naimittika , kāmya , vikarma and accumulated
aprārab-dha , but not prārabdha -karma . This has been
verified in Vedānta-darśana :


tad-adhigama uttara-pūrvārghayor

aśleṣa-vināśau tad-vyāpadeśat


Brahmasūtra 4.1.13

Even a jñāni has to face the results of his prārabdha -
karma. According to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, however, a
person who has taken shelter of the holy name, be it
even nāmābhāsa (a semblance of pure chanting), not only
destroys the results of all his karma , such as
accumulated aprārabdha and kūṭa , but also the fruits of
prārabdha -karma. What, then, is to be said about the
chanting of śuddha-nāma ? Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has written
in Śrī Nāmāṣṭaka (śloka 4):


yad-brahma-sākṣāt-kṛti-niṣṭhayāpi

vināśam āyāti vinā na bhogaiḥ

                           290
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



O Nāma Prabhu! Your appearance on the tongue of Your
bhaktas burns up the results of prārabdha-karma, which
is otherwise unavoidable, even after realising brahma by
unbroken meditation. This is declared adamantly and
repeatedly in the Vedas.




Śloka 38




na hi jñānena sadṛśaṁ



pavitram iha vidyate

tat svayaṁ yoga-saṁsiddhaḥ

kālenātmani vindati

iha—in this world; hi na vidyate—there certainly does
not exist; (any such) pavitram—purifying thing; jñ
ānena-sadṛśam—as compared to transcendental knowledge;
yoga-saṁsiddhaḥ—one who has attained complete perfection
of niṣkāma-karma-yoga ; vindati—finds; tat—that (jñ āna
); svayam—spontaneously manifest; ātmani—within his
heart; kālena—in course of time .

In this world, there is nothing more purifying than
transcendental knowledge. A person who has attained
complete perfection in niṣkāma-karma-yoga, receives such
jñ āna naturally within his heart, in due course of
time.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, it is said that tapasya, yoga and other processes
are not as purifying as jñ āna . Not everyone can attain
this transcendental jñ āna . It is achieved, not
immediately or in the immature stage, but after
attaining complete perfection in niṣkāma -karma -yoga
over a prolonged period of time. This jñ āna reveals
itself within one’s self (ātmā). One does not receive
this transcendental knowledge merely by accepting
sannyāsa .




Śloka 39

                             291
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




śraddhāvān labhate jñānaṁ

tat-paraḥ saṁyatendriyaḥ

jñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śāntim

acireṇādhigacchati

śraddhāvān—a faithful person; saṁyata-indriyaḥ—who has
controlled senses; (and) tat-paraḥ—is devoted to that
(yoga practice); labhate—obtains; jñ ānam—transcendental
knowledge; labdhvā—after obtaining; jñ ānam—
transcendental knowledge; adhigacchati—he attains; parām
—the supreme; śāntim—peace; acireṇa—without delay.

A person who is faithful, who has conquered his senses
and who is devoted to the practice of niṣkāma-karma-yoga
attains transcendental knowledge. After attaining
transcendental knowlege, he quickly attains the supreme
peace: relief from bondage to the material world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“How and when does one attain this jñāna?” Śrī Bhagavān
answers this question by saying, “That jñ āna is
attained when one becomes faithful, that is, when his
mind becomes purified by the performance of niṣkāma-
karma and when he is endowed with proper intelligence,
having an inclination towards the instructions of śāstra
. Tat-paraḥ means that, when one undergoes the practice
of niṣkāma-karma with staunch niṣṭhā, he simultaneously
gains control over his senses and achieves supreme
peace. In other words, he becomes free from bondage to
the material world.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The word acireṇa in the original śloka means without any
delay, or immediately. For example, when a lamp is lit
in a room which has been in darkness for a long time,
the darkness is immediately dispelled without any
separate endeavour. Similarly, as tattvajñ āna arises,
it simultaneously dispels ignorance.




                            292
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śloka 40



ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca

saṁśayātmā vinaśyati

nāyaṁ loko ‘sti na paro

na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ

(he who is) ajñaḥ—a fool; ca—and; aśraddadhānaḥ—
faithless; ca—and; saṁśaya-ātmā—a doubting soul;
vinaśyati—is ruined; saṁśaya-ātmanaḥ—for a doubting
soul; asti—there is; na—not; sukham—happiness; ayam
lokaḥ—in this world; na—nor; paraḥ—in the next .

Those who are ignorant, faithless and of a doubting
nature are ruined. For the doubting person, there is
happiness neither in this world nor in the next.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




After explaining the adhikāra of a person qualified to
attain jñ āna , Śrī Bhagavān describes one who is not
fit to attain such knowledge. Ajñaḥ means foolish like
an animal. Aśraddadhānaḥ refers to one who has knowledge
of śāstra , but does not have faith in any siddhānta
because he cannot reconcile the contradictions between
the various philosophers. Saṁśaya- ātmā means one who,
despite having faith, still doubts whether his efforts
will become successful. Of these three, the line
beginning with nāyam specifically condemns one who is
saṁśaya-ātmā (doubtful).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After explaining the types of people who are qualified
to attain jñāna and its subsequent result, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
describes the ignorant who are not qualified, and the
degraded result of such disqualification. A man who is
ignorant, who lacks faith and who is doubtful, perishes.

According to Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī, ajñaḥ here means
ignorant of the topics instructed by Śrī Guru .
According to Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, it means that
like an animal, one does not have śāstra-j ñ āna .

Those who do not have faith in the words of śāstra, guru
and the Vaiṣṇavas are called aśraddhālu , faithless. One
who always doubts the instructions of Hari, Guru and the

                           293
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇavas is called saṁśaya-ātmā, a man of doubt. Such
doubtful persons are more fallen than the ignorant and
faithless, and they cannot attain happiness and peace
anywhere, either in this world or in the next.




Śloka 41




yoga-sannyasta-karmāṇaṁ

jñāna-sañchinna-saṁśayam

ātmavantaṁ na karmāṇi

nibadhnanti dhanañjaya

dhanañjaya—O winner of wealth; sannyasta-karmāṇam—one
who has renounced karma ; yoga—through niṣkāma-karma-
yoga ; saṁśayam—and one whose doubts; sañchinna—are
slashed; jñ āna—by transcendental knowledge; (and) ātma-
vantam—who has realised his ātma-svarūpa ; karmāṇi—
karmic reactions; na nibadhnanti—do not bind.

O Dhanañjaya, conqueror of riches! A person who has
renounced karma through the process of niṣkāma-karma-
yoga, who has dispelled all his doubts by jñ āna and who
has realised his ātma-svarūpa, is not bound by karma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the word
yoga-sannyasta to explain the kind of person who can
attain niṣkarma . Those who have realised the soul are
ātmavān or pratyag-ātmā, are not bound by karma . A
person achieves this stage by performing niṣkāma -karma
-yoga , giving up karma through the process of sannyāsa
(renunciation) and then removing his doubts by the
cultivation of jñ āna.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In these last two ślokas, Śrī Kṛṣṇa brings this subject
to a conclusion. According to the instructions of
Bhagavān, one takes shelte r of niṣkāma -karma -yoga by
offering all his actions unto His lotus feet. When the
citta (heart) is purified by this process, it is

                           294
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

illuminated by knowledge, and this cuts asunder all
doubts. At that time, such people are completely freed
from the bondage of karma .

The word pratyag-ātmā mentioned in the commentary
indicates the jīvātmā who has given up the sense of
enjoyment and who has attained a devotional attitude
towards Bhagavān. Otherwise, a jīvātmā who is averse to
Bhagavān, and who is absorbed in sen se gratification,
is called parāg-ātmā.




Śloka 42




tasmād ajñāna-sambhūtaṁ

hṛt-sthaṁ jñānāsinātmanaḥ

chittvainaṁ saṁśayaṁ yogam

ātiṣṭhottiṣṭha bhārata

tasmāt—therefore; bhārata—O descendant of Bhārata; jñ
āna-asinā—with the weapon of knowledge; chi ttvā—
slashing; saṁśayam—the doubt; ātmanaḥ hṛt-stham—situated
in your heart; ajñ āna-sambhūtam—born of ignorance;
ātiṣṭha—take shelter; enam yogam—of this yoga ; (and)
uttiṣṭha—arise.

Therefore, O Bhārata, with the sword of jñāna slash this
doubt in your heart which is born of ignorance; take
shelter of niṣkāma-karma-yoga, and prepare for battle.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān concludes this chapter with this śloka
beginning with tasmād aj ñ āna . Hṛt-stha refers to
cutting the doubt in the heart (chittvā), yoga means
taking shelter of niṣkāma-karma-yoga and ātiṣṭha means
‘be ready for the battle’. Of all the processes
recommended for attaining mukti , jñ āna is glorified
here; and niskāma-karma is the only means to attain jñ
āna . This is the essence of this chapter.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Fourth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




                             295
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “This chapter gives
instructions on two divisions of sanātana-yoga (the
eternal yoga system). The first is the jaḍa-dravyamaya
division, which consists of mundane rituals, or the
sacrifice of material possessions. The second is the
ātma-yathātma-rūpa-cinmaya division, or knowledge of the
self and of Bhagavān. When the jaḍa-dravyamaya division
is performed separately, it simply becomes karma . Those
who are bound in this division are known as karma -jaḍa
, deeply engrossed in mundane enjoyment. However, those
who perform jaḍa-karma (mundane rituals) with the sole
purpose of attaining spiritual advancement are yukta or
properly situated. When we specifically deliberate on
the true nature of spiritual activities, we understand
that there are two aspects. One is knowledge of jīva-
tattva and the other is knowledge of bhagavat-tattva.
Only those who experience and realise bhagavat-tattva
attain the essence of ātma-yathātmā (knowledge of the
real nature of the ātmā) which is to be Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
servant. This experience is perfected by realisation of
the transcendental birth and activities of Bhagavān and
of the jīva’s eternal association with Him. This subject
is described in the beginning of this chapter. Bhagavān
Himself is the first instr uctor of this nitya-dharma .
Because the jīva has become bound to inert matter by the
defect of his own intelligence, Bhagavān descends by the
prowess of His cit-śakti and, by giving instruction on
His tattva , He makes the jīva eligible to participate
in His līlā.

“Those who say that the body, birth and activities of
Bhagavān are products of māyā are extremely foolish.
People attain Me according to the degree of purity
(knowledge of My tattva ) with which they worship Me.”
All the activities of the karma -yogīs are termed yajña
. The various types of yajña in the world, such as
daiva-yajña , brahmacarya-yajña , gṛhamedha -yajña ,
saṁyama - yajña , aṣṭāṅga -yoga -yajña , tapo-yajña ,
dravya -yajña , svādhyāya -yajña and varṇāśrama-yaj ña ,
all constitute karma .

“The only useful factor which is to be sought after in
all these yajñas is the conscious part, ātma-yathātmā,
or knowledge of the real nature of the ātmā. Doubt is
the greatest enemy of this tattvajñ āna . A person who
is endowed with śraddhā, and who takes instructions on
this tattva from one who is tattvavit thus realises the
self and can dispel all his doubts. As long as one has
affinity for the material world, one should take shelter
of niṣkāma-karma-yoga in order to achieve the stage of
ātma-yathātmā.”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Fourth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




                           296
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Chapter Five




Karma-Sannyāsa-Yoga



Yoga Through the Renunciation of Action




Śloka 1




arjuna uvāca —

sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa

punar yogaṁ ca śaṁsasi

yac chreya etayor ekaṁ

tan me brūhi suniścitam

arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; śaṁsasi—You are
first praising; sannyāsam—renunciation; karmaṇām—of
actions; ca—and; punaḥ—thereafter; yogam—karma-yoga ;
brūhi —please tell; me—me; suniścitam—very clearly; tat
ekam —that one (path); etayoḥ—of these two; yat —which;
(is) śreyaḥ—auspicious (for me).

Arjuna said: O Kṛṣṇa, after first praising karma-
sannyāsa (the renunciation of action), You are again
describing niṣkāma-karma-yoga (action offered to
Bhagavān without attachment to its fruit). Therefore,
please tell me definitely, which of these two is
auspicious for me?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Karma has been described as being superior to jñāna to
encourage ignorant people to perform karma properly, and
thus ultimately to achieve unswerving perfection in jñ
āna . This Fifth Chapter explains knowledge of the
Absolute Truth (tat-padārtha ) and the characteristics
of those who have an even-tempered nature. After hearing
the last two ślokas of the previous chapter, Arjuna is
now doubtful. He thinks that Kṛṣṇa has contradicted
Himself, and in this śloka beginning with the words
sannyāsaṁ karmaṇām , he poses a question: “In the śloka
, yoga-sannyasta (Gītā 4.41), You have spoken about

                           297
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

karma-sannyāsa which appears when jñ āna is produced by
the performance of niṣkāma-karma-yoga. Again in the
śloka , tasmad ajñana (Gītā 4.42), You have spoken about
niṣkāma-karma-yoga . But karma-sannyāsa (renunciation of
action) and niṣkāma-karma-yoga (the yoga of selfless
action) have opposite natures, like moving and non-
moving entities. It is not possible to perform them
simultaneously. Should a jñ ānī perform karma-sannyāsa ,
or niṣkāma-karma-yoga ? I have not understood Your
intention on this subject and am asking You to please
tell me for certain which of these two is auspicious for
me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the Second Chapter, Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructed Arjuna how
to perform niṣkāma-karma-yoga in order to attain jñ āna
, which dispels ignorance. In the Third Chapter, He
explained that when one has attained ātma-j ñ āna
(knowledge of the self), there is no need to engage in
karma (prescribed duties), because karma-yoga is
included in jñ āna-yoga . It is a sign of ignorance to
consider jñ āna and karma to be separate. After con
cluding this, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa said in the Fourth
Chapter that to attain jñ āna-niṣṭhā (steadiness in
knowledge), which is the means to obtain ātma-j ñ āna ,
it is appropriate to first adopt niṣkāma-karma-yoga .
Arjuna knows that these topics are very difficult to
grasp, and he is inquiring from Kṛṣṇa as if he is in
ignorance, so that common people may easily understand.
Initially, Kṛṣṇa declared karma-sannyāsa or jñ āna-yoga
to be superior. Now, however, He is again giving
instructions on niṣkāma-karma-yoga . Arjuna has said,
“It is impossible for one person to follow both of these
instructions at the same time, because they are
contradictory, just as it is impossible to be both
stationary and in motion, or for there to be light and
darkness in the same place. Please tell me clearly which
of these two will bring me auspiciousness?” This is
Arjuna’s fifth question.




Śloka 2




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaś ca

niḥśreyasa-karāv ubhau

tayos tu karma-sannyāsāt


                           298
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

karma-yogo viśiṣyate

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord said; sannyāsaḥ—
renunciation of activities; ca —and; karma-yogaḥ—
niṣkāma-karma-yoga ; (are) ubhau —both; niḥśreyasa-karau
—auspicious; tu —but; tayoḥ—of the two; karma-yogaḥ—
niṣkāma-karma-yoga ; viśiṣyate—is better; karma-
sannyāsāt —than renunciation of work.

Śrī Bhagavān said: Both karma-sannyāsa and niṣkāma-
karma-yoga are auspicious, but niṣk āma-karma-yoga is
certainly superior to karma-sannyāsa.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Niṣkāma-karma-yoga is superior to karma-sannyāsa. Even
if a jñ ānī performs niṣkāma -karma-yoga there is no
defect. ActuallyÇ its performance further purifies his
heart and he thereby becomes more established in jñ āna
. One may ask, “If a karma-sannyāsī is experiencing some
disturbance in the heart due to worldly desires, is he
forbidden to engage in action (karma ) to pacify it?”
Śrī Bhagavān answers that such a disturbance in the
heart (citta ) of a karma-sannyāsī is an obstacle to the
cultivation of jñ āna. If he accepts sense objects
having once given them up, he becomes a vāntāśī, one who
eats his own vomit.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In answer to Arjuna’s question, Śrī Bhagavān is saying
that both jñāna-yoga (karma-sannyāsa ) and niṣkāma-
karma-yoga are auspicious. However, niṣkāma-karma- yoga
is superior to karma-sannyāsa or jñ āna-yoga , because
in niṣkāma-karma-yoga there is less possibility of
falldown. If a karma-sannyāsī (a person who has
abandoned action) develops a desire for sense
gratification and falls down, he is called a vāntāśī.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.15.36) also confirms this:


yaḥ pravrajya gṛhāt pūrvaṁ

tri-vargāvapanāt punaḥ

yadi seveta tān bhikṣuḥ

sa vai vāntāśy apatrapaḥ


If a person renounces the sannyāsa-āśrama, which is the
perfection of tri-varga (religion, economic development

                             299
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

and sense gratification), and again enters household
life, he is called a vāntāśī, a shameless person who
eats his own vomit.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam further says that one may criticise an
ill-behaved jñānī, but should not condemn an ananya-
bhakta in the same way, even if his conduct is extremely
poor. This is also confirmed in Gītā (9.30): api cet
sudurācāraḥ.

It should be clearly understood that karma-kāṇḍa is not
the same as karma-yoga . Actions prescribed in śāstra
are called karma . When a jīva engages in action
considering himself as both the doer and the enjoyer of
the fruits of action, his activities are called karma-
kāṇḍa . In this case, even the pious activities
prescribed in the Vedas bind one to the material world.
Karma-kāṇḍa does not lead one to yoga (union) with Śrī
Bhagavān, and thus it is condemned in all śāstra . Only
by bhagavad-arpita niṣkāma-karma , selfless actions whi
ch are offered to Bhagavān, can yoga with Him be
established. This is called niṣkāma-karma-yoga . It can
be referred to as a semblance or beginning of bhagavad-
dharma . It can also be called the gateway to bhakti .
In other words, an indirect union with Bhaga vān, is
established by niṣkāma-karma-yoga . Therefore in Gītā
(2.48) it is said: yoga-sthaḥ kuru karmāṇi. “Being
equally disposed to success and failure, carry out your
prescribed duties according to your nature.”




Śloka 3




jñeyaḥ sa nitya-sannyāsī

yo na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣati

nirdvandvo hi mahā-bāho

sukhaṁ bandhāt pramucyate

mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed; saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; na dveṣṭi —
neither hates; na kāṅkṣati —nor desires; jñeyaḥ—is
known; nitya-sannyāsī—always situated in renunciation;
hi —for; (being) nirdvandvaḥ—free from duality; sukham —
easily; (he) pramucyate —is liberated; bandhāt —from
material bondage.

O Mahā-bāho, he who neither hates nor desires anything
is always worthy to be known as a sannyāsī, because one
who is free from the dualities of aversion and
attachment easily becomes liberated from the bondage of
this material world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī

                            300
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




It is possible to achieve the liberation which is
attained by sannyāsa without entering the sannyāsa
order. For this purpose, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this
ślo ka beginning with jñeyah . “O Mahā-bāho, you should
understand that a pure-hearted niṣkāma-karma-yogī is
always a sannyāsī.” The address ‘O Mahā-bāho’ implies
that one who is able to conquer the realm of mukti is
certainly a great hero (mahā-vīra ).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




This śloka establishes why niṣkāma-karma-yoga is
superior. Due to the purity of his heart, a niṣkāma-
karma-yogī is called a fixed renunciate (nitya-
sannyāsī). Although he has not accepted the dress of a
sannyāsī, he remains blissfully absorbed in bhagavat-
sevā by offering himself and all sense objects at
Bhagavān’s lotus feet. Detached from sense enjoyment and
without any desire for the fruits of his actions, he
remains free from attachment and envy. Thus he is easily
liberated fro m bondage to the material world.




Śloka 4




sāṅkhya-yogau pṛthag bālāḥ

pravadanti na paṇḍitāḥ

ekam apy āsthitaḥ samyag

ubhayor vindate phalam


bālāḥ—the ignorant; pravadanti—declare; sāṅkhya-yogau —
karma-sannyāsa and niṣkāma-karma-yoga ; (to be) pṛthag —
different; paṇḍitāḥ—the learned; na —reject (this); api
—even; (by) āsthitaḥ—being situated; samyag —properly;
ekam —in one (of them); vindate —one obtains; phalam —
the result; ubhayoḥ—of both.

Only the ignorant say that sāṅkhya (karma-sannyāsa) and
niṣkāma-karma-yoga are different. The wise reject such
opinions. By following either path correctly, one
attains the result of both in the form of mokṣa.




                             301
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“O Arjuna, you have asked which of these two is
superior, but this is not actually a question at all;
the wise see no difference between them.” For this
purpose Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning
with sāṅkhya . Here, sāṅkhya , which means jñ āna-niṣṭhā
(being fixed on the level of jñ āna ), indicates one of
its limbs, sannyāsa . Only children or fools say that
sannyāsa is different from niṣkāma-karma-yoga . The wise
do not think like this. This has been described in the
previous śloka : jñeyaḥ sa nitya-sanny āsī (Gītā 5.3).
Thus, by taking shelter of either, the result of both is
attained.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




When the heart becomes purified by properly engaging in
niṣkāma-karma-yoga, jñ āna appears, after which one
eventually achieves liberation (mokṣa ). This is also
the fundamental purpose of karma-sannyāsa . Since the
end result of both niṣkāma-karma-yoga and karma-sannyāsa
is mukti they are non-different. By following one of
them, the result of both is achieved. Although
externally pravṛtti (the directions for enjoying the
material world according to the regulative principles)
appears to be different from nivṛtti (the directions for
giving up the materal world for higher spiritual
understanding), the wise do not see a difference between
them, since the result of both these processes is the
same.




Śloka 5




yat sāṅkhyaiḥ prāpyate sthānaṁ

tad yogair api gamyate

ekaṁ sāṅkhyaṁ ca yogaṁ ca

yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati


tat sthānam—that position; yat—which; prāpyate —is
obtained; sāṅkhyaiḥ—by the principles of sāṅkhya-yoga ;
api —is also; gamyate —obtained; yogaiḥ—by niṣkāma-
karma-yoga ; sāṅkhyam c a yogam —sāṅkhya and yoga ;

                            302
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(are) ekam —one; ca —and; saḥ yaḥ—he who; paśyati —sees
(thus); (actually) paśyati—sees.

The result attained by sāṅkhya-yoga is also attained by
niṣkāma-karma-yoga. Those who are wise, and who
correctly see that sāṅkhya-yoga and niṣk āma-karma-yoga
give the same result, actually see.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The previous subject is being clarified in this śloka
beginning with yat . Sāṅkhya means sannyāsa , and yoga
means niṣkāma-karma-yoga . Here the words sāṅkhyaiḥ and
yogaiḥ are plural to emphasise their importance. Those
who see them with the eyes of wisdom as being the same,
although the processes are different, see correctly.




Śloka 6



sannyāsas tu mahā-bāho

duḥkham āptum ayogataḥ

yoga-yukto munir brahma

na cireṇādhigacchati

mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed; tu—however; (practising)
sannyāsaḥ—renunciation; ayogataḥ—without niṣkāma-karma-
yoga ; āptum —brings; duḥkham —distress; tu—however;
yoga-yuktaḥ—one who is engaged in niṣkāma-karma-yoga ;
(becomes) muniḥ—a sage; (and) na cireṇa —without delay;
adhigacchati —he attains; brahma —the stage of
transcendence.

O Mahā-bāho, practising karma-sannyāsa without niṣkāma-
karma-yoga brings distress, but one who performs
niṣkāma-karma-yoga becomes a jñ ānī and very quickly
attains brahma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The jñānī’s acceptance of karma-sannyāsa without
complete purification of heart leads to misery. Niṣkāma-
karma-yoga , however, brings happiness, that is, it
helps to attain brahma . This feature was indicated

                           303
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

earlier, and is further clarified in this śloka
beginning with sannyāsas tu . When the heart is
disturbed by worldly desires, sannyāsa becomes
miserable. Only niṣkāma-karma-yoga brings peace to the
disturbed heart.The word ayogataḥ means in the absence
of niṣkāma -karma-yoga ; thus the renunciation of one
who is not qualified to take sannyāsa becomes a cause of
misery. The author of Vārttika-sūtra therefore says:


pramādino bahiścittaḥ piśunāḥ kalahotsukāḥ

sannyāsino pi dṛśyante daiva-sandūśitāṣayāḥ


It is seen that even sannyāsīs have agitated minds and
are negligent and eager to quarrel if their hearts are
impure, due to their long association with the illusory
energy.

It is also said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.18.40),
“Tridaṇḍī-sannyāsīs who are bereft of proper knowledge
(jñ āna ) and renunciation (vairāgya ) and who have not
controlled their five senses and the mind, lose both
worlds.”

Hence a niṣkāma-karma-yogī, after becoming a jñ ānī,
quickly achieves brahma .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




It is better to engage in niṣkāma-karma-yoga than to
take sannyāsa before the heart is pure.




Śloka 7




yoga-yukto viśuddhātmā

vijitātmā jitendriyaḥ

sarva-bhūtātma-bhūtātmā



kurvann api na lipyate

yoga-yuktaḥ—one who performs niṣkāma-karma-yoga;
viśuddha-ātmā—who has purified intelligence; vijita-ātmā
—a controlled mind; jita-indriyaḥ—controlled senses;
ātma-bhūta-ātmā—and is the object of affection; sarva-
bhūta —for all living beings; na lipyate —is unaffected;

                           304
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

api —although; kurvan —acting.

One who performs niṣkāma-karma-yoga with pure
intelligence and a pure heart, and who has controlled
his senses, is the object of affection for all jīvas. He
does not become tainted by action, even when he performs
it.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here in this śloka beginning with the words yoga-yuktaḥ,
Śrī Bhagavān is informing Arjuna that, even after
engaging in karma , a jñ ānī remains unaffected. Yoga-
yukta-jñ ānīs are of three types: (1) viśuddhātmā, of
pure intelligence, (2) vijitātmā, of pure mind, and (3)
jitendriyaḥ, of controlled senses. They are mentioned in
order of the superiority of their spiritual advancement.
All jīvas are affectionate to that householder who is
properly engaged in niṣkāma-karma yoga and who does not
accept karma-sannyāsa. Sarva-bhūtātmā means he whom all
living entities love like their own selves.




Ślokas 8—9



naiva kiñcit karomīti

yukto manyeta tattvavit

paśyañ śṛṇvan spṛśañ jighrann

aśnan gacchan svapan śvasan

pralapan visṛjan gṛhṇann

unmiṣan nimiṣann api

indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu

vartanta iti dhārayan


tattvavit—a knower of the truth; yuktaḥ—a niṣkāma-karma-
yogī; eva —certainly; paśyan —while seeing; śṛṇvan —
hearing; spṛśan —touching; jighran —smelling; aśnan —
eating; gacchan —walking; svapan —sleeping; śvasan —
breathing; pralapan —speaking; visṛjan —evacuating;
gṛhṇan —grasping; unmiṣan —opening; nimiṣan —and
shutting (the eyes); api —also; na manyeta —should not
consider; iti —that; karomi —I am doing; kiñcit —
anything; dhārayan —considering; iti —that; indriyāṇi —
the senses; vartante —are engaged; indriya-artheṣu —in
their sense objects.

                           305
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


When a niṣkāma-karma-yogī becomes situated in
tattvajñāna, he concludes with his intelligence that
even while he is seeing, hearing, touching, smelling,
eating, moving, sleeping, breathing, speaking,
evacuating, grasping and opening and closing his eyes,
he actually does nothing; rather his senses are engaged
with their respective sense objects.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this śloka beginning with naiva, Śrī Bhagavān gives
instruction about actions in which one may become
implicated in the functions of the senses, or afflicted
by them. Yuktaḥ refers to the niṣkāma-karma-yogīs who
conclude that when one uses the sense of sight and the
other senses, it is nothing more than the senses
engaging with their objects.




Śloka 10



brahmaṇy ādhāya karmāṇi

saṅgaṁ tyaktvā karoti yaḥ

lipyate na sa pāpena

padma-patram ivāmbhasā


ādhāya—having offered; karmāṇi—his activities; brahmaṇi
—to the Supreme Lord; tyaktvā—giving up; saṅgam —
attachment; saḥ yaḥ—he who; karoti —acts (thus); na
lipyate —is not affected; pāpena —by sin; iva —as;
padma-patram —the lotus leaf; ambhas ā—by water.

One who has renounced attachment to karma, and offers
all the fruits of his action to Me, Parameśvara, does
not become affected by sin, just as a lotus leaf remains
untouched by water.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“One who gives up attachment to the fruits of karma does
not become bound by any action if he dedicates his work
to Me, Parameśvara, even while he still has a false

                            306
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ego.” Here the word pāpa (sin) is used to indicate that
such a person does not become implicated in any sinful
action.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The pure soul has no connection with material
activities. Niṣkāma-karma-yogīs become tattvavit ,
endowed with transcendental knowledge, a gradual
purification of heart. They then realise the nature of
the self (ātma-tattva ) and understand that even when
they perform bodily activities, they are not the doers.
They think that according to their pūrva-saṁskāra
(previous impressions) all activities of the material
body are automatically performed by the inspiration of
Īśvara. Due to the exis tence of the material body there
may be a feeling that they themselves are the performers
of action, yet when they give up the body after
attaining perfection (siddhi ), there remains absolutely
no feeling that they are the doers of action. Any action
performed by such mah ātmas does not bind them to the
material world.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has also said, “When the
sādhaka-bhakta gives up the false ego of being the doer,
he performs all bodily-related activities naturally, out
of previous habit.”




Śloka 11




kāyena manasā buddhyā



kevalair indriyair api

yoginaḥ karma kurvanti

saṅgaṁ tyaktvātma-śuddhaye

ātma-śuddhaye—for the purification of the mind; yoginaḥ—
a niṣkāma-karma-yogī; tyaktvā—giving up; saṅgam—
attachment; kurvanti —performs; karma—action; kāyena —
with the body; manasā—with the mind; buddhyā—and with
the intelligence; api —even; kevalaiḥ—with only;
indriyaiḥ—the senses.

To purify the mind, a niṣkāma-karma-yogī gives up all
attachment and performs action with his body, mind and
intelligence. Sometimes he performs action only with his
senses, not even engaging his mind.

                             307
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Niṣkāma-karma-yogīs also perform action only with their
senses. For example, when one chants mantras such as
indrāya svāhā while making an offering in the fire yajña
, the mind may be elsewhere, yet the activity goes on.
Ātma-śuddhaye means that yogīs perform action only to
attain purity of mind.




Śloka 12




yuktaḥ karma-phalaṁ tyaktvā

śāntim āpnoti naiṣṭhikīm

ayuktaḥ kāma-kāreṇa



phale sakto nibadhyate

tyaktvā—giving up; karma-phalam—the fruit of work;
yuktaḥ—one linked up in niṣkāma-karma-yoga ; āpnoti —
obtains; naiṣṭhikīm —perpetual; śāntim —peace; ayuktaḥ—
one who is not so linked; saktaḥ—being attached; phale —
to the fruit of work; kāma-kāreṇa —because of the
impetus of lust; nibadhyate —becomes entangled.

Having given up attachment to the fruits of his actions,
the niṣkāma-karma-yogī attains eternal peace (mokṣa).
The sakāma-karmī, however, who is attached to the fruits
of his activities and is impelled by material desires,
becomes entangled.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the performance of karma, detachment and attachment
are the causes of liberation and bondage, this śloka
beginning with the word yuktaḥ is spoken to clarify
this. A yukta-yogī or niṣkāma-karma-yogī gradually
attains śānti , or mokṣa. Ayuktaḥ refers to sakāma-
karmīs , who due to material desires, are attached to
the results of their actions, and are thus bound to the
material world.

                           308
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 13




sarva-karmāṇi manasā

sannyasyāste sukhaṁ vaśī

nava-dvāre pure dehī

naiva kurvan na kārayan

vaśī—the self-controlled; dehī—embodied soul; sannyasya
—having renounced; manasā—through his mind; sarva-
karmāṇi —all activities; eva —certainly; āste —remains;
sukham —happily; pure —in the city; nava-dvāre —of nine
gates; na kurvan —neither doing anything; na kārayan —
nor causing any action.

The self-controlled jīva (niṣkāma-karma-yogī), having
renounced attachment to the fruits of all karma within
his mind, dwells peacefully in the city of nine gates,
neither performing action himself nor causing anyone to
act.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




According to the previous statement, jñeyaḥ sa nitya-
sannyāsī (Gītā 5.3), a person who performs action
without attachment is in fact the real sannyāsī. To
explain this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is speaking this śloka beginning
with sa rva-karmāṇi . Although performing external
activities related to the body, a self-controlled man,
completely renouncing all actions through his mind,
remains happily situated. Where does such a person live?
Kṛṣṇa replies, “In the city of nine gates.” In other
words, in a body freed from the false ego. In this case,
the word dehī refers to the jīva who has attained jñ āna
. Although he may perform karma , he knows that in
reality he is not the cause of the happiness that
results from his actions, and he therefore understands
that actually he performs no work. Similarly, while
engaging others in work he does not make them act,
because he has no purpose to fulfil. In other words, he
remains unconcerned by their actions.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti



                           309
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.19.43) states: gṛhaṁ śarīraṁ
mānuṣyam. “The human body is like a house.” This subject
can be specifically studied in the narration concerning
Purañjana. The house of the human body has nine gates:
the two eyes, two ears, two nostrils and one mouth are
the seven gates in the head, and the lower gates are for
evacuation and procreation. A yogī sees his own self, or
his own svarūpa , as being different from this body of
nine gates. Like a traveller, the yogī does not become
attached to or possessive of his body, which is likened
to a hotel. Instead, he performs exclusive sevā to
Bhagavān, the master of all the senses.




Śloka 14



na kartṛtvaṁ na karmāṇi

lokasya sṛjati prabhuḥ

na karma-phala-saṁyogaṁ

svabhāvas tu pravartate

prabhuḥ—Parameśvara, the Supreme Lord; na sṛjati —does
not create; lokasya —a person’s; kartṛtvam —tendency to
act; na karmāṇi —nor the actions; na saṁyogam —nor
connection; karma-phala —with the fruits of action; tu —
only; svabhāvaḥ—their natural propensity; pravartate —
enacts.

Parameśvara has not created the tendency for individuals
to act, or their karma (actions), or the resultant
fruits. All this is enacted by their acquired nature,
that is they are impelled by the ignorance that has
covered them since time immemorial.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Someone may question Bhagavān’s partiality. If it is
true that the jīva has no tendency to act as the doer,
then why, throughout the material world which Īśvara has
created, is he seen as the doer and the enjoyer of the
fruits thereof? It appears that Īśvara created these
tendencies, which are forced upon the jīva . If this is
so, then it means that He carries the defect of being
partial and without mercy. In response He says, “No, no.
Na kartṛtvam.” He has used the word na three times to
stress and emphatically refute this point. He has
neither created the initiative, nor has he created the
karma in the form of prescribed duties, nor the result

                           310
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

of karma , which is sense enjoyment. It is only the
conditioned nature of the jīva , in other words, his
ignorance since time immemorial, which induces him to
recognise the ego as being the prompter of action.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




“The jīvas are not initiators of their own actions.” One
should not think from this statement that the jīvas
engage in actio n only by the inspiration of
Parameśvara. If this were the case, He would possess
defects such as being biased and cruel. Besides,
Bhagavān is not the agent who unites the jiva with the
results of his karma . This union occurs only because of
the jīva’s ignorance from time immemorial (anādi-
avidyā). The divine material energy (daivī-māyā-prakṛti
) in the form of ignorance activates the acquired nature
of the jīva . Only those jīvas who possess such a
conditioned nature, which is born of ignorance, are
engaged in action by Parameśvara. He Himself does not
create the initiative within the jīvas to act or not to
act.

Vaiṣamya-nairghṛṇye doṣair na sāpekṣatvāt tathā hi
darśayati (Brahmasūtra 2.1.34). According to this sūtra
, Parameśvara is completely free from such defects as
being biased or cruel.

It is mentioned in the Vedas, that just as brahma is
anādi (without beginning), so the karmika impressions of
the jīvas are also beginningless. The jīvas’ actions
create impressions, and Parameśvara simply engages them
in their successive activities according to these
impressions. Thus it is illogical to say that
Parameśvara has the defect of partiality (Chāndogya
Upaniṣad 6.2.1).

It is also said in the Bhaviṣya Purāṇa, “It is only
according to the impressions of past karma that Śrī
Viṣṇu engages the jīva in mundane activities. Since the
jīva’s impressions are beginningless, Parameśvara is not
guilty of any defect.”

Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa explains in his Govinda-
bhāṣya, “Someone may conclude that since Parameśvara
enga ges a jīva in action according to the past
impressions of his karma , we have to accept that
Parameśvara is also not independent, but is under the
influence of karma. The response is, ‘No, this is not
correct, since in reality even the existence of karma i
s under His control.’ Parameśvara engages the jīva in
karma according to the nature he has acquired since time
immemorial. Although Īśvara can change this nature, He
never does. Thus, in all circumstances, He is free from
partiality.”




                           311
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 15




nādatte kasyacit pāpaṁ

na caiva sukṛtaṁ vibhuḥ

ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ

tena muhyanti jantavaḥ

vibhuḥ—the great (Parameśvara); eva—certainly; na ādatte
—accepts; na—neither; pāpam —the sinful reaction;
kasyacit —of anyone; na —nor; sukṛtam —the pious
reaction; ajñ āne na —ignorance; tena —however; āvṛtam —
covers; (inherent) jñ ānam —transcendental knowledge;
jantavaḥ—of the living beings; (who) muhyanti —are
bewildered.

Parameśvara does not accept anyone’s sinful reaction or
their pious reaction. The ignorance, however, which
covers the inherent true knowledge of the jīvas,
bewilders them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Īśvara does not prompt or inaugurate the jīvas’ good or
bad actions, for the same reason that He Himself does
not incur sin or piety. For this purpose, He speaks this
ślok a beginning with nādatte . It is only His avidyā-
śakti that covers the fine knowledge of the jīva . To
explain this He says ajñ ānena , meaning that the inborn
or natural knowledge of the jīva becomes covered by
ignorance, and it is due to this that he becomes
deluded.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Bhagavān is vibhu, all-pervading and boundless. He is
full in realisation, bliss and unlimited energy. He is
always absorbed in His own nature, the ocean of ānanda .
As He is indifferent to everything, He does not prompt
good or bad deeds. Śrī Bhagavān is ātmārāma (self-
satisfied) and āptakāma (He whose every desire is
fulfilled). It is His avidyā-śakti which covers the
natural and inborn knowledge of the jīva , and by it the
jīva in the conditioned state identifies himself with
the body. The jīva develops the ego of being the doer of

                           312
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

his actions only because he falsely identifies the body
as the self.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.16.11) states:

nādatta ātmā hi guṇaṁ

na doṣaṁ na kriyā-phalam

udāsīnavad āsīnaḥ

parāvara-dṛg īśvaraḥ

The jīvātmā of Citraketu Mahārāja’s dead son gave this
instruction to Citraketu Mahārāja, who was suffering
from lamentation. “The Paramātmā, Īśvara, does not
accept happiness or distress, or the results of actions
such as the attainment of a kingdom. He witnesses the
cause and effect of one’s actions and, because he is not
under the control of the material body and events, he
remains indifferent.”




Śloka 16




jñānena tu tad ajñānaṁ

yeṣāṁ nāśitam ātmanaḥ

teṣām āditya-vaj jñānaṁ

prakāśayati tat param

tu—but; teṣām—for those; yeṣām —whose; tat ajñ ānam —
ignorance; nāśitam —is destroyed; jñ ānena —by
knowledge; ātmanaḥ—of the soul; jñ ānam —that knowledge;
prakāśayati —reveals; tat —that; param —Bhagavān;
āditya-vat —shining like the sun.

But for those whose ignorance has been destroyed by
knowledge of the Supreme Absolute, that knowledge, like
the shining sun, reveals the aprākṛta-parama-tattva ,
Śrī Bhagavān.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Just as Śrī Bhagavān’s avidyā-śakti covers the jīva’s
knowledge, so His v idyā-śakti destroys ignorance and
reveals his pure knowledge. By jñ āna or vidyā-śakti
(the potency of knowledge), avidyā is destroyed.

Just as the sun’s rays dispel darkness and illuminate

                           313
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the earth, the sky and other objects, similarly vidyā
destroys ignorance and illuminates that parama-aprākṛta-
j ñ āna (knowledge of the transcendental Śrī Bhagavān).
Thus, Parameśvara neither binds nor liberates anyone.
Rather, it is only ignorance and knowledge which bind
and liberate respectively Ç according to the qualities
of material nature. The tendency to enjoy or to initiate
action is the cause of bondage. Similarly, detachment,
peace and so forth are liberating. These are qualities
of prakṛti. Parameśvara is only partly responsible for
the instigation of actions, b ecause, due to His being
Antaryāmī (the Supersoul), all the qualities of material
nature become manifest. Hence, there is no possibility
that the imperfections of partiality or cruelty exist in
Him.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




According to his own material desires, the jīva acquires
a body from material nature and engages in karma .
Parameśvara does not determine the jīva’s sinful or
pious actions. Both the piety of the advancing sādhaka
and the sin which degrades him occur as a result of his
previous saṁskāras (impressions). To punish the jīva ,
Śrī Bhagavān’s māyā-śakti covers his constitutional
nature. The jīva then begins to identify the self with
the body and subsequently considers himself to be the
doer of all his actions. Parameśvara can in no way be
blamed for this condition of the jīva .

Two of māyā-śakti’s functions, avidyā and vidyā, are
instrumental in the bondage and liberation of the jīva
respectively. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.11.3) it is said:
vidyāvidye mama tanū viddhy uddhava śarīriṇām

mokṣa-bandha-karī ādye māyayā me vinirmite


O Uddhava, both avidyā and vidyā are functions of My
māyā-śakti.

According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, here
vidyā bestows mokṣa and avidyā is the cause of bondage.
There are three functions of māyā: pr adhāna , avidyā
and vidyā. Pradhāna creates a designation for the jīva
which is not real, although it appears to be so. Avidyā
falsely superimposes such designations to be real, and
by vidyā such super-impositions are easily removed. Here
it must be properly understood that the gross and subtle
bodily designations of the jiva , which are created by
pradhāna are not false, but the concept of ‘I’ and
‘mine’ in both of them is false. In the Vedas and
Upaniṣads this is called vivarta .

Within Parameśvara, the natural ego of being the doer is
eternally present. Prakṛti is His inert śakti. Simply by
His glance, the function of prakṛti is instigated.
Consequently, prakṛti is the secondary cause of the

                           314
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

creation of the material world. Parameśvara is indeed
its instigat or, but only in an indirect or partial
manner.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “Knowledge is of two
types: prākṛta (mundane) and aprākṛta (transcendental) .
Prākṛta , meaning knowledge related with inert matter,
is called avidyā or the ignorance of the jīva .
Aprākṛta-j ñ āna is called vidyā. When the material
knowledge of the jīva has been destroyed by spiritual
knowledge, that same spiritual jñ āna is revealed as the
supreme spiritual jñ āna , and enlightens him about the
aprākṛta-parama-tattva , the supramundane truth.”




Śloka 17



tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas

tan-niṣṭhās tat-parāyaṇāḥ

gacchanty apunar-āvṛttiṁ

jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ

(those whose) tat-buddhayaḥ—intelligence is in Him; tat-
ātmānaḥ—whose minds are within Him; tat-niṣṭhāḥ—who are
fixed on Him; tat-parāyaṇāḥ—who are devoted to hearing
and chanting; kalmaṣāḥ—whose inebrieties; nirdhūta —have
been cleansed away; jñ āna —through transcendental
knowledge; apunaḥ—never again; gacchanti —attain; (take)
āvṛttim —rebirth.

Those whose intelligence is fixed in Parameśvara, whose
minds are absorbed only in meditation on Him, who are
exclusively devoted to Him, who are engaged in hearing
and chanting about Him, and whose avidyā has been
completely destroyed by vidyā, attain mokṣa, from where
there is no return.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Vidyā illuminates knowledge of the jīvātmā only, not of
Parameśvara. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.21) it is said:
bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ. “I can only be attained by
bhakti .”

To attain knowledge of Paramātmā, the jñānīs must again
specifically practise bhaktisādhana . Śrī Bhagavān
speaks this śloka beginning with tad-buddhayaḥ to
explain this. Here, the word tat (tad ) refers to the
same all-pervading Parameśvara described earlier. Tad-
buddhayaḥ means that those whose intelligence is fixed

                            315
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

in that Parameśvara meditate on Him only. Tad-ātmā means
those who are solely absorbed in Him. Jñ ānaṁ ca mayi
sannyaset. “Even a jñ ānī should surrender his jñ āna to
Me” (Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 11.19.1).

According to this statement, even if he has knowledge
that the self is separate from the body, he is not
called tan-niṣṭhāḥ unless he has given up his niṣṭhā
(fixed steadiness) in sāttvika-bhāva and has developed
exclusive niṣṭhā in bhagavad -bhakti . Tat-parāyaṇāḥ
means those who are devoted to hearing and chanting
about Him.

It is said later in Gītā (18.55):


bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā viśate tad-anantaram


It is only by bhakti that one can know Me as I am and
thus attain Me. Therefore, those whose ignorance has
been completely destroyed by knowledge attain knowledge
of Paramātmā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Sattvāt sañjāyate jñānam (Gītā 14.17): “Jñ āna is
sattvika .” Paramātmā, however, is beyond the three
modes, and is also their controller, guṇādhīśa . That is
why, although knowledge in the form of sāttvika-j ñ āna
can destroy ignorance (ajñ āna ), it cannot cause
knowledge of Paramātmā to appear. Gītā (18.55) states:
bhaktyā mām abhijānāti. “Only bhakti can manifest
knowledge of Śrī Bhagavān’s tattva.” In this context on
e should carefully consider Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s commentary on this śloka (18.55).




Śloka 18



vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śva-pāke ca

paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

paṇḍitāḥ—the learned; sama-darśinaḥ—look equally; (upon)
brāhmaṇe —a brāhmaṇa ; vidyā-vinaya-sampanne —equipped
with knowledge and gentle qualities; gavi —a cow;

                           316
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

hastini —an elephant; ca —and; śuni —a dog; ca —and; eva
—indeed; śva-pāke —a dog-eater.

The wise look with equal vision upon a gentle and
learned brāhmaṇa, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a
caṇḍāla.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The wise who are extremely devoted to Parameśvara, as
mentioned in the previous śloka, transcend the material
modes (guṇātīta ) and become disinterested in accepting
the guṇas which exist in e very entity to varying
degrees. Thus they become equipoised. To explain this,
Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning with
vidyā-vinaya . A cow and a brāhmaṇa are said to be in
sattva-guṇa , thus they are superior to the elephant
which is in rajo-guṇa , and to the dog and the dog-eater
(caṇḍāla ) which are in tamo-guṇa. But the paṇḍitas who
have transcended the modes do not notice such
differences. Rather, they see brahma which is beyond the
modes everywhere. They are known as sama-darśī, those
with equal vision.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The vision of the wise jñānī is being explained in the
above śloka . Here the word sama-darśīḥ means to see
that Bhagavān’s taṭastha-śakti manifests as the jīvātmā
with a specific svarūpa in every material body. Only
such seers of the self (ātma-darśī) are known as sama-
darśī. Bhagavān has clarified this further in Gītā
(6.32) and it is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.29.14): brāhmaṇe pukkase stene brahmaṇye ‘rke
sphuliṅgake

akrūre krūrake caiva

sama-dṛk paṇḍito mataḥ

In My opinion, one who sees with equal vision a brāhmaṇa
and a caṇḍāla, a thief and a devotee of brahma, the
sunrays and the sparks of a fire, a cruel person and a
kind person, is wise.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains sama-dṛk as
realising the eternal existence of Me, parabrahma , in
every living entity. One who has such a vision is called
sama-darśī.




                           317
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 19



ihaiva tair jitaḥ sargo

yeṣāṁ sāmye sthitaṁ manaḥ

nirdoṣaṁ hi samaṁ brahma

tasmād brahmaṇi te sthitāḥ


taiḥ—those; yeṣām—whose; manaḥ—minds; sthitam —are
situated; sāmye —in equanimity; sargaḥ—the creation;
jitaḥ—is conquered; iha eva —in this very world; brahma
—brahma ; (is) nirdoṣam —flawless; samam —and
equipoised; tasmāt —therefore; te —they; hi—certainly;
sthitāḥ—are situated; brahmaṇi —in brahma .

Those whose minds are fixed in equanimity conquer the
whole universe in this very life. They possess the
flawless qualities of brahma, and are therefore situated
in brahma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, Śrī Bhagavān glorifies equal vision. That which
has been created in this world is called sargaḥ. Jitaḥ
means to overpower this material existence or to be
liberated from its bondage.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Ihaiva means indeed while living in this world. In other
words, it is in the stage of sādhana that one becomes
free from bondage to this material world.




Śloka 20



na prahṛṣyet priyaṁ prāpya

nodvijet prāpya cāpriyam


                             318
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

sthira-buddhir asammūḍho

brahma-vid brahmaṇi sthitaḥ


brahma-vit—a knower of spirit; (who is) sthitaḥ—
situated; brahmaṇi —in spirit; (is) sthira-buddhiḥ—of
steady intelligence; asammūḍhaḥ—and undeluded; na
prahṛṣyet —he is not elated; prāpya —on receiving;
priyam —something pleasant; ca —and; na udvijet —he is
not disturbed; prāpya —on obtaining; apriyam —an
unpleasant thing.

One who knows brahma, and who is firmly situated in
brahma, has steady intelligence and is not deluded. He
neither rejoices upon obtaining something pleasant, nor
despairs upon receiving something unpleasant.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the words na
prahṛṣyet to describe the equal vision of the wise in
relation to pleasant and unpleasant mundane events . Na
prahṛṣyet means that one is not elated, and nodvijet
means that one is not dejected. The meaning is that one
must practise like this in the stage of sādhana . With
this intention the imperative case has been used.
Because of the false ego, people become deluded by
happiness and lamentation. Being free from such ego, the
wise remain undeluded.




Śloka 21




bāhya-sparśeṣv asaktātmā

vindaty ātmani yat sukham

sa brahma-yoga-yuktātmā

sukham akṣayam aśnute


asakta-ātmā—a soul unattached; bāhya-sparśeṣu—to sense
pleasures; vindati —finds; yat —whatever; sukham —
happiness; ātmani —within the soul; saḥ—that; yukta-ātmā
—soul united; brahma-yoga —with the Supreme Spirit
through yoga ; aśnute —attains; akṣayam —immortal;
sukham —happiness.

He who is not attached to sense pleasure finds happiness
within the self. Being united with brahma through yoga,

                            319
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

he attains unending happiness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The minds of those who are united with brahma through
yoga are not attached to sense pleasure because, by
achieving Paramātmā, the bliss attained by a jīvātmā is
unending. Only they can experience this. Why would a
person who continuously tastes nectar be interested in
eating mud?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




External sense objects, such as sound and touch, are
experienced only with the help of the senses. They are
not the characteristics of the ātmā. Those who remain
detached from ex ternal sense objects dwell in the bliss
derived from the experience of Paramātmā within
themselves, and they do not even think of sense objects,
what to speak of enjoying them. According to the śloka ,
paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate (Gītā 2.59), since they remain
absorbed in the superior rasa , the bliss of serving
Bhagavān, they remain completely indifferent to the
mundane enjoyment which comes from material sense
objects.




Śloka 22




ye hi saṁsparśa-jā bhogā

duḥkha-yonaya eva te

ādy-antavantaḥ kaunteya

na teṣu ramate budhaḥ


kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; bhogāḥ—pleasures; ye —which;
(are) saṁsparśa-jāḥ—born of sensual contact; hi —
certainly; (are) duḥkha-yonayaḥ—sources of misery; te —
they; (have) ādi-antavantaḥ—a beginning and an end; eva
—certainly; budhaḥ—an enlightened man; na ramate —does
not delight; teṣu —in them.

O Kaunteya, pleasures born of contact with the senses

                           320
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

are certainly the cause of misery. Since they have a
beginning and an end, a wise man does not become
attached to them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




A wise man does not become attached to sense enjoyment.
For this reason, this śloka beginning with the words ye
hi is spoken.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The happiness derived by the contact of the senses with
sense objects is called saṁsparśa-mokṣa. Such happiness
has a beginning and an end, for when the contact is
broken, the happiness ceases. For this reason, the wise
do not become attached to such sense enjoyment, which is
transient and which only appears to be pleasant. It is
only to maintain the body that they engage their senses
in action with an attitude of detachment.




Śloka 23




śaknotīhaiva yaḥ soḍhuṁ

prāk śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt

kāma-krodhodbhavaṁ vegaṁ

sa yuktaḥ sa sukhī naraḥ

prāk—before; vimokṣaṇāt—giving up; śarīra —the body; saḥ
naraḥ—that man; yaḥ—who; iha eva —in this very life;
śaknoti —is able; soḍhum —to tolerate; vegam —the urges;
udbhavam —born; kāma-krodha —of lust and anger; yuktaḥ—
is a yogī; saḥ—he; sukhī—is happy.

Before giving up the body, he, who in this very life can
tolerate the urges born of lust and anger, is a yogī,
and is certainly happily situated.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī

                           321
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Despite having fallen into the ocean of material
existence, the persons described in this śloka are yogīs
and are happy. To explain this Śrī Bhagavān is speaking
this śloka beginning with śaknoti .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The intense desire or hankering to attain sense objects
that are favourable for sense pleasure is referred to
here as kāma , or lobha . The deepest meaning of the
word kāma , which in this context indicates all types of
desires, is the desire to gain pleasure by the mutual
combination of man and woman. The mind’s excessive
repulsion (envy) towards that which is unfavourable to
sense-enjoyment is called krodha. Those who can tolerate
the urges of kāma and krodha until the time of death are
known as yogīs , and they are happy.




Śloka 24



yo ‘ntaḥ-sukho ‘ntar-ārāmas

tathāntar-jyotir eva yaḥ

sa yogī brahma-nirvāṇaṁ

brahmabhūto ‘dhigacchati

(he) yaḥ—who; (is) antaḥ-sukhaḥ—happy within; antaḥ-
ārāmaḥ—who enjoys within; tathā—and; yaḥ—who; (is)
antaḥ-jyotiḥ—illumined within; eva —certainly; saḥ—that;
yogī—connected soul; (is) brahmabhūtaḥ—situated in
brahma ; adhigacchati—he attains; nirvāṇam —emancipation
from material existence; brahma —through realisation of
brahma .

A yogī who is happy within the self, who takes pleasure
within the self, and is illumined within the self, is
situated in brahma and attains the bliss of brahma-
nirvāṇa, emancipation from material existence.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           322
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


For those who are untouched by the conditions of the
material world, the experience of brahma itself is
pleasurable. To explain this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with the words yo ‘ntaḥ. Those who
achieve bliss within their inner self take pleasure only
in the self, and thus their vision is focused within.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




How the strong urges of kāma and krodha can be easily
and naturally pacified is being explained here by Śrī
Bhagavān. By experiencing the self, such urges can be
easily controlled. Yogīs who experience happiness in
realisation of the self, who take pleasure within the
self, and whose vision is always focused on the nature
of the self, take shelter of niṣkāma-karma and attain
the stage of brahmabhūta , the nature of brahma. They
eventually become established in their own (jīva )
svarūpa . Such yo gīs easily become indifferent to the
mundane sensual activities of kāma , krodha , etc., and
experience bliss within the self, known as brahma-
nirvāṇa . In Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s commentary on
Gītā 5.26, he says, “A sannyāsī who is free from kāma
and krodha , who has control over the mind, and who
knows ātma-tattva , very quickly attains full
realisation of brahma-nirvāṇa .”

After deliberation on real and unreal objects, a
niṣkāma-karma-yogī while living in the material world,
situates himself in brahma , the reality which is beyond
the modes of material nature. Such a state, which is
free from material miseries, is called brahma-nirvāṇa .




Śloka 25



labhante brahma-nirvāṇam

ṛṣayaḥ kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ

chinna-dvaidhā yatātmānaḥ

sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ

ṛṣayaḥ—persons active within; kalmaṣāḥ—whose sinful
qualities; kṣīṇa —are destroyed; yata-ātmānaḥ—who have
controlled minds; chinna-dvaidhāḥ—whose dualistic view
has been cut down; ratāḥ—who are attached; sarva-bhūta-
hite —to the welfare of all living beings; labhante —
achieve; brahma-nirvāṇam —emancipation from saṁsāra
through realisation of brahma .


                            323
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Those ṛṣis who are free from sin and doubt, who have
control over their minds, and who are engaged in the
eternal welfare of all living entities, attain brahma-
nirvāṇa.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Many persons attain perfection by practice (sādhana-
siddha). To explain this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka
beginning with the word labhante .




Śloka 26




kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ

yatīnāṁ yata-cetasām

abhito brahma-nirvāṇaṁ

vartate viditātmanām

yatīnām—for the sannyāsīs; vimuktānām —who are
liberated; kāma-krodha —from lust and anger; yata-
cetasām —who have control over their minds; abhitaḥ—in
every way; vidita-ātmanām —and who are well-versed in
ātma-tattva ; nirvāṇam —the extinguishing of material
life; brahma —through spiritual realisation; vartate —
takes place.

For those sannyāsīs who are free from kāma and krodha,
who have control over their minds, and who are well
versed in ātma-tattva, every aspect of brahma-nirvāṇa is
attained by them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“How long will it take for those who have knowledge of
tvaṁ-padārtha (the self) but who are bereft of knowledge
of Paramātmā, to attain the happiness of brahma-nirvāṇa
?” Anticipating this question, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with the words kāma-krodha. For one
whose mind has become stable and whose subtle body has
been destroyed, it does not take long to attain brahma-
nirvāṇa in its full perfection.


                           324
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Ślokas 27-28




sparśān kṛtvā bahir bāhyāṁś

cakṣuś caivāntare bhruvoḥ

prāṇāpānau samau kṛtvā

nāsābhyantara-cāriṇau

yatendriya-mano-buddhir

munir mokṣa-parāyaṇaḥ

vigatecchā-bhaya-krodho

yaḥ sadā mukta eva saḥ


vigata—who is free; icchā-bhaya-krodhaḥ—from desire,
fear and anger; kṛtvā—having put; bahiḥ—outside; bāhyān
—external; sparśān —sensual contacts; ca —and; kṛtvā—
having focused; cakṣuḥ—the eyes; antare —in between;
bhruvoḥ—the eyebrows; kṛtvā—having made; prāṇa-apānau —
the out-going and in-going breaths; nāsa-abhyantara-
cāriṇau —moving within the nostrils; samau —equal;
(whose) indriya —senses; manaḥ—mind; buddhiḥ—and
intelligence; yata —are controlled; yaḥ—who; mokṣa-
parāyaṇaḥ—is dedicated to attaining liberation; saḥ
muniḥ—that sage; (is) eva—certainly; sadā—always; muktaḥ
—liberated.

He who is free from desire, fear and anger completely
removes the external sense objects, such as sound and
touch from his mind. He then fixes his vision between
the eyebrows and suspends the upward and downward
movement of the prāṇa and apāna air, which moves in both
nostrils. In this way, he balances the life-airs,
controls his senses, mind and intelligence, and
dedicates himself to attaining mokṣa. Such a sage is
certainly always liberated.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this way, by performing niṣkāma-karma-yoga offered to
Īśvara, the sādhaka achieves a pure heart. It is then
that knowledge of the self (tvaṁ-padārtha ) appears. To
gain knowledge of tat-padārtha (brahma ), one has to
cultivate bhakti. Finally one experiences brahma (Śrī
Bhagavān) by guṇātīta-j ñ āna , which is born from
bhakti . For a person whose heart has been purified by

                            325
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

niṣkāma-karma-yoga , the performance of aṣṭāṅga-yoga is
superior to jñ āna-yoga , which is the process to
realise brahma . This is explained in the Sixth Chapter.
Here Śrī Bhagavān is speaking these three ślokas
beginning with the word sparśān as a sūtra of the Sixth
Chapter . Sparśān refers to all external senses: eyes,
ears, tongue, nose and skin. All of them enter the mind;
so one should drive them out and restrain the mind from
running towards them. One’s vision should be fixed
between the eyebrows. If one completely closes the eyes
there is the possibility that he will fall asleep, and
if one keeps them completely open, there is the
possibility that he will be distracted by the objects of
the senses. Thus, to ensure that neither occurs, one
should keep the eyes half open, and within the nostrils
control the upward and downward movement of pr āṇa and
apāna in the form of the out-going and incoming breath,
thus balancing them. Those who control their senses in
this way are to be considered liberated.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, the heart becomes purified only by niṣkāma-
karma-yoga offered to Me. After purifying the heart, one
attains jñ āna , which then gives rise to jñ āna-
svarūpa-bhakti , bhakti in the form of knowledge. This
is the means to determine tat-padārtha (brahma ).
Finally, the experience of brahma comes from bhakti
performed with guṇātīta-j ñ āna . I have explained this
to you previously. Now I will explain aṣṭāṅga-yoga as
the means to realise brahma for one whose heart has been
purified. I am presenting statements just to give an
idea of this. Please listen. The external forms of
sound, touch, form, taste and smell are to be completely
removed from the mind. While practising control of the
mind in this way, fix the eyes between the eyebrows and
look at the tip of the nose. By completely closing the
eyes there is the possibility of falling asleep, and by
completely keeping them open, there is the possibility
of being distracted by external objects. One should
therefore control the eyes by keeping them half-closed
in such a way that one’s vision falls between the
eyebrows on to the tip of the nose. Breathing through
the nostrils, the out-going prāṇa and the incoming apāna
should be regulated so that the upward and downward
movement is balanced. Thus, seated with controlled
senses, mind and intelligence, sages aiming at mukti
give up desire, fear and anger and practise with the aim
of realising brahma . In this way they can attain
complete deliverance from material bondage.Thus, as part
of the sādhana of niṣkāma-karma-yoga , its limb aṣṭāṅga-
yoga can also be practised.”




                           326
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śloka 29




bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati

jñātvā—understanding; mām—Me; (to be) bhoktāram —the
enjoyer; (of all) yajña-tapas ām —sacrifices and
austerities; mahā-īśvaram —the great master; sarva-loka
—of all worlds; suhṛdam —the friend; sarva-bhūtānām —of
all living beings; ṛcchati —attains; śāntim —peace.

He who knows Me to be the enjoyer of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Controller of all planets, and
the well-wisher of all jīvas, attains mokṣa.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Like the jñānī, such a yogī also attains mokṣa by
knowledge of Paramātmā, which appears through bhakti .
This is stated in this śloka beginning with the word
bhoktāram. “I am the enjoyer of the yajña performed by
the karmī, and I am the sustainer of tapasya performed
by the jñ ānī. I am the worshipable object of karmīs ,
jñ ānīs and yogīs , and I am Antaryāmī, and the only
Supreme Controller (maheśvara ) of all the planets. I am
the well-wisher of all jīvas , because through My
bhaktas I mercifully bestow instructions on bhakti . For
this reason, know Me to be the worshipable object of
devotees also. Since I am nirguṇa , it is not possible
to realise Me by jñ āna in sattva-guṇa . In Śrīmad-Bhāg
avatam (11.14.21) I declared: bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ.
‘I can be achieved only through bhakti .’ Only through
nirguṇa-bhakti can the yogīs realise My partial aspect,
Paramātmā, as their worshipable object, and attain śānti
or mokṣa .”

Jñānīs and karma-yogīs attain knowledge of both the
jīvātmā and Paramātmā through niṣkāma-karma , and so
attain mukti . This is the essence of this chapter.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Fifth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti


                            327
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




The niṣkāma-karma-yogīs also attain mokṣa by knowledge
of Paramātmā, which appears through bhakti. Śrī Bhagavān
is the only enjo yer of articles offered with bhakti at
the time of yajña and tapasya . He, Antaryāmī, is indeed
the worshipable object of the yogīs , the well-wisher of
all jīvas , and He is maheśvara , the Supreme Controller
of all planets.


tam īśvarāṇāṁ paramaṁ maheśvaraṁ

taṁ devatānāṁ paramaṁ ca daivatam

patiṁ patīnāṁ paramaṁ parastād

vidāma devaṁ bhuvaneśam īḍyam


Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.7

We know our worshipable Lord, who is the master of the
worlds, to be the supreme amongst all controllers, the
supreme Lord of lords, and the supreme protector of
those who can award protection. He is transcendental to
impersonal brahma.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “After hearing the
first four chapters, a doubt could arise. If one attains
mokṣa as the result of niṣkāma-karm a-yoga , then what
place does jñ āna-yoga have, and how does it manifest?
The instructions in this chapter have been spoken to
remove this doubt. Jñ āna-yoga (sāṅkhya-yoga ) and
niṣkāma-karma-yoga are non-different from each other,
for they share the same supreme goal, namely bhakti . In
the initial stages of niṣkāma-karma-yoga , karma
predominates over jñ āna , and in the final stage (jñ
āna-yoga ), jñ āna predominates over karma . By
constitutional nature the jīva is a pure, conscious
entity. However, he becomes bound by inert matter
because he desires to enjoy māyā, and as he identifies
himself with matter, gradually his constitutional
position becomes more covered. As long as this material
body exists, material action is necessary. The only way
for the baddha -jīva to attain liberation is through
cit-ceṣṭā, or the endeavour to revive his constitutional
state. To the same degree of intensity with which he
makes efforts to revive his original conscious state
during his journey within the material body, the
predominance of karma becomes weak. Brahma-nirvāṇa
(deliverance from mundane bondage and contact with the
pleasure of brahma ) appears automatically while
performing sādhana to develop equal vision, detachment,
control over mundane lust and anger and the eradication
of all doubts, etc. While practising karma-yoga as well
as maintaining the body, one can also perform aṣṭāṅga-
yoga-sādhana which is comprised of the eight processes:
yama , niyama , āsana , pratyāhāra , prāṇāyāma , dhyāna
, dhāraṇā and samādhi . The bliss of bhagavad-bhakti
gradually manifests during the performance of such
sādhana , if one attains the association of a bhakta .
This is called mukti-pūrvaka-śānti , everlasting peace

                            328
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

accompanied by mukti. Here, mukti means being situated
in one’s own svarūpa . At that time, the tendency to
perform pure bhajana illuminates the glory of the
constitutional nature of the jīva .”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Fifth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Six




Dhyāna-Yoga



Yoga Through Meditation




Śloka 1




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ

kāryaṁ karma karoti yaḥ

sa sannyāsī ca yogī ca

na niragnir na cākriyaḥ

śrī bhagavān uvāca—Śrī Bhagavān said; yaḥ—he who; karoti
—performs; karma —work; kār yam —as prescribed;
anāśritaḥ—unattached; karma-phalam —to the fruit of his
action; saḥ—he; (is) sannyāsī—in the renounced order; ca
—and; (is) yogī—a yogī; ca —and; na —not; niragniḥ—one
who ceases activities such as the practice of fire
yajñas ; ca —and; na —not; akriyaḥ—one who performs no
work.

Śrī Bhagavān said: Those who perform prescribed duties
without desiring the results of their actions are actual
sannyāsīs and yogīs. Those who cease performing yajñas,
such as the agni-hotra-yajña, are not sannyāsīs, and
those who merely abandon all bodily activities are not
yogīs.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                           329
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




The Sixth Chapter deals with the various types of yoga
performed by yogīs whose minds are self-controlled. It
also explains the means to control the flickering mind.

A person who is engaged in the practice of aṣṭāṅga-yoga
(the eightfold yoga system) should not suddenly give up
niṣkāma-karma (selfless action), which purifies the
heart. For this reason Śrī Bhagavān says, “Those who
perform their prescribed duties knowing them to be
obligatory, without desiring the results, and who have
renounced the fruits of their actions, are actual
sannyāsīs. Since their minds are free from desires for
sense enjoyment, such persons are also called yogīs .
Niragni means that a person is not called a sannyāsī
simply because he has abandoned all karma (action) such
as performance of the agni-hotra-yajña . Akriyaḥ means
that a person is not called a yogī simply because he has
given up all bodily activities, and sits motionless with
half-closed eyes.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Aṣṭāṅga-yoga was described in a condensed form (sūtra)
in three ślokas at the end of the Fifth Chapter. In the
Sixth Chapter, the subject of these three ślokas is
explained in detail.

The word agni-hotra mentioned in the commentary is a
special type of Vedic yajña performed to satisfy the
agni-devatā. According to this procedure, at the end of
a marriage ceremony, the brāhmaṇas should perform a
yajña by establishing the fire and chanting Vedic
mantras prescribed for the spring season. At that time,
one makes a determined vow to perform the yajña with
some particular substance (such as ghee). After that, it
should be performed with that substance only for the
rest of one’s life. On the amāvasyā (dark-moon) night,
the person has to perform the yajña himself with barley
water. On other days there is no discrepancy, even if
there is some variation. When one has performed a
hundred yajñas , one must perform a yajña to the sun
during the morning, and to the fire at twilight. It is
imperative to commence da śa-paurṇamāsa-yāga while
meditating on the fire on the first full-moon day.
Besides that, one has to perform three yajñas on the
purṇimā and three on the amāvasyā, and must perform
these six yajñas for the rest of his life. The śat-
patha-brāhmaṇa section of the Vedas explains in great
detail the results obtained by performing this yajña.




Śloka 2

                           330
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




yaṁ sannyāsam iti prāhur

yogaṁ taṁ viddhi pāṇḍava

na hy asannyasta-saṅkalpo

yogī bhavati kaścana

pāṇḍava—O son of Pāṇḍu; viddhi—know; iti —that; hi tam —
very thing; yam —which; prāhuḥ—they (the wise) call;
yogam —unmotivated yoga of work; (is also) sannyāsam —
renunciation of work; asannyasta-saṅkalpaḥ—without
renouncing desire; na kaścana —no one; bhavati —can
become; yogī—a yogī.

O Arjuna, know that what the wise call niṣkāma-karma-
yoga is non-different from karma-sannyāsa, because one
who is unable to give up the desire for the fruits of
action and sense enjoyment can never become a yogī.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




To renounce the fruits of action is the factual meaning
of the word sannyāsa, and to stabilise the mind so that
it is not disturbed by sense objects is the meaning of
the word yoga . Therefore, the meaning of both sannyāsa
and yoga is one. Those who are asannyasta-saṅkalpa , who
have neither given up the desire for the fruits of their
action nor the desire for sense enjoyment, can never be
called yogīs .




Śloka 3




ārurukṣor muner yogaṁ

karma kāraṇam ucyate

yogārūḍhasya tasyaiva

śamaḥ kāraṇam ucyate

muneḥ—for the sage; ārurukṣoḥ—who is beginning; yogam —
the process of dhyāna-yoga ; karma —niṣkāma-karma-yoga ;
ucyate —is said; (to be) kāraṇam —the sādhana ; tasya
yoga-ārūḍhasya —for that person who has attained to
dhyāna-yoga ; eva —certainly; śamaḥ—renunciation; ucyate
—is said; (to be) kāraṇam —the sādhana.


                            331
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

For a sage who is aspiring to become situated in
unwavering dhyāna-yoga, niṣkāma-karma is said to be the
sādhana, and when he ascends to that stage of yoga
called dhyāna-niṣṭha (steadiness in meditation),
renouncing actions which distract his mind from dhyāna
is said to be the sādhana.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




One may question whether or not an aṣṭāṅga-yogī of the
quality mentioned in Gītā (6.1) must perform niṣkāma-
karma for the rest of his life. That doubt is removed by
this śloka beginning with the word ārurukṣoḥ, which
establishes a limit for niṣkāma-karma . Muni means that,
in order for aspirants to become situated in yoga , they
must perform niṣkāma-karma , because it purifies the
heart. Once they have attained steadiness in meditation,
they must then stop performing any action which may
distract them. Those who desire to attain dhyāna yoga ,
but whose minds are not yet completely purified, should
perform niṣkāma-karma .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “Yoga is compared to a
unique ladder. The lowest rung is compared to the life
of the jīva caught in degraded worldliness, in which his
consciousness is absorbed in mundane matter. This yoga
ladder consists of the steps from that level up to the
stage where the jīva is in pure conciousness. The
various rungs of the ladder have different names, but
yoga is a common term for them all. This yoga has two
divisions (for two types of yogīs ): 1) For the yoga-
arurukṣu munis who desire to practise yoga and who have
just begun climbing the ladder, niṣkāma-ka rma is said
to be the only means and, 2) for an ārūḍha-yogī, who has
already ascended the ladder and achieved perfection in
yoga , the only aim is the attainment of śama (cessation
of desire for fruitive karma ) or eternal bliss. These
two gross divisions are called karma and śānti .” In
other words, performance of niṣkāma-karma-yoga and
eternal bliss are their respective goals.




Śloka 4



yadā hi nendriyārtheṣu

                           332
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


na karmasv anuṣajjate

sarva-saṅkalpa-sannyāsī

yogārūḍhas tadocyate

yadā—when; na anuṣajjate—one is neither attached;
indriya-artheṣu —to the objects of the senses; na —nor;
karmasu —to actions; tadā—then; ucyate —it is said; hi —
that certainly; yoga-ārūḍhaḥ—he has attained to yoga ;
(since he is) sannyāsī—a renouncer; sarva-saṅkalpa —of
all his desires.

A tyāgī who has become free from attachment to the sense
objects and the performance of actions is called yoga-
ārūḍha (adept in yoga), for he has given up all desires
for the fruits of his actions.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Only those whose hearts have become completely pure are
called yoga-ārūḍha. In this śloka beginning with the
words yadā hi , Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the symptoms
of such a person. Indriya-artheṣu means that they are
neither attached to sense objects such as sound, nor to
actions which are the means of attaining those sense
objects.




Śloka 5




uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ

nātmānam avasādayet

ātmaiva hy ātmano bandhur

ātmaiva ripur ātmanaḥ

uddharet—one should deliver; ātmānam—the soul; ātmanā—
through the mind; na avasādayet —one should not degrade;
ātmānam —the soul; ātmanā—through the mind; hi eva ātmā—
the very mind; (which is) bandhuḥ—the friend; ātmanaḥ—of
the soul; eva —indeed; ātmā—that mind; (is also) ripuḥ—
the enemy; ātmanaḥ—of the soul.

One must deliver the self by detaching his mind from the
material world and not allow it to degrade him, because
the mind can be the friend and also the enemy of the
jīvātmā.


                            333
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The self (ātmā) falls into the ocean of the material
world only because of his attachment to sense objects.
With great endeavour one must deliver the self. Ātmanā,
the mind which is detached from sense objects, delivers
ātmānam , the jīva . Na avasādayet means that the mind
which is attached to sense objects should not cause the
ātmā to fall into the material ocean. In this way the
ātmā (mind) is the friend and also the enemy of the jīva
.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The mind which is free from any attachment is one’s
friend, and the mind which is full of attachment is
one’s enemy. It is said:


mana eva manuṣyāṇāṁ

kāraṇaṁ bandha-mokṣayoḥ

bandhāya viṣayāsaṅgo

muktyair nirviṣayaṁ manaḥ


Amṛta-bindu Upaniṣad 2

A man’s mind is the sole cause of bondage and of mokṣa.
A mind absorbed in sense objects causes bondage and when
it is detached from them, it is the cause of mukti.




Śloka 6



bandhur ātmātmanas tasya

yenaivātmātmanā jitaḥ

anātmanas tu śatrutve

vartetātmaiva śatru-vat

ātmā—the mind; eva—certainly; (is) bandhuḥ—the friend;
tasya ātmanaḥ—of that soul; yena ātmanā—by which person;

                            334
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ātmā—the mind; jitaḥ—has been disciplined; tu —but;
anātmanaḥ—for a person without spiritual knowledge; ātmā
—the mind; varteta —engages; śatrutve —in harmful
activity; eva —just; śatru-vat —like an enemy.

For one who has conquered his mind, the mind is his
friend, but for the jīvātmā who has no control over his
mind, it works against him just like an enemy.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Whose friend and whose enemy is the mind? To answer
this, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning with
the word bandhuḥ. For the ātmā, that is, the jīva who
has conquered his mind, the mind is his friend. But for
one who is anātmā, whose mind is uncontrolled, it acts
harmfully like an enemy.




Śloka 7



jitātmanaḥ praśāntasya

paramātmā samāhitaḥ

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu

tathā mānāpamānayoḥ

jita-ātmanaḥ—for the person whose mind is controlled;
praśāntasya—and who is peaceful; sukha-duḥkheṣu —amidst
happiness and distress; śīta-uṣṇa —cold and heat; tathā—
as well as; māna-apamānayoḥ—honour and dishonour; ātmā—
soul; parama samāhitaḥ—has attained eternal trance.

One whose mind is controlled is free from the dualities
of heat and cold, happiness and misery, honour and
dishonour, attachment and envy. The soul of such a yogī
is deeply absorbed in samādhi.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now, in these next three ślokas the characteristics of
one who is yoga-ārūḍha are being described. A person who
is jita -ātmanaḥ (one who has conquered his mind) and
praśānta (free from attachment, envy and so forth) is
properly situated in samādhi and is not disturbed by

                           335
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

heat or cold, honour or dishonour.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the original śloka, the word paramātmā does not mean
Parameśvara-Paramātmā, but it indicates the ātmā, or the
jīvātmā. Here, the meaning of the word parama with the
word samāhitaḥ is that a person endowed with the above
symptoms is deeply absorbed in samādhi . Both Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa have said that the word parama here
indicates intensity.




Śloka 8




jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā

kūṭa-stho vijitendriyaḥ

yukta ity ucyate yogī

sama-loṣṭāśma-kāñcanaḥ

ātmā—the soul; tṛpta—who is satisfied; jñ āna-vij ñ āna
—through transcendental knowledge and its realisation;
kūṭa-sthaḥ—whose consciousness is unaffected by material
transformation; vijita-indriyaḥ—who has conquered the
senses; sama —and looks equally; loṣṭa-aśma-kāñcanaḥ—on
sand, stone and gold; iti —thus; ucyate —is said to be;
yogī—a yogī; yuktaḥ—yoga-ārūḍha purūṣa .

A person whose mind is satisfied by jñāna and vijñāna,
whose consciousness is unaffected by material
transformation, who has conquered the senses, and who
looks equally upon sand, stone and gold is yoga-ārūḍha,
adept on the path of yoga.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those whose hearts have become free from hankering, and
are satisfied due to having both jñāna (knowledge) and
vijñ āna (direct realisation of this knowledge) are
kūṭa-sthaḥ, that is, they are always situated in the
true nature of their selves and remain detached from all
mundane objects. For them, a grain of sand, gold and so

                           336
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

on are all the same.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Kūṭa-sthaḥ: kāla-vyāpī sa kūṭa-stha eka-rūpatayā tu yah.
“One who is devoid of sensual disturbance and eternally
remains situated in his own svarūpa is called kūṭa-
sthaḥ.”




Śloka 9




suhṛn-mitrāry-udāsīna—

madhyastha-dveṣya-bandhuṣu

sādhuṣv api ca pāpeṣu

sama-buddhir viśiṣyate

(one who sees with) sama-buddhiḥ—his impartial
intelligence; suhṛt —towards well-wishers; mitra —
friends; ari —enemies; udāsīna —neutral persons;
madhyastha —arbitrators; dveṣya —the envious; bandhuṣu —
relatives; sādhuṣu —saints; api ca —and also; pāpeṣu —
sinful persons; viśiṣyate —is more advanced.

One who looks upon well-wishers, friends, enemies,
neutral people, arbitrators, envious people, relatives,
saintly persons and sinners with equal vision is even
more exalted.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Suhṛt means one who is a well-wisher by nature. Mitra
means one who performs welfare work out of affection.
Ari refers to one who is violent or a killer. Udāsīna
means one who is indifferent to quarrelling parties.
Madhyastha means one who is an arbitrator for opposing
parties. Dveṣya means one who is envious and acts
harmfully. Bandhu means a relative, sādhu means a
saintly (dharmika ) person and pāpī means a sinful
(adharmika ) person.

One who regards all of these types of people with an
equal mind, seeing them all alike, is considered to be a

                             337
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

most distinguished and excellent person. Such a person
is superior to those who look upon a grain of sand,
stone and gold equally.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the previous śloka, a person who has equal vision
towards a grain of sand, stone, gold and so forth, was
called a yogī. But among persons who are yoga-ārūḍha
(ascending the path of yoga ), those who see with equal
vision a well-wisher, a friend, an enemy, a neutral
person, an arbitrator, an envious person, a relative, a
saint and a sinner are even more highly situated than
those who see inert matter equally.




Śloka 10



yogī yuñjīta satatam

ātmānaṁ rahasi sthitaḥ

ekākī yata-cittātmā

nirāśīr aparigrahaḥ

ekākī—living alone; sthitaḥ—situated; rahasi —in a
solitary place; (he should be) nirāśīḥ—free from desire;
aparigrahaḥ—not accepting sense objects; yata-citta-ātmā
—controlling his mind and body; yogī—a yogī; satatam —
always; yuñj īta ātmānam —should absorb his mind in
samādhi .

While residing alone in a solitary place, controlling
his citta (thoughts) and body, devoid of desires and not
accepting sense objects, a yogī should absorb his mind
in samādhi.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now, from this śloka beginning with yogī yuñj īta up to
the śloka ending with sa yogī paramo mataḥ (Gītā 6.32),
Śrī Bhagavān explains the process of dhyāna-yoga along
with its limbs. A yogī should be yoga-ārūḍha-ātmā (fix
his mind in trance).



                           338
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After explaining the symptoms of one who is a yoga-
ārūḍha (adept in yoga ), Bhagavān gives instruction on
yoga-sādhana . A yoga-sādhaka should withdraw his mind
from the objects of sense enjoyment and practise
niṣkāma-karma-yoga offered to Bhagavān. In this way, he
should try to fix his mind in samādhi , medita ting
deeply on Śrī Bhagavān. He should perform his sādhana
without any material desires, and with staunch
renunciation, reside in a solitary place, control his
mind, and refrain from all activities which are
unfavourable to yoga .




Ślokas 11— 12




śucau deśe pratiṣṭhāpya

sthiram āsanam ātmanaḥ

nātyucchritaṁ nātinīcaṁ

cailājina-kuśottaram

tatraikāgraṁ manaḥ kṛtvā

yata-cittendriya-kriyaḥ

upaviśyāsane yuñjyād

yogam ātma-viśuddhaye

śucau deśe—in a clean place; pratiṣṭhāpya—establishing;
ātman aḥ—his; sthiram —steadfast; āsanam —seat;
(placing) uttaram —in sequence; kuśa —a mat of kuśa
grass; ajina —a deerskin; caila —and a cloth; na ati-
ucchritam —neither too high; na ati-nīcam —nor too low;
upaviśya —sitting; tatra —there; āsane —on the seat;
kṛtvā—having fixed; manaḥ—his mind; eka-agram —one-
pointedly; yata —controlling; kriyaḥ—the activities;
citta —of his mind; indriya —and senses; yuñjy āt yogam
—he should practise yoga ; ātma-viśuddhaye —for the
purification of his mind.

In a sanctified place, one should make an āsana by
placing kuśa grass, deerskin and then cloth on the
ground. It should be neither too high nor too low.
Sitting on that āsana, one should practise yoga to
purify the mind with one-pointed concentration, and
control all of his thoughts and activities.



                           339
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Pratiṣṭhāpya means ‘after establishing’. Cailājina-
kuśottaram indicates that one should put deerskin on a
mat made from kuśa and on top of that a seat made of
cloth. A yogī should continue his practice to purify the
ātmā (mind). In other words, after becoming free from
the distraction of trying to become qualified to realise
brahma , one’s intelligence should remain one-pointed.
It is said in the Katha Upaniṣad (1.3.12): dṛśyate tv
agryayā buddhyā. “One can see brahma with one-pointed
intelligence.”




Ślokas 13— 14




samaṁ kāya-śiro-grīvaṁ

dhārayann acalaṁ sthiraḥ

samprekṣya nāsikāgraṁ svaṁ

diśaś cānavalokayan

praśāntātmā vigata-bhīr

brahmacāri-vrate sthitaḥ

manaḥ saṁyamya mac-citto

yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

dhārayan—holding; kāya—his body; śiraḥ—head; grīvam —and
neck; samam —equipoised; acalam —unmoving; sthiraḥ—
steadfast; ca —and; samprekṣya —gazing; svam nāsika-
agram —at the tip of his nose; anavalokayan—not
glancing; diśaḥ—to the (other) directions; praśānta-ātmā
—filled with peace; vigata-bhīḥ—free from fear; sthitaḥ—
fixed; brahmacāri-vrate —in a vow of celibacy; saṁyamya
—controlling; manaḥ—the mind; yuktaḥ—engaged in; mat-
cittaḥ—thinking of Me; āsīta —should sit; mat-paraḥ—
engrossed in Me.

Keeping one’s body, neck and head erect and steady, one
should fix one’s vision solely on the tip of the nose.
Thus, following strict celibacy, becoming fearless,
peaceful and controlling the mind, one should practise
yoga by meditating on Me with one-pointed attention,
remaining always devoted to Me.




                             340
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The middle part of the body is called kāya, the torso.
Samam means not crooked, or in other words, straight,
and acalam means not moving, steady. “Keeping the torso
straight and steady and restraining the mind from sense
objects, one should become dedicated to My bhakti while
meditating on My beautiful four-handed Viṣṇu form.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




If the sitting posture is firm and comfortable, it helps
in one’s spiritual practice. There are sixty-four types
of postures such as svastika , mayūra , garuḍa and padma
. Patañjali has also said: sthira-sukham āsanam. “The
āsana should be firm and comfortable.” In Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad (2.8) the process of āsana has been explained:
“Keeping the torso, head and neck in a straight line and
controlling all the senses, one should practise yoga by
absorbing one’s mind in meditating on brahma situated in
the heart. Such learned sādhakas cross over the terrible
ocean of kāma and krodha in the material world by the
boat of brahma .”

If one doubts the need to adopt an āsana (posture) for
the gross body while remembering Bhagavān within the
mind, Vedānta-sūtra (4.1.7) says: āsīnaḥ sambhavāt. “One
should remember Śrī Hari while sitting in a firm āsana
.” Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa explains in his Govi nda-
bhāṣya , “It is not possible to concentrate the citta
(thoughts) without an āsana. While walking, moving,
standing and sleeping, the thoughts remain distracted.
In such circumstances it is not possible to make the
citta one-pointed.”

This is also cited in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from: śucau deśe
pratiṣṭhāpya (3.28.8) up to hetutvam apy asati
(3.28.36), and also (11.14.32) sama āsana āsīnaḥ. These
ślokas are of great value in helping to understand this
topic in more detail.

In the   yoga-śāstra also it is said: antar-lakṣyo ‘bahir-
dṛṣtiḥ   sthira-cittaḥ susaṅgataḥ. “One’s outer perception
should   be directed within, and one’s mind should be
stable   due to auspicious association.”




Śloka 15




                            341
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

yuñjann evaṁ sadātmānaṁ

yogī niyatamānasaḥ

śāntiṁ nirvāṇa-paramāṁ

mat-saṁsthām adhigacchati

evam—thus; sadā—always; yuñjan —engaging; ātmānam —the
mind; yogī—the yogī; niyatamānasaḥ—of controlled mind;
adhigacchati —attains; śāntim —peace; (in) mat-saṁsthām
—My form of nirviśeṣabrahma ; nirvāṇa-paramām—complete
cessation of material existence.

Thus, constantly keeping the mind absorbed in Me through
yoga by following this process, a yogī whose mind is
controlled, can become situated in My svarūpa
(nirviśeṣabrahma) and attain śānti in the form of
complete emancipation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Yogīs whose minds are beyond thoughts of sense objects
and are self-controlled, absorb their minds in Me
through the practice of dhyāna-yoga and attain nirvāṇa
(emancipation). Thus becoming firmly situated in My
nirviśeṣabrahma-svarūpa , they attain śānti , complete
emancipation from bondage to the material world.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the result of
practising dhyāna-yoga. Tam eva viditvāti mṛtyum eti.
“By the practice of yoga , having attained knowledg e of
Bhagavān (in His impersonal feature), he crosses beyond
the cycle of birth and death in the form of material
existence,” (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.8). In this way,
the yogī attains nirviśeṣabrahma (featureless brahma ).




Śloka 16



nātyaśnatas tu yogo ‘sti

na caikāntam anaśnataḥ

na cāti-svapna-śīlasya

                            342
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


jāgrato naiva cārjuna

arjuna—O Arjuna; ca—and; tu —however; yogaḥ—union with
the Paramātmā; asti —is; eva —certainly; na —not
(attained); ati-aśnataḥ—by one who eats excessively; ca—
and; na—not; eka-ant am anaśnataḥ—by one who does not
eat sufficiently; ca —and; na —not; ati-svapna-śīlasya —
by one who sleeps excessively; na —nor; jāgrataḥ—by one
who does not sleep enough.

O Arjuna, yoga cannot be perfected by a person who eats
too much or too little, or by one who sleeps too much or
too little.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In two ślokas, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the symptoms
of a person who has become steadfast in the practice of
yoga . Atyaśnatah means one who eats too much. It is
said in yoga-śāstra : pūryed aśanenārdhaṁ

tṛtīyam udakena tu

vāyoḥ sañcaraṇārthaṁ tu

caturtham avaśeṣayet

One should half-fill the belly with food, one-fourth
with water, and should leave one-fourth empty for the
movement of air.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




To attain perfection in sādhana, a yogī should not
practise yoga when he is hungry or tired, or when his
mind is disturbed. One should not practise yoga when he
is too cold, too hot or in a hurry, because in doing so
he will not attain perfection. While chanting hari-nāma
, following the various aṅgas (limbs) of bhakti , and
specifically while remembering Kṛṣṇa’s līlā, one should
carefully observe the above principles. In order to keep
the citta concentrated, the sādhaka should spend some
time chanting hari-nāma in a solitary p lace with one-
pointed attention. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has given
such instructions in his book Hari-nāma-cintāmaṇi .




Śloka 17

                           343
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




yuktāhāra-vihārasya

yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu

yukta-svapnāvabodhasya

yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā

vihārasya—for one whose recreation; āhāra—and eating;
yukta —are balanced; ceṣṭasya —whose movements; karmasu
—in (all) activities; yukta —are balanced; avabodhasya —
whose waking; svapna —and sleeping; yukta —are balanced;
yogaḥ—the process of linking with the Supreme Lord;
bhavati —becomes; duḥkha-hā—a slayer of material
miseries.

For one who is moderate in eating and recreation,
balanced in work and regulated in sleeping and
wakefulness, his practice of yoga destroys all material
miseries.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




A person’s worldly and transcendental activities will
lead to success if he is regulated in eating (āhāra) and
recreation (vihāra ).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




If a person is not moderate in eating and recreation, he
faces various miseries that become an obstacle in his
sādhana . Similarly, if the mind is flickering and
agitated because of various anxieties, it is also not
possible for him to attain perfection in his sādhana .
Therefore, in a balanced manner, the sādhaka should eat
food which is easily digestible and nourishing. It is
imperative for the bhaktisādhaka to follow the
instructions given by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his book,
Śrī Upadeśāmṛta , wherein it is said that only a person
who controls the urges of the mind, anger, tongue and
genitals can perform sādhana properly. Additionally, one
should always keep a distance from the six unfavourable
activities: over-eating, over-endeavouring, talking
unnecessarily, having undue attachment to or disregard
for rules and regulations, taking bad association and
maintaining a strong desire to follow false philosophy.

In this śloka, the words yukta-svapnāvabodhasya mean
regulated sleep and regulated wakefulness.

                           344
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 18



yadā viniyataṁ cittam

ātmany evāvatiṣṭhate

nispṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyo

yukta ity ucyate tadā

yadā—when; cittam—the mind; viniyatam —is fully
controlled; avatiṣṭhate —and stays; ātmani —in the soul;
tadā—then; ucyate —he is said; (to be) yuktaḥ iti —
connected in yoga ; eva —certainly; nispṛhaḥ—free from
cravings; sarva-kāmebhyaḥ—for all sense enjoyment.

When the mind becomes completely controlled and firmly
fixed in the self alone, at that time one is said to be
yukta (perfected in yoga), and is free from the craving
for all sense enjoyment.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“When is one’s yoga complete?” In reply to this, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa speaks this śloka beginning with yadā. “One has
become a niṣpanna-yogī (has attained perfection in yoga
) when he can situate the controlled citta (mind)
unwaveringly in the ātmā (self).”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The yogī is said to have attained perfection in yoga
when, during his yoga practice, his citta becomes
steady, free from desires for sense enjoyment, and
situated within his self alone.




Śloka 19



yathā dīpo nivāta-stho

                           345
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


neṅgate sopamā smṛtā

yogino yata-cittasya

yuñjato yogam ātmanaḥ

yathā—as; dīpaḥ—a lamp; nivāta-sthaḥ—situated in a
windless place; na iṅgate —does not flicker; sā—that;
upamā—analogy; smṛtā—is taught (by the wise); yoginaḥ—of
a yogī; yata-cittasya —whose mind is controlled;
yuñjataḥ yogam—while practicing connection; ātmanaḥ—with
the ātmā.

Just as a lamp in a windless place does not flicker, so
a yogī whose citta is controlled remains steady in his
concentration on self-realisation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




A lamp does not flicker in a place where there is no
breeze, therefore the citta (mind) of a yoga-yukta-yogī
is compared to a lamp.




Ślokas 20-25




yatroparamate cittaṁ

niruddhaṁ yoga-sevayā

yatra caivātmanātmānaṁ

paśyann ātmani tuṣyati

sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad

buddhi-grāhyam atīndriyam

vetti yatra na caivāyaṁ

sthitaś calati tattvataḥ

yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ

manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ

yasmin sthito na duḥkhena

guruṇāpi vicālyate

taṁ vidyād duḥkha-saṁyoga—

                             346
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


viyogaṁ yoga-saṁjñitam

sa niścayena yoktavyo

yogo ‘nirviṇṇa-cetasā

saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs

tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ

manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ

viniyamya samantataḥ

śanaiḥ śanair uparamed

buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā

ātma-saṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā

na kiñcid api cintayet

eva—certainly; yatra—when; cittam —the mind; niruddham —
being controlled; uparamate —becomes peaceful; yoga-s
evayā—through the practice of yoga ; ca —and; yatra —
when; paśyan —perceiving; ātmānam —the soul; ātmanā—
through the mind; tuṣyati —one becomes satisfied; ātmani
—in the soul; eva —certainly; yatra —situation in which;
vetti —one understands; tat —that; ātyantikam —
limitless; sukham —happiness; yat —which; (is) buddhi-
grāhyam —perceived through the intelligence; ca —and;
ati-indriyam —transcendental to the senses; sthitaḥ—
being so situated; ayam —this (yogī); na —never; calati
—moves away; tattvataḥ—from that truth; ca —and; la
bdhvā—having obtained; yam —which; manyate —he
considers; na aparam —no other; lābham —gain; (is)
adhikam —greater; tataḥ—than that; sthitaḥ—being
situated; yasmin —in which; na vicālyate —he is not
deviated; api —even; guruṇā—by the greatest; duḥkhena —
suffering; vidyāt —one should understand; tam —that;
yoga-saṁjñitam—realisation of yoga ; viyogam —which
dissociates one; duḥkha-saṁyoga —from association with
suffering; saḥ—that; yogaḥ—yoga ; yoktavyaḥ—should be
practised; niścayena —with determination; anirviṇṇa-
cetasā—and undeviating consciousness; eva —certainly;
tyaktvā—having abandoned; aśeṣataḥ—completely; sarvān —
all; kāmān —desires; saṅkalpa-prabhavān —born of desire;
(and) viniyamya —regulating; indriya-grāmam —the group
of senses; samantataḥ—on all sides; manasā—through the
mind; śanaiḥ śanaiḥ—very gradually; uparamet —one should
detach; manaḥ—the mind; buddhyā—through intelligence;
dhṛti-gṛhītayā—achieved through conviction; ca —and;
kṛtvā—having fixed (the mind); ātma-saṁstham —in
transcendence; cintayet —one should think; na kiñcit —of
nothing else; api —at all.

In that state of yoga called samādhi, the yogī’s mind is
controlled by the practice of yoga. He becomes detached
from the sense objects, and is satisfied within by
realising the self through that purified citta (mind).
In that state, the yogī experiences eternal bliss
through his transcendental intelligence, which is beyond
the realm of the senses. Being thus established, he

                            347
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

never deviates from his ātma-svarūpa (intrinsic nature)
and upon attaining ātma-sukha (the bliss of the self),
he considers there to be no greater acquisition. When he
is situated on that platform, he does not become
perturbed even by the greatest of miseries. Know that
state to be devoid of any contact with the duality of
mundane happiness and misery. This yoga should be
performed with full patience of mind, having completely
given up all whimsical desires and, with the mind
controlling the senses from all directions, one should
follow the instructions of śāstra and sādhu with
determination. One should make his intelligence resolute
and determined, and should gradually become detached by
establishing the mind in the self and by not thinking of
anything else.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word yoga in the śloka, nāt yaśnatas tu yogo ‘sti
(Gītā 6.16) and in other ślokas means samādhi . This
samādhi is of two types, namely samprajñ āta , in which
one is conscious of the difference between knowledge,
the object of knowledge and the knower, and asamprajñ
āta , in which no such difference is perceived .
Samprajñ āta has various divisions such as savitarka
(argument) and savicāra (philosophical research). What
is spontaneous or asamprajñ āta-samādhi-yoga ? To answer
this, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking three and a half ślokas
beginning here with the word yatroparamate .

When one attains samādhi, the citta becomes fully
detached from sense objects and has no contact with
them, because one has achieved self-restraint (niruddha
) . This is confirmed in Patañjali’s Yoga-sūtra : yogaś
citta-vṛtti-ni rodhaḥ. “When the citta-vṛtti (attention)
is fully restrained from sense enjoyment and absorbed in
the blissful realisation of the self and Paramātmā, it
is called yoga.”

The qualified yogī realises Paramātmā by his purified
mind and remains satisfied with that alone. This is his
blissful state, samādhi. This samādhi is attained by an
intellect which has become qualified to experience the
self and Paramātmā. This is because it is atīndriya
(beyond the senses), and beyond the happiness attained
by contact of the senses with the sense objects.
Wherever this yogī lives, he does not deviate from his
ātma-svarūpa and thus, after attaining this blissful
state, he considers the pursuit of any other type of
acquisition as insignificant. Even if there is contact
with misery, he does not experience it. This is yoga-
saṁjñitam , or simply yoga , and only this can be called
samādhi. A yogī should not lament, “I have not attained
perfection after so much time, so what is the purpose in
undergoing all this pain?” Rather, within his mind, he
should maintain firm patience. “Whether perfection comes
in this life or in the next, I will continue to
endeavour. Why should I become impatient?”

                           348
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


In this regard, Śrī Gauḍapāda, Śaṅkarācārya’s parama-
gurudeva, has given the example of vowing to dry up the
ocean by taking out a drop of water at a time with the
tip of a piece of kuśa grass. Similarly, by untiring,
determined endeavour, a person can control the mind.

In this regard there is a story. Once a bird laid her
eggs on the shore of an ocean, but the waves carried the
eggs away. The bird resolved to dry up the ocean, and
began to take water out, drop by drop, in her beak.
Other birds came to convince her that her endeavour was
futile, but she did not stop her work. By chance, Śrī
Nāradajī came to that place, and he also tried to
convince the bird to stop, but the bird took a vow in
his presence: “I will not rest until I dry up the ocean,
whether it is in this life or in the next.” Merciful
Nārada then sent Garuḍa to help her. When Garuḍa heard
that the ocean had carried away the eggs of someone in
his own caste, he began to dry up the ocean by fanning
it with his wings. The ocean became terrified, and
immediately gave the eggs back to the bird.

Thus it is certain that when a person begins the process
of yoga, jñ āna or bhakti with faith in such statements
of śāstra , Śrī Bhagavān will definitely bless such
enthusiastic endeavour.

In the two ślokas beginning with the word saṅkalpa , Śrī
Bhagavān is explaining the initial and ultimate
activities of a person engaged in such yoga . Abandoning
all material desires (Gītā 6.24) is the initial act and
not worrying about anything else, as spoken in Gītā
(6.25), is the final act.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Words cannot describe the happiness that manifests in
the yogī’s pure heart when he attains perfection in yoga
, and his heart becomes cleansed by samādhi . It can
only be realised with one’s purified mind.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “In this way, by the
practice of yoga, the mind gradually becomes detached
from sense enjoyment and free from the control of all
mundane objects. At that time, the stage of samādhi
appears. In that state, the mind becomes qualified to
realise and experience Paramātmā, thus realising the
happiness born from that union. Pata ñjali Muni’s
philosophical literature is the only bona fide
literature on aṣṭāṅga-yoga . Because commentators do not
understand its factual meaning, they say that, according
to the vedānta-vādīs (propounders of Vedānta ), the
attainment of bliss and the conscious state of the self
is called mokṣa . This is unreasonable because, if bliss
is accepted in the kaivalya (liberated) stage of
impersonal monism, then the duality of the experience
and the one who has the experience will exist. Thus it

                           349
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

will not be kaivalya (oneness). But these commentators
do not understand what Patañjali Muni means, because in
his last sūtra he has said: puruṣārtha-śūnyānāṁ guṇānāṁ
pratiprasavaḥ kaivalyaṁ svarūpa-pratiṣṭhā vā citi-śaktir
iti


Yoga-sūtra 3.34

The function of the real self (cit-dharma) awakens when
one is free from the four goals of human life (dharma,
artha, kāma and mokṣa), and when the guṇas do not cause
any worldly disturbance. This state is called kaivalya
(oneness). In this state one becomes situated in one’s
own svarūpa. It is then called citi-śakti.

“If we deeply deliberate on this it becomes clear that
Patañjali Muni does not accept that the functions of the
self are annihilated in its ultimate state; rather, he
accepts that at that stage no transformation or
perversion of its function takes place. Citi-śakti means
cit-dharma . When there are no perverse transformations
in the proper functioning of the self, then svarūpa-
dharma , the true nature of the self, awakens. When that
state of the self is in contact with the material
energy, it is called ātma-guṇa-vikāra (the
transformation of the constitutional functions of one’s
self). If perverse transformations are removed, then
ānanda , which is an intrinsic characteristic of the
ātmā, will awaken. This is the opinion of Patañjali.

“Ānanda awakens when one is free from any perversion by
the guṇas and is of a blissful nature. It is the supreme
end of yoga. Later, it will be explained that this and
nothing else is called bhakti .

“Samādhi is of two types: samprajñāta and asamprajñ āta
. Samprajñ āta-samādhi has many divisions such as
savitarka (argument) and savicarana (philosophical
research). But asamprajñ āta-samādhi is only of one
type. In the state of asamprajñata-sam ādhi , one
attains eternal bliss, which is devoid of any contact of
the senses with their sense objects through the
intelligence which has become qualified to experience
the true self or has become one with the self. In that
pure state of realising eternal bliss within the self,
the mind of the yogī does not deviate from the Absolute
Reality. Without attaining this state, the jīva can
never achieve eternal auspiciousness merely by the
practice of aṣṭāṅga-yoga. This is because, if the yogī
is deprived of this blissful state, then the secondary
results of this practice in the form of mystic powers
and so on attract his mind, and will deviate him from
the topmost objective which is samādhi-sukha (bliss in
trance). Due to such obstacles, there is the danger of
many inauspicious mishaps in the practice of this
aṣṭāṅga-yoga such as degradation and deviation . In
bhakti-yoga , however, there is no such danger. This
will be explained later on.

“The yogī does not consider any other bliss to be
superior to the bliss achieved in samādhi . In other
words, while maintaining his life, he experiences
temporary happiness through contact of the senses with

                           350
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

their sense objects, but he considers this to be
completely insignificant. Even at the time of death,
while tolerating the extreme pain of an accident or
bodily miseries, he enjoys the bliss of samādhi , which
is the only object of his search. Being unmoved by all
these pains, he still does not give up his supremely
blissful state. He understands that these miseries will
not stay for long and will disappear soon enough. If
there is a delay or any obstacle in achieving the result
of yoga , he does not become so frustrated that he gives
up his practice. With great endeavour he continues his
yoga practice until he attains the result.

“The first duty on the path of yoga is to follow yama ,
niyama , āsana , prāṇāyāma and so on and to completely
abandon desires which are born from the attraction to
attaining mystic siddhis. In addition, with the help of
the purified mind, the yogī should control his senses.
He should gradually learn renunciation with intelligence
acquired from following the limb of dhāraṇā
(concentrating the mind). This renunciation is called
pratyāhāra (withdrawal of the senses from the sense
objects). He should achieve ātma-samādhi by completely
controlling his mind through the processes of dhyāna ,
dhāraṇā and pratyāhāra . In the final state, he should
not think any mundane thoughts, and should not become
attached to the maintenance of his body while thinking
about it. This is the ultimate duty of the yogī.”




Śloka 26



yato yato niścalati

manaś cañcalam asthiram



tatas tato niyamyaitad

ātmany eva vaśaṁ nayet

yataḥ yataḥ—to whichever (sense); cañcalam—the restless;
asthiram —unsteady; manaḥ—mind; niścalati —wanders; eva
—certainly; tataḥ tataḥ—from that; niyamya —regulating;
nayet —one should lead; etat —this; vaśam —controlled
(mind); ātmani —within the soul.

No matter how the restless and unsteady mind wanders to
the various sense objects, it should be restrained and
fixed within the self alone.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           351
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017


If, due to poor saṁskāra, the mind   of the yogī becomes
unsteady by contact with rajo-guṇa   , then he should
again practise yoga . Śrī Bhagavān   is explaining this by
speaking this śloka beginning with   the words yato yataḥ.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




When the mind of the sādhaka becomes restless and
wanders to the sense objects, he should immediately
restrain it from those sense objects to which it has
wandered and fix it in the self alone.




Śloka 27




praśānta-manasaṁ hy enaṁ

yoginaṁ sukham uttamam

upaiti śānta-rajasaṁ

brahmabhūtam akalmaṣam

enam yoginam—that yogī; hi —certainly; (has) praśānta-
manasam —great peace of mind; brahmabhūtam —realisation
of brahma ; śānta-rajasam —his passions are pacified;
akalmaṣam —he is freed from reactions to past sins;
(and) upaiti —he achieves; uttamam —supreme; sukham —
bliss.

Such a peaceful yogī, who sees everything in connection
with brahma, and who is free from rajo-guṇa and the
reactions of past sins, attains supreme bliss in the
form of self-realisation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




After overcoming all the impediments by practice, a yogī
attains the bliss of samādhi as previously described.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti


                           352
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




The bliss of samādhi itself appears to the yogī.




Śloka 28




yuñjann evaṁ sadātmānaṁ

yogī vigata-kalmaṣaḥ

sukhena brahma-saṁsparśam

atyantaṁ sukham aśnute

vigata-kalmaṣaḥ—being freed from sins; yogī—the
transcendentalist; sadā—always; yuñjan —regulating;
ātmānam —the mind; evam —thus; sukhena —easily; aśnute —
attains; atyantam —supreme; sukham —bliss; (which is)
brahma-saṁsparśam —full realisation of brahma .

In this way, by continuous practice, a sinless yogī
makes the self steady in yoga and easily attains supreme
bliss in the form of brahma realisation, becoming
liberated from material life.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




At that time, such yogīs become perfect. The words
sukham aśnute mean that they become liberated in this
life (jīvan-mukta ).




Śloka 29




sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ

sarva-bhūtāni cātmani

īkṣate yoga-yuktātmā

sarvatra sama-darśanaḥ

yoga-yukta-ātmā—a person connected in yoga; (with) sama-
darśanaḥ—equal vision; īkṣate —sees; sarvatra —

                            353
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

everywhere; ātmānam —Supersoul; stham —situated; sarva-
bhūta —in all living beings; ca —and; sarva-bhūtāni —all
living beings; ātmani —in the Supersoul.

A person who is linked in yoga realises brahma
everywhere. He observes Him as Paramātmā who is situated
in all living entities, and observes all living entities
in Him.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this śloka beginning with the words sarva-bhūta-stham
ātmānam , Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the characteristics
of a per son who has realised brahma , and who has
become liberated in this life. He directly experiences
the presence of Paramātma in all jīvas , understanding
that He is the substratum of all jīvas . The words yoga-
yuktātmā refer to a person who realises the Supreme Lord
in all beings, both moving and non-moving, due to his
mind being absorbed in brahma . In other words, he
experiences brahma everywhere.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “Arjuna is asking,
‘What type of bliss comes from contact with brahma ?’
Śrī Bhagavān anticipates this question, and explains
briefly that the yogī who has attained samādhi behaves
in two ways: 1) according to his bhāva (vision) and 2)
according to his kriya (activity). His bhāva is such
that he sees Para mātmā in all jīvas and all jīvas in
Paramātmā. His activities reflect such equal vision
everywhere. In the next two ślokas , this bhāva is
explained and in the śloka after that, kriya is
explained.”




Śloka 30



yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra

sarvaṁ ca mayi paśyati

tasyāhaṁ na praṇaśyāmi

sa ca me na praṇaśyati


                           354
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(he) yaḥ—who; paśyati—sees; mām —Me; sarvatra —
everywhere; ca —and; paśyati —sees; sarvam —everything;
mayi —in Me; tasya —for him; aham —I; na praṇaśyāmi —am
never lost (invisible); ca —and; saḥ—he; na praṇaśyat i
—he is never lost; me—to Me.

For one who sees Me in all beings and sees all beings in
Me, I am never lost, nor is he ever lost to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this śloka beginning with the words yo mām, Śrī
Bhagavān is explaining the result of the yogī’s direct
experience. “For him, I, brahma , am never lost, because
for such a yogī, direct experience of Me becomes
eternal. The yogī who worships Me never falls down.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān is never out of sight for sādhakas who have
direct experience of Him, and such sādhakas are also
never out of His vision. Due to their constant mutual
contact, the worshipper never falls.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I
indeed belong to those who see Me everywhere and who see
all entities in Me. When My bhakta surpasses the stage
of śānta-rati (neutral attachment), a special type of
loving relationship arises between us, in which both of
us feelÇ ‘I am his and he is mine.’ After this
relationship has developed, I never bestow upon him
complete destruction by giving him dry impersonal mokṣa
. He can no longer be lost because he has become My
servant and has attained the eternal function of his
self.”




Śloka 31




sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ

bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ

sarvathā vartamāno ‘pi

sa yogī mayi vartate

                             355
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


saḥ—that; yogī—transcendentalist; yaḥ—who; bhajati —
worships; mām —Me; sarva-bhūta-sthitam—as I am situated
in all beings; āsthitaḥ—ascending; ekatvam —the stage of
one-pointed intelligence; vartate —exists; mayi —in Me;
api —although; vartamānaḥ—existing; sarvathā—in all
circumstances.

The yogī who worships Me, the all-pervading Supersoul,
with one-pointed intelligence in both the sādhana and
siddha stage, considering Me to be the Supreme Absolute
Reality without a second, dwells only in Me in all
circumstances.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Even before he has directly realised Me, who am the all-
pervasive Paramātmā, the yogī who worships Me with the
attitude explained in the previous śloka is not
compelled to follow all the rules and regulations of
sādhana . Paramātmā is the cause of everything and the
Supreme Absolute Reality without a second. He who takes
shelter of this realisation and engages in My bhajana by
śravaṇa , smaraṇa and so on is certainly situated in Me
in all respects and under all conditions. He is not in
the material world, whether he performs action as
prescribed in śāstra or not.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The various living entities have different types of
bodies which are classified as moving and non-moving.
The jīvas within these bodies are also different.
Consequently, there are unlimited jīvas . In
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (5.9) it is said: bālāgra-śata-
bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca

bhāgo jīvaḥ sa vijñeyaḥ

sa cānantyāya kalpate

Although the jīva is situated in the inert body, he is a
subtle and non-material reality. One may divide the tip
of a hair into one hundred parts and further divide one
of those parts into another hundred, but the jīva is
even smaller and more subtle than that.

The jīva, being extremely subtle, is an anti-material
entity, and is capable of acquiring the nature of
ānantya . Anta means death, and freedom from death is
called ānantya or mokṣa. Paramātmā, although one, dwells
within the hearts of the unlimited jīvas as Antaryāmī

                           356
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

and as a witn ess. This is also stated in the smṛti-
śāstra : eka eva paro viṣṇuḥ

sarva-vyāpī na saṁśayaḥ

aiśvaryād rūpam ekaṁ ca

sūrya-vat bahudheyate

The all-pervading Śrī Viṣṇu is one, and by the influence
of His aiśvarya He appears in various forms, just as the
one sun appears in many places at the same time.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “Meditation on the
four-handed form of Śrī Viṣṇu (Īśvara) is recommended to
the yogī during the sādhana stage, culminating in the
realisation of My sac-cid-ānanda form of Śyāmasundara in
nirvikalpa -samādhi (a state of trance). In this state,
one’s intellect becomes free from the dualities of time
in regard to parama-tattva. In other words, one becomes
free from the misconception that He is different in the
sādhana-avasthā (practice stage) and siddha-avasthā
(perfected stage). ‘The yogīs who worship Me, who am
all-pervading, perform bhakti unto Me by śravaṇa and
kīrtana. Even in their working stage (karma-avasthā),
their period of deliberation (jñ āna-avasthā) and their
meditation (samādhi ), in all circumstances they always
dwell in Me.’ This means they attain kṛṣṇa-sāmīpya-mokṣa
, liberation characterised by the symptom of always
being situated near Kṛṣṇa. In Śrī Nārada-pa ñcar ātra ,
which gives instructions on yoga , it is said: dik-
kālādy-anavacchinne

kṛṣṇe ceto vidhāya ca

tan-mayo bhavati kṣipraṁ

jīvo brahmaṇi yojayet

When the jīva fixes his mind on the form of parabrahma
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is beyond the bounds of material time and
space, and becomes absorbed in Him, he experiences the
ecstatic bliss of transcendental association with Him.

Thus, kṛṣṇa-bhakti is certainly the supreme state of
yoga -samādhi .”




Śloka 32



ātmaupamyena sarvatra

samaṁ paśyati yo ‘rjuna

sukhaṁ vā yadi vā duḥkhaṁ

sa yogī paramo mataḥ

arjuna—O Arjuna; saḥ—that; yogī—transcendentalist; yaḥ—

                            357
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

who; paśyati —sees; sarvatra —all other beings; samam —
equally; ātmaupamyena —with himself; yadi vā—whether;
sukham —in happiness; vā—or; duḥkham —in distress; mataḥ
—is considered; (to be) paramaḥ—the best.

O Arjuna, he who, through self-realisation, sees all
jīvas as equal to himself, and who considers their
pleasure and pain to be his own, is the best yogī. That
is My opinion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




It has been said that in sādhana-avasthā, yogīs are
equally disposed towards all beings. Here, this śloka
beginning with ātmaupamyena specifically describes the
primary characteristic of their equanimity. Those
equipoised yogīs appreciate that just as they themselves
like happiness and dislike pain, others similarly
experience happiness and pain. They therefore have equal
vision everywhere and are the ever well-wishers of
everyone. “Such yogīs are the topmost. This is My
opinion.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Even during sādhana-avasthā, yogīs are endowed with
equan imity. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as
saying, “I am explaining how a yogī behaves. Only he who
has equal vision towards everyone is considered to be
the topmost yogī. The word sama-dṛṣṭi (equal vision)
means that in his dealings with others the yogī sees all
jīvas to be like himself, and considers the happiness
and pain of other jīvas as his own. Therefore, he is
always the well-wisher of all jīvas , and acts
accordingly for their eternal benefit. This is called
sama-darśana .”




Śloka 33




arjuna uvāca —

yo ‘yaṁ yogas tvayā proktaḥ

sāmyena madhusūdana


                           358
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

etasyāhaṁ na paśyāmi

cañcalatvāt sthitiṁ sthirām

arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; madhusūdana—O Madhusūdana;
ayam yogaḥ—this process of yoga ; yaḥ—which; proktaḥ—was
spoken; tvayā—by You; (is) sāmyena —based on equanimity;
(however) aham —I; na paśyāmi —am unable to understand;
sthirām —the stable; sthitim —situation; etasya —of that
process; cañcalatv āt —on account of (the mind’s)
restlessness.

Arjuna said: O Madhusūdana, the yoga described by You
that is based on equanimity towards everyone,
everywhere, seems to be impermanent, due to the restless
nature of my mind.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Thinking that the equipoised symptoms described by Śrī
Bhagavān are difficult to attain, Arjuna speaks this
śloka beginning with the words yo ‘yam. “This yoga
depends on being equipoised in all situations, and I do
not see how one can achieve success in it, because its
practice cannot be maintained at all times. Because of
the flickering nature of the mind, such practice can
last only for two or three days. Additionally, You have
explained equanimity by saying that one should see the
happiness and misery of all people of the world as one’s
own. This vision may be possible toward those who are
one’s relatives or those who are neutral, but such an
attitude is impossible to maintain towards one’s enemies
or those who are envious and critical. I cannot see how
the happiness and pain of myself, Yudhiṣṭhira and
Duryodhana are in reality equal. Although by proper
deliberation, one can have equal vision of the jīvātmā,
Paramātmā, the life air and senses of the self, one’s
enemies and all embodied jīvas , this vision is
difficult to maintain for more than two or three days
because the very powerful and flickering mind cannot be
restrained merely by discrimination. Rather, it is seen
that the mind that is attached to sense enjoyment will
ultimately overpower one’s discrimination.”




Śloka 34



cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa

pramāthi balavad dṛḍham

tasyāhaṁ nigrahaṁ manye


                           359
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

vāyor iva suduṣkaram

kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; hi—certainly; manaḥ—the mind; (is)
cañcalam —naturally restless; pramāthi —agitating the
intelligence, body and senses; balavat —powerful; (and)
dṛḍham —violent; aham —I; manye —think; nigraham —
subjugation; tasya —of it; (is) suduṣkaram —very hard to
do; iva —like; vāyoḥ—of the wind.

O Kṛṣṇa, the mind is by nature restless, powerful,
obstinate and capable of completely overpowering the
intelligence, body and senses. It seems as difficult to
control as the wind.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.3.3) it is said: ātmānaṁ
rathinaṁ viddhi śarīraṁ ratham eva ca. “Know the ātmā to
be the passenger and the body to be the chariot.”

It is said in the śrutis that learned paṇḍitas compare
the body to a chariot, the senses to furious horses, the
mind to the controller of the senses (the reins), the
sense objects (sound, form, taste, touch and smell) to
the pathways, and the intelligence to the driver. It is
understood from this statement that the intelligence
controls the mind, but Arjuna challenges this, saying
that the powerful mind can even overpower the
intelligence. One may question how that can be. He then
replies, “Just as a powerful disease may not be affected
by the medicine that has the potency to cure it,
similarly the mind, which is very powerful by nature,
does not always accept intelligence endowed with
discrimination.” Moreover, he says that the mind is very
obstinate. Just as one cannot possibly pierce iron with
a small needle, similarly it is not possible for even
subtle intelligence to pierce the mind. The mind is like
the wind, and just as it is difficult to control the
mighty wind blowing in the sky, it is extremely
difficult to control the mind by the process of a
ṣṭāṅga-yoga , through breath restraint.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




A story from the Eleventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
illustrates how the process of serving Bhagavān can
simply and naturally control the most powerful and
flickering mind.

Once there was a wealthy brāhmaṇa who lived with his son
and family members in the land of Avanti. Although he
was rich, he was extremely miserly, and would not spend

                           360
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

even a penny for the pleasure of his family or
community; rather, he was always engaged in accumulating
wealth. When his children grew up, they became very
perturbed by his behaviour, and his neighbours, family
members and others in the community also became opposed
to him. Even the royal servants opposed him because he
did not pay his taxes. Unfortunately, in this
unfavourable situation, his house burnt down, and his
family and community members rejected him.

However, due to some good saṁskāra and the influence of
sādhu-sanga , he accepted the dress of a tridaṇḍi-
sannyāsī. On the instruction of his sad-guru he engaged
in bhakti , and adopted equal vision towards friends and
enemies, happiness and misery, good and bad, and towards
himself and others. He remained satisfied even when the
people of his own village mistreated him as he was
begging. They would call him an atheist and a cheater
and they would throw stool and urine into his begging
bowl instead of food or grains. Yet with an undisturbed
citta (mind), always meditating on Bhagav ān, he finally
attained eternal sevā to Bhagavān Mukunda.




Śloka 35




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

asaṁśayaṁ mahā-bāho

mano durnigrahaṁ calam

abhyāsena tu kaunteya

vairāgyeṇa ca gṛhyate

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord said; mahā-bāho—
O mighty-armed Arjuna; asaṁśayam —without doubt; manaḥ—
the mind; durnigraham—is hard to subjugate; (and) calam
—unsteady; tu —but; abhyāsena —by practice; ca —and;
vairāgyeṇa —by renunciation; gṛhyate —it can be
controlled; kaunteya —O son of Kuntī.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Mahā-bāho, undoubtedly the mind is
restless and hard to control. Yet, by abhyāsa (constant
practice) and vairāgya (true renunciation), it can be
controlled, O Kaunteya.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān accepts Arjuna’s statement, and allays his
doubt by speaking this śloka beginning with the word

                           361
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

asaṁśayam. “What you have said is true. Still, even a
chronic disease can certainly be cured if one regularly
takes medicine according to the prescription of an
expert physician, although it may take some time. In the
same way, the uncontrollable mind can be subdued by
abhyāsa , the regular practice of yoga in accordance
with the instructions of a sad-guru , by constant
cultivation of dhyāna-yoga (meditation on Parameśvara)
and vairāgya (true renunciation).”

This is also stated in Pātañjala-sūtra 12: abhyāsa-
vairāgyābhyāṁ tan-nirodhaḥ. “By constant practice and
true renunciation the tendencies of the citta can be
controlled.”

“O Mahā-bāho (Arjuna), you have not only defeated many
great heroes in battleÇ you have also pleased Lord Śiva,
who carries the trident. But what is the use of all
this? O crest-jewel of all great heroes, your name,
Mahā-bāho, will only be appropriate if you can conquer
the mind with the weapon of yoga . O Kaunteya, don’t
fear in this regard. You are the son of My father’s
sister, therefore, it is My duty to help you.”




Śloka 36



asaṁyatātmanā yogo

duṣprāpa iti me matiḥ

vaśyātmanā tu yatatā

śakyo ‘vāptum upāyataḥ

(it) duṣprāpaḥ—is difficult to achieve; asaṁyata-ātmanā—
by one whose mind is uncontrolled; yogaḥ—connection with
the Supreme Lord; tu —however; vaśya-ātmanā—by one whose
mind is disciplined; yatatā—and who strives; avāptum —to
obtain (it); upāyataḥ—by the (above-mentioned) means;
(it is) śakyaḥ—achievable; iti —that; (is) me —My; matiḥ
—opinion.

It is very difficult for one whose mind is not
controlled to achieve self-realisation through this yoga
system. However, one who has brought his mind under
control, and who strives by the proper means of abhyāsa
and vairāgya, can attain perfection in yoga. This is My
opinion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now Śrī Bhagavān is giving instruction on the subject of

                           362
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

yoga. One who has not controlled his mind by abhyāsa and
vairāgya does not become perfect in yoga . However, if
one regulates his mind by abhyāsa and vairāgya , and
constantly engages in sādhana over a prolonged period of
time, he can attain yoga or samādhi , which is
characterised by the symptom of a controlled mind.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “One
who does not endeavour to control his mind by vairāgya
and abhyāsa can never perfect the previously mentioned
system of yoga . However, he who endeavours to control
the mind by adopting the proper means can definitely
attain perfection in yoga . When I say, ‘by the proper
means’, I imply that he who tries to concentrate his
citta by performing niṣkāma-karma-yoga offered to
Bhagavān and who engages in the abhyāsa of meditation on
Me, as a limb of this yoga system, simultaneously
accepting with vairāgya sense objects for his
maintenance, gradually attains perfection in yoga .”




Śloka 37




arjuna uvāca —

ayatiḥ śraddhayopeto

yogāc calita-mānasaḥ

aprāpya yoga-saṁsiddhiṁ

kāṁ gatiṁ kṛṣṇa gacchati

arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; kām —to which?;
gatim —destination; gacchati —does he go; ayatiḥ—he who
is not an ascetic; (yet) upetaḥ—endowed; śraddhayā—with
faith; calita-mānasaḥ—whose mind becomes deviated; yogāt
—from the practice of yoga ; aprāpya —without attaining;
yoga-saṁsiddhim —complete perfection in yoga .

Arjuna asked: O Kṛṣṇa, what is the destination of one
who begins the process of yoga with faith but later, due
to an uncontrolled mind, falls back into worldliness and
fails to attain perfection in yoga?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                           363
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Arjuna raises the question, “You said that only those
who endeavour with abhyāsa and vairāgya attain
perfection in yoga , but what is the destination of one
who falters in this endeavour?”

He who is faithful because of theistic intelligence in
yoga-śāstra engages in the practice of yoga without
hypocrisy. However, due to a lack of proper practice and
detachment, his mind may deviate from yoga and become
absorbed in sense objects. Although he does not fully
perfect his yoga , he does make some progress.
Therefore, what is the destination of such a yog ī who
has gone beyond the stage of yoga-ārurukṣu (desiring
yoga ) and has situated himself on the first step of
yoga ?




Śloka 38




kaccin nobhaya-vibhraṣṭaś

chinnābhram iva naśyati

apratiṣṭho mahā-bāho

vimūḍho brahmaṇaḥ pathi

mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed Kṛṣṇa; (being) ubhaya-
vibhraṣṭaḥ—unsuccessful in both (karma and yoga );
vimūḍhaḥ—baffled; pathi —on the path; brahmaṇaḥ—of
spiritual realisation; kaccit —whether?; naśyati —he
perishes; iva—like; chinna-abhram —a riven cloud;
apratiṣṭhaḥ—without a footing.

O Mahā-bāho Kṛṣṇa, if one falls from both the processes
of karma and yoga and becomes deviated from the path of
attaining brahma, does he not perish like a riven cloud,
with no shelter anywhere?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna is raising a question. “What happens to a person
who has deviated from the paths of karma and yoga ? In
other words, what happens to a person who has given up
the path of karma and has also not attained perfection
in the path of yoga ? Does that yogī not face the same
fate as a riven cloud that has separated from a cloud
mass and dissolves into thin air, because it does not
join other clouds? When he begins the path of yoga , he

                            364
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

has the desire to give up sense enjoyment, but at the
same time, because his vairāgya is not complete, the
desire to enjoy the senses still remains within him.
This is a very difficult situation. Since he has
abandoned the path of karma (a means to attain Svarga),
his next world, Svarga, is also lost, and by not
attaining perfection in yoga , which is the means for
mokṣa , he also fails to achieve mokṣa . From this it
appears that he is lost in both worlds. That is why I am
asking You whether a person who has deviated from the
sādhana of attaining brahma becomes bereft of all
shelter. Is he lost or not?”




Śloka 39



etan me saṁśayaṁ kṛṣṇa

chettum arhasy aśeṣataḥ

tvad-anyaḥ saṁśayasyāsya

chettā na hy upapadyate

kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; etat—this; (is) me saṁśayam —my doubt;
arhasi —You should; chettum —dispel (it); aśeṣataḥ—
completely; tvat-anyaḥ—other than Yourself; hi —
certainly; chet tā—a remover; asya saṁśayasya—of this
doubt; na upapadyate —is not to be found.

O Kṛṣṇa, this is my doubt and I implore You to remove it
completely. Other than You, no one else can possibly
dispel this doubt.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka, Arjuna says, “O Kṛṣṇa, You are the
supreme controller of all controllers, the supreme cause
of all causes, and You are omniscient. No devatā or ṛṣi
is omniscient (sarva-jña ) and all-powerful (sarva-
śaktimān ) like You. Therefore, other than You, there is
nobody who is able to dispel my doubt.”




Śloka 40




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

                           365
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


pārtha naiveha nāmutra

vināśas tasya vidyate

na hi kalyāṇa-kṛt kaścid

durgatiṁ tāta gacchati

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Person said; pārtha—O
son of Pṛthā; tāta —dear one; eva —certainly; tasya —for
that person; vidyate —there is; na —neither; vināśaḥ—
destruction; iha —in this world; na —nor; amutra —in the
next; hi—certainly; kaścit —someone; kalyāṇa-kṛt —who
performs auspicious acts; na gacchati —does not go;
durgatim —to an unfavourable destination.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Pārtha, such an unsuccessful yogī
is not lost either in this world or the next because, My
dear friend, a person who is engaged in auspicious acts
never attains an unfavourable destination.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this world as well as in the next world, such an
unsuccessful yogī engages in yoga which leads to
auspiciousness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




By addressing Arjuna as Pārtha in this śloka, Śrī
Bhagavān is instructing him in a very loving manner.
Bhagavān c onsiders Arjuna to be extremely dear to Him.
By using the word tāta , which literally means son, He
demonstrates His affection for Arjuna. A father expands
himself in the form of his son, and therefore he is
called tat. When the suffix ana is applied to the
original word tat , it becomes tāta . Śrī Gurudeva also
affectionately calls his disciple, who is like his son,
tāta . Here, Śrī Bhagavān says that those who engage in
yoga with faith never arrive at a degraded destination.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Pārtha, one who engages in the practice of yoga never
meets destruction, either now or in the future. The
performer of that yoga which leads to eternal good can
never be subject to an evil fate. Basically, all of
humanity is divided into two categories: righteous
(regulated) and unrighteous (unregulated). The behaviour
of unregulated people is always like that of animals,
whether they are cultured or uncultured, dull or
intelligent, weak or strong. There is no possibility of

                           366
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the world receiving any good from their activities.

“The righteous (regulated) can be divided into three
categories: karmī, jñ ānī and bhakta . Karmīs are
further divided into two divisions: sakāma-karmī and
niṣkāma-karmī. The sakāma-karmīs hanker for petty kinds
of happiness, or temporary pleasures. Although they
attain Svarga and worldly progress, all their pleasure
is temporary. Therefore, that which is called kalyāṇa
(auspiciousness for the jīvas ) is unknown to them. The
state of kalyāṇa for the jīvas is to become free from
the grip of worldliness and to attain nityānanda ,
eternal bliss. Therefore any process which does not lead
to this eternal bliss is futile. Only when the purpose
of achieving this nityānanda is combined with karma-
kāṇḍa activities, can such karma be called karma-yoga .
First, the citta is purified by such karma -yoga , then
one attains jñ āna. After that, one engages in dhyāna-
yoga (meditation) and then finally, the zenith of all
processes, the path of bhakti-yoga is attained.

“The injunction of accepting austerities by renouncing
selfish pleasures in sakāma-karma is called tapasya by a
karmī. However many austerities he may perform, his goal
is only sense pleasure and nothing else. The asuras ,
after achieving the results of their austerities, simply
enjoy their senses. On the other hand, when that
person’s karma surpasses the boundaries of sense
enjoyment, then ni ṣkāma-karma-yoga appears, which aims
at the eternal good of the jīva . A dhyāna -yogī or a jñ
āna -yogī, firmly situated on the path of niṣkāma-karma-
yoga , often naturally performs actions for the eternal
good of all beings.

“In every respect an aṣṭāṅga-yogī surpasses whatever
results a jīva attains by sakāma-karma .”




Śloka 41



prāpya puṇya-kṛtāṁ lokān

uṣitvā śāśvatīḥ samāḥ

śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe

yoga-bhraṣṭo ‘bhijāyate

yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ—one deviated from the path of yoga; prāpya
—attains; lokān —the planets; puṇya-kṛtām —of the pious;
uṣitvā—after dwelling; śāśvatīḥ—for very long; samāḥ—
years; abhijāyate —he takes birth; gehe —in the house;
śucīnām —of the pure (brāhmaṇas ); (and) śrīmatām —of
the wealthy.

One who deviates from the path of yoga after practising
for only a short time attains the planets of the pious
and, after enjoying there for many years, takes birth in
a righteous and wealthy family.

                           367
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




What is the destination of persons who deviate from the
path of yoga? In answer to this, Śrī Bhagavān says that
they reside on the planets which are attained by the
pious persons, who perform yajñas such as the aśvamedha-
yaj ña . Since enjoyment and mokṣa are both the results
of yoga , the yogīs who have not yet matured and have
fallen because of a desire to enjoy only attain
enjoyment. On the other hand, since it is impossible for
matured yogīs to desire enjoyment, they certainly attain
mokṣa . If, by the will of providence, a mature yogī
does develop a desire to enjoy, he also can attain
enjoyment like Kardama and Saubhari Ṛṣis.

The word śuci means those who are of good character and
conduct, and śrī means wealthy business people or
royalty. A fallen yogī takes birth only in the houses of
such families after residing in Svarga and other higher
planets.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The yogīs who have fallen from the path of aṣṭāṅga-yoga
can be divided into two categories. In the first
category are those who have fallen after following the
process of yoga for a short time. Such yogīs do not
attain lower destinations according to the śloka:
nehābhikrama-nāśo ‘sti (Gītā 2.40); rather, they enjoy
happiness on the higher planets attained by pious
persons who perform yajñas such as the aśvamedha-yaj ña.
They then take birth in the houses of qualified
brāhmaṇas or rich men who are engaged in dharmika
activities. Both of these situations are favourable for
their continued practice of yoga .

In the second category are those who have practised yoga
for a long time and whose practice has almost matured.
By the will of providence, however, they have developed
a desire to enjoy sense gratification in this life. In
their next life some of them achieve their desired
enjoyment and finally becoming indifferent to that, they
complete their process of yoga . Examples of this are
Kardama (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.23) and Saubhari Ṛṣis.
Kardama Ṛṣi was a yogī of high calibre. On the order and
inspiration of his father Brahmā, he unwillingly married
Devahūtī and enjoyed conjugal pleasure superior to that
of the Prajāpatis. Kapiladeva, an avatāra of Bhagavān,
appeared as Kardama Ṛṣi’s son, and, after renouncing all
material enjoyment and sense pleasure, again engaged in
the worship of Bhagavān. The life history of Saubhari

                           368
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Ṛṣi has been related in the Sārārtha-varṣiṇī Prakaśikā-
vṛtti of Bha gavad-gītā 2.65.




Śloka 42



athavā yoginām eva

kule bhavati dhīmatām

etad dhi durlabhataraṁ

loke janma yad īdṛśam

athavā—or else; eva bhavati—he becomes; (placed) kule —
in a family; dhīmatām —of wise; yoginām —
transcendentalists; yat janma —a birth; īd ṛśam —such
as; etat—this; hi —certainly; durlabhataram —is more
difficult to obtain; loke —in this world.

The yogī who deviates after practising for a long time
takes his birth in the home of yogīs who are great in
wisdom. Such a birth is undoubtedly very rare in this
world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān has explained the destination of a yogī who
falls after practising for a short while. Now, in this
śloka beginning with athavā, He explains the destination
of a yogī who falls after practising for a long time.
Yogīs such as Nimi are in this category.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Some yogīs from the second category who deviate from
their practice take birth in a dynasty of yogīs who are
steadfast in tattvajñ āna. They then complete their
progress on the path of yoga . Such a birth is certainly
very rare. Nimi Mahārāja is given as an example of such
a yogī (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 9.13.1-10).




Śloka 43

                           369
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




tatra taṁ buddhi-saṁyogaṁ

labhate paurva-daihikam

yatate ca tato bhūyaḥ

saṁsiddhau kuru-nandana

kuru-nandana—O descendant of Kuru Mahārāja; tatra—then;
labhate —he obtains; buddhi-saṁyogam —connection through
his intelligence; tam —with that (intelligence); paurva-
daihikam —of his previous life; ca —and; tataḥ—then;
yatate —he endeavours; bhūyaḥ—further; saṁsiddhau —for
complete perfection.

O Kuru-nandana, that unsuccessful yogī regains the
divine consciousness of his previous birth that is
related to Paramātmā, and he again endeavours to attain
perfection in yoga.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In both types of birth, the fallen yogīs attain the
divine intellect of their previous birth. That intellect
is fixed in Paramātmā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In both of these births, due to saṁskāras resulting from
yoga practice in their previous birth, the fallen yogī
attains intelligence which is fixed in his own dharmika
principles and also knowledge related to Paramātmā.
After attaining purity of heart in a natural way, he
begins to endeavour seriously for perfection in yoga ,
like one who has awoken from sleep. Now he cannot be
checked by any obstacle. That is why such a yogī neither
attains a degraded destination nor becomes lost.




Śloka 44



pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva

hriyate hy avaśo ‘pi saḥ

                            370
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


jijñāsur api yogasya

śabda-brahmātivartate

abhyāsena—due to the practice; pūrva—of his previous
life; saḥ—he; eva hi hriyate —is certainly attracted;
api —even; avaśaḥ—forcibly; tena —by that; api —even
though just; jijñ āsuḥ—an inquisitive person; yogasya —
concerning the practice of transcendental realisation;
ativartate —he transcends; śabda-bra hma —the fruitive
portions of Vedic study.

By virtue of his previous practice, he is automatically
attracted to the path of mokṣa, and after enquiring a
little about yoga, he transcends the path of sakāma-
karma described in the Vedas.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word hriyate means attracted. Being attracted to
yoga he becomes inquisitive. He then surpasses the path
of sakāma-karma that is described in the Vedas , while
remaining situated on the path of yoga .




Śloka 45



prayatnād yatmānas tu

yogī saṁśuddha-kilbiṣaḥ

aneka-janma-saṁsiddhas

tato yāti parāṁ gatim

tu—indeed; yogī—that transcendentalist; yatmānaḥ—
endeavouring; prayatnāt —with great effort; (being)
saṁśuddha-kilbiṣaḥ—freed from all sins; aneka-janma —
after many births; saṁsiddhaḥ—becomes completely
perfect; tataḥ—then; yāti —enters; parām gatim —the
supreme destination.

However, the yogī who practises sincerely is freed from
all sins after many births, and ultimately becomes
perfect. Thus he attains the supreme destination.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                           371
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



According to Gītā (6.37), one falls from the path of
yoga because he is negligent in his endeavour. For such
a fallen yogī, the path of yoga is attained in his next
life, but perfection is not. He will attain perfection
in as many lives as it takes him to become mature. He
who never weakens in his endeavour does not fall from
the path. Rather, after many births, he becomes mature
in yoga and attains perfection. Kardama Muni has also
said: draṣṭuṁ yatante yatayaḥ

śūnyāgāreṣu yat-padam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.24.28

Even the renounced sages who endeavour in a solitary
place to have darśana of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
cannot attain perfection in one lifetime.

It is for this reason that Bhagavān speaks this śloka,
prayatnād yatamānas tu , which means endeavouring harder
than before. The word tu shows a difference between
these persons and those previously mentioned who fall
from yoga . Saṁśuddha-kilbiṣaḥ indicates that even a
person whose impurities have been completely removed
cannot attain saṁsiddhi or mokṣa in one life.




Śloka 46




tapasvibhyo ‘dhiko yogī

jñānibhyo ‘pi mato ‘dhikaḥ

karmibhyaś cādhiko yogī

tasmād yogī bhavārjuna

yogī—the Paramātma-yogī; mataḥ—is considered; adhikaḥ—
greater; tapasvibhyaḥ—than the ascetics; adhikaḥ—
greater; api —even; jñ ānibhyaḥ—than the brahmavādīs ;
ca —and; yogī—the yogī; (is) adhikaḥ—greater; karmibhyaḥ
—than the fruitive workers; tasmāt —therefore; arjuna —O
Arjuna; bhava —be; yogī—a yogī.

The yogī is considered superior to the tapasvī
(ascetic), the jñānī and the karmī. Therefore, O Arjuna,
be a yogī.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                             372
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

“Which is superior among karma, jñāna , and yoga ?” In
answer to this, Śrī Bhagavān says that a jñ ānī (one who
worships brahma ) is superior to an ascetic (tapasvī),
or one who is devoted to performing severe austerities
such as cāndrāyaṇa-vrata Ç and superior to such a jñ ānī
is a yogī (worshipper of Paramātmā). “This is My
opinion.” If a yogī is superior to a jñ ānī, then what
can be said about his superiority over a karmī (fruitive
worker)?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Generally, it is thought that a karmī, jñānī, tapasvī,
yogī and bhakta are all equal. In this present śloka ,
Śrī Bhagavān is giving His definite opinion that they
are not equal; rather, there is a gradation. A niṣkāma-
karma-yogī is superior to a sakāma-karmī (tapasvī) and a
jñ ānī is superior again . An aṣṭāṅga-yogī is superior
to a jñ ānī, and a bhakti -yogī is superior to all, as
is described in the next śloka .




Śloka 47




yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

api—however; sarveṣām—amongst all; yoginām —of the yogīs
; śraddhāvān —one endowed with faith; mad-gatena —by
attaching himself to Me; antar-ātmanā—through his mind;
yaḥ—who; bhajate —worships; mām —Me; (it is) me — My;
mataḥ—opinion; (that) saḥ—he; (is) yuktatamaḥ—most
intimately connected in yoga .

He who constantly performs My bhajana with full faith,
always thinking exclusively of Me within himself is, in
My opinion, the topmost of all yogīs.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Is there no one, then, who is superior to the yogī?” In

                            373
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

response to this question Śrī Bhagavān says, “Don’t say
that,” and He speaks this śloka beginning with yoginām .
The word yoginām is in the sixth case, but actually it
is to be taken in the fifth case. In the previous śloka
the words tapasvibhyo jñ ānibhyo ‘dhikaḥ are in the
fifth case. Similarly, it should also be understood here
as yogibhyaḥ, the bhakta is even superior to the yogī.
“My bhakta is not superior to only one type of yogī, but
to all types, whether they are yogārūḍha , situated in
samprajñ āta-samādhi , or situated in asamprajñ āta-
samādhi .”

The import of the word yoga is that it is the means to
karma , jñ āna , tapa , bhakti and so on. “Among such
yogīs , those who worship Me with bhakti are My devotees
and are the best of sādhakas .”

Karmīs, tapasvīs, and jñ ānīs are also accepted as yogīs
, but an aṣṭāṅga-yogī is superior to them. “A bhakti-
yogī however, who is engaged in hearing and chanting
about Me, is the topmost.” As it is said in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (6.14.5): muktānām api siddhānāṁ

nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

sudurlabhaḥ praśāntātmā

koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

O mahā-muni, among millions of muktas and siddhas, a
peaceful person who is devoted to Śrī Nārāyaṇa is most
rare.

In the next eight chapters, bhakti-yoga will be
delineated. This ślok a , which is the sūtra of those
chapters, is like an ornament adorning the necks of the
bhaktas . In the First Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā, the
crest jewel of all śāstra , an outline of the text has
been given. In the Second, Third and Fourth Chapters,
niṣkāma-k arma is explained. In the Fifth Chapter jñ āna
has been described and the Sixth Chapter describes yoga
. These six chapters, however, primarily describe karma
(action).

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Sixth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




At the end of this chapter Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
categorically stated that a bhakti-yogī is superior to
all other yogīs . Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura gives a
special explanation of this śloka as follows: “Amongst
all types of yogīs , the practitioner of bhakti-yoga is
superior. One who performs My bhajana with faith is the
best of yogīs . Amongst righteous, regulated human

                           374
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

beings, the niṣkāma-karmī, the jñ ānī, the aṣṭāṅga-yogī
and the practitioner of bhakti-yoga are all yogīs ,
whereas the sakāma-karmī is not. In fact, yoga is one,
not two. Yoga is a progressive path on which there are
various steps. Taking shelter of this path, the jīva
situates himself on the path of brahma realisation.
Niṣkāma-karma-yoga is the first step. When jñ āna and
vairāgya are added, it becomes jñ āna-yoga , which is
the second step. When dhyāna , in the form of meditation
on Īśva ra, is added to jñ āna-yoga , it is called
aṣṭāṅga-yoga , the third step. And when prīti ,
affection for Bhagavān, is added to this third step of
aṣṭāṅga-yoga , then that is bhakti-yoga , the fourth
step. All these steps combined together constitute the
one staircase called yoga . In order to explain this
yoga clearly, all other partial types of yoga have been
delineated. One who desires eternal auspiciousness takes
exclusive shelter of yoga . As he gradually progresses
on this ladder, he first becomes steady on the step he
is on, then he rises to the next step. But one who
clings to a particular step, having only established
himself in that type of yoga , is known by the name of
that particular yoga . Therefore, one is known as a
karma -yog ī, one as a jñ āna -yogī, one as an aṣṭāṅga-
yogī and another as a bhakti-yogī.

“Therefore, O Pārtha, one whose supreme objective is
only to perform bhakti unto Me is the topmost among all
the yogīs . You should become that type of yogī, namely,
you should become a bhakti-yogī.”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Sixth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Seven




Vijñāna-Yoga



Yoga Through Realisation of Transcendental Knowledge




Śloka 1




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha

yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ

                           375
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


asaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ

yathā jñāsyasi tac chṛṇu


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord said; pārtha—O
son of Pṛthā; śṛṇu —just hear; yathā—how; jñ āsyasi —you
shall know; mām —Me; samagram —in truth; yuñjan —by
practising; tat —that; yogam —bhakti-yoga ; āsakta-manāḥ
—with mind attached; mayi —to Me; mad-āśrayaḥ—and taking
shelter of Me; asaṁśayam —free from doubt.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Pārtha, now hear how you will know
Me in full by practising bhakti-yoga with your mind
attached to Me, taking full shelter of Me alone, being
free from all doubt.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




When will I attain the shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu who is an abode of eternal bliss and
an ocean of mercy? Having given up the processes of
bhukti and mukti and taking shelter of the path of
bhakti , when will I become qualified to taste the
nectar of prema ?

This Seventh Chapter describes the vibhūtis (opulences)
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the supreme object of worship.
There is also a description of the four types of
worshippers who perform bhajana to Him and the four
types of persons who do not.

The first six chapters describe the processes of jñāna
and yoga , which both result in mokṣa and initially
depend on niṣkāma-ka rma to purify the heart. Now, in
the next set of six chapters, there is a description of
various types of bhakti-yoga beginning with bhakti mixed
with karma , jñ āna and so on. These practices (śravaṇa
etc.) result in destinations (types of liberations) such
as sālokya , and are attained by the sādhakas of niṣkāma
and sakāma-upāsana. Most prominently, there is a
description of the process of bhakti-yoga which is
independent of karma , jñ āna , etc., and grants that
mukti in which one becomes a loving associate of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. As it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.32-33):
yat karmabhir yat tapasā

jñāna vairāgyataś ca yat

Simply by practising bhakti-yoga, My bhakta easily
attains in full whatever auspicious results can be
achieved by performing karma (prescribed duties),
tapasya and other auspicious activities, and by
cultivating jñ āna, vairāgya, yoga and dāna (charitable
acts).

Even if one desires the destinations of Svarga, mokṣa,

                           376
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

or Vaikuṇṭha, one can attain them easily by bhakti-yoga
. It is clear from these statements that bhakti is
supremely independent. Bhakti is quite capable of
granting the fruits of those processes even if one does
not perform them. This bhakti-yoga is easy to perform,
but difficult to attain.

It is said in Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (3.8): tam eva
viditvā atimṛtyum eti. “One can transcend death when one
knows Him (Parameśvara).” This statement may cause one
to doubt whether one can attain mokṣa merely by bhakti ,
without having jñ āna. In response Śrī Bhagavān says,
“Do not raise such an o bjection.” Tam eva , one can
only transcend death by knowing tat-padārtha
(Paramātmā), through direct realisation of Him. One
cannot attain freedom from death merely by knowing tvaṁ-
padārtha (the jīvātmā), prakṛti (material nature) or any
other entity. This is the import of the above statement
in Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad .

The only way to taste sugar candy is with the tongue,
not with the eyes or ears. Similarly, bhakti is the only
way to realise parabrahma . Brahma is guṇātīta (beyond
the guṇas ), so it is only possible to attain brahma
with the help of bhakti as bhakti is also guṇātīta .
Ātma-j ñ āna , knowledge of the self which is free from
identification with the body and so forth, is in sattva-
guṇa , so it cannot enable one to attain brahma .

Bhaktyāham ekayā grahyaḥ. “I am attained only by
aikāntika-bhakti .” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.14.21).
Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti (Gītā 18.55). “Only by bhakti can
the jīva specifically know the tattva of My svarūpa and
svabhāva .” Śrī Bhagavān says, “I will establish My
saviśeṣa (specific nature) by these two statements.”

Jñāna and yoga are well known as the means to attain
mukti , but this is only possible by the influence of
guṇībhūta-bhakti (bhakti predominated by karma , jñ āna
, tapasya and so on). Jñ āna and yoga are incapable of
giving such a result when they are bereft of bhakti .
There are many statements that establish that jñ āna and
yoga are ineffective without bhakti . Moreover, in the
above statement from Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad , the word
eva (only) has been used before the word vidi tvā
(knowing). This means that it is not a fact that mokṣa
is attained only by jñ āna . It implies that it is
possible to attain mokṣa by knowing Paramātmā, and
sometimes even without knowing Him. Thus mokṣa is
attained by nirguṇa -paramātma -jñ āna (knowledge of
Paramātmā which is beyond the modes) generated from
bhakti , and sometimes mokṣa can be attained solely by
bhakti , even without knowledge of Paramātmā. This
meaning is also conveyed by the Upaniṣad statement
previously quoted.

The tongue cannot taste the sweetness of miśri (rock
sugar) if it is affected by the disease of jaundice, but
by continuously consuming miśri , the defect of the
tongue will be cured, and the taste of miśri will be
relished again. There is no doubt about it. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.47.59) Śrī Uddhava says, “Nectar always
grants immortality, even if one tastes it without
knowing its characteristics.” Similarly, one may be

                           377
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ignorant of His svarūpa , but if he constantly performs
bhajana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he is granted his desired result.
It is also said of Śrī Nārāyaṇa in the Mokṣadharma , “A
person who has taken shelter of Śrī Nārāyaṇa does not
need to perform the sādhana by which one attains the
four goals of life: dharma , artha , kāma and mokṣa .
Indeed, he attains these goals, even without practising
this sādhana .” It is also said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.20.32-33): “Whatever is achieved by following these
processes or performing one’s prescribed duty and
austerities, My bhaktas attain easily by bhakti-yoga .”
Moreover, it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.16.44):
“Simply by hearing Your holy name once, even a low born
caṇḍāla is liberated from the material world.” These
statements establish that, one can only attain mokṣa by
practising bhakti . Furthermore: “Of all yogīs , the
best is he who performs bhajana with great faith within
his heart,” (Gītā 6.47). By this statement, Śrī Bhagavān
also indicates a special characteristic of His bhaktas
whose minds are fixed in Him, and who have faith in His
bhaktas . One may raise the question, “What type of
bhaktas are eligible to have jñ āna and vijñ āna of Śrī
Bhagavān?” This śloka beginning with the words mayy
āsakta , and also the next śloka , are spoken in
response to this question.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.42) states: “Just as a person
has experience of satisfaction, nourishment and the
removal of hunger all at the same time when he eats
food, similarly one who performs bhajana of Śrī Bhagavān
simultaneously achieves devotion, realisation of
Bhagavān and detachment.”

“It is noteworthy that one who eats only one mouthful of
food experiences neither satisfaction nor nourishment.
Satisfaction and nourishment are experienced only by one
who eats a full meal. In the same way, although one
starts to realise Me from the initial stages of
performing My bhajana , only one who has become situated
on the platform of āsakti , and whose mind is attached
to My Śyāmasundara svarūpa , adorned with a yellow
dress, realises Me in reality. You can know Me only in
this way.

“Please hear how one can have direct realisation of Me
and what type of yoga grants this. One can become My
ananya-bhakta even without the help of jñ āna , karma ,
etc. by gradually becoming united with Me, and
eventually taking complete shelter of Me.”

In this śloka, the word asaṁśayam indicates a doubt
about the possibility of attaining nirviśeṣabrahma , and
samagram indicates that the realisation of that svarūpa
is incomplete. This will be stated later on in Gītā
(12.5): kleśo ‘dhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām

avyaktā hi gatir duhkhaṁ

dehavadbhir avāpyate

Those who fix their mind on nirguṇabrahma have to
undergo great miseries. It may be difficult for an
embodied jīva to attain that unmanifest nature.


                           378
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

In other words, there is a doubt as to whether one can
attain the nirviśeṣabrahma-svarūpa. However, in the
present śloka Śrī Bhagavān is declaring , “This doubt
does not exist in relation to My bhakti-yoga , because
My devotees always realise Me, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, parabrahma -
tattva. Moreover, brahma , the worshipable object of the
jñ ānīs , is only My glorious effulgence. As I said to
King Satyavrata in My Matsya avatāra , ‘By following My
instructions you will also come to know My glories,
which are manifested in your heart by śabda-brahma , the
sound representation of parabrahma ,’ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
8.24.38). And in Gītā (14.27) I have said: ‘I am the
shelter or basis of nirviśeṣabrahma .’ Therefore,
knowledge of My nirviśeṣa-svarūpa is not complete but
only partial compared to knowledge of My Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Śyāmasundara pītāmbara-dhāri-svarūpa. Knowledge of
nirviśeṣabrahma is asamagram (incomplete).”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Pārtha, in the first six chapters, I explained jñāna and
aṣṭāṅga-yoga. These are paths to attain mokṣa , and they
require the help of niṣkāma -karma -yoga to purify the
heart. In the second set of six chapters, I am
explaining bhakti-yoga. Please listen. With your mind
steadfast in attachment to Me, having taken complete
shelter of Me by practising bhakti-yoga , you will
attain thorough knowledge of Me. There is no doubt about
this.

“The knowledge of nirviśeṣabrahma is incomplete because
it denies knowledge of the qualities of the personal
feature of the Absolute (saviśeṣa-j ñ āna ). One attains
the featureless nirviśeṣa conception by negating
material variety. My nirviśeṣabrahma nature manifests
only as the object of this nirviśeṣa conception, which
is not nirguṇa , because it merely transcends physical
and mental knowledge, and is therefore limited to
knowledge in sattva -guṇa . Bhakti is a function of
nirguṇa-vṛtti (transcendental nature). My form is also
nirguṇa , and can only be seen by the transcendental
(nirguṇa ) eyes of a jīva which have been uncovered by
the process of nirguṇa-bhakti.”




Śloka 2



jñānaṁ te ‘haṁ sa-vijñānam

idaṁ vakṣyāmy aśeṣataḥ

yaj jñātvā neha bhūyo ‘nyaj

                             379
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


jñātavyam avaśiṣyate

aham—I; vakṣyāmi—shall explain; te —to you; aśeṣataḥ—in
full; idam —this; jñ ānam —knowledge; sa-vijñ ānam —
together with the process of realising that knowledge;
yat —which; jñ ātvā—having understood; na anyat —nothing
else; bhūyaḥ—further; avaśiṣyate —will remain; jñ
ātavyam —to be known; iha —in this world.

I shall reveal to you in full this jñāna, enriched with
vijñāna (realisation). When you know this, there will
remain nothing further to be known in this world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Until one is situated on the platform of āsakti
(attachment) in the process of My bhakti , knowledge of
Me is aiśvarya-mayī (in awe and reverence), and is
called jñ āna. Later, when one attains āsakti , My
mādhurya is realised through vijñ āna . Please hear
about both of these, after knowing which, there will be
nothing else to be known. Knowledge of My
nirviśeṣabrahma as well as vijñ āna are included within
this.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




When one performs nirguṇa-bhakti, he realises the
complete svarūpa of Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who i s
eternal, full of knowledge and bliss, and who is the
basis of transcendental aiśvarya and mādhurya . Śrī
Vyāsa attained complete vision and realisation of the
svarūpa of Bhagavān in a state of samādhi , only through
bhakti-yoga . Apaśyat purusaṁ pūrṇam (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
1.7.4). “And thus he saw the complete Personality of
Godhead.” It should be understood that both brahma -jñ
āna and paramātma -jñ āna are included within this
complete vision and realisation (vijñ āna ) of Kṛṣṇa’s
svarūpa . Therefore, when one has attained knowledge of
Śrī Bhagavān, nothing else remains to be known.

The synonym for nirguṇa-bhakti is prema-bhakti . To
attain prema-bhakti , one must pass through nine stages:
(1) śraddhā, (2) sādhu-saṅga , (3) bhajana -kriyā, (4)
anartha-nivṛtti , (5) niṣṭh ā, (6) ruci , (7) āsakti
(these seven stages comprise sādhana -bhakti ), (8)
bhāva and (9) the appearance of prema . Before the
sādhaka-bhakta achieves the stage of āsakti , knowledge
of Bhagavān is aiśvarya-mayī. But when āsakti becomes
mature, he realises mād hurya within his heart. This is
called vijñ āna.

                           380
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 3



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

sahasreṣu—among thousands; manuṣyāṇām—of men; kaścit —
someone; yatati —endeavours; siddhaye —for perfection;
api —yet even; yatatām —of those who endeavour;
siddhānām —and attain perfection; kaścit —some (rare)
person; vetti —knows; mām—Me; tattvataḥ—in truth.

Among thousands of men, one may endeavour for
perfection. And among those who attain perfection, it is
rare for even one to know My svarūpa in truth.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Even jñānīs and yogīs who are endowed with the symptoms
described in the previous six chapters rarely attain
knowledge of Me complete with vijñ āna .” Saying this,
Śrī Bhagavān speaks about vijñ āna (realisation of Him)
in this śloka beginning with the word manuṣyānām .
“Among countless jīvas , one becomes a human being, and
among thousands of humans one of them tries to attain
the ultimate goal of life. Among thousands who make such
an endeavo ur, it is rare for one to know in truth and
to have direct realisation of My Śyāmasundara
Muralīdhārī form.”

The conclusion is that the bliss one experiences by
realisation of saviśeṣabrahma is thousands of times
greater than the bliss experienced by realising
nirviśeṣabrahma .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka, Bhagavān is showing that bhagavad-jñ āna
is extremely rare. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.14.5), this
has been described: muktānām api siddhānāṁ


                             381
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

sudurlabhaḥ praśāntātmā

koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

O Mahā-muni, among millions of such liberated and
perfected persons, a bhakta of Nārāyaṇa, who is very
peaceful, is extremely rare. Even more rare than such
aiśvarya-maya-bhaktas of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, who are attracted
to His majesty, are the mādhurya-parāyaṇabhaktas of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. The bliss derived from tasting the sweetness of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is millions of times greater than the
brahmānanda, the bliss of brahma.

Also in the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.25:


brahmānando bhaved eṣa cet parārdha-guṇī-kṛtaḥ

naiti bhakti-sukhāmbhodheḥ paramāṇu-tulām api


Even when the bliss of brahma is multiplied by the
number of days in Brahmā’s lifespan, it still cannot be
compared to a single particle of the pleasure of tasting
the mellows of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness.

This is also stated in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā
7.84-85).




Śloka 4




bhūmir āpo ‘nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

iyam—this; prakṛtiḥ—energy; me —of Mine; (has) aṣṭadhā—
eightfold; bhinnā—divisions; iti —as follows; bhūmiḥ—
earth; āpaḥ—water; analaḥ—fire; vāyuḥ—air; kham —ether;
manaḥ—mind; buddhiḥ—intelligence; ca —and; eva —
certainly; ahaṅkāraḥ—false ego.

My external material energy has eight divisions: earth,
water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false
ego.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                           382
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



In relation to bhakti, the word jñ āna indicates only
the aiśvarya-j ñ āna of Śrī Bhagavān. It does not
indicate ātma -jñ āna. Hence, in this śloka beginning
with the word bhūmi and in the next śloka , He is
delineating His aiśvarya -jñ āna by explaining His
spiritual (parā) and material (aparā) energies. The word
bhūmi-ādi (earth, etc.) indicates the five material
elements (pañca-mah ā-bhūta ) along with their
respective subtle elements such as fragrance. The word
ahaṅkāra (false ego) refers to their effects, the
senses, and their cause, the mahat -tattva . Since the
intelligence and the mind are prominent among these
elements, they have been mentioned separately.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Knowledge of My svarūpa and My aiśvarya is called
bhagavad -jñ āna .” It is described in this way: ‘I, the
Supreme Absolute Reality Śrī Kṛṣṇa, am always situated
in My svarūpa , and possess all energies (śaktis ) in
full. Brahma is only a featureless (nirviśeṣa )
expression of My śakti , and does not have a form
(svarūpa ). The existence of brahma is based on the
concept of negating the created world. Paramātmā is also
a partial manifestation of My energy in this world. In
fact, He is a reality specifically related to the
temporary material world, and does not have an eternal
svarūpa . Bhagavat-svarūpa is My only eternal feature
and has two types of śakti . One śakti is called
bahiraṅga or māyā-śakti , the external energy. Since it
is the cause (mother) of the inert world, it is also
called apara -śakti . One should understand the number
of elements in this apara -śakti related to inert
matter. The five gross elements: earth, water, fire, air
and ether are called mahā-bhūta (gross elements). Smell,
taste, form, touch and sound are their five respective
qualities. Hence, there are ten elements. You should
understand that the senses are their active elements
initiated by the element of the false ego, or ahaṅkāra ,
and that mahat -tattva is their cause. The mind and
intelligence have been mentioned as separate elements,
because of their prominent and distinctive functions
among the group of elements, but in fact they are one.
This entire group is all part of My external energy.”




Śloka 5




apareyam itas tv anyāṁ

                           383
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho

yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed (Arjuna); viddhi—you must
understand; iyam —this (material energy); (to be) aparā—
inferior; tu —but; itaḥ—beyond it; (there is) anyām—
another; parām —superior; prakṛtim —energy; me —of Mine;
(consisting of) jīva-bhūtām —the living beings; yayā—by
which; idam —this; jagat —universe; dhāryate —is
accepted.

O Mahā-bāho, you should know that My external energy,
which consists of eight divisions, is inferior. There is
another potency of Mine known as the jīva-svarūpa, which
is superior and which accepts this material world for
the purpose of enjoying the fruits of karma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Because its nature is inert, the earlier mentioned
bahiraṅga-śakti is external (a parā). The taṭastha-śakti
, in the form of the jīvas , is different from this
bahiraṅga-śakti and superior (parā) to it because of the
presence of consciousness. The reason that it is
superior is that by its conscious nature it sustains the
universe, that is, it accepts the material world for the
purpose of its own enjoyment.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Besides this material nature (apara-prakṛti), there is
My marginal nature (taṭastha-prakṛti ), which is also
called jīva or para -prakṛti . That prakṛti is conscious
(caitanya-svarūpā), and it is in the form of the jīvas
(jīva -svarūpā). All the jīvas emanating from that
energy have made this inert material world conscious.
The jīva has the capacity to understand and move in
either the cid -jagat (transcendental world), which has
emanated from My internal energy (antaraṅga-śakti ), or
in the jaḍa-jagat (inert world) which has emanated from
My external energy (bahiraṅga-śakti ). Jīva -śakti is
also called taṭastha -śakti for this reason.”

Those baddha-jīvas who are averse to Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifest
in this world from this taṭastha-śakti . It is a great
misconception to think that the baddha-jīvas have given
up their service to Kṛṣṇa, and have come from Vaikuṇṭha

                           384
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

or even higher, from Goloka. This idea is opposed to
siddhānta . Once a jīva has attained service to Kṛṣṇa in
His abode, it is impossible for him to fall from that
position. As it is said in Gītā (15.6): yad gatvā na
nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama

Those who attain My supreme dhāma never return to this
material world.

Citraketu Mahārāja and Jaya and Vijaya never fell down.
They appeared in this world voluntarily, and enacted the
roles of baddha-jīvas for the pleasure of Bhagavān. The
jīvas who are absorbed i n service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the
spiritual world manifest either from Śrī Baladeva
Prabhu, or from His expansion, Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa, who is
non-different from Him. They are eternally liberated
jīvas . It is never possible that they fall.




Śloka 6



etad-yonīni bhūtāni

sarvāṇīty upadhāraya

ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ

prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā

upadhāraya—know; etad—that; iti —that; sarvāṇi —all;
bhūtāni —living beings; (have come from these) yonīni —
energies; aham —I; (am) prabhavaḥ—the origin; tathā—and;
pralayaḥ—annihilation; kṛtsnasya —of the whole; jagataḥ—
universe.

Know that all created beings have been born from these
two prakṛtis. I alone am the sole cause of the creation
and destruction of the entire universe.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, Śrī Bhagavān establishes Himself as the cause of
the universe, for He is the origin of both these śaktis
. Māyā-śakti as kṣetra (the field) and jīva -śakti as
kṣetrajña (the knower of the field) are the two causes
of all moving and non-moving created beings. “Thus, as
the controller of these śaktis , I am the creator of the
entire universe. At the time of annihilation, these
śaktis dissolve and rest in Me, the supreme energetic
(śaktimān ). I am therefore their only destroyer.”




                           385
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “Cit
and acit (conscious and inert), that is, the jīvas and
the inert creation, have emanated from these two
prakṛtis. Both māyā and jīva-śakti are My potencies as
they originate from Me. I, Bhagavān, am therefore the
root cause of bo th the origin and dissolution of the
universe.”




Śloka 7



mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat

kiñcid asti dhanañjaya

mayi sarvam idaṁ protaṁ

sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva

dhanañjaya—O winner of wealth, Arjuna; na asti—there
does not exist; kiñcit —anything; anyat —else; parataram
—greater; mattaḥ—than Me; sarvam —all; idam —this
universe; protam —is dependent; mayi —on Me; iva —as;
maṇi-gaṇāḥ—jewels; (strung) sūtre —on a thread.

O Dhanañjaya, there is nothing superior to Me. This
whole universe is dependent on Me, like jewels strung on
a thread.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān says, “In this way, I am the cause of
everything. Just as cause and effect are non-different
from each other, so are the energy and the energetic.”

It is said in śruti: ekam evādvitīyaṁ brahma. “Before
the creation of this universe, there was only one
Absolute Reality without a second.” (Chāndogya Upaniṣad
6.2.1) Moreover: neha nānāsti kiñcana. “Nothing exists
except for advaya brahma , the one nondual Absolute
Truth in various forms.” (Bṛhad-āranyaka Upaniṣad
4.4.19) Also in śruti it is stated: “Since My śaktis are
the cause of all creations, I am the cause of
everything.”

In this way, after first explaining His nature of being
everything, Bhagavān is now explaining His quality of

                           386
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

being all-pervading by the words mayi and so on. Sarvam
idam means, “Both the cit (conscious) and jaḍa (inert)
universes are non-different from Me because they are My
creations (effects). In other words, they are My svarūpa
, and just as jewels are strung on a thread, they are
strung o n Me, Antaryāmī.” Śrī Madhusūdana Sarasvatīpāda
has written: sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva. “This example merely
proves that the universe is resting in Bhagavān, but it
does not prove that He is the cause of the universe.
However, ‘gold is the cause of a golden earr ing’ is an
appropriate example to establish Him as the cause of the
universe.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the previous śloka, Śrī Bhagavān established Himself
as the independent cause of creation and dissolution.
Now, in the present śloka , He is e stablishing that as
all-pervading Antaryāmī, He alone is the cause of
maintenance. “I, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, am the parama-tattva and the
cause of all causes.” Lord Brahmā also establishes this
principle in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.1): īśvaraḥ paramaḥ
kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam


The Supreme Lord, the embodiment of truth, consciousness
and joy, is Govinda Kṛṣṇa. He is without beginning, the
origin of all that be, and the Cause of all causes.

To make this subject easier to understand, we will cite
concepts from Govinda-bhāṣya written by Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa: “Parabrahma-svarūpa , Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is the
Supreme Absolute Reality (para-tattva-vastu ). There is
nothing superior to Him because there is no other
independent entity. Yasmāt paraṁ nāparam asti ki ñcit
(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.9). These statements from the
śrutis have not accepted the existence of anything
higher than the all-worshipable brahma . In the Vedas
(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.8-9) it is said: “I have known
this effulgent brahma which is like the sun and beyond
all darkness (ignorance). One attains immortality and
the goal of human life (puruṣārtha) by knowing Him. The
only means to attain immortality is by knowledge of this
mahā-puruṣa . There is nothing superior to Him.”

“After accepting the superiority of parabrahma
established in these mantras , it is further said:
‘Those who know the pure or constitutional nature of
brahma attain immortality in due course of time;
otherwise there is no cessation to their miseries.’ If
something is accepted as superior to brahma , then Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s statement: mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat ki ñcid asti
dhanañjaya , becomes false” Govinda-bhāṣya (Brahmasūtra
3.2.37).

Śvetāsvatara Upaniṣad (6.8) repeats the same: na tat-

                           387
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate. “There is nothing equal
to or greater than saviś eṣabrahma -tattva .”




Śloka 8



raso ‘ham apsu kaunteya

prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ

praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu

śabdaḥ khe pauruṣaṁ nṛṣu

kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; aham—I; asmi —am; rasaḥ—the
taste; apsu —in water; prabhā—the light; śaśi-sūryayoḥ—
of the moon and sun; praṇavaḥ—the syllable oṁ; sarva-
vedeṣu —in all Vedic mantras ; śabdaḥ—the sound; khe —in
ether; (and the) pauruṣam —ability; nṛṣu —in man.

O Kaunteya, I am the taste in water, the radiance of the
moon and sun, and the syllable oṁ in all Vedic mantras.
I am the sound in ether and the ability in man.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“As Antaryāmī, I enter into and exist in this universe
which was created by Me. Similarly, I alone exist as the
essence within all humans and all other living entities.
Somewhere I am the cause and somewhere I am the effect.”
Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning with the
words raso ‘ham and the next three ślokas in order to
establish this truth. Apsu (water) means, “The rasa
(taste) in water, is its cause, which is also My
opulence (vibhūti ) . Similarly, My effulgence is the
cause of the sun and the moon, and oṁkāra is the cause
of the Vedas. They are also My vibhūti. I am also the
cause of the sky, sound, and the very essence of human
beings, which is the source of their vital energy
(pauruṣa ).”




Śloka 9



puṇyo gandhaḥ pṛthivyāṁ ca

tejaś cāsmi vibhāvasau


                             388
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

jīvanaṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

tapaś cāsmi tapasviṣu

asmi—I am; puṇyaḥ—the pure; gandhaḥ—fragrances;
pṛthivyām —within the earth; ca —and; tejaḥ—the heat;
vibhāvasau —within fire; ca —and; jīvan am —life; sarva-
bhūteṣu —in all beings; ca —and; asmi —I am; tapaḥ—
austerity; tapasviṣu —in ascetics.

I am the pure fragrance of the earth, the heat in fire,
the life in all beings and the austerity of the
ascetics.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




According to the Amara-koṣa dictionary, the word puṇya
means an original and attractive fragrance. The use of
the word ca indicates the relationship of the word puṇya
with rasa (taste), etc. The word teja implies the
capacity to digest and cook all ingredients. It also
means to illuminate and to protect from cold and so on.
This capacity is the essence. Jīvana means essence in
the form of life, and tapa means to tolerate dualities.




Śloka 10




bījaṁ māṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

viddhi pārtha sanātanam

buddhir buddhimatām asmi

tejas tejasvinām aham

pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; viddhi—know; mām —Me; (as)
sanātanam —the eternal; bījam —seed; sarva-bhūtānām —for
all living beings; aham —I; asmi —am; buddhiḥ—the
intelligence; buddhimatām —of the intelligent; (and the)
tejaḥ—prowess; tejasvinām —of the powerful.

O Pārtha, know Me to be the eternal cause of all beings.
I am the intelligence of the intelligent, and the
prowess of the powerful.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                           389
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



The word bīja (seed) means the untransformed cause which
is called pradhāna . Sanātana means eternal. “The
essence of an intelligent person is his intelligence,
and that is Me.”




Śloka 11




balaṁ balavatāṁ cāhaṁ

kāma-rāga-vivarjitam

dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu

kāmo ‘smi bharatarṣabha

bharata-ṛṣabha—O best of Bharata’s line; aham asmi—I am;
balam —the strength; balavatām —of the strong;
vivarjitam —devoid; kāma-rāga —of lust and attachment;
ca —and; kāma —passion; bhūteṣu —in all living beings;
dharma-aviruddhaḥ—not incompatible with the codes of
dharma .

O best of the Bharata dynasty, I am the strength of the
strong, free from attachment and desire. In all beings I
am sexual union in accordance with dharma, for the
purpose of procreation alone.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word kāma generally refers to the desire for one’s
maintenance, and rāga refers to anger. In this context,
however, these meanings do not apply. Dharmāviruddhaḥ
means that which is not opposed to dharma , that is,
passion which is used only to produce children from
one’s own wife.




Śloka 12




ye caiva sāttvikā bhāvā

rājasās tāmasāś ca ye


                           390
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

matta eveti tān viddhi

na tv ahaṁ teṣu te mayi

ca—and; viddhi—you should know; eva —certainly; ye ye —
whichever; bhāvāḥ—states of existence (there are);
sāttvikāḥ—in goodness; rājasāḥ—passion; ca —and; tāmasāḥ
—ignorance; eva —certainly; tān —them; mattaḥ—to come
from Me; iti —thus; aham —I (am); na—not; teṣu —in them;
tu —but; te mayi —they are in Me.

Know that all states of existence: sāttvika, rājasika
and tāmasika, are manifested by the modes of My material
nature. I am not subject to these modes, for they are
all under the control of My energy.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“In this way, I have explained only some of the
vibhūtis, such as those which are the cause and the
essence of objects. But what is the purpose of going
into details? Everything is under My control and is My
vibhūti .” To explain this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with the words ye caiva. “Control of the
mind and senses, as well as the devas themselves are
sāttvika-bhāvas (states of existence). Happiness, pride
and other such feelings, as well as the asuras
themselves are rājasika-bhāvas. And lamentation,
delusion and other such attitudes, as well as rākṣasas
(those who are lower than asuras ), are tāmasika-bhāvas
(natures). They all come from Me, but it should be
understood that they are the effects of the guṇas of My
material nature, so I am not personally present in them.
Unlike the jīvas , I am not under their control; rather,
they exist under My control.”




Śloka 13



tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair

ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat

mohitaṁ nābhijānāti

mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam

mohitam—deluded; ebhiḥ—by these; tribhiḥ—three; bhāvaiḥ—
states; guṇa -mayaiḥ—of the qualities of material
nature; idam —this; sarvam —entire; jagat —world; na
abhijānāti —does not know; mām —Me; (who am) param —
beyond; ebhyaḥ—these modes; avyayam —and imperishable.


                           391
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Deluded by these three states of existence (sattva-guṇa,
rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa) the whole world does not know
Me, who am beyond the modes and imperishable.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna may ask, “Why do people not know You,
Parameśvara?” In response, Kṛṣṇa speaks this śloka
beginning with the word tribhiḥ. “The jīvas of this
world are bewildered because they are controlled by
their acquired nature, which is composed of the
activities of the three guṇas. This consists of control
of the mind, control of the senses, happiness,
lamentation, attachment and envy. But I am beyond the
guṇas and free from any perverted transformation, and
that is why they cannot understand Me.”




Śloka 14




daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī

mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante

māyām etāṁ taranti te

hi—indeed; eṣā—this; daivī—divine; māyā—illusory energy;
guṇamayī—consisting of the guṇas ; mama —of Mine; (is)
duratyayā—difficult to overcome; te —they; ye —who;
prapadyante —surrender; eva —only; mām —to Me; taranti —
transcend; e tām —this; māyām —illusion.

This external energy of Mine which consists of the three
guṇas, and which bewilders the jīvas, is certainly very
difficult to overcome, but those who take exclusive
shelter of Me can easily transcend this māyā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The following question may be raised: “How can one
become free from the delusion created by the three
guṇas?” In response, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka
beginning with the word daivī. “This māyā is called
daivī because it deludes the devas (the jīvas ), who are

                           392
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

divine by nature, but who are absorbed in the sporting
pleasures of sense enjoyment. This māyā is guṇa -mayī,
composed of the three guṇas . The word guṇa -mayī has
another meaning. It has the form of a strong rope with
three strands. This bahiraṅga-śakti which belongs to Me,
Parameśvara, is duratyayā, extremely difficult to cross
over. No one is able to cut this rope and become free
from the bondage of the guṇas .” Śrī Bhagavān says,
“Believe Me.” Then He touches His own chest, and goes on
to say mām , “A person can only transcend this māyā if
he exclusively surrenders unto Me in this form of
Śyāmasundara.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Parā (spiritual) and aparā (material) are Bhagavān’s two
types of śaktis . The spiritual, internal energy is
called antar aṅgā (cit -śakti ) and the material,
external energy is called bahiraṅgā (acit , aparā or
māyā-śakti ). In the Upaniṣads it is also said: māyāṁ tu
prakṛtiṁ vidyān mayinaṁ tu maheśvaram. “Māyā should be
understood as apara-śakti , and the person (puruṣa ) who
is the shelter of māyā, should be understood to be the
maheśvara , the Supreme Controller.” (Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad 4.10) This is also confirmed in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (8.5.30): na yasya kaścātititarti māyāṁ

yayā jano muhyati veda nārtham


The jīva is bewildered by māyā-śakti and therefore he is
unable to understand the nature of the self. This
insurmountable māyā of Bhagavān cannot be overcome by
anyone without His mercy.

One may question that if māyā-śakti is the cause of the
jīva ’s bondage, can one become free from this bondage
by pleasing this māyā-śakti ? What is the need to take
shelter of Śrī Hari, Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas? In the
present śloka , Bhagavān responds to this, using the
words mama māyā. He says, “This māyā is not independent,
rather, it is under My control, so it has no
independence to liberate anyone from the material
world.” This is what He means by the statement: mām eva
ye prapadyante. “Only a person who surrenders to Me can
cross over this insurmountable māyā of Mine; others
cannot.”

This is also confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.58):


samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavaṁ

mahat-padaṁ puṇya-yaśo murāreḥ

bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ

padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām

                           393
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



When a person takes shelter of the boat of the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is supremely famous and is the
shelter of great personalities such as Śiva and Brahmā,
this ocean of the material world becomes just like the
water contained in the hoof-print of a calf. His supreme
destination is then Vaikuṇṭha, which is free from all
types of miseries.




Śloka 15




na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ


duṣkṛtinaḥ—miscreants; mūḍhāḥ—fools; nara-adhamāḥ—the
lowest among mankind; (and) apahṛta-jñ ānāḥ—those whose
knowledge is stolen; māyayā—by illusion; āśritāḥ—who
take shelter; āsuram—of the demonic; bhāvam —nature; na
prapadyante—do not surrender; mām —to Me.

Those miscreants and fools who are devoid of
discrimination, who are the lowest among human beings,
whose knowledge has been completely stolen by māyā, and
who have an āsurika nature, do not surrender unto Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If the question is raised, “Why, then, do the paṇḍitas
not take shelter of You?” Śrī Bhagavān replies, “Those
who are genuine paṇḍitas do take exclusive shelter of
Me, but those who like to consider themselves to be
paṇḍitas do not.” Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka
beginning with the words na mām to explain this. The
word duṣkṛtinaḥ refers to those who are wicked, though
they may have some piety. And some may appear to be
paṇḍitas but are actually kupaṇḍitas (pseudo paṇḍitas ).
They are of four types: (1) Mūḍhāḥ—a fruitive worker (a
karmī

), who is no better than an animal. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.32.19) describes, “Just as a stool-eating hog rejects
sweet-rice and enjoys stool, those cheated by destiny,
who give up the nectar of hearing hari-kathā and engage
in hearing other useless talks, are most unfortunate.”

                           394
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Who but an animal would not like to perform sevā to Śrī
Mukunda?

(2)Narādhamāḥ—the lowest among mankind. Even after
performing bhakti for some time and attaining the
qualities of a human being, they finally give up the
process of bhakti wilfully, thinking that it is not
effective in attaining the desired fruit. Such persons
are narādhamas .

(3)Māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ—those whose knowledge has been
stolen by māyā, even after studying the śāstra . They
think that only the form of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, situated in
Vaikuṇṭha, can be served eternally and can grant eternal
bhakti ; one cannot perform bhakti et ernally to other
forms, such as Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, because They are human-
like. Śrī Bhagavān has said in the Gītā (9.11): “Fools
disrespect Me when I appear in My human form. After
apparently surrendering unto Me, they have not
surrendered in reality.”

(4)Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ—”Asuras such as Jarāsandha
shoot arrows in order to hurt My transcendental body.
Similarly, persons who carry this āsurika-bhāva use
illogical reasoning to deny My śrī-vigraha (Deity form),
which is eternally situated in Vaikuṇṭha. They do not
surrender unto Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Having taken shelter of an āsurika-bhāva, four types of
persons do not surrender unto Me: the duṣkṛta (wicked),
the mūḍha (foolish), the narādha ma (lowest of human
beings) and the māyayāpahṛta -jñ ānī (persons whose
knowledge is covered by māyā).

(1)Duṣkṛtas are those who live an extremely unrighteous
life.

(2)Mūḍhās are those atheistic persons who only follow
moral principles, without taking shelter of Me, the
presiding Deity of morality.

(3)Narādhamas are the lowest of human beings, are those
who consider Me to be only an aspect of morality, but
not the Lord of morality.

(4)Māyayāpahṛta-jñānīs are those whose knowledge remains
covered by māyā, and even when they have studied śāstras
such as Vedānta they worship the devas such as Brahmā.
They do not know My omnipotent nature, the eternal
conscious nature of the jīva , the temporary nature of
the relationship of the jīva with inert matter, or the
eternal nature of the relationship of the jīva with Me
as My servant.”



                           395
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 16




catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

janāḥ sukṛtino ‘rjuna

ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

jñānī ca bharatarṣabha

arjuna—O Arjuna; bharata-ṛṣabha—best of Bharata’s
lineage; catur-vidhāḥ—four kinds; sukṛtinaḥ—of pious;
janāḥ—persons; bhajante —worship; mām —Me; ārta —the
distressed; jijñ āsuḥ—the inquisitive; artha-arthī—the
seeker of wealth; ca —and; jñ ānī—the man in knowledge.

O best of the Bharata dynasty, there are four types of
pious men who perform My bhajana; the distressed (ārta),
the inquisitive (jijñ āsu), the seeker of wealth
(arthārthī) and the man of wisdom (jñ ānī).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Who then performs Your bhajana?” In response to this
question, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with
the words catur-vidhā. “Sukṛta refers to those who
worship Me and who follow the rules and regulations of
varṇāśrama-dharma. Ārta refers to persons afflicted with
distress such as disease and who worship Me to get
relief. Jijñ āsu means those who worship Me desiring
ātma-j ñ āna (knowledge of the self) or scholarly
knowledge of the śāstra through grammar. Arthārthī
refers to those who worship Me with a desire for
enjoyment in this world, such as possession of land,
elephants, horses, beautiful women, gold, or enjoyment
in Svarga. Jñ ānīs with pure hearts also worship Me. Of
these four, the first three are sakāma -gṛhasthas ,
householders who have fruitive desires, and the fourth
group consists of niṣkāma -sannyāsīs (renunciates who
perform selfless actions).

These four types of persons are eligible to perform
pradhānībhūta-bhakti, the process wherein bhakti
predominates over karma , jñ āna , etc. The first three
perform karma -miśra-bhakti , bhakti mixed with karma ,
and the fourth performs jñ āna -miśra-bhakti , bhakti
mixed with jñ āna . Later, in the śloka : sarva-dvārāṇi
saṁyamya (Gītā 8.12.), yoga -miśra-bhakti will be
explained. However, kevala-bhakti , which is devoid of
karma or jñ āna , is explained in the beginning of the
Seventh Chapter: mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha (Gītā 7.1).
Kevala-bhakti will also be delineated later in two

                           396
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ślokas : ananya-cetāḥ satatam (Gītā 8.14) and mahātmānas
tu māṁ pārtha (Gītā 9.13).

In the middle six chapters of Gītā, Śrī Bhagavān has
explained two types of bhakti : pradhānībhūtā and
kevalā. In the third process, which is called guṇībhūta-
bhakti , bhakti is present to some extent but it is
predominated by karma , jñ āna and so forth. This is the
process that karmīs , jñ ānīs and yogīs perform simply
to attain perfection in their respective endeavours. It
cannot be called bhakti because it is karma or jñ āna ,
etc., which predominate, and not bhakti herself.

Prādhānyena vyapadeśā bhavanti is a name given to
something according to its predominating element.
According to this principle of logic (nyāya ), such
processes are named after their respective predominating
natures: karma , jñ āna and yoga. These processes are
not categorised as bhakti because bhakti is not
predominant.

The result of sakāma-karma is Svarga, and the result of
niṣkāma -karma is jñ āna . The result of jñ āna and yoga
is mokṣa . Now, the result of the two types of bhakti ,
pradhānībhūtā and kevalā, are being explained. In
pradhānībhūta-bhakti , those who are distressed (ārtta
), those who aspire for knowledge (jijñ āsu ) and those
who seek wealth (art hārthī) perform karma -miśra-bhakti
, that is, bhakti which is mixed with karma. Hence they
are called sakāma -bhaktas. The only result of this type
of bhakti is the fulfillment of one’s material desires.
Due to the superior nature of the object of their
endeavour (bhakti ), they finally attain mokṣa , e.g.
sālokya , which is characterised by a predominance of
happiness and majesty (aiśvarya ) . They do not fall
down, like a karmī who falls after enjoying in Svarga.
This is stated later on: yānti mad-yājino ‘pi mām (Gītā
9.25).

The result of the fourth type, jñāna-miśra-bhakti , is
superior to that of karma -miśra-bhakti . Those who
practise it attain śānta-rati , like the four Kumāras,
headed by Sanaka. By the special mercy of Śrī Bhagavān
and His bhaktas , this type of bhakti culminates in
premotkarṣa , the excellence of prema , which is seen in
people like Śukadeva Gosvāmī. When karma -miśra-bhakti
is niṣkāma (selfless), it results in jñ āna -miśra-
bhakti , the result of which has just been explained.

Sometimes, a person who is performing jñāna-miśra or
karma -miśra-bhakti attains prema in the moods of dāsya
(servitorship) and so forth, due to his intense desire
which is developed by the association of bhaktas who
have dāsya-bhava , etc. That prema , however, is
predominated by aiśvarya . The result of śuddha , ananya
, akiñcana and uttama-bhakti , etc., which is free from
jñ āna and karma and which has various branches, is that
one attains the position of a loving associate of Kṛṣṇa
in dāsya-bhāva , sakhya-bhāva and so on. This has been
established in many places in the commentaries of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam . The concept of sādhya -bhakti has
also been briefly explained in this commentary.



                           397
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Śrī Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“It is generally not possible for those who are
miscreants (duṣkṛta ) to perform My bhajana , because
they are not on the path of gradually developing their
consciousness. Sometimes, however, such people attain My
service by chance. Among those with sukṛti who lead a
regulated life, four types are qualified to perform My
bhajana . Those who are engaged in kāmya -karma
(fruitive activities) remember Me when they are
afflicted by some misery. They are called ārta , the
distressed. Even those who are duṣkṛta sometimes
remember Me when in distress.

“The foolish (mūḍha), who stick to morality as described
in the previous śloka , engage in the gradual process of
inquiring about tattvajñ āna. By this, they feel the
necessity of accepting the existence of Parameśvara. As
He is the objec t of their inquisitiveness, they
gradually remember Me. Narādhamas , the lowest among
mankind, who take up bhakti and then later discard it,
gradually become dissatisfied with their concept of an
ethical controller, and come to realise the real
controller of morality. They then become regulated
bhaktas and, since they turn to Me to fulfil their
desired goals, they are known as arthārthī. When the
jīva realises that knowledge of brahma and Paramātmā is
incomplete, he takes shelter of My śuddha-j ñ āna . At
that time the covering of māyā is removed and, knowing
himself to be My eternal servant, he accepts My full
shelter.

“Those who are ārta (distressed) have the defect of
various desires; those who are jijñ āsu (inquisitive)
have the defect of bondage to moralistic knowledge; the
arthārthīs (seekers of wealth) have the defect of
striving to attain Svarga; and the jñ ānīs , who think
that bhagavat -tattva is temporary, have the defect of
wanting to merge into brahma. When these impurities are
removed, these four types of persons become eligible to
perform pure bhakti . As long as these impurities exist
in them, their pure bhakti is considered to be
pradhānībhūtā. They attain bhakti when their impurities
are completely removed . This bhakti is called kevalā,
akiñcin ā or ut tamā.”

The word sukṛti used in this śloka means piety that is
generated from following the principles of varṇa and
āśrama . Such pious persons, whose bhakti is
pradhānībhūtā, engage in Bhagavān’s service in four
ways.

Examples of karma-pradhānībhūta-bhakti are included in
the first three categories below: (1)Ārta: Kings who
were captured by Jarāsandha; and Gajendra, who was
caught by a crocodile.

(2)Jijñāsu: Śaunaka and other ṛṣis who were inquisitive

                           398
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

about ātma-j ñ āna .

(3)Arthārthī: Those such as Dhruva who sought wealth.

(4)Jñānī: The four Kumāras come in this category. This
is jñ āna -pradhānībhūta-bhakti .

Pradhānībhūta-bhakti is defined as that karma, jñ āna
and yoga in which bhakti predominates, in other words,
where karma , jñ āna and yoga are subordinate to bhakti.

Kevala-bhakti is defined as follows:

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvrṭam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu

śīlanam bhaktir uttamā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.11

Uttama-bhakti is performed when a person is free from
all other desires except to render service to Kṛṣṇa,
when his intelligence is completely free from the
concept of nirviśeṣabrahma-jñ āna, and from affinity to
nitya (regular) and naimittika (causal or occasional)
karma, yoga, tapasya, etc., and when he renders service
to Kṛṣṇa and His bhaktas in a favourable way.

Guṇībhūta-bhakti is defined as that process in which
karma, jñ āna and yoga predominate, not bhakti . When
bhakti is only practised to assist in the attainment of
mokṣa or Svarga, then such karma is merely called karma
, jñ āna is called jñ āna , and yoga is called yoga .
Such karma , jñ āna and yoga are not śuddha -bhakti ,
but guṇībhūta-bhakti . Guṇībhūta-bhakti is not
considered to be in the category of bhakti because
bhakti does not predominate in it. In conclusion,
therefore, bhakti is of two types: kevalā and
pradhānībhūtā. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has
given detailed explanations of bhakti -tattva in his
Sārārtha -darśinī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam . For
this information, one should consult the following
ślokas from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam : ātmārāmaś ca munayo
(1.7.10), ṛte ‘rthaṁ yat pratīyeta (2.9.34), muktānām
api siddhānām (6.14.5), yāvan nṛkāya-ratham (7.15.45)
and ye ‘nye ‘ravindākṣa (10.2.32).




Śloka 17



teṣāṁ jñānī nitya-yukta

eka-bhaktir viśiṣyate

priyo hi jñānino ‘tyartham


                             399
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ahaṁ sa ca mama priyaḥ

jñānī—the man in knowledge; nitya-yuktaḥ—is always
connected; eka-bhaktiḥ—and exclusively devoted;
viśiṣyate —is distinguished; teṣām —among these; hi —
certainly; aham —I; (am) ati-artham priyaḥ—exceedingly
dear; jñ āninaḥ—to the jñ ānī; ca —and; saḥ—he; (is)
priyaḥ—dear; mama —to Me.

The tattva-vid-jñānī, My exclusive devotee whose
thoughts are always fixed on Me, is the best of these,
because I am very dear to him and he is very dear to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Who is the best of the four types of devotees who are
eligible to perform bhakti?” In answer, Śrī Bhagavān
speaks this śloka beginning with the word teṣām. “Those
jñ ānīs who are always united with Me are the best of
the four. By the practice of jñ āna , their thoughts are
completely under control and thus their minds remain
one-pointed. The other three types (ārta and so on) are
not like this.” Arjuna then asks, “Do all jñ ānīs
worship You out of fear that they may fail in their
endeavour to attain jñ āna ?” In response, Bhagavān says
eka-bhakti . Eka means prominent. This means, “Those jñ
ānīs in whom bhakti is prominent (pradhānībhūtā) perform
bhajana to Me, unlike other jñ ānīs in whom jñ āna is
prominent . Those who are attached only to bhakti are
bhakti -eka , and they are jñ ānīs in name only.

“In this way, in My beautiful form of Śyāmasundara, I am
very dear to the jñānīs . In the states of both sādhana
and sādhya , they are unable to give up their attachment
to this form. It is because of the principle of
surrender (as described in Gītā 4.11) that they are also
very dear to Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “When
they have become free from impurities, the ārta, jijñ
āsu , arthārthī and jñ ānī become devotedly surrendered
to Me and become My bhaktas . Among them, the jñ ānīs
attain śuddha-j ñ āna , having given up the impurity of
jñ āna , which is the desire for salvation . They then
become endowed with bhakti-yoga , and attain superiority
over the other three types of devotees. This means that
although the process of karma cleanses the jīva of all
impurities, the svarūpa of the jīva , which is conscious
by nature, is not realised by the practice of karma to
the same extent that it is realised by the cultivation

                           400
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

of jñ āna-yoga. Ultimately, by associating submissively
with bhaktas , everyone realises his own svarūpa .
During the sādhana stage, only jñ āni -bhaktas who are
eka-bhaktir viśiṣyate (specifically endowed with one-
pointed pure devotion), are superior to the other three
types of eligible person s described above. They are My
unalloyed servants. Thus I am very dear to them and they
are also very dear to Me.” Śukadeva Goswāmī is an
example of this. Previously, he was a brahma-jñ ānī, but
in the association of Śrī Vyāsadeva, he realised
bhagavad -jñ ān a (prema-bhakti ). During the sādhana
stage, the service to Kṛṣṇa of those bhaktas who have
attained pure knowledge (śuddha-j ñ āna ) is also
supremely pure, without the slightest scent of
materialism.




Śloka 18



udārāḥ sarvaḥ evaite

jñānī tv ātmaiva me matam

āsthitaḥ sa hi yuktātmā

mām evānuttamāṁ gatim


eva—certainly; ete—these; (are) sarvaḥ—all; udārāḥ—
magnanimous (souls); tu —but; jñ ānī—the man in
knowledge; matam —is considered; me —by Me; (as) eva
ātma —My very self; hi eva —certainly; saḥ—that; yukta-
ātmā—soul is always connected; āsthitaḥ—abiding; mām —in
Me; anuttamām —as His unsurpassable; gatim —goal (of
life).

Though these are all certainly great souls, I consider
the jñānī to be as dear to Me as My own self. Since his
thoughts dwell always in Me, he takes determined shelter
of Me as his supreme destination.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Does that mean that the other three types of persons,
the ārta and so on, are not dear to You?” In response,
Śrī Bhagavān says, “No, no, that is not so,” and speaks
this śloka beginning with udārāḥ. “Whoever performs My
bhajana with a desire to receive something from Me, and
who accepts that benediction when I award it to him, is
dear to Me. Having had their desires fulfilled by Me,
they give Me the quality of being bhakta-vatsala
(affectionate to My bhakta ) . However, jñ ānī tv
ātmaiva refers to the jñ ānī who is considered to be My

                            401
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

own self and extremely dear to Me, because, while
performing My bhajana , he does not expect anything in
return from Me such as Svarga or mokṣa. As a result I
always remain under his control. He is like My own self.
This is My opinion. Because he knows only Me,
Śyāmasundara, as the highest destination, he remains
free from anxiety and he is determined to attain Me. He
does not take shelter of My nirviśeṣa-s varūpa , brahma-
nirvāṇa.

“I am bhakta-vatsala Bhagavān, and I consider such a jñ
ānī, who is endowed with niṣkāma-pradhānībhūta-bhakti ,
to be My very self. But one who is endowed with
unalloyed kevala-bhakti is even more dear than My own
self.”

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.15): “O Uddhava,
as a bhakta you are so dear to Me; not even My own son
Brahmā or Śaṅkara, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Laksmī-devī or My own
svarūpa are as dear to Me as you are.” Moreover, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (9.4.64) says: “Without the associaton of My
bhakta -sādhus I do not desire even the bliss of My own
svarūpa .”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.42) says ātmārāma also enjoys.
This means that, although yogeśvareśvaraḥ Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
ātmārāma , who delights within Himself, He receives a
greater pleasure from the service of the gopīs. Thus He
mercifully enjoys and performs pastimes with them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “When
the above-described four classes of devotees accept
kevala-bhakti , they become supremely great. However,
the jñ āni -bhaktas are situated in Me because they have
more niṣṭhā than the others to realise Me, the supreme
conscious entity, and their highest destination. They
are very dear to Me, and are able to control Me
completely.”

People perform bhajana to Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa as a result
of sukṛti accumulated in their previous lives. Those who
are averse to Kṛṣṇa remain non-devotees, engaged in the
worship of various devas and devīs . Therefore, those
who perform Kṛṣṇa’s bhajana are endowed with great
intelligence, whether they have material desires (sakāma
) or are free from them (niṣkāma ). This is also
expressed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.3.10): akāmaḥ sarva-
kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param

In his Śārārtha-darśinī commentary on this śloka , Śrīla

                           402
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains the word udāra-
dhīḥ to mean of pure and great intelligence (subuddhi ).
“Performance of Bhagavān’s bhajana is the symptom of
pure and great intelligence regardless of whether one
has material desires or is free from them. The absence
of such worship is a symptom of impure and lowly
intelligence.”

What to speak of the devotees who are free from material
desires, even those devotees who have material desires
attain service to Bhagavān in His abode, by His mercy or
by the mercy of His bhaktas , when they have enjoyed
their desired objective. Therefore, they possess pure
and great intelligence.




Śloka 19



bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ


ante—at the end; bahūnām—of many; janmanām —births; jñ
ānavān —one who has knowledge; iti —that; vāsudevaḥ—
Vāsudeva; sarvam —is everything; prapadyate—surrenders;
mām —to Me; saḥ—that; mahā-ātmā—great soul; (is)
sudurlabhaḥ—extremely rare.

After many births of spiritual practice, the jñānī who
is endowed with knowledge that everything both conscious
and inert is related to Vāsudeva surrenders himself
fully to Me, and performs bhajana to Me. Such a mahātmā
is extremely rare.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The following question may be raised: “Since the jñānīs
accept Your shelter as the supreme destination, they
certainly attain You, but how long will it take for such
jñ ānīs to become qualified to enter bhakti ?” In answer
to this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with
the word bahūnām . “Vāsudevaḥ sarvam means that those jñ
ānīs take shelter of Me when, after many, many births
they see Vāsudeva everywhere. Such sādhus surrender unto
Me due to the influence of good association which is
arranged by My will. That is, they surrender to Me
according to the bhāva received in such association.
Among thousands and thousands of men, such a jñ āni-

                           403
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

bhakta , whose thoughts are fixed in Me is very rare,
what to speak of aikāntika -bhaktas , who are far more
rare.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




“Of the four types of devotees (ārta, etc.), the jñ ānīs
who have niṣṭhā in Me, Kṛṣṇa, are the best.” A jñ ānī
who has spiritual fortune (sukṛti ) attains the
association of śuddha Vaiṣṇavas after many, many
lifetimes, and he thus becomes aware of the svarūpa of
Śrī Vāsudeva. He sees Bhagavān Vāsudeva everywhere,
which means that he sees everything as being related to
Vāsudeva. Thus he obtains śuddha-bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Such mahātmās are extremely rare.

Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has given the following
comment on this śloka: “The bhaktas who are ārta , jijñ
āsu and arthārthī enjoy the highest type of material
happiness for many lifetimes as a result of devotion
unto Me. Finally, they become detached from such
material pleasure, and in some lifetime come in contact
with Vaiṣṇavas who know My svarūpa-tattva. In that
association, they attain knowledge of My svarūpa .
Knowing only Me, Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva, as the
parama-tattva , they take shelter of Me.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“After performing sādhana for many, many lifetimes, the
jīvas attain pure jñ āna , and become steadfast in the
transcendental consciousness of the self. In the
beginning of such spiritual practice, when they are
trying to give up their mundane identification, they
take support of impersonal monism (advaita-bhāva ) to
some extent. During this stage, they develop disgust
towards the material world, but they also remain
indifferent toward spirituality, especially regarding
the variegated nature of spiritual life. When they have
become a little advanced in the eternal, conscious
existence of the self (caitanya -dharma ), and in
understanding the special nature of spiritual life which
consists of variegated activities, they become attracted
to it and surrender unto Me, who am parama-caitanya-r
ūpa (the supreme conscious form). At that time they
understand that this mundane world is not independent
but a perverted reflection of the conscious reality, the
transcendental realm, and that a relationship with
Vāsudeva also exists in this world. Hence everything is
in relationship with Vāsudeva. Those mahātmās , who have
such a surrendered attitude towards Me, are very rare.”




Śloka 20



                           404
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ

prapadyante ‘nya-devatāḥ

taṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya

prakṛtyā niyatāḥ svayā


hṛta-jñānāḥ—those whose knowledge is stolen; taiḥ taiḥ—
by their various; kāmaiḥ—lusty desires; prapadyante —
surrender; anya-devatāḥ—to other gods; āsthāya —
practising; tam tam—the various; niyamam —regulations;
niyatāḥ—controlled; svayā—by their own; prakṛtyā—nature.

Those whose intelligence has been stolen by material
desires, and who try to eliminate their distress, follow
the rules of worship for a particular deva, who can
fulfil their desires. Thus, being swept away by their
own nature, they worship such devas.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Very well, I have understood that even those with
material desires, such as the distressed, become
partially successful by performing Your bhajana , but
what is the destination of those distressed persons who
worship the devas for relief from their miseries?” In
response to this Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka
beginning with the words kāmais taiḥ, and the next three
ślokas. “Those who think that the devas , such as Sūrya,
can immediately remove miseries like disease and that
Śrī Viṣṇu canno t, have lost their intelligence (hṛta -
jñ āna ). They remain bound by their own nature and it
is that ill-nature which keeps them from surrendering to
Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Intelligent and fortunate persons, who are influenced by
various types of desires, try to satisfy their desires
by worshipping Parameśvara Śrī Kṛṣṇa. When they have
fulfilled their desires, by His mercy they gradually
lose interest in such enjoyment and attain His bhajana .
In this regard, the ślokas from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.3.10 and 5.19.26) are worth contemplating.

As a result of being averse to Kṛṣṇa, fools and
unfortunate persons remain bound by the rājasika and
tāmasika guṇas and think that the devas can fulfil their

                           405
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

desires more quickly. They, therefore, worship various
unimportant devas according to their respective natures
in an attempt to satisfy their various material desires,
and quickly attain perishable fruits.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Those such as the distressed are averse to Me as long
as their impurities remain, but when they are freed from
material impurities, they perform bhakti to Me. Those
who take shelter of My transcendental nature, however,
do not become attracted to the external nature, even
though they may be full of desires. I free them from all
their material motivations within a short time.
Conversely, those who are averse to Me lose their
spiritual intelligence and, being impelled by their
material desires, worship particular devas who can
quickly award the trivial objects of their desires. They
do not trust Me, the eternal, beautiful Śyāmasundara,
the embodiment of viśuddha-sattva. Hence, they are
driven away from Me by their lower rājasika and tāmasika
natures, and worship particular devatās , following
whatever obscure rules are favourable to such worship.”




Śloka 21




yo yo yāṁ yāṁ tanuṁ bhaktaḥ

śraddhayārcitum icchati

tasya tasyācalāṁ śraddhāṁ

tām eva vidadhāmy aham


yām yām tanum—whichever form of the devatās; yaḥ yaḥ
bhaktaḥ—whichever devotee; icchati —desires; arcitum —to
worship; śraddhayā—with faith; eva —certainly; aham
vidadhāmi —I bestow; tasya tasya —to that particular
devotee; acalām —unshakeable; śraddhām —faith; tām —in
that (deva ).

Whichever devatā the fruitive devotee wants to
faithfully worship, I, as the indwelling Antaryāmī, make
his faith in that particular devatā unflinching.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If Arjuna says, “For the auspiciousness of their
devotees, those devatās will generate in them faith in
Your bhakti , being pleased by their worship,” then Śrī
Bhagavān responds by saying, “No, it is not so. The

                            406
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

devatās are unable to generate faith (śraddhā) in
devotion to themselves, so how can they generate śraddhā
in My bhakti ?” Hence, He speaks this śloka beginning
with the words yo yo yam. “Whichever devatā they may
want to worship, such as Sūrya, who is nothing but My
vibhūti , I, the indwelling Antaryāmī, inspire their
śraddhā in that particular devatā and not in Myself.
This is because they are averse to Me. Those devatās are
also unable to generate śraddhā in Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Some think that, by worshipping the devatās, they can
inspire śraddhā in bhagavad-bhakti in the hearts of
their worshippers. However, Śrī Kṛṣṇa explains that it
is He as Antaryāmī who gives the deva worshippers steady
faith in whichever deva they desire to worship,
according to their desires, although the devas are
nothing but His vibhūti . He does not inspire faith in
Himself in the hearts of those who are averse to Him. If
the devatās cannot generate śraddhā towards the mselves
in their worshippers, then how can they create faith in
Bhagavān?




Śloka 22



sa tayā śraddhayā yuktas

tasyārādhanam īhate

labhate ca tataḥ kāmān

mayaiva vihitān hi tān

yuktaḥ—endowed; tayā śraddhayā—with that faith; saḥ—he;
īhate —tries to perform; arādhanam —the worship; tasya —
of that deva ; ca —and; tataḥ—thereby; labhate —he
attains; (the fulfilment of); kāmān —his desires; eva —
in actuality; tān —those (boons); (are) vihitān —
granted; mayā—by Me; hi —alone.

Endowed with such śraddhā, he attempts to worship that
particular devatā and thus attains fulfilment of his
desires, which in actuality are granted by Me alone.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           407
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Īhate means ‘he does’. They attain their desired ends by
worshipping the respective devatās , but in actuality
those d evatās are not able to fulfil those desires.
Therefore, Śrī Bhagavān says: māyaiva vihitān. “ In
reality, those desires are fulfilled by Me alone.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Some think that if they worship the devatās, they will
obtain the fruits of their desires by that devatā’s
mercy. But, from this śloka it is clear that the devas
are unable to award the results of worship that is
performed to them. Those who worship the devas can
obtain their desired results only when it is sanctioned
by Bhagavān, but such ignorant people cannot understand
that it is Śrī Bhagavān, as Antaryāmī who has fulfilled
their desires. Here it is seen that the devatās cannot
generate śraddhā in themselves among their own
worshippers. Similarly, they cannot independently aw ard
the results of fruitive activities unless Antaryāmī Śrī
Bhagavān sanctions it.




Śloka 23




antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ

tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām

devān deva-yajo yānti

mad-bhaktā yānti mām api

tu—indeed; tat phalam—that benefit; (obtained) teṣām —by
those; alpa-medhasām —persons of meagre intelligence;
bhavati —is; antavat —perishable; (for) deva-yajaḥ—the
worshippers of the gods; yānti —go; devān —to the gods;
api —whereas; mat-bhaktāḥ—My bhaktas ; yānti—go; mām —to
Me.

However, the fruit attained by such men of meagre
intelligence is perishable. The worshippers of devatās
go to their planets, whereas My bhaktas come to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                            408
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


The results obtained by worshipping the devatās are
perishable and transitory. If one raises the question,
“Although equal endeavour is performed in both types of
worship, why do You give perishable results to the
worshippers of the devas , and imperishable results to
Your own bhaktas ? For You, who are Parameśvara, this is
certainly unjust,” Śrī Bhagavān responds by saying,
“This is not unjust. Those who worship the devas attain
those devas and My bhaktas attain Me. One attains the
object of one’s worship. This is indeed justice. If the
devatās themselves are perishable, how will their
worshippers become imperishable and why will the results
of their worship not be destroyed?” For this reason,
these worshippers have been called less intelligent.
Bhagavān is eternal and so are His bhaktas , His bhakti
and the results of His bhakti. They are all eternal.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




A question may be raised, “Since the devas, as His
vibhūtis , are also the limbs of Śrī Bhagavān, there is
no difference between the worship of the devas and that
of the bhaktas of Bhagavān. What is the harm in
worshipping these devas if Bhagavān Himself generates
the faith in the worshippers toward their worshipable
deity, and also grants them the result of their fruitive
activities?” In response to this Śrī Bhagavān replies,
“If, being impelled by some desire, one takes shelter of
the devas , he is called hṛta -jñ āna , a person who has
lost his intelligence.” Since he attains only perishable
results, he is described as having less intelligence.
Someone may say that because Bhagavān bestows eternal
results to His bhaktas and perishable results to the
worshippers of the devas , He is not equal to both;
rather He is biased. In response one can say that it is
certainly just to receive the result that one desires.
Because both the devatās and their planets are
temporary, their worshippers attain perishable results
on perishable planets. However, the bhaktas of sac-cid-
ānanda Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa attain His eternal service in
His eternal dhāma by worshipping Him. Therefore, those
who are intelligent worship the eternal form (nitya-
svarūpa ) of Śrī Bhagavān even if they have material
desires. They do not worship other devas and devīs .




Śloka 24




avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ

manyante mām abuddhayaḥ

                           409
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mamāvyayam anuttamam

abuddhayaḥ—the unintelligent; manyante—consider; mām —
Me; avyaktam —the unmanifest; āpannam —to have taken on;
vyaktim —a manifest form (personality); ajānantaḥ—they
are unaware; mama —of My; param —supreme; avyayam —
imperishable; anuttamam —transcendental; bhāvam —nature.

The unintelligent consider that I, who am unmanifest and
beyond mundane existence, take birth like an ordinary
human being. They do not know the supreme, excellent,
immutable and transcendental nature of My form, birth,
pastimes and qualities.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Even those who know śāstras such as the Vedas do not
know My tattva , what to speak of less intelligent
worshippers of devas. Brahmā spoke this to Me (in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.29): ‘O Bhagavān! O Deva! Only
those who have attained a particle of compassion from
Your lotus feet are able to understand Your real gl
ories. No one else will be able to understand You, even
if they search for a very long time.’ Therefore,
everyone except My bhaktas lacks the necessary
intelligence to understand My tattva -jñ āna .” To
convey this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning
with avyaktam . “Those who are unintelligent consider Me
to be the unmanifested nirviśeṣabrahma , which is beyond
the mundane plane. They think that I have no eternal
form and that My manifest human-like svarūpa is illusory
like that of mortals because I took birth in the house
of Vasudeva. This is because they do not know My para-
bhāva , My transcendental form, birth, activities,
pastimes, etc. What is the nature of that bhāva ? It is
eternal and supreme.” The dictionary named Medinī states
that existence, nature, purpose, endeavour, birth,
action, pastimes and objects are all bhāva . Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta has established that
Bhagavān’s form, qualities, birth, pastimes and so on
are endless and are, therefore, all eternal. Śrīla
Śrīdhara Svāmī quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “My para-bhāva
that is My svarūpa is avyaya (immutable). It is eternal,
supremely pure and viśuddha -sattva .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Men who have fruitive desires are less intelligent. It
is a matter of great surprise, however, that those who

                           410
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

are expert in śāstras such as the Veda and Vedānta also
disregard the omnipotent sac-cid-ānanda-ghana-vigraha ,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-māyā-svarūpa , who takes birth and
performs pastimes. Although He is the supreme objective
established by the Vedas , they worship His featureless,
immutable form of brahma , considering that to be
supreme. This indicates that they lack intelligence.




Śloka 25



nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya

yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ

mūḍho ‘yaṁ nābhijānāti

loko mām ajam avyayam

aham—I (am); na—not; prakāśaḥ—revealed; sarvasya—to all;
samāvṛtaḥ—covered; yogamāyā—by My internal potency; ayam
mūḍhaḥ lokaḥ—these foolish people; na abhijānāti —do not
comprehend; mām —Me; ajam —the unborn; avyayam —and
imperishable.

I am not manifest to all. To the foolish I am veiled by
My yogamāyā potency; therefore, they do not know My
unborn and imperishable svarūpa.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If Arjuna raises a question, “If it is to be accepted
that You are eternal, and have an eternal form,
qualities and pastimes, then why aren’t these pastimes
visible at all times?” then in response to this, Śrī
Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the word nāham
. “I do not manifest Myself at all times, in every
country, and before each and every person. The sun is
continuously present in the universe, yet when it is
blocked by the Sumeru Mountain it is not seen by
everyone all the time. Similarly, although I exist
eternally with My qualities, pastimes and associates, I
am covered by My yogamāyā, so I am only seen sometimes
in some brahmāṇḍas. I am not seen everywhere, all the
time by everyone.”

Someone may say, “The sun is always present among the
luminaries in this universe, but it is not seen by
everyone in all countries at the same time. Sūrya,
however, can always be seen in his abode. In the same
way, like the sun, You are always visible to those in
Your abode. Why, then, are You not visible to those now
situated in Your abodes such as Mathurā and Dvārakā?” In

                           411
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

response, Kṛṣṇa says, “If the Sumeru Mountain is in the
midst of t he luminaries, the sun will be blocked by it
and will not be visible. Similarly, yogamāyā is always
present in My abodes such as Mathurā, just like Mount
Sumeru in the sun’s abode.” Kṛṣṇa only becomes visible
at certain periods. “That is why those who are foolish
are not able to understand Me, Śyāmasundara, the son of
Vasudeva, being unborn and immutable. Although I am an
ocean of all auspicious qualities, they eventually give
Me up, and worship My nirviśeṣa-svarūpa-brahma .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In Goloka Vṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His līlā are
eternally manifest. Through the medium of yogamāyā, He
sometimes descends with His eternal associates to
manifest His nitya-līlā out of compassion for the jīvas
of this world. Those who are unaware of this tattva are
unable to understand this secret. They think that the
unmanifest nirviśeṣabrahma is the only para-tattva , and
that Bhagavān, whose names, forms, qualities and
activities are transcendental, has manifested Himself
from that nirviśeṣabrahma . Such people are fools and
have been described here as mūḍha because their
intelligence is covered by mahāmāyā. Here, it should be
understood that Bhagavān has two types of māyā-śakti :
yogamāyā (internal) and mahāmāyā (external). Yogamāyā is
His svarūpa-śakti (internal potency), which is expert in
making the impossible possible, and mahāmāyā is the
shadow of this yogamāyā. The first, yogamāyā, arranges
yoga , the enactment of the līlā of Bhagavān, who is
omniscient (sarva-jñ ā) and omnipotent (sarva-śaktimān
). Yo gamāyā does this by putting Him and His associates
in transcendental illusion. She also arranges for the
yoga (union) of Bhagavān and the jīvas who are
practising sādhana-bhakti . That is why this potency is
called yogamāyā. On the other hand, mahāmāyā bewitches
those jīvas who are averse to Bhagavān, and binds them
by the results of their various activities. A cloud
cannot cover the sun; rather, it is only the eyes of the
jīvas situated on earth which are covered. Similarly,
mahāmāyā cannot cover Bhagavān, but can only cover the
knowledge of the jīvas and thus prevent them from seeing
Him.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “Do
not think that I was previously unmanifest and that I
have now manifested this beautiful sac-cid-ānanda form
of Śyāmasundara. My Śyāmasundara form is eternal.
Although this form is like the self-effulgent spiritual
sun of the transcendental realm, it remains hidden from
the vision of common men because it is covered by the
shadow of yogamāyā. The less intelligent cannot
understand My avyaya-svarūpa (immutable nature) because
of this covering.”




                           412
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 26



vedāhaṁ samatītāni

vartamānāni cārjuna

bhaviṣyāṇi ca bhūtāni

māṁ tu veda na kaścana

arjuna—O Arjuna; aham veda—I know; samatītāni —the past;
ca —and; vartamānāni —present; ca —and; bhaviṣyāṇi —
future; (of) bhūtāni —living beings; tu —but; mām —Me;
na kaścana —no one; veda —knows.

O Arjuna, I know all the moving and non-moving beings of
the past, present and future, but Me, no one knows.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“That māyā which cannot bewilder its foundation (Me) is
called bahiraṅga-māyā. However, antaraṅga-māyā does not
cover knowledge of Me.” To explain this, Śrī Bhagavān is
speaking this śloka beginning with vedāham . “No one can
know Me fully, neither those in this mundane worl d, nor
those who have transcended this world, nor even
personalities such as Mahārudra, who are omniscient.”
That māyā which makes yoga (union) between the bhaktas
and Bhagavān is called yogamāyā. Most people’s jñ āna is
covered by mahāmāyā, and the knowled ge of omniscient
personalities such as Mahārudra remains covered by
yogamāyā; therefore they cannot know Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




One may raise the doubt: “If Bhagavān is covered by
yogamāyā, He must also be in illusion like the jīva ,
and have the defect of ignorance.” In response it is
said, “Māyā is engaged in My service being subject to My
prowess, and remains under My control from afar. This
māyā cannot cause any transformation to take place in
Me.” Māyā cannot cover the knowledge of Bhagav ān. Śrī
Bhagavān is again emphasising this, saying, “I know
everything in the past, present and future, but if even
great, omniscient personalities such as Mahārudra do not
know Me fully, because their knowledge is covered by
yogamāyā, what then to speak o f common men?” For this
reason, common people do not accept that the human-like

                           413
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

form of Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa is eternal. It is not
possible to know and realise the tattva of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
His līlā without the mercy and shelter of yogamāyā, even
if one has knowledge of His nirviśeṣabrahma , or of His
partial expansion, Paramātmā.




Śloka 27



icchā-dveṣa-samutthena

dvandva-mohena bhārata

sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ

sarge yānti parantapa

bhārata parantapa—O scion of Bhārata, conqueror of the
foe; sarge—at the time of creation; sarva-bhūtāni —all
living beings; yānti —enter; sammoham —into complete
illusion; dvandva-mohena —bewildered by duality; icchā-
dveṣa-samutthena—born of desire and hate.

O scion of Bhārata, O Parantapa, at the time of creation
all jīvas enter into complete illusion, bewildered by
the dualities of happiness and distress which are born
of desire and hate.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“How long have the jīvas been bewildered by Your māyā?”
Śrī Bhagavān anticipates this question by speaking this
śloka beginning with icchā. “Sarga means creation. All
jīvas have been bewildered since the beginning of
creation. By what? By desire and hate which is born from
their previous karma . They are deluded by the dualities
which arise from the desire for sense objects which are
to their liking, and from aversion to those which are
not. Examples of this are honour and dishonour, cold and
heat, happiness and distress, male and female. The jīvas
are bewildered by the designations which are delusions
born of ignorance, such as ‘I am honoured, therefore I
am happy; I am disrespected, therefore I am miserable;
this beautiful woman is my wife; this man is my
husband.’ In other words, they become deeply attached to
wife, children and so on. Those with such deep worldly
attachment do not have the right to engage in My bhakti
. As I have said to Uddhava in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.20.8): ‘By good fortune, a person who has developed
śraddhā in hearing My kathā and who has neither
repulsion nor excessive attachment to sense objects
attains perfection in bhakti-yoga .’”


                           414
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The jīvas remain bereft of Parameśvara jñ āna because
they are deluded by māyā. At that time, being further
bewildered by the delusion of duality arising from
desire and hate, their aversion to Kṛṣṇa becomes deeper.
The reason for this is that the jīva in his pure stat e
sees the eternal form of Bhagavān with his
transcendental senses. However, the baddha-jīva in the
material world is overpowered by avidyā and remains
bewildered by duality which arises from desire and hate.
At that time, he becomes bereft of vidvat-pratīti ,
access to transcendence. Bhagavān becomes visible to the
material eyes of the jīvas by yoga (union) with the cit
-śakti by which He manifests His nitya-svarūpa . Even
then, such persons think that the svarūpa of Bhagavān is
temporary. They do not have t he proper knowledge to
perceive Him, because they are covered by māyā. This is
their great misfortune.




Śloka 28




yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ


tu—but; janānām—those persons; puṇya-karmaṇām —who have
performed pious activities; yeṣām —whose; pāpam —sinful
activities; anta-gatam —have come to an end; te —they;
(become) nirmuktāḥ—freed; dvandva-moha —from the
bewilderment of duality; (and) bhajante —worship; mām —
Me; dṛḍha-vratāḥ—with determined vows.

However, those pious persons whose sins have been
eradicated become free from the bewilderment of duality
and engage in My bhajana with firm determination.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Who then, has the adhikāra to perform bhakti?” In

                            415
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

answer to this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning
with the word yeṣām . “When one’s sins are almost
destroyed by pious activities, sattva -guṇa rises within
him and reduces tamo-guṇa and its effect, delusion. When
he associates with My bhakta , who is not overly
attached to this world, his delusion decreases, and he
engages in My bhajana by his own will. Only those whose
sins are completely destroyed by the practice of
devotional service to Me have become completely free
from delusion and perform My bhajana with great
determination.” Pious deeds alone are not the cause of
bhakti . Śrī Bhagavān says in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.12.9): “Bhakti cannot be attained by a person
endeavouring in yoga , sāṅkhya , dāna , vrata , tapasya
, yajña , vairāgya and study of the śāstra .” One does
not attain bhakti-yoga simply by taking shelter of pious
activities. This has been established in various ways.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




There are two ways in which the baddha-jīvas attain one-
pointedness in bhajana to Bhagavān. Firstly, a jīva who
is bound by māyā may by good fortune, develop śraddhā in
hearing hari-kathā in the association of devotees,
although he is not yet performing bhakti to Kṛṣṇa. Then,
by continuously hearing descriptions of His name, form
and qualities, he becomes free from sins (anarthas ) and
detached from worldliness. He develops niṣṭhā towards
Kṛṣṇa and progressively enters aikāntika-bhakti . In the
second category are the jīvas who have not completely
renounced sense-objects, but are also not excessively
attached to them. When such jīvas , by great fortune,
attain the association of a mahā-bhāgavata , they engage
in bhajana , and, as a result, all their sins, their
attachment to sense enjoyment and their delusion are
removed, and they also develop niṣṭhā in bhajana .
Having achieved such niṣṭhā, they enter aikāntika-bhakti
. The association of mahā-puruṣas , their mercy and
one’s endeavour to perform bhajana are the only means of
attaining bhakti .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “Hear
from Me how one can gain the adhikāra to realise My
nitya-svarūpa . The asuras who are overpowered by a
sinful nature do not have such access. One who has
completely eradicated his sins by performing many pious
deeds and by following a regulated dharmika life
performs niṣkāma-karma -yoga in the beginning, then jñ
āna -yoga , and finally one achieves samādhi by dhyāna -
yoga. Only then is he able to realise My eternal,
beautiful cit -tattva Śyāmasundara form. That
realisation which comes by virtue of vidyā
(transcendental knowledge) is called vidvat-pratīti .
Only those who are endowed with this realisation can
gradually become free from dvaita (duality) and advaita
(nonduality), and can engage in My bhajana with great
determination.”


                           416
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 29



jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya

mām āśritya yatanti ye

te brahma tad viduḥ kṛtsnam

adhyātmaṁ karma cākhilam


te ye—those who; yatanti—endeavour; mokṣāya —for
deliverance; jarā-maraṇa —from old age and death; (by)
āśritya —taking shelter; mām —of Me; viduḥ—understand;
kṛtsnam akhilam —completely; (concerning) brahma —
spirit; tat —that (the Supreme Personality); adhyātmam —
the nature of the jīvātmā; ca —and; karma —the process
of action and reaction.

Those who strive for liberation from old age and death
by taking refuge of Me attain knowledge of brahma, of
the pure constitutional nature of the jīva, and an
understanding of the principle of karma, which is the
cause of their bondage to the material world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān said earlier that all sakāma-bhaktas , such
as the distressed, become perfect by performing His
bhajana . Others however, who worship the devas , will
degrade themselves and remain in the material world. In
saying this, Bhagavān is also referring to those who are
unqualified to perform His bhajana . Here, in this śloka
beginning with jarā, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking about the
fourth type of sakāma -bhakta . “Those yogīs who
endeavour to stop the cycle of old age and death, and
who worship Me with a desire for mokṣa are, by the
influence of My bhakti , eventually able to attain full
understanding of brahma (that is, My eternal beautiful
Śyāmasundara form), adhyātmā (the complete self, or the
jīva who possesses a body and exists in it as an
enjoyer) and the principle of karma (that is, how the
jīvas enter this material world).”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




                           417
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhagavān first explained the first three types of
sakāma-bhaktas , such as the distressed. “They initially
perform My bhajana in order to attain their desired
goals. After they have attained these goals and
understood that such goals are actually miserable and
degrading, they become detached from them. Finally, by
taking s ādhu-saṅga , they become successful and attain
My aikāntika-bhakti .” In the present śloka , Bhagavān
is explaining the fourth type of bhakta , namely the
sakāma -bhakta who desires mokṣa . “When such sakāma -
bhaktas achieve the association of My śuddha-bhaktas ,
they lose their desire to attain brahma-sāyujya and
focus on becoming situated in their pure constitutional
form as the servants of Bhagavān. These sakāma-j ñ āni-
bhaktas are real mumukṣus , persons who desire mokṣa .
Only such brahmabhūta-j ñ āni-bhaktas (who have attained
the nature of brahma ) completely understand brahma-
tattva , adhyātma-tattva and karma -tattva and attain
para-bhakti.”




Śloka 30




sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ

sādhiyajñaṁ ca ye viduḥ

prayāṇa-kāle ‘pi ca māṁ

te vidur yukta-cetasaḥ


ye te—those who; viduḥ—know; mām —Me; sa-adhibhūta —
underlying the gross material elements of the cosmos;
adhidaivam —underlying the devatās ; ca —and; sa-
adhiyajñam —underlying all sacrifices; yukta-cetasaḥ—
with minds attached to Me; viduḥ—know; mām —Me; api —
even; prayāṇa-kāle —at the time of death.

Those who know Me as the presiding deity (governing
principle) of adhibhūta, adhidaiva and adhiyajña, and
whose minds are attached to Me, remember Me even at the
time of death.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“By the influence of My bhakti, the knowledge of those
who have realised Me as the presiding Deity of adhibhūta
, adhidaiva and adhiyajña remains intact up to the time
of death. Unlike others, their intelligence is not
affected by the body they will achieve in the future in
accordance with their karma performed in this life.” To

                           418
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

explain this, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka
beginning with sādhibhūta . The words adhibhūta , etc.,
will be explained in the next chapter. Only the bhaktas
of Bhagavān Śrī Hari can cross over māyā by completely
understanding His tattva . Six types of such devotees
have been delineated in this chapter.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Seventh
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān is saying, “Those who, by the power of My
bhakti, know Me as the governing principle of adhibhūta-
tattva , adhidaiva-tattva and adhiyajñatattva can
remember Me at the time of death. They are not fearful
of death because they do not forget Me.”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Seventh
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Eight




Tāraka-Brahma-Yoga



Yoga with Parabrahma




Śloka 1




arjuna uvāca —

kiṁ tad brahma kim adhyātmaṁ

kiṁ karma puruṣottama

adhibhūtaṁ ca kiṁ proktam

adhidaivaṁ kim ucyate


                            419
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; puruṣottama—O Supreme Person;
kim—what (is); tat brahma—that (known as) spirit; kim—
what (is); adhyātmam —the principle of the jīvātmā; kim—
what (is); karma —the principle of action and reaction;
kim —what (is); adhibhūtam —the basis of the gross
material elements; proktam—said to be; ca—and; kim—what
(is); adhidaivam—the principle underlying the celestial
deities; ucyate —said to be .

Arjuna inquired: O Puruṣottama, what is brahma (Absolute
Reality)? What is adhyātma (the pure self)? What is
karma (the principle of action)? What is adhibhūta, the
basis of this material manifestation, and what is
adhidaiva, the principle underlying the devas?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the first two ślokas of this chapter, Arjuna raises
seven questions. Six of those questions relate to the
factual meanings of the six words mentioned at the end
of the last chapter: brahma , adhyātma , karma ,
adhibhūta , adhidaiva and adhiyajña. The seventh
question is, “How does a man whose senses are controlled
know You at the time of death?” In this chapter,
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa explains these topics in detail ,
answering all of Arjuna’s questions.




Śloka 2



adhiyajñaḥ kathaṁ ko ‘tra

dehe ‘smin madhusūdana

prayāṇa-kāle ca kathaṁ

jñeyo ‘si niyatātmabhiḥ

kaḥ—who (is); adhiyajñaḥ—the Lord of sacrifice; katham—
how (does He exist); atra —here; asmin—in this; dehe —
body; madhusūdana—O killer of the demon Madhu; ca—and;
katham —how; asi —are You; jñeyaḥ—to be known; prayāṇa-
kāle —at the time of death; niyata-ātmabhiḥ—by those of
self-disciplined mind.

Who is adhiyajña, the presiding deity of yajña, and how
is He dwelling in this body, O Madhusūdana? And by what
means are You to be known at the time of death by a
self-controlled person?




                            420
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the Eighth Chapter, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa explains yoga
in response to Pārtha’s questions . Within this topic,
He also explains yoga-miśrā bhakti , śuddha-bhakti and
the destinations of both.

Bhagavān spoke on seven topics such as brahma at the end
of the last chapter. Now, in this chapter, Arjuna is
inquiring about those topics in this and the previous
śloka , beginning with the words kiṁ tad . Who is
adhiyajña (the presiding deity of yajna ), who resides
in this body, and how can He be known?




Śloka 3




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

akṣaraṁ paramaṁ brahma

svabhāvo ‘dhyātmam ucyate

bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo

visargaḥ karma-saṁjñitaḥ


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the illustrious, all-opulent Lord
said; akṣaram—the imperishable; paramam —Supreme Truth;
brahma —(is) spirit; svabhāvaḥ—the nature of the jīva ;
ucyate —is known as; adhyātmam—adhyātma , the self;
visargaḥ—the creation; udbhava-karaḥ—which brings about;
bhāva—the thread of existence through successive births;
bhūta—for the living beings; karma-saṁjñitaḥ—is known as
karma.

Śrī Bhagavān said: The eternal, imperishable parama-
tattva is indeed brahma. The jīva in his pure state is
called adhyātma, and the principle of yajña in this
material world, whereby the development of the jīvas’
material bodies and their expansions take place, is
known as karma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




While answering Arjuna’s questions, Śrī Bhagavān says
that brahma is that which is imperishable and eternally

                            421
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

supreme. “O Gārgī, the learned brāhmaṇas call it akṣara
” (Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 3.8.8).

Svabhāvaḥ: Those who create material bodies because they
identifiy their ātmā with the body (sva-bhāvayati ) are
called svabhāvaḥ, or jīvas (in the conditioned state) .
The word svabhāvaḥ also means ‘jīvas in their
constitutional state,’ and refers to those who situate
themselves in their pure state by cultivating bhakti ,
and attain svaṁ (Paramātmā). Here svabhāvaḥ does not
refer to the conditioned jīva but to the unalloyed
entity, the śuddha-jīva , who is also known as adhyātma
. Visarga , or the jīva’s saṁsāra , results in bhūta-
bhāva-udbhava-karaḥ, the gross and subtle elements which
create human and other bodies according to the
consciousness of the jīva. Saṁsāra (the cycle of
material existence) is created by the karma (action) of
the jīva , so here the word karma indicates the material
existence of the jīva .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Brahma means that which does not perish. It is called
akṣara because it is infallible. Akṣara-tattva is free
from destruction and transformation and is also called
parabrahma . Here it should be understood that only
saviśeṣa-maya Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Conscious Reality
who possesses all transcendental attributes, is
parabrahma , not nirviśeṣabrahma , His featureless
impersonal aspect. Although the word akṣara refers to
all three features of the Supreme, namely brahma ,
Paramātmā and Bhagavān, here it only indicates
parabrahma , Svayam Bhagavān. One should deliberate on
Gītā (15.16-18) for a detailed understanding of this
subject. This is also established in the prayers of Lord
Brahmā (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.32):


yan-mitraṁ paramānandaṁ

pūrṇaṁ brahma sanātanam


Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the complete, eternal brahma, and
whose form is composed of supreme bliss, is their
friend.

This is also cited in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhyalīlā
19.96): aham iha nandaṁ vande

yasyālinde paraṁ brahma

I forever worship that Nanda Mahārāja in whose courtyard
parabrahma is playing as Nandanandana.

Adhyātma means svabhāvaḥ, or the śuddha-jīva situated in
his unalloyed state, free from any contact with inert
matter. Svaṁ bhāvayati means that one maintains the

                           422
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

conception, ‘I am this gross body,’ due to contact and
identification with the body. There is another meaning
of svabhāvaḥ, or svaṁ bhāvayati. The jīva who realises
Paramātma is called svabhāvaḥ. Śrīpāda Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa also translates the word svabhāvaḥ as the
jīvātmā: jīvātmānaḥ sambandhī yo bhāvo. “Bhāva , or
existence, in relationship with the jīvātmā is called
svabhāvaḥ.” That same jīvātmā who has taken shelter of
the body considers himself to be the enjoyer of sense
objects. Therefore, the word adhyātma refers to the jīva
.

Visarga means yajña which is performed by offering
material ingredients for the pleasure of the devatās.
This gives rise to the gross and subtle elements, which
in turn create the material world in the form of the
jīvas ’ gross bodies. This should be understood as
visarga , the material existence of the jīva.




Śloka 4




adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ

puruṣaś cādhidaivatam

adhiyajño ‘ham evātra

dehe deha-bhṛtāṁ vara

vara—O best; deha-bhṛtāṁ—of embodied beings; kṣaraḥ—the
perishable; bhāvaḥ—nature; (is called) adhibhūtam —
adhibhūta ; ca—and; puruṣaḥ—the universal form; (is
known as) adhidaivatam—adhidaiva ; eva —indeed; aham —I
(am); adhiyajñaḥ—the Lord of sacrifice; atra —here; dehe
—within the material body.

`O Arjuna, best among embodied beings, that which is
perishable is called adhibhūta, and the universal form
is adhidaiva, the presiding Lord of all devatās. I alone
am adhiyajña , situated in the body as Antaryāmī, and I
inspire a person to perform activities, such as yajña.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Adhibhūta refers to perishable objects such as pots and
cloth which exist by taking the support of the living
entities. According to the Nirukta (Vedic dictionary),
adhidaiva refers to the virāṭ-puruṣa , who has authority
over the devatās such as Sūrya. “I inspire activity such
as yajña by My partial expansion as Ant aryāmī; hence I
am adhiyajña .” Anticipating the doubt, “How are You

                           423
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

situated as adhiyajña ?” Bhagavān speaks the words aham
eva (only I). “Only I am to be known in My non-different
expansion of Antaryāmī. Unlike the jīvas (adhyātma ), My
portion (aṁśa ) Antar yāmī is non-different from Me. The
jīvātmā is My separated part (vibhinnāṁśa ), and
Paramātmā Antaryāmī, who is non-different from Me, is My
svaṁśa . As My friend, you are deha-bhṛtāṁ vara , the
best among the embodied beings.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here Śrī Bhagavān is answering three of Arjuna’s
questions:

Adhibhūta: Gross articles such as pots or cloth, which
are perishable and which change at every moment, exist
by taking support of the living entities, and are thus
called adhibhūta .

Adhidaiva: The complete cosmic being or virāṭ-puruṣa is
called adhidaiva because He has sovereignty over the
devatās .

Adhiyajña: The word adhiyajña refers to the puruṣa who
is situated in the bodies of the jīvas as all-pervading
Antaryāmī, who inspires action (karma ) such as yajña ,
and who gives the results of karma . Antaryāmī is
svāṁśatattva , a plenary portion of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
It is said in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.6):


dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyā

samānaṁ vṛkṣaṁ pariṣasvajāte

tayor anyaḥ pippalaṁ svādv atty

anaśnann anyo ‘bhicākaśīti


Kṣīrodakaśāyī-puruṣa and the jīva live as two friendly
birds on the branch of a banyan tree, which is likened
to this temporary material body. The jīva tastes the
fruits of the tree according to his karma, while the
other bird, Paramātmā, is not engaged in enjoying the
fruits, but simply witnesses the jīva’s activities.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.2.8) Śrī Sukadeva Gosvāmī also
says:


kecit sva-dehāntar-hṛdayāvakāśe

prādeśa-mātraṁ puruṣaṁ vasantam


Some yogīs remember the prādeśa-mātra puruṣa who is
situated within the cave of their hearts.

                             424
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


The word prādeśa-mātra has been translated by Śrīla
Śrīdhara Svāmī as the distance from the thumb to the tip
of the first finger. Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, “By
His acintya-śakt i , He is situated within that area as
a fifteen-year-old kiśora.” Moreover, it is said in
Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.1.12): anguṣṭha-mātraḥ puruṣo madhya
ātmani tiṣtḥati. “Antaryāmī puruṣa is the size of a
thumb and is situated in the middle part of the body,
the heart.”

All this evidence proves that Antaryāmī Paramātmā is
situated within the heart of the ordinary jīva , and
occupies a space the size of the thumb. For His special
bhaktas , however, Kṛṣṇa Himself is situated in their
hearts in His kiśora form as a fift een-year-old. For
example, that Antaryāmī situated within the heart of
Bilvamaṅgala is none other than the transcendental
kiśora , Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. As he says in Kṛṣṇa-
karṇāmṛta (1):


cintāmaṇir jayati somagirir gurur me

śikṣā-guruś ca bhagavān śikhi-piccha-mauliḥ


All glories to Cintāmaṇi, whom I consider to be my guru,
and who has fulfilled all desires. All glories to my
guru, Somagiri, and to my śikṣā-guru , Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who has a peacock feather in His hair and who is
situated in my heart.

The Antaryāmī situated in the heart of Arjuna is the
same kiśora Kṛṣṇa Himself, who is situated on his
chariot.




Śloka 5



anta-kāle ca mām eva

smaran muktvā kalevaram

yaḥ prayāti sa mad-bhāvaṁ

yāti nāsty atra saṁśayaḥ

ca—and; saḥ yaḥ—he who; anta-kāle —at the time of death;
muktvā—giving up; kalevaram —the body; smaran —
remembering; mām —Me; eva —alone; prayāti yāti—certainly
attains; mat-bhāvam—My nature; asti —there is; na—no;
saṁśayaḥ—doubt; atra—on this point.

Whoever, at the time of death, leaves his body while
remembering Me alone surely attains My nature. Of this
there is no doubt.



                            425
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“How can one know You at the time of leaving the body?”
In answer to Arjuna’s question, Śrī Bhagavān says, “By
remembering Me, one is in knowledge of Me, but o ne can
never know Me fully in the same way that one may know
material objects such as pots and cloth.” How many types
of jñ āna are there by which to remember Śrī Bhagavān?
This is explained in the following four ślokas .




Śloka 6




yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ

tyajaty ante kalevaram

taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya

sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ


yamyam—whatever; vā api—possible; bhāvam—contemplation;
smaran —one remembers; ante —at the last moment when;
tyajati —one gives up; kalevaram—the body; kaunteya —O
son of Kuntī; eva —certainly; eti —one attains; tam tam—
that very same state; sadā bhāvitaḥ—because he is always
absorbed in; tat-bhāva —that contemplation.

Whatever one remembers at the time of death, O Kaunteya,
he is sure to attain that same state, due to being
always absorbed in such contemplation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Just as one attains Me by remembering Me only,
similarly, one also attains the state corresponding to
whatever or whoever else he remembers.” To explain this,
Śrī Bhagavān is speaking these words yaṁ yaṁ. People are
absorbed in a particular state of existence due to
remembrance and continuous meditation on it.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti


                             426
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




By remembering Bhagavān at the time of death, one
attains His nature. Similarly, one attains a nature
corresponding to the other beings and objects one
remembers. Bharata Mahārāja thought of a young deer at
the time of death and in his next life he received the
body of a deer. For this reason, one must not think of
anything except Bhagavān at the time of death. To attain
such consciousness, it is imperative to endeavour in
this direction from the very beginning of one’s life.
Although Bharata Mahārāja was a bhakta of high calibre
and was situated on the platform of bhāva , he was
reborn as a young deer by the will of the Lord to set an
example for humanity. Because he had remembrance of his
past life, he completely avoided the association of
materialistic persons in his next and subsequent births,
and remained engaged in the cultivation of bhakti . The
ordinary jīvas , who are bound by the results of their
karma , should take a good lesson from the example of
Bharata Mahārāja, and should not commit offences at his
feet, thinking that he was bound by the result of karma
as they are. Furthermore, the story of Purañjana
described in the Bhāgavatam shows how he attained the
body of a woman in his next life, because he was
thinking of a woman at the time of death. Actually,
whatever we do during the course of our lives influences
our consciousness at the time of death, and we take
another birth accordingly. This is why sādhakas should
perform hari-nāma and practise śuddha-bhakti in this
life, so that at the time of death they will be able to
remember Bhagavān intensely, and their path to eternal
auspiciousness will become blessed.




Śloka 7



tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu

mām anusmara yudhya ca

mayy arpita-mano-buddhir

mām evaiṣyasy asaṁśayaḥ

tasmāt—therefore; sarveṣu—at all; kāleṣu—times; anusmara
—remember; mām—Me; ca —while; yudhya —fighting; manaḥ-
buddhiḥ—with mind and intelligence; arpita—offered; mayi
—unto Me; eva eṣyasi —you shall certainly attain; mām—
Me; asaṁśayaḥ—without doubt.

Therefore, you should always remember Me, and at the
same time perform your prescribed duty of fighting. With
your mind and intellect devoted to Me, you will attain
Me without doubt.




                           427
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The mind is saṅkalpātmaka, meaning that it can
concentrate on a particular motivation and can also
oscillate. Buddhi means intelligence and vyavasāyātmikā
means that which is resolute.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




“Thus, by constantly remembering My parabrahma-bhāva, My
eternal beautiful form as Kṛṣṇa, act according to your
own svabhāva , your acquired nature as a kṣatriya , and
fight. When your mind is concentrated in this way, your
intelligence is resolute and you are surrendered unto
Me, you will surely attain Me.”




Śloka 8



abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena

cetasā nānya-gāminā

paramaṁ puruṣaṁ divyaṁ

yāti pārthānucintayan

pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; (one who is) abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena
—engaged in yoga practice; cetasā—with mind; na anya-
gāminā—undeviating; anucintayan—while contemplating
(Him); yāti—one attains; paramam—that supreme; divyam—
divine; puruṣam—person.

O Pārtha, one who is engaged in constant yoga practice
with undeviated attention, and who continuously thinks
of parama-puruṣa (the Supreme Person), will surely
attain Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“In this way, he who practises remembering Me during his
life will naturally remember Me at the time of death,
and in this way he will achieve Me. Thus, remembrance of

                           428
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

Me alone is the supreme yoga of the mind.” To explain
this, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning with
the words abhyāsa-yoga. “Abhyāsa means to practise
continuous remembrance of Me, and yoga means to fix the
mind in such practice, not hankering for different sense
objects. When one constantly remembers Me with such
undeviated attention, he will be able to conquer the
nature of the mind.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




It is necessary to engage in abhyāsa-yoga in order to
attain unbroken continuity in bhajana (like the flow of
a stream which cannot be checked). One will be able to
engage the mind in remembering Śrī Bhagavān by the
performance of abhyāsa-yoga and by withdrawing it from
other sense objects. By continually practising
remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa throughout one’s life, one will
be able to conquer the distracted mind, thus enabling
one to remember Kṛṣṇa at the time of death. This is also
stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.18): abhyāsenātmano
yogī

dhārayed acalaṁ manaḥ

A yogī should make his mind steady by practise.

One may refer to Gītā (12.9) to study this topic
further.




Ślokas 9—10




kaviṁ purāṇam anuśāsitāram

aṇor aṇīyāṁsam anusmared yaḥ

sarvasya dhātāram acintya-rūpam

āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt


prayāṇa-kāle manasācalena

bhaktyā yukto yoga-balena caiva

bhruvor madhye prāṇam āveśya samyak

sa taṁ paraṁ puruṣam upaiti divyam



                             429
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(one) anusmaret—can remember; param divyam puruṣam —that
divine person; purāṇam—the ancient; kavim—sage;
anuśāsitāram —who is the controller; aṇīyāṁsam —smaller;
aṇoḥ—than the smallest; dhātāram —the maintainer;
sarvasya —of everyone; acintya-rūpam—whose form is
inconceivable; āditya-varṇam—who is coloured like the
sun; (and is) parastāt—transcendental; tamasaḥ—to the
darkness; saḥ yaḥ—he who; prayāṇa-kāle —at the time of
death; āveśya—fixing; prāṇam—his life air; samyak —
completely; madhye —between; bhruvoḥ—the eyebrows; yoga-
balena—by the power of yoga ; ca—and; eva —indeed;
yuktaḥ—engaging; acalena—with undeviating; manasā—mind;
(and) bhaktyā—with devotion; upaiti—attains; tam—(Him).

One should remember that Person who is omniscient and
eternal, who is the Supreme Controller, who is smaller
than the smallest, who is the maintainer of everyone,
whose form is inconceivable, who is self-effulgent like
the sun and who is transcendental to this material
nature. One who, at the time of death, fully fixes his
life air between the eyebrows by the strength of yoga,
and concentrates with undeviating attention and full
bhakti, certainly attains Him.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




It is impossible to withdraw the mind from sense-objects
without yogābhyāsa. Without continuous practise of yoga
, it is impossible to remember Śrī Bhagavān. Bhakti
which is mixed with any type of yoga is called yoga-
miśrā bhakti . Śrī Bhagavān is explaining this in the
next four ślokas beginning here with kavim . Kavim means
omniscient. Ṛṣis such as Sanaka are sarva-jña
(omniscient), but their omniscient nature is not
unlimited. This is why Śrī Bhagavān is using the word
purāṇam , without begi nning. Although Antaryāmī is
omniscient and beginningless, He does not give
instructions in bhakti , so Bhagavān is saying
anuśāsitāram , meaning that He mercifully gives
instructions on bhakti through His svarūpa-avatāras such
as Śrī Rāma and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The tattva of such a merciful
personality is very difficult to understand.

He says that He is more subtle than the most subtle.
Does this mean that He is atomic like the jīva? To
clarify this, He says: sarvasya dhātāram. “I am the
sustainer of everything, and because I am all-pervading,
I am of unlimited size, therefore I am acintya
(inconceivable).” Although He has a human-like form, He
is explaining His manifestations who are non-different
from Him. Āditya-varṇam means that, like Sūrya, He
illuminates both Himself and others. He is beyond
material nature (tamasaḥ) and, although He is the master
of māyā-śakti , He is beyond māyā. At the time of death,
yogīs remember Him with undeviated minds. They are
blessed with the potency of continuous remembrance of
Him th at they have practised during their lives. How
does one attain this stability of mind? Bhagavān says,

                           430
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

“He attains it on the strength of yogābhyāsa .” What
type of yoga ? He answers, “The yoga in which the life
air is fixed between the eyebrows (āj ñ ā-cakra ).”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the previous śloka, the process of remembering Śrī
Bhagavān at the time of death was mentioned, and now it
is explained in this śloka .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Please listen as I explain the process of meditation on
the Supreme Person (parama puruṣa ). He is omniscient,
beginningless and inconceivable to mundane intelligence.
He is the smallest, yet He is also the Supreme
Controller who maintains everyone. He exists eternally
in His beautiful, human-like Śyāmasundara form. His
tattva is beyond material nature and, because He is
self-illuminating like the sun, His bodily hue
illuminates His form. One who leaves his body having
made his mind steady by bhakti , and who fixes the life
air between the eyebrows by the power of yogābhyāsa ,
attains that Supreme Person. This yoga system has been
instructed to ensure that one’s attention is not
distracted from the parama puruṣa by suffering and pain
at the time of death.”




Śloka 11



yad akṣaraṁ veda-vido vadanti

viśanti yad yatayo vīta-rāgāḥ

yad icchanto brahmacaryaṁ caranti

tat te padaṁ saṅgraheṇa pravakṣye


pravakṣye—I shall describe; te—to you; saṅgraheṇa —in
summary; tat—that; padam—state; yat —which; veda-vidaḥ—
those conversant with the Vedas ; vadanti —speak of;
(as) akṣaram —imperishable; yat—into which; yatayaḥ—
ascetics; vīta-rāgāḥ—who are free from attachment;
viśanti —enter; (and) yat —which; caranti—they who
practise; brahmacaryam—celibacy; icchantaḥ—desire (it).

I will now tell   you in brief about that ultimate goal,
which the Vedic   paṇḍitas describe as akṣaram
(imperishable).   Ascetics who are free from all desires
enter there, as   well as those who observe the principle
of celibacy and   have a desire to attain that goal.


                            431
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




One may ask, “Can He be known simply by fixing the life
air on the ājñā-cakra ? What type of yoga is this? What
is japa ? What is the object of meditation? What is the
ultimate goal? Please explain these in brief.”
Anticipating these questions, Śrī Bhagavān speaks thi s
śloka beginning with the word yad and the next two
ślokas. “Oṁkāra , the sound manifestation of brahma , is
akṣara (imperishable) and is identical with brahma . The
knowers of the Vedas proclaim this. The ascetics enter
this syllable oṁ, the sound manifestation of brahma ,
that imperishable reality. Please listen as I explain
what this goal is and how it can be achieved.”




Ślokas 12—13



sarva-dvārāṇi saṁyamya

mano hṛdi nirudhya ca

mūrdhny ādhāyātmanaḥ prāṇam

āsthito yoga-dhāraṇām

om ity ekākṣaraṁ brahma

vyāharan mām anusmaran

yaḥ prayāti tyajan dehaṁ

sa yāti paramāṁ gatim


(he) prayāti yāti—certainly attains; paramām—the
supreme; gatim—destination; saṁyamya —disciplining;
sarva-dvārāṇi —all the gates of the body (senses); ca —
and; nirudhya —confining; manaḥ—the mind; hṛdi —within
the heart; ādhāya —fixing; prāṇam —the life air; mūrdhni
—at the top of the head; (this is) āsthitaḥ—the
situation; yoga-dhāraṇām —for the trance of self-
realisation; ātmanaḥ—of the soul; vyāharan —uttering; om
—the sacred syllable oṁ; iti —thus; eka-akṣaram—the one
complete, imperishable syllable; (which is the sound
form of) brahma —brahma ; sa yāti—he who; tyajan —giving
up; deham —the body; anusmaran mām —remembers Me
according to the guidance of guru .

The yogī attains the supreme destination by controlling
all the senses, confining the mind within the heart,
fixing the life-breath between the eyebrows, being
deeply absorbed in samādhi by the practice of yoga,

                           432
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

repeating the syllable oṁ — which is a manifestation of
brahma — and giving up his body while meditating on Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




While explaining this type of yoga, Śrī Bhagavān is
speaking the above two ślokas beginning with sarva-
dvārāṇi. “A person attains the supreme destination of
sālokya-mukti and comes to My planet by restraining all
his senses, such as the eyes, from their external sense
objects; confining the mind to the heart, not desiring
any sense object; fixing the life air between the
eyebrows; performing yoga-dhāraṇām , taking shelter of
My Deity form by meditating on the Deity from His feet
to His head; chanting oṁkāra (oṁ), which is identical
with brahma ; and giving up his body while continuously
meditating on the meaning of oṁ, Myself.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Oṁ is the sound manifestation of brahma. It is also said
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.1.17): abhyasen manasā śuddhaṁ
trivṛd-brahmākṣaraṁ param. span>“One should practise by
repeating in his mind the pure form of brahma-akṣara ,
the sound manifestation of brahma (praṇava ), made of
three letters: ‘a’, ‘u’ and ‘m’.”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said in Caitanya-caritāmṛta:


praṇava ye mahā-vākya-īśvarera-mūrti

praṇava haite sarva-veda, jagate-utpatti


Madhyalīlā 6.174

and also:


praṇava se mahā-vākya vedera nidāna

īśvara-svarūpa praṇava sarva-viśva-dhāma


Ādi-līlā 7.128

Praṇava is the essence of all the Vedas and is the mahā-
vākya, the greatest syllable (sound vibration). All
other mantras have limitations. Praṇava is identical
with the śrī-murti of Jagadiśa. All the Vedas as well as
this universe are generated from praṇava. The essence of

                           433
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the Vedas is indeed this mahā-vākya in the form of
praṇava. It is the svarūpa of Bhagavān and the basis of
the whole universe.




Śloka 14




ananya-cetāḥ satataṁ

yo māṁ smarati nityaśaḥ

tasyāhaṁ sulabhaḥ pārtha

nitya-yuktasya yoginaḥ

pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; tasya—for that; nitya-yuktasya —
constantly engaged; yoginaḥ—transcendentalist; yaḥ—who;
nityaśaḥ—regularly; (and) satatam —continuously; smarati
—remembers; mām —Me; ananya-cetāḥ—with an undistracted
mind; aham —I (am); sulabhaḥ—easy to achieve.

O Pārtha, for one who is constantly absorbed in bhakti-
yoga and who continuously remembers Me with an
undistracted mind, I am easily attainable.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Karma-miśrā bhakti has been explained in Gītā (7.29),
and yoga-miśrā bhakti and pradhānī-bhūtā bhakti , along
with their dominant factors (karma , jñ āna and yoga ),
have been explained in Gītā (8.13). Now, in this śloka
beginning with the words ananya-cetāḥ, Śrī Bhagavān is
explaining kevala-bhakti , which is superior to all
other types of yoga and is nirguṇa . “I am easily
attainable for such a bhakta who continuously remembers
Me without considering the purity of time, place or
circumstance, whose mind is not attracted to the
practices of karma , jñ āna and yoga , who does not
worship the devatās or strive to achieve any other goal
such as Svarga and mukti. That bhakta will not have to
undergo the misery experienced while practising yoga ,
jñ āna and so on. The words nitya-yuktasya refer to he
who is always hankering for union with Me.” If one
doubts that Bhagavān will also be easily attainable in
the future, He responds, “I am always easily attainable
for him.” The word yoginaḥ means one who is endowed with
bhakti-yoga , that is, one who is connected to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
in a relationship such as d āsya or sakhya.




                           434
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I
have explained bhakti mixed with karma and jñ āna from
Gītā (7.16) which discusses ārta (the distressed), jijñ
āsu (the inquisitive), arthārthī (those desirous of
wealth) and jñ ānī (men of knowledge) up to Gītā (7.29),
wherein birth, death and mokṣa are explained. In other
words, I have instructed you about the nature of karma-
jñ āna-pradhānī-bhūtā bhakti , or bhakti which
predominates over karma and jñ āna . From the śloka :
kaviṁ purāṇam (Gītā 8.9), I have explained yoga-miśrā
bhakti or the nature of yoga-pradhānī-bhūtā bhakti . I
have given some hints about kevala-bhakti between these
ślokas just to give you a taste. Now, please listen as I
explain the nature of kevala-bhakti. I am easily
attainable for such a bhakti-yogī who is ever united
with Me, who remembers Me with his mind restrained from
attraction to all other objects, and who is exclusively
devoted. In other words, it is very difficult to achieve
Me by performing pradhānī-bhūtā bhakti . This is to be
understood.”




Śloka 15



mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

mahātmānaḥ—the great souls; upetya—having attained; mām
—Me; na āpnuvanti—do not take; punaḥ janma —rebirth (in
saṁsāra ); duḥkha-ālayam —which is the abode of misery;
(and is) aśāśvatam —transitory; gatāḥ—having attained;
paramām —the highest; saṁsiddhim —perfection.

The mahātmas, having attained Me, do not take birth
again in this temporary world which is the abode of
misery, for they have attained the highest perfection.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What becomes of those who attain You?” In response, Śrī
Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the word mām.
“They do not have to take another birth which is
temporary and full of misery. Instead, they attain a

                           435
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

birth like Mine which is eternal and full of bliss.”
According to the Amara-koṣa dictionary, the words
śāsvata , dhruva , nitya , sadātana and sanātana are all
synonymous. “When I take My blissful, eternal and
transcendental birth in the house of Vasudeva, My
eternal associates (My bhaktas ) also take birth. They
do not take birth at any other time.” The word paramām
has special significance. “Other types of bhaktas attain
saṁsiddhi (perfection), but those who are ananya-cetāḥ,
who have fixed their minds solely on Me, attain paramāṁ
saṁsiddhim , that is, they become associates in My
līlā.” Hence, it has been established that the bhaktas
who are ananya-cetāḥ are superior to the bhaktas who
were described previously.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Those who have become indifferent to karma, jñ āna ,
yoga and so forth, and who have not taken shelter of the
various devas , but who worship only Kṛṣṇa with ananya-
bhakti , surely attain only Him. They do not have to
take another miserable, temporary birth, but become
eternally absorbed in Kṛṣṇa’s service, being freed from
the bondage of birth and activities (karma ). As it is
said in the Padma-Purāṇa (quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
10.113): na karma-bandhanaṁ janma vaiṣṇavānāñ ca vidyate
viṣṇor anucaratvaṁ hi mokṣam āhur manīṣiṇaḥ. “For the
Vaiṣṇavas, the bondage of karma does not exist. Since
the Vaiṣṇavas have become the associates of Viṣṇu, they
are called mukti-bhājana (qualified for mukti ) by those
who know tattva .”

By performing kevalā or rāgānugā bhakti, the ananya-
bhaktas of Bhagavān attain supreme perfection. That is,
by attaining svarūpa-siddhi and vastu-siddhi , they are
counted among the associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His
pastimes and engage in His service. Whe n it is time for
His appearance they, like Him, also appear in order to
nourish and enhance His manifest līlā.




Śloka 16




ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ

punar āvartino ‘rjuna

mām upetya tu kaunteya



punar janma na vidyate

                           436
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


arjuna—O Arjuna; kaunteya—son of Kuntī; lokāḥ—the
planets; ā-brahma-bhuvanāt —up to Brahma-loka; punaḥ
āvartinaḥ—are places of repeated birth and death; tu —
but; upetya—having attained; mām —Me; vidyate —there is;
na —no; punaḥ—further; janma—rebirth.

O Arjuna, all planets in this universe up to Brahma-loka
are places of repeated birth and death, but one who
attains Me, O Kaunteya, never takes birth again.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Indeed, all jīvas, even those who have great sukṛti ,
take birth, but My bhaktas do not.” To explain this,
this śloka beginning with ā-brahma is spoken. The jīvas
who live on all of the planets up to Satya-loka, the
planet of Lord Brahmā, must take birth again.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “From
Brahma-loka or Satya-loka down to the lowest planet, all
are temporary. The jīvas from those planets may take
another birth, but one who takes shelter of Me as the
object of kevala-bhakti does not take birth again.” It
is not said that there is no rebirth for karma-yogīs ,
aṣṭāṅga-yogīs and those who take shelter of pradhānī-
bhūtā bhakti . This implies that kevala-bhakti is the
ultimate fruit or the perfection of all these processes
and one can become free from the cycle of rebirth by
gradually attaining this stage of kevala-bhakti .




Śloka 17



sahasra-yuga-paryantam

ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ

rātriṁ yuga-sahasrāntāṁ

te ‘ho-rātra-vido janāḥ

te—those; janāḥ—persons; ahaḥ-rātra-vidaḥ—who know his
day and night; viduḥ—understand; (that period) yat —
which; paryantam —comprises; sahasra-yuga —a thousand

                           437
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ages (one age equals 4,320,000 years); (is) ahaḥ—one
day; brahmaṇaḥ—of Brahmā; rātrim —his night; (also)
yuga-sahasra-antām—lasts a thousand ages.

Those who know the truth about Brahmā’s day and night
understand that his day lasts for one thousand cycles of
the four yugas, and that his night is also of the same
duration.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




One may doubt what is said in the Second Canto of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.6.19), “Above the three planetary
systems (bhūr , bhuvaḥ and svaḥ) is Maha-loka and above
Maha-loka are the three planets Jana, Tapa and Satya.
These three are immortal, contain all the requirements
for one’s maintenance, and are free from fear.” Some say
that Brahma-loka is free from fear, and that even
sannyāsīs desire to dwell there. Does this mean that
those residing on that planet will never die?”
Anticipating this question, Śrī Bhagavān states, “No, it
is not true. Brahmā, the master of that planet, himself
dies, so what to speak of others.” To clarify this
further, He speaks this śloka beginning with sahasra ,
which says that those who know śāstra understand that
Brahmā’s one day equals one thousand cycles of the four
yugas (totalling 4,320,000,000 years) and his night is
of the same duration. After Brahmā’s great life span of
one hundred years of these days and nights, fortnights
and months, he falls and dies, but that Brahmā who is a
Vaiṣṇava attains mukti.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “According to the
calculation of human beings, one day of Brahmā is equal
to one thousand cycles of four yugas , and his night is
of the same period. In this way, Brahmā falls or dies
after living for one hundred such years. However, those
Brahmās’ who are devoted to Śrī Bhagavān achieve mukti .
If this is Brahmā’s situat ion, then how can the
fearlessness of sannyāsīs who have attained his planet
be eternal? It cannot be. They are also bound to take
birth again.”




Śloka 18



                           438
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



avyaktād vyaktayaḥ sarvāḥ

prabhavanty ahar-āgame

rātry-āgame pralīyante

tatraivāvyakta-saṁjñake


sarvāḥ—all; vyaktayaḥ—the individual embodied jīvātmās ;
prabhavanti —become manifest; avyaktāt —from the
unmanifest; ahaḥ-āgame —when the day comes; (and)
pralīyante—they merge; avyakta-saṁjñake —into that
(state) known as the unmanifest; tatra eva —at that very
time; rātri-āgame —when the night comes.

All jīvas manifest from the unmanifest cause at the
beginning of Brahmā’s day, and become merged into the
same unmanifest cause upon the arrival of his night.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those who are residents of the lower three planets,
bhūr, bhuvaḥ and svaḥ, must die in every day of Brahmā.
For this reason, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka
beginning with the word avyaktād. Śrīpada Madhusūdana
Sarasvatī says, “In the cycle of the creation and
annihilation of Brahmā’s day , the element sky exists
daily.” Therefore, the word avyakta in this śloka does
not refer to the pradhāna but indicates Brahmā’s night.

From that unmanifest cause, namely Brahmā’s night, comes
his day, which manifests the field for enjoyment in the
form of the body, sense objects and so forth. The whole
world becomes actively manifest in this way. Then, at
the approach of his night, it is again dissolved into
the unmanifest cause while he sleeps.




Śloka 19




bhūta-grāmaḥ sa evāyaṁ

bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate

rātry-āgame ‘vaśaḥ pārtha

prabhavaty ahar-āgame

pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; saḥ ayam—that very; eva—same;

                            439
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

bhūta-grāmaḥ—host of beings; bhūtvā bhūtvā—having
repeatedly taken birth; pralīyate —is dissolved; rātri-
āgame—on the arrival of his night; (and) avaś aḥ—
helplessly; prabhavati—springs up; ahaḥ-āgame —on the
arrival of his day.

`O Pārtha, that very host of jīvas, both moving and non-
moving, who come into being at the approach of Brahmā’s
day are again helplessly dissolved on the arrival of his
night. They repeatedly manifest at the approach of
Brahmā’s day, under the strict law of karma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this way, all moving and non-moving jīvas come into
being and are again annihilated.




Śloka 20



paras tasmāt tu bhāvo ‘nyo

‘vyakto ‘vyaktāt sanātanaḥ

yaḥ sa sarveṣu bhūteṣu

naśyatsu na vinaśyati

tu—but; paraḥ—superior; tasmāt —to that; avyaktāt —
unmanifest state; (there is) anyaḥ—another; avyaktaḥ—
unmanifest; bhāvaḥ—nature; (which is) sanātanaḥ—eternal;
saḥ—that (nature); yaḥ—which; na vinaśyati —is not
destroyed; sarveṣu—when all bhūteṣu —living beings;
naśyatsu —are destroyed.

Yet, superior to that unmanifest state, there exists
another unmanifest nature, which is eternal and
wonderful and which is not destroyed, even at the time
of the great dissolution, when all of this world is
annihilated.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Superior to the unmanifest principle of the prajāpati
Hiraṇyagarbha Brahmā, there is another unmanifest
nature, which is eternal and without beginning, and is
the cause of this Hiraṇyagarbha.

                             440
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 21



avyakto ‘kṣara ity uktas

tam āhuḥ paramāṁ gatim

yaṁ prāpya na nivartante

tad dhāma paramaṁ mama

avyaktaḥ—the unmanifest (nature); uktaḥ—is described;
iti —as; akṣaraḥ—imperishable; (sages) āhuḥ—call; tam —
that; paramām —the supreme; gatim —destination; prāpya —
having attained; yam —which; na nivartante —they (the
jīvātmās ) do not return; tat —that; (is) mama —My;
paramam —supreme; dhāma —abode.

That eternal unmanifest nature is known as akṣara and is
the supreme destination. Having attained that dhāma,
they never return to this world. It is My eternal abode
and My eternal nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word avyakta, mentioned in the previous śloka , is
being explained in this śloka beginning with avyaktaḥ.
That which is imperishable or indestructible is called
akṣara . The Nārāyaṇa-śruti says: eko nārāyaṇa āsīn na
brahmā na ca śaṅkaraḥ. “In the beginning there was only
Śrī Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa; neither Brahmā nor Śiva existed.”

“My supreme abode is eternal. Akṣara-parama-dhāma means
that My abode is brahma , and it possesses an effulgent
form.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Having described the temporary existence of all moving
and non-moving beings, Śrī Bhagavān now explains the
eternality of parameśvara-tattva (the supreme
controlling principle). In the present two ślokas , He
explains the sanātana-puruṣa , who is superior to the
unmanifest Hiraṇyagarbha, and who is inaccessible to the
mind and senses. This unmanifest reality is also called
akṣarabrahma , and is alone the supreme destination of

                           441
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the jīvas . Upon attaining that parama-dhāma , there is
no possibility of ever again returning to this material
world.




Śloka 22



puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ pārtha

bhaktyā labhyas tv ananyayā

yasyāntaḥ-sthāni bhūtāni

yena sarvam idaṁ tatam

pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; (it is I) saḥ—that; paraḥ—
supreme; puruṣaḥ—person; yasya —whose (expansion); (is)
antaḥ-sthāni —situated in the heart; bhūtāni —of all
living beings; (and) yena —by whom; idam —this; sarvam —
entire (universe); tatam—is pervaded; labhyaḥ—is
attained; tu —indeed; ananyayā—through unalloyed;
bhaktyā—devotion.

O Pārtha, I am that Supreme Person in whom all beings
are situated, and by whom, as Antaryāmī, this whole
world is pervaded. I am attained only by ananya-bhakti.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“That parama-puruṣa (Supreme Person), who is My aṁśa
(Antaryāmī Paramātmā), is attained only by ananya-bhakti
. Ananyā means that bhakti in which there is no trace of
karma , jñ āna , yoga , worldly desire and so on. This
is the meaning of My earlier statement in Gītā (8.14):
ananya-cetāḥ satatam.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




That puruṣa described in the previous śloka, who is
situated in the unmanifest stage, is the sva-aṁśa
(plenary portion) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. All jīvas are situated
in Him and, because He is also situated within all jīvas
, He is An taryāmī. He can be attained only by ananya-
bhakti which is devoid of karma , jñ āna , yoga , etc.




                           442
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 23



yatra kāle tv anāvṛttim

āvṛttiṁ caiva yoginaḥ

prayātā yānti taṁ kālaṁ

vakṣyāmi bharatarṣabha

bharatarṣabha—O best of Bharata’s line; vakṣyāmi—I shall
describe; tam —that; kālam —time; yatra —at which; kāle
—according to dictates of the deity of time; (there is)
eva —certainly; anāvṛttim —no return; ca —and; āvṛttim —
return; (thus) yoginaḥ—yogīs ; prayātāḥ—having passed
from the body; tu —indeed; yānti —attain (their desired
destination).

O best of the Bharatas, I shall now explain the
different paths protected by the presiding devas of
time, by which yogīs who pass away from this world
either come back again or do not return.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Previously You said, ‘After attaining My parama-dhāma,
the jīva never returns.’ By this statement, You
established that, after attaining Your abode, Your
bhaktas never return. Yet, You have not given any
instruction about that special path and how to attain
it. The path of Arci (the deva of the sunrays) is in
sattva-guṇa , but that special path of which You now
speak must be beyond the guṇas , since Your bhaktas are
also beyond the guṇas. For now, however, I am inquiring
about the path which is followed by karmīs , jñ ānīs and
yogīs .”

Anticipating Arjuna’s question, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with yatra. “A person returns or does
not return to this world depending on the path that is
indicated by the exact time at which he leaves his body.
I will now explain that time or path.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The ananya-bhaktas of Bhagavān easily attain His abode,
unlike the karmīs , jñ ānīs and yogīs , and they do not
have to undergo the miserable path which is in sattva-

                           443
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

guṇa . Since the bhaktas who follow nirguṇa-bhakti are
also nirguṇa , their paths and the time of their passing
are also nirguṇa . The bhaktas do not have to depend on
time, considering whether or not the sun is in the
northern hemisphere. The time at which they enter Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s aprākṛta-līlā is always nirguṇa .




Śloka 24




agnir jyotir ahaḥ śuklaḥ

ṣaṇ-māsā uttarāyaṇam

tatra prayātā gacchanti

brahma brahma-vido janāḥ

janāḥ—persons; brahma-vidaḥ—conversant with brahma ;
prayātāḥ—who depart from the body; (by the path of the
gods of) agniḥ— fire; jyotiḥ—light; ahaḥ—the day; (of)
śuklaḥ—the moon’s waxing fortnight; ṣaṭ-māsāḥ—the six
months; uttarāyaṇam —of the sun’s northern course; tatra
—then; gacchanti —they enter; brahma —the Absolute.

Those who know brahma and who depart from this world
during the influence of the presiding devas of fire, the
light, auspicious days, the fortnight of the waxing moon
and the six months of the sun’s northern course, attain
brahma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining how to follow the path
from which there is no return. It is said in Chāndogya
Upaniṣad : te ‘rciṣam abhisambhavanti. “They attain the
presiding deva of arci (the sunrays).” Therefore, the
words agniḥ and jyotiḥ indicate the presiding deva of
arci . The word ahaḥ refers to the presiding deva of the
day, and the word uttarāyaṇam refers to its presiding
deva of the six months of the northern course of the
sun. The jñ ānīs , or those who are brahma-vid (who know
brahma ), attain brahma by following this path. In this
regard, the śrutis say that they attain the deva
presiding over arci , and then the devas of the day, the
fortnight and month in that order. From the deva of the
month, they attain the deva of the year, and then
Āditya, the sun-god.




                           444
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “Those who are brahma-
vid, who give up their bodies at the times of the
presiding devas of fire and light, on an auspicious day,
and when the sun is in the northern course, attain
brahma . The words agniḥ and jyotiḥ refer to the
presiding deva of arci (light), and the word ahaḥ refers
to the presiding deva of the day. The word śukla refers
to the presiding deva of the bright fortnight, and
uttarāyaṇa refers to the deva presiding over the six
months of the sun’s northern course. The only course for
a yogī desiring to attain brahma is to successively pass
through the presiding devas of arci , the day, the
bright fortnight and so forth, at a particular time when
the mind and the senses are satisfied and joyful. Yogīs
who die at these times never return.”




Śloka 25




dhūmo rātris tathā kṛṣṇaḥ

ṣaṇ-māsā dakṣiṇāyanam

tatra cāndramasaṁ jyotir

yogī prāpya nivartate

yogī—the mystic; (who departs by the path of the devas
of) dhūmaḥ—smoke; rātriḥ—night; tathā—and; kṛṣṇaḥ—the
moon’s dark fortnight; ṣaṭ-māsāḥ—the six months;
dakṣiṇāyanam —of the sun’s southern course; prāpya —
after attaining; cāndramasam—the moon; (and) jyotiḥ—
celestial delights; tatra —then; nivartate —he returns.

The karma-yogī, who departs by the path of the devas who
preside over the times of smoke, the night, kṛṣṇa-pakṣa
(the dark half of the month) and the six months of the
sun’s southern course, attains Svarga. After enjoying
celestial pleasures there, he again returns to this
material world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the return path of the
karmīs. As before, the words smoke, night and so on
refer to the presiding devas of those times. A karma-
yogī, who passes through the paths of these devas ,

                            445
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

attains Svarga (the moon) and enjoys the result of his
karma there. He returns to this material world when the
results of his karma are exhausted.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Karmīs who pass through the path of smoke, night, the
dark fortnight, the sun’s six-month course in the
southern hemisphere and the light of the moon, or who
engage in fruitive acts with their senses, return to
this material world upon attaining the particular
presiding devas of these times.




Śloka 26



śukla-kṛṣṇe gatī hy ete

jagataḥ śāśvate mate

ekayā yāty anāvṛttim

anyayāvartate punaḥ

śāśvate—in the eternal; mate—opinion (of the sages); hi
—certainly; ete —these two; gatī—paths; (exist) jagataḥ—
throughout the cosmic manifestation; śukla —by light;
kṛṣṇe —and by darkness; ekayā—by one; yāti —one enters;
anāvṛttim —the state of no return; anyayā—by the other;
āvartate —one returns; punaḥ—again.

In departing from this world, only two paths, śukla and
kṛṣṇa, are considered to be eternal. Passing through
śukla-pakṣa (the bright path) one attains mokṣa, and by
passing through kṛṣṇa-pakṣa (the dark path), one returns
to this world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now Śrī Bhagavān is concluding the topic of the above-
mentioned two paths in this śloka beginning with the
words śukla-kṛṣṇa. Śāśvat means that there are two
eternal paths in this world of beginningless saṁsāra .
One is śukla-pakṣa , by which one attains mokṣa , and
the other is kṛṣṇa-pakṣa , by which one returns to the
material world.


                           446
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The above mentioned paths of arci, etc., or deva-yāna
(voyage through the paths of the devas ) are the
illuminators of knowledge, and are well known by the
name śukla-gati (the bright path). The path of smoke,
etc., or pitṛ-yāna (voyage through the path of the
forefathers), is full of darkness and ignorance, and is
called kṛṣṇa-gati (the dark path). From time immemorial,
these two paths have functioned in this world. Those
yogīs who are brahma-vid take shelter of the bright
path, and passing through the planets of arci and so
forth in the paths of the devas , they gradually attain
mokṣa . On the other hand, those yogīs who engage in
karma to satisfy their own desires take shelter of
kṛṣṇa-gati through pitṛ-yāna (the path of the
forefathers). They enjoy the heavenly pleasures of
Svarga, having passed through the paths of the presiding
devas of darkness and so on, and finally return to this
material saṁsāra . A detailed description of deva-yāna
and pitṛ-yāna is given in Chāndogya Upaniṣad .




Śloka 27



naite sṛtī pārtha jānan

yogī muhyati kaścana

tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu

yoga-yukto bhavārjuna

pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; yogī—the transcendentalist; jānan
—knowing; ete —these; sṛtī—paths; na kaścana muhyati —is
never bewildered; tasmāt —therefore; arjuna —O Arjuna;
sarveṣu —at all; kāleṣu —times; bhava —be; yoga-yuktaḥ—
connected in yoga .

O Pārtha, the bhakti-yogīs who have perfect knowledge of
these two paths are never bewildered. Therefore, O
Arjuna, be always fixed in yoga.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Knowledge of these two paths gives rise to
discrimination; thus in this śloka beginning with naite

                           447
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

, such a jñ ānī is glorified. Śrī Bhagavān says to
Arjuna, “Become a bhakti -yogī.” In other words, “Become
a person of composed mind.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Bhaktas are never deluded, because they remain fixed in
bhakti-yoga with knowledge based on tattva . Therefore,
they know the real distinction between these two paths,
and they take shelter of the path of bhakti , which
transcends both. That is, they take shelter of ananya-
bhakti-yoga , knowing both paths to be miserable.
Therefore, O Arjuna, you should take shelter of that
yoga only.”




Śloka 28




vedeṣu yajñeṣu tapaḥsu caiva

dāneṣu yat puṇya-phalaṁ pradiṣṭam

atyeti tat sarvam idaṁ viditvā

yogī paraṁ sthānam upaiti cādyam


yogī—a yogī; eva atyeti —certainly surpasses; tat —that;
puṇya-phalam —pious benefit; yat —which; pradiṣṭam —is
allotted; vedeṣu —for Vedic studies; yajñeṣu —
sacrificial performances; tapaḥsu —austerities; ca —and;
dāneṣu —charitable deeds; ca —and; viditvā—becoming
aware; sarvam —of all; upaiti —attains; idam —this;
param —the supreme; ādyam —original and superexcellent;
sthāna m —realm of the Lord.

A bhakti-yogī surpasses all the pious results of
studying the Vedas and of performing yajña, tapasya,
dāna, karma and so on. Acquiring the knowledge which I
have spoken to you, he attains the supreme,
transcendental abode.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The benefit attained by acquiring jñāna as described in

                           448
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

this chapter is explained in this śloka beginning with
vedeṣu. Tat sarvam atyeti means that, by surpassing the
results of all these activities, the bhakti-yogī attains
a superior place which is eternal and aprākṛta ,
transcendental.

The superiority of a bhakti-yogī was also described
earlier, but here it is clarified further. In this
chapter, the supremacy of the ananya-bhaktas has been
established.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Eighth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “If you follow bhakti-
yoga, you will not be denied the results of any other
activity. You will attain whatever results may come from
yajña , tapasyā, dāna , or any type of jñ āna or from
studying the Vedas , and you will reach My supremely
transcendental and eternal realm.” In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.20.32-33) it is stated: yat karmabhir yat tapasā

jñāna-vairāgyataś ca yat

yogena dāna-dharmeṇa

śreyobhir itarair api

sarvaṁ mad-bhakti-yogena

mad-bhakto labhate ‘ñjasā

svargāpavargaṁ mad-dhāma

kathañcid yadi vāñchati

Through bhakti-yoga My devotee can easily attain
whatever a sādhaka achieves by performing karma,
tapasyā, jñ āna, vairāgya and so on.

In the Mahābhārata there is a statement pertaining to
mokṣa :


yā vai sādhana-sampattiḥ puruṣārtha-catuṣṭaye

tayā vinā tadāpnoti naro nārāyaṇāśrayaḥ.


A bhakta who has taken shelter of Śrī Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa,
attains all the opulence one attains from the four goals
of human life (dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa) without
undergoing any misery.


                            449
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura also says that one
attains all auspiciousness by performing kevala-bhakti,
and without bhakti one cannot attain anything. Thus,
bhakti is established as the supreme auspicious process
in both ways, by the direct and indirect statements of
śāstra . This is also stated in Nārada-pa ñcar ātra :
hari-bhakti-mahā-devyāḥ sarvā muktyādi sidhyaḥ bhuktayaś
cādbhutās tasyaś ceṭakavad anuvratāḥ


Brahma-vidyā and the eight types of perfection, such as
aṇimā, appear in their personified form like devoted
servants before an ananya-bhaktaÇ even when they are not
desired.”

In his Vidvad-rañjana-bhāṣya, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
writes, “Faith turns into niṣtḥā, or exclusive
absorption in My service, when the anarthas of a devotee
who has single one-pointed faith are removed by bhajana
, in the association of My bhaktas . All sins are
removed by bhajana in saintly association (sādhu-saṅga
), even though śraddhā may not have fully developed yet,
an understanding of tattva may be lacking, and doubts
about the worshipable Deity may still linger as
impurities.”

Moods of devotion that are mixed with jñāna (jñ āna-
miśrā-bhāva ) and yoga (yoga-miśrā-bhāva ), and polluted
by bhukti and mukti are anarthas that prevent one from
understanding bhajana-tattva . One’s bhajana becomes
purified of these anarthas , to the extent that the
tendency of one’s bhakti becomes kevalā (one-pointed)
and he takes shelter of viśuddha-tattva , the pure,
Absolute Reality of Śrī Bhagavān. This is the essence of
the Eighth Chapter.

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Eighth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Nine




Rāja-Guhya-Yoga



Yoga Through the Most Confidential Knowledge




Śloka 1




                           450
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

śrī-bhagavān uvāca —

idaṁ tu te guhyatamaṁ

pravakṣyāmy anasūyave

jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ

yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ‘śubhāt

śrī-bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord   said;
pravakṣyāmi—I shall explain; te—to you;   anasūyave —who
are non-envious; idam —this; guhyatamam   —most
confidential; jñ ānam vij ñ āna-sahitam   tu —knowledge
together with realised knowledge, i.e.

which has the symptoms of exclusive and pure devotion;
jñ ātvā—knowing; yat —which; mokṣyase—you shall be
released; aśubhāt —from inauspiciousness, i.e.

from this miserable cycle of saṁsāra .

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Arjuna, because you are non-
envious, I will impart to you this most confidential
knowledge, which is endowed with the characteristics of
śuddha-bhakti and which bestows direct realisation of
Me. Such knowledge will liberate you from the miseries
of the material world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The Ninth Chapter gives knowledge of Śrī Bhagavān’s
aiśvarya. Such jñ āna is desired by His bhaktas so that
they can favourably execute their service to Him. This
chapter clearly describes the supremacy of śuddha-bhakti
.

In comparison to karma, jñāna and yoga , we find that
bhakti is supreme. Bhakti is of two types: pradhānī-
bhūtā and kevalā, both of which have been explained in
the Seventh and Eighth Chapters. Of these two, kevala-
bhakti is extremely powerful and unlike jñ āna does not
depend upon purity of heart. This in itself
substantiates the supremacy of kevala-bhakti . Knowledge
of Bhagavān’s aiśvarya is necessary to perform kevala-
bhakti . Details of that aiśvarya are given in this
Ninth Chapter. The middle eight chapters (Six to
Thirteen), are the essence of Bhagavad-gītā and of all
Vedic literature, and the Ninth and Tenth Chapters are
the essence of these middle chapters. Śrī Bhagavān is
glorifying the subject matter that will be defined in
three consecutive ślokas , the first of which begins
with the words idaṁ tu . “Jñ āna , which is favourable
for liberation, as described in the Second and Third
Chapters, is called guhyam , confidential . The Seventh
and Eighth Chapters explain knowledge of bhagavat-tattva
, which is essential for one who wishes to attain Me.
Such knowledge of bhakti-tattva is called guhyatara ,

                           451
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

more confidential. Now in this chapter I shall explain
that jñ āna along with the characteristics of śuddha-
bhakti , which is guhyatama , most confidential.”

Here the word jñāna should only be understood to mean
bhakti. It does not refer to the regular jñ āna
delineated in the first six chapters. In the next śloka
, the word jñ āna indicates only bhakti since the word
avyaya , eternal, has been used as an adjective for jñ
āna . This is because it refers to a transcendental
nature in this context and it does not indicate the jñ
āna previously mentioned, which is sāttvika , but not
nirguṇa or guṇātīta .

In the śloka: aśraddadhānāḥ puruṣā dharmasyāsya
parantapa (Gītā 9.3), the word dharma only means bhakti.
Here the word anasūyave means that this instruction is
for those who are non-envious. It is not meant for
others. Vijñ āna-sahitam means, “I shall impart this
instruction to you which leads to direct realisation of
Me. This will free you from an inauspicious life, which
is unfavourable to bhakti . With this jñ āna , you will
become free from all obstacles.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the Seventh and Eighth Chapters, Śrī Kṛṣṇa explained
pradhānī-bhūta-bhakti and kevala-bhakti , and the
difference between the two. In the present chapter He is
clarifying the supremacy of kevala-bhakti. Kevala-bhakti
does not depend on purification of the heart. Bhakti-
devī can even mercifully enter the hearts of extremely
abominable persons who are gripped by all types of
anarthas , and turn those persons into supremely pure,
highly exalted mahā-bhāgavatas who are worshipable for
the whole world. She is very powerful in her own right.

Spiritual jñāna, as explained in the Second and Third
Chapters, is helpful to attain mokṣa and it is guhya ,
confidential. Bhagavat-tattva-jñ āna , as described in
the Seventh and Eighth Chapters, causes bhakti to appear
and is guhyatara , more confidential. The present
chapter describes jñ āna related to kevala-bhakti , as
instructed by Bhagavān. This jñ āna is guhyatama , most
confidential. Only with the help of this guhyatama-jñ
āna can one attain freedom from the inauspiciousness of
this world. “This guhyatama-jñ āna related to śuddha-
bhakti is parama-vijñ ānamaya , that is, it can bestow
direct realisation of Me.” Vijñ āna means to comprehend
that jñ āna which is related to Śrī Bhagavān,
specifically with realisation. Bhagavān said to Brahmā:
jñ ānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me yad vijñāna-samanvitam

sarahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca

gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.31

                           452
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Knowledge of Me is nondual, absolute and highly
confidential. Although nondual, it has four eternal
divisions: jñāna (My svarūpa), vijñ āna (realisation of
Me), rahasya (prema-bhakti unto Me) and tad-aṅga-
pradhāna (sādhana-b hakti, the means to attain Me). The
jīva cannot understand this with his limited
intelligence. He can only realise it by My mercy. Jñ āna
is My svarūpa and vijñ āna is one’s relationship with Me
through bhakti. The jīva is My rahasya and the pradhāna
is My jñ āna-aṅga (all that is accessory to My svarūpa).
The eternal nonduality and the eternal confidential
difference between these four principles is due to My
acintya-śakti.

Bhagavān also spoke this to Uddhava:


athaitat paramaṁ guhyaṁ

śṛṇvato yadu-nandana

su-gopyam api vakṣyāmi

tvaṁ me bhṛtyaḥ suhṛt sakhā


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.11.49

O Yadu-nandana (Uddhava), please hear this most
confidential knowledge. Although it is extremely
confidential, I will speak it to you because you are My
servant and well-wishing friend.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.1.8), Śrī Śaunaka and other ṛṣis
requested Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī to explain such realised
confidential truths: vetthaṁ tvaṁ saumya tat sarvaṁ

tattvatas tad-anugrahāt

brūyuḥ snigdhasya śiṣyasya



guravo guhyam apy uta

The guru-varga also explains these extremely
confidential secrets to disciples of an affectionate
nature.

Here also, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is imparting this
guhyatama-jñāna to Arjuna knowing him to be free from
envy and hatred, and possessing an affectionate heart.
The meaning is that this guhyatama-jñ āna is instructed
by a genuine tattvajña guru , only to the type of
disciple previously mentioned.

A similar instruction is given in Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
(6.22—23):

vedānte paramaṁ guhyaṁ

purā-kalpe pracoditam


                             453
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

nāpraśāntāya dātavyaṁ

nāputrāya siṣyāya vā punaḥ

yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

Bhagavad-upāsanā-tattva, the principle of worshipping
Bhagavān, is the essence of Vedānta and is highly
confidential. In ancient times, Śrī Bhagavān illuminated
the heart of Śvetāśvatara Ṛṣi with this tattva, being
pleased by his worship. Therefore, although this
instruction is not for one who is not a śuddha-bhakta,
it can be bestowed to a sober son or disciple who is a
bhakta of Bhagavān. This instruction should not be
imparted to anyone else, even if one is moved by
affection for that person.

All the confidential meanings of the śrutis fully
illuminate the heart of that sādhaka , that m ahātmā who
has para-bhakti for Bhagavān and equally for his
gurudeva. In this context, it is worth contemplating
Bhagavad-gītā (18.54-58).




Śloka 2




rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ



pavitram idam uttamam

pratyakṣāvagamaṁ dharmyaṁ

susukhaṁ kartum avyayam

idam—this (knowledge); (is) rāja-vidyā—the king of all
knowledge; rāja-guhyam —the king of all confidential
topics; uttamam pavitram —the most pure knowledge; (it
is) pratyakṣa-avagamam —directly realised; (it is)
dharmyam —conducive to virtue; (it is) kartum su-sukham
—performed joyfully (without difficulty); (it is)
avyayam —imperishable.

This jñāna is the king of all knowledge and the monarch
of all confidential subjects. It is extremely pure and,
since it directly reveals the nature of the self, it is
the perfection of dharma. It is joyfully performed,
bestowing transcendental and imperishable results.




                             454
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Moreover, this knowledge is the king of all knowledge.
There are various types of jñāna and worship, but their
only rājā (king) is bhakti. This bhakti is the rājā of
confidential subjects. In other words, bhakti herself is
very confidential. Although knowledge is of many
varieties, this particular jñ āna (bhakti ), along with
vijñ āna (realisation of that knowledge), is the rājā of
them all, as it is the most confidential. All sinful
activities are atoned for by this bhakti (jñ āna along
with vijñ āna ), which shows that this bhakti is pure.
It is more purifying than tvaṁ-padārtha-j ñ āna ,
knowledge of the self. Śrīpāda Madhusūdana Sarasvatī
says that thi s bhakti can destroy, within the blink of
an eye, the gross and subtle stages of all types of
sinful activities accumulated over thousands of
lifetimes, as well as their cause, which is ignorance.
Thus it is supremely purifying. Pratyakṣa-avagamam means
that which can be perceived or realised directly.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.42) states:


bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir

anyatra caiṣa trika eka-kālaḥ

prapadyamānasya yathāśnataḥ syus

tuṣṭiḥ puṣṭiḥ kṣud-apāyo ‘nu-ghāsam


A person who is absorbed in eating achieves happiness
from tasting every mouthful of food, nourishment as his
stomach is filled and relief as his hunger is removed.
These three results come to him simultaneously. In the
same way, a person who is engaged in bhajana of Śrī Hari
simultaneously attains prema , realisation of
Parameśvara and detachment from sense objects.

According to this statement from the Eleventh Canto, a
person attains realisation of Bhagavān in proportion to
the intensity of his bhajana . This jñ āna (bhakti ) is
dharmya , meaning that it is not beyond the boundaries
of dharmika laws (i.e. not adharmika ). A person can
attain the perfection of all occupational duties simply
by bhakti , even if he does not perform any other
dharmika duties. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.31.14), Deva
ṛṣi Nārada also says, “Just as by watering the root of a
tree, its trunk, branches and leaves become nourished,
similarly, by worshipping Bhagavān Acyuta alone,
everyone else is automatically worshipped.”

Kartuṁ su-sukham means that one does not have to undergo
too much physical, mental or verbal misery on the path
of bhakti , unlike the processes of karma , jñ āna ,
etc. In the practice of bhakti , characterised by
śravaṇa , kīrtana and so on, only the senses such as the
ears and tongue are engaged. Since bhakti is beyond the

                           455
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

modes (nirguṇa ), it is not perishable like karma , jñ
āna and so forth.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




This Ninth Chapter describes kevala-bhakti, which is
nirguṇa . This jñ āna in the form of kevala-bhakti is
the crest-jewel of all vidyā. It is supremely
confidential, most purifying and experienced by direct
perception. It bestows the fruits of all other dharmika
processes, is joyfully performed and bestows
imperishable results.

Here, the word vidyā means worship (upāsanā), hence
kevala-bhakti is the best of all vidyās. For this
reason, it is called rāja-vidyā and, because it is the
most confidential among all confidential subjects, it is
called rāja-guhya .

Pavitram idam uttamam: Sins are not completely destroyed
by performing atonements such as dāna (charity), yajña
(offering oblations) and tapas (cāndrāyaṇa-vrata etc.).
Furthermore, even by once removing the results of sins
through such processes as tapasya and brahmacarya ,
there is the possibility that the tendency to sin will
again sprout. However, according to śāstras such as
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , sins are completely destroyed by the
performance of kevala-bhakti. This is true to such an
extent that all sins are destroyed at the root simply by
the concomitant results of kevala-bhakti . In other
words, even the very desire to perform sin is destroyed.
This is not possible by processes other than bhakti ,
such as prāyaścitta (atonement), brahmacarya and
tapasya. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.1.15) this is
confirmed: kecit kevalayā bhaktyā vāsudeva-parāyaṇāḥ.
“Only by kevala-bhakti can all one’s sins be eradicated
at the root.” And also in 6.1.16, na tathā hy aghavān
rājan pūyeta tapa-ādibhiḥ. “All one’s sins can be
removed only by service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pure
representative and not by any other process.”

In Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, the first characteristic
of kevala-bhakti is described as kleśa-ghnī. Kleśa-ghnī
means that this bhakti completely destroys all sin (pāpa
), the seed of sin (pāpa-bīja ), ignorance (avidyā),
fructified reaction (prārabdha-kar ma ) and unfructified
reaction (aprārabdha-karma ).


aprārabdhaṁ phalaṁ pāpaṁ

kūṭaṁ bījaṁ phalonmukham

kramenaiva pralīyate

viṣṇu-bhakti-ratātmanām



                           456
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Padma Purāṇa

Kevala-bhakti not only purifies the gross and subtle
designations of the jīva , but it also purifies and
satisfies the ātmā: yayātmā suprasīdati (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 1.2.6). According to the śloka : ātmārāmāś ca
munayaḥ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.10), bhakti’s attraction
is the bliss one derives from serving Kṛṣṇa, by which
even those who are ātmārāma (satisfied within the self)
and āptakāma (who have no desires left to fulfil) are
attracted and give up such natures.

Pratyakṣa anubhava-svarūpa: Just as a person feels
satisfaction, nourishment and the removal of hunger with
every mouthful of food that he eats, similarly prema ,
direct experience of Bhagavān, as well as aversion to
sense enjoyment, appear simultaneously within a sādhaka-
bhakta , even during sādhana-daśā (the practice stage).


bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir

anyatra caiṣa trika eka-kālaḥ

prapadyamānasya yathāśnataḥ syus

tuṣṭiḥ puṣṭiḥ kṣud-apāyo ‘nu-ghāsam


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.42

The processes of karma, yoga, jñ āna , etc., cannot
bestow direct realisation upon the sādhaka in the way
that bhakti can . Brahmasūtra also states: prak āśaś ca
karmaṇy abhyāsāt. “Bhakti is so powerful that she
bestows an experience of herself even in the initial
stages.”

Sarva-dharma-phala-prada: By performing bhakti one
receives the complete result of all types of dharma and
also attains bhagavat-prema , which is the objective
established in the Vedas , Upaniṣads and other śrutis .
According to the śloka : sarva-dharmān parityajya mām
ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja (Gītā 18.66), having given up all
types of dharma , such as varṇāśrama-dharma , karma , jñ
āna , yoga and all other paths that are followed for the
purpose of satisfying the body and mind, and taking
exclusive shelter of kevala-bhakti by performing bhajana
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one can easily and naturally attain the
result of all the previously mentioned processes. As it
i s said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.13): saṁsiddhir hari-
toṣaṇam The highest perfection in life is to please Śrī
Hari.”

And (11.20.33):

sarvaṁ mad-bhakti-yogena

mad-bhakto labhate ‘ñjasā

“By pure devotional service My bhakta can very easily
achieve such benedictions as Svarga, liberation or My
supreme abode.”


                            457
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Although the performance of different dharmika processes
does not exist in the practice of kevala-bhakti , the
real dharma of the jīva , which is to serve guru and so
forth, remains present within him. The śruti also
confirms this opinion in mantras such as: ācāryavān
puruṣo veda . Devaṛṣi Nārada also establishes this in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.31.14): yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena

tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ

prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇāṁ

tathaiva sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā


Just as by properly watering the root of a tree, its
trunk, branches, twigs, leaves and flowers are
nourished, and just as by eating food the prāṇa (life
air) is satisfied and all the senses nourished, in the
same way only by worshipping Śrī Bhagavān is everyone
worshipped.

Sukha-sādhya (su-sukham): The sādhana of kevala-bhakti
involves no difficulty as the paths of jñ āna , yoga and
so on do; instead one experiences happiness. It is
therefore called sukha-sādhya , meaning that the final
result, sādhya , is joyfully performed. The sādhana of
bhakti can be performed simply by engaging the senses
such as the tongue and ear in chanting the sweet holy
names of Kṛṣṇa and by hearing about His līlā, or merely
by using tulasī leaves and a little water. Prahlāda
Mahārāja also gave this instruction to the sons of the
asuras : na hy acyutaṁ prīṇayato bahv-āyāsaḥ. “To please
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is Acyuta, one does not have to
work laboriously,” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.6.19).

While commenting on this śloka, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, “Although one has to endure
great troubles to maintain the family and make them
happy, one need not undergo such trouble to please Śrī
Hari. Because He is ever situated within the heart of
everyone as Antaryāmī, one need not undergo any trouble
searching for Him. One can please Him at all times, in
all circumstances and in all respects, even by
performing mānasa-sevā or by following any one of the
processes of bhakti such as śravaṇa and kīrtana , or
just by desiring to perform service. Thus, there is no
pain involved in performing bhakti .” One experiences
joy even while performing bhakti in the stage of
sādhana.

taṁ sukhārādhyam ṛjubhir

ananya-śaraṇair nṛbhiḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.19.36

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is easily pleased by a person who has
completely surrendered and who is simple-hearted.

It is also said in Gautamīya-tantra:

tulasī-dala-mātreṇa


                            458
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

jalasya culukena vā

vikṛīṇīte svam ātmānaṁ

bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalaḥ

Bhagavān, who is bhakta-vatsala, completely sells
Himself to those bhaktas who, with love and devotion,
offer Him a tulasī leaf and a palmful of water.

Akṣaya-phala-prada (avyayam): The processes of karma ,
jñ āna and yoga are impermanent. After yielding
perfection (the goal), such processes become futile and
are then abandoned. However, bhakti exists in the stages
of both sādhana and siddha , because bhakti herself is
not only the sādhana but is also the sādhya (goal to be
achieved). Even in the liberated stage bhakti is not
lost, but rather it is performed purely and perfectly.
Therefore, it is permanent and unchanging.




Śloka 3




aśraddadhānāḥ puruṣā

dharmasyāsya parantapa

aprāpya māṁ nivartante

mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani

parantapa—O conqueror of the foe; puruṣāḥ—persons;
aśraddadhānāḥ—who are faithless; asya —in this;
dharmasya —practice of devotional service; aprāpya —
without attaining; mām —Me; nivartante —they return;
vartmani —on the path; saṁsāra —of material existence;
mṛtyu —and death.

O Parantapa, those who have no faith in this dharma in
the form of My bhakti do not attain Me. They wander on
the path of material existence, which is full of death.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna may raise the following doubt: “If this dharma is
so easily perfected, why do people remain in material
existence?” In response to this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks
this śloka beginning with aśraddadhānāḥ. The word asya
means dharma in the form of bhakti. Aśraddadhānāḥ
puruṣāḥ means people who lack faith in this.

“The superiority of bhakti is established by the

                             459
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

statements of ś āstra , but those who are faithless
consider such glorification to be an exaggeration. They
reject this dharma due to atheistic intelligence. Even
if someone renounces the path of bhakti and practises
severe alternative measures to attain Me, still he will
not be successful. Instead, he will continuously wander
on this path of material existence which is pervaded by
death.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Even after hearing and being acquainted with the glories
of bhakti as described here, some consider these glories
to be an exaggeration and they do not develop faith in
bhakti . Such faithless persons who do not adopt
bhagavad-bhakti are forced to take repeated births in
this material world . Śraddhā (faith) is the root cause
of bhakti . One can only attain Bh agavān, who is
bhakta-vatsala , by bhakti . This is also confirmed in
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhyalīlā 22.64): śraddhāvān jana
haya bhakti-adhikārī. “Those who are faithful are
eligible for bhakti.” Furthermore, it is said: brahmāṇḍa
bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya

bhakti-latā-bīja

Madhyalīlā 19.151

In the course of wandering throughout this universe, a
rare jīva who is extremely fortunate obtains the seed of
the creeper of bhakti by the mercy of Śrī Gurudeva.

Śrī Gurudeva infuses the desire to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa into
the heart of the jīvas. This desire is known as kṛṣṇa-
sevā-vāsanā, and by it one attains pāramārthika-śraddhā,
transcendental faith, which is the root cause of bhakti
. Those who are faithless and unfortunate do not take
shelter of this path of bhakti which has been
established in all śāstra . They try to attain Śrī
Bhagavān by adopting other processes such as the
performance of pious activities, jñ āna , yoga and
tapasya , but their whimsical attempts go in vain.
Śrīmad-Bhāga vatam (11.12.9) states:


yaṁ na yogena sāṅkhyena

dāna-vrata-tapo-’dhvaraiḥ

vyākhyā-svādhyāya-sannyāsaiḥ

prāpnuyād yatnavān api


Even though one engages with great endeavour in mystic
yoga, philosophical speculation, charity, vows,

                            460
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

penances, ritualistic sacrifices, teaching Vedic mantras
to others, personal study of the Vedas, or the renounced
order of life, still one cannot achieve Me.

Furthermore, the essence of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.87.33) is
a s follows: “Those who abandon service to the lotus
feet of Śrī Gurudeva, which is their primary support on
the path of bhakti , and who desire to subdue their
minds by yoga or other methods, are pursuing futile
hopes. They fall down into the ocean of materi al
existence, which is full of obstacles and various types
of calamities.” Śrī Bhagavān has also explained this
topic in great detail in Bhagavad-gītā (3.31 and 12.20).




Śloka 4




mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ

jagad avyaktamūrtinā

mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni

na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ

idam—this; sarvam—entire; jagat —cosmic manifestion;
tatam —is pervaded; mayā—by Me; avyaktamūrtinā—by My
form which is unmanifest (to the senses); sarva-bhūtāni
—all living beings; mat-sthāni —are situated in Me; ca —
yet; aham —I; na avasthitaḥ—am not situated; teṣu —in
them.

This whole universe is pervaded by Me in My svarūpa
which is unmanifest to the material senses. All living
beings and elements are situated in Me, but I am not in
them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān says, “Only when bhakti is in the mood of
dāsya (servitorship) do My bhaktas desire knowledge of
My aiśvarya .” To explain this knowledge, Bhagavān is
speaking seven ślokas starting here beginning with the
word mayā. “I am the cause of this world, and I pervade
it through My svarūpa which is avyakta , unmanifest and
beyond the senses. Thus all moving and non-moving beings
are situated in Me, who am the cause of everything and
the complete conscious entity. Even so, because I am
asaṅga , aloof and unattached, I am not situated in the
created beings, unlike earth which is present in its
effects (i.e. earthen objects such as pots).”

                           461
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Pariṇāma: Milk is a pure substance. By contact with
acid, it turns to curd. This is called a transformation.
Thus curd is a pariṇāma (effect or product) of milk when
milk is transformed.

Vivarta: To mistake one object for another is called
vivarta. Examples of vivarta are mistaking a rope for a
snake, and thinking that there is silver in an oyster.

The essence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s instruction lies herein.
“This universe is not a pariṇāma (transformation) of Me,
nor is it a vivarta (illusion). I am the Absolute Self-
effulgent Reality. The jīvas and the universe are also
real; both are the pariṇāma of My śakti . The jīvas are
eternal and have come into existence from the taṭastha-
śakti , but the material world, which is born from My
bahiraṅga-śakti , is temporary and subject to
destruction even though it is real. The jīvas and the
universe are transformations of My śakti , which is non-
different from Me; hence they are simultaneously one
with and different from Me. This conception is acintya
(inconceivable), because it can be understood only by
śāstra and can not be experienced by ordinary
intelligence. Wherever one experiences both difference
and oneness at the same time, the perception of
difference is indeed stronger than the perception of
oneness. Therefore, I am the Absolute Conscious Entity,
different from both the jīva as well as the universe.”




Śloka 5



na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni

paśya me yogam aiśvaram

bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho

mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ


ca—and; bhūtāni—the living beings and the elements;
(are) na —not; mat-sthāni —situated in Me; paśya —
behold; me —My; yogam —mystic; aiśvaram —opulence; mama
—My; ātmā—self; bh ūta-bhṛt —is the support; bhūta-
bhāvanaḥ—and the maintainer of all beings and elements;
ca —yet; na bhūta-sthaḥ—I am not situated in those
entities and elements.

All that is created does not actually exist in My

                           462
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

svarūpa. Behold My mystic opulence! As Paramātmā I
support and maintain all living beings and elements, yet
I Myself am not situated in them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Therefore, although all living beings and elements are
situated within Me, they are not situated in My svarūpa
because I am asaṅga , aloof from them. If you raise the
doubt, ‘This is contrary to Your previous statement
(Gītā 9.4) that You are all-pervading and the support of
the whole universe,’ then in response I say, “Behold My
extraordinary yoga-aiśvarya (opulence), which can make
the impossible possible. This is simply the effect of My
aiśvarya only. Behold another wonderful quality of Mine!
One who supports the living beings and the elements is
bhūta-bhṛt , and one who maintains the living beings and
the elements is bhūta-bhāvana . Although I possess these
qualities, I am not bhūta-stha , situated in the created
beings and elements . There is no difference between My
body and Me. The jīva remains within his body because he
becomes attached to it in the course of supporting and
maintaining it. Similarly, although I support and
maintain the material manifestation, and although I am
situated in the illusory cosmic form, I am not in it
because I am not attached to it; rather, I am detached.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




“I pervade the whole material universe. All beings and
elements are situated within Me, yet they do not exist
in My svarūpa .” To clarify this subject further, Śrī
Bhagavān tells Arjuna, “Although I am the supporter and
maintainer of all beings and elements, I am not situated
wit hin them.” This principle has also been confirmed in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.11.38): etad īśanam īśasya

prakṛti-stho ‘pi tad-guṇaiḥ

na yujyate sadātma-sthair

yathā buddhis tad-āśrayā

Īśvara, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is not affected by the modes of
nature although He presides over the material nature.
This is a most wonderful characteristic of His.

This act of making the impossible possible is achieved
through My yoga-aiśvarya .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “All
beings and elements exist in Me alone. Do not conclude

                            463
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

from this that all beings exist in My śuddha-svarūpa
(actual self). Rather, they exist under the influence of
My māyā-śakti . You, the jīva , will not be able to
comprehend this fact by your own limited intelligence.
Therefore, understand it to be My yoga-aiśvarya , and
know Me as bhūta-bhṛt (the supporter), bhūta-stha (all-
pervading), and bhūta-bhavana (the maintainer of all
manifestations). Consider My activities to be the
functions of My energy. Fix yourself in the conception
that there is no difference between Myself and My body,
as I am absolute spirit. For this reason, I am actually
completely aloof, although I am the cause and basis of
the material manifestation.”




Śloka 6




yathākāśasthito nityaṁ

vāyuḥ sarvatra-go mahān

tathā sarvāṇi bhūtāni

mat-sthānīty upadhāraya

upadhāraya—understand; iti—that; yathā—as; sarvatra-gaḥ—
travelling everywhere; mahān —the mighty; vāyuḥ—wind;
nityam —always; ākāśasthitaḥ—rests within space; tathā—
similarly; sarvāṇi —all; bhūtāni —beings; mat-s thāni—
are situated in Me.

Just as the all-pervasive and limitless wind rests
always in the sky, which is separate from it, in the
same way all beings are situated in Me, but I am not in
them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Asaṅga means that, “Although all beings and the elements
are situated in Me, they are not actually in Me, and
although I am in all beings and elements, I am not
actually in them.” Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka
beginning with the word yathā to give an example of
this. “It is the nature of the wind to be always moving,
thus it is said to be sarvaga , moving everywhere. It is
described as mighty (mahān ), because its capacity is
unlimited. Just as the wind is situated in the sky which
is by nature asaṅga (aloof or unmixed), it is
simultaneously not situated in the sky. Also because of
the sky’s asaṅga nature, it is not situated in the wind,
although it is situated in the wind. Similarly, the
pañca-mah ābhūta (five great elements) such as the sky

                           464
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

and air, which exist everywhere, are not in Me, because
My nature is asaṅga . They are not in Me although they
are situated in Me. Deliberate on this and try to
understand it.”

Arjuna may raise the following question: “You said,
‘Behold My extraordinary yoga-aiśvarya!’ How is the
inconceivable nature of Your yog a-aiśvarya proved by
this example? In other words, if it can be explained by
an example, how is it inconceivable?” In response to
this question, Bhagavān says, “The sky, which is inert,
is asaṅga , but among conscious beings it is not
possible for anyone other than Myself to be asaṅga even
if they have presided over the manifested creation.” How
can one who creates remain untouched or aloof from
creation? If it is so, it is indeed extraordinary. This
proves that He is inconceivable. Here the example of the
sky is given so that common people may easily understand
the siddhānta . Actually, there is no scope for
comparison regarding the Inconceivable Entity.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The statement: paśya me yogam aiśvaram, “Behold My yoga-
aiśvarya ,” has a deep meaning. One can only realise
bhagavat-tattva by the mercy of Bhagavān. Without His
mercy one cannot have His darśana . One can see Bhagavān
only by bhakti , which is the favourable propensity to
render service to Him. This has been confirmed in Brahma
-saṁhitā (5.38): premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi


With the eye of devotion which is anointed with the
salve of love, bhaktas always see Śrī Govinda within
their hearts.

Although Śrī Bhagavān is all-pervading, He always exists
in His human-like feature of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Just as the sun,
though always existing in his individual personal form,
pervades the whole universe by its light, in the same
way Bhagavān, by His yogamāyā, remains situated in His
own personal form and at the same time pervades all
moving and non-moving entities throughout the universe.

“O Arjuna, realisation or darśana of Me is never
possible by one’s gross senses. I am revealing Myself to
you only out of mercy. My yogamāyā-śakti , which is
expert at making the impossible possible, is most
wonderful. It is only by the help of this śakti that I
remain aloof from all beings, even while sustaining
them.” Kṛṣṇa gives this clear explanation to Arjuna out
of His mercy.

                           465
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Baddha-jīvas cannot really understand this tattva , so
to explain it with a mundane example is not very
satisfactory. Yet, in an attempt to make it clearly
understandable, I will give you an example. Although you
will be unable to understand it fully even after serious
contemplation, you will be able to comprehend something.
Sky is an all-pervading element and in it the movement
of air is multi-directional. The sky is the substructure
of everything, yet it is asaṅga , always aloof from the
activities of the wind. In the same way, by My external
energy, the entire cosmic manifestation emanates and
functions, but like the sky I remain untouched by it.”




Śloka 7



sarva-bhūtāni kaunteya

prakṛtiṁ yānti māmikām

kalpa-kṣaye punas tāni

kalpādau visṛjāmy aham

kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; kalpa-kṣaye—when devastation
occurs at the end of a kalpa (a millennium, the lifespan
of Lord Brahmā); sarva-bhūtāni —all living beings and
elements; yānti —enter; māmikām —My; prakṛtim —nature;
kalpa-ādau —at the beginning of a new kalpa ; aham —I;
punaḥ—again; visṛjāmi —create; tāni —them.

O Kaunteya, when the universal devastation occurs, all
beings enter My prakṛti, and at the beginning of the
next kalpa, by My potency, I again create them all with
their specific natures.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The following doubt may be raised: “At present it is
known that all visible beings and elements are situated
in You, but where do they go during the mahā-pralaya
(great annihilation)?” Anticipating this ques tion from
Arjuna, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with
sarva . “They enter My māyā-śakti which consists of
three guṇas. Then, after the annihilation, or in other
words at the beginning of creation, I again create all
of them with their specific natures.”




                           466
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material
world are carried out entirely by the will of Śrī
Bhagavān. Here the word kalpa-kṣaye means the end of
Brahmā’s life span. This subject was explained earlier.
There is a mahā-pralaya , great annihilation, at the end
of Brahmā’s life span. At that time, all the jīvas along
with their karma-vāsanā (desires for action) enter Śrī
Bhagavān’s bahiraṅga-śakti and by His will they are
again created by His material nature at the beginning of
the next kalpa . They receive bodies in various types of
species according to their previous desires. One can
refer to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.4.5-6) for further
information.




Śloka 8



prakṛtiṁ svām avaṣṭabhya

visṛjāmi punaḥ punaḥ

bhūta-grāmam imaṁ kṛtsnam

avaśaṁ prakṛter vaśāt

avaṣṭabhya—through the medium; svām—of My own; prakṛtim
—material nature (consisting of three qualities);
visṛjāmi —I create; punaḥ punaḥ—repeatedly; imam —this;
kṛtsnam—entire; avaśam —helpless; bhūta-grāmam—host of
beings; vaśāt —by the influence; prakṛteḥ—of their
individual natures.

Through My prakṛti, which consists of the three guṇas, I
repeatedly create this host of living beings who are
bound by their karma according to their individual
natures.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna may raise the following question: “If you are
asaṅga (completely aloof) and nirvikāra (free from any
transformation), how do You create?” Anticipating this
question, Śrī Kṛṣṇa speaks this śloka beginning with the
word prakṛtim . “Being situated in My prakṛti , and
presiding over it, I create a host of jīvas who are
bound by their past karma according to their nature
(svabhāva ).”


                            467
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




This material world is a manifestation or transformation
of Bhagavān’s apara-śakti (inferior energy). As far as
the jīvas are concerned, they are His taṭastha-śakti ,
or a transformation of the jīva-śakti , and are eternal,
unlike the material world, which is being constantly
recreated. They are simply put into the womb of material
nature from where they enter the various species of life
according to their previous karma and undergo the result
of that karma . Incidentally, it is necessary to say at
this point that all species of life such as animals,
birds and humans are created at the same time. The
modern principle of evolution, introduced by Darwin, has
no foundation whatsoever, and is a completely mistaken
belief. This is proven by the fact that, even after
millions of years no superior form of human being has
evolved, nor has any other l iving entity evolved to
surpass the human species. Even after performing His act
of creation, Śrī Bhagavān remains completely asaṅga
(aloof from all these activities) and nirvikāra (without
any transformation). The jīvas and the material world
become manifest only when His energy is transformed.




Śloka 9



na ca māṁ tāni karmāṇi

nibadhnanti dhanañjaya

udāsīna-vad āsīnam

asaktaṁ teṣu karmasu

dhanañjaya—O Arjuna; ca—since; āsīnam—I am situated;
udāsīna-vat—neutrally; asaktam—detached; teṣu karmasu—
from these actions; tāni—these; karmāṇi—activities; na
nibadhnanti—do not bind; mām—Me .

O Dhanañjaya, since I remain detached like a neutral
observer, from acts such as creation, these actions
cannot bind Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The following question may be raised: “If You, like the

                           468
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

jīva, perform karma (action), why do You not become
bound by it?” Śrī Bhagavān responds to this question
with the present śloka beginning with the words na ca .
“It is only attachment to acts, such as creation, which
causes bondage, but I am not attached. Being āptakāma ,
My every desire is satisfied.” This is why Śrī Bhagavān
says udāsīna-vat , “I remain indifferent to all acts
such as creation, just as a person who is indifferent to
others does not become involved in their miseries and
lamentations.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Dhanañjaya, all these actions cannot bind Me. I always
remain detached from such actions, like one who is
indifferent, although I am not actually indifferent.
Rather, I am always absorbed in My own blissful
spiritual activities. Only My external potency, māyā,
and the taṭastha-śakti , both of which indirectly
nourish My transcendental bliss, create various kinds of
beings. My svarūpa is not disturbed by these śaktis.
Whatever actions the jīvas perform under the influence
of My māyā indirectly help to enliven My purely divine
blissful pastimes. Thus, My attitude toward mundane
activities is like that of an unconcerned observer.”




Śloka 10




mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya



jagad viparivartate

kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; mayā—by My; adhyakṣeṇa —
superintendence; prakṛtiḥ—nature; sūyate —creates; sa-
cara-acaram —the universe with moving and non-moving
beings; (it is) anena—by this; hetunā—cause; (that)
jagat —the universe; viparivartate —turns (in its
cycles).

O Kaunteya, it is under My direction that the entire
cosmic manifestation and all moving and non-moving
beings are brought forth by māyā-śakti. For this reason,
the material world is created again and again.


                           469
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If Arjuna raises the doubt, “I cannot believe that You,
being the creator of this cosmic manifestation, are so
indifferent.”

Then Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the
word mayādhyakṣeṇa to remove his doubt. Adhyakṣeṇa mayā
means, “I am just the instrumental cause. It is the
material nature which creates the entire moving and non-
moving material world. My function is only to preside
over it, just as the prakṛti (energy or administration)
of kings like Ambarīṣa perform their royal duties. There
the king is indifferent, and simply represents the
kingdom. Just as subjects will not be able to act
without the existence of the royal throne, in the same
way the material nature will not be able to perform any
function without the elements that are symptomatic of My
existence, that is, without My presiding over it.”

Hetunānena means “This material world is repeatedly
created only because I preside over it.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Bhagavān is the master of the material modes and the
superintendent of māyā. He is the instrumental cause of
material nature and He also presides over it in acts
such as creation. It is only by the inspiration of His
glance that material nature can repeatedly create this
world of moving and non-moving beings. Material nature
receives the power to create from Him alone because it
is under His control. Inert matter cannot perform the
function of creation by itself. Similarly, iron can burn
by contact with fire, but is not independently capable
of burning without the potency of fire. Kṛṣṇa is
therefore the root cause of the material world. Inert
nature can be compared to the nipple-like bags hanging
from the neck of a goat; they are only for external
show, there is no milk to be had from them.




Śloka 11




avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā


                           470
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mama bhūta-maheśvaram

mūḍhāḥ—fools; avajānanti—show disrespect; mām—to Me;
ajānantaḥ—not knowing that; mama—My; param—supreme;
bhāvam—nature; āśritam—which has taken shelter; mānuṣīm—
in a human-like; tanum—form; (as) bhūta-mahā-īśvaram—the
Supreme Lord of all beings.

When I appear in My human-like form, foolish people with
mundane intelligence disrespect Me, because they cannot
comprehend My nature as the Supreme Lord of all beings.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna may raise the following doubt: “It is true that
You are none other than Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahāpuruṣa whose
form is sac-cid-ānanda , who pervades unlimited
universes and who is famous for creating each universe
by Your own nature. Some persons however, upon having
darśa na of Your human form as the son of Vasudeva, do
not accept Your supreme position.” To remove Arjuna’s
doubt, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with
avajānanti mām . “They deride Me only because they do
not know the supreme nature of My visible human-like
form, whose svarūpa is even superior to that of great
personalities like Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu.”

“What type of svarūpa?” Bhagavān answers, “I am bhūta-
maheśvaram , the great controller of bhūta (brahma ),
which is satya-svarūpa , the embodiment of truth. In
other words, I am parama-satya -svarūpa , the embodiment
of the highest truth.” The Amara-koṣa dictionary defines
bhūta as a substance which is covered by earth (yukte
kṣmād āvṛte bhūtam ).

The Gopāla-tāpanī śruti says, “Śrī Govinda in His sac-
cid-ānanda-vigraha is sporting in the kuñjas of immortal
trees in Śrī Vṛndāvana, and I and the Marut devas (devas
of the air) satisfy Him with great eulogies.” In this
connection, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (9.23.20) says: paramātmā
narākṛtiḥ. “The sac-cid-ānanda nature of My human form
is glorified only by My pure bhaktas who are well versed
in My tattva , and who know that I pervade the entire
universe in this body alone. This was observed by Mother
Yaśodā in My childhood.”

The words paraṁ bhāvam also mean supreme existence or
the pure transcendental sac-cid-ānanda form. In the
Amara-koṣa dictionary the words bhāva , svabhāva and
abhiprāya are defined as synonymous. The word parama-
bhāva (supreme nature) is also described in a more
specific way as mama bhūta-maheśvaram. “I am t he
Supreme Controller and the creator of a host of beings
such as Lord Brahmā. Unlike the jīvas , My body is non-

                           471
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

different from Me, Parameśvara. That is, I am indeed
that very same brahma . Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who knows
My tattva , states: ‘He displayed a body that can only
be known by the Vedas.’ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.21.8).
Therefore, persons like you, Arjuna, who know My tattva
, have faith in this statement.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the origin of all viṣṇu-tattva.
Nirviśeṣabrahma is described in the Upaniṣads as the
bodily effulgence of Kṛṣṇa. Paramātmā, who pervades the
entire universe, is His partial expansion. Śrī Nārāyaṇa,
the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, is His pastime potency (svāṁśa-
vilāsa ) . Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is the origin of all avatāras
, the Controller of all controllers and the ultimate
Transcendental Reality. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the master of all
beings, and the only Lord of all the universes. He is
omniscient (sarva-jña ), omnipotent (sarva-śaktimān )
and very compassionate (mahā-kāruṇika ), and He can do
anything simply by willing. Foolish people, however, are
disrespectful to Him when they have darśana of His
beautiful human-like form. Such foolish people consider
the svarūpa of Vasudeva-nandana or Yaśodā-nandana Kṛṣṇa
to be mundane and mortal , like that of an ordinary
human being. Some think that Kṛṣṇa’s body is material
and perishable. They imagine an ātmā to be within His
body, and that ātmā to be Paramātmā. Those who think
like this are foolish, because śāstra declares that
Kṛṣṇa’s body is sac-cid-ānanda , and that there is no
difference between His body and Himself. This is evident
from the following quotations from different śāstras :
1) oṁ sac-cid-ānanda-r ūp āya k ṛṣṇāya (Gop āla-t āpan ī
Upani ṣad 1.1) Yes, let us contemplate Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose
f

orm is imbued with eternality, cognisance and bliss.

2) tam ekaṁ govindaṁ sac-cid-ānanda-vigraham (ś ruti )
It is He alone, Govinda, who has an eternal, cognisant
and blissful form.

3) dvibhujaṁ mauna-mudrāḍhya ṁ vana-m ālinam īś varam (ś
ruti ) The Lord, while wearing a garland of forest
flowers, plays His flute, enchantingly forming the
mauna-mudra with His hands.

4) īśvaraḥ parama ḥ k ṛṣṇa ḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha ḥ
(Brahma-sa ṁhita 5.1) The Supreme Lord, Īśvara, is
Kṛṣṇa; His form is eternal, all-knowing and blissful.

5) apaśyaṁ gop ām anipadyam ānam (Ṛg-Veda 1.22, 1.66.31)
I saw a boy who appeared in the dynasty of cowherds, and
who is never annihilated.

6) gūḍhaṁ para ṁ brahma manu ṣya-li ṅgam (Śr īmad-Bh
āgavatam 7.15.75) The Supreme Lord is hidden by His
accepting a human-like form.

                           472
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


7) sākṣād g ūḍha ṁ para ṁ brahma manu ṣya-li ṅgam (Śr
īmad-Bh āgavatam 7.15.15) He is directly the supreme
brahma, yet He is hidden because He has a human form.

8) yatrāvatīr ṇo bhagav ān param ātm ā nar āk ṛti ḥ (Śr
īmad-Bh āgavatam 9.23.20) ...whereupon the all-opulent
Lord descended in the form of a man.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed a resident
brāhmaṇa of Kāśī that Kṛṣṇa’s form and Kṛṣṇa’s name are
non-different. His name, form and nature are all sac-
cid-ānanda and are one in tattva . There is no
difference between His body and His self, His name (nāma
) and the possessor of His name (nāmī). Those who think
that the sac-cid-ānanda form of Kṛṣṇa is material are
offensive. Caitanya-caritāmṛta explains that amongst all
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastime s, His nara-līlā is topmost. His
form in which He dresses as a cowherd boy, carries a
flute in His hand, and is a young boy dressed like a
dancer, is the most supreme and sweetest form of all.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “The
essence of My statements is that My svarūpa is sac-cid-
ānanda , and that My śakti performs all actions by My
mercy, although I am independent from them. It is only
by My mercy that I am visible in this mundane world, and
this is just an effect of My yogamāya-śakti . I am the
complete transcendental reality beyond all mundane rules
and, even though I am the personification of the
conscious reality (caitanya-svarūpa ), I become visible
in this material world by manifesting that very same
svarūpa . But human beings, who are atomic in size, have
a tendency to be overawed by something that is immense
in size. Such is their conception of the unmanifest
state of brahma . This is due to their conditioned
intelligence, but that form is not My paraṁ bhāva
(supreme nature). My par aṁ bhāva is that I am
completely alaukika (transcendental). Although My human-
like form is of a medium size, by My śakti I am
simultaneously all-pervading and smaller than the atom.
My svarūpa is manifested by My acintya-śakti (yogamāyā).
Those who are foolish consider My transcendental sac-
cid-ānanda-mūrti to be human, and that I have been
forced to accept this material body by the laws of
material nature. They are unable to understand that I am
the controller of all beings in this very svarūpa , this
beautiful transcendental human-like form. “Therefore,
because they have a misconception about transcendental
reality (avidvat-pratīti ), they superimpose their
limited understanding on Me. However, those who have
developed vidvat-pratīti and who have proper access to
transcendence can realise My svarūpa as the ever-
existing sac-cid-ānanda-tattva .”




Śloka 12




                           473
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo

mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ

rākṣasīm āsurīṁ caiva

prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ

eva mogha-āśāḥ—certainly their hopes go in vain; mogha-
karmāṇaḥ—their fruitive work is fruitless; mogha-jñ ānāḥ
—their culture of knowledge is fruitless; vicetasaḥ—
those bewildered persons; śritāḥ—take shelter; mohinīm —
of the illusory; prakṛtim —nature; ca —and; rākṣasīm —
ignorant; (and) āsurīm —demonic views.

The hopes of such foolish people for liberation,
fruitful gain and the culture of jñāna all go in vain.
Thus, with their minds distracted, they adopt the
deluded nature of atheists and asuras.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What is the destination of those who deride Śrī
Bhagavān, thinking that He has a human body made of
māyā?” Anticipating this question from Arjuna, Śrī
Bhagavān says that even though they are bhaktas , their
hopes go in vain. That is, their desires to attain one
of the four types of mukti , such as sālokya , bear no
fruit. If they are karmīs , they cannot attain the
result of their karma such as Svarga. If they are jñ
ānīs , they cannot attain mokṣa as a result of their jñ
āna. So what do they achieve? In answer to this, Śrī
Bhagavān speaks the third line of this śl oka beginning
with rākṣasīm. “They attain an āsurika nature.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




This śloka describes the destination of those who deride
the supramundane sac-cid-ānanda human-like body of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, as described in the previous śloka . Their minds
become distracted and they remain attracted to an
āsurika and atheistic nature which destroys their
discrimination, what to speak of their desires,
activities and knowledge which all become useless. Thus
they fall from the path leading to the supreme goal.
This is explained in the Bṛhad-vaiṣṇava Tantra : yo
vetti bhautikaṁ dehaṁ

kṛṣṇasya paramātmanaḥ

sa sarvasmād bahiṣ-kāryaḥ


                            474
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

śrauta-smārta-vidhānataḥ

Those who consider the body of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be made of
the five material elements are disqualified from
performing all types of karma according to the rules of
śruti and smṛti. It is recommended that if one sees the
faces of such sinful people, one should immediately take
bath with his clothes on. It is āsurika to remain
attached to that bewildering nature, full of the
characteristics of ignorance such as violence. It
destroys their discrimination; thus they go to the
hellish planets.




Śloka 13



mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha

daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya-manaso

jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; mahā-ātmānaḥ—the great souls; tu
—however; āśritāḥ—taking shelter; daivīm —of the divine;
prakṛtim —nature; jñ ātvā—knowing Me; (to be) avyayam —
the imperishable; bhūta-ādim —cause of all beings;
ananya-manasaḥ—with undeviating minds; bhajanti—worship;
mām —Me.

O Pārtha, the mahātmās, however, having taken shelter of
My divine nature, know Me to be the original and
imperishable cause of all beings. They constantly engage
in My bhajana with their minds fixed exclusively on Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Those great souls who have attained greatness by the
mercy of My bhakti, even though they are only human
beings, and who have taken shelter of daivīṁ prakṛtim
(the transcendental nature), only engage in bhajana to
serve Me in My human-like form. Their minds are not
attracted by karma , jñ āna and other desires;
therefore, they are ananya-manāḥ (exclusively absorbed
in Me) and, having received knowledge of My aiśvarya
such as mayā tatam idaṁ sarvam (Gītā 9.4), they know Me
to be the cause of all beings from Lord Brahmā down to a
blade of grass. They know Me to be avyaya , (eternal and
immutable), and My form to be sac-cid-ānanda . My
bhaktas need this type of knowledge to worship Me and
only this much. Following their mood, one should regard
ananya-bhakti , which is free from the jñ āna of tvaṁ-

                           475
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

padārtha , karma and so on, as topmost, as the king of
all confidential secrets (rāja-guhyam ).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




One may raise the question, “Then who is that person who
engages in bhajana to Him, respecting Kṛṣṇa’s sac-cid-
ānanda form?” Bhagavān answers this with the present
śloka . Those who have attained the causeless mercy of a
bhakta and Śrī Bhagavān take shelter of śuddha-bhakti .
Only such mahātmās engage in bhajana to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is the embodiment of sac-cid-ānanda. Such great
personalities are very rare. This principle has been
confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (7.19). Such great
personalities are endowed with divine natures. Contrary
to this, there are others with āsurika natures. It is
said in the Padm a Purāṇa : viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva
āsurās tad-viparyayaḥ. “According to smṛti śāstra , the
bhaktas of Viṣṇu are called devas and those who are
averse to Him are called asuras .”




Śloka 14




satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ

yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ

namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā

nitya-yuktā upāsate


satatam—constantly; kīrtayantaḥ—glorifying; mām —Me; ca
—and; yatantaḥ—endeavouring; (with) dṛḍha-vratāḥ—
determined vows; ca —and; namasyantaḥ—bowing down;
bhaktyā—with devotion; mām —before Me; nitya-yuktāḥ—they
who are always united (with Me); upāsate —worship (Me).

Constantly chanting the glories of My names, qualities,
form and pastimes, endeavouring with determined vows,
and offering praṇāmas with devotion, they engage in My
worship, remaining always united with Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                             476
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

“You said that they engage in Your bhajana, but what is
that bhajana ?” In answer to this question, Śrī Bhagavān
speaks this śloka beginning with the word satatam. “They
constantly perform My kīrtana in which, unlike karma -
yoga , there is no consideration of the purity or
impurity of time, place or person. Smṛti (Viṣṇu-
dharmottara ) says, ‘For a person who is attached to
chanting the name of Śrī Hari, there is no rule
regarding time or place. What to speak of chanting with
a contaminated mouth, the re is no restriction to
chanting in any impure state.’ These great souls are
yatantaḥ, which means that they endeavour with steadfast
vows. A poor householder, in order to maintain his
family with hopes of gaining wealth, may endeavour to do
so near a wealthy person. Similarly, My bhaktas develop
an attachment to kīrtana , etc., in order to obtain
bhakti , and endeavour in the assembly of sādhus . And
even after attaining bhakti , they practise it again and
again, just as one may revise the śāstra many times.
Those who are steadfast and never break their vow to
chant a fixed number of names, who bow down a set number
of times, who perform other such services regularly and
who fast on ekādaśī are called yatnavān or persons of
endeavour. They think, ‘This practice is imperative for
me.’ In the phrase namasyantaś ca , the word ca means
that all other limbs of bhakti , such as śravaṇa and
pāda-sevana , are also included in this. These great
bhaktas are called nitya-yuktāḥ, meaning that they
desire to obtain My eternal association. The import of
the two phrases kīrtayanto mām and mām upāsate in this
śloka is that only My kīrtana and other aṅgas (limbs)
comprise My upāsanā (bhakti ). Therefore repetition of
the word mām is not a defect.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




This śloka explains how the great personalities who were
described in the previous śloka worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.3.22) states: bhakti-yogo bhagavati
tan-nāma-grahaṇādibhiḥ. “They incessantly engage in the
kīrtana of My nāma , rūpa , guṇa and līlā.” It is stated
in the Vaiṣṇava-cintāmaṇi : na deśa-niyamo rājan na
kāla-niyamas tathā

vidyate nātra sandeho

viṣṇor nāmānukīrtane

This bhakti, in the form of kīrtana, does not depend on
the purity of time, place, or person.

The Skanda Purāṇa states: cakrāyudhasya nāmāni sadā
sarvatra kīrtayet. “The name of Śrī Hari, who carries a
disc in His hand, is to be chanted everywhere at all
times.”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu confirms this in Śikṣāṣṭakam:
kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ.

                           477
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


An ordinary person cannot become a mahātmā simply by
advertising himself or collecting votes. No one can
become a mahātmā by these processes. In this śloka , Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Himself has given the svarūpa-lakṣaṇa (intrinsic
characteristic) of a mahātmā. Those who are constantly
engaged in heari ng, chanting and remembering the
supremely pure name, form and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is the ātmā of all ātmās , are called mahātmās . Others,
such as jñ ānīs , yogīs and tapasvīs who engage in pious
activities and those who consider Bhagavān to be nirviśe
ṣa (featureless), nirākāra (impersonal) and niḥśaktika
(devoid of potency), are not addressed as mahātmā in
Bhagavad-gītā. Any person in any āśrama , be he a
brahmacārī, a gṛhastha or a sannyāsī, can become a real
mahātmā by taking shelter of a bona fide guru and by
cultivating bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Mahātmās who understand Me properly always glorify
(perform kīrtana of) My nāma , rūpa , guṇa and līlā.
That is, they follow the nine types of bhakti (navadhā
bhak ti ), such as hearing and chanting with determined
vows in order to attain eternal service to My sac-cid-
ānanda Śyāmasundara form. They become steady in all
activities, whether bodily, mental, social or spiritual,
solely to please Me. They surrender to Me b y the
process of bhakti -yoga even while living in this
material world. This ensures that their minds do not
become disturbed by materialistic activities.”




Śloka 15



jñāna-yajñena cāpy anye

yajanto mām upāsate

ekatvena pṛthaktvena

bahudhā viśvatomukham

anye—others; api—however; yajantaḥ—worship; jñ āna-yaj
ñena —through the culture of knowledge; ca —and; anye —
others; upāsate —worship; mām —Me; ekatvena —through the
monistic conception; pṛthaktvena —with a conception of
duality; anye —others; bahudhā—with the conception of
many gods; anye —others; viśvataḥ-mukham —with the
concept of the universal form.

Among those who engage in yajña by the cultivation of
knowledge, some worship Me with the knowledge of
oneness, some with the knowledge of duality, some
through the forms of various devatās, and some worship
Me as the universal form.




                           478
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this Chapter and in previous chapters only ananya-
bhaktas have been referred to as mahātmās. It has been
shown that such bhaktas are superior to all other types
of devotees such as ārta (the distressed). Now Śrī
Bhagavān is speaking about the other three types of
bhaktas who were not described earlier, and who fall
into a different category. They are ahaṅ-graha-upāsakas
, those who identify themselves with the object of
worship; that is, they consider the jīvas and Bhagavān
to be one. The pratīka-upāsakās worship the devas
considering them to be supreme, but in fact those devas
are simply vibhūtis of the Lord. The viśvarūpa-upāsakas
worship the universal or cosmic form of the Lord. None
of them are mahātmās because they are unable to perform
the sādhana described previously (Gītā 9.14).

The three meanings of jñāna-yajña are described in the
śrutis.

1) “O Deva-puruṣa, Master of all aiśvarya! Whatever You
are, I am the same as that, and whatever I am, You are
also the same.” This is ahaṅgraha-upāsanā and some jñ
ānīs engage in the worship of Parameśvara by this type
of yajña. Here, the word ca has been used to mean evam
(also) and the word api has been used in the sense of
giving up all other processes. The word ekatvena
(oneness) means thinking that the worshipper is one with
the worshipable. In the tantra it is said: nādevo devam
arcayet. “One who is not a devatā himself cannot worship
a devatā.” Ahaṅgraha-upāsanā means to worship Gopāla
with the feeling, “I am Gopāla.”

2) Inferior to this type of worship is pṛthaktvena
(worship in duality), in which the worshippers engage in
yajña in the form of pratīka-upāsanā. Following the
statements in the śrutis, they think, ‘The sun is
brahma; this alone is the instruction.’ “Those who have
even less intelligence than these worship My universal
form in various ways, considering Me to be the ātmā of
everything.” This is the explanation of Śrīpāda
Madhusūdana Sarasvatī. Some worshippers think that the
Supreme Lord Viṣṇu is the sun, and that there is no sun
other than Him; that He Himself is Indra, and there is
no other Indra; and that He is Soma, and there is no
other Soma. This type of worship, in which the vibhūtis
are seen as being Bhagavān in different forms, is called
pratīka-upāsanā.

3) To worship all the vibhūtis with the knowledge that
Viṣṇu is everything is called viśvarūpa-upāsanā.

Jñāna-yajña, therefore, has three divisions. Sometimes,
ekatvena (the oneness of the worshipper with the object
of worship) and p ṛthaktvena (the worship of Śr ī Bhagav
ān’s vibh ūtis as being different from Bhagav ān) are
placed in one category because they are almost the same.
For example, in aha ṅgraha-up āsan ā is the mentality
that “I am Gop āla,” and on the other hand the feeling
that, “I am the servant of Gop āla.” These two types of

                           479
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

feelings are likened to a river that is approaching the
ocean. The river is different from the ocean, yet also
non-different. The second category is vi ś var ūpa-up
āsan ā. Jñ āna-yajña is, therefore, of two types when
categorised in this way.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The superior and exalted postion of the ananya-bhaktas
is apparent when they are compared to those bhaktas such
as ārta (the distressed). Ananya-bhaktas can be
addressed as mahātmā. Having stated this, Śrī Bhagavān
explains three other types of worshippers who are
inferior to them. These three types of worshippers are
unable to perform the sādhana of the ananya-bhaktas so
they worship Śrī Bhagavān by the yajña of knowledge
endowed with guṇī-bhūta-bhakti (bhakti which is
predominated by karma , etc.), and they deliberate on
the reality of ekatvena (oneness), pṛthaktvena
(difference, duality) and bahudhā or viśvatomukham (the
universal form).

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, superior to those such as the ārta-bhaktas are
the ananya-bhaktas who are known as mahātmās . I have
explained the ārta-bhaktas in various ways. Now I will
explain the three types of bhaktas who are inferior to
them, and whom I have not yet mentioned. Learned
scholars call these three types of worshippers
ahaṅgraha-upāsaka , pratīka-upāsaka , and viśvarūpa-
upāsaka . Ahaṅgraha-upāsakas are superior to the other
two. They identify themselves as being one with
Bhagavān. This mentality, or egoism is one type of yajña
for worshipping Parameśvara. The ahaṅgraha-upāsakas
worship brahma while performing this yajña with a
conception of oneness. Pratīka-upāsakas are inferior to
them. They think of themselves as separate from Bhag
avān and they worship the sun and Indra, etc., but
without understanding that they are only Śrī Bhagavān’s
vibhūtis. Those who are even less intelligent worship
Śrī Bhagavān in the form of viśvarūpa (the universal
form).Thus, jñ āna-yaj ña is of three types.”




Ślokas 16—19




ahaṁ kratur ahaṁ yajñaḥ

svadhāham aham auṣadham

mantro ‘ham aham evājyam


                           480
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

aham agnir ahaṁ hutam

pitāham asya jagato

mātā dhātā pitāmahaḥ

vedyaṁ pavitram oṁkāra

ṛk sāma yajur eva ca

gatir bhartā prabhuḥ sākṣī

nivāsaḥ śaraṇaṁ suhṛt

prabhavaḥ pralayaḥ sthānaṁ

nidhānaṁ bījam avyayam

tapāmy aham ahaṁ varṣaṁ

nigṛhṇāmy utsṛjāmi ca

amṛtaṁ caiva mṛtyuś ca

sad asac cāham arjuna

aham kratuḥ—I am the agniṣṭoma ritual; aham yajñaḥ—I am
the smārta-yaj ña (such as vaiśva-deva ); aham svadhā—I
am the śrāddha (offering) to the forefathers; aham
auṣadham —I am the medicinal herbs; aham mantraḥ—I am
the mantra ; aham eva —I am certainly; ājyam —the ghee;
aham agniḥ—I am the fire; aham hutam —I am the offering
in the fire; ah am pitā—I am the father; mātā—the
mother; dhātā—supporter; pitā-mahaḥ—and the grandfather;
asya —of this; jagataḥ—universe; vedyam —I am worthy to
be known; pavitram —the purifier; oṁ-kāraḥ—I am the
syllable oṁ; ca —and; eva —certainly; ṛk sāma yajuḥ—the
Ṛg , Sāma and Yajur Vedas ; (I am) gatiḥ—the goal of
life; bhartā—the sustainer; prabhuḥ—the master; sākṣī—
the witness; nivāsaḥ—the abode; śaraṇam —the shelter;
suhṛt —the dear friend; prabhavaḥ—the creation; pralayaḥ
—the dissolution; sthānam —the basis; nidhānam —the
place of rest; (and) avyayam bījam —the imperishable
seed; aham tapāmi —I cause heat; aham nigṛhṇāmi —I
withhold; ca —and; utsṛjāmi —release; varṣam —rain;
arjuna —O Arjuna; aham —I am; eva —certainly; amṛtam —
immortality; ca —and; mṛtyuḥ—death; ca —as well as; sat
—eternal, subtle spirit; (and) asat —temporary, gross
matter.

O Arjuna, I am the Vedic rituals such as agniṣṭoma, the
smārta-yajñas such as vaiśva-deva, and I am śrāddha, the
oblation to the forefathers. I am the potency of the
healing herb, the mantra, the ghee, the fire and I am
homa or yajña. I am the mother, the father, the
maintainer and the grandsire of the universe. I am the
object of knowledge and the purifier. I am the syllable
oṁ and I am also the Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma Vedas. I am
destiny in the form of the fruit of karma, the
sustainer, the Lord, the witness, the abode, the refuge
and the dearest well-wishing friend. I am the creation,
the dissolutionÇ the basis, the resting place and the
eternal seed. I give heat and I withhold and release the
rain. I am immortality and I am death personified. I am

                             481
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the cause of everything and also the effect; spirit and
matter are both in Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Why do people worship You in various ways?”
Anticipating this question, in this and the next three
ślokas, Śrī Bhagavān is giving a detailed explanation of
His nature by which He is everything within the universe
. In other words, He is describing His cosmic form. The
word kratuḥ means yajñas such as agniṣṭoma which are
prescribed in the Vedas , as well as yajñas such as
vaiśva-deva which are described in the smṛti -śāstra of
the smārtas . The word auṣadham means the potency
produced from the auṣadhi , herbs which have medicinal
benefit. The word pitā signifies that because He is the
efficient material cause of the universe either
individually or collectively, He is therefore the
father. The word mātā means that, because He holds the
universe in His womb, He is the mother. He maintains the
universe and nourishes it, therefore He is dhātā, the
sustainer, and since He is the father of Brahmā, who is
the creator of this universe, He is the grandfather. The
word vedyam means the object of knowledge and pavitram
means that which purifies. The word gati means fruit in
the sense of result or destiny, either good or bad, of
our past and present actions. Bhartā means the husband
or protector, prabhuḥ means the controller, sākṣī means
the witness of auspicious and inauspicious activities,
and nivāsaḥ means the abode. Śaraṇam means one who
delivers others from calamities and suhṛt means one who
does welfare work without any motive. Prabhavaḥ means,
“Only I perform the actions of creation, destruction and
maintenance.” Nidhānam means, “I am the treasure, being
endowed with padma , śaṅkha , gadā and cakra .” The word
bīja means the cause or seed. However, avyayam means “I
am not perishable like seeds of rice. I am imperishable,
eternal and unchanging. I provide heat in the summer
season in the form of the sun. I award the rains in the
rainy season. I am amṛta (immortality), mṛtyu (the cycle
of birth and death), sat (subtle substance, or spirit)
and asat (gross matter). Knowing Me in this way, they
worship Me in My universal form.” This is how this śloka
relates to the previous one.




Śloka 20




trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā

yajñair iṣṭvā svar-gatiṁ prārthayante


                           482
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

te puṇyam āsādya surendra-lokam

aśnanti divyān divi deva-bhogān


trai-vidyāḥ—those conversant with (the karma-kāṇḍa
portions of) the three Vedas ; iṣṭvā—having worshipped;
mām —Me; yajñaiḥ—through sacrifices; soma-pāḥ—and
drinking soma-rasa ; pūta-pāpāḥ—being freed from sinful
reaction; prārthayante —they pray; svaḥ-gatim —for the
destination of Svarga; āsādya —upon achieving; puṇyam —
merit; sura-indra-lokam —and the planet of Indra; te —
they; aśnanti —enjoy; divyān —divine; deva-bhogān —godly
delights; divi —in heaven.

Those who are devoted to fruitive activity as described
in the three Vedas worship Me by performing yajña.
Having become free from sins by drinking the soma juice,
which is the remnant of the yajña, they pray for
entrance into Svarga. When they attain the planet of
Indra by virtue of their pious deeds, they enjoy the
celestial pleasures of the devas.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“In this way, these three types of bhaktas who perform
worship attain mukti , knowing only Me to be
Parameśvara, but those who are karmīs do not attain
mukti .” To explain this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks two
consecutive ślokas beginning with the word trai-vidyā.
“Those who know the science of the three Vedas—Ṛg ,
Yajur and Sāma—and are devoted to the karma prescribed
in them worship Me only indirectly by the performance of
yajña . They do not know that devas such as Indra are My
form in the absolute sense. Therefore, they worship Me
in the form of Indra only, and drink the soma juice, the
remnants of the yajña . Those who take this soma juice
attain piety and enjoy celestial pleasures.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “Only
when there is some scent of bhakti in these three types
of worship will the jīva begin worshipping Me as
Parameśvara. He will gradually give up the impurities of
mixed worship and attain mokṣa in the form of My śuddha-
bhakti . If the worshipper abandons the false conception
of oneness with Bhagavān as in the ahaṅgraḥa-upāsanā
process, he can gradually attain śuddha-bhakti by
properly deliberating on bhakti . The idea in the
pratīka-upāsanā process that other devas are Bhagavān
can also gradually culminate in realisation of My sac-

                           483
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

cid-ānanda svarūpa of Śyāmasundara, by deliberating on
tattva in the association of sādhus . The unsteady
knowledge (worship) of Paramātmā in the process of
viśvarūpa -upāsanā can also be removed by gradually
realising that the worship of My svarūpa is the most
elevated. The worshipper can then concentrate on My
human-like sac-cid-ānanda feature.

But if a person who performs one of these three types of
worship persists in his attraction for karma and jñ āna
, which is a symptom of his aversion to Me, he cannot
attain the all-auspicious bhakti . Because of their
aversion to Me, those who worship oneness (ahaṅgraḥa-
upāsaka ) gradually fall into the network of illusory
māyāvāda reasoning. The pratīka-upāsakas become bound by
the laws of karma prescribed in the Ṛg , Sāma , and
Yajur Vedas. Having studied these three types of Vedic
knowledge, which give instruction on karma , they become
freed from sin by drinking the soma juice. They worship
Me by yajña and pray to attain Svarga in the planets of
the devas as a result of their pious deeds. Thus they
attain the divine pleasures of the devas .”




Śloka 21




te taṁ bhuktvā svarga-lokaṁ viśālaṁ

kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti

evaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannā

gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante


puṇye—when (their) pious merit; kṣīṇe—is exhausted; te —
they; viśanti —enter; martya-lokam —the region of
mortals; bhuktvā—having enjoyed; tam —that; viśālam —
vast; svarga-lokam —planet of heaven; evam —thus; kāma-
kāmāḥ—those desiring sense pleasures; anuprapannāḥ—
following; trayī-dharmam —the karma-kāṇḍa portions of
the three Vedas ; labhante —achieve; gata-āgatam —
repeated going and coming (from earth to heaven).

When their pious merit is exhausted, they again return
to the mortal world, having enjoyed immense celestial
pleasures. In this way, those who desire sense pleasures
and who perform fruitive activities as described in the
three Vedas receive only repeated birth and death within
this material world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           484
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Gata-āgatam means going and coming, or repeated birth
and death.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Those who desire material pleasures, as described in the
previous śloka, and who are averse to Bhagavān again
fall into this material world after enjoying celestial
pleasures and recei ve the result of taking birth
repeatedly. This is also confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.32.2): sa cāpi bhagavad-dharmāt

kāma-mūḍhaḥ parāṅ-mukhaḥ

yajate kratubhir devān

pitṝṁś ca śraddhayānvitaḥ


With their faith in the path of fruitive activity and
being averse to the dharma of the soul, which is
bhagavad-ārādhanā (worship of Bhagavān), such persons
are bewildered by material desires and perform various
types of yajñas to worship mortal devas and the
forefathers.

karma-vallīm avalambya tata āpada ḥ kathañcin narak ād
vimukta ḥ punar apy eva ṁ sa ṁs ār ādhvani vartam āno
nara-loka-s ārtham upay āti evam upari gato ‘pi Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 5.14.41

In this way, living beings achieve Svarga by taking
refuge in the creeper of fruitive activity. Thus they
attain temporary relief from the miseries of hell. When
their piety is exhausted, however, they again enter the
world of birth and death.

tāvat sa modate svarge

yāvat puṇyaṁ samāpyate

kṣīṇa-puṇyaḥ pataty arvāg

anicchan kāla-cālitaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.10.26

They enjoy the pleasures of Svarga until their piety has
been exhausted. They then reluctantly fall back down
being impelled by the power of time.




Śloka 22


                             485
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




ananyāś cintayanto māṁ

ye janāḥ paryupāsate

teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ

yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham


janāḥ—persons; ye—who; ananyāḥ—exclusively; cintayantaḥ—
contemplate; paryupāsate mām —and worship Me by every
means; teṣām —for them; nitya-abhiyuktānām —who are
constantly engaged; aham —I; vahāmi —carry; (their) yoga
—necessities; kṣemam —for their well-being.

However, for those who are always absorbed in thoughts
of Me, and who worship Me with one-pointed devotion by
every means, I Myself carry their necessities and
preserve what they have.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“The happiness of My bhaktas is not due to receiving the
fruit of karma , rather it is because it is granted by
Me. Nityābhiyuktānām refers to those who are always
united with Me. The happiness of such paṇḍitas who are
linked with Me by bhakti is bestowed by Me. Those who
are not paṇḍitas are bereft of this knowledge of bhakti
. Nityābhiyuktānām also means that I grant success in
yoga , dhyāna and so on to those who always desire union
with Me. Kṣemam means that even if they are not
expecting it, I Myself maintain them and carry their
burden.” Here Śrī Bhagavān has not used the word karomi
which means ‘I do’, but He has used the word vahāmi
which means ‘I carry’. This implies, “I personally carry
the burden of maintaining their bodies, just as a
householder carries the burden of maintaining his wife,
son and other family members. Their yoga (progress) and
kṣema (maintenance) are not a result of the fruit of
their karma , unlike others.”

“What is the purpose behind You, Parameśvara, who are
always indifferent and self-satisfied, carrying their
burden?” (This appears to be contradictory because it is
the bhakta’s duty to serve Parameśvara). As it is said
in Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (Eastern Division 15), “Bhakti
means devotional service to Him, in which one gives up
all kinds of designations, be they material or tra
nscendental, and absorbs the mind only in Bhagavān.”
This is called naiṣkarmya , freedom from karma and its
reactions. “My ananya-bhaktas are niṣkāma (selfless),
and because of this selfless nature I bestow bliss upon
them. I am neutral but I give this bliss to My bhaktas
because of My affection for them, thus I am called
bhakta-vatsala . Therefore, it is incorrect to say that

                           486
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

those bhaktas are lacking in love for Me because they
give Me the responsibility of their maintenance and
nourishment. I willingly accept this responsibility even
if they do not completely give it to Me. This
responsibility is not a burden for Me, who am capable of
creating all the universes merely by My will.
Furthermore, because I am attached to My bhaktas , it is
a great pleasure to carry their burden, just as it is a
pleasure for a man to carry the burden of maintaining a
pleasing wife.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




How does Śrī Bhagavān carry the yoga-kṣema (progress and
maintenance) of His bhaktas ? In this regard a true
story is told.

Once, there was a poor brāhmaṇa whose name was Arjuna
Miśra. He was a parama-bhakta of Śrī Bhagavān. Every
morning after performing his bhajana , he spent two
hours writing a commentary on Śrī Bhagavad-gītā and then
he would go out to beg for alms. Wh atever he received
by begging he would give to his wife, who would prepare,
cook and offer the food to Śrī Bhagavān with great love.
She then gave the mahāprasāda to her husband. Whatever
was left over she would eat with great satisfaction.
They were very poor and all their clothes were torn.
They only had one dhotī that was suitable to wear
whenever they left the house. When the brāhmaṇa wore
that dhotī to go for alms, his wife covered her body
with some torn cloth, and when he returned, she put on
that same dhotī to go outside or perform other household
duties. They both considered their poverty to be a gift
from Śrī Bhagavān and were fully satisfied. They always
offered whatever alms were collected by Bhagavān’s mercy
to their iṣṭa-deva , Śrī Gopīnātha, an d later accepted
His mahāprasāda . This was their constant bhāvanā
(mood). Thus their time passed blissfully and they were
not the least disturbed by their situation.

In this way, the brāhmaṇa regularly wrote his commentary
on Bhagavad-gītā. One day, after performing his morning
bhajana he sat down to write a commentary on the śloka :
ananyāś cintayanto māṁ

ye janāḥ paryupāsate

teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ

yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham


Gītā 9.22

Upon reading this, his mind became perplexed with a
grave doubt that he was unable to resolve in any way.
“Will that Person, Svayam Bhagavān, who is the only
master of the whole universe, Himself carry the yoga-

                           487
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

kṣema (progress and maintenance) of those who are
engaged in His ananya-bhajana ? No, this cannot be true.
If this were so, then why is my situation as it is? I am
completely dependent on Him, and with exclusive
devotion, have offered everything unto His lotus feet.
Why then, do I have to undergo the misery of poverty?
Therefore, this statement, nityābhiyuktānāṁ yoga-kṣemaṁ
vahāmy aham , could not have been spoken by Bhagavān
Himself; it must have been interpolated.” He tried to
resolve this difficulty on the strength of his own
intelligence but instead he became more and more
perplexed and his doubt gradually increas ed. Finally,
he put three slash marks on this line with his red pen,
stopped writing and went out to beg alms.

Now, the most compassionate Bhagavān, who protects the
surrendered souls, saw that a doubt had appeared in the
mind of His bhakta regarding His words. Taking the form
of an extremely beautiful, tender, black-coloured boy,
He filled two baskets with ample rice, dāl , vegetables,
ghee and so on and putting them on either ends of a
bamboo stick, He personally carried them on His
shoulders to the house of this brāhmaṇa .

The door was locked from inside. First He knocked on the
door, and then loudly called, “O mother, O mother!” But
the poor brāhmaṇī was only wearing torn cloth, so how
could she come out? Out of shyness, she sat quietly but
the knocking a nd calling out continued. Finding no
other alternative, she shyly came out keeping her head
lowered and finally opened the door. Carrying that
weight, the boy entered the courtyard, placed His load
on the floor and stood to one side. Śrī Bhagavān, in the
guise of that boy, spoke to her as follows, “Mother,
Paṇḍitajī (the brāhmaṇa ) has sent these supplies.
Please take them inside.”

Until now, the brāhmaṇī had been standing with her face
lowered. Upon hearing the sweet words of the boy, she
looked up and saw in the courtyard two big baskets
filled with foodstuffs. She had never seen so many
vegetables and food grains. Being repeatedly requested
by the boy to take them, she carried them to the inner
part of the house. While doing so, she constantly gazed
upon His beautiful face, and became completely
satisfied. “Aho , how beautiful His face is! How can a
person of such dark colour have such transcendental
beauty?” She had never even imagined such beauty.
Awestruck, she stood transfixed. Her eyes then noticed
that on the chest of the boy were three bleeding slash
marks as if someone had cut it with a sharp weapon. Her
heart disturbed, she cried, “O son! Which merciless
person has made these cuts on Your chest? Alas! Alas!
Even a stone-hearted person would melt at the thought of
making cuts on such soft limbs!”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in the guise of the boy, said, “Mother, while
bringing you these foodstuffs, I was delayed, so your
husband himself made these cuts on My chest.”

Her eyes full of tears, the brāhmaṇī cried, “What! He
made these cuts on your chest? Just let him come home
and I will ask him how he could have done such a
merciless thing! My son, don’t feel distressed. Stay for

                           488
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

some time. I will prepare this food and You also can
accept the prasāda of Ṭhākurajī.”

Seating the boy in the courtyard, the brāhmaṇī went to
the kitchen and started to prepare an offering. Kṛṣṇa
then thought, “The purpose for which I Myself carried
these foodstuffs has been completed. Now, when the
brāhmaṇa returns to his house, he will immediately
discover the authenticity of My words, and he will never
doubt them again.” In this way, having made arrangements
to dispel the doubts of His bhakta , Kṛṣṇa disappeared.

That day, despite great effort, the brāhmaṇa was unable
to collect any alms. Losing all hope, he returned home,
thinking that his inability to collect anything was the
will of Ṭhākurajī. He knocked on the back door and his
wife opened it. When he saw that she was busy cooking,
he inquired, “How is it that you are cooking when I
received n o alms today? What can you cook with?”

“Why? Some time back you sent so much foodstuff in the
hands of that boy that it will take six months for both
of us to finish it. Why are you asking me, ‘What will
you cook?’” She was a little surprised. “And your heart
is like stone. This I did not know before. That boy had
three red marks on His chest. How could you slash the
tender body of that boy? Have you no mercy?”

The brāhmaṇa, completely amazed, asked her to explain.
“I didn’t send anything home nor did I beat a boy. I do
not understand what you are talking about.”

After hearing the statements of her husband, she showed
him the rice, dāl, flour and other things, but when she
entered the courtyard to show him the boy and His cuts,
the boy was not there. She began to search for Him
everywhere. Where had He gone? The outside gate was
closed as before. They both looked at each other in
surprise. The brāhmaṇa now began to understand the whole
situation and tears flowed continuously from his eyes.
After washing his hands and feet he entered the Deity
room and, to completely dispel his doubt, he opened his
Bhagavad-gītā. That morning he had made three slash
marks with his red ink on the line: nityābhiyuktānāṁ
yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham , but now these three marks were
gon e. Overwhelmed with happiness, he came out of the
Deity room crying. “My dear, you are so fortunate! Today
you have directly seen Śrī Gopīnātha! And all these
foodstuffs were brought personally by Him! How could I
possibly have brought so much stock? This morning, while
writing my commentary on the Bhagavad-gītā, I doubted
the statements of Bhagavān and slashed those words with
three lines of red ink. That is why the tender chest of
our Ṭhākurajī, Gopīnātha, was marked with cuts. He is
supremely compassiona te. He has taken so much trouble
to prove the authenticity of His statements and to
remove the doubts of an atheist like me.”

Then, his throat choked up and he was unable to speak.
Overwhelmed with love, he cried out, “Hā Gopīnātha! Hā
Gopīnātha!” and fell to the ground. Standing in front of
Śrī Gopīnātha, the eyes of his wife, who was struck
dumb, filled with tears. After some time the brāhmaṇa
returned to consciousness and, after taking his bath,

                           489
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

performed his daily duties. He offered the preparations
to Śrī Gopīnātha that his wife had prepared and, with
great love, they both accepted His remnants. He
continued writing the commentary on Gītā every day, and
his life became full of love.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “You
should not think that these three types of upāsakas
(worshippers) who have fruitive desires attain happiness
and that My bhaktas suffer. My bhaktas think of Me only,
without deviation. For the maintenance of their bodies
they accept anything that is favourable to My bhakti and
reject all that is unfavourable. In this way, they are
nitya-abhiyukta , or ever-united with Me by devotional
love. Free from selfish desires, they offer everything
to Me only. I alone provide all their wealth and any of
their other requirements, and thus I maintain them. The
meaning is that, from an external point of view, there
may appear to be a similarity between materially
motivated pratīka-upāsakas and My bhaktas who only
accept that which is favourable to My service. However,
there is a big difference between the two. I carry the
yoga (progress) and kṣema (maintenance) of My bhaktas
even if they have no mundane desires. The special
benefit My bhaktas receive is that by My mercy they
enjoy all sense objects in a dispassionate manner and
finally they attain eternal bliss. However, the pratīka-
upāsakas again return to the field of karma after
enjoying sense pleasure . They do not attain eternal
bliss. I am indifferent to all mundane occurences, but
out of affection for My bhaktas , I feel delight to help
them in every respect. In My doing this, there is no
offence at all on the part of My bhaktas , because they
do not pray to Me for anything except My favour. I
Myself personally supply their requirements.”




Śloka 23




ye ‘py anya-devatā-bhaktā

yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

te ‘pi mām eva kaunteya

yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam


kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; api—although; te bhaktāḥ—those
bhaktas ; ye —who; yajante —worship; anya-devatā—other
devatās ; anvitāḥ śraddhayā—with faith; eva —certainly;
api —also; yajanti —worship; mām —Me; (but) avidhi-
pūrvakam —in a way contrary to the injunctions of
śāstra.

O Kaunteya, those who worship other devatās with faith
actually worship Me alone, but in a way that is
unauthorised.

                            490
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The following doubt may be raised: “In accordance with
the śloka of Bhagavad-gītā 9.15, jñ āna-yaj ñena c āpy
anye , You said that worship of You is of three types.
The statement, bahudhā viśvatomukham , explains the
third type, worship of Your universal form. You revealed
the nature of that form by statements such as, ‘I am
yajña , I am the Vedic ritual, etc.’ (Gītā 9.16-19). No
devatā exists independently from You; such is the nature
of the universal form. It can be concluded from this
that those who worship devatās such as Indra are, in
fact, worshipping You, so why will they not be
liberated? Furthermore, You have said that those who
have material desires become entangled in the cycle of
birth and death (Gītā 9.21) and attain perishable
results. Why is this so?”

In response, Śrī Bhagavān says, “It is true that they
worship Me, but they do so without following the
prescribed rules to attain Me. They therefore remain in
the material world.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The following point may be raised: “The devatās are
Bhagavān’s vibhūti-svarūpa (forms of opulence) and the
limbs of His body. It does not matter how those who
worship the devatās perform their worship, ultimately it
reaches Bhagavān. Those who worship the devas attain the
planets of those particular devas and, after enjoying
the peri shable fruits there, they return to this
earthly plane. The unalloyed worshippers of Śrī
Bhagavān, however, do not return to this material world
after attaining sevā to Śrī Bhagavān in His dhāma , so
if both types of worship are meant for Bhagavān, why do
t heir end results differ?”

In response to this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is explaining to Arjuna,
“The devatās are not separate from Me nor are they
controllers independent of Me. The worship of those who
consider them as such is unauthorised.”

This subject is also clearly explained in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (4.31.14):


yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena

tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ


                           491
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇāṁ

tathaiva sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā


By properly watering the root of a tree, its trunk,
branches, twigs, leaves, flowers and so forth all become
nourished, just as by eating food the life air and the
senses become nourished. In the same way, by worshipping
Bhagavān Acyuta everyone, including all the devas, are
worshipped.

The essence of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s
commentary on this śloka is that, by pouring water on
the root of a tree, its branches and sub-branches become
nourished, but the same result is not achieved by
pouring water on its leaves, branches, fruits and
flowers. Somebody may say that there is no harm in
giving water to the branches as well as to the root of a
tree; rather there is some benefit. Therefore, if one
worships the devatās along with worshipping Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
then what is the harm? In response to this another
example is given. The l ife air is sustained by
supplying food to the stomach; thus all the body’s
organs and senses become nourished. However, if one
gives food separately to the ears, eyes and nose, then
one will become deaf and blind and ultimately one will
die. In the same way, by worshipping the various devatās
, considering them independent gods, one will only
attain adverse results. The authorised process,
therefore, is to exclusively worship Śrī Bhagavān.
Moreover, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.40.9-10) says: sarva eva
yajanti tvāṁ

sarva-deva-mayeśvaram

ye ‘py anya-devatā-bhaktā

yady apy anya-dhiyaḥ prabho

yathādri-prabhavā nadyaḥ

parjanyāpūritāḥ prabho

viśanti sarvataḥ sindhuṁ

tadvat tvāṁ gatayo ‘ntataḥ


When reading these ślokas, most people will understand
them to mean, “Just as rivers flowing from the mountains
become filled with rain water, divide into various
branches and enter the one ocean from various
directions, in the same way, the worship performed by
those on various paths ultimately culminates in worship
of Śrī Bhagavān alone. Subsequently, by worshipping
other devas one will also receive the result of
worshipping Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” However this understanding is
not correct. The essence of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s commentary on the above two ślokas is as
follows: “Karmīs , yogīs and others actually worship Me
only because I alone am the embodiment of all the devas
and the Supreme Controller of all controllers. A person
who thinks, ‘I am worshipping Śiva, I am worshipping

                             492
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sūrya, I am worshippin g Ganeśa,’ considering himself to
be devoted to them, actually only worships Me. However,
if it is said that in this way they worship Me alone and
as a result will surely attain Me, it is not so. The
worship performed by them certainly comes to Me, but the
worshippers do not. The rivers flowing from the
mountains become full of rain water. The clouds pour
forth water all over the mountains and eventually this
water takes the form of rivers. All the rivers, flowing
their independent courses through different places,
finally enter the ocean. The rivers coming from the
mountains enter the ocean, but their source, the
mountain, does not. In the same way, worship performed
by persons practising various processes comes to Me
alone. However, their source, the worshipper, does not.”

Here, Śrī Bhagavān is compared to the ocean, the Vedas
to the clouds, the various types of processes of worship
to the water, the worshippers to the mountain and the
various devatās to the different places. Just as rivers
pass through various lands and enter the ocean, the
worship of various devatās comes to Śrī Viṣṇu and, just
as the mountain does not reach the ocean, the worshipper
of the devas does not reach Viṣṇu.

Ocean water evaporates to form rainclouds over the
mountains. Upon falling, that same water gathers as a
river and passes through different lands. It is known by
different names and finally it reaches the ocean. In the
same way, the different types of worship as described in
the śrutis originally came from Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They
are performed by various qualified persons to different
devas and they are known by the names of those various
types of worship . Their worship finally comes to Śrī
Viṣṇu through the medium of the devas . Through his
worship a person only attains his own worshipable deva ,
a temporary position. He does not attain eternal sevā in
the eternal dhāma of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “In
reality, I, the embodiment of sac-cid-ānanda, am the
only Parameśvara, Supreme Controller. There is no deva
independent of Me. In My own svarūpa , I am the
transcendental sac-cid-ānanda reality, eternally beyond
the material creation. Many persons worship devas , such
as Sūrya. In other words, conditioned human beings in
the material world give hon our to the majestic feature
of My māyā-śakti in the form of various devatās and
worship them. But by proper deliberation it can be
understood that My vibhūtis , the devas , are simply My
guṇa-avatāras . Those who worship these devas knowing
their actual position and the reality of My svarūpa ,
consider them to be My guṇa-avatāras. In this way, their
worship is authorised and approved of as the progressive
path. But those who worship the devas , thinking them to
be eternal and independent of Me, worship in an
unauthorised way which does not follow the prescribed
rules, and so they do not achieve eternal results.”




Śloka 24

                           493
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ

bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca

na tu mām abhijānanti

tattvenātaś cyavanti te

aham—I (am); hi—certainly; bhoktā—the enjoyer; ca —and;
eva —indeed; prabhuḥ—the master; sarva-yajñ ānām —of all
sacrifices; tu —but; te —they; na abhijānanti —do not
recognise; mām —Me; tattvena —as I am, in My svarūpa ;
ataḥ—therefore; cyavanti —they fall down (they wander in
saṁsāra ).

I am the only master and enjoyer of all yajñas, but
those who do not recognise My svarūpa repeatedly wander
in the cycle of birth and death.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What is meant by the phrase ‘without the prescribed
rules’?” In response to this question, Śrī Bhagavān
speaks this śloka beginning with ahaṁ hi. “In the form
of various devas I am the only enjoyer; I am the Lord
and master and I am the giver of results. Those who are
pratīka-upāsakas , however, do not know My tattva . For
example, they think that by worshipping Sūrya, whom they
see as Parameśvara, the Supreme Controller, Sūrya will
be pleased with them and fulfil their desired results.
They cannot understand with their intelligence that
Parameśvara, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, has become Sūrya, and it is
Śrī Nārāyaṇa Himself who gives them such faith. Indeed,
it is He who bestows the results of Sūrya worship.
Hence, it is because of a lack of tattvajñ āna of Me
that they fall down. Those who understand that it is Śrī
Nārāyaṇa only who is worshipped in the form of Sūrya and
the other devas , and who worship Me being conscious of
My universal existence, become liberated. Therefore, it
is imperative for those who worship My vibhūtis , such
as Sūryadeva, to know that they are actually My
vibhūtis. They are not to be worshipped independently of
Me.” This is explained here.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




“Why is the worship of various devas improper? What is
the result of that unauthorised worship?” This is being

                           494
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

explained in the present śloka . “In the form of devas
such as Indra, I alone am the enjoyer of all yajñas . I
am the master, maintainer, controller and bestower of
the results of them all. Worshippers of the devas do not
know that the devas are My vibhūtis ; hence, they
worship them with faith considering them to be
independent of Me and the bestowers of the results of
their activities. Because they are unaware of My tattva
, they do not have faith in Me; therefore, this type of
worship is unauthorised. As a result of such
unauthorised worship, they fall away from the truth and
remain entangled in the cycle of birth and death.

“However, by worshipping devas such as Sūrya,
considering them to be My vibhūti , they gradually
ascend the progressive path and, by the mercy of My
bhaktas who know My tattva , they come to understand the
science of My svarūpa. Thus, their intelligence becomes
exclusively fixed on Me, Kṛṣṇa, whose svarūpa is sac-
cid-ānanda .”

This siddhānta is also verified in the śrutis:


nārāyaṇād brahmā jāyate

nārāyaṇād indro jāyate

nārāyaṇād dvādaśādityā rudrā

sarva-devatā sarva-ṛṣayaḥ

sarvāṇi bhūtāni nārāyaṇād eva

samutpadyate nārāyaṇe pratīyante


Brahmā is born from Śrī Nārāyaṇa, Indra is born from Śrī
Nārāyaṇa, Śiva is born from Śrī Nārāyaṇa, all the
devatās and all living entities are also born from Śrī
Nārāyaṇa. When their universal duties are complete and
they die, all will again merge into Śrī Nārāyaṇa.

The smṛtis have also established the same conclusion:


brahmā śambhus tathaivārkaś

candramāś ca śatakratuḥ

evam ādyās tathaivānye

yuktā vaiṣṇava-tejasā

jagat tu viyujyante ca

tejasā kāryāvasāne


vitejasaś ca te sarve


pañcatvam upayānti te


                            495
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Brahmā, Śiva, as well as the sun god, the moon god,
Indradeva and other powerful personalities empowered by
Śrī Viṣṇu, are forced to give up all those powers when
they die.

This conclusion is also seen in other Upaniṣads. The
above statements from śruti and smṛti indicate a
difference between the devas and Śrī Viṣṇu, who is the
Supreme Controller (sarveśvareśvara ). The supremacy of
Śrī Viṣṇu over other devas is established in ś ruti and
smṛti , yet somewhere in them it is said that a
particular deva is equal to Śrī Viṣṇu. This statement is
made either because the influence of a particular deva
is under the control of Śrī Viṣṇu, or because the deva
is very dear to Him.

If one concludes from this that it is proper to worship
all devas, considering them to be Nārāyaṇa, then it is
to be understood that everyone is generated from
Nārāyaṇa, by Him they exist and in Him they are
annihilated or dissolved. None of them are Nārāyaṇa, nor
can they ever become Nārāyaṇa. It has been stated in
śāstra that it is a grievous offence to equate the devas
or jīvas with Śrī Bhagavān. Such offenders are called
pāṣaṇḍīs (atheists).


yas tu nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ

brahma-rudrādi-daivataiḥ

samatvenaiva vīkṣeta

sa pāṣaṇḍī bhaved dhruvam


Padma Purāṇa

Just as it is improper to worship the devatās with the
understanding that they are independent lords, it is
also atheistic to equate the devas (jīvas ) with Lord
Nārāyaṇa.

Therefore, it is prescribed that the viśvar ūpa-up
āsakas (worshippers of the universal form) should
worship the devas as the vibh ūti of Śr ī Nār āya ṇa. In
this regard, śāstra makes two types of statements. It is
said in Nārada-pañcar ātra :


antaryāmi-bhagavad-dṛṣṭyaiva

sarvārādhanaṁ vihitam


All are to be worshipped with the vision that Antaryāmī,
the all-pervading Lord, is dwelling within them.

And the Viṣṇu-yāmala states:

viṣṇu-pādodakenaiva

pitṝṇāṁ tarpaṇa kriyā


                            496
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

viṣṇor niveditānnena

yaṣṭavyaṁ devātāntaram

ādi-prakāreṇa vihitam iti

It is with the foot water of Śrī Viṣṇu that one should
perform activities such as offering oblations to the
forefathers, and it is with the remnants of Śrī Viṣṇu’s
foodstuffs that one should please the devas.




Śloka 25



yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino ‘pi mām


deva-vratāḥ—those devoted to the devas; yānti —go; devān
—to the devas ; pitṛ-vratāḥ—those devoted to the
forefathers; yānti —go; pitṝn —to the forefathers;
bhūta-ijyāḥ—the worshippers of the spirits; yānti —go;
bhūtāni —to the spirits; api —and; mat-yājinaḥ—My
worshippers; yānti —go; mām —to Me.

Those who worship the devatās go to the planets of the
devatās, those who worship the forefathers go to the
planets of the forefathers, those who worship the
spirits go to the planets of the spirits, but those who
worship Me will surely come to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Various rules and regulations have been prescribed for
the worship of the different devatās, and the Vaiṣṇavas
worship Viṣṇu by a similar process, according to the
injunctions of śāstra . One may question, “What is the
defect in this deva worship?” To clear up this doubt,
Śrī Bhagavān says, “It is true; they worship the devas
according to the rules for their worship. As a result,
such devatā-bhaktas achieve those devatās . This is the
principle.” To explain this point, Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with the words yānti deva. “If those
devas themselves are perishable, how can their bhaktas
become imperishable? But I am imperishable and eternal,
therefore, My bhaktas are also imperishable and
eternal.” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.3.25) also verifies this
point: bhavān ekaḥ śiṣyate ‘śeṣa-saṁj ñaḥ. “After the

                            497
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

devastation only You remain, therefore You are called
Ananta.” Moreover, the śrutis state: eko nārāyaṇa evāsīn
na brahmā na ca śaṅkaraḥ. “In the beginning there was
only Nārāyaṇa, not Brahmā or Śiva.”

Also in the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad it is said:
parārdhānte so ‘budhyata gopa-rūpā me purastād
āvirbabhūva. “At the end of the first half of Brahmā’s
life, he understood that I had appeared before him in
the form of a cowherd boy.”

The śrutis also state: na cyavante ca mad-bhaktā
mahatyāṁ pralayād api. “My bhaktas continue to exist
even at the time of the great dissolution, that is, they
do not take birth again.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




Here, Śrī Bhagavān is showing the difference between
those who worship the devatās and those who worship Him
(His bhaktas ) . He is also showing the difference in
the results attained by both. Some may say, “Just as the
Vaiṣṇavas worship Viṣṇu according to the process
described in śāstra , we are worshipping the devatās
according to the rules of śāstra. How, then, is our
worship considered incorrect?”

In answer to this Bhagavān says, “According to śāstra ,
a person will only have realisation to the extent that
the personality whom he worships has realisation. This
is just. The worshippers of the devas therefore attain
the planets of the devas. Because both the devas and
their planets are perishable, their worshippers achieve
perishable results. On the contrary, both My dhāma and I
Myself are sac-cid-ānanda , eternal, cognisant and
blissful; therefore, those who worship Me achieve
blissful service to Me in My eternal dhāma . It is also
said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.27): sama-śīlā bhajanti ,
that those who worship the devas (such as Indra) perform
yajñas such as daśa -paurṇamāsya-yaj ña that are in
sattva-guṇa. Those who worship the forefathers do so by
śrāddha and other ceremonies, which are in rajo-guṇa ,
and those who worship spirits, yakṣas (ghosts), rākṣasas
and vināyakas (elements which create obstacles for
others) worship by the process of bali or offerings,
which is in tamo-guṇa . My bhaktas , who are nirguṇa ,
worship Me with devotion using natural and easily
available objects.”

Someone may say, “Those who worship the devas also have
faith in You, because the sarva-deva-pūjā (worship of
all the devas ) also includes the worship of Nārāyaṇa.”
Bhagavān says in response, “The purpose of worshipping
Nārāyaṇa in sarva-deva-pūjā, is simply so that t he
worshippers can perfect their worship. Factually, they
have no faith in Nārāyaṇa. Those who worship the devas
think as follows: ‘I am a worshipper of Indra and other
devas . They are my worshipable gods and they themselves

                           498
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

will fulfil my desires, being satisfied with my
worship.’ Contrary to this, My bhaktas think, ‘I am a
worshipper of Śrī Vāsudeva who is the omnipotent Supreme
Controller. He alone is my worshipable Lord, and only
for His pleasure am I worshipping Him with various
offerings according to His liking. Being pleased, He
will fulfil my desires.’ Externally, both types of
worship appear to be equal, but, because those who
worship the devas are averse to My bhakti , they attain
only limited enjoyment on the planets of those devas.
After enjoying there, they again fall to this earthly
plane of existence. My ananya-bhaktas , however, attain
service to My sac-cid-ānanda form in My eternal dhāma
and do not return to this material world again. They
remain absorbed in My loving pastimes, experiencing
unlimited happiness in My association.”




Śloka 26




patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ


yaḥ—whoever; prayata-ātmanaḥ—having a devoted nature;
prayacchati —freely offers (without a desire for
personal reward); me —to Me; patram —a leaf; puṣpam —a
flower; phalam —a fruit; toyam —or water; bhaktyā—with
devotion; tat —that very thing; bhakti-upahṛtam —served
with devotion; aham —I; aśnāmi —accept.

If any pure-hearted bhakta offers Me a leaf, a flower,
fruit or water with love and devotion, I will surely
accept that gift.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“There is often much misery in deva worship, but such
pain does not exist in the performance of bhakti to Me,
and it can also be performed with ease.” Śrī Bhagavān
speaks this śloka beginning with the word patram to
explain this point . It is described here that it is the
bhakti of the devotee which causes Bhagavān to accept
his offerings. The word bhaktyā has been used in the
second line and also again in the third line in the word
bhakty-upahṛtam . Thus there is repetition. According to
the rules of Sanskrit grammar, the word bhaktyā in the

                             499
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

third case implies those who are endowed with bhakti ,
that is, ‘My bhaktas ’. So it emphasises, “If someone
other than My bhakta offers Me fruits or flowers with
superficial devotion, I do not accept it, but I accept
(aśnāmi ) whatever My bhaktas give Me, be it even a
leaf. In other words, I fully enjoy that which is
offered to Me with bhakti , but I do not enjoy the
offering of someone who has been forced to do it. But if
the body of My bhakta is impure, I do not accept his
offering.” Therefore, Bhagavān says prayatātmanaḥ,
meaning he whose body is pure. From this statement it is
concluded that a woman is forbidden to make an offering
during her monthly menstrual cycle. Another meaning of
the word prayatātmanaḥ is, “I accept the offerings of
those whose hearts are pure. Other than My bhaktas , no
one’s heart is pure.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.8.6) Parīkṣit Mahārāja says,
“Those who are pure-hearted never give up the lotus feet
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” The symptom of a person who has a pure
heart is that he is unable to give up service to the
lotus feet of Bhagavān. Therefore, if such a bhakta is
sometimes seen to possess lust or anger, it should be
understood that he cannot do any harm to others. He is
likened to a snake whose poisonous fangs have been
removed.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Having explained the imperishable and unlimited nature
of the result of bhagavad-bhajana, Bhagavān is now
explaini ng the quality of bhagavad-bhajana , which is
easy to perform. When some easily attainable object such
as a leaf, flower, fruit, or water is offered to
Bhagavān with bhakti , then He accepts it thoroughly,
although He is endowed with unlimited opulence and is
perfectly satisfied. He becomes hungry and thirsty
because of His bhakta’s love for Him and, absorbed in a
mood of bhakti , He eats that offering out of prema . At
the house of bhakta Vidura, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, with great prema
, even ate banana peels from the hand s of Vidura’s
wife. While eating the dry rice that His dear friend
Sudāmā Vipra brought and offered with prema , Śrī Kṛṣṇa
said: patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.81.4

The preparation may be delicious or not, but if it is
offered with love and a feeling that it is very
delicious, it becomes most delicious to Me. At that
time, I give up all other thoughts and relish it. Even

                            500
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

if such a fruit or flower has no taste or fragrance, I
accept it, being captivated by My bhakta’s prema.

One may ask if Kṛṣṇa accepts that article which is
offered to Him with bhakti by those who worship the
devas . In response, He says, “No. I only accept
whatever My bhaktas give Me, not items offered by
others.”

The ṛtvik priests in the sacrifice of King Nābhi spoke
to Śrī Bhagavān, who appeared there:


parijanānurāga-viracita-śabala-saṁśabda-salila-sita-
kisalaya-tulasikā-dūrvāṅkurair api sambhṛtayā saparyayā
kila parama parituṣyasi


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 5.3.6

You certainly become especially pleased by the worship
offered by Your bhaktas who are full of anurāga for You,
who offer prayers with choked voices and who perform
pūjā to You with water, tulasī leaves and sprouting
durvā grass.

A similar statement from Gautamīya-tantra in Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa states:


tulasī-dala-mātreṇa

jalasya culukena vā

vikṛīṇīte svam ātmānaṁ

bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalaḥ


Bhagavān, who is bhakta-vatsala, completely sells
Himself to those bhaktas who, with love and devotion,
offer Him a tulasī leaf and a palmful of water.

While eating a morsel of dry rice from the begging bag
of the bhakta, Śuklāmbara Brahmacārī, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu said:


prabhu bale tora khūdkaṇa mui khāūṁ

abhaktera amṛta ulaṭi nā cāūṁ


O Śuklāmbara, I am accepting this dry rice from you, but
I do not even look at ambrosial food that is offered by
a non-devotee.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.31.21), Devaṛṣi Nārada also told
the Pracetās: na bhajati kumanīṣiṇāṁ sa ijyām. “Śrī Hari
never accepts the servic e of ill-minded people who,
intoxicated by their scholarship, wealth or high birth,
disrespect His bhaktas who perform ananya-sevā to Him.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa personally gave a similar instruction to

                             501
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Uddhava: “Even the gifts given to Me in profusion by
non-devotees do not satisfy Me.” Furthermore, to clarify
this siddhānta , the Lord told Sudāmā:


aṇv apy upāhṛtaṁ bhaktaiḥ

premṇā bhūry eva me bhavet

bhūry apy abhaktopahṛtaṁ

na me toṣāya kalpate


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.81.3

If My bhakta gives Me the smallest offering, I consider
it extremely great, but if non-devotees give Me
elaborate offerings, they cannot satisfy Me.

Here, the word prayatātmā means one who has purified his
heart by bhakti . Śrī Bhagavān eats the foodstuffs
offered with prīti by such pure-hearted bhaktas , but He
does not eat foodstuffs given by others. Prahlāda
Mahārāja has also made a similar statement: iti
puṁsārpitā viṣṇor arpitaiva sati yadi kriyate. “The
performance of hearing, chanting and so on is śuddha-
bhakti only if a person has full y surrendered himself
at the lotus feet of Bhagavān, not otherwise.”

The purport is that only when the limbs of bhakti are
performed with complete surrender can the heart become
purified. Śrī Bhagavān lovingly accepts only the
offerings of such bhaktas .




Śloka 27



yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat



yat tapasyasi kaunteya

tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam

kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; yat—whatever; karoṣi —
undertakings you make; yat —whatever; aśnāsi —you eat;
yat —whatever; juhoṣi —you sacrifice; yat —whatever;
dadāsi —you give in charity; yat —whatever; tapasyasi —
austerities you perform; kuruṣva —you must do; tat —
that; mat-arpaṇam —as an offering to Me.

O Kaunteya, whatever activities you perform, whatever
you eat, whatever you sacrifice and give in charity and
whatever austerities you perform, offer them all to Me.


                             502
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna may ask the following question: “Up until now,
You have explained various types of bhakti from the
śloka : ārto jij ñ āsur arthārthī j ñ ānī (Gītā 7.16) .
Which one of them should I follow?”

To remove Arjuna’s doubt, Śrī Bhagavān says, “O Arjuna,
at present you are unable to give up karma, jñ āna and
so on, and therefore you do not have the adhikāra to
perform the topmost bhakti , namely kevalā or ananya-
bhakti . And you do not need to perform the inferior
sakāma -bhakti because your adhikāra is higher than
that. Therefore, you should perform niṣkāma-karma -jñ
āna-miśra-pradhānī-bhūta-bhakti , or bhakti (which is
predominating) mixed with niṣkāma-karma and jñ āna .”
For this reason, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka
beginning with the words yat karoṣi and also the next
śloka. “Whatever mundane or Vedic activities you perform
as normal routine, whatever food or water you take
daily, and whatever austerities you may perform, you
should maintain the understanding that all of them can
be offered to Me.” This, however, is neither niṣkāma -
karma -yoga nor bhakti -yoga . Those who are devoted to
niṣkāma-karma-yoga offer to Bhagavān only those actions
prescribed in śāstra , not the normal activities of day-
to-day life. This is more common. But bhaktas offer
every function of the senses along with their soul, mind
and life air unto their worshipable Lord. As it is said
in a description of bhakti in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(1.2.36): “Whatever activities a bhakta performs with
his body, speech, mind, senses, intelligence and ātmā,
or by dint of his own nature, are all offered to the
transcendental Śrī Nārāyaṇa.” The following question may
be raised: If juhoṣi (the performance of yajña ) is the
same as arcana (a limb of bhakti ), which is performed
for the purpose of satisfying Śrī Viṣṇu, and if tapasya
is to perform the ekādaśī fast, then why are they not
considered ananya-bhakti ? In response Bhagavān says,
“This is all right, but actions in ananya-bhakti are not
offered t o Bhagavān after they have been performed;
rather, a person first offers them to Him and then
performs the act.” As Prahlāda Mahārāja said: śravaṇaṁ
kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau

bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā

kriyeta bhagavaty addhā

tan manye ‘dhītam uttamam

                            503
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.5.23-24

Here it is evident that bhakti is performed while first
offering these activities to Him, not that the
activities are offered after they are performed. In his
explanation of this śloka , Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmipāda
says that bhakti to Viṣṇu is performed while offering
these activities to Him, not that the acts are offered
after they have been performed. Therefore, the present
Gītā śloka does not culminate in kevala-bhakti .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




For those who are unable to take shelter of the most
superior ananya-bhakti, as described by Bhagavān, and
also for those who do not have a taste for performing a
lower class of bhakti , Śr ī Bhagavān is instructing His
dear friend Arjuna, whom He is using as an instrument to
teach humanity, to adopt niṣkāma-karma-j ñ āna-miśra-
pradhānī-bhūta-bhakti , in which all actions are offered
to Him.

When Kṛṣṇa says, “Whatever actions you perform, be they
laukika (mundane) or Vedic, offer them to Me,” a person
should not wrongly think that he can perform any
activity and eat and drink whatever he likes without
there being any defect, as long as it is offered to
Bhagavān. Just because he feels obliged to offer all
actions unto the lotus feet of Bhagavān, does not mean
that they will be successful. Nor does it mean that an
act prescribed in the Vedas , to whichever deva or with
whatever desire, will in the end be offered merely by
saying the mantra , śrī kṛṣṇāya samarpaṇam astu , like
the smārtas who are engaged in mundane activities. For
this reason, all commentators on this śloka like Śrīla
Śrīdhara Svāmī have explained the deep meaning: one
should act in such a way that all of his activities are
offered directly to Śrī Bhagavān. In other words, only
those actions which are performed for His pleasure
should be offered. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.36) Devaṛṣi
Nārada also says: kurvāṇā yatra karmāṇi bhagavac-
chikṣayā. “The śaraṇāgata-bhaktas , who perform pleasing
a cts for Bhagavān, offer those acts solely to Him.”

While commenting on this śloka, Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura shows the difference between the
activities of a karmī and those of a bhakta. “A karmī
only offers Bhagavān the activities that are in acco
rdance with Vedic injunction so that his karma will not
be fruitless. Bhaktas , however, perform all their
activities, whether laukika , Vedic, or related to the
body, with the feeling that ‘Bhagavān is my master, and
it is for His pleasure that I am offerin g everything
unto His feet.’ This is the great difference between the
two.”


                           504
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

This conclusion has also been confirmed in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.2.36) in the dialogue of the Nava-
yogendras :


kāyena vācā manasendriyair vā

buddhyātmanā vānusṛta-svabhāvāt

karoti yad yat sakalaṁ parasmai

nārāyaṇāyeti samarpayet tat


In accordance with the particular nature that one has
acquired in conditioned life, whatever one does with
body, words, mind, senses, intelligence or purified
consciousness, one should offer to the Supreme, thinking
that this is for the pleasure of Śrī Nārāyaṇa.

While commenting on this śloka, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda writes: “The activities of a bhakta
are performed with body, mind, speech, intelligence,
false ego, heart and all the senses, but they should not
be compared to the dharmika acts of karmīs which are
performed for their own enjoyment. As a result of
offering one’s actions to Kṛṣṇa as described above,
one’s aversion towards Him is gradually removed. Jīvas
who are situated in their svarūpa perform all their
actions only for the purpose of serving Kṛṣṇa. If some
pious karmīs who have spiritual good-fortune follow the
ideals of bhaktas in a bona fide sampradāya and offer
all their activities unto the lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān, they quickly rise above karma-miśra-bhakti and
are counted among the bhaktas .”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, now ascertain your own qualification. You are
engaged in assisting Me in My pastimes, having descended
wi th Me as a dharmavīra (righteous hero); therefore,
you can neither be counted among the nirapekṣa
(indifferent, śānta ) bhaktas nor the sakāma-bhaktas .
You will only perform that bhakti which is mixed with
niṣkāma-karma and jñ āna. It is, therefore, your duty to
offer Me whatever austerities and other activities you
perform. The conception of the materialists is to
perform an act with material desires and then offer the
activity to Me simply as a remnant. This conception is
empty and useless. You should offer the action in the
right way at its inception and thus perform niṣkāma-
karma-j ñ āna-miśra-bhakti .”




Śloka 28




śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ

mokṣyase karma-bandhanaiḥ

                            505
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā

vimukto mām upaiṣyasi


evam—thus; mokṣyase—you shall be freed; śubha-aśubha-
phalaiḥ—from the auspicious and inauspicious results;
karma-bandhanaiḥ—by which there is bondage through
fruitive reaction; (being) yukta-ātmā—a soul linked up;
sannyāsa-yoga —in the yoga of renunciation; vimuktaḥ—
fully liberated; upaiṣyasi —you will attain; mām —Me.

In this way, you will be freed from the bondage of the
auspicious and inauspicious results of karma. Being thus
blessed with the yoga of renunciation by offering Me all
the results of your actions, you will become
distinguished even among liberated souls and you will
attain Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“In this way, you will become free from the bondage of
karma and its unlimited good and bad results.” Śrī
Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad states: “Kṛṣṇa-bhajana is bhakti
.” By this bhakti one becomes free from worldly (laukika
) as well as higher celestial (pāralaukika )
designations. In other words, one becomes free from
desiring the fruits of one’s activities and fixes one’s
mind only in bhajana to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is called
naiṣkarmya , and, therefore, to give up the result of
karma is certainly sannyāsa . Those whose ātmā (mind) is
fixed in such yoga are yoga-yuktātmā. “When gifted with
this yoga , you will not merely be liberated, mukta ,
but you will be vimukta , a distinguished person even
among the liberated souls and you will come to Me to
engage in My direct service.”

“O mahāmuni, among millions of liberated and perfected
beings, a peaceful devotee of Lord Nārāyaṇa is most
rare” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.14.5). And furthermore, “The
Lord can give mukti but He rarely gives bhakti ”
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 5.6.18). From this statement of
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, it is understood that direct service
to Bhagavān with prema is superior to mukti .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




One’s heart is purified by taking shelter of pradhānī-
bhūta-bhakti, as described above, and offering all
actions to Bhagavān. Thus becoming free from the bondage
of all good and bad karma , such persons can attain a

                           506
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

special position amongst liberated souls and finally
they can attain Bhagavān. Here it shoul d be
specifically understood that they attain the premamayī-
sevā of Śrī Bhagavān, which is far superior to mukti .




Śloka 29



samo ‘haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

na me dveṣyo ‘sti na priyaḥ

ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā

mayi te teṣu cāpy aham


aham—I am; samaḥ—equal; sarva-bhūteṣu —to all living
beings; me —for Me; na asti —there is no-one; dveṣyaḥ—
hated; na priyaḥ—or dear; tu —however; te —they; ye —
who; bhajanti —worship; mām —Me; bhaktyā—with devotion;
(are) mayi —in Me; ca —and; aham —I (am); api —also;
teṣu —in them.

I am equally disposed to all living beings and am
neither inimical nor partial to anyone. But as those who
serve Me with bhakti are attached to Me, so too am I
bound by affection for them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna may say, “O Kṛṣṇa, You bring only Your bhaktas
near You by liberating them, but You do not bring the
non-devotees. This means that You are also partial,
since this is an expression of attachment and envy.” In
response, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with
samo ‘ham , in which He says, “No, no, I am equal to
all. The bhaktas live in Me and I also live in them.”
According to this explanation, the whole universe is in
Bhagavān and Bhagavān is also in the whole universe. He
shows no partiality by doing this. The statement (Gītā
4.11), ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy
aham means, “I reciprocate with the consciousness with
which one surrenders to Me and also worship him
accordingly; and in whichever way the bhaktas are
attached to Me, I, who exist in them, am similarly
attached to them.” This should be understood. In this
regard, the example of a wish-fulfilling tree can be
given. Those who desire the tree’s fruit take shelter of
it, but in reality they are not attached to the tree at
all; they are only attached to its fruit. Moreover, the
wish-fulfilling tree does not become attached to those
who take its shelter, nor does it hate those who have

                             507
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

enmity towards it. Yet Bhagavān kills the enemies of His
bhaktas with His own hands. As Bhagavān said while
speaking about Prahlāda, “When Hiraṇyakaśipu acts
inimically towards Prahlāda, I will certainly destroy
him even though he has become powerful by the boons of
Brahmā.” Some commentators give a different explanation
of the word tu in this śloka. “This partiality in the
form of bhakta-vātsalya is always an ornament, not a
defect.” In this way, Kṛṣṇa’s bhakta-vātsalya is well
known, not His vātsalya for a jñ ānī or yogī. Just as it
is natural for a person to be affectionately inclined to
his own servant and not to the servants of others,
Bhagavān h as affection for His bhaktas and not for the
devotees of Rudra or Durgā-devī.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The following objection may be raised: “By giving
special liberation to His bhaktas, Bhagavān bestows upon
them the premamayī-sevā of His lotus feet, but He does
not behave like this with the non-devotees. Is this not
symptomatic of the defect of partiality, which arises
from attachment and envy?” In response to this, it is
stated that He has equal vision. He does not hate
anybody nor is anyone dear to Him. He creates and
maintains humans and other living beings according to
their karma . Somebody may say that while maintaining
the jīvas according to their karma , He gives happiness
to one, misery to someone else and mokṣa to another, so
does this not indicate the defect of partiality arising
from attachment and envy? The answer to this is found in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.17.22) wherein it is said: na tasya
kaścid dayitaḥ pratīpo

na jñāti-bandhur na paro na ca svaḥ

samasya sarvatra nirañjanasya

sukhe na rāgaḥ kuta eva roṣaḥ


He is equal to all living beings. There is nobody who is
dear or not dear to Him. Since a detached person has no
attraction to sense pleasure, how can he become angry
when his sense pleasure is disturbed?

This is also seen in the next śloka of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(6.17.23):


tathāpi tac-chakti-visarga eṣāṁ

sukhāya duḥkhāya hitāhitāya

bandhāya mokṣāya ca mṛtyu-janmanoḥ

śarīriṇāṁ saṁsṛtaye ‘vakalpate


                           508
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original performer of action,
He Himself is not the cause of the jīva’s happiness,
distress, bondage and liberation. It is only guṇa-māyā
which governs the karmic results of the jīva’s sin and
piety and becomes the cause of the jīva’s birth and
death, happiness and distress.

Because there is no difference between the energy and
the energetic, it is true that the activities of His
māyā-śakti will also be seen as His own work. Yet one
cannot attribute the defect of partiality to Him,
because the results a jīva receives for his actions are
in accordance with his own karma . While commenting on
this śloka , Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives
the example of the sun and the owl. The sunlight is
miserable for the owl, the kumuda flower and certain
other entities, but it is pleasing for the cakravāka
bird and the lotus flower. One cannot accuse the sun of
having the defect of partiality. In the same way,
Bhagavān’s māyā awards results according to the jīva’s
actions. One cannot attribute to Him the defect of
partiality because of this. In this context, one should
also deliberate upon the following śloka from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (8.5.22): na yasya vadhyo na ca rakṣaṇīyo

nopekṣaṇīyādaraṇīya-pakṣaḥ

athāpi sarga-sthiti-saṁyamārthaṁ

dhatte rajaḥ-sattva-tamāṁsi kāle


For Śrī Bhagavān, there is no one to be killed, no one
to be protected, no one to be neglected and no one to be
worshiped. Nonetheless, for the sake of creation,
maintenance and annihilation according to a specific
time, He accepts different forms in either sattva, rajo
or tamo-guṇa.

This is Bhagavān’s general principle for all jīvas, but
in the present Gītā śloka He explains a special
principle by the word tu. “Those who follow the limbs of
bhakti such as śravaṇa and kīrtana and engage in My
bhajana are extremely attached to Me and become situated
in Me. And I, who am the Supreme Controller, also become
situated in them with devotion.” According to the
principle of a gem and gold, the gem produces the gold .
Similarly, by the grace of Bhagavān, bhakti appears in
one’s heart. Bhagavān also has dev otion to His bhaktas
. As Śukadeva Gosvāmī says in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.86.59): bhagavān bhakta-bhaktimān. “The Supreme Lord
is devoted to His bhaktas.” It is also stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (8.16.14): tathāpi bhaktaṁ bhajate
maheśvaraḥ. “In the same way that bhaktas are attached
to Maheśvara Kṛṣṇa, He is also attached to His bhaktas.”
This is the special quality of mutual love. It is
written in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.55): visṛjati hṛdayaṁ
na yasya sākṣād. “Such premi-bhaktas who have tied
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet with the ropes of love are never
given up by Him.” This śloka describes that, just as
their relationship of the heart is mentioned, their
external relationship is also established. This
relationship is confirmed in Ādi Purāṇa : asmākaṁ guravo

                             509
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

bhaktā

bhaktānāṁ guravo vayam

mad-bhaktā yatra gacchanti

tatra gacchāmi pārthiva.


Bhagavān says, “Bhaktas are My guru; and I am the guru
for the bhaktas. Wherever the bhaktas go, I also go
there.”

A wish-fulfilling tree gives results according to the
mood of those who have taken its shelter and does not
give results to those who have not taken its shelter. In
the same way, although He is impartial, Bhagavān
differentiates between those who take His shelter and
those who do not by giving them different results. The
speciality of Śrī Kṛṣṇa over and beyond the wish-
fulfilling tree is that the wish-fulfilling tree does
not become subordinate to those who take its shelter,
whereas Kṛṣṇa becomes subordinate to His bhaktas .
Therefore, one can only see the qualities of friendship,
hatred and indifference in Him in relationship to bhakti
. Well-known examples are His friendly relationship with
Ambarīṣa Mahārāja and His indifference toward Durvāsā
and others who were envious. It is a fact that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is equal to a ll, but what is more important is that He
favours His bhaktas . Of all His qualities, this
particular quality is a special ornament. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam , Bhagavad-gītā and other śāstras give
evidence of this.




Śloka 30



api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

cet—if; api—even; su-durācāraḥ—a person of very bad
character; (becomes) ananya-bhāk —exclusively devoted;
(and) bhajate —worships; mām —Me; saḥ—he; eva —
certainly; hi mantavyaḥ—should indeed be considered;
sādhuḥ—a virtuous person; (for) saḥ—he; (has become)
samyak —rightly; vyavasitaḥ—situated.

If even a man of abominable character engages in My
ananya-bhajana, he is still to be considered a sādhu,
due to being rightly situated in bhakti.




                             510
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“My attachment for My bhakta is natural and, even if his
behaviour is degraded, My attachment for him is not lost
and I make him supremely righteous.” For this reason,
Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the words
api cet. Sudurācāraḥ means that even if he is addicted
to killing others, having illicit relations with women,
and being attached to others’ wealth, if he engages in
My bhajana , he is surely saintly. What type of bhajana
must he perform? In answer to this Bhagavān says:
ananya-bhāk. “He is a sādhu who does not worship any
devatā but only worships Me, who does not engage in any
karma and jñ āna but only engages in bhakti to Me, and
who does not desire any happiness such as the attainment
of a kingdom but only desires to attain Me.” But where
is the question of his being a sādhu if some type of bad
behaviour is visible in him? In response, Bhagavān says:
mantavyaḥ. “He must be considered a sādhu . From the
word mantavyaḥ, the following injunction is indicated:
There is a flaw in that person who does not consider him
to be a sādhu. In this regard, My order alone is
authoritative.”

If a person who engages in Your bhajana is also poorly
behaved, can he be considered a partial sādhu ? In
response, Śrī Bhagavān says: eva. “He is to be
considered a complete sādhu . One should not see that he
lacks any saintly qualities because he has made a
staunch resolve (samyag vyavasitaḥ). His resolve is as
follows: ‘Due to my sins, whether I go to hell or
degrade to a bird or animal species, I will never give
up aikāntika-bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.’”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the present śloka, Bhagavān, who is bhakta-vatsala ,
is explaining the inconceivable power of His bhakti by
making a declaration. “Even if My bhakta is seen to be
engaged in an abominable act, I will very quickly make
him an exalted person whose behaviour is good. There is
no possibility of bad behaviour in such perfect persons
who take shelter of My ananya-bhakti . Even if they
appear to be badly behaved in the eyes of the ignorant,
in reality they are not. In fact, they are definitely
saintly. What to speak of the ignorant, even big
scholars cannot understand the actions and moods of the
Vaiṣṇavas. It is said in Caitanya-caritāmṛta :
vaiṣṇavera kriyā mudrā vij ñe n ā bujhaya. ‘It is not
possible to understand the behaviour of uttama-adhikārī
bhaktas with one’s material senses.’”

While warning a brāhmaṇa resident of Navadvīpa not to
disrespect Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu said:

                           511
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



śuna vipra mahādhikārī yevā haya

tabe tāna doṣa-guṇa kichu nā janmaya


Caitanya-Bhāgavata, Ādi-līlā 6.26

There is no possibility of good or bad material
qualities even touching an uttama-bhāgavata mahā-
adhikārī of bhakti. Those who continue to view him as
lowly will go to hell.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa similarly instructed Uddhava:


na mayy ekānta-bhaktānāṁ

guṇa-doṣodbhavā guṇāḥ

sādhūnāṁ sama-cittānāṁ

buddheḥ param upeyuṣām


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.20.36

There is no possibility of the piety or sin resulting
from the performance of prescribed or forbidden
activities coming to My aikāntika-bhaktas who are free
from attachment and envy, who have equal vision towards
everyone and who have attained Bhagavān, who is beyond
mundane intelligence.

Yet one should always remember that the apparently poor
behaviour of such ananya-bhaktas is not to be imitated.
One should neither criticise them nor associate with
them. As it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.29):
tejīyasāṁ na doṣāya vahneḥ sarva-bhujo yathā.
Destruction is certain for those who criticise the
behaviour of mahā-bhāgavatas who externally may appear
to behave improperly. Fire burns all substances, pure or
impure, although it remains pure itself. Similarly,
although externally the behaviour of powerful mahā-
puruṣas may appear improper, they always remain pure.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes that the sons of Marīci, who
were the grandsons of jagad-guru Brahmā, had to take
birth among the asuras as a result of ridiculing
Brahmā’s inconceivable behaviour.

What to speak of perfected devotees, even if the sādhaka
of ananya-bhakti is seen to sometimes act improperly due
to previous habits, he should still be considered
saintly because his action is accidental. This is the
deep meaning of this śloka . While commenting on the
above śloka of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.36), Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives the same conclusion.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is saying, “A bhakta who performs ananya-
bhajana , who does not worship any other god or goddess,
who does not take shelter of any process other than My
bhakti , such as karma , jñ āna and yoga , who does not
desire anything besides My pleasure and, what is more,

                             512
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

who knows Me as the only Master and as the Supreme,
engages in My bhajana. Such a bhakta naturally has no
taste for improper behaviour. But if accidentally, or by
the will of fate, there is a discrepancy in his
behaviour, he should still be considered saintly. This
is My special order. If a person disobeys it, he will
incur sin. The reason such persons are to be considered
sādhus is explained herein. It is because their resolve
is proper. In other words, they have aikāntika-niṣṭhā,
exclusive faith, in Me.”

In this regard, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has
commented on the following śloka from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.20.27-28):


jāta-śraddho mat-kathāsu

nirviṇṇaḥ sarva-karmasu

veda duḥkhātmakān kāmān


parityāge ‘py anīśvaraḥ


tato bhajeta māṁ prītaḥ

śraddhālur dṛḍha-niścayaḥ

juṣamāṇaś ca tān kāmān

duḥkhodarkāṁś ca garhayan


He writes that the word dṛḍha-niścayaḥ in the phrase
śraddhālur dṛḍha-niścayaḥ means, “Whether I am attached
to home, etc., or not, or whether that attachment
increases, if millions of obstacles enter my bhajana ,
if due to offenses I have to go to hell, or even if I am
overpowered by lust, I will not accept the processes of
jñ āna , karma and yoga under any c ircumstance, even if
Brahmā himself orders me.” Those who have such
determination are called dṛḍha-niścayaḥ.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “Even
if those who engage in My bhajana with their minds
completely fixed on Me, are badly behaved, still they
should be considered saintly because the resolve they
take in their engagement is righteous in every respect
and all-beautiful.” The meaning of the word su-durācāraḥ
must be understood properly. The behaviour of a baddha-
jīva is of two types: sāmbandhika (conditional) and
svarūpa-gata (constitutional). Activities such as
keeping clean, performing pious acts and nourishing or
satisfying the needs of the body, society and progress
of mind are called sāmbandhika (conditional) . Bhajana
which is a fully conscious activity performed for Me by
the jīva in his pure state is his svarūpa-gata
(constitutional function). This function is also called
amiśra-bhakti or kevala-bhakti . In the bound state the
jīva’s performance of kevala-bhakti has an irrevocable
relationship with his sāmbandhika behaviour. Sāmbandhika
behaviour will certainly continue as long as one has

                            513
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

this body, even when ananya-bhakti appears. Only when
bhakti appears does the jīva lose his taste in
everything that is unfavourable to devotion. One becomes
detached from sense objects to the extent that one’s
taste increases in kṛṣṇa-bhajana . Until the taste for
sense objects is completely removed, it sometimes forces
one to behave improperly, but it is very quickly subdued
by acquiring a loving tendency towards Kṛṣṇa. The
behaviour of a person who is situated in the higher
levels of bhakti is all-beautiful and righteous. If
sometimes, accidentally, a person is seen to be engaging
not only in bad, but evil behaviour, performing
activities for which a bhakta does not have a natural
taste such as killing others, taking away others’ wealth
and having illicit relationships with others’ wives, he
will be very quickly purified of such behaviour
nonetheless. My bhakti , which is very powerful and
purifying, is not polluted by this behaviour. This
should be understood. A parama-bhakta should not be
considered degraded because of his past indulgence in
activities such as eating fish or having illicit
relationships with women.”




Śloka 31




kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā

śaśvac chāntiṁ nigacchati

kaunteya pratijānīhi

na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

bhavati—he becomes; kṣipram—quickly; dharma-ātmā—a
virtuous person; nigacchati —and attains; śaśvat —
lasting; śāntim —peace; kaunteya —O son of Kuntī;
pratijānīhi —you should proclaim (that); me —My; bhaktaḥ
—devotee; na —never; praṇaśyati —perishes.

He quickly becomes virtuous and attains eternal peace. O
Kaunteya, declare it boldly that My bhakta never
perishes.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The following questions may be raised: “How can You
accept the service of such an adharmika and unrighteous
person? How can You eat the foodstuffs offered by a
person whose heart is polluted by defects such as lust
and anger?” Śrī Bhagavān answers by speaking this śloka
beginning with the word kṣipram. “He very quickly

                            514
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

becomes righteous.” Here the word kṣipram means that, he
quickly becomes righteous and achieves eternal peace.
The words bhavati and nigacchati are used in the present
tense instead of the future. This proves that right
after engaging in irreligious or abominable activity, he
laments and remembers Kṛṣṇa again and again, thus he
quickly becomes righteous. “Alas, alas! There is nobody
fallen like me who has brought such infamy to bhakti .
Fie on me!” Repeatedly lamenting in this way, he attains
eternal peace. Or if he eventually becomes dharmika and
righteous, irreligiosity and contamination may remain in
him in a subtle form. The deadly heat of fever or poison
may remain for some time even after taking the best
medicine. Similarly, as soon as bhakti enters such a
person’s mind, his evil conduct ceases, though it may
remain in a subtle form for some time. Later, in a
higher state, indications of poor behaviour such as lust
and anger may exist but they will have no influence,
just like a snake whose poisonous fangs have been
removed and whose poison is thus ineffective. This
should be understood. Thus, his lust and anger are
eternally quelled (śāntim ) in a way that is
unparalleled. He should be considered to have a pure
heart even while he is still in the condition where he
behaves inappropriately.

Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī says that if they become religious
or righteous then there is no argument, but what can be
said of a bhakta who is unable to give up such bad
behaviour even until the time of death? In response to
this, Bhagavān strongly and angrily says: kaunteya
pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati. “Even when he
dies, he does not fall. But those who speak harshly
against him due to poor logic will not accept this.”
Thinking like this, Kṛṣṇa spoke words of encouragement
to Arjuna who was overwhelmed with grief and doubt. “O
Kaunteya, while making a great sound with kettle drums,
go to the assembly of those who dispute this, and
raising both your arms in the air, and being free from
any doubt, declare that a bhakta of Mine is never
destroyed, even if he is poorly behaved. Rather, he
becomes successful. In this way all their illogical
words will be destroyed by your eloquence and they will
definitely take shelter of you, accepting you as their
guru .”

Here, the following objection may be raised: Why is
Bhagavān asking Arjuna to make this declaration instead
of making it Himself? As Bhagavān says in Bhagavad-gītā
(18.65): “You will surely attain Me. In truth, I am
taking this vow because you are very dear to Me.” So why
does Bhagavān not say: “O Kaunteya, I declare that My
bhakta is never lost”? In response it is said that at
that time Bhagavān pondered, “I cannot tolerate even the
slightest insult to My bhaktas and therefore, in many
instances, I Myself sometimes break My own vow, even
though I have to accept insults as a result. In this
way, I protect the words of My bhakta , just as I will
protect the words of Bhīṣma in this battle by breaking
My own vow. Those who are non-devotees and cynics will
laugh a t My vow, but the words of Arjuna will be like
marks etched on stone.” For this reason, Kṛṣṇa made
Arjuna take this vow.


                           515
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Having heard about the ananya-bhakti of such an ill-
behaved person, some will understand this to mean that
an ananya-bhakta is only one who has no adharmika
qualities such as lamentation, delusion and anger which
all arise from attachment to wife, children and so
forth. But such an explanation by so-called scholars
should be rejected.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Sādhakas of ananya-bhakti have a natural distaste for
improper or evil behaviour and always will have. Yet, if
by accident the ananya-bhakta is poorly behaved, due to
the will of providence that tendency is only temporary.
The inconceivable influence of ananya-bhakti is not lost
by it. The tendency to misbehave is quickly removed by
the inconceivable influence of ananya-bhakti situated in
the heart, and such persons become free from piety and
sin and attain supreme peace born of bhakti . “Ananya-
bhaktas are never lost.” In the present śloka , Kṛṣṇa,
who is very affectionate to His bhaktas , is making His
dearmost friend Arjuna take this oath. This statement is
also in the Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa :


bhagavati ca harāv ananya-cetā

bhṛśa-malino ‘pi virājate manuṣyaḥ

na hi śaśa-kala-cchaviḥ kadācit

timira-parābhavatām upaiti candraḥ


Those bhaktas whose thoughts are exclusively absorbed in
Śrī Hari are always situated in their own glory, even if
externally they are seen to engage in abominable
behaviour. This is because of the influence of bhakti
situated within their hearts. This is likened to the
full moon that has dark spots on it, even though it is
never covered by darkness.

Śrī Bhagavān has also said:


bādhyamāno ‘pi mad-bhakto

viṣayair ajitendriyaḥ

prāyaḥ pragalbhayā bhaktyā

viṣayair nābhibhūyate


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.14.18

My dear Uddhava, if My bhakta has not fully conquered
his senses, he may be afflicted by material desires, but

                             516
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

because of his unflinching bhajana to Me, he will not be
defeated by sense gratification.

While commenting on this śloka, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes: “Even those who are just in
the preliminary stage of sādhana-bhakti become
successful and blessed, not to mention those who are
gradually attaining the stages of niṣṭhā and bhāva ,
what to speak of śuddha-bhaktas in whose hearts bhāva
has already manifested.”

In literature dealing with jñāna-mārga (the path of jñ
āna ), both a jñ ānī who behaves improperly, and his jñ
āna are criticised, but even if a bhakta behaves
improperly he and his bhakti are not criticised in the
bhakti-śāstras . In this regard, one of the best Nava-
yogendras , Karabhājana Ṛṣi, says: sva-pāda-mūlaṁ
bhajataḥ priyasya

tyaktānya-bhāvasya hariḥ pareśaḥ

vikarma yac cotpatitaṁ kathañcid

dhunoti sarvaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.5.42

It is not possible for those premi-bhaktas who engage in
bhajana to the lotus feet of their most dear Śrī Kṛṣṇa
with ananya-bhāva, having given up all other thoughts,
faiths and activities, to engage in sinful activities.
However, if somehow or other they do, then by sitting in
their heart, Śrī Hari cleans everything and makes their
hearts pure.

Someone may say that a bhakta who engages in sinful
activity must atone for it, but Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.20.25) states: yadi kuryāt pramādena

yogī karma vigarhitam

yogenaiva dahed aṁho

nānyat tatra kadācana

A bhakti-yogī never engages in an abominable act, but if
at some time, he commits an offense inadvertently then
he should destroy this sin by the process of bhakti-yoga
only; he should not take to other difficult atonements
such as cāndrāyaṇa.

This same conclusion is also given in Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu:

niṣiddhācārato daivāt

prāyaścittān tu nocitam

iti vaiṣṇava-śāstrāṇāṁ

rahasyaṁ tad-vidāṁ matam

If by the will of fate a sādhaka engages in a forbidden

                            517
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

act, then it is not proper for him to atone for it
separately because the influence of bhakti performs the
function of atonement. Separate atonement is not
necessary. This is the secret of the Vaiṣṇava
literature.

Somebody may raise the following objection: “Why did
Bhagavān Himself not make the statement, ‘My bhaktas are
not lost.’ Why did He ask Arjuna to do it?” The answer
is that bhakta-vatsala Śrī Kṛṣṇa protects the words of
His bhaktas even at the expense of breaking His own
word. An example of this took place in the battle of
Kurukṣetra, where He protected the vow of Bhīṣma by
breaking His own.




Śloka 32



māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya

ye ‘pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās

te ‘pi yānti parāṁ gatim


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; vyapāśritya—by taking shelter;
mām —of Me; hi —certainly; api —even; te —those; ye —
who; syuḥ—may be; pāpa-yonayaḥ—born of sinful parentage;
striyaḥ—women; vaiśyāḥ—merchants; tathā—and; api —even;
śūdrāḥ—manual labourers; yānti —attain; parām —the
supreme; gatim —destination.

O Pārtha, by taking shelter of Me, even the low-born,
such as women, merchants, śūdras, or whoever, are
certain to attain the supreme destination.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“In this way, bhakti to Me does not consider the
incidental discrepancies of a person who behaves
improperly due to karma. What is the wonder in this? My
bhakti does not consider the natural, inherent defects
in those who are badly behaved because of their caste.”
Antyaja , mlecchas , etc., are called pāpa -yonayaḥ
(those of sinful birth). As it is said in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (2.4.18), “I pay my obeisances to that
omnipotent Bhagavān, who is so merciful that, by taking
shelter of the lotus feet of a sad -guru who is His
representative and who has taken shelter of Him, one can
become free from the defects born of caste or action, be
he a Kirāta, Hūṇa, Āndhra, Pulinda, Pulkaśa, Ābhīra,

                            518
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śumbha, Yavana, Khasa, etc. All of these are miscreants
because of their caste, and sinful due to their
actions.”

Moreover, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.33.7) says: “Any person
whose tongue has chanted Your name even once is most
worshipable, even though he may be born in a caṇḍāla
family. Those who chant Your name have already performed
all types of tapasya and yajña , bathed in all the holy
places, studied the Vedas and performed all other
prescribed actions.” This also refers to women,
prostitutes, vaiśyas and so on who take shelter of Śrī
Bhagavān even if they are impure and not truthful.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the previous śloka, Bhagavān explained that a sādhaka
who devoutly engages in the practice of ananya-bhakti
should be considered saintly, even if externally some
incidental poor behaviour is seen in him. Now, in the
present śloka , Bhagavān is explaining that those who ta
ke shelter of Him by engaging in ananya-bhakti , even if
born in sinful caṇḍāla or mleccha families, in low-class
śūdra families, or even women such as prostitutes who
are naturally engaged in illicit activities, all very
quickly attain the supreme destination by the influence
of bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which is rare even for yogīs .

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.4.18), Śrī Sukadeva Gosvāmī
says: kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśāḥ... “Kirāta,
Hūṇa, Āndhra, Pulinda, Pulkaśa, Ābhīra, Śumbha, Yavana,
Khasa, etc., and all others addicted to sinful
activities can be purified by taking shelter of the
bhaktas of Śrī Hari, due to His being the supreme power.
I offer my obeisances to Him.”

While commenting on this śloka, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes: “Just by beco ming endowed
with a scent of kevala-bhakti , even the most sinful
attain perfection. Those who are low by caste or birth,
such as the Kirātas and those who perform sinful
actions, become purified by bhakti only when they accept
a śuddha-vaiṣṇava as their guru . A person becomes
supremely pure and free from the defects coming from his
birth as well as his actions, merely by accepting the
shelter of the lotus feet of a sad-guru . In Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says that bhakti
destroys both prārabd ha and aprārabdha sins at their
very root. The Kirātas, for example, are impure because
of their birth in a low caste. Sin in the form of a low
caste birth is prārabdha-karma and is removed by just a
scent of bhakti .” In this regard, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura further says: “In practical life
ignorant persons identify those who have accepted
vaiṣṇava-dīkṣā by their dynasty or caste. From the
spiritual perspective, none of the defects of caste and
birth remain in a person who has taken dīkṣā. This is
the reality. Such persons themselves become fallen who

                           519
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

place undue emphasis on the birth and caste of one who
has taken dīkṣā from a sad-guru. Such condemnation,
however, brings no harm to the person who has taken
initiation. A person who criticises Vaiṣṇavas is
required to atone for it himself. Devahūti also said:
yan-nāmadheya-śravaṇānukīrtanād

yat-prahvaṇād yat-smaraṇād api kvacit

śvādo ‘pi sadyaḥ savanāya kalpate

kutaḥ punas te bhagavan nu darśanāt


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.33.6

Simply by hearing and chanting Your name, paying
obeisances to You and remembering You, even a caṇḍāla
immediately becomes qualified to perform soma-yajña ,
without waiting for another birth to be able to do so. O
Bhagavān! What, then, can be said about the incomparable
influence of Your darśana?

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda writes: “This
śloka is not spoken for common caṇḍālas (dog-eaters) who
have taken birth in a fallen family according to their
prārabdha-karma , and remain engaged for the rest of
their lives in abominable acts fit for their caste.
Rather, it is spoken for Vaiṣṇavas who, after taking
birth in a family of dog eaters, become disinterested in
the abominable activities of their family tradition and,
after taking dīkṣā from a sad-guru , remain enga ged in
the service of Śrī Bhagavān.”

It is certain that those who are gifted with a saintly
nature have followed with staunch faith all the
behaviour of a brāhmiṇical tradition in their past life.
In their previous birth, these people have completed
austerities and sacrifices, bathed in the holy places,
studied the Vedas and so forth. They have just acted out
taking birth in an āsurika family to bewilder the
foolish and teach the ideal among the Vedic paṇḍitas .
Bhagavān has also said in Itihāsa-samuccaya :


na me ‘bhaktaś caturvedī

mad-bhaktaḥ śva-pacaḥ priyaḥ

tasmai deyaṁ tato grāhyaṁ

sa ca pūjyo yathā hy aham


It is not that a brāhmaṇa who knows all the four Vedas
will necessarily be a bhakta, but My bhakta, even if
born in a caṇḍāla family, is dear to Me and is the
proper recipient of charity and the proper person from
whom charity should be accepted. Even if born in a
caṇḍāla family, My bhakta, like Me, is respected by all,
even by the brāhmaṇas.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that, in this way, the
reason a person who has taken shelter of the holy name

                            520
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

of Śrī Kṛṣṇa has taken birth in the house of a caṇḍāla
is to perfect the quality of humility which is
favourable for bhakti . From this śloka , we can also
understand more about the deliverance of the hunter by
the mercy of Nārada Muni, of Jagāi and Mādhāi by the
mercy of Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda, and of the prostitute
by the mercy of Ṭhākura Haridāsa.




Śloka 33




kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyā

bhaktā rājarṣayas tathā

anityam asukhaṁ lokam

imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām


kim punaḥ—how much more; puṇyāḥ—the pious; brāhmaṇāḥ—
brāhmaṇas ; tathā—and; rāja-ṛṣayaḥ—saintly kings; (can
become) bhaktāḥ—devotees; prāpya —therefore having come;
(to) imam —this; anityam —temporary; (and) asukham —
unhappy; lokam —world; bhajasva —worship; mām —Me.

What doubt, then, can there be that pious brāhmaṇas and
saintly kings can become bhaktas? Therefore, having come
to this temporary and miserable world, engage yourself
in performing My bhajana.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“If this is their destination, what to speak of the
bhaktas who are brāhmaṇas , born in good families and
who are of pure conduct. Therefore, O Arjuna, render
loving service unto Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




If those who are born in a low family and who behave
badly can very quickly develop good conduct by taking
shelter of ananya-bhakti , and can thus attain the
supreme destination, what is the wonder if those who are
born in a good family and whose conduct is pure also
achieve the supreme destination by taking exclusive s

                            521
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

helter of Śrī Bhagavān? Making Arjuna the object of His
teachings, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is instructing all jīvas to perform
bhajana to His eternal blissful svarūpa as long as they
remain in this temporary and miserable world.

In this śloka it is declared that the material world is
mutable, perishable and miserable, but it does not
describe it as false. Some philosophers imagine that the
world is false but this idea is against the principle of
Bhagavad-gītā. The dhāma of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called aprākṛta
or transcendental, and it is eternal and blissful. Jīvas
who attain to that abode never fall from there.




Śloka 34



man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi yuktvaivam

ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ


bhava—be; mat-manāḥ—absorbed in thoughts of Me; bhava—
become; mat-bhaktaḥ—My devotee; bhava—be engaged; mad-
yājī—as My worshipper; namaskuru—bow down; mām —before
Me; eva—certainly; evam—in this way; yuktvā—having
engaged; ātmānam—your body and mind; mat-parāyaṇaḥ—and
surrendered to Me; eṣyasi—you will come; m ām—to Me.

Always absorb your mind in Me, become My bhakta, worship
Me and offer obeisances unto Me. In this way, with mind
and body fully surrendered in My service, you will
certainly achieve Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




By the words man-manāḥ, Śrī Bhagavān is concluding this
chapter by explaining the process of bhajana . Ātmānam ,
‘engage your mind and body in Me and perform bhajana to
Me.’ The mere contact of bhakti purifies everyone,
whether they are qualified or not. This is described in
this Ninth Chapter which is entitled rāja-guhyaḥ.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Ninth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




                            522
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The supreme purpose for every jīva is to attain kṛṣṇa-
prema . Performing ananya-bhakti is the only means to
achieve this purpose. Only śuddha-jīvas are qualified to
perform bhajana of Śrī Bhagavān, the para-tattva . The
svarūpa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the highest object of worship
for śuddha-jīvas. Unless one understands this siddhānta
perfectly, his endeavour for the supreme goal
(paramārtha ) cannot be executed purely. Śuddha-bhakti ,
completely free from jñ āna , karma and yoga , has been
explained in Chapters Seven and Eight. In the Ninth
Chapter, the most supreme worshipable tattva has been
described. In order to establish this tattva , it is
necessary to describe the defects coming from the
worship of other devīs and devatās who also appear to be
the worshipable reality. Therefore, the eternally
perfect nature of the supremely pure and conscious
svarūpa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa has been established
scientifically. The jñ ānī, yogī and the performers of
yajñas worship only manifestations, such as brahma and
Para mātmā, of this very Bhagavān, who has an eternal
svarūpa. A śuddha-bhakta , however, does not worship
these partial manifestations of the Absolute; he only
worships the eternal form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It is due to
extreme ignorance that a person worships devas and devīs
separately from the eternal form of Kṛṣṇa because by the
worship of these devatās he can only partially attain
his destination. One should completely give up the
worship of other devas and devīs in the bhakti -yoga
process and, with no ulterior motive and with staunch
faith, one should maintain one’s body while engaging in
navadha-bhakti such as śravaṇa , kīrtana and smaraṇa of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa only. Such ananya-bhaktas are superior to
karmīs , jñ ānīs and yogīs , even if those ananya-
bhaktas are badly behaved in the preliminary stage.
Hence, they are indeed saintly because in a matter of a
few days they become fixed in their aikāntika-bhāva and
their character becomes pure in all respects.

Only śuddha-bhakti to Bhagavān will produce the above-
described fruit of prema . The śuddha-bhakta of Bhagavān
is never destroyed, nor can he fall because Bhagavān
personally maintains and protects him. Hence, those who
are intelligent maintain their body simply to perform
śuddha-bhakti to Śrī Bhagavān.

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Ninth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Ten


Vibhūti-Yoga


                           523
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Yoga Through Appreciating the Opulences of Śrī Bhagavān




Śloka 1




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

bhūya eva mahā-bāho

śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

yat te ‘haṁ prīyamāṇāya

vakṣyāmi hita-kāmyayā

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord said; mahā-bāho—
O mighty-armed warrior; bhūyaḥ—again; śṛṇu—hear; me—My;
eva—even; paramam—higher; vacaḥ—instruction; yat —which;
aham vakṣyāmi—I shall speak; te—to you; prīyamāṇāya—who
have love (for Me); hita-kāmyayā—because I desire your
welfare.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Mahā-bāho, again hear My
instructions, which are superior to what I have spoken
previously. Desiring your ultimate welfare, I shall
reveal this knowledge to you because of the love you
have for Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The Seventh Chapter onwards explains bhakti-tattva along
with Bhagavān’s aiśvarya feature . That same bhakti-
tattva , also known as bhagavad-vibhūti , is being
described in this Tenth Chapter along with its
confidential meaning.

It has been explained from the Seventh Chapter onwards
that Śrī Bhagavān’s aiśvarya feature causes knowledge to
arise in the heart of the sādhaka that clearly reveals
Him to be the supreme worshipable object. Knowledge of
this same aiśvarya is now being given in detail for the
pleasure of persons blessed with devotion to Him. Kṛṣṇa
says in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.21.35): parokṣa-vādā
ṛṣayaḥ parokṣaṁ ca mama priyam. “The statements of the
ṛṣis are indirect (parokṣa ) and I also enjoy speaking
in this way.” According to this statement, Kṛṣṇa’s
indirect manner of speaking makes these topics a little
difficult to understand. For this reason, He is speaking
this śloka beginning with the word bhūya (again) which
means that He is repeating rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ idam ,

                           524
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the most confidential knowledge, for Arjuna’s better
understanding. “O Mahā-bāho! Just as you have manifested
the superior strength of your arms, you are also able to
express the superior power of your intelligence. For you
who are prepared to listen, the word śṛṇu (hear) is used
to ensure that you fully retain what is being said to
you.” The word paramam means that this knowledge is even
superior to what was previously spoken.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the Seventh, Eighth and Ninth Chapters, Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa explains the aiśvarya of the highest worshipable
reality (bhajanīya parameśvara-tattva ). In the Tenth
Chapter, He describes His vibhūtis (majestic opulences).
According to the Sandarbhas , parokṣa-vāda means to keep
secret that knowledge which is most exalted and rare,
and which is not to be given to all, and then to explain
it in an indirect way. Parokṣa-vāda is the nature of the
Vedas . It is also Śrī Bhagavān’s nature (to keep
Himself h idden). Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā
3.88) states:


tathāpi tāṅhāra bhakta jānaye tāṅhāre


That which is described in parokṣa-vāda is difficult for
an ordinary person to comprehend. Kṛṣṇa tries to hide
Himself in various ways but He reveals Himself to His
bhaktas.

It is therefore necessary to carefully deliberate upon
vibhūti-yoga as described in this chapter by taking
shelter of bhakti.




Śloka 2




na me viduḥ sura-gaṇāḥ

prabhavaṁ na maharṣayaḥ

aham ādir hi devānāṁ

maharṣīṇāṁ ca sarvaśaḥ


aham—I (am); hi—certainly; ādiḥ—the origin; sarvaśaḥ—in
every respect; devānām—of the gods; ca—and; mahā-ṛṣīṇām—
of the great sages; na—neither; sura-gaṇāḥ—the hosts of
gods; na—nor; mahā-ṛṣayaḥ—the great sages; viduḥ—

                           525
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

realise; me—My; prabhavam—glorious appearance in truth.

I am the original cause, in every respect, of all the
devas and maharṣis, even though they do not know the
tattva of My glorious appearance in this mundane world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“This tattva can be only understood by My special mercy,
not by any other means.” Śrī Bhagavān, therefore, speaks
this śloka beginning with the words na me . Mama-
prabhāvam means, “Even the devas do not know the most
extraordinary tattva concerning My birth from Devakī.”
If one raises the question that perhaps the devas cannot
understand this tattva because they are absorbed in
sense enjoyment but surely the ṛṣis know it, the
response is, “No, not even the ṛṣis have knowledge of
this tattva , because I am their original cause in every
respect. In the material world, the son does not know
the facts of his father’s birth and, similarly, the ṛṣis
do not know the tattva concerning My transcendental
appearance and līlā in this world.” Bhagavad-gītā
(10.14) states: “O Bhagavān, neither the devas , the
asuras , nor anyone else can understand the tattva of
Your birth and Your appearance in this world.” Thus, the
word prabhava means Your birth and appearance in this
world . There is no need to imagine any other meaning.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Kṛṣṇa’s mercy cannot be attained by any means other than
bhakti. Without His mercy, a person cannot understand
the tattva of Bhagavān on the strength of his own
endeavour, even if he tries in hundreds of ways. It is
said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.42—44): prajāpati-patiḥ
sākṣād bhagavān giriśo manuḥ

dakṣādayaḥ prajādhyakṣā

naiṣṭhikāḥ sanakādayaḥ

marīcir atry-aṅgirasau

pulastyaḥ pulahaḥ kratuḥ

bhṛgur vasiṣṭha ity ete

mad-antā brahmavādinaḥ

adyāpi vācas-patayas

tapo-vidyā-samādhibhiḥ

                           526
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017


paśyanto ‘pi na paśyanti

paśyantaṁ parameśvaram

Although Brahmā, Śiva, the four Kumāras beginning with
Sanaka, Bhṛgu and famous brahmavādīs (jñ ānīs) such as
Vasiṣṭha desire to have darśana of Parameśvara and
endeavour for this by the processes of tapasyā, jñ āna
and samādhi, they have been unable to attain My darśana
to this day.

Moreover Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.29) states:


athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya—

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko ‘pi ciraṁ vicinvan


O Bhagavān, You are unfathomable. Who in the three
worlds can understand where, why, when and how You
perform Your līlā? Still, O Bhagavān, You manifest
Yourself in the hearts of Your bhaktas, who have
received even a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus
feet. Thus they become blessed and are the only ones who
can understand the tattva of the glory of Your sac-cid-
ānanda svarūpa. Even after long-term enthusiastic
endeavour, in sādhanas such as jñ āna and vairāgya a
person can never actually know Your glories.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I am
the original cause of the devatās and the ṛṣis. That is
why, on the strength of their own endeavours, they can
never understand My līlā-prabhava , the reality of My
appearance in the material world in a human-like form.
Everyone, including the devas and maharṣis , searches
for My tattva by the strength of their intelligence.
They can only partially realise Me despite diligently
endeavouring with their material intelligence. That part
is nirviśeṣabrahma , the impersonal aspect of the
mundane world. It is unmanifest, unvariegated and devoid
of qualities. They consider nirviśeṣabrahma to be the
parama-tattva , but it is not. I am parama-tattva and
the embodiment of sac-cid-ānanda , which is the
speciality of My eternal svarūpa . I always manifest
Myself through My acintya-śakti (inconceivable potency)
. I am completely devoid of any material contamination
and possess all transcendental qualities. My aparā-śakti
(external potency) manifests a partial aspect of My
svarūpa called Īśvara or Paramātmā, who dwells within
all jīvas . Brahma is one of My indistinct forms and is
without attributes, is impersonal and is the negative
aspect of My personality, beyond the conception of the
baddha-jīvas who are deluded by My aparā-śakti . Therefo
re, only two of My manifestations, Īśvara (or Paramātmā)
and brahma , are indicated by these direct and indirect
relationships with the created world. Sometimes, by My
acintya-śakti , I manifest My own svarūpa in this
material world. At that time, the aforementioned devas

                           527
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

and maharṣis , who cannot understand the glory of My
acintya-śakti on the strength of their own intelligence,
think the appearance of My eternal, transcendental
svarūpa (the above-mentioned īśvara-tattva ) to be
mortal. This is because they are bewildered by māyā.
Thinking the dry brahmabhāva to be superior, they
attempt to merge into it. My bhaktas , however,
understand that My acintya-śakti is beyond the grasp of
their limited human comprehension, and simply engage in
My bhajana . Upon seeing their attitude, I become
compassionate and bestow pure intelligence upon them by
which they can easily experience My svarūpa .”




Śloka 3



yo mām ajam anādiṁ ca

vetti loka-maheśvaram

asammūḍhaḥ sa martyeṣu

sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate



saḥ yaḥ—he who; vetti—knows; mām —Me; ajam —as the
unborn; ca —and; anādim —without beginning; mahā-īśvaram
—the great controller; loka —of the worlds; asammūḍhaḥ—
unbewildered; martyeṣu —among mortals; pramucyate —he is
fully freed; sarva-pāpaiḥ—from all sins.

He alone who knows Me as unborn, beginningless, and as
Maheśvara, the Supreme Controller of all the worlds, is
free from illusion among mortals and freed from all
sins.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“The following question may be raised. “Do the devatās
and maharṣis know the facts about the birth of Your
body, which is parabrahma , beyond the bounds of all
time and space?” Touching His chest with His forefinger,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa responds by speaking this śloka beginning with
the words yo mām . “He who knows Me to be unborn alone
knows Me in truth.” Does this mean that only You are the
beginningless truth and the great Grandsire Brahmā is
not? If Brahmā is without beginning, then he must know
You to be Paramātmā without birth or cause. In response,
to this, Śrī Bhagavān says, yo mām vetti , etc.

“Only he who knows Me to be without beginning or cause,
unborn and born from Vasudeva, is the actual knower of

                           528
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the truth (tattvajña ).” Here, the word mām refers to
Śrī Bhagavān who is born from Vasudeva. “According to My
statement (in Gītā 4.9), My birth and ac tivities are
divine. Because I am Paramātmā, My taking birth and
remaining unborn are performed by My acintya-śakti and
are absolutely true.” As it is said in Gītā (4.6),
“Though I am unborn, I, who am eternal and unchanging,
take birth.” Uddhava has also said: karmāṇy anīhasya
bhavo ‘bhavasya te

durgāśrayo ‘thāri-bhayāt palāyanam

kālātmano yat pramadā-yutāśramaḥ

svātman-rateḥ khidyati dhīr vidām iha


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.4.16

O Prabhu! Although You are desireless, You engage in
action, although unborn You take birth, and although You
are death personified, You run in fear of the enemy and
hide in the Dvārakā fort. Although You are self-
satisfied, You enjoy with sixteen thousand women. Seeing
these wonderful activities, the intelligence of even
great scholars becomes bewildered.

In this regard, there is a śloka by Śrīla Rūpa GosvāmīÇ
the author of Śrī Laghu Bhāgavatāmṛta : “The
bewilderment of the scholars in this case is not factual
because it is not due to material illusion. However, it
would be better if it were absent. In other words, even
that which is unintelligable for scholars is created by
My acintya-śakti. Hence, the acintya-śakti is the cause
of My variegated or contradictory nature which causes
their bewilderment. In My Dāmodaralīlā, I appeared to be
limited, My belly bound by a small thread of jingling
bells, and simultaneously I appeared to be unlimited,
because My belly could not be bound by the long ropes of
Yaśodā-maiyā. This is beyond reasoning. In the same way,
My taking birth an d at the same time not being born is
also beyond reasoning.”

By use of the word loka-maheśvaram which means the
Supreme Lord of the universe, Bhagavān explains His
aiśvarya which is very difficult to understand. “O
Arjuna, among human beings, only those who know your
chariot driver to be loka-maheśvara are asammūḍhāḥ,
freed from all sins or obstacles to bhakti. Those who
think that I am unborn, without beginning and have the
nature of a supreme controller, etc., but who think that
I only imitate birth, are sammūḍhāḥ (bewildered) and are
not liberated from sin.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here it is stated that Śrī Bhagavān is ajaḥ, unborn. In
the Second Chapter the jīvas are also described as ajaḥ,

                           529
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

even though they are vibhinnāṁśa , separated parts of
Bhagavān (also Gītā 15.7, mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke ). The
jīva is aṇucit , an atomic conscious entity, but
Bhagavān is pūrṇacit , the complete conscious entity.
The jīvas are under the control of Bhagavān’s māyā
whereas He is the master of māyā. The gross body of the
shackled jīvas is mutable but Kṛṣṇa’s body is sac-cid-
ānanda , immutable and eternal. When He descends into
the material world, He comes in His own eternal svarūpa
through the medium of His yogamāyā-śakti . He existed
before the creation, He is still existing now and He
will continue to exist in the future. The following
mantras from the Vedas also establish this conclusion:
aham evāsam evāgre , “Only I was existing before
creation, when there was nothing but Myself” (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 2.9.33); bhagavān eka āsedam , “Śrī Bhagavān
existed prior to the creation as one without a second”
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.5.23); anādir ādir govindaḥ, “That
original Person is Lord Govinda, who is without
beginning” (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.1); eko ha vai nārāyaṇa
āsīt , “In the beginn ing only Nārāyaṇa existed” (Mahā
Upaniṣad 1) .

The present śloka describes that although Bhagavān is
unborn, by the influence of His acintya-śakti He is
simultaneously the eternal son of Vasudeva-Devakī and
Nanda-Yaśodā. His svarūpa can only be understood by
kevala-bhakti and not by any other sādhana .

One should not consider Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be an ordinary
person. But if it is said that He is famous as the son
of Devakī or Yaśodā, then how can He be without birth?
The answer to this is given in śāstras such as Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam , as follows: “Śrī Kṛṣṇa did not take birth
like an ordinary baby. In the prison house of Kaṁsa, He
appeared before Vasudeva and Devakī in His svarūpa as a
young boy carrying śaṅkha , cakra , gadā and padma
(conch, disc, club and lotus flower ), decorated with
various types of ornaments and with beautiful hair on
His head. Later, at the request of Vasudeva and Devakī,
He became a small baby.”Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa did not
openly exhibit His līlā of being born in His two-handed
form from the womb of Yaśodā-maiyā as Yaśodā-nandana in
Gokula, still, while only an infant, He killed very
fearsome and powerful asuras such as Pūtanā and
Śakaṭāsura thus liberating them. He displayed the whole
universe within His child-like mouth and performed many
other amazing activities not possible for an ordinary
baby. Therefore, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Svayam Bhagavān, the
Īśvara of all īśvaras , the source of everyone and
without cause.




Ślokas 4—5




buddhir jñānam asammohaḥ

kṣamā satyaṁ damaḥ śamaḥ

                           530
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ bhavo ‘bhāvo

bhayaṁ cābhayam eva ca


ahiṁsā samatā tuṣṭis

tapo dānaṁ yaśo ‘yaśaḥ

bhavanti bhāvā bhūtānāṁ

matta eva pṛthag-vidhāḥ


buddhiḥ—the ability to discern subtle meanings; jñānam —
the capacity to distinguish between matter and spirit;
asammohaḥ—absence of perturbation; kṣamā—tolerance;
satyam —speaking the truth; damaḥ—control over the
external organs; śamaḥ—control over the mind; sukham—
happiness; duḥkham —unhappiness; bhavaḥ—birth; abhāvaḥ—
death; bhayam—fear; ca abhayam —fearlessness; ca —and;
eva —certainly; ahiṁsā—non-violence; samatā—equanimity;
tuṣṭiḥ—satisfaction; tapaḥ—accepting bodily austerities
as directed in the śāstra ; dānam—charity; yaśaḥ—fame;
ayaśaḥ—infamy; (all these) pṛthak-vidhāḥ—various; bhāvāḥ
—states of being; bhavanti —exist; bhūtānām —among the
living beings; (and they) eva —solely; mattaḥ—originate
from Me.

Intelligence, knowledge, freedom from anxiety,
tolerance, truthfulness, control of the senses, control
of the mind, happiness, distress, birth, death, fear,
fearlessness, non-violence, equanimity, satisfaction,
austerity, charity, fame and criticism—all these diverse
qualities of the living beings originate from Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Those with knowledge of śāstra are unable to comprehend
My tattva simply on the strength of their own
intelligence. Intelligence comes from Me alone, and is
produced from sattva-guṇa which is within My māyā-śakti.
It has no independent qualification to penetrate and
understand My tattva which is guṇātīta , beyond the
modes.” Therefore, Bhagavān says, “There are three
qualities which could indirectly cause one to acquire
tattvajñ āna of Me: buddhi (the ability to ascertain
subtle meanings), jñ ānam (discrimination of conscious
and unconscious objects) and asammohaḥ (the absence of
anxiety). But these qualities are not the direct cause.
None of the various qualities that are seen in people at
different times are created independently.” Therefore,
Śrī Bhagavān further states: “Kṣamā (tolerance), satya
(truthfulness), dama (control of the external senses)
and śama (controlling the mind) are all sāttvika. Sukha
is sāttvika , duḥkha is tāmasika , bhavo ‘bhāvo (birth
and death) are a special type of misery and fear is

                           531
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

tāmasika. Fearlessness arising from knowledge is
sāttvika but, if it is born from rajo-guṇa then it is r
ājasika . Samatā means to see equally the happiness and
distress of others as one’s own. Samatā (equanimity) and
ahiṁsā (non-violence) are sāttvika . Tuṣṭi
(satisfaction) is sāttvika if it is free from illusion.
If not, then it is rājasika . When a person is free from
illusion, or the feeling that he is the doer, his
performance of tapa (austerity) and dāna (charity) are
sāttvika. If performed by one who is under illusion,
they are rājasika . Yaśaḥ (fame) and ayaśaḥ (infamy)
should be understood in the same manner. They have all
originated from My māyā, but since śakti (the energy)
and śaktimān (the energetic) are non-different, it
should be understood that they are created by Me alone.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here it is being established that Bhagavān alone is the
primeval, original cause and the controller of everyone.
Everything inert or conscious is related to Him by His
acintya-bhedābheda-tattva .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “Even
those people of fine intelligence who know the śāstra
cannot comprehend My tattva . The reason why is as
follows: The characteristics of the living entities
includes intelligence which has the ability to grasp
subtle subjects, the ability to discriminate between
that which is conscious and that which is not, freedom
from anxiety, tolerance, truthfulness, control of the
senses and the mind, happiness, distress, birth, death,
non-violence, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity,
charity, fame and infamy. I am aloof from them all
although I am their original cause. After knowing My
acintya-bhedābheda-tattva , nothing remains to be known.
Śakti (energy) and śaktimān (the energetic) are both
non-different and different. Similarly I, śaktimān ,
along with everything in this ever-changing world, have
emanated from My energy, and although different are
eternally the same.”




Śloka 6



maharṣayaḥ sapta pūrve

catvāro manavas tathā

mad-bhāvā mānasā jātā

yeṣāṁ loka imāḥ prajāḥ


                           532
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


sapta—the seven; mahāṛṣayaḥ—great sages; tathā—and;
pūrve —before (them); catvāraḥ—the four Kumāras headed
by Sanaka; mat-bhāvāḥ—are born from Me; manavaḥ—the
Manus headed by Svāyambhuva Manu; jātāḥ—born; mānasāḥ—
from My mind; yeṣām —from whom are generated; imāḥ—all
the; prajāḥ—living beings; loke —within this world.

The seven maharṣis, such as Marīci; before them the four
brahmarṣis, such as Sanaka; and the fourteen Manus, such
as Svāyambhuva are all born from My form of
Hiraṇyagarbha, through My mind. This human race has been
populated with their progeny or disciples, such as
brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




After explaining that those with attributes such as
intelligence, knowledge and freedom from anxiety are
incapable of comprehending His tattvajñ āna , Śrī
Bhagavān again explains the reality of their
deficiencies. In other words, the se qualities come from
Kṛṣṇa alone. Kṛṣṇa is speaking this śloka beginning with
the word maharṣayaḥ. “The seven maharṣis such as Marīci
and, before them, the four Kumāras and the fourteen
Manus such as Svāyambhuva are all born from Me, that is,
from My for m of Hiraṇyagarbha. They are born from My
mind. The earth is populated with brāhmaṇas and
kṣatriyas who are the sons, grandsons, disciples and
grand-disciples of Marīci, Sanaka and so on.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here, Śrī Bhagavān is giving the genealogical synopsis
of the universe which is born from Him. Brahmā, who was
born from the energy of Mahāviṣṇu known as
Hiraṇyagarbha, was the first jīva in this universe. The
four Kumāras—Sanaka, Sananda, Sanātana and Sanat-kumāra—
were the first to come from Brahmā. Then came the seven
sages Bhṛgu, Marīci, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and
Vasiṣṭha, and after them the fourteen Manus—Svāyambhuva,
Svārociṣa, Uttama, Tāmasa, Raivata, Cākṣuṣa, Vaivasvata,
Sāvarṇi, Dakṣasāvarṇi, Brahmasāvarṇi, Dharmasāvarṇi,
Rudra-putra (Sāvarṇi), Rocya (Devasāvarṇi) and Bhautyaka
(Indrasāvarṇi). They were all born from Hiraṇyagarbha,
who is endowed with Kṛṣṇa’s energy. Their progeny, a
chain of disciples and grand-disciples such as brāhmaṇas
, populated the entire world.




                           533
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Śloka 7



etāṁ vibhūtiṁ yogaṁ ca

mama yo vetti tattvataḥ

so ‘vikalpena yogena

yujyate nātra saṁśayaḥ

saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; vetti—knows; tattvataḥ—factually; etām
—of this; vibhūtim —opulence; mama —of Mine; ca—and;
yogam —the process of bhakti-yoga ; yujyate —engages in
that yoga ; avikalpena —undeviatingly; yogena —with jñ
āna-yoga , knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s tattvas ; atra —on this
point; (there is) na saṁśayaḥ—no doubt.

He who knows in truth all My vibhūtis and the principle
of bhakti-yoga is endowed with unwavering tattvajñ āna
of Me. Of this there is no doubt.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“I am achieved only by aikāntika-bhakti.” Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.14.21) states: bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ.
“Only My aikāntika-bhaktas who, by My mercy, have strong
theistic faith in My statements become aware of My
tattva .” For this reason, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with the word etām . Those who know the
tattva of the vibhūtis described earlier and the
principles of bhakti-yoga are fixed in the understanding
that these are the words of th eir Prabhu, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
and are indeed the Supreme Reality. “They become endowed
with yoga characterised by fixed knowledge of My tattva
.” There is no doubt about this.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




There are many devatās on different planets who are
appointed to maintain this universe. Among them, Brahmā,
the four Kumāras, the seven sages and the progenitors
are prominent. Since they were all originally born from
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, He is the grandfather of all
grandfathers. With knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s ai śvarya , one
should engage in bhajana to Him with fixed faith and
without any doubt . Without proper knowledge of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s greatness, it is not possible to perform ananya-
bhakti to Him.


                           534
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 8



ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

aham—I (am); prabhavaḥ—the source; sarvasya —of all
creation; sarvam —everything; pravartate —emanates;
mattaḥ—from Me; budhāḥ—learned persons; matvā—having
comprehended; iti —thus; bhāva-samanvitāḥ—filled with
ecstasy; bhajante —worship; mām —Me.

I am the source of both mundane and spiritual worlds.
Everything emanates from Me. The wise who know this well
engage in My bhajana with bhāva in their hearts.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




While explaining His vibhūtis (majestic features), which
are characterised by supreme aiśvarya , Śrī Bhagavān
says, “I am the original cause and the source of
everything material and spiritual. Inspired by My
Antaryāmī svarūpa , the whole universe engages in work,
and by the inspiration coming from My avat āras such as
Nārada, all become engaged in the sādhana (practice) of
bhakti , jñ āna , tapasyā and karma , etc., and the
sādhya (attainment of the respective goals).” In
defining aikāntika bhakti-yoga , Śrī Bhagavān says: iti
matvā. “Being fixed in this type of theistic knowledge
and endowed with bhāvas such as dāsya and sakhya
(servitorship and friendship), those who perform My
bhajana are paṇḍitas (those who know the essence of the
Vedas ).”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the origin of both mundane and spiritual
creations. Such tattvajñāna is undoubtedly attainable
from the instructions and mercy of the tattvavit
Vaiṣṇavas. Only with the help of such transcendental
knowledge (tattvajñ āna ), can the thoughts of sādhus
become fixed in śuddha-bhakt i to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One cannot

                           535
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

acquire pure tattvajñ āna by receiving the instruction
that has come from modern concocted commentaries which
are devoid of bhakti , by hearing from bewildered so-
called gurus who are bereft of tattvajñ āna , or by
receiving the instructions of so-called bhaktas . This
is also confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.7.50): ahaṁ
brahmā ca śarvaś ca

jagataḥ kāraṇaṁ param

ātmeśvara upadraṣṭā

svayaṁ-dṛg aviśeṣaṇaḥ

Lord Viṣṇu replied: Brahmā, Śiva and I are the supreme
cause of the material manifestation. I am the Supersoul
and the self-sufficient witness. But in one sense we are
non-different because everything rests in Me.

The Varāha Purāṇa also states:

nārāyaṇaḥ paro devas

tasmāj jātaś caturmukhaḥ

tasmād rudro ‘bhavad devaḥ

sa ca sarva-jñatāṁ gataḥ

Śrī Nārāyaṇa is the Supreme Lord and from Him alone
Brahmā, Rudra, etc., are born. Nārāyaṇa is omniscient.

This Nārāyaṇa is the vaibhāva-vilāsa of Kṛṣṇa. Elsewhere
in the Vedas , Kṛṣṇa is also described as the son of
Devakī: b rahmaṇyo devakī-putrāḥ (Nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad 4).




Śloka 9




mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā

bodhayantaḥ parasparam

kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ

tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca

mat-cittāḥ—those whose thoughts are about Me; mat-gata-
prāṇāḥ—whose every life-breath is dedicated to Me;
nityam tuṣyanti —they always experience satisfaction; ca
—and; ramanti —take delight; (from) bodhayantaḥ—
enlightening; parasparam —each other; ca—and;
kathayantaḥ—conversing; mām —about Me.

Those whose minds are absorbed in Me and whose lives are
wholeheartedly devoted to My service derive great
satisfaction and bliss from constantly enlightening one
another about My tattva and performing kīrtana of My

                             536
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

nāma, rūpa, guṇa and līlā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“By My mercy, only ananya-bhaktas attain buddhi-yoga
and, although tattvajñ āna , which is enriched by the
above-mentioned characteristics is difficult to
conceive, they attain it. Mac-cittāḥ refers to those
whose minds are attracted to tasting the sweetness of My
nāma , rūpa , guṇa and līlā. Mad-gata-prāṇāḥ refers to
those who cannot maintain their lives without Me, just
as a person cannot maintain his life without food.
Bodhayantaḥ means that such people enlighten each other
about the svarūpa and tattva of bhakti and with great
affection contribute to one another’s spiritual
progress. Mām means ‘I am a great ocean of the sweetest
rūpa , guṇa and līlā.’ They attain bliss while
describing and loudly chanting about My sweet rūpa ,
guṇa and so on.” In this way, śravaṇa , kīrtana and
smaraṇa are superior to all other processes of bhakti .
Ananya-bhaktas only attain satisfaction and bliss by
performing this type of bhakti. This is the secret. In
other words, they also attain satisfaction during
sādhana-daśā, as they perform unobstructed bhajana .
During sādhya-daśā, they enj oy with Kṛṣṇa within their
mind by remembering their perfect state. Śrī Bhagavān’s
statements here describe rāgānuga-bhakti only .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the present śloka, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is explaining the nature
of His ananya-bhaktas and their practice of bhakti. Here
the word mad-gata-prāṇāḥ means, “My bhaktas are unable
to maintain their lives without Me, just as fish cannot
remain alive without water.” If a fish comes out of the
water on to the beach with a desire to achieve
happiness, it will certainly die immediately. In the
same way, the jīvas who are averse to Śrī Hari are as
good as dead, even while in these bodies.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “The
character of those whose minds are exclusively devoted
is as follows: By completely offering their minds and
lives unto Me, they mutually exchange their bhāvas and
remain engaged in glorifying My līlās and so forth. In
this way, by śravaṇam and kīrtanam they attain the
happiness of bhakti. In their sādhya stage, that is,
after attaining pure prema , which is accessible only
through rāga-mārga , they experience the pleasure of
enjoying with Me within vraja-rasa , culminating in the
bhāva of madhura-rasa .”


                             537
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 10




teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

teṣām—for those; bhajatām—who worship Me; prīti-pūrvakam
—with love; (and) satata-yuktānām —who desire My eternal
connection; dadāmi —I bestow; tam —that; buddhi-yogam —
transcendental knowledge; yena —whereby; te —they;
upayānti —approach; mām —Me.

Upon those who perform bhajana to Me with love, yearning
for My eternal association, I bestow the transcendental
knowledge by which they can come to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“So, they attain satisfaction and bliss. According to
Your statement, Your bhaktas attain supreme bliss only
by performing bhakti to You. It is therefore clear that
they are beyond the guṇas. But how do they get direct
realisation of You and from whom do they learn the
process to achieve it?” Anticipating this question f rom
Arjuna, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with
the word teṣām . “I Myself inspire all of the natural
tendencies within the hearts of those who desire My
eternal association so that they achieve this. This
buddhi-yoga cannot be achieved by individual effort or
obtained from someone. It is bestowed by Me alone and
only such loving bhaktas are qualified to receive it.
After being blessed with this buddhi-yoga , they achieve
Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




This śloka explains how ananya-bhaktas a ttain direct
realisation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says, “To those who
continuously perform My bhajana with love, I Myself
grant buddhi-yoga by which they easily attain direct
realisation of Me.” It is also said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

                           538
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(4.28.41): sākṣād bhagavatoktena guruṇā hariṇā nṛpa

viśuddha-jñāna-dīpena

sphuratā viśvatomukham

O King, as the guru of Malayadhvaja, Bhagavān Himself
illuminated his heart with the light of knowledge.

This is also explained in Vedānta-sūtra (3.8.48):
viśeṣānugrhaś ca. “One can only see Kṛṣṇa by His mercy.”




Śloka 11



teṣām evānukampārtham

aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ

nāśayāmy ātma-bhāva-stho

jñāna-dīpena bhāsvatā


eva—only; anukampa-artham—out of compassion; teṣām —for
them; aham —I; ātma-bhāva-sthaḥ—situated within the
intelligence of the jīvātmā; nāśayāmi —destroy; bhāsvatā
—with the blazing; jñ āna-dīpena —lamp of transcendental
knowledge; tamaḥ—the darkness; ajñ āna-jam —born of
ignorance.

Only out of compassion for these ananya-bhaktas do I,
dwelling within the core of their hearts, destroy, with
the blazing lamp of transcendental knowledge, the
darkness of saṁsāra, born of ignorance.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna may ask, “Surely, You cannot be achieved by a
person who has not acquired real knowledge (vidyā-
vṛtti). That is why one will endeavour for vidyā.” In
response, Śrī Bhagavān says, “No, No. I am explaining
how I bless only My ananya-bhaktas , not yogīs or
others. I Myself am always enthusiastic to give My mercy
to them so they need not undergo any anxiety to achieve
it. Entering the core of their intelligence (ātma-bhāva-
sthaḥ), I dispel the darkness of their hearts with the
lamp of knowledge (jñ āna-dīpena ). That jñ āna which
enlightens one about Me is not sāttvika ; it is nirguṇa
. And because this jñ āna is born from bhakti , it is
special, even within the category of nirguṇa-jñ āna.
Only with the lamp of this particular jñ āna do I
destroy the darkness in their hearts. Therefore, why

                           539
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

should they endeavour for this? For those who are
exclusively devoted to Me, I carry their maintenance and
their requirements.” In accordance with this statement
of Gītā (9.22), Śrī Bhagavān accepts the burden of
satisfying all of the material and spiritual needs of
his ananya-bhaktas .

The above four ślokas of Gītā are famous as the essence
of Bhagavad-gītā. They are all-auspicious and dispel the
jīva’s misery, which is born of ignorance.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Although jñānīs and yogīs try to attain knowledge by the
power of their own intelligence, they remain
unsuccessful. Only the ananya-bhaktas of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who
take exclusive shelter of Him can easily attain
knowledge of Him by His mercy. And since the bhaktas
cannot maintain their lives without Kṛṣṇa, they are the
supreme object of His mercy. Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa
quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying : “Being pleased by their
aikāntika bhāva , I bestow upon them complete mercy and
also inspire their intelligence, just as I care for
their yoga and kṣema . The full responsibility for their
maintenance is solely Mine. They do not need to
endeavour for anything.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “In
this way, ignorance cannot remain within those who
engage in the process of bhakti-yoga. Some think that
only those who try to search after tad-vastu (the
Absolute Reality) by sequentially eliminating that which
is atat (non-real), according to the principle of
negation (neti-neti ), attain true knowledge, and that
those who simply cultivate the process of bhakti are
unable to attain such rare jñ āna . O Arjuna, the basic
idea is that the insignificant jīva can never attain
real tattvajñ āna merely on the strength of his own
intelligence. No matter how much he deliberates, he can
never achieve even a particle of pure jñ āna . But if I
bless him, then even an insignificant jīva can easily
acquire complete and thorough transcendental knowledge
by the influence of My acintya-śakti . Simply by
dwelling within the hearts of My ananya-bhaktas , I
easily enlighten them with the lamp of transcendental
knowledge. By special mercy, I become situated in their
hearts and completely destroy the darkness born of
ignorance which arises from mundane association. It is
the right of the jīva to acquire that pure knowledge
which appears only by the process of bhakti-yoga , not
by reasoning.”

Just as the essence of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is contained
within four ślokas (2.9.31-34) spoken directly by
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa to Brahmā, in the same way, the above
four ślokas (10.8-11) are the essence of Bhagavad-gītā.
Hence, they are popularly known as catuḥ-ślokī Gītā. The
essence of Gītā as described in these four ślokas is

                           540
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

bhakti. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is personally explaining the nature of
ananya-bhakti to Arjuna. When the sādhaka takes shelter
of ananya-bhakti , Śrī Kṛṣṇa bestows His mercy upon him
so that he can easily cross the ocean of material e
xistence and become eligible to enter His rasamayī
bhakti (bhakti characterised by five primary mellows) in
the land of Vraja.




Ślokas 12-13




arjuna uvāca —

paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma

pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān

puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam

ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum

āhus tvām ṛṣayaḥ sarve

devarṣir nāradas tathā

asito devalo vyāsaḥ

svayaṁ caiva bravīṣi me

arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; bhavān—Your Lordship; (is)
param brahma —the supreme spirit; param dhāma —the
supreme abode; paramam pavitram —the supremely pure;
śāśvatam —the eternal; divyam —divine; puruṣam —person;
ādi-devam —the original God; ajam —unborn; vibhum —all-
pervasive; sarve —all; ṛṣayaḥ—the sages; āhuḥ—speak;
tathā—in this way; tvām —of You; tathā—also; deva-ṛṣiḥ—
sage among the gods; nāradaḥ—Nārada, the giver of Nāra
(Bhagavān); asitaḥ—Asita; devalaḥ—Devala; vyāsaḥ—Veda-
vyāsa; ca —and; eva—indeed; svayam —You yourself;
bravīṣi—are speaking it; me —to me.

Arjuna said: I know that You are the Supreme Absolute
Truth and the Supreme Abode. You are supremely pure and
the destroyer of the impurity of ignorance. The great
ṛṣis such as Devarṣi Nārada, Asita, Devala and Vyāsa
also glorify You as the eternal Personality,
transcendental and primeval Lord who is unborn and
omnipresent. Now You Yourself are saying this to me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna now speaks this śloka beginning with the word

                           541
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

param with a desire to hear in detail the meaning of
what was previously described in brief. Param means the
highest and dhāma means ‘You are parama-brahma , having
the beautiful f orm of Śyāmasundara.’ According to the
Amara-koṣa dictionary, gṛha (home), deha (body), tviṭ
(complexion), prabhāva (glory) and dhāma (abode) are all
synonymous. “You are that very dhāma . Unlike the jīvas
, there is no difference between You and Your body.”
What is the svarūpa of that dhāma ? In response Śrī
Bhagavān says: pavitraṁ-paramam . “Whoever sees the
svarūpa of this form becomes free from the impurity of
ignorance.” Therefore, the sages call You śāsvataṁ
puruṣam āhuḥ (the eternal person) and glorify the
eternal nature of Your human form.




Śloka 14



sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye

yan māṁ vadasi keśava

na hi te bhagavan vyaktiṁ

vidur devā na dānavāḥ

keśava—O Keśava; manye—I consider; sarvam—all; etat —
that; yat —which; vadasi —You are saying; mām —to me;
(to be) ṛtam —truth; bhagavān —O all-opulent Lord; hi —
certainly; na —neither; devāḥ—the gods; na —nor; dānavāḥ
—the demons; viduḥ—comprehend; te —Your; vyaktim —
personality.

O Keśava, I accept all that You have told me to be true.
Neither the devas nor the dānavas comprehend the tattva
of Your birth.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna says, “I have no doubt about this. Other ṛṣis
consider You who are the Supreme Absolute TruthÇ
possessor of the eternal, beautiful form of Śy
āmasundara (parabrahma-dhāma ) to be unborn, but they do
not know about Your vyaktim (birth). They do not know
how it is possible for You, parabrahma , to
simultaneously take birth and not take birth. You say,
‘The devas and the maharṣis do not know about My
appearance’ (Gītā 10.12), but I accept everything Yo u
tell me as truth. O Keśava! Ka refers to Brahmā and īśa
refers to Rudra. Since You have even bound these two
personalities with ignorance regarding Your tattva and
appearance, it is not surprising that the other devas
and the dānavas also cannot know You.”

                            542
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 15




svayam evātmanātmānaṁ

vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama

bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa

deva-deva jagat-pate

puruṣa-uttama—O Supreme Person; bhūta-bhāvana—controller
of all; bhūta-īśa —Lord of all created beings; deva-deva
—God of gods; jagat-pate —Master of the cosmic
manifestation; eva —only; tvam svayam —You, Yourself;
vettha —know; ātmānam —Yourself; ātmanā—through Your own
potency.

O Puruṣottama, Supreme Person! O Bhūta-bhāvana, Creator
of beings! O Bhūteśa, Lord of all created beings! O
Deva-deva, God of gods! O Jagat-pati, Master of the
universe! You alone know Yourself by Your own potency.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Thus You alone know Yourself. The word eva establishes
that Your bhaktas know the tattva of Your being unborn
yet taking birth. This is inconceivable. But why is it
that even they are not in full knowledge of this? Only
You know Yourself by Your cit-śakti and not by any other
means. Therefore, tvaṁ puruṣottama , You are the best of
persons, superior even to the creator of the mahā-tattva
, Mahā-viṣṇu. Yo u are not only the best but You are
bhūta-bhāvana , the controller of everyone up to the
great Grandsire Brahmā. You are not only the controller
but also the Deva amongst the devas as You sport with
the devas such as Brahmā and Śiva, who are like Your
pasti me instruments. Furthermore, You are Jagat-pati,
the Master of the universe. Out of Your unlimited
compassion, You are the Master of all jīvas like me, who
are living in this material world.”

The four invocations in this śloka are merely an
explanation of the word puruṣottama . For example, ‘O
Bhūta-bhāvana, You are the father of all living beings.’
Sometimes, someone may be a father but he does not
control his offspring. But, O Bhūteśa, You are the
controller of all living beings. Someone may be the
control ler of living entities and not be worshipable,
but You, Deva-deva, are worshipable even for the devas .
And someone may possess all of these qualities and still

                           543
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

fail to maintain other living entities, but, O Jagat-
pati, You alone maintain the universe.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Desiring to hear in detail the vibhūtis of Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna speaks in support of His statements by
saying, “Only You know the glory of Your acintya-tattva
(inconceivable reality). Nobody, including devas ,
dānavas or humans, can know even a particle of Your
glories by their independent endeavour. Only ananya-
bhaktas can know something of it by Your mercy. For this
reason, I beg You to please be merciful to me.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Arjuna as saying, “O
Bhūta-bhāvana! O Bhūteśa! O Deva-deva! O Jagat-pati! O
Puruṣottama! Only You, by Your own cit-śakti know about
Your own personality and the tattva of Your birth. Devas
and humans can never understand by their own
intelligence how Your eternal form, which exists even
before creation, becomes manifest in this inert world
while at the same time remaining independent from the
laws of this world. Only those upon whom You bestow Your
mercy can understand this.”




Śloka 16



vaktum arhasy aśeṣeṇa

divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ

yābhir vibhūtibhir lokān

imāṁs tvaṁ vyāpya tiṣṭhasi

hi—certainly; arhasi—You ought; vaktum —to explain;
aśeṣeṇa —fully; divyāḥ ātma -vibhūtayaḥ—Your own divine
opulences; yābhiḥ—with which; vibhūtibhiḥ—opulences;
vyāpya —by (Your) all-pervasive quality; tvam tiṣṭhasi —
You reside; imān —in these; lokān —worlds.

Please describe to me in full Your majestic opulences,
by which You pervade and reside in all of these worlds.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                             544
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

“Your tattva is very difficult to understand. I am now
inquisitive to know about Your vibhūtis. If you say that
those divine opulences cannot be explained in full, at
least please tell me about Your superior vibhūtis.”




Śloka 17



kathaṁ vidyām ahaṁ yogiṁs

tvāṁ sadā paricintayan

keṣu keṣu ca bhāveṣu

cintyo ‘si bhagavan mayā


yogin—O person possessing supernatural powers; katham—
how; aham vidyām —may I know; (and) sadā—always;
paricintayan —contemplate; tvām —You; bhagavan —O all-
opulent Personality; ca —and; keṣu keṣu —in what
various; bhāveṣu —states of existence; asi —are You;
cintyaḥ—to be contemplated; mayā—by me.

O Supreme Mystic, possessor of the yogamāyā-śakti, how
shall I know You and constantly think of You? O
Bhagavān, upon which of Your forms and in what mood am I
to meditate?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna says, “O Yogin, by which means can I constantly
know You while fully meditating on You? In Gītā (18.55),
You say, ‘Only by bhakti can one know the truth of My
supremacy and My svarūpa .’ So now I would like to know
upon which of Your forms I should devotedly meditate and
with what vision?” [The word yogin (the abode of
yogamāyā) is likened to the word vanamālī (He who wears
a forest garland), which can refer only to Kṛṣṇa. It is
a qualifying adjective used only for a special person.
It is not that each and every person who wears a forest
garland can be called vanamālī. Similarly, one who
possesses the yogamāyā-śakti is called yogin. This
exclusively refers to Kṛṣṇa.]




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




                            545
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Having requested Śrī Bhagavān in the previous śloka to
describe His vibhūtis , Arjuna specifically prays in
this śloka to understand in which objects and forms His
vibhūtis exist. Yogamāyā, who can make the impossible
possible, is always residing with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. For this
reason, Arjuna addresses Him as yogin , the abode of
yogamāyā. Only Kṛṣṇa is able to describe His vibhūtis .
This is being indicated here.




Śloka 18




vistareṇātmano yogaṁ

vibhūtiṁ ca janārdana

bhūyaḥ kathaya tṛptir hi

śṛṇvato nāsti me ‘mṛtam

janārdana—O inspirer of the people; kathaya—speak;
bhūyaḥ—further; vistareṇa—in detail; ātmanaḥ—of Your
personal; yogam —mystic powers; ca —and; vibhūtim—
opulences; hi—certainly; me —for me; na asti —there is
no; tṛptiḥ—satiation point; śṛṇvataḥ—while hearing;
(this) amṛtam —nectar.

O Janārdana, please tell me again in detail about Your
mystic powers and vibhūtis, for I am not satiated by
hearing Your nectar-filled words.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“In Gītā (10.8), You say: ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ
sarvaṁ pravartate , ‘I am the source of all worlds, both
mundane and spiritual. Everything emanates from Me,’
and: iti matvā bhajante mām , ‘Knowing Me in this way,
paṇḍitas who know the essence of the Vedas , render
loving service unto Me.’ You say that all aspects of
being are produced by Your divine and splendid energies
and that paṇḍitas engage in Your bhajana through bhakti-
yoga . O Janārdana, the sweetness of Your beneficial
instructions has created a greed in me and now I yearn
for a more detailed description (vistareṇa ). In this
regard, what can I do? Having tasted the nectar of Your
instructions through my ears, I am not feeling
satisfied. Therefore, please explain Your vibhūtis again
in detail.”




                           546
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Śloka 19




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

hanta te kathayiṣyāmi

divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ

prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha

nāsty anto vistarasya me

śrī bhagavān—the resplendent and all-opulent Personality
of Godhead; uvāca —said; kuru-śreṣṭha —O best of the
Kurus; hanta —yes; hi kathayiṣyāmi —I shall certainly
describe; te —to you; divyāḥ—My divine; ātma-vibhūtayaḥ—
personal opulences; prādhānyataḥ—selecting the chief
opulences; (for) na asti —there is no; antaḥ—limit; me —
to My; vistarasya —extensive (glories).

Śrī Bhagavān said: O best of the Kurus, yes, I shall
certainly describe My divine opulences to you, but only
those which are prominent, there being no limit to My
glories.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word hanta in this śloka indicates compassion. Śrī
Bhagavān says, “I will only explain My prominent glories
because there is no end to their variety.” Vibhūtayaḥ
means the host of vibhūtis . The word divyā signifies,
“I will only speak of My superior glories, not
insignificant ones such as blades of grass.” Here, the
word vibhūti implies both material as well as spiritual
objects. They are all generated from Bhagavān’s energy
and should be meditated upon in relation t o Him
according to the various degrees of their respective
states of being.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Having heard Arjuna’s request for a description of
vibhūti-yoga , Bhagavān answers with the word hanta ,
thus showing great compassion to him . Indicating that
it is impossible to describe His unlimited vibhūtis , He
says that He will explain the most prominent among them
for Arjuna’s sake. Because these vibhūtis directly
originate from His śakti , they should be understood in

                            547
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

relation to Bhagavān. He is eternally present in His
two-handed Śyāmasundara form as the source of all these
vibhūtis , although He is distinct from them. After
describing these vibhūtis , Śrī Kṛṣṇa concludes by
saying, “Only by one of My portions (aṁśa ) do I pervade
this whole universe of moving and non-moving beings. I
do not pervade it by My complete Self.” Whatever exists
in this world that is glorious emanates from His śakti .
One should understand this topic in this way.

It is clear from the above statements of Kṛṣṇa that the
svarūpa of Bhagavān exists independently of these
vibhūtis , and that this svarūpa is indeed Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa.




Śloka 20



aham ātmā guḍākeśa

sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ

aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca

bhūtānām anta eva ca

guḍāka-īśa—O controller of sleep; aham—I (am); ātmā—the
Supersoul; sthitaḥ—seated; āśaya —in the hearts; sarva-
bhūta —of all beings; eva —certainly; aham —I (am); ca —
also; ādiḥ—the beginning; madhyam —the middle; ca —and;
antaḥ—the end; bhūtānām —of all beings.

O Guḍākeśa, I am Antaryāmī who resides within the heart
of every jīva, and I alone am the cause of the creation,
maintenance and destruction of all beings.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān says, “O Arjuna, you should understand that
it is only by one of My portions that I am the cause of
all vibhūtis .” Here the word ātmā means the Antaryāmī
of the original prakrti , the puruṣa-avatāra
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who creates the mahat-tattva .
Guḍākeśa means one who has control over sleep. By using
this word, Śrī Bhagavān indicates that Arjuna is capa
ble of meditating. “I am also the Supersoul of the
complete creation, sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ.” Sarva-bhūta
means Vairāja or Brahmā. “I am Antaryāmī situated within
the heart of Vairāja or Brahmā; in other words, I am the
Supersoul of the complete creation, Garbhodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu. Because I am also situated within the heart of
every jīva , I am also the individual Supersoul,
Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. I alone am the beginning (birth),

                           548
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

middle (existence) and end (the cause of annihilation)
of the jīvas and the elements.”




Śloka 21



ādityānām ahaṁ viṣṇur

jyotiṣāṁ ravir aṁśumān

marīcir marutām asmi

nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī

ādityānām—of the Ādityas; aham—I (am); viṣṇu —Viṣṇu, the
all pervasive one; jyotiṣām —of luminaries; (I am)
aṁśumān —the radiant; raviḥ—sun; marutām —of the Maruts
(wind gods); asmi —I am; marīciḥ—Marīci; nakṣatrāṇām —of
the stars; aham—I (am); śaśī—the moon.

Of the twelve Ādityas I am Viṣṇu, who is My vibhūti.
Among luminaries I am the radiant sun, of the Maruts I
am Marīci, and among stars I am the moon.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Among the twelve Ādityas I am Viṣṇu. Among the
luminaries everywhere I am aṁśu-mān, the radiant sun,
also known as Viṣṇu. This is My vibhūti . And I am
Marīci, a special variety of wind.”




Śloka 22



vedānāṁ sāma-vedo ‘smi

devānām asmi vāsavaḥ

indriyāṇāṁ manaś cāsmi

bhūtānām asmi cetanā

vedānām—of the Vedas; asmi —I am; sāma-vedaḥ—the Sāma-
veda ; devānām —of gods; asmi —I am; vāsavaḥ—Indra; ca —
and; indriyāṇām —of the senses; asmi —I am; manaḥ—the
mind; (and) bhūtānām —in living beings; asmi —I am;
cetanā—consciousness.


                           549
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Of the Vedas I am the Sāma-veda, among the devatās I am
Indra, of the senses I am the mind, and I am
consciousness in the jīvas.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word vāsavaḥ means Indra, bhūtānām means that which
is related to the j īvas and cetanā means consciousness
or knowledge potency.




Śloka 23



rudrāṇāṁ śaṅkaraś cāsmi

vitteśo yakṣa-rakṣasām

vasūnāṁ pāvakaś cāsmi

meruḥ śikhariṇām aham

rudrāṇām—of Rudras; asmi—I am; śaṅkaraḥ—Śaṅkara; ca —
and; yakṣa-rakṣasām —of yakṣas and rakṣasas ; vitta-īśaḥ
—the lord of wealth, Kuvera; vasūnām —of the Vasus; asmi
—I am; pāvakaḥ—fire; ca —and; śikhariṇām —of peaked
mountains; aham —I (am); meruḥ—Mount Meru.

Of all the Rudras I am Śaṅkara, of the Yakṣas and
Rakṣasas I am Kuvera, of the eight Vasus I am Agni, and
among mountains I am Sumeru.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word vitta-īśah means Kuvera, the lord of wealth.




Śloka 24




purodhasāṁ ca mukhyaṁ māṁ

viddhi pārtha bṛhaspatim

                            550
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


senānīnām ahaṁ skandaḥ

sarasām asmi sāgaraḥ


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; purodhasām—of priests; viddhi —
know; mām —Me; (to be) mukhyam—the chief; bṛhaspatim —
Bṛhaspati; ca —and; senānīnām —of generals; aham —I
(am); skandaḥ—Kārttikeya; sarasām —of reservoirs of
water; asmi —I am; sāgaraḥ—the ocean.

O Pārtha, of priests know Me to be Bṛhaspati, the chief.
Of generals I am Kārttikeya, and among reservoirs of
water I am the ocean.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word skandaḥ refers to Kārttikeya.




Śloka 25




maharṣīṇāṁ bhṛgur ahaṁ

girām asmy ekam akṣaram

yajñānāṁ japa-yajño ‘smi

sthāvarāṇāṁ himālayaḥ


mahā-ṛṣīṇām—of great sages; aham asmi—I am; bhṛguḥ—
Bhṛgu; girām —of utterances; (I am) ekam-akṣaram —the
one (all-pervasive) syllable oṁ; yajñ ānām —of
sacrifices; asmi —I am; japa-yajñaḥ—the sacrifice of
japa ; sthāvarāṇām —of non-moving things; (I am) him
ālayaḥ—the Himalayan mountains.

Among maharṣis I am Bhṛgu, of utterances I am the
syllable oṁ, of sacrifices I am japa-yajña, and among
non-moving objects I am the Himalayan mountains.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The words ekam akṣaram mean praṇava oṁ.

                           551
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 26




aśvatthaḥ sarva-vṛkṣāṇāṁ

devarṣīṇāṁ ca nāradaḥ

gandharvāṇāṁ citrarathaḥ

siddhānāṁ kapilo muniḥ

sarva-vṛkṣāṇām—of all trees; (I am) aśvatthaḥ—the
banyan; ca —and; devaṛṣīṇām —of celestial sages; (I am)
nāradaḥ—Nārada Ṛṣi; gandharvāṇām —of Gandharvas; (I am)
citrarathaḥ—Citraratha; siddhānām —of perfected beings;
(I am) muniḥ—the ascetic; kapilaḥ—Kapila.

Of trees I am the banyan, of devarṣis I am Nārada, of
Gandharvas I am Citraratha, and among perfected beings I
am Kapila Muni.




Śloka 27




uccaiḥśravasam aśvānāṁ

viddhi mām amṛtodbhavam

airāvataṁ gajendrāṇāṁ

narāṇāṁ ca narādhipam


aśvānām—of horses; viddhi—know; mām —Me; uccaiḥśravasam
—as Uccaiḥśravā; amṛta-udbhavam —born of the ocean of
nectar; gajendrāṇām—of elephants; (I am) airāvatam —
Airāvata; ca —and; narāṇām —of men; (I am) nara-adhipam—
the lord of men (the king).

Of horses know Me to be Uccaiḥśravā, born from the
churning of nectar, among elephants I am Airāvata, and
among men I am the king.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           552
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

Amṛtodbhavam means born from the churning of nectar.




Śloka 28




āyudhānām ahaṁ vajraṁ

dhenūnām asmi kāmadhuk

prajanaś cāsmi kandarpaḥ

sarpāṇām asmi vāsukiḥ

āyudhānām—of weapons; aham—I; asmi —am; vajram —the
thunderbolt; ca —and; dhenūnām —of cows; (I am) kāmadhuk
—the wish-fulfilling cow; asmi—I am; prajanaḥ—the
(famed) procreator; kandarpaḥ—Cupid; sarpāṇām —of
snakes; asmi —I am; vāsukiḥ—Vāsuki.

Among weapons I am the thunderbolt, and of cows I am
Kāmadhenu, the wish-fulfilling cow. I am the god of
love, Kandarpa, who causes procreation, and among snakes
I am Vāsuki.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word kāmadhuk means kāmadhenu. Among procreators I
am indeed, Kandarpa (Cupid), who causes the birth of
living beings.




Śloka 29




anantaś cāsmi nāgānāṁ

varuṇo yādasām aham

pitṝṇām aryamā cāsmi

yamaḥ saṁyamatām aham

ca—and;    nāgānām—of divine serpents; asmi—I am; anantaḥ—
Ananta;    yādasām —of aquatics; (I am) varuṇaḥ—Varuṇa,
lord of    the waters; ca—and; pitṝṇām —of ancestors; aham
asmi —I    am; aryamā—Aryamā; saṁyamatām —of chastisers;
aham —I    (am); yamaḥ—Yamarāja.

                             553
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Of Nāgas I am the divine serpent Ananta, among aquatics
I am Varuṇa, lord of the waters, of the ancestors I am
Aryamā, and of chastisers I am Yamarāja.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here yādasām, means of the aquatics. Saṁyamatām means of
those who give punishment.




Śloka 30




prahlādaś cāsmi daityānāṁ

kālaḥ kalayatām aham

mṛgāṇāṁ ca mṛgendro ‘haṁ

vainateyaś ca pakṣiṇām

daityānām—of daityas (the demoniac descendants of Diti);
aham asmi —I am; prahlādaḥ—Prahlāda; ca —and; kalayatām
—of controllers; (I am) kālaḥ—time; ca —and; mṛgāṇām —of
beasts; (I am) mṛga-indraḥ—the chief of beasts, the
lion; pakṣiṇām —of birds; aham —I (am); vainateyaḥ—the
son of Vinatā, Garuḍa.

Among the daityas I am Prahlāda, and of controllers I am
time. Of beasts I am the lion, and among birds I a m
Garuḍa.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word kalayatām means among the controllers, mṛga-
indraḥ means lion, and vainateyaḥ means Garuḍa.




Śloka 31



pavanaḥ pavatām asmi

                            554
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


rāmaḥ śastra-bhṛtām aham

jhaṣāṇāṁ makaraś cāsmi

srotasām asmi jāhnavī

pavatām—of purifiers; aham asmi—I am; pavanaḥ—the wind;
śastra-bhṛtām —of wielders of weapons; (I am) rāmaḥ—
Paraśurāma; jhaṣāṇām —of aquatic creatures; asmi —I am;
makaraḥ—the makara (a fabulous marine creature); ca —
and; srotasām —of rivers; asmi —I am; jāhnavī—the Gaṅgā
(born from the ear of sage Jahnu).

Among that which is swift and purifying I am the wind,
of wielders of weapons I am the āveśa-avatāra
Paraśurāma. Among the aquatics I am the makara , and
among all the rivers, I am Gaṅgā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Pavatām means ‘Among the fast-moving and purifying, I am
the wind.’ Here, the word rāmaḥ refers to Lord
Paraśurāma. Because he is an āveśa-avatāra , a special
jīva empowered by Śrī Bhagavān and endowed with His
śakti , he is included among the vibhūtis of Bhagavān.
In Bhāgavatāmṛtam , the following statement from the
Padma Purāṇa has been cited: “O Devī, I have explained
to you the entire history of the śaktyāveśa-avatāra ,
Jāmadagnya (Paraśurāma, the son of Jamadagni), the
carrier of the axe.” Furthermore, Śrī Bhagavān entered
Paraśurāma. Bhāgavatāmṛtam describes the characteristic
of an āveśa-avatāra : “When Śrī Janārdana empowers an
exalted jīva with one of His potencies such as jñ āna ,
that jīva is counted as an āveśa-avatāra .” “Among
aquatics (jhaṣāṇāṁ) I am the exalted makara , and of
rivers (srotasām ) I am Gaṅgā.”




Śloka 32



sargāṇām ādir antaś ca

madhyaṁ caivāham arjuna

adhyātma-vidyā vidyānāṁ

vādaḥ pravadatām aham


arjuna—O Arjuna; sargāṇām—of creations; aham —I (am);
ādiḥ—the beginning; antaḥ—the end; ca —and; madhyam—the
middle; ca —and; eva—certainly; vidyānām —of processes

                           555
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

of knowledge; (I am) adhyātma-vidyā—spiritual knowledge;
pravadatām —of logical arguments; aham —I (am); vādaḥ—
the conclusion.

O Arjuna, I am the beginning, the middle and the end of
all creation. Of all knowledge I am ātma-jñāna, and in
logical debate I am vāda, the principle that asserts a
conclusion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“That which is created, such as the sky, is called
sarga. I am the creator (ādi ), annihilator (anta ) and
maintainer (madhya ) of these. Therefore, creation,
maintenance and annihilation, being My vibhūtis , are to
be meditated upon.” The statement, “I am the beginning,
middle and end,” establishes that Śrī Bhagavān is the
original doer (kārttā) behind all creation. “Of Vedic
knowledge, I am āt ma-jñ āna , knowledge of the self.
Within logical debate (pravadatām ), consisting of jalpa
, vitaṇḍā and vāda which establish one’s own point and
refute the opponent’s assertion, I am vāda , by which
the correct siddhānta and tattva are established.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




In this śloka, Bhagavān has explained that, of the
various aspects of knowledge, His vibhūti is adhyātma-
vidyā, spiritual knowledge. Vidyā is the education which
a person acquires in relation to knowable subjects by
the use of his own intelligence. Śāstra describes
eighteen types of vidyās. Among them, fourteen are
prominent: aṅgāni vedaś catvāro mīmāṁsā nyāya-vistaraḥ

dharma-śāstraṁ purāṇañ ca vidyā hy etāṁ caturdaśaḥ

āyur-vedo dhanur-vedo gāndharvāś ceti te trayaḥ

artha-śāstraṁ caturthañ ca vidyā hy aṣṭādaśaiva tāḥ

Viṣṇu Purāṇa


Śikṣā, kalpa, vyākaraṇa, nirukta, jyotiṣa and chanda are
the six types of knowledge known as vedāṅga (the limbs
of the Vedas). Ṛg, Sāma, Yajuh and Atharva are the four
Vedas. All these combined with mīmāṁsā, nyāya, dharma-
śāstra and the Purāṇas comprise the fourteen chief
vidyās.

Practise of these vidyās sharpens a person’s
intelligence and increases his various fields of

                           556
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

knowledge. This jñ āna not only helps a person to
maintain his livelihood, but it also guides him on the
path of dharma . However, adhyātma-vidyā (transcendental
knowledge) gives human beings immortality, liberating
them from their bondage to the material world. It gives
them complete knowledge of parabrahma , which allows
them to realise the supreme eternal reality; Thus it is
superior to all the above-mentioned vidyās . This
adhyātma-vidyā is Kṛṣṇa’s vibhūti . Bhagavad-gītā and
the Upaniṣads are included within the category of
adhyātma-vidyā. The rasamayī bhakti (bhakti which is
filled with rasa ) of the residents of Vraja, as
described in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , is
millions of times superior to the adhyātma-vidyā of
Uddhava. Since this rasamayī bhakti is the essence of
the hlādinī and saṁvit-śaktis of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa ,
it is truly the svarūpa of Kṛṣṇa, whereas adhyātma-vidyā
is a partial vibhūti of prema-bhakti. This is also
confirmed in the dialogue between Rāya Rāmānanda and Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhyalīlā
8.245): prabhu kahe,—”kon vidyā vidyā-madhye sāra?”

rāya kahe,—”kṛṣṇa-bhakti vinā vidyā nāhi āra”


Mahāprabhu inquired, ‘Among all vidyās, which is the
best?’

Rāya Rāmānanda replied, ‘Besides kṛṣṇa-bhakti there is
no other vidyā.’

A similar statement is made in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(4.29.49): sā vidyā tan-matir yayā. “That by which one’s
intelligence becomes fixed on the lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān is the only real vidyā.”

Moreover, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.3) states:


jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva

jīvanti san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām

sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo ‘jita jito ‘py asi tais tri-lokyām


Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has explained the confidential
meaning of the statement jñāne prayāsam udapāsya in this
śloka. “There are three types of knowledge that are
opposed to bhakti , which concern the oneness of the
jīva and brahma ; nirviśeṣa , nirākāra and jīva-brahma-
aikyavāda jñ āna. What is more, Svayam Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is replete with six opulences: jñ āna-tvadīya-
svarūpa-aiśvarya-mahimā-vicāre. From a portion of a
portion of His plenary portion, this material world is
created, maintained and annihilated. Even if one does
not try to understand all these subject matters, or does
not even make the effort to travel to the holy places,
merely by listening with love to Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful
pastimes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who cannot be conquered by anybody,
becomes controlled.”


                           557
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has also said (in regard to those who
debate) that He is the vāda, the conclusion (tattva )
ascertained by proper deliberation, logic and argument.
In the field of argument and logic, vāda , jalpa and
vitaṇḍā are quite well known. When, for the sake of
establishing one’s own opinion, one continuously finds
faults with the opponent’s statements, it is called
jalpa . Keeping the truth aside and avoiding proper
deliberation and logic while finding fault in an
opponent’s statement, is called vitaṇḍā. The purpose of
such arguments is not to ascertain reality but only to
display one’s scholarship, and the desire to defeat the
opponent is very strong. That deliberation which
ascertains the Absolute Reality is called vāda . This
vāda is superior to all other forms of discussion.

When a self-realised guru and a disciple who is
hankering for transcendental knowledge have a positive
dialogue about the Absolute Truth, the conclusion they
reach is called vāda . The pride of scholarship does not
exist within such exchanges, as neither has the desire
to defeat the other.




Śloka 33



akṣarāṇām a-kāro ‘smi

dvandvaḥ sāmāsikasya ca

aham evākṣayaḥ kālo

dhātāhaṁ viśvatomukhaḥ

akṣarāṇām—of letters; asmi—I am; a-kāraḥ—the letter A;
ca —and; sāmāsikasya—of compound words in Sanskṛit
verse; (I am) dvandvaḥ—the dual compound; eva—certainly;
aham —I (am); akṣayaḥ—unchanging; kālaḥ—time; aham —I
(am); dhātā—the creator, Brahmā; mukhaḥ—whose faces
(see); viśvataḥ—on all sides.

Of letters I am the letter A, and of compound words I am
dvandva, the dual compound. Among annihilators I am
Mahākāla Rudra, and of creators I am the four-headed
Brahmā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Among compound words I am dvandva or the dual compound.
Because in the dvandva compound both elements are
prominent, it is the best. Among the annihilators, I am
Mahākāla Rudra (akṣayaḥ kālaḥ), inexhaustible time.
Among creators, I am viśvatomukhaḥ, the four-headed

                           558
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Brahmā.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Among letters, I am the a-kāra. A-kāra is the first
letter and, because it is part of all other Sanskrit
letters, it is the best. This is also stated in the
śruti : akṣarāṇām a-kāro ‘smi (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
11.16.12). Bhagavān says that among compound words, He
is dvandva , the dual compound. When, in the process of
making one word, two or more other words give up their
case endings and are combined together, it is called
samāsa , and the resulting word is called samāsa-pada ,
or the compound word. Primarily, there are six types of
samāsa : 1) dvandva , 2) bahuvrihi , 3) karmadhāraya ,
4) tat-puruṣa , 5) dvigu and 6) avyayībhāva . Among them
dvandva is the best because in other compounds either
the first or the second part is prominent, or both words
combined together give the meaning of another (third)
object, but in the dvandva-samāsa both words remain
prominent, such as Rāma-Kṛṣṇa or Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, therefore,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa has said that the dvandva-samāsa (dual
compound) is His vibhūti .




Śloka 34



mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham

udbhavaś ca bhaviṣyatām

kīrtiḥ śrīr vāk ca nārīṇāṁ

smṛtir medhā dhṛtiḥ kṣamā

ca—and; aham—I (am); sarva-haraḥ—all-devouring; mṛtyuḥ—
death; ca —and; bhaviṣyatām —of the progressive
saṁskāras ; (I am) udbhavaḥ—birth; nārīṇām —among women;
(I am) kīrtiḥ—fame; śrīḥ—fortune; vāk —speech; smṛtiḥ—
memory; medhā—intelligence; dhṛtiḥ—fortitude; ca —and;
kṣamā—forgiveness.

I am all-devouring death, and of the six progressive
transformations experienced by all living beings, I am
birth. Among women I am fame, beauty, fine speech,
memory, intelligence, forbearance and forgiveness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                             559
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



“For those who are dying at every moment, I am sarva-
haraḥ, death, which takes away all memories.” Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.22.39) states: mṛtyur atyanta-vismṛtiḥ.
“Complete forgetfulness is death.” “The word bhaviṣyatām
means that of the future transformations of the living
entities, I am janma , the first. Of women I am the
three qualities of kīrtiḥ (fame), śrī (beauty) and vāk
(cultured speech); as well as the four qualities of
smṛtiḥ (memory), medhā (intelligence), dhṛtiḥ
(forbearance) and kṣamā (forgiveness).” The word ca
indicates that the wives of Dharma such as Mūrtti, etc.,
are also Him.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here Śrī Bhagavān says that among women He is kīrtiḥ
(fame), śrī (beauty or fortune), vāk (fine speech),
smṛtiḥ (memory), medhā (intelligence), dhṛtiḥ (fortitude
or patience) and kṣamā (forgiveness). This can be
understood in two ways: (1) “The qualities which are
found in women such as fame, beauty, sweet speech,
memory, sharp intelligence, fortitude and forgiveness
are indeed Me.” The qualities such as fame, beauty,
sweet speech, memory, subtle thinking and forgiveness,
to be found in Sītā Devī, Umā, Rukmiṇī, Draupadī and
specifically in the Vraja-gopīs, are all vibhūtis of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

(2) Among the twenty-four daughters of Prajāpati Dakṣa,
Kīrti, Medhā, Dhṛti, Smṛti and Kṣamā are ideal women in
all respects. Kīrti, Medhā and Dhṛti were married to
Dharma, Smṛti was married to Aṅgirā and Kṣamā to the
great sage Pulaha. Śrī is the name of the daughter of
the great sage Bhṛgu, and she was born from the womb of
Khyāti, the daughter of Dakṣa. Śrī Viṣṇu accepted her as
His wife. Vāk is the daughter of Brahmā. According to
their respective names, these seven women are the
presiding deities of the seven qualities mentioned
above. They have been included among the most blessed
women, therefore Śrī Kṛṣṇa says that they are His
vibhūtis .




Śloka 35




bṛhat-sāma tathā sāmnāṁ

gāyatrī chandasām aham

māsānāṁ mārga-śīrṣo ‘ham

                           560
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


ṛtūnāṁ kusumākaraḥ

sāmnām—of the hymns of the Sāma-veda; aham—I (am);
bṛhat-sāma —the Bṛhat-sāma ; tathā—and; chandasām —of
Sanskrit metres; (I am) gāyatrī—gāyatrī; māsānām —of
months; aham —I (am); mārga-śīrṣaḥ—November-December (a
grāhāyaṇa ); ṛtūnām —of seasons; (I am) kusumākaraḥ—
flower-bearing spring.

Among the hymns of the Sāma-veda I am Bṛhat-sāma, the
prayer to Indra. Of metres I am gāyatrī, of months I am
Mārga-śīrṣa, and of seasons I am vasanta, the flower-
bearing spring.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān earlier said that of the Vedas He is the
Sāma-veda . Now He also says that within the Sāma-veda
He is Bṛhat-sāma . The Ṛg-mantra , which is sung as tvām
ṛddhim havāmahe , indicates the Bṛhat-sāma . Among
metres He is the metre called gāyatrī. Among seasons He
is also kusuma-ākaraḥ, the flower-bearing vasanta .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Bhagavān is non-different from His nāma, guṇa, līlā and
stutis (prayers). The Sāma-veda contains prayers which
are Bhagavān personified. It is, th erefore, accepted as
the best of the Vedas and is known as His vibhūti .
Gāyatrī illuminates the svarūpa of Kṛṣṇa and is,
therefore, called the mother of the Vedas. Bhagavān has
thus counted gāyatrī amongst His vibhūtis . Among the
twelve months He says that Mārga-śīrṣa is His vibhūti .
That month is neither too hot nor too cold, and various
Vedic activities are performed at that time. Just before
it begins, Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā is performed, which is the
topmost of all His pastimes. In this month nature
flourishes in full bloom and in the householders’ fields
new crops are planted. Agrāhāyaṇa means the beginning of
the year and, therefore, Bhagavān says that it is His
vibhūti . Of seasons vasanta (spring) is best. It is
also known by the name ṛtu-rāja , the king of seasons.
In this season, nature gives up her old ornaments and
becomes adorned with fresh decorative coverings. Both
inert and conscious beings are infused with new life. In
this season Kṛṣṇa’s swing pastime and other vasanta
pastimes are performed. This season is especially
supreme because Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared at this
time, having accepted the bhāva and kānti (complexion)
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the personification of mahābhāva .
Thus Bhagavān has counted it among His vibhūtis .

                           561
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 36



dyūtaṁ chalayatām asmi

tejas tejasvinām aham

jayo ‘smi vyavasāyo ‘smi

sattvaṁ sattvavatām aham

chalayatām—of those who cheat; asmi—I am; dyūtam —
gambling; tejasvinām —of the splendid; aham —I (am);
tejaḥ—the splendour; asmi —I am; jayaḥ—victory; asmi —I
am; vyav asāyaḥ—determnation; sattvavatām —of the
strong; aham —I (am); sattvam —the strength.

I am the gambling of the cheats, and the splendour of
the splendid. I am victory among the victorious, the
endeavour of the industrious, and the strength of the
mighty.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Among those who are trying to deceive each other
(chalayatām), I am gambling. Of those who become
victorious, I am victory. Of industrious people, I am
effort, and of those who are strong (sattvavatām ), I am
strength.”




Śloka 37



vṛṣṇīnāṁ vāsudevo ‘smi

pāṇḍavānāṁ dhanañjayaḥ

munīnām apy ahaṁ vyāsaḥ

kavīnām uśanā kaviḥ


vṛṣṇīnām—of the Vṛṣṇis; asmi—I am; vāsudevaḥ—Vāsudeva
Kṛṣṇa; pāṇḍavānām —of the Pāṇḍavas; dhanañjayaḥ—Arjuna;
api —and; munīnām —of sages; aham—I (am); vyāsaḥ—Veda-
vyāsa; kavīnām —of poets; (I am) kaviḥ—the poet; uśanā—
Śukrācārya.

                           562
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Of the Vṛṣṇis I am Vāsudeva, of the Pāṇḍavas I am
Arjuna, of the munīs I am Vyāsa, and among kavis I am
the poet Śukrācārya.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Of the Vṛṣṇis I am Vāsudeva. This means that My father,
Vasudeva, is My vibhūti.” Therefore, here the word
Vāsudeva is formed by putting the suffix aṇ on the word
Vasudeva. ‘Of the Vṛṣṇis I am Vāsudeva,’ is not
acceptable because Śrī Bhagavān is describing His
vibhūtis , not His own svarūpa . Vāsudeva is one o f the
aspects of His svarūpa , and not His vibhūti .




Śloka 38



daṇḍo damayatām asmi

nītir asmi jigīṣatām

maunaṁ caivāsmi guhyānāṁ

jñānaṁ jñānavatām aham

damayatām—of subduers; asmi—I am; daṇḍaḥ—the rod of
chastisement; jigīṣatām —of those desiring victory; asmi
—I am; nītiḥ—morality; guhyānām —of secrets; asmi —I am;
maunam —silence; ca —and; eva —certainly; jñ ānavatām —
of the wise; aham —I (am); jñ ānam —wisdom.

Among those who dispense justice, I am the rod of
chastisement, and among seekers of victory, I am
morality. Of secrets I am silence, and I am the wisdom
of the wise.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“I am the lawful ruler’s rod of punishment.”




Śloka 39


                           563
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




yac cāpi sarva-bhūtānāṁ

bījaṁ tad aham arjuna

na tad asti vinā yat syān

mayā bhūtaṁ carācaram

ca—and; arjuna—O Arjuna; yat —whatever; bījam—seed of
generation; api —there may be; sarva-bhūtānām —among all
living beings; tat —that (seed); (is) aham —Myself; yat
—whatever; bhūtam —being; syāt —may exist; cara-acaram—
either moving or non-moving; tat —that; na asti —does
not exist; vinā—without; mayā—Me.

O Arjuna, I am the original cause, the generating seed
of all existence. No entity, either moving or non-
moving, can exist separately from Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word bīja implies paroha, the cause of origin. Śrī
Bhagavān says that He is the cause of the birth of all
beings. “Without Me, who am the cause of appearance, the
birth of any moving or non-moving body cannot take
place.”




Śloka 40




nānto ‘sti mama divyānāṁ

vibhūtīnāṁ parantapa

eṣa tūddeśataḥ prokto

vibhūter vistaro mayā

parantapa—O chastiser of the foe; asti—there is; na —no;
antaḥ—end; mama divyānām —to My divine; vibhūtīnām —
opulences; tu —but; eṣaḥ—this; vistaraḥ—elaborate
description; proktaḥ—spoken; mayā—by Me; vibhūteḥ—about
My opulence; uddeśataḥ—is done just as an indication.

O Parantapa, My divine vibhūtis are endless. What I have
described to you is a mere indication of My opulences.




                            564
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In concluding this chapter on His vibhūtis, Śrī Bhagavān
speaks this śloka beginning with the words nānto ‘sti.
“The description of My vibhūtis is spoken in brief
(uddeśataḥ).”




Śloka 41




yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ

śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā

tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ

mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam


eva—indeed; yat yat—whatever; sattvam —existence (there
is); vib hūtimat —having opulence; śrīmat —beauty; vā—
or; ūrjitam —power; eva —certainly; tvam —you; avagaccha
—should understand; tat tat —all those; (to be); aṁśa-
sambhavam—generated from a part; mama —of My; tejaḥ—
power.

Know for certain that everything in existence which is
opulent, majestic and endowed with power springs from
but a part of My śakti.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




To simultaneously describe all the unmentioned vibhūtis
of the past, present and future, Śrī Bhagavān speaks
this śloka beginning with yad yad . The word v ibhūtimat
means majestic, śrīmat means opulence (riches or
fortune), ūrji means endowed with excessive power and
influence, and sattva means anything which exists.




Śloka 42



athavā bahunaitena

                             565
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna

viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam

ekāṁśena sthito jagat

athavā—however; ārjuna—O Arjuna; kim —what; tava jñ
ātena —can be understood by you; etena —by this; bahunā—
multi-faceted description; (merely) eka-aṁśena —by My
single expansion; aham —I; sthitaḥ—repose; (and)
viṣṭabhya —pervade; idam—this; kṛtsnam —whole; jagat —
cosmic manifestation.

Of what use to you, Arjuna, is all this detailed
knowledge? Just know that by one partial aspect of
Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What need is there for you to know all this in detail?
You should just understand the essence. I, by the
partial aspect of Myself as the Antaryāmī puruṣa of
material nature, support the entire universe. As the
substratum, I support it. As the presiding authority I
preside over it, and as the controller I control it.
Being all-pervasive, I pervade it and as the creator I
am its cause.”

After understanding with the pure intelligence bestowed
by Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa that He Himself supports the
entire universe, one should render service to Him
exclusively and relish His mādhurya (sweetness). This is
stated in the Tenth Canto.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Tenth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “In the previous
chapter, pure kṛṣṇa-bhakti was instructed. A person
deliberating on that may understand that service to
Kṛṣṇa can be rendered by worshipping other devatās . To
remove this misconception, Kṛṣṇa says in this chapter
that devatās such as Brahmā and Rudra are nothing but
His vibhūtis . ‘I am the cause of everything. I am
birthless, beginningless and the Supreme Controller.
When one understands My vibh ūti-tattva by properly
deliberating upon it, there remains no other impediment

                            566
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

to ananya-bhakti . I pervade this entire universe by My
partial aspect of Paramātmā and have manifested all
these vibhūtis . After understanding My vibhūti -tattva
, bhaktas attain knowledge of bhagavat-tattva , and with
śuddha-bhakti they engage in bhajana to My Śrī Kṛṣṇa
svarūpa .’ In the eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh
ślokas of this chapter, śuddha-bhakti and its result
have been described. Only bhajana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
the o rigin of all these vibhūtis , can lead to prema
which is the eternal dharma of the jīva . This is the
essence of this chapter.”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Tenth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Eleven


Viśvarūpa-Darśana-Yoga



Yoga Through Beholding the Lord’s Universal Form




Śloka 1




arjuna uvāca —

mad-anugrahāya paramaṁ

guhyam adhyātma-saṁjñitam

yat tvayoktaṁ vacas tena

moho ‘yaṁ vigato mama

arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; vacaḥ—the words; paramam—of
supreme; guhyam —confidential knowledge; adhyātma-saṁj
ñitam —concerning Your opulences; yat —which; uktam —
were spoken; tvayā—by You; mat-anugrahāya —out of mercy
for me; tena —by those words; ayam —this; mohaḥ—
delusion; mama —of mine; vigataḥ—has been dispelled.

Arjuna said: Having heard the supremely confidential
knowledge of Your vibhūtis, which You revealed out of
compassion for me, my delusion has now been dispelled.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                            567
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




In the Eleventh Chapter, Arjuna becomes fearful upon
seeing the viśvarūpa (universal form) of Śrī Bhagavān,
and with perplexed intelligence he begins praying to
Him. Thereafter, Śrī Hari gives bliss to Arjuna by again
showing him His eternal two-handed form.

At the end of the last chapter, Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “I
pervade and support the whole universe merely by one of
My aṁśas (portions).” After hearing of the vibhūtis of
his dear friend who is the primeval person and the abode
of all vibhūtis , Arjuna became immersed in supreme
bliss. He rejoiced upon hearing Śrī Bhagavān’s
descriptions of His vibhūtis . With a desire to see that
form, Arjuna now speaks three ślokas , the first
beginning with the words mad-anugrahāya.

Arjuna’s moha (ignorance) of the aiśvarya of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
was dispelled upon hearing the statements of Śrī
Bhagavān, from whom all these vibhūtis originate.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the previous chapter, when Arjuna heard Śrī Bhagavān
speak the most confidential and supremely secret
instructions on ātma-tattva , his delusion was removed
to a ce rtain extent. He understood clearly that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is Svayam Bhagavān, the limit of para-tattva. By
His aṁśa of Paramātmā, He enters and pervades this
entire universe, manifesting unlimited opulences.
Although He is the fountainhead of all vibhūtis , He rem
ains distinct from them in His eternal, two-handed
Śyāmasundara svarūpa . Arjuna rejoices upon hearing
Bhagavān’s statements and wants to realise this jñ āna
(and thus possess it as vijñ āna ) . He therefore says,
“Previously I doubted whether or not Your vibhūtis are
independent from You. But now this doubt, which was born
from ignorance, has been dispelled.” On a deeper level,
this statement indicates that he now wants to see
Kṛṣṇa’s viśvarūpa .




Śloka 2




bhavāpyayau hi bhūtānāṁ

śrutau vistaraśo mayā

tvattaḥ kamala-patrākṣa


                           568
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

māhātmyam api cāvyayam


kamala-patra-akṣa—O lotus-eyed Lord; hi—indeed; śrutau —
have been heard; mayā—by me; tvattaḥ—from You;
vistaraśaḥ—extensively; bhava-apyayau —the origin and
dissolution; bhūtānām—of the living beings; ca —and; api
—also; avyayam —Your immortal; māhātmyam —glories.

O lotus-eyed Lord, I have heard from You in detail about
the origin and dissolution of the living entities, as
well as Your unlimited glories.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




These middle six chapters explain that the root cause of
everything, including creation and annihilation, is Śrī
Bhagavān. As it is said in Gītā (7.6), “I alone am the
cause of the creation and destruction of the entire
universe.” Śrī Bhagavān is unchangeable and eternal
(avyaya ). That is, although He manifests the creation,
He remains free from any transformations and
attachments. This is shown in ślokas such as Gītā (9.4):
“By Me this whole universe is pervaded,” and Gītā (9.9):
“All these works cannot bind Me.”




Śloka 3



evam etad yathāttha tvam

ātmānaṁ parameśvara

draṣṭum icchāmi te rūpam

aiśvaraṁ puruṣottama

parameśvara—O Supreme Controller; evam—I accept; etat —
this; yathā—as; tvam —You; āttha —have spoken; ātmānam —
of Yourself (concerning Your opulences); puruṣa-uttama —
O Supreme Person; icchām i —I wish; draṣṭum —to see; te
—Your; rūpam —form; aiśvaram —of opulence.

O Parameśvara, I accept all that You have spoken about
Yourself as true. O Puruṣottama, now I wish to see that
great form, replete with Your aiśvarya.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                           569
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Ātmānaṁ tvam yathāttha. “You said, ‘I am situated in
this world by pervading it with one of My aṁśas ’ (Gītā
10.42). This is, indeed, true. I have not a trace of
doubt about this. Yet I desire the satisfaction of
seeing Your aiśvarya form. That is, I want to see with
my own eyes the form of that aṁśa , Your īśvara form, in
which You exist upon entering this world.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




With a desire to see that form of Bhagavān which is full
of aiśvarya, Arjuna is saying, “O Parameśvara, I have
heard about Your won derful, unlimited vibhūtis and I
have no doubt that You are the source of them. Now,
however, I am becoming eager to actually see that
aiśvarya form of Yours. You are Antaryāmī, who exist
within everyone’s heart (sarva-antaryāmī). Therefore,
You also know my inner desire and You are capable of
fulfilling it.”

Someone may raise the following doubt: If Arjuna is an
eternal friend of Kṛṣṇa, who is the mādhurya-maya-
vigraha (embodiment of sweetness), why is he desiring to
see the viśvarūpa which expresses Bhaga vān’s aiśvarya ?
The answer is that, just as a person who is very fond of
sweets also sometimes desires to eat bitter and sour
food (such as neem leaves or pickle), in the same way,
Arjuna, who is always tasting Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness
(mādhurya ) also developed a desire to see His viśvarūpa
which is an expression of His aiśvarya .

This has another meaning. Although Arjuna has no doubt
about the aiśvarya and superexcellence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he
is desiring to see this aiśvarya form simply for his own
personal satisfaction.




Śloka 4




manyase yadi tac chakyaṁ

mayā draṣṭum iti prabho

yogeśvara tato me tvaṁ

darśayātmānam avyayam

prabho—O master; yadi—if; tvam manyase —You think; iti —
that; tat —it; śakyam —is possible; draṣṭum —to be seen;
mayā—by me; tataḥ—then; yog a-īśvara —O controller of

                           570
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

all mystic power; darśaya —show me; avyayam —Your
unchanging; ātmānam —self.

O Prabhu! If You think that it is possible for me to
behold Your imperishable aiśvarya form, then please, O
Yogeśvara, reveal that form to me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna says, “Although I am not qualified to see that
form of Yours, it is possible for me to see it by the
influence of Your mystic power, because You are
Yogeśvara, the Supreme Mystic.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the previous śloka, Arjuna expressed his desire to
see the aiśvarya form of Śrī Bhagavān. In the present
śloka , he is seeking His approval. “O Prabhu! O master
of all! O Yogeśvara! I have expressed my internal
desires to You. Although I am unqualified, if You
consider me an object of Your mercy, then kindly reveal
that viśvarūpa to me.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “The jīva is an atomic
conscious entity (aṇu-caitanya ), therefore he cannot
properly understand the activities of Śrī Bhagavān who
is supreme infinite consciousness (vibhu-caitanya ). ‘I
am a jīva but even after You have mercifully bestowed
upon me the adhikāra to understand and behold Your
svarūpa-tattva , the universal form, I am unable to
comprehend Your infinite aiśvarya features. This is
because they are beyond the conception of the jīva . You
are Yogeśvara and my Prabhu. Therefore, please show me
Your yoga-aiśvarya which is by nature imperishable and
conscious.’”




Śloka 5




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

paśya me pārtha rūpāṇi

śataśo ‘tha sahasraśaḥ


                           571
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

nānā-vidhāni divyāni

nānā-varṇākṛtīni ca

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord said; pārtha—O
son of Pṛthā; paśya —behold; me —My; rūpāṇi —forms;
śataśaḥ—by the hundreds; atha —and; sahasraśaḥ—
thousands; (they are) nānā-vidhāni —variegated; divyāni
—divine; ca —and; nānā-varṇa —have many colours; ākṛtīni
—and shapes.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Pārtha, behold My hundreds and
thousands of various multi-coloured divine forms.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Initially, I will reveal to him (Arjuna) the first
puruṣa (Kāraṇodakaśāyī), who is My aṁśa and the An
taryāmī of material nature. He is described in the
Puruṣa-sūkta as having thousands of heads, eyes and
feet. I will then make him understand My svāṁśa , My own
expansion whose feature of kāla , all-devouring time, is
relevant to the present context.” Thinkin g like this,
Śrī Bhagavān instructs Arjuna, “Be attentive.” In saying
this, He draws Arjuna’s attention towards Himself. By
using the two words paśya and rūpāṇi , Śrī Bhagavān is
saying, “In My one svarūpa only, there are hundreds of
forms (hosts of vibhūti s ) . Behold them.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Understanding Arjuna’s internal desire, Śrī Bhagavān is
making Arjuna attentive. He does this in order to show
Arjuna His form as the Antaryāmī of material nature.
This form has hundreds of heads, eyes and forms as
described in the Puruṣa-sūkta , and it is His svāṁśa-
rūpa (the form of His own expansion). He also wants
Arjuna’s attention so that He can show him the unlimited
vibhūtis existing in just one of His aṁśas. In other
words, on the pretext of making him attentive, Bhagavān
is blessing Arjuna to have the qualification to see this
form. By addressing him as Pārtha, Kṛṣṇa also indicates
His relationship with him.




Śloka 6




                           572
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

paśyādityān vasūn rudrān

aśvinau marutas tathā

bahūny adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi

paśyāścaryāṇi bhārata

bhārata—O descendant of Bhārata; paśya—see; ādityān —the
Ādityas; vasūn —Vasus; rudrān —Rudras; aśvinau —Aśvinīs;
tathā—and; marutaḥ—the Maruts; paśya —behold; bahūni —
many; āścaryāṇi —astonishing (sights); adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi —
which you have never seen before.

O Bhārata, behold the twelve Ādityas, the eight Vasus,
the two Aśvinī-kumāras, the forty-nine Maruts and so
many other wondrous and astonishing forms that you have
never seen before.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here Śrī Bhagavān’s addressing Arjuna as Bhārata is
significant. Arjuna was born in the dynasty of rājarṣi
Bharata, the greatly pious and pure bhakta. For this
reason, he is also greatly dharmika and an aikāntika
bhakta of Bhagavān. Therefore, he is qualified to see
the form of Bhagavān which had not been seen before.




Śloka 7




ihaika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ

paśyādya sa-carācaram

mama dehe guḍākeśa

yac cānyad draṣṭum icchasi

guḍākeśa—O conqueror of sleep; adya—now; paśya —behold;
mama dehe —in My body; kṛtsnam —the entire; jagat —
universe; sa-cara-acaram —together with all moving and
non-moving beings; iha —here; eka-stham —in one place;
ca —and; yat —whatever; anyat —else; icchasi —you
desire; draṣṭum —to see.

O Guḍākeśa, now behold the entire universe, including
all moving and non-moving beings, assembled together in
one place within this body of Mine. Whatever else you
may wish to see is also visible within this universal
form.


                             573
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“That whole universe which you will not be able to see,
even by wandering for millions of years, is situated in
just one part of My body.” To explain this, Śrī Bhagavān
is speaking this śloka beginning with the words ihaika-
sthaṁ jagat . “The cause of your victory or defeat,
whatever it may be, is existing in this body, which is
the shelter of the universe.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān is again saying, “Within this universal
form of Mine, you will behold the entire world of moving
and non-moving entities. This universal form cannot be
seen by the performance of hard labour for millions o f
years. It can only be seen by My mercy. In this
viśvarūpa , you will see Me and the entire world, as
well as your victory or defeat in this battle of
Kurukṣetra. Moreover, you can also see whatever else you
want to see.” Here, the word Guḍākeśa is used. Guḍākā
means sleep or ignorance, and īśa means master. In this
way, Bhagavān indicates that Arjuna should behold this
form with great attention. Thus his doubts about victory
or defeat will be dispelled, and Arjuna will be able to
understand that in this un iverse the performance of
every activity is pre-arranged by Kṛṣṇa. Neither Arjuna
nor anyone else is able to change this arrangement in
any way.




Śloka 8



na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum

anenaiva sva-cakṣuṣā

divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ

paśya me yogam aiśvaram

tu—but; eva—certainly; na śakyase —you are unable;
draṣṭum —to see; mām —Me; anena —with these; sva-cakṣuṣā
—eyes of yours; dadāmi —I am giving; te —to you; divyam
—divine; cakṣuḥ—eyes; paśya —now see; me —My; yogam —
mystic; aiśvaram —opulence.


                            574
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

However, you are unable to see Me with the eyes you have
now. Therefore, I confer upon you divine eyes with which
to behold My yoga-aiśvarya.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is saying, “Arjuna, do not consider this
form to be illusory and composed of māyā, but know it to
be sa c-cid-ānanda . My svarūpa , in which the whole
universe exists, is beyond the perception of the
material senses.” To make him understand this, Śrī
Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning with na tu. He
says, “You will not be able to see Me, the embodiment of
concentrated cit , with your material eyes. Therefore, I
am granting you divyam (divine) eyes by which you will
see Me.” The purpose of the above statement is just to
astonish Arjuna who identifies himself as being an
ordinary mortal human being. But Arj una is a chief
associate of Śrī Bhagavān and only appears to be a
human, so his eyes are not actually material like those
of an ordinary human. Arjuna, who directly experiences
the mādhurya of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, will not be able to see His
aṁśa (the universal form) with those same eyes and,
therefore, he has to accept divine eyes. What kind of
logic is this? Some say that the supremely fortunate
eyes of an ananya-bhakta see the great sweetness, mahā-
mādhurya , of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s human-like pastimes and do not
see the ai śvarya feature of His divine pastimes. This
is compared to the tongue which is used to tasting miśri
(rock sugar) and does not appreciate the taste of guḍa
(gur , unproccessed sugar). Therefore, on the request of
Arjuna, and to give him the special, wondrous sight of
the aiśvarya feature of His divine form, Śrī Bhagavān
gives him divya-cakṣu , superhuman eyes appropriate for
savouring this particular loving exchange. Another
purpose in giving him divya-cakṣu will become clear at
the end of this chapter.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




Arjuna is a nitya-siddha parikara, an eternally perfect
associate of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. With eyes full of prema , he
always sees and relishes the ever-sweet form of Kṛṣṇa.
However, because he has a desire to see the universal
form, Bhaga vān’s giving him divya-cakṣu is discussed
herein. Transcendental eyes are superior to gross
material eyes. Yet, these divine eyes are quite
insignificant and inferior to the unalloyed loving eyes
of Arjuna. The viśvarūpa of Śrī Bhagavān cannot be seen
with gross material eyes; it can only be seen by divine
vision attained by His mercy. Still, the mādhurya of Śrī
Bhagavān is neither visible to ordinary eyes nor to

                           575
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

divine eyes.

Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa clarifies this point in his
commentary. “Śrī Kṛṣṇa gave Arjuna divine eyes which
were needed to see His divine viśvarūpa , but He did not
give him a corresponding divine mind. If He had given
him a divine mind, Arjuna would have developed interest
in actually relishing the viśvarūpa , but upon seeing
it, Arjuna became disinterested. This is evident in
Arjuna’s words after his astonishment upon seeing the
universal form. He prayed that Śrī Kṛṣṇa only show him
His natural, sac-cid-ānanda , two-handed form.” This
sentiment is also found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.7.34-37): ekadārbhakam ādāya

svāṅkam āropya bhāminī

prasnutaṁ pāyayām āsa

stanaṁ sneha-pariplutā


pīta-prāyasya jananī

sutasya rucira-smitam

mukhaṁ lālayatī rājan

jṛmbhato dadṛśe idam

khaṁ rodasī jyotir-anīkam āśāḥ

sūryendu-vahni-śvasanāmbudhīṁś ca

dvīpān nagāṁs tad-duhitṝr vanāni

bhūtāni yāni sthira-jaṅgamāni

sā vīkṣya viśvaṁ sahasā

rājan sañjāta-vepathuḥ

sammīlya mṛgaśāvākṣī

netre āsīt suvismitā


One day, Kṛṣṇa was on Yaśodā-maiyā’s lap. She was
breast-feeding Him and kissing His captivating cheeks
which were enhanced by His mild smile. The child then
yawned and showed Yaśodā-maiyā His universal form within
His mouth. The sudden sight of this universal form in
the mouth of her baby greatly astonished her. Her body
started to tremble and she closed her eyes. She thought,
‘Alas! What is this I have seen?’ Fearful that somebody
may have cast an evil-eye or spell on Kṛṣṇa, she called
the family priest and had him chant mantras for Kṛṣṇa’s
protection. She felt relief only after she had given
Kṛṣṇa a purifying bath.

In his commentary on this śloka, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
explains a deep secret. “How is it that Yaśodā-maiyā was
able to see the viśvarūpa of Kṛṣṇa if she didn’t have
divya-cakṣu ? For the nourishment of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes

                           576
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(līlā-puṣṭi ), the maidservant of Lakṣmi-devī (the
pleasure potency), is making Yaśodā’s love ever-new and
ever-fresh by allowing her to taste vismaya-rasa (the
nectar of astonishment) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s aiśvarya-śakti .”

The purport of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s
commentary on this Bhāgavatam story is as follows. “This
aiśvarya-śakti could not slacken the vātsalya-j ñ āna of
Yaśodā-maiyā. This śakti of Śrī Hari appeared in order
to test Prema devī, the goddess of love, but upon seeing
Prema devī’s immeasurable power, she accepted the
position as Prema devī’s servant. Here Yaśodā-maiyā’s
vātsalya-prema is Prema devī.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.8.32-39) describes the following
pastime:


ekadā krīḍamānās te

rāmādyā gopa-dārakāḥ

kṛṣṇo mṛdaṁ bhakṣitavān

iti mātre nyavedayan...

...etad vicitraṁ saha-jīva-kāla—

svabhāva-karmāśaya-linga-bhedam

sunos tanau vīkṣya vidāritāsye

vrajaṁ sahātmānam avāpa śankām


One day, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was playing at Brahmāṇḍa-ghaṭa with
Śrīdāma, Subala, Balarāma and some other cowherd boys.
Child Kṛṣṇa secretly ate some mud, but somehow the
cowherd boys saw Him doing this and complained to
Yaśodā-maiyā. Yaśodā-maiyā came running, and, catching
hold of Kṛṣṇa’s hand, she began to chastise Him.
Trembling with fear, Kṛṣṇa said, ‘Mother, I have not
eaten any mud. All these boys are liars. If you don’t
believe Me, then you can look in My mouth and see for
yourself.’ Saying this, Kṛṣṇa opened His mouth and
showed her the whole universe containing all moving and
non-moving entities, the sky, etc., as well as His own
dhāma.

Although the aiśvarya feature is not acknowledged in
mādhuryalīlā, it manifests itself at the appropriate
time. That is, although Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s aiśvarya remains
unmanifest in His mādhuryalīlā, mādhuryalīlā is not
devoid of it. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the fountainhead of all
aiśvarya and mādhurya . In some specific pastimes when
both are needed, the aiśvarya manifests itself. Being
inspired by the potency called satya-saṅkalpa (when
one’s words are always truthful), the aiśvarya-śakti
manifested and drowned Yaśodā-maiyā in vismaya-rasa by
showing her Kṛṣṇa’s viśvarūpa. This made her forget her
anger towards Him. In this way, the aiśvarya-śakti
rendered service to Prema devī. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is sporting as
a human boy and th erefore, for the nourishment of His
līlā and to increase the prema of His bhaktas , He

                           577
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

sometimes manifests His aiśvarya.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta describes how Advaita Ācārya
requested Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to show Him that
viśvarūpa which is described in Bhagavad-gītā. On His
request, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu showed Him all the
incidents that took place in the battle of Mahābhārata
along with His viśvarūpa . Seeing the viśvarūpa ,
Advaita Ācārya closed His eyes. Then Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, making that form unmanifest, showed His
natural form thereby restoring Advaita Ācārya to His
normal state.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “You
are My bhakta. With the eyes of unalloyed prema , you
can see My Kṛṣṇa svarūpa . My aiśvarya is related to the
phenomenal world, so it has no purpose for those with
eyes of unalloyed prema and it cannot be seen by them.
Gross material eyes also cannot behold My aiśvarya form.
But those eyes which are not filled with pure love,
having some relationship with this world, but at the
same time are not material, are called divya-cakṣu . I
am bestowing upon you divya-cakṣu by which you will be
able to see My aiśvarya form. Those who are endowed with
divine eyes and the ability to reason naturally become
attached to My aiśvarya-s varūpa which has a connection
with this cosmic world, unlike My transcendental Kṛṣṇa
svarūpa . This is because their eyes of unalloyed prema
remain closed.”




Śloka 9




sañjaya uvāca —

evam uktvā tato rājan

mahā-yogeśvaro hariḥ

darśayām āsa pārthāya

paramaṁ rūpam aiśvaram

sañjaya uvāca—Sañjaya said; rājan—O king; tataḥ—then;
uktvā—having spoken; evam —thus; mahā-yogeśvaraḥ—the
great Master of all mystic power; hariḥ—Śrī Hari;
darśayām āsa —displayed; pārthāya —to Pārtha; rūpam —His
form; paramam —of supreme; aiśvaram —opulence.

Sañjaya said: O King, after saying this, Mahā-yogeśvara
Śrī Hari revealed to Arjuna His supreme aiśvarya form.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti



                           578
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



After saying this, Śrī Bhagavān showed Arjuna His
viśvarūpa. Sañjaya is describing this su bject to the
blind king Dhṛtarāṣṭra in six ślokas , while saying that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not only great, but that He is the greatest
mystic, Yogeśvara. In order to show His universal form
to Arjuna, He has given him divine eyes, which means
that Arjuna is very dear to Him. The purport here is
that victory for Arjuna in this battle appears to be a
simple matter of course. Now there is no doubt that by
the mercy of Bhagavān, both material and spiritual
auspiciousness will come to Arjuna. By this, Sa ñjaya
also indica tes to Dhṛtarāṣṭra that his desire for his
sons’ victory has been completely thwarted.




Ślokas 10—11




aneka-vaktra-nayanam

anekādbhuta-darśanam

aneka-divyābharaṇaṁ

divyānekodyatāyudham

divya-mālyāmbara-dharaṁ

divya-gandhānulepanam

sarvāścarya-mayaṁ devam

anantaṁ viśvatomukham


(that form had) aneka—many; vaktra-nayanam—mouths and
eyes; aneka —many; adbhuta-darśanam —wonderful aspects;
aneka —many; divya-abharaṇam —divine ornaments; aneka —
many; divya —divine; udyata-ayudham —raised weapons;
dharam —it wore; divya-mālya —divine garlands; ambara —
and garments; (it was) anulepanam —smeared; divya-gandha
—with divine scents; (it was) aścarya-mayam —
astonishing; sarva —in every way; devam —brilliant;
anantam —limitless; (and had) mukham —faces; viśvataḥ—on
all sides.

Arjuna saw the viśvarūpa of Śrī Bhagavān, who possessed
unlimited mouths and eyes and all varieties of
astonishing features. Countless exquisite ornaments and
heavenly garlands bedecked that form, in whose hands
numerous celestial weapons were raised. He was dressed
in lavish garments, anointed with divine fragrances and
He was full of wonders, unlimited and resplendent, with
faces on all sides.




                           579
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Viśvatomukham means whose face is everywhere.




Śloka 12



divi sūrya-sahasrasya

bhaved yugapad utthitā

yadi bhāḥ sadṛśī sā syād

bhāsas tasya mahātmanaḥ

yadi—if; bhavet—there could be; sāḥ bhāḥ—the light;
sūrya-sahasrasya —of a thousand suns; utthitā—arising;
yugapat —simultaneously; divi —into the sky; sadṛśī—
such; syāt—would be; bhāsa ḥ—the splendour; tasya —of
that; mahā-ātmanaḥ—great personality.

If a thousand suns rose all at once in the sky, such
splendour might approach the effulgence of that Supreme
Person in His radiant universal form.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If the splendour of a thousand suns were to appear
simultaneously, then to some extent it could be compared
to the effulgence of this viśvarūpa puruṣa .




Śloka 13




tatraika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ

pravibhaktam anekadhā

apaśyad deva-devasya

śarīre pāṇḍavas tadā

tadā—at that time; pāṇḍavaḥ—the son of Pāṇḍu; apaśyat —

                           580
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

saw; tatra —there; kṛtsnam —the entire; jagat —universe;
pravibhaktam —divided; anekadhā—into many; eka-stham —in
one place; śarīre —within the body; deva-devasya —of the
God of gods.

At that time, Arjuna could see the totality of the
entire universe situated in one place in that gigantic
body of Viśvarūpa, the God of gods.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




On that very battlefield, Arjuna saw unlimited universes
in the body of deva-devasya, the God of gods. With their
various distinctive features, they were situated in one
part of His body, in every pore and in each belly. The
word anekadhā means that some of these forms were made
of earth, some were golden and some were made of gems.
Some were fifty yojanas in measurement (one yojana
equals eight miles), some a hundred, some lākhs of
yojanas and some were millions of yojanas in size.




Śloka 14



tataḥ sa vismayāviṣṭo

hṛṣṭa-romā dhanañjayaḥ

praṇamya śirasā devaṁ

kṛtāñjalir abhāṣata

tataḥ—then; saḥ dhanañjayaḥ—he, the winner of wealth,
Arjuna; vismaya-āviṣṭaḥ—(became) overwhelmed by wonder;
hṛṣṭa-romāḥ—his hairs stood erect; praṇamya—bowing down;
śirasā—his head; kṛta-añjaliḥ—and folding his hands;
abhāṣata —he addressed; devam —the Lord.

Struck by wonder, his hair standing on end, Arjuna bowed
his head to offer prāṇama and, with folded hands, he
spoke the following words to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the originator
of that universal form.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The universal form which Mahā-Yogeśvara Kṛṣṇa showed to
Arjuna was most astonishing, supremely resplendent,

                           581
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

wonderful to behold and decorated with various types of
celestial ornaments. It was unlimited and all-pervading.
In the body of the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna saw
the entire universe situated in one place and divided
into various forms. To remove Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s doubt that
Arjuna may have run away in fear after seeing that
terrifying form, Sa ñjaya said, “Arjuna is a great
bhakta who knows kṛṣṇatattva and is endowed with sattva-
guṇa. He did not become fearful upon seeing that
thousand-headed form of Kṛṣṇa, but instead experienced
adbhuta-rasa (astonishment). Arjuna was endowed with
natural fortitude, but because he was absorbed in
adbhuta-bhāva , he became ecstastic; his hairs stood on
end and his body trembled. Paying obeisances by bowing
his head and folding his hands, he began to speak.”

Arjuna’s eyes were not closed out of fear, but due to
his experiencing abdhuta-rasa. The viśvarūpa of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the viṣaya-ālambana (object) of this rasa , and
Arjuna is the āśraya-ālambana (receptacle). To see that
form again and again is an uddīpana (stimulus for
remembrance). Paying obeisances and folding his hands
are anubhāvas , and his hairs standing on end, etc., are
sāttvika-bhāvas. Agitation of mind, fortitude,
exhilaration and so forth are sañc ārī-bhāvas . Here the
sthāyī-bhāva is vismaya (wonder). All the above-
mentioned ingredients combined with Arjuna’s sthāyī-
bhāva to manifest vismaya-rasa . Regarding adbhuta-rasa
, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (4.2.1): ātmocitair vibhāvādyaiḥ

svādyatvaṁ bhakta-cetasi

sā vismaya-ratir nītād—

bhuto-bhakti-raso bhavet

When vismaya-rati becomes relishable within the heart of
a bhakta by mixing with the appropriate elements of
vibhāva and so forth, which are proper and favourable to
one’s own bhāva, it is called adbhuta-rasa.




Śloka 15




arjuna uvāca —

paśyāmi devāṁs tava deva dehe

sarvāṁs tathā bhūta-viśeṣa-saṅghān

brahmāṇam īśaṁ kamalāsana-stham

ṛṣīṁś ca sarvān uragāṁś ca divyān


arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; deva—O Lord; paśyāmi —I
perceive; tava dehe —within Your body; devān —the gods;

                           582
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

tathā—as well as; sarvān —all; saṅghān—the assemblies;
bhūta-viśeṣa —of different living beings; brahmāṇam —
Brahmā; (who is) kamala-āsana-stham —seated on the
lotus; īśam —Śiva; ṛṣīn —the sages; ca —and; sarvān —
all; divyān —divine; uragān —snakes.

Arjuna said: O My Lord, within Your divine body I see
the devatās and all the hosts of living beings. I see
Lord Brahmā upon his lotus-flower seat, Lord Śiva and
all the divine ṛṣis and serpents.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The phrase bhūta-viśeṣa-nāma means all those living
entities who are born from the womb, from eggs and from
perspiration. The word kamalāsana-stham means Lord
Brahmā, who is situated on the Sumeru mountain, which is
like the lotus-whorl of the unive rse.




Śloka 16




aneka-bāhūdara-vaktra-netraṁ

paśyāmi tvāṁ sarvato ‘nanta-rūpam

nāntaṁ na madhyaṁ na punas tavādiṁ

paśyāmi viśveśvara viśva-rūpa


viśveśvara—O Lord of the universe; viśva-rūpa—O form of
the universe; paśyāmi —I see; tvām —You; (with)
anantarūpam —Your limitless forms; (which have) aneka —
limitless; bāhu —arms; udara —bellies; vaktra —mouths;
(and) netram —eyes; sarvataḥ—on all sides; paśyāmi —I
see; na —no; antam —end; na —no; madhyam —middle; (and)
punaḥ—furthermore; na —no; ādim —beginning; tava —to
Your form.

O Viśveśvara, Lord of the universe! O Viśvarūpa! I see
Your innumerable forms with unlimited hands, bellies,
mouths and eyes on all sides. Moreover, I cannot see in
You any beginning, middle or end.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           583
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017


The word viśveśvara means the Primeval Person.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Arjuna says, “O Viśvarūpa! I see in Your body all-
pervading, unlimited forms with unlimited hands,
bellies, mouths and eyes, but I am unable to understand
Your body’s beginning, middle or end.”




Śloka 17



kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ cakriṇaṁ ca

tejo-rāśiṁ sarvato dīptimantam

paśyāmi tvāṁ durnirīkṣyaṁ samantād

dīptānalārka-dyutim aprameyam


paśyāmi—I see; tvām—You; (like an) aprameyam —
immeasurable; dīptimantam—brilliant; tejaḥ-rāśim —mass
of splendour; sarvataḥ—on every side; kirīṭinam—wearing
crowns; gadinam —bearing clubs; ca —and; cakriṇam —
discs; dur-nirīkṣyam —difficult to behold; dīpta —with a
blazing radiance; anala —like fire; (and) arka -dyutim —
an effulgence like the sun; samantāt —everywhere.

I see Your form as the supremely brilliant, all-
pervading abode of splendour, adorned with crowns and
bearing clubs and discs on all sides. It is very
difficult to look upon You in the blazing fire of Your
effulgence, which is radiating like the sun in all
directions.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After seeing the viśvarūpa, Arjuna says, “O Viśveśvara,
I am seeing Your bodily limbs, heads, crowns, clubs,
discs and so forth to be like the effulgence of millions
of suns. It is difficult for me to look at them. I am
see ing them on all sides and am unable to ascertain
their beginning or end.” If one asks how Arjuna was
easily able to see this form, the answer is that
Bhagavān mercifully gave him divya-cakṣu.

                           584
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 18




tvam akṣaraṁ paramaṁ veditavyaṁ

tvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānam

tvam avyayaḥ śāśvata-dharma-goptā

sanātanas tvaṁ puruṣo mato me


tvam—You (are); paramam—the supreme; akṣaram —brahma
(Viṣṇu); veditavyam —worthy to be known (by liberated
souls); tvam —You (are); param —the supreme; nidhānam —
resting place; asya —of this; viśvasya —universe; tvam —
You (are); avyayaḥ—the immutable; goptā—protector;
śāśvata-dharma —of eternal dharma ; tvam —You (are);
sanātanaḥ—the primeval; puruṣaḥ—person; (this is) me —
my; mataḥ—opinion.

You are parabrahma, the supreme knowable object for all
liberated persons. You are the supreme resting place of
this universe. You are inexhaustible, the protector of
sanātana-dharma and the primeval puruṣa. This is my
opinion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word veditavyam means worthy to be known by
liberated persons. Yad akṣaram means brahma-tattva , and
nidhānam means the place of dissolution.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Upon seeing the inconceivable aiśvarya form of Bhagavān,
Arjuna concluded that He is indeed the supreme object of
knowledge, akṣara-tattva (the imperishable reality), and
can be known only by transcendental knowledge. He is the
resting place of everyone, immutable, and the
imperishable person. He is also the source of eternal
dharma , and He is its protector.


sa kāraṇaṁ karaṇādhipādhipo

                           585
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


na cāsya kaścijanitā na cādhipaḥ


Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.9

The eternal, primeval person and cause of all causes, as
described in this mantra, is also Him.




Śloka 19




anādi-madhyāntam anantavīryam

ananta-bāhuṁ śaśi-sūrya-netram

paśyāmi tvāṁ dīpta-hutāśa-vaktraṁ

sva-tejasā viśvam idaṁ tapantam


tvām—You; (are) anādi-madhya-antam—without beginning,
middle or end; anantavīryam —having infinite prowess;
ananta-bāhum —infinite arms; śaśi-sūrya-netram—eyes like
the sun and moon; paśyāmi —I see; d īpta-hutāśa —the
blazing fire of the agni-hotra-yajña emanating from;
vaktram —Your mouths; idam —this; viśvam —universe;
tapantam —is scorched; sva-tejasā—by Your radiance.

You are without beginning, middle or end. You possess
infinite prowess, innumerable arms, and eyes like the
sun and the moon. I see fire blazing from Your mouths
and the whole universe being scorched by Your radiance.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Since Arjuna is absorbed in an ocean of great wonder,
repetition of this statement beginning with the word
anādi is not a defect. It is said that if one repeats a
subject twice or thrice inadvertently out of surprise or
happiness, it is not incorrect.




Śloka 20




dyāv ā-pṛthivyor idam antaraṁ hi

                            586
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


vyāptaṁ tvayaikena diśaś ca sarvāḥ

dṛṣṭvādbhutaṁ rūpam idaṁ tavograṁ

loka-trayaṁ pravyathitaṁ mahātman


tvayā—You; ekena—alone; vyāptam —pervade; sarvāḥ—all;
diśaḥ—directions; idam antaram —the space; dyau-
pṛthivyoḥ—between heaven and earth; ca —and; mahā-ātman
—O great personality; dṛṣṭvā—seeing; idam —this;
adbhutam —astonishing; ugram —terrible; rūpam —form;
tava —of Yours; loka-trayam —the three worlds;
pravyathitam —are very disturbed.

You alone pervade all the directions and all space
between earth and the heavens. O Mahātmā! Seeing this
wondrous and terrible form of Yours, all the inhabitants
of the three worlds are becoming afflicted with fear.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now in this śloka beginning with the word dyau and for
the next nine ślokas , Śrī Bhagavān is showing His kāla-
rūpa , the feature of all-devouring time, as part of
that universal form, because it has a purpose in the
present context.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After seeing that kāla-rūpa of Śrī Bhagavān, Arjuna
says, “O Sarvāśraya, resting place of everyone, You are
pervading the whole earth, the firmament, the sky and
all directions with Your viśvarūpa . By You alone, the
three worlds are pervaded. Upon seeing this most
wonderful divine form of Yours, the people of the three
worlds are disturbed and agitated in fear.”

This great battle of Kurukṣetra was also seen by devas
such as Brahmā, many asuras , the Pitṛs (forefathers),
Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Kinnaras and human beings.
All saw the battle according to their respective
temperaments such as friendship, enmity and
indifference, but only those who were bhaktas could see
the universal form, by Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, due to being given
divya-cakṣu .

It was not that only Arjuna saw the viśvarūpa with its
chariots, horses and so on like a person who sees his
own dream, but even personalities like Vyāsa, Sa ñjaya,
Gran dsire Bhīṣma and Brahmā witnessed this aiśvarya

                           587
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

form of Śrī Bhagavān. This is the meaning of this śloka
.




Śloka 21




amī hi tvāṁ sura-saṅghā viśanti

kecid bhītāḥ prāñjalayo gṛṇanti

svastīty uktvā maharṣi-siddha-saṅghāḥ

stuvanti tvāṁ stutibhiḥ puṣkalābhiḥ


hi—indeed; amī sura-saṅghāḥ—the assembly of gods;
viśanti —are entering; tvām —unto You; kecit —some;
bhītāḥ—out of fear; prāñjalayaḥ—with hands clasped;
uktvā iti —after first uttering; svasti —let there be
auspiciousness; gṛṇanti —they are offering prayers;
maharṣi-siddha-saṅghāḥ—the assembly of great sages and
siddhas ; stuvanti —are prasing; tvām —You; puṣkalābhiḥ—
with Vedic; stutibhiḥ—hymns.

The hosts of devas are taking Your shelter by entering
into You. Out of fear, some are eulogizing You with
folded hands. The great sages and siddhas are gazing
upon You while chanting auspicious Vedic hymns, offering
many prayers and praising You profusely.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word tvām means unto You.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Upon seeing the kāla-rūpa feature of the universal form,
Arjuna became absorbed in it and again began saying,
“All the devas on the battlefield are taking shelter of
You by entering into You. Some of them are ready to run
in fear but, unable to do so, are praying in a perplexed
mood with folded hands, ‘O Prabhu, please protect me!’
At the same time, the maharṣis and siddhas are seeing
the terrible result of the battle and saying, ‘Let there
be auspiciousness for the universe.’’’


                           588
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 22




rudrādityā vasavo ye ca sādhyā

viśve ‘śvinau marutaś coṣmapāś ca

gandharva-yakṣāsura-siddha-saṅghā

vīkṣante tvāṁ vismitāś caiva sarve


rudra—the Rudras; ādityāḥ—the Ādityas; ye vasavaḥ—the
Vasus; ca —and; sādhyāḥ—the Sādhyadevas; viśve —the
Viśvadevas; aśvinau —the two Aśvinīs; marutaḥ—the
Maruts; ca —and; uṣma-pāḥ—the forefathers; ca —and;
gandharva —the Gandharvas; yakṣa —Yakṣas; asura —Asuras;
ca —and; siddha-saṅghāḥ—the assembly of Siddhas;
vismitāḥ—in great wonder; sarve —all; vīkṣante eva —are
verily beholding; tvām —You.

The eleven Rudras, the twelve Ādityas, the eight Vasus,
the Sādhyadevas, the Viśvadevas, the two Aśvinī-kumāras,
the Maruts, Pitṛs, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Asuras and the
Siddhas are all beholding You with wonder.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those who accept offerings of hot food items are known
as uṣma-pāḥ. In the śruti also it is stated: uṣma bhāgā
hi pitaraḥ. “The portion given to the Pitṛs is uṣma
(hot).”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Not only Arjuna but also the Rudras, the twelve Ādityas,
the eight Vasus, the Sādhyas, the Viśvadevas, the two
Aśvinī-kumāras, the Maruts, the Pitṛs headed by Uṣmapā,
the Gandharvas such as Citraratha, the Yakṣas such as
Kuvera, the Daityas such as Virocana, and the Siddhas
(perfected beings) such as Kapila, all are looking at
the majestic form of Śrī Bhagavān wit h amazement. Here
the word uṣma-pāḥ means the forefathers who accept
offerings of hot food.



                           589
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 23




rūpaṁ mahat te bahu-vaktra-netraṁ

mahā-bāho bahu-bāhūru-pādam

bahūdaraṁ bahu-daṁṣṭrā-karālaṁ

dṛṣṭvā lokāḥ pravyathitās tathāham


mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; dṛṣṭvā—seeing; te —Your;
mahat —gigantic; rūpam —form; (with its) bahu—many;
vaktra —faces; (and) netram —eyes; bahu —many; bāhu —
arms; uru —thighs; pādam —and feet; bahu —many; udaram —
bellies; bahu —many; karālam —terrible; daṁṣṭrā—teeth;
lokāḥ—the people; pravyathitāḥ—are very fearful; tathā—
as also; aham —I (am).

O Mahā-bāho, on seeing Your gigantic form with its
unlimited mouths, countless eyes, innumerable arms,
thighs, feet, bellies and many fearsome teeth, everyone,
including me, is becoming terrified.




Śloka 24




nabhaḥ-spṛśaṁ dīptam aneka-varṇaṁ

vyāttānanaṁ dīpta-viśāla-netram

dṛṣṭvā hi tvāṁ pravyathitāntar-ātmā

dhṛtiṁ na vindāmi śamaṁ ca viṣṇo


viṣṇo—O Lord Viṣṇu; dṛṣṭvā—seeing; tvām—Your form;
(which is) dīptam —blazing; (and) aneka-varṇam —multi-
coloured; nabhaḥ-spṛśam —pervading the sky; vyātta-
ānanam —with wide-open mouths; dīpta-viśāla-netram —with
fiery vast eyes; antar-ātmā—my mind; pravyathita —is
very disturbed; hi —indeed; na vindāmi —I do not find;
dhṛtim —steadiness; ca —or; śamam —peace.

O Viṣṇu! Seeing Your blazing, multi-coloured form
pervade the sky with Your great fiery eyes and vast,
wide-open mouths, my mind is overpowered by fear and I
am not feeling steady or at peace.




                           590
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word śamam means peace.




Śloka 25




daṁṣṭrā-karālāni ca te mukhāni

dṛṣṭvaiva kālānala-sannibhāni

diśo na jāne na labhe ca śarma

prasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa


dṛṣṭvā—seeing; te—Your; daṁṣṭrā-karālāni —fearsome
teeth; ca —and; mukhāni —mouths; eva —indeed; sannibhāni
—resembling; anala —the fire; kāla —of annihilating
time; na jāne —I am unable to ascertain; diśaḥ—the four
directions; ca —and; na labhe —I do not obtain; śarma —
happiness; deva-īśa —O Lord of the gods; jagat-nivāsa —O
shelter of the universe; prasīda —be pleased.

Seeing all those dreadful mouths, full of fearsome teeth
and blazing like the fire of annihilation, I am unable
to ascertain where the four directions are, or feel any
kind of happiness. O Lord of the devas! O shelter of the
universe! Kindly be merciful to me.




Ślokas 26—27




amī ca tvāṁ dhṛtarāṣṭrasya putrāḥ

sarve sahaivāvani-pāla-saṅghaiḥ

bhīṣmo droṇaḥ sūta-putras tathāsau

sahāsmadīyair api yodha-mukhyaiḥ

vaktrāṇi te tvaramāṇā viśanti

daṁṣṭrā-karālāni bhayānakāni

kecid vilagnā daśanāntareṣu

sandṛśyante cūrṇitair uttamāṅgaiḥ

                           591
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



ca—and; eva—indeed; sarve —all; amī—these; putrāḥ—sons;
dhṛtarāṣṭrasya —of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; saha —together; avani-
pāla-saṅghaiḥ—with the assembly of kings; bhīṣmaḥ—
Bhīṣma; droṇaḥ—Droṇācārya; asau —that; sūta-putraḥ—
charioteer’s son, Karṇa; tathā—and also; api —indeed;
saha —together; asmadīyaiḥ—with our; yodha-mukhyaiḥ—
chief soldiers; te —they; viśanti —are entering;
tvaramāṇāḥ—speedily; tvām —Your; vaktrāṇi —mouths;
bhayānakāni —which are filled with fearful; daṁṣṭrā-
karālāni —frightful teeth; kecit —some; s andṛśyante—are
seen; vilagnāḥ—stuck; daśana-antareṣu —between the
teeth; uttama-aṅgaiḥ—with their heads; cūrṇitaiḥ—
crushed.

All the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra along with their allied host
of kings, Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Karṇa, as well as the leading
warriors on our side, are rushing towards you with great
speed and entering Your cave-like mouths which are
filled with frightful teeth. Some are also trapped
there, with their heads crushed between those teeth.




Śloka 28




yathā nadīnāṁ bahavo ‘mbu-vegāḥ

samudram evābhimukhā dravanti

tathā tavāmī nara-loka-vīrā

viśanti vaktrāṇy abhivijvalanti


eva—indeed; (just) yathā—as; amī—these; vīrā—heroes;
nara-loka —of human society; viśanti —enter; tava —Your;
abhivijvalanti —blazing; vaktrāṇi —mouths; tathā—
similarly; bahavaḥ—the many; ambu-vegāḥ—waves; nadīnām —
of rivers; dravanti —impetuously rush; abhimukhāḥ—
towards; samudram —the ocean.

All these great heroes are entering Your blazing mouths,
just as the waves of a river rush impetuously towards
the ocean.




Śloka 29




yathā pradīptaṁ jvalanaṁ pataṅgā

viśanti nāśāya samṛddha-vegāḥ

                           592
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


tathaiva nāśāya viśanti lokās

tavāpi vaktrāṇi samṛddha-vegāḥ


yathā—as; pataṅgāḥ—moths; samṛddha-vegāḥ—with great
speed; viśanti —enter; pradīptam —a blazing; jvalanam —
fire; nāśāya —for destruction; ta thā—similarly; eva —
indeed; lokāḥ—these people; api —also; samṛddha-vegāḥ—
with great speed; viśanti —enter; tava —Your; vaktrāṇi —
mouths; nāśāya —to their destruction.

As moths rush into a blazing fire and perish, so too are
these warriors entering Your mouths with great speed,
only to die.




Śloka 30




lelihyase grasamānaḥ samantāl

lokān samagrān vadanair jvaladbhiḥ

tejobhir āpūrya jagat samagraṁ

bhāsas tavogrāḥ pratapanti viṣṇo


viṣṇo—O Viṣṇu; lelihyase—You lick (them with fiery
tongues); samagrān —all; l okān —people; samantāt —from
all sides; grasamānaḥ—devouring (them); jvaladbhiḥ—with
blazing; vadanaiḥ—mouths; pratapanti —scorching (the
universe); samagram —the entire; jagat —universe; āpūrya
—filled; tejobhiḥ—with the rays; (of) tava —Your; ugrāḥ—
terrible; bh āsaḥ—light.

O Viṣṇu, with Your fiery tongues You are licking up the
hosts of living beings on all sides and devouring them
with Your blazing mouths. You are scorching the entire
universe with the fierce, all-pervading rays of Your
effulgence.




Śloka 31




ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo

namo ‘stu te deva-vara prasīda

vijñātum icchāmi bhavantam ādyaṁ


                           593
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

na hi prajānāmi tava pravṛttim


deva-vara—O best of gods; astu namaḥ—let my obeisances
be; te —unto You; prasīda —be gracious (to me); icchāmi
—I wish; (You to) ākhyāhi —tell; me —me; kaḥ—who; (are)
bhavān —You (are); (this) ugra-rūpaḥ—fierce form of the
Lord; vijñ ātum —to understand; bhavantam —Your honour;
(who are) ādyam —the primeval cause; hi —indeed; na
prajānāmi —I do not understand; tava —Your; pravṛttim —
activities.

O Deva-vara, best among gods, I offer my obeisances unto
You. Kindly be gracious to me and tell me who You are in
this ferocious form. I very much want to know You, the
primeval cause, because I do not comprehend Your
activities.




Śloka 32




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

kālo ‘smi loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho

lokān samāhartum iha pravṛttaḥ

ṛte ‘pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣyanti sarve

ye ‘vasthitāḥ pratyanīkeṣu yodhāḥ


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord said; asmi—I am;
pravṛddhaḥ—mighty; kālaḥ—time; loka-kṣaya-kṛt —destroyer
of the worlds; pravṛttaḥ—engaged; samāhartum—to destroy;
lokān —the people; iha —in this world; api —even; ṛte —
without; tvām —you; sarve —all; yodhāḥ—the soldiers; ye
—who; avasthitāḥ—are present; pratyanīkeṣu —in either
army; na bhaviṣyanti —shall not remain.

Śrī Bhagavān said: I am time, the mighty destroyer of
the world, and I am here to annihilate all these people.
Even without your efforts, not one warrior in either
army will survive.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān   tells Arjuna, “I am all-destroying time and
at present I   have accepted this gigantic form. I am
present here   to annihilate Duryodhana and others. The
result of My   mission will be that, except for you five
Pāṇḍavas, no   one on this battlefield will remain alive.

                            594
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Even without your endeavour or the efforts of other
warriors like you, all will be devoured within the jaws
of terrible time, because in My form as time I have
already taken their lives. Those heroes who are present
on both sides will definitely enter the mouth of death,
even without doing battle. Therefore, O Arjuna, if you
remain aloof from the battle, you will fall down from
your status as a kṣatriya because you have neglected
your svadharma , and still they will not be saved.”




Śloka 33



tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha yaśo labhasva

jitvā śatrūn bhuṅkṣva rājyaṁ samṛddham

mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvam eva

nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin


tasmāt—therefore; tvam—you; uttiṣṭha —arise; (and)
labhasva —attain; yaśaḥ—fame; jitvā—by conquering;
(your) śatrūn —enemies; (and) bhuṅkṣva —enjoy; samṛddham
—a prosperous; rājyam —kingdom; eva —indeed; ete —these
(soldiers); pūrvam —already; nihatāḥ—are slain; mayā—by
Me; savya-sācin —O expert bowman; bhava —just be; eva
nimitta-mātram —but an instrument.

Rise up, therefore, to enter the battle and achieve
glory by conquering your enemies, and thereby enjoy an
unrivalled kingdom. All these warriors are already slain
by Me alone. O Savyasācī, expert bow-man, just become My
instrument.




Śloka 34




droṇaṁ ca bhīṣmaṁ ca jayadrathaṁ ca

karṇaṁ tathānyān api yodha-vīrān

mayā hatāṁs tvaṁ jahi mā vyathiṣṭhā

yudhyasva jetāsi raṇe sapatnān


droṇam—Droṇa; ca—and; bhīṣmam —Bhīṣma; ca —and; jaya-
dratham —Jayadratha; ca —and; karṇam —Karṇa; tathā—also;
anyān —other; yodha-vīrān —heroes among the fighters;
api —although; (they are) hatān —already slain; mayā—by
Me; jahi—you must slay (them); tvam —you; mā vyathiṣṭhāḥ

                           595
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

—should not be disturbed; yudhyasva —just fight; jetāsi
—you shall vanquish; (your) sapatnān —enemies; raṇe—on
the battlefield.

Droṇa, Bhīṣma, Jayadratha, Karṇa and many other great
heroes have already been destroyed by Me, so simply kill
them and do not be disturbed. Your victory in battle is
assured; therefore fight.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




There is a hidden meaning to the statement, “I have
already killed Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Jayadratha, Karṇa and
others.” Bhagavān is saying that when all the warriors
on the side of the Kauravas were publicly insulting
Draupadī by disrobing her, at that time they were all
killed by Him because of their heinous Vaiṣṇava aparādha
. “Just to give you fame, I have made these people stand
before you like statues. It is as if they are lifeless.
Just be the instrument in killing them.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa had already taken the life force from all the
heroes who were participating in the battle of
Mahābhārata. Similarly, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , Bhīṣma
prayed as follows:


sapadi sakhi-vaco niśamya madhye

nija-parayor balayo rathaṁ niveśya

sthitavati para-sainikāyur akṣṇā

hṛtavati pārtha-sakhe ratir mamāstu


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.9.35

Let my supreme attachment be to that Pārtha-sakhā, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who, upon hearing the request of his friend
Arjuna to situate his chariot in the centre of both
armies, immediately brought the chariot to that spot. On
the pretext of pointing out Droṇa, Bhīṣma and so on, He
took away the life of the warriors in the opposing party
with His glance.




Śloka 35




sañjaya uvāca —

etac chrutvā vacanaṁ keśavasya

                           596
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


kṛtāñjalir vepamānaḥ kirīṭī

namaskṛtvā bhūya evāha kṛṣṇaṁ

sa-gadgadaṁ bhīta-bhītaḥ praṇamya


sañjaya uvāca—Sañjaya said; śrutvā—hearing; etat —this;
vacanam —statement; keśavasya —of Śrī Keśava; kirīṭī—
Arjuna; kṛta-añjaliḥ—with folded hands; vepamānaḥ—
trembling; namaskṛtvā—bowed down; bhūyaḥ—repeatedly; eva
—indeed; praṇamya —with a bowed head; bhīta-bhītaḥ—very
fearfully; āha—he addressed; kṛṣṇam —Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sa-
gadgadam—with a choked voice.

Sañjaya said to Dhṛtarāṣṭra: Upon hearing these words of
Śrī Keśava, Arjuna, trembling, offered repeated
obeisances with folded hands and, being extremely
frightened, began speaking to Kṛṣṇa in a faltering voice
as follows.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After hearing this dialogue between Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna
from the mouth of Sañjaya, Dhṛtarāṣṭra Mahārāja
undoubtedly understood that the great unconquerable
fighters headed by Bhīṣm a and Droṇa would also be
killed and that there was no possibility of Duryodhana’s
victory. The idea that they should try for a truce in
such a situation came to his mind, but he didn’t express
this externally.

The wise Sañjaya could understand his mind and
immediately began to describe what happened next. On the
side of the Pāṇḍavas, Arjuna trembled upon hearing the
words of Kṛṣṇa. Paying obeisances again and again, with
a disturbed mind and a faltering voice, he offered his
supplication at the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān.




Śloka 36




arjuna uvāca —

sthāne hṛṣīkeśa tava prakīrtyā

jagat prahṛṣyaty anurajyate ca

rakṣāṁsi bhītāni diśo dravanti

sarve namasyanti ca siddha-saṅghāḥ

                           597
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; sthāne—rightly; hṛṣīka-īśa —O
Lord of the senses; jagat —the world; prahṛṣyati —
rejoices; ca —and; anurajyate —becomes attached; tava
prakīrtyāḥ—to Your glorification; bhītāni —the fearful;
rakṣāṁsi —fiends; dravanti —flee; diśaḥ—to all
directions; ca —and; siddha-saṅghāḥ—the assembly of
perfected beings; sarve —all; namasyanti —bow down.

Arjuna said: O Hṛṣīkeśa! Everyone in the universe is
becoming joyful and attached to You on hearing the
glorification of Your name, form and qualities. The
rākṣasas are scattering out of fear, while the hosts of
siddhas are offering their obeisances unto You. All this
is, indeed, most appropriate.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna knows the following tattva: The śrī vigraha of
Bhagavān is pleased with those who are devoted to Him,
whereas He displays His dreadful feature to those who
are averse to Him. Arjuna explains this while offering
prayers to Śrī Bhagavān. The word sthāne is indeclinable
and it means yukta or appropriate. It is used in all
components of this śloka . Arjuna has addressed Kṛṣṇa as
Hṛṣīkeśa, meaning one who turns the senses of His
bhaktas towards Himself, and the senses of His non-
devotees away. “This entire world is being attracted to
You by the saṅkīrtana of Your glories. This is
appropriate because this world is devoted to You.
Rākṣasas , asuras , dānavas , piśācas , etc., are
running in all directions out of fear. This is also
appropriate because they are averse to You. Hosts of
beings, who have become perfect by practising bhakti to
You, are paying obeisances to You. This is also
appropriate because they are Your bhaktas .” This śloka
is famous in mantra-śāstra as the rākṣoghṇa-mantra (a
mantra to destroy rākṣasas ).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The transcendental influence of Śrī Bhagavān’s form is
such that bhaktas become joyful upon seeing it. But to
those who are āsurik a by nature and who are not devoted
to Him, this form appears like Yamarāja, the lord of
death. In the wrestling arena of Mathurā, worshipable
elders like Nanda Mahārāja, friends and the Yādavas were
very pleased to see the beautiful nava-kiśora , Śrī
Kṛṣṇa , but He appeared as death personified to Kaṁsa,
as hard as a thunderbolt to the wrestlers, as the
enforcer of chastisement to the wicked kings, and as

                           598
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

para-tattva (Paramātmā) to the yogīs . Therefore, upon
hearing the glories of Kṛṣṇa, devoted jīvas feel joy and
become attached to Him. The siddhas become surrendered
to Him, while the asuras and rākṣasas who are averse to
Him run in fear. These reactions are appropriate for
each of them.




Śloka 37




kasmāc ca te na nameran mahātman

garīyase brahmaṇo ‘py ādi-kartre

ananta deveśa jagan-nivāsa

tvam akṣaraṁ sad-asat tat paraṁ yat


mahātman—O great person; deva-īśa—Lord of the gods;
ananta —O unlimited person; ca —and; jagat-nivāsa —O
refuge of the universe; garīyase —who are greater; api —
even; brahmaṇaḥ—than Brahmā; ādi-kartre —and who are the
original creator; tvam —You (are); akṣaram —the
imperishable (reality); tat —that; yat —which (is);
param —transcendental; sat-asat —to cause and effect;
kasmāt —why; na nameran —should they not offer
obeisances; te —to You.

O Mahātmā! O Lord of the devas! O Ananta! O refuge of
the world! You are greater even than Brahmā. You are the
original creator and You are brahma, the imperishable
reality beyond both cause and effect. Why then, would
they not offer obeisances to You?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna said, “Why will they not offer obeisances and bow
down to You? Certainly they will.” Here, the word sat
means effect, and asat means the cause, thus, “That
person who is superior to and beyond both sat and asat
is You, the imperishable (akṣara ) brahma .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the previous śloka, Arjuna explained that Śrī

                             599
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhagavān is worshipable for Brahmā, etc. In this śloka ,
he establishes that Śrī Bhagavān is the soul of
everyone. “Devas , ṛṣis , Gandharvas and other beings
like them will indeed pay obeisances to You. They cannot
exist without doing so because You are one without a
second, inconceivable, and endowed with wonderful
potencies. You are the Supreme Person, superior to
everyone. You are the original creator of Lord Br ahmā,
who is the creator of the universe. Therefore, You are
even superior to Brahmā.”

Arjuna also said, “Only Śrī Bhagavān is worshipable for
all, but not only that but since He is the soul of
everyone, He is everything.” He is superior to and
distinct fr om the imperishable brahma-tattva , jīva-
tattva and prakṛti-tattva . Although He is different
from all these tattvas , they manifest from His acintya-
śakti. Therefore, He also exists as everything. Not
everything is Śrī Bhagavān, nor is anything equal to
Him. Everything is the effect or result of His śakti .
From this point of view, He alone is everything, because
no other object or reality exists independent of Him.
Thus, He is called the unparalleled parama-tattva. The
śrutis state, sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma. “Indeed,
everything is brahma” (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 3.14.1). They
also state, neha nānāsti ki ñcana (Bṛhad-āraṇyaka
Upaniṣad 4.4.19) and (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.1.11). Here it is
said that everything such as the jīva and the inert
world is brahma . There is nothing except brahma .

In contrast to this, śruti states:


nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān


. Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13 ,

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.13

Parabrahma is the prime eternal among all eternal beings
and the prime conscious entity among all conscious
beings.

According to this śloka, the jīvas are eternal,
conscious and unlimited in number but parabrahma is the
one and only supreme eternal and the supreme conscious
being. Subsequently, the only verdict of the Vedas is
the principle of acintya-bhedābheda , the purest of all
tattvas .




Śloka 38



tvam ādi-devaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇas

tvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānam

                             600
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


vettāsi vedyaṁ ca paraṁ ca dhāma

tvayā tataṁ viśvam anantarūpa


tvam—You (are); ādi-devaḥ—the original God; tvam —You
(are); purāṇaḥ—the primeval; puruṣaḥ—personality; param
nidhānam —the sole resting place; asya —of this;
viśvasya —universe; param —the supreme; dhāma —abode; ca
—and; asi —You are; vettā—the knower; (and) vedyam —that
which is worthy of being known; anantarūpa —O You who
have unlimited forms; tvayā—by You; viśvam —the
universe; tatam —is pervaded.

You are the original Lord, the primeval person and the
sole resting place of this universe. You are the supreme
abode, the knower of everything and all that is to be
known. O Anantarūpa, possessor of unlimited forms, You
alone pervade the entire universe.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Nidhānam means resting place or place of dissolution,
and paraṁ dhāma refers to that svarūpa which is beyond
the guṇas .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original God. He is the supreme refuge
of everyone and He is all-pervading. Because His dhāma
is a manifestation of His parā-śakti (transcendental
energy), He is non-different from His abode according to
the principle of śakt i-śaktimān abheda . This is
established in Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.7): tam
īśvarāṇāṁ paramaṁ maheśvaraṁ

taṁ devatānāṁ paramaṁ ca daivatam

patiṁ patīnāṁ paramaṁ parastād

vidāma devaṁ bhuvaneśam īḍyam


We know our worshipable God, who is the master of the
worlds, to be the supreme amongst all controllers, the
supreme God of gods, and the supreme protector of those
who can award protection. He is transcendental to
impersonal brahma.

And furthermore, Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8) states:


                           601
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca


The Lord has no duty to perform nor is anyone seen to be
equal to or greater than Him. From realised souls we
hear that the Supreme Lord’s energy acts in manifold
ways to make everything in His creation function
systematically, as if it takes place automatically.




Śloka 39




vāyur yamo ‘gnir varuṇaḥ śaśāṅkaḥ

prajāpatis tvaṁ prapitāmahaś ca

namo namas te ‘stu sahasra-kṛtvaḥ

punaś ca bhūyo ‘pi namo namas te


tvam—You (are); vāyuḥ—the wind-god; yamaḥ—the god of
chastisement; agniḥ—the fire-god; varuṇaḥ—the ocean-god;
śaśa-aṅkaḥ—the moon-god; prajā-patiḥ—the progenitor
Brahmā; ca —and; pra-pitā-mahaḥ—the father of the gran
dfather Brahmā; astu —let there be; namaḥ namaḥ—repeated
obeisances; te —to You; sahasra-kṛtvaḥ—a thousand times;
ca —and; punaḥ—again; api —and still; bhūyaḥ—further;
namaḥ namaḥ—repeated obeisances; te —unto You.

You are the wind-god Vāyu and Yama, the superintendent
of death. You are the fire-god Agni, the ocean-god
Varuṇa, the moon-god Candra, the creator Brahmā, and
also the father of Brahmā. Therefore, I offer my
obeisances to You thousands of times, again and again.




Śloka 40



namaḥ purastād atha pṛṣṭhatas te

namo ‘stu te sarvata eva sarva

anantavīryāmita-vikramas tvaṁ

sarvaṁ samāpnoṣi tato ‘si sarvaḥ

                           602
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



sarva—O original form of everything; astu—let there be;
namaḥ—obeisances; te —to You; purastāt —from the front;
atha —and then; pṛṣṭhataḥ—from behind; namaḥ—obeisances;
te —to You; sarvataḥ—from all sides; eva —indeed; amita-
vikramaḥ—You possess limitless prowess; anantavīrya —and
limitless valour; tvam —You; samāpnoṣi —pervade; sarvam
—everything; tataḥ—hence; asi —You are; sarvaḥ—
everything.

O Sarva-svarūpa! My obeisances to You from the front,
behind and from all sides! Possessing infinite prowess
and valour, You pervade the entire universe. Therefore,
You are everything.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Just as gold is present in all golden ornaments, such
as armour and earrings, You pervade this world which is
Your effect, and thus You are sarva (everything).”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Upon understanding that Kṛṣṇa is everyone’s worshipable
object, Arjuna paid his obeisances again and again to He
who embodies everything. Out of deep faith and honour,
not considering these praṇāmas enough, he bowed down to
Kṛṣṇa who has unlimited prowess (anantavīrya ) and
immeasurable strength (aparimeya-śakti ), who is
sarvātmā, the soul of souls, and sarva-svarūpa , the
form of everything (front, back, left, right and all
directions). This is also seen in the statement of
Śukadeva Gosvāmī in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.56):
vastuto jānatām atra kṛṣṇaṁ sthāsnu cariṣṇu ca

bhagavad-rūpam akhilaṁ

nānyad vastv iha kiñcana

Those in this world who understand Śrī Kṛṣṇa as He is,
perceive all things, either moving or non-moving, to be
His manifestations. Such liberated souls see no other
reality.




Ślokas 41—42



                           603
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



sakheti matvā prasabhaṁ yad uktaṁ

he kṛṣṇa he yādava he sakheti

ajānatā mahimānaṁ tavedaṁ

mayā pramādāt praṇayena vāpi

yac cāvahāsārtham asat-kṛto ‘si

vihāra-śayyāsana-bhojaneṣu

eko ‘tha vāpy acyuta tat-samakṣaṁ

tat kṣāmaye tvām aham aprameyam


ajānatā—because of not knowing; idam—these; mahimānam —
glories; tava —of Yours; pramādāt —out of carelessness;
va api —or else perhaps; praṇayena —out of affection;
matvā—thinking (of You); iti —as; sakhā—a friend; yat —
what; uktam —was said; mayā—by me; prasabham —rashly;
iti —thus; he kṛṣṇa —O Kṛṣṇa; he yādava —O Yādava; he s
akhā—O friend; avahāsa-artham —with the purpose of
jesting; yat —by which; asi —You were; asat-kṛtaḥ—
dishonoured; ca vihāra-śayyā-āsana-bhojaneṣu —while
sporting, relaxing, sitting and taking food; ekaḥ—alone;
athavā—or; api —also; acyuta —O Acyuta! tat-samakṣam—in
the presence of relatives; tat —for that; tvām —from
You; aprameyam —O immeasurable one; aham kṣāmaye —I
request forgiveness.

Not knowing Your glories, and either because I was
careless, or affectionately considering You as my
friend, I have rashly addressed You, “O Kṛṣṇa! O Yādava!
O Friend! O Acyuta!” If in jesting I have shown You
disrespect, either alone with You or in the presence of
relatives, while sporting, relaxing, sitting or taking
food, I humbly entreat You, O Aprameya, Lord of
boundless glories, to please forgive me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Alas! Alas! I have committed unlimited offenses to You,
the possessor of supreme aiśvarya.” Lamenting like this
Arjuna spoke this śloka beginning with the word sakheti
. Arjuna says, “He Kṛṣṇa” and so forth, meaning ‘You,
Kṛṣṇa, are famous as the son of Vasudeva, a human being
who is not famous and who is even known as an
arddharathī (one who needs assistance to defeat a single
opponent). But I, Arjuna, am an atirathī (one who can
fight alone against unlimited warri ors), and I am
popular as the son of King Pāṇḍu.’ He Yādava means, “You
were born in the Yadu dynasty and have no kingdom,
whereas I was born in the dynasty of Puru and am
therefore of royal lineage. Yet the friendly

                             604
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

relationship I have with You is not bec ause of Your
ancestors or the influence of a dynasty, but because of
You. It was with friendly intentions that I rashly spoke
insulting words. For that reason, I am begging Your
forgiveness.” These words are related to the following
statement.

“Due to madness, the affection I expressed while
sporting and joking with You insulted the glory of Your
universal form. In other words, either alone or in the
presence of friends, I have insulted You with sarcastic
words such as satyavādi ,You are truthful, niṣkapaṭa ,
You are free from cheating, and parama-sarala , You are
very simple. I beg Your forgiveness for thousands of
such offenses. O Prabhu! Please forgive me. I implore
You!”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Upon seeing the supremely majestic viśvarūpa of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, which is a manifestation of His vibhūti , Arjuna
forgot his natural friendly relationship in sakhya-rasa
, as aiśvarya-j ñ āna arose within him. He is lamenting
for all the times he addressed Kṛṣṇa in sakhya-bhāva “He
Sakhā! He Yādava! He Kṛṣṇa!” and is begging His
forgiveness again and again.




Śloka 43




pitāsi lokasya carācarasya

tvam asya pūjyaś ca gurur garīyān

na tvat-samo ‘sty abhyadhikaḥ kuto ‘nyo

loka-traye ‘py apratima-prabhāva


apratima-prabhāva—O possessor of unrivalled power; asi—
You are; pitā—the father; lokasya —of this world; cara-
acarasya —of moving and non-moving beings; tvam—You;
pūjyaḥ—are worshipable; ca —and; guruḥ—the spiritual
guide; garīyān —the greatest respectable person; asya —
of this world; na asti —there is no one; tvat-samaḥ—
equal to You; api loka-traye —even within these three
worlds; kutaḥ—where is; anyaḥ—another; (who is)
abhyadhikaḥ—greater.

O possessor of unrivalled power! You are the father, the
most worshipable, the guru and the most honoured person
in this entire world of moving and non-moving beings. No

                             605
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

one in the three worlds is Your equal, so who could
possibly be greater than You?




Śloka 44




tasmāt praṇamya praṇidhāya kāyaṁ

prasādaye tvām aham īśam īḍyam

piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuḥ

priyaḥ priyāyārhasi deva soḍhum


tasmāt—thus; praṇamya—offering obeisances; praṇidhāya —
prostrating; kāyam —my body; aham prasādaye —I plead for
grace; tvām—from You; īḍyam —the adorable; īśam —Lord;
iva —as; pitā—a father; putrasya —with his son; iva —as;
sakhā—a friend; sakhyuḥ—with his friend; priyaḥ—as a
lover; priyāyā—with his beloved; deva —O Lord; arhasi —
You ought; soḍhum —to forgive (me).

Thus, I offer my prostrated obeisances at Your lotus
feet. O adorable Parameśvara, I entreat You to be
gracious to me. O Deva, just as a father forgives his
son, a friend tolerates a friend or a lover excuses his
beloved, please forgive all my offenses.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The phrase kāyaṁ praṇidhāya means falling to the ground
like a stick.




Śloka 45




adṛṣṭa-pūrvaṁ hṛṣito ‘smi dṛṣṭvā

bhayena ca pravyathitaṁ mano me

tad eva me darśaya deva rūpaṁ

prasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa



                           606
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

deva—O Lord; dṛṣṭvā—having seen; adṛṣṭa-pūrvam —that
which has not been seen before; asmi —I; hṛṣitaḥ—am
overjoyed; ca—but; me —my; manaḥ—mind; pravyathitam —is
extremely perturbed; bhayena —by fear; eva darśaya —just
show; me —me; tat —that (familiar); rūpam —form; deva-
īśa —O Lord of the gods; jagan-nivāsa —O abode of the
universe; prasīda —please be gracious.

O Deva! Having seen this viśvarūpa of Yours which was
never seen before, I am overjoyed, but my mind is also
very much perturbed due to fear. O Deveśa, God of gods!
Please again show me Your four-handed form. O Jagan-
nivāsa, refuge of the entire universe, please be
gracious to me!




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Arjuna says, “Upon seeing this viśvarūpa which has never
been seen before, I feel jubilant. At the same time, my
mind is agitated with fear because of its terrible
features. Therefore, please show me that form of Yours
as Vasudeva-nandana, which is the pinnacle of sweetness
and millions of times more dear to me than my own life.
Please be gracious to me. I have seen enough of Your
aiśvarya . I acknowledge that You alone are Deveśa, the
God of all gods, the controller of all devas , and
Jagan-nivāsa, the abode of the whole universe.” When
Arjuna saw the universal form, he was unable to see
Kṛṣṇa’s original human form, because it was covered by
yogamāyā, even though Kṛṣṇa remained present before him.
This is understood here.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Kṛṣṇa is asamorddhva-tattva: nobody is equal to or
greater than Him. In this regard Bhagavān Himself says:


mamāham evābhirūpaḥ kaivalyād


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 5.3.17

I am advitiya-puruṣa, one without a second. Only I am
equal to Myself. There is no one who is equal to Me,
what to speak of being greater than Me.

It is also said in Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8):


na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate


                           607
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


The Lord has no duty to perform. A person who is equal
to Him or greater than Him is not to be seen.

In Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhyalīlā 20.152) it is said:


kṛṣṇera svarūpa-vicāra śuna, sanātana

advaya-jñāna-tattva, vraje vrajendra-nandana


O Sanātana, please hear about Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
svarūpa. Although He is the Absolute Truth devoid of
duality, He is eternally present in Vraja as the son of
Nanda Mahārāja.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s power is inconceivable. He is the adorable
father and the ādi-guru (original guru ) of the entire
moving and non-moving world. He alone is the supreme
worshipable reality (sevya-tattva ) for the jīvas .
Considering this, Arjuna paid ob eisances again and
again and said, “In this world, the father does not
accept the faults of his son as serious, a friend the
faults of a friend, nor a lover the faults of the
beloved. You are Śrī Bhagavān, yet You feel pleasure in
dealing with bhaktas in sakhya , vātsalya and mādhurya-
rasa. Out of mercy, You reciprocate with all of them
accordingly. Although my earlier behaviour with You was
not improper from the perspective of our eternal
relationship in sakhya-bhāva , when I consider Your
glories and tattva , it seems that it was improper.

“Previously, I had not seen this universal form of
Yours. Now my curiosity is satisfied. Although by seeing
it I feel happy, my mind is disturbed due to its
terrible features. Therefore, please again show me Your
form as Vasudeva-nandana, the zenith of sweetness, which
is millions of times more dear to me than my own life.”
Although the narākāra-rūpa (human-like form) of
Vasudeva-nandana Kṛṣṇa was present before Arjuna as he
beheld the universal form, it was covered by yogam āyā.
Therefore, Arjuna was unable to see Him and he requested
Him to show His caturbhuja-rūpa (four-handed form).




Śloka 46




kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ cakra-hastam

icchāmi tvāṁ draṣṭum ahaṁ tathaiva

tenaiva rūpeṇa catur-bhujena

sahasra-bāho bhava viśva-mūrte


aham—I; icchāmi—wish; draṣṭum —to see; tvām —You; tathā

                           608
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

eva —like that; kirīṭinam —helmeted; gadinam —holding a
club; cakra-hastam —and disc in hand; sahasra-bāho —O
thousand-armed one; viśva-mūrte —O universal form; eva
bhava —just be present; tena —in that; r ūpeṇa —form;
catur-bhujena —with four arms.

I long to see You in that caturbhuja-rūpa, adorned with
helmet, mace and disc. O Sahasra-bāho, thousand-armed
one! O Viśvamūrti, universal form! Please show me that
four-armed form once again.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“In the future, whenever You show me Your aiśvarya
feature, please only show me that of Your nara-līlā,
that Vasudeva-nandana rūpa which I have seen earlier.
Please show me that parama-rasamaya-rūpa , the form
which embodies supreme rasa and which gives bliss to
mana-nayana , the eyes of my mind. That form is not
adṛṣṭa-pūrva , that which was not seen before. The
aiśvarya of the universal form, which is part of Your
divine pastime, is not very appealing to the eyes of my
mind.”

With the above intention in mind, Arjuna says, “Please
give me darśana of that form I saw previously, which has
a divine, precious helmet made of jewels. In other
words, I want to see that form You showed Your parents
at the time of Your birth. O Viśvamūrte (one who has the
form of the univ erse)! O Sahasra-bāho (one who has
thousands of arms)! Please withdraw this present form
(viśvarūpa ), and appear in Your caturbhuja-rūpa .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The svarūpa of Kṛṣṇa is that of a young boy (nava-kiśora
), a beautiful actor (naṭa-vara ), dressed as a cowherd
boy (gopa-veśa ) with a flute in his hand (veṇu-kara).
This is Kṛṣṇa’s eternal form. Although He is the
embodiment of mādhurya , aiśvarya is also fully present
in Him. Whether aiśvarya is manifest or not, if the
activities appropriate for nara-līlā are not
transgressed, it is certainly called mādhurya . For
example, the killing of Pūtanā occured when Kṛṣṇa was a
baby. However, His behaviour as a baby was not exceeded
by this manifestation of His aiśvarya . Neglecting the
activities of nara-līlā to manifest aiśvarya-bhāva is
called aiśvarya . For example, at the time of His birth,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared before Vasudeva and Devakī bedecked
with various ornaments and dresses, thus exceeding the
activities of a human child. This is called aiśva rya-
mayī-līlā.

                           609
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Here Arjuna’s seeing the universal form is aiśvarya-
mayī-līlā. Afterwards he prayed to see the four-handed
form, which was somewhat familiar to him, as this was
appropriate for the activities of nara-līlā. While
performing His pastimes with the Yādavas and Pāṇḍavas in
His two-handed form, Śrī Kṛṣṇa would sometimes manifest
His four-handed form. The pastimes in Dvārakā are
somewhat aiśvarya-mayī, but all pastimes in Vraja are
mādhurya-mayī, or naravat (human-like).

When Arjuna tied Aśvatthāmā, the killer of Draupadī’s
five sons, with ropes and brought him to her feet,
Draupadī was able to forgive Aśvatthāmā, but Bhīma could
not and wanted to kill him. To fulfil the desires of
both and also to test the sharpness of Arjuna’s
intelligence, Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifested His four-handed form.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.7.52) states:


niśamya bhīma-gaditaṁ

draupadyāś ca caturbhujaḥ

ālokya vadanaṁ sakhyur

idam āha hasann iva


Caturbhuja, after hearing the words of Bhīma, Draupadī
and others, saw the face of His dear friend Arjuna, and
began to speak as if smiling.

Once, while Kṛṣṇa was joking with Rukmiṇī, she could not
understand the meaning of His words and fell to the
ground unconscious. At that time, Kṛṣṇa manifested His
caturbhuja-rūpa and lifted her up with two of His arms.
With His other two arms He began to arrange her
dishevelled hair and clean her face. As it is said in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.60.26): paryaṅkād avaruhyāśu

tām utthāpya caturbhujaḥ

keśān samuhya tad-vaktraṁ

prāmṛjat padma-pāṇinā


Arising swiftly from the couch, the four-armed Lord
smoothed her hair and gently touched her face with His
lotus hand.

Once, in His Vraja līlā, Kṛṣṇa suddenly disappeared from
the rāsa-līlā. Manifesting His caturbhuja-rūpa He stood
on the path of the gopīs who were searching for Him.
When the gopīs saw Him, they paid their obeisances and
moved on in search of dvibhuja (two-handed)
Śyāmasundara. In the meantime, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the
embodiment of mahābhāva , came to that place. Seeing
Her, Kṛṣṇa became overwhelmed and despite great
endeavour He was unable to maintain His four-armed form.
This caturbhuja-rūpa disappeared into His dvibhuja-rūpa
.


                            610
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Arjuna as saying, “Now
I want to see Your four-armed form in which You wear a
crown on Your head and carry weapons such as a club and
disc in Your hands. When You manifested the creation
from Your caturbhuja-mūrti , You manifested Your
viśvarūpa-mūrti , of sahasra-bāhu (one thousand arms). O
Kṛṣṇa, I have understood without a doubt t hat this two-
armed Śyāmasundara form is the embodiment of sac-cid-
ānanda para-tattva , is eternal and is the attractor of
all jīvas . The caturbhuja-mūrti of Nārāyaṇa eternally
exists as the aiśvarya-vilāsa of this two-armed
Śyamasundara rūpa . At the time of creation, this
gigantic viśvarūpa-mūrti manifests from that four-armed
Nārāyaṇa form. My curiosity has been satisfied by this
supreme knowledge.”




Śloka 47




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

mayā prasannena tavārjunedaṁ

rūpaṁ paraṁ darśitam ātma-yogāt

tejo-mayaṁ viśvam anantam ādyaṁ

yan me tvad anyena na dṛṣṭa-pūrvam


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord said; arjuna—O
Arjuna; mayā—because I; (am) prasannena —pleased; tava —
with you; idam —this; tejaḥ-mayam —resplendent; anantam
—unlimited; ādyam —original; param —supreme; viśvam —
universal; rūpam —form; darśitam —has been shown; me
ātma-yogāt —by My yogamāyā; (a form) yat —which; na
dṛṣṭa-pūrvam —has not been seen previously; anyena —by
someone other; tvat —than you.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Arjuna, because I am pleased with
you, I have shown you My resplendent, unlimited and
primeval universal form by My inconceivable yogamāyā-
śakti. This form has never been seen by anyone other
than you.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“O Arjuna, you prayed to Me, Puruṣottama, to show you My
aiśvarya-rūpa (Gītā 11.3), and thus I have shown you
that viśvarūpa puruṣa which is but an aṁśa , partial
aspect of Me. Why has your mind become disturbed upon
seeing it? Moreover, you now desire to see My human-like

                           611
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

form and are entreating Me, ‘Be gracious, be gracious!’
Why do you speak in this surprising manner? I showed you
and no one else My viśvarūpa because I was pleased with
you. No one but you has ever seen it before. Why do you
no longer wish to see it?”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna, “On your request, I
showed you My partial aspect, My resplendent viśvarūpa ,
through the potency of My acintya-śakti because I was
pleased with you.” In Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s
commentary, he has compared this prakāśa (manifestation)
of Kṛṣṇa with a valuable gem and an expert theatre
actor. Although a valuable gem is only one object, by
displaying its various colours it satisfies many
viewers. Similarly, an expert actor entertains his
audience by appearing in various roles. In the same way,
although Kṛṣṇa is one, He manifested the viśvarūpa which
is present within Him. This is the hidden meaning of
Kṛṣṇa’s statement.

Kṛṣṇa again said, “Because of you, even the devatās and
many bhaktas saw this form. No one had ever seen it
before. When I went to the assembly of Duryodhana as a
messenger of the Pāṇḍavas, and in various ways tried to
persuade the Kauravas to give half the kingdom to the
Pāṇḍavas, the wicked Duryodhana tried to capture Me. I
then manifested a partial aspect of My viśvarūpa before
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the kings of various states and many noble
persons. Bhīṣma, Droṇa and all the ṛṣis who were present
in that assembly were unable to tolerate its effulgence
and closed their eyes. On Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s request, I gave
him divine vision for a short whil e so that he could
see Me. Arjuna, you are My friend, and I have shown you
this form which was never shown to anyone else because I
am pleased with you.”




Śloka 48




na veda-yajñādhyayanair na dānair

na ca kriyābhir na tapobhir ugraiḥ

evaṁ-rūpaḥ śakya ahaṁ nṛ-loke

draṣṭuṁ tvad anyena kuru-pravīra


kuru-pravīra—O hero among the Kurus; anyena tvat—other
than by you; aham —I; na śakyaḥ—cannot; draṣṭum —be

                           612
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

seen; nṛ-loke —in this world of men; evaṁ-rūpaḥ—in this
way; veda-adhyayanaiḥ—through study of the Vedas ; yajña
—through sacrificial performances; na —not; dānaiḥ—by
acts of charity; na —not; kriyābhiḥ—by ritualistic
activities; ca —and; na —not; ugraiḥ—by severe; tapobhiḥ
—austerities.

O Kuru-pravīra, great hero among the Kurus, no one but
you in this mortal world is able to see My viśvarūpa.
This form cannot be seen by study of the Vedas, nor
through sacrifices, charity, rituals or severe penances.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān says, “The ability to see the form I have
shown you cannot be achieved even by processes such as
studying the Vedas . I am unable to show this form to
anyone other than you. Fix your niṣṭhā in that most rare
of forms only, understanding that you have achieved the
most unattainable object. Why do you again wish to see
My human form after seeing this most rare form?”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Kuru-pravīra, nobody in this world has ever seen this
viśvarūpa , manifested by My yogamāyā-śakti , even by
the study of the Vedas , sacrifices, charity, religious
activities or severe austerities . You are the only one
to have seen it. All those jīvas who have attained the
position of devas see and remember My viśvarūpa with
their divine eyes and divine minds. In this mundane
world, those who are bound by delusion and covered by
ignorance cannot see this divine form, but My bhaktas ,
who are in yoga (union) with Me and always fixed in
nitya-cit-tattva (the eternal conscious reality),
transcend delusion as well as divinity. They, just like
you, do not feel comfortable with this form, but hanker
to see My cinmaya-nitya-rūpa , that transcendentally
beautiful human-like form.”




Śloka 49




mā te vyathā mā ca vimūḍha-bhāvo


                           613
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

dṛṣṭvā rūpaṁ ghoram īdṛṅ mamedam

vyapeta-bhīḥ prīta-manāḥ punas tvaṁ

tad eva me rūpam idaṁ prapaśya


mā te—you should not have; vyathā—fear; ca—and; mā—do
not; (be) vimūḍha-bhāvaḥ—bewildered; dṛṣṭvā—having seen;
īdṛk —such; idam ghoram —a terrible; rūpam—form; mama—of
Mine; (be) vyapeta-bhīḥ—free from fear; prīta-manāḥ—of
cheerful mind; tvam prapaśya —you just behold; punaḥ—
again; idam —this; tat eva —very same; rūpam—form; me —
of Mine.

Do not fear or be deluded by seeing this terrible form
of Mine. Become fearless and with a cheerful mind behold
once again My beautiful four-armed form to your complete
satisfaction.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“O Parameśvara! Why aren’t You blessing me? You want to
forcibly show me this form even though I am unwilling to
see it. My body is becoming troubled and my mind
perplexed by seeing Your aiśvarya-rūpa . I am repeatedly
falling unconscious. I pay my obeisances from a distance
to this parama-aiśvarya-rūpa of Yours, and will never
again pray to You to show it to me. Please forgive me
for this. Please forgive me. Please show me the moon-
like face of Your human-like form with which You shower
the nectar of Your sweet smile.”

Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the word
mā te to give solace to a disturbed Arjuna.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Arjuna became very fearful and agitated upon seeing the
terrible viśvarūpa. Śrī Bhagavān pacified him saying,
“Be neither fearful nor agitated. In the assembly when
Draupadī was being insulted, Duryodhana, Bhīṣma,
Droṇācārya and others remained silent. Even Yudhiṣṭhira
and the other Pāṇḍavas were unable to protect her and
remained sitting with their heads lowered. Duryodhana,
Karṇa and others were ridiculing her with various
sarcastic statements and Duḥśāsana slapped his thigh and
then pulled at Draupadī’s cloth with his full strength.
In such a helpless situation, Draupadī fully surrendered
to Me. At that time, I vowed to destroy the adharmika ,
wicked Duryodhana and all his followers. Therefore, I
will ṣurely execute this massacre. You are just an

                           614
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

instrument. I have shown you My wrathful, terrible,
annihilating form just to give you faith in this. You
are My nitya-sakhā therefore, I know that this form will
not be pleasing to you. Now without fear, behold that
form you have requested Me to show you.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Foolish persons do not believe in this viśvarūpa . By
seeing this terrible form you should be neither agitated
nor bewildered. My bhaktas are peaceful, and therefore
they long to see My sac-cid-ānanda-nara-rūpa . I
therefore bless you not to be agitated or bewildered by
My vi śvarūpa . Those bhaktas who are attracted to My
mādhurya have no purpose with this viśvarūpa . Since you
are My līlā-sakhā (pastime friend), you are to be an
instrument in all My pastimes. It is not proper for you
to be disturbed like this. Now give up your fear, and
with a cheerful mind see My nitya-rūpa (transcendental
human-like form).”




Śloka 50




sañjaya uvāca —

ity arjunaṁ vāsudevas tathoktvā

svakaṁ rūpaṁ darśayām āsa bhūyaḥ

āśvāsayām āsa ca bhītam enaṁ

bhūtvā punaḥ saumya-vapur mahātmā


sañjaya uvāca—Sañjaya said; tathā iti—thus; uktvā—
speaking; mahā-ātmā—the magnanimous; vāsudevaḥ—son of
Vasudeva; bhūyaḥ—again; darśayām āsa —showed; svakam —
His personal; rūpam —form; arjunam—to Arjuna; ca —and;
āśvāsayām āsa —consoled; enam —that; bhītam —frightened
person; bhūtvā—by becoming; punaḥ—again; saumya-vapuḥ—
the gentle form.

Sañjaya said: Having spoken thus, the supremely
compassionate son of Vasudeva again revealed His four-
armed form, and then further consoled the frightened
Arjuna by assuming His gentle two-armed form.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this way, after showing the extremely wrathful form
of His aṁśa, Śrī Bhagavān showed His mādhurya-aiśvarya-
maya caturbhuja-rūpa , His four-armed form decorated

                           615
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

with helmet, mace, cakra and so forth, being so
requested by Arjuna. That Supreme Personality again
manifested His pleasing two-handed form, decorated with
bracelets, earrings, turban, pītāmbara and other
ornaments, thus giving solace to the frightened Arjuna.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Sañjaya is describing what happened next. Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa withdrew His sahasrasīrṣa-rūpa (thousand-headed
form) and manifested His caturbhuja-rūpa , blackish in
colour like the blue lotus. He had manifested this form
as Devakī-nandana in the prison house of Kaṁsa. Finally,
He gave solace to the frightened Arjuna by manifesting
His supremely pleasing dvibhuja-mūrti (two-armed form).




Śloka 51




arjuna uvāca —

dṛṣṭvedaṁ mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ

tava saumyaṁ janārdana

idānīm asmi saṁvṛttaḥ

sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ


arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; janārdana—O Janārdana; dṛṣṭvā—
seeing; idam —this; mānuṣam —human-like; saumyam —
pleasing; rūpam —form; tava —of Yours; idānīm—now; asmi
saṁvṛttaḥ—I have become; sa-cetāḥ—rational; (and) gataḥ—
have returned; prakṛtim —to my nature.

Arjuna said: O Janārdana, now my heart feels delight
upon seeing this captivating human-like form of Yours,
and I have returned to my normal condition.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Seeing the most sweet form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and feeling as
if he were immersed in the ocean of bliss, Arjuna said,
“My heart feels delight now that I have returned to my
prakṛtim (normal state).”

                           616
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




At that time Arjuna, who was now free from all fear, saw
Śrī Kṛṣṇa first in His extremely sweet caturbhuja-rūpa,
and then in His dvibhuja Śyāmasundara form. In great
bliss Arjuna said, “O Janārdana, after seeing Your most
pleasing human-like form, I have become self-composed
and have regained my natural condition.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa mostly performed His pastimes with the Yādavas
and the Pāṇḍavas in His dvibhuja-rūpa, yet sometimes He
performed them in His caturbhuja-rūpa . Therefore, His
caturbhuja-rūpa is also known as human. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (7.15.75), Nārada Muni describes Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
human form to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira: gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma
manuṣya-liṅgam. “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is living intimately with you
in your house, just like your brother.”




Śloka 52




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

su-durdarśam idaṁ rūpaṁ

dṛṣṭavān asi yan mama

devā apy asya rūpasya

nityaṁ darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord said; idam—this;
rūpam —form; mama —of Mine; yat —which; dṛṣṭavān asi —
you have seen; (is) su-durdarśam —very rarely seen; api
—even; devāḥ—the gods; nityam —always; darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ
—aspire to have a sight; asya —of this; rūpasya —form.

Śrī Bhagavān said: This human form of Mine which you
have seen, is rarely seen by others. Even the devas are
ever hankering to have darśana of this form.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this and the next two ślokas beginning with the words

                           617
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

su-durdarśam , Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the glo ry of
the svarūpa He is now showing to Arjuna. “Even the devas
aspire to see this svarūpa but never can. However you,
Arjuna, do not want to see My viśvarūpa . This is
appropriate because you are eternally tasting the mahā-
mādhurya of My original human form. How, therefore,
could this viśvarūpa attract your eyes? I blessed you
with divine eyes, but I did not bless you with a
corresponding divine mind. Therefore, you whose mind
only likes to see My mahā-mādhurya human form, did not
fully appreciate seeing My other (universal) form, even
though I gave you divine vision. If I had given you an
appropriate divine mind, then you would also have become
attracted to My viśvarūpa , like the devas .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the present śloka Śrī Kṛṣṇa is explaining the glory
of His human-like form (nara-rūpa ) . Exhibiting the
most exceptional aspect of His mercy to Arjuna, He says,
“It is extremely rare to behold this human form which
you are seeing. Even the devas cannot see it. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam , Tenth Canto, the Garbha-stotra states that
it is even difficult for the devas to see this form. You
are My nitya-bhakta who tastes the great sweetness of My
human form. Therefore, the viśvarūpa was not pleasing to
you. I gave you divine eyes but not a divine mind. If I
had given you a divine mind, then, like the devas , you
would have been attracted to this universal form.
Because you are My nitya-sakhā, you can never give up
your sakhya-bhāva . Thus, this human form is very
pleasing to you.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, the form which you now see is most rare, sud-
urdarśam . Even devas like Brahmā and Rudra always
hanker to see this nitya-rūpa . If you wonder how this
human form is so rare when it is seen by everyone, then
I want to explain this tattva to you. Hear attentively.
There are three types of perceptions related to My sac-
cid-ānanda kṛṣṇa-rūpa : avidvat-pratīti , yauktika-
pratīti and vidvat-pratīti . Avidvat-pratīti is the
perception of the ignorant which is only based on
empiric knowledge. They see My nitya-svarūpa as mundane
and temporary. One cannot understand the supreme nature
of this svarūpa by such perception. By yauktika
(reasoning) or divya-pratīti , the devas and persons who
are proud of their jñ āna consider My svarūpa to be
mundane and temporary. They accept the eternal reality
of either My universal form, which pervades the whole
universe, or My negative aspect of the universe,
nirviśeṣa -brahma. They conclude that My human form is
only a temporary means of worship. However, by vidvat-
pratīti (perception which is based on transcendental
knowledge), My bhaktas , who are endowed with conscious
vision (cit-cakṣu ), realise My human form to be
directly the abode of sac-cid-ānanda . This type of
realised vision is rare even for the devas , among whom

                           618
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

only Brahmā and Śiva, who are My śuddha-bhaktas , are
always longing to see My human form. Having seen this
viśvarūpa , you have been able to understand, by My
mercy, the supremacy of My eternal form. This is because
you are engaged in My pure bhakti in friendship.”




Śloka 53




nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā

na dānena na cejyayā

śakya evaṁ-vidho draṣṭuṁ

dṛṣṭavān asi yan mama


aham—I; na śakyaḥ—can not; draṣṭum —be seen; evaṁ-vidhaḥ
—in this way; yathā—as; dṛṣṭavān asi —you have seen; mām
—Me; vedaiḥ—by study of the Vedas ; na —nor; tapasā—by
austerities; na —not; dānena —by charitable acts; ca —
and; na —nor; ījyayā—by sacrifice.

It is not possible to see Me in this form as you see Me
now merely by studying the Vedas, practising
austerities, giving in charity or performing sacrifices.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“If, like you, someone wants to see My eternal two-
handed human form, considering it to be the essence of
human endeavour, they will not be able to know or see
it, even if they perform such processes as studying the
Vedas and executing austerities. Believe this.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




One cannot obtain darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His most
pleasing eternal human like form, which was seen by the
bhakta Arjuna, by studying the Vedas , or by performing
austerities, charity or worship, etc. It is said in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.12.9): yaṁ na yogena sāṅkhyena

dāna-vrata-tapo-’dhvaraiḥ


                            619
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

vyākhyā-svādhyāya-sannyāsaiḥ

prāpnuyād yatnavān api


Even by practices performed with great endeavour such as
mystic yoga, philosophical speculation, charity, vows,
austerities, performance of sacrifice, teaching Vedic
mantras, study of śāstra, or taking the renounced order
of life, one cannot achieve Me.

And furthermore it is said:


na sādhayati māṁ yogo

na sāṅkhyaṁ dharma uddhava

na svādhyāyas tapas tyāgo

yathā bhaktir mamorjitā


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.14.20

My dear Uddhava, I am controlled only by the bhakti
rendered to Me by My pure hearted devotees. I can never
be controlled by those who only study Sāṅkhya philosophy
or śāstra, or who perform mystic yoga, pious acts,
austerity or renunciation.




Śloka 54



bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya

aham evaṁ-vidho ‘rjuna

jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ca tattvena

praveṣṭuṁ ca parantapa


parantapa—O chastiser of the foe; arjuna—Arjuna; tu —
however; ananyayā—by exclusive; bhaktyā—devotional
service; aham —I; śakyaḥ—can; jñ ātum —be known; ca —
and; draṣṭum —seen; evaṁ-vidhaḥ—in this way (in this
human-like form); ca —and; tattvena —truly; praveṣṭum —
enter (into association with Me.) O Parantapa, Arjuna!
Only by ananya-bhakti can one actually know and see My
eternal, beautiful human form and truly enter into
association with Me in My abode.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                             620
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



“Then by which means are You attainable?” Expecting this
question from Arjuna, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka
beginning with the word bhaktyā. Even if one has the
desire to attain nirvāṇa-mokṣa (impersonal liberation),
he can only enter into the brahma-svarūpa with the help
of bhakti . There is no other way. After jñ āna-sannyāsa
, the guṇi-bhūtā bhakti of the jñ ānīs finally develops
to a slight degree. Nothing else happens. By this they
attain sāyujya-mukti .

“Later they attain Me, having known My svarūpa in
truth.” This I will explain and establish later in Gītā
18.55.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The vision of this pleasing human form is possible only
by ananya-bhakti. In this regard, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.12.8) states: kevalena hi bhāvena

gopyo gāvo nagā mṛgāḥ

ye ‘nye mūḍha-dhiyo nāgāḥ

siddhā mām īyur añjasā

The residents of Vraja, such as the gopīs, cows,
animals, the snakes such as Kāliya, the twin arjuna
trees and other non-moving entities with their
consciousness covered, such as, bushes and schrubsÇ all
attained the perfection of life, and came to Me simply
because of their one-pointed devotion for Me.

And furthermore, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.21) states:


bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ

śraddhayātmā priyaḥ satām

bhaktiḥ punāti man-niṣṭhā

śva-pākān api sambhavāt


I can only be attained through bhakti performed with
full faith. I am naturally dear to My bhaktas who take
Me as the exclusive goal of their bhajana. Even the dog-
eaters can purify themselves of their lower birth by
performing bhajana to Me.




Śloka 55

                            621
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




mat-karma-kṛn mat-paramo

mad-bhaktaḥ saṅga-varjitaḥ

nirvairaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu

yaḥ sa mām eti pāṇḍava


pāṇḍava—O son of Pāṇḍu; saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; mat-karma-kṛt —
dedicates his work to Me; mat-paramaḥ—makes Me his
ultimate shelter; mat-bhaktaḥ—practises devotional
service to Me; saṅga-varjitaḥ—free from (materialistic)
association; nirvairaḥ—without enmity; sarva-bhūteṣu —
towards any living being; eti —comes; mām —to Me.

O son of Pāṇḍu, one who works exclusively for Me and
considers Me alone to be his supreme goal, who engages
in the various limbs of bhakti such as śravaṇa and kīr
tana while avoiding mundane attachments, and who remains
free from enmity towards any living being—he alone
attains Me in My supremely beautiful Kṛṣṇa form.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now in this śloka beginning with the words mat-karma-kṛt
, Śrī Bhagavān explains t he characteristics of His
ananya-bhaktas to conclude the discussion on bhakti ,
which began in Chapter Seven. Saṅga-varjitaḥ means
devoid of attachment to the results and free from poor
association.

The import of the Eleventh Chapter is that Arjuna has
become firmly convinced about the mahā-aiśvarya of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and that he will be victorious in battle.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Eleventh
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka Śrī Kṛṣṇa is explaining the limbs of
bhakti that are to be followed by bhaktas who take
shelter of ananya-bhakti . “Those who become free from
all mundane attachment and envy towards all jīvas and
engage in My ananya-bhakti by performing activities such
as building temples for Me, cleaning them, offering

                             622
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

service to Tulasī-devī, and performing śravaṇa , kīrtana
and smaraṇa of hari-kathā, they alone are My bhaktas .”

Similar statements are made in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.11.38-39):


mamārcā-sthāpane śraddhā

svataḥ saṁhatya codyamaḥ

udyānopavanākrīḍa-

pura-mandira-karmaṇi

sammārjanopalepābhyāṁ

seka-maṇḍala-vartanaiḥ

gṛha-śuśrūṣaṇaṁ mahyaṁ

dāsa-vad yad amāyayā


One should faithfully install My Deity form in the
temples. If one is unable to perform this work alone, he
should endeavour with the help of others. He should make
flower and fruit gardens, cities and temples for Me, as
well as places to celebrate My pastime festivals. Like a
faithful and devoted servant he should, render service
in the temple without duplicity, clean it, wash it,
sprinkle it with fragrant water, and perform various
services.

Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa writes, “My bhaktas are
those who are mat-paramaḥ, who consider only Me to be
the supreme goal and who do not aspire for other goals,
such as Svarga. They are engaged in tasting nine types
of bhakti-rasa (the limbs of bhakti ), such as the
hearing and chanting of My name, form and so forth.
Those who are saṅga-varjita , free from the attachment
to the results of their actions and free from poor
association, and those who are nirvaira , free from
enmity to all living beings, see that their miseries are
the result of their own previous karma and have no
feeling of enmity towards those who are inimical towards
them. Rather, they feel compassion for them. Only such
persons attain to My kṛṣṇa-svarūpa , not others.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes in his Vidvat-rañjana
commentary, “In this chapter Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rūpa has been
established as the supreme refuge and the ultimate
worshipable reality, compared to His viśvarūpa kāla-rūpa
and even the viṣṇu-rūpa . Besides the svarūpa-vigraha ,
(the eternal, all-attractive human form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa),
bhaktas have no attraction for the sambandha-vigraha
(the relative manifestation of Bhagavān). This chapter
concludes that the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is the ocean
of all nectarean mellows (nikhila-rasāmṛta-sindhu ) and
the only abode of supreme sweetness (paramamādhurya-
bhāva ).”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Eleventh

                           623
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Twelve


Bhakti-Yoga

The Yoga of Pure Devotional Service




Śloka 1




arjuna uvāca —

evaṁ satata-yuktā ye

bhaktās tvāṁ paryupāsate

ye cāpy akṣaram avyaktaṁ

teṣāṁ ke yoga-vittamāḥ

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; (there are) bhaktāḥ—the
bhaktas ; ye —who; (are) satata-yuktāḥ—always engaged;
evam —in this way; ca —and; api—also; (there are those)
ye —who; paryupāsate —worship; tvām —You; (as) akṣaram —
the imperishable; avyaktam —unmanifest; ke —which?;
teṣām —of them; (are) yoga-vittamāḥ—the best knowers of
yoga .

Arjuna said: According to Your earlier explanation,
there are bhaktas endowed with niṣṭhā, who continuously
engage in bhajana to Your Śyāmasundara form, and there
are also those who worship nirviśeṣa-akṣarabrahma. Of
these two, who is the best type of yogī?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this Twelfth Chapter, Śrī Bhagavān confirms the
superiority of all types of bhaktas over the jñ ānīs.
And among the bhaktas , only those who possess qualities
such as non-enviousness are glorified.

When the subject of bhakti was introduced, Arjuna heard
that those who are endowed with śraddhā, who engage in
bhajana to Śrī Bhagavān with their hearts devoted to
Him, are yuktatama , the best among all types of yogīs .
This is the opinion of Śrī Bhagavān (Gītā 6.47). Arjuna
heard about the supremacy of the bhaktas in introductory

                           624
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

statements such as these, and as this section concludes,
he inquires further, being desirous to hear more about
that supremacy. “You explained that the word satata-
yuktāḥ means those who are devoted to performing work
for You. Those who are endowed with the symptoms You
previously describ ed engage in the service of Your
Śyāmasundara form. Others worship nirviśeṣa
(featureless), akṣara (imperishable) brahma , which is
described in the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka śruti : ‘O Gārgī, the
brāhmaṇas know this akṣarabrahma as asthūla (that which
is not gross), asūkṣma (that which is not subtle),
ahrasva (that which is not small), and so forth.’ Of
these two types of persons who know yoga , who is
superior? In other words, who is acquainted with the
better means to know and achieve You?” Here, in the
original ślok a , the word yoga-vittamāḥ has been used.
The word yoga-vittara is generally used to compare two
types of worshippers, whereas the word yoga-vittamāḥ
indicates the superlative degree, and is used to decide
who is the best among all types of people who perform
worship. By using this word, Arjuna not only compares
the two, but wants to know who is the best.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Of the various types of sādhana practised to quickly
attain Bhagavān, śuddha-bhakti is the simplest, easiest
and most natural to perform. Its influence is unfailing.
In this chapter, viśuddha-bhakti is exclusively
established as superior.

Arjuna has been hearing Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
instructions with great attention. In the Sixth Chapter,
in the śloka: yogīnām api sarveṣām (Gītā 6.47), Śrī
Kṛṣṇa said that of all yogīs (such as the karma-yogī,
the dhyāna-yogī and the tapa-yogī) the bhakti-yogī is
superior. In the Seventh Chapter, in the śloka , mayy
āsakta-manāḥ (Gītā 7.1), He said that to take shelter of
bhakti-yoga is best. In the Eighth Chapter, in the śloka
, prayāṇa-kāle manasācalena (Gītā 8.10), He described
the glory of yoga-bala , the power of yoga. In the Ninth
Chapter, in the śloka , jñ āna-yaj ñena c āpy anye (Gītā
9.15), He talked about jñ āna-yoga and at the end of the
Eleventh Chapter, in the śloka , mat-karma-kṛn mat-
paramo (Gītā 11.55), He again described the excellence
of bhakti-yoga . After hearing about these various types
of yoga , Arjuna was unable to ascertain whether it is
better to worship the saviśeṣa-svarūpa (the p ersonal
form) of Yaśodā-nandana Śyāmasundara Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or
brahma , which is niḥśaktika (devoid of energy),
nirākāra (formless), avyakta-svarūpa (unmanifest) and
nirviśeṣa (featureless). Of these two types of yogīs ,
who has the superior knowledge of yoga ? By saying yoga-
vittamāḥ, Arjuna is inquiring about who is the best of
all yogīs .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Arjuna as saying, “O
Kṛṣṇa! From all the instructions You have given so far,

                           625
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

I have understood that there are two types of yogīs .
One type worships You by performing all bodily and
social activities under the control of Your supreme
ananya-bhakti . The other type of yogī accepts bodily
and social activities only according to his needs by
following the principles of niṣkāma-karma-yoga , and
takes shelter of Your imperishable and unmanifest
feature through adhyātmika-yoga (yoga related to brahma
). Of these two types of yogīs , who is superior?”




Śloka 2




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

mayy āveśya mano ye māṁ

nitya-yuktā upāsate

śraddhayā parayopetās

te me yuktatamā matāḥ


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord said; te—those;
ye —who; (are) nitya-yuktāḥ—always connected (with Me);
upetāḥ—engaged; parayā—with transcendental; śraddhayā—
faith; āveśya —absorbing; (their) manaḥ—minds; mayi —
within Me; (and) upās ate —worship; mām —Me; matāḥ—are
considered; me —by Me; (to be) yuktatamāḥ—the best
connected.

Śrī Bhagavān said: Those yogīs, who with transcendental
faith fix their mind on My Śyāmasundara form, and
constantly worship Me with ananya-bhaktiÇ are the best
among those who know yoga. This is My opinion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān responds to Arjuna’s question in the
previous śloka by saying, “My bhaktas are the best who,
with nirguṇa-śraddhā (faith which is free from the
influence of the modes), fix their minds on My
Śyāmasundara form, being ever-desirous of union with
Me.” As it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.27),
“Śraddhā which has the ātmā (self) as its focus is in
sattva-guṇa ; śraddhā which has karma (action) as its
focus is in rajo-guṇa , and śradd hā which has
irreligious activities as its focus is in tamo-guṇa .
But that śraddhā whose object and focus is service to Me
is nirguṇa.” In the present śloka it is said, “My
ananya-bhaktas are yuktatamāḥ, or yoga-vittamāḥ, the

                           626
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

best of yogīs .” From this it can be concluded that,
compared to ananya-bhaktas , others, such as those whose
bhakti is mixed with jñ āna or karma , are yoga-vittara
, but not yoga-vittamāḥ (the best knowers of yoga ).
Thus, bhakti is superior to jñ āna and, within bhakti ,
ananya-bhakti is supreme. This has been established
here.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After hearing Arjuna’s question, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa was
very much pleased and said, “I consider only those
bhaktas who constantly worship Me with nirguṇa-śraddhā
and unalloyed devotion , fixing their minds on My
Śyāmasundara form, to be the best of yogīs .” Such
unalloyed devotees are in reality the topmost yogīs . A
yogī whose bhakti is mixed with jñ āna and karma is a
little inferior. Bhakti-yoga is therefore superior to jñ
āna-yoga because it is by this yoga alone that one
performs pure ananya-bhakti . The word śraddhā mentioned
in the original śloka means staunch faith in the
statements of śāstra , guru and Bhagavān. As it is said
in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhyalīlā 22.62): śraddhā’-
śabde—viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya

kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya


The determined faith, that merely by the performance of
bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa all activities are performed, is
called śraddhā.

Elsewhere it is also said: śraddhā tv anyopāya-varjaṁ
kṛṣṇonmukhī citta-vṛtti-viśeṣaḥ. “The citta-vṛtti ,
tendency of the heart, which is directed only towards
Kṛṣṇa, and which is free from any desire to follow other
processes, is called śraddhā.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.27) describes four types of
faith:


sāttviky ādhyātmikī śraddhā

karma-śraddhā tu rājasī

tāmasy adharme yā śraddhā

mat-sevāyāṁ tu nirguṇā


Faith in śāstra which deals with the science of the self
is sāttvika; faith related to fruitive activities is
rājasika; faith in adharmika acts is tāmasik a, and
faith in My service is nirguṇa.

Here it should be understood that the word nirguṇa means
transcendental and beyond material qualities (aprākṛta

                            627
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

). It does not mean bereft of all qualities. Hence, a
bhakti -yogī endowed with nirguṇa-śraddhā is best.
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s intention is to give this
understanding.




Ślokas 3—4



ye tv akṣaram anirdeśyam

avyaktaṁ paryupāsate

sarvatra-gam acintyañ ca

kūṭastham acalaṁ dhruvam

sanniyamyendriya-grāmaṁ

sarvatra sama-buddhayaḥ

te prāpnuvanti mām eva

sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ


tu—but; eva—certainly; ye —those who; paryupāsate—
worship; akṣaram —the imperishable; anirdeśyam —
undefinable; avyaktam —unmanifest; sarvatra-gam —all-
pervading; acintyam—inconceivable; ca —and; kūṭa-stham —
uniform; acalam —non-moving; dhruvam —fixed; sanniyamya
—controlling; indriya-grāmam —the group of senses; (and)
sama-buddhayaḥ—being equally disposed; sarvatra —in all
situations; ratāḥ—being attached; hite —to the welfare;
sarva-bhūta —of all beings; eva —certainly; prāpnuvanti
—obtains; mām —Me.

But those who worship My indescribable, unmanifest, all-
pervading, inconceivable, immutable, eternal and
featureless brahma-svarūpa while controlling their
senses, maintaining equal vision everywhere and engaging
in activities for the welfare of all beings, also attain
Me alone.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Those who worship My nirviśeṣabrahma-svarūpa remain
distressed; therefore, they are inferior to My bhaktas
.” In order to establish this principle, Śrī Bhagavān
speaks these two ślokas beginning with ye tu. Akṣara
means that brahma cannot be described in words, because
it is unmanifest, formless (avyaktam ), all-pervading
(sarvatra-ga ) and eternal (dhruvam ). It is not subject
to transformation (acalam ), but exists uniformly at all

                           628
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

times (kuṭa-stham ), and it cannot be comprehended by
logic (acintya ). The phrase mām eva means, “They attain
Me alone. In other words, there is no difference between
that imperishable (akṣara ) brahma and Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān says, “Those who with controlled senses and
equal vision engage in activities for the welfare of all
jīvas and worship My akṣara (imperishable), anirdeśya
(indescribable) and avyakta (unmanifest)
nirviśeṣabrahma-svarūpa , ultimately attain Me only
after performing troublesome sādhana. From the śloka ,
brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham (Gītā 14.27), it is understood
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the āśraya (shelter) of
nirviśeṣatattva . Therefore, the worshippers of
nirviśeṣabrahma are also indirectly dependent on Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the shelter of all upās ya-tattva
(worshipable realities), and is Himself the supreme
worshipable object. Upāsya-tattva includes Śrī
Rāmacandra, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva and
nirviśeṣabrahma , who all depend on Kṛṣṇa. Those
worshippers who have taken shelter of upāsya-tattva are
certainly under the shelter of Kṛṣṇa. All upāsya-tattva
is dependent on kṛṣṇatattva as their origin. Among
upāsya-tattva , the first three svarūpas are tad-ekātma-
rūpa (one in tattva ), but from the perspective of rasa
, there is a gradation. Similarly, there is also a
gradation among those worshippers who have taken shelter
of these realities. Brahma is the effulgence of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s limbs, an incomplete manifestation of Kṛṣṇa’s
cid-aṁśa (internal self-conscious potency). Therefore,
those who achieve nir viśeṣabrahma or sāyujya-mukti are
indirectly dependent on Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone. However, they
do not experience the bliss of loving sevā, etc.

For this reason, even if Śrī Kṛṣṇa offers His bhaktas
the various types of mukti such as sāyujya , they do not
accept them, as stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.29.13):
sālokya-sārṣṭi-sāmīpya—

sārūpyaikatvam apy uta

dīyamānaṁ na gṛhṇanti

vinā mat-sevanaṁ janāḥ


A pure devotee does not accept any kind of liberation:
sālokya, sārṣṭi, sāmīpya, sārūpya or ekatvam (sāyu jya),
even though they may be offered to him.

Some consider worship of akṣarabrahma to be superior to
the worship of the sac-cid-ānanda-mūrti of Śyāmasundara
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. However, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Himself very
clearly explaining the superiority of His ananya-bhaktas
over those who worship nirākāra (formless)
nirviśeṣabrahma . Furthermore, some persons think, “Why

                           629
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

would worship of brahma not be superior, since it is
full of difficulty and perfected over a long period of
time?” They consider that of the two types of brahma ,
saguṇa and nirguṇa , nirguṇa -nirākāra -brahma is the
original and superior tattva. They think that common
people are unable to perform worship of nirguṇabrahma
because it is troublesome, whereas the worship of saguṇa
sākāra , personal brahma , is easily performed since
anyone can do it. Here it is necessary to understand
that these conceptions are false. Kṛṣṇa alone is the
original tattva. Brahma-tattva is dependent on Him, and
is simply the effulgence of His bodily limbs. In Gītā
(15.18), Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself has declared that as
puruṣottama-svarūpa , He is superior to akṣara
(imperishable) and kūṭa-stha (unchanging) brahma . Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa and other commentators on the Gītā
explain akṣara-svarūpa to mean jīva-svarūpa , whereas
Śrī Rāmānujācārya explains it to mean pratyag-ātma (the
all-pervading) svarūpa .

Here the word akṣara does not mean parabrahma. The
Supreme Person, parabrahma , has been clearly described
as different from and superior to that brahma , which is
akṣara and kūṭa-stha . In this regard, one should refer
to Gītā (15.16-17): kūṭa-stho ‘kṣara ucyate and uttamaḥ
puruṣas tv anyaḥ.

Moreover, worshippers of brahma also consider the jīva
alone to be brahma : jīvo brahmaiva nāparaḥ. They say
that when the ignorance of the jīva is dispelled, the
brahma-jñ ānī becomes brahma . Even if the jīva attains
the stage of brahma , it is not stated in any śāstra
that he attains the nature of parabrahma . Śrī Kṛṣṇa
alone is parabrahma . This has been established in
various statements from śruti and smṛti . In the Vedānta
also it is stated that the jīva never attains the stage
of parabrahma . One should always keep in mind that the
attributes of Bhagavān described in śāstra , such as
saguṇa , sākāra and saviśeṣa , are transcendental and
fully conscious. Therefore, Śrī Bhagavān is
simultaneously both saguṇa and nirguṇa . Saguṇa and
nirguṇa are not two separate tattvas , but two aspects
of the same tattva.




Śloka 5



kleśo’dhikataras teṣām

avyaktāsakta-cetasām

avyaktā hi gatir duḥkhaṁ

dehavadbhir avāpyate

teṣām—for those; cetasām—whose minds; avyakta-āsakta —
are attached to the unmanifest; (there is) adhikataraḥ—
more; kleśaḥ—trouble; hi —because; avyaktā—the
unmanifest; gatiḥ—state; avāpyate —is obtained; duḥkham

                           630
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

—with difficulty; dehavadbhiḥ—by those who are embodied.

Those whose minds are attached to the nirviśeṣabrahma-
svarūpa experience great difficulty, for it is
troublesome for the embodied jīvas to attain steadiness
in that which is unmanifest.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“How then, are the jñānīs inferior?” In response to
Arjuna’s question, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka
beginning with the words kleśo ‘dhikataras teṣām .
“Those who desire the experience of brahma which is
avyakta (unmanifest) must undergo extreme difficulty in
attaining it. The senses are only able to experience
that which has attributes (viśeṣa ) that pertain to the
respective senses, such as sound. They are unable to
experience that which is devoid of qualities or
attributes (nirviśeṣa ).”

It is essential for those who desire nirviśeṣa-jñāna to
c ontrol the senses, but to do so is as difficult as
controlling the flow of a river. As Sanat Kumāra says to
Pṛthu Mahārāja in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.22.39), “The
bhaktas can easily cut the hṛdya-granthi (knot of the
heart), which consists of karma-vāsanā (fr uitive
desires) by remembering with devotion the effulgence of
the toes of the lotus petal-like feet of Bhagavān. The
yogīs , however, who are bereft of bhakti , are not able
to cut the knot of the heart as bhaktas can, even though
they are free from any mundane enjoying propensity and
can control their senses. Therefore, give up the
endeavour to control the senses and so forth and engage
in the bhajana of Śrī Vāsudeva. Those who practise the
processes of yoga , etc ., with a desire to cross this
ocean of mater ial existence, which is full of
crocodiles in the form of the senses, have to face
extreme difficulties if they fail to take shelter of
Bhagavān, who is likened to a boat. Therefore, O King,
you should also accept the lotus feet of the most
worshipable Bhagavān as the boat in which to cross this
ocean, which is insurmountable and full of obstacles.”

Even if the destination of nirviśeṣabrahma is achieved
after much trouble, it happens only with the help of
bhakti. Without bhakti for Bhagavān, the worshipper of
brahma not only undergoes misery, but also fails to
attain brahma . As Lord Brahmā said, “The only gain of a
person who beats a husk from which the rice has been
taken is the trouble they took to beat it” (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 10.14.4).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti



                           631
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Worshippers of nirviśeṣabrahma face misery both during
sādhana and siddha . No sādhana can give perfection
without the help of bhakti. Taking support of bhakti as
a secondary process, those who worship nirviśeṣabrahma
strive to achieve brahma-jñ āna. In turn, Bhakti-devī
awards them the secondary result, which is brahma-jñ āna
, and then disappears. Such persons who worship brahma ,
thus, remain bereft of relishing the supremely
beneficial name, form, pastimes and qualities of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. They ete rnally submerge themselves in an ocean
of great misery in the form of sāyujya-mukti. This is
self-destructive. For this reason Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.14.4) states: śreyaḥ-sṛtim bhaktim udasya te vibho.

“My dear Lord, bhajana unto You is the most superior
path for realisation of the self. If someone gives up
that path and engages in cultivating speculative
knowledge, he will simply undergo a troublesome process
and will not achieve his desired ends. As a person who
beats an empty husk of wheat cannot get grain, one who
simply speculates cannot achieve self-realisation. His
only gain is trouble.”

The stages of both sādhana (practice) and sādhya
(perfection) are described as troublesome for the
nirviśeṣa-j ñ ānīs . On the other hand, bhakti is
supremely pleasurable and auspicious in both stagesÇ
sādhana and sādhya . Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.22.39) states:


yat-pāda-paṅkaja-palāśa-vilāsa-bhaktyā

karmāśayaṁ grathitam udgrathayanti santaḥ

tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo ‘pi ruddha-

sroto-gaṇās tam araṇaṁ bhaja vāsudevam


The bhaktas,who are always engaged in the service of the
toes of the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān, can very easily
overcome the hard knot of desires for fruitive
activities. Because this is very difficult, the non-
devotees, jñ ānīs and yogīs who endeavour to stop the
waves of sense gratification, are unable to do so.
Therefore, you are advised to engage in the bhajana of
Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva.

And furthermore, in 12.4.40:


saṁsāra-sindhum ati-dustaram uttitīrṣor

nānyaḥ plavo bhagavataḥ puruṣottamasya

līlā-kathā-rasa-niṣevaṇam antareṇa

puṁso bhaved vividha-duḥkha-davārditasya


For those who are scorching in the forest fire that
generates various types of miseries, and who desire to

                           632
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

cross over the insurmountable ocean of material
existence, there is no other boat than serving and
relishing the nectar of the līlā-kathā of Puruṣottama
Bhagavān Śrī Hari.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “The difference between
a jñānī-yogī and a bhakti -yogī is that in the stage of
sādhana a bhakti -yogī can easily cu ltivate the process
to achieve the supreme objective, Bhagavān, and attains
the sādhya (stage of perfection) without fear of self-
destruction. On the other hand, during a jñ āna -yogī’s
sādhana , he becomes fixed in avyakta-tattva (the
unmanifest reality) and has to suffer the trouble of
practising vyatireka-cintā, the conception of negation,
always thinking, 'Not this, not this.’ The vyatireka-
cintā (negative process) means to think in a way that is
opposite to the natural aptitude or constitutional
function of the jīva , so it is very troublesome for the
living entities. The stage of sādhana is also not free
from fear because the nitya-svarūpa of Bhagavān has not
been realised before completion of the sādhana stage.
Hence, the jñ āna -yogī’s supreme destination is also
miserable. The jīva is an eternal conscious entity
(nitya-cinmaya-vastu ). If the jīva becomes merged in
the unmanifest state, which is suicidal for him, his
constitutional and purposeful quality of kṛṣṇa-dāsya is
destroyed. He has cultivated very deep impressions
(saṁskāras ) of ahaṅ-graha -buddhiḥ (considering oneself
as supreme) by identifying himself with brahma , so it
is very difficult for him to give up this conditioned
consciousnessÇ even if he comes to understand that his
own svarūpa is individual and has the constitutional
nature of service.

“For the embodied jīva, embarking upon meditation on the
unmanifest only results in misery, both as the means
(sādhana ) and as the objective (sādhya ). In reality,
the jīva is caitanya-svarūpa , conscious by nature, and
has a spiritual body. Therefore, this unmanifest or
impersonal meditation is contrary to the jīva’s own
svarūpa and is simply a source of misery. Bhakti-yoga
alone is the source of eternal auspiciousness for the
jīva . Jñ āna-yoga , when bereft of bhakti and practised
independently, always becomes a source of
inauspiciousness. Therefore, adhyātma-yoga , the process
of self-realisation which is performed by worshipping
the nirākāra , nirvikāra , sarva-vyāpī (all-pervading)
nirviśeṣa-svarūpa is not praiseworthy and does not
guarantee attainment of the ultimate destination.”




Ślokas 6—7



ye tu sarvāṇi karmāṇi

mayi sannyasya mat-parāḥ




                           633
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ananyenaiva yogena

māṁ dhyāyanta upāsate

teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā

mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt

bhavāmi na cirāt pārtha

mayy āveśita-cetasām

tu—but; eva ye—they; mat-parāḥ—who are dedicated to
achieve Me; sannyasya —renouncing; sarvāṇi —all; karmāṇi
—activities; mayi —unto Me; ananyena —with unwavering;
yogena —connection; dhyāyantaḥ—meditate on; (and)
upāsate —worship; mām —Me; pārtha —O Pārtha; teṣām —for
those; āveśita-cetasām—whose minds are absorbed; mayi —
in Me; na cirāt —before long; aham —I; bhavāmi —become;
samuddhartā—the deliverer; sāgarāt —from the ocean;
mṛtyu-saṁsāra —of death and rebirth.

But to those loving bhaktas who perform all their
actions with the goal of attaining Me, O Pārtha, and who
absorb themselves exclusively in My bhajana with
unalloyed devotion, I give swift deliverance from this
ocean of birth and death.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān says, “Without jñāna, simply by bhakti
alone, My bhaktas are easily and blissfully freed from
this material existence. Here the word sannyāsa means
tyāga (to give up). Becoming free from karma , jñ āna ,
tapasyā and other processes, My bhakta s give up all
other activities for My sake and engage in worship of Me
with ananya-bhakti for the purpose of achieving Me.
Thus, they are easily and happily freed from the
material world.” As it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.20.32-33), “Whatever result one achieves by the
performance of karma , tapasyā, jñ āna and vairāgya ,
and also whatever My bhakta desires, be it Svarga, mokṣa
, or even residence in My dhāma , can all be easily
attained by performance of My bhakti-yoga .”

It is also said in the Nārāyaṇīya-mokṣadharma, “The
fruits one receives from performing sādhana to attain
the four types of human goals (catuḥ puruṣārtha ), are
attained by a person who has taken refuge in Śrī
Nārāyaṇa without performing any such sādhana .”

“If one asks, ‘By which sādhana do they cross over this
material world?’ then listen. This question is
irrelevant, because I Myself deliver them, even if they
do not perform any sādhana .” From this statement it is
understood that Bhagavān only exhibits His vātsalya-
bhāva for His bhaktas and not for the jñ ānīs .


                           634
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




In the previous two ślokas, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining
the glories of His ananya-bhakti and His ananya-bhakta .
By performing this ananya-bhakti and by the mercy of
Bhagavān, an ananya-bhakta can very easily cross over
the ocean of material existence and attain supremely
blissful prema-sevā to Śrī Bhagavān.

Kṛṣṇa Himself is the shelter or pratiṣṭhā of brahma .
This Kṛṣṇa, Svayam Bhagavān, is the source of Paramātmā
and all other avatāras . A bhakta who knows the reality
of this svarūpa of Bhagavān takes shelter of kevala-
bhakti in the association of bhaktas . He does not have
to undergo the difficulties experienced in the sādhana
and sādhya stages as do those who worship nirviśeṣa
nirākārabrahma described above. In a very short time, he
easily attains premamayī sevā to Śrī Bhagavān.

In introducing the bhaktas who take shelter of such
kevala-bhakti , Śrī Bhagavān says, “Such one-pointed
bhaktas consider their prescribed duties of varṇa and
āśrama to be obstacles to bhakti , and completely give
them up. They consider My premamayī sevā to be the one
and only goal to be attained, and with ananya-bhakti
engage in My worship by hearing, chanting and
remembering My nāma , rūpa , guṇa and līlā. They even
become absorbed in Me during the sādhana stage, while
performing śravaṇam , kīrtanam and so forth. I very
quickly deliver such bhaktas , whose hearts are attached
to Me and who are fully absorbed in Me, from this ocean
of material existence, which is very difficult to cross.
They need not be in anxiety about crossing over it,
unlike the jñ ānīs and yogīs . Furthermore, they are
unable to tolerate any delay in achieving Me. Placing
them on the back of Garuḍa, I very quickly carry them to
My abode. They do not attain gradual mukti through the
paths of Arci (light) and so forth, as followed by jñ
ānīs and yogīs . By My own will, I free them from this
illusory world, bring them to My abode, and engage them
in My premamayī sevā.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I
very quickly deliver from the ocean of material
existence, characterised by birth and death, those who
take shelter of My bhagavat-svarūpa (personal feature).
Making all bodily and social activities completely
subordinate to My bhakti , and always meditating upon
and worshipping My nitya -śrī-vigraha , the eternal,
beautiful human-like form of Kṛṣṇa, by the process of My
ananya-bhakti , their hearts, thus, become completely
absorbed in Me. In other words, in their conditioned
state, I give them liberation from the bondage of this
illusory material existence. After their bondage of māyā
has been cut, I protect them from the suicidal attempt
of adopting the conception of oneness. This self-
destructive conception of oneness in people whose minds
are attached to the unmanifest is the cause of

                           635
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

inauspiciousness for them. My vow is: ye yathā māṁ
prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham (Gītā 4.11). From
this it is understood that those who meditate on the
avyakta (unmanifest) become merged in the avyakta-
svarūpa . What is My loss in this? Having attained such
a destination, the jīvas who have the suicidal
conception of oneness lose the importance or utility of
their own svarūpa . In other words, they become deprived
of the eternal bliss of My loving service.”




Śloka 8



mayy eva mana ādhatsva

mayi buddhiṁ niveśaya

nivasiṣyasi mayy eva

ata ūrddhvaṁ na saṁśayaḥ


ādhatsva—fix; (your) manaḥ—mind; eva —only; mayi —on Me;
(and) niveśaya —repose; (your) buddhim —intelligence;
mayi —in Me; ataḥ ūrddhvam —thus at the last moment of
quitting the body; eva nivasiṣyasi —you shall certainly
reside; mayi —in Me; na saṁśayaḥ—there is no doubt.

Fix your mind exclusively on My Śyāmasundara form, and
engage your intelligence fully in Me. Thus, upon leaving
your body, you shall certainly come to reside with Me.
Of this there is no doubt.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Since My bhakti is the topmost process, you should
perform bhakti only.” To instruct Arjuna in this way,
Śrī Bhagavān is speaking three ślokas beginning here
with mayy eva . Worship of the nirviśeṣa-svarūpa has
been prohibited by use of the word eva . Śrī Bhagavān
says mayi , meaning ‘upon Me’. “You should fix your mind
exclusively on My Śyāmasundara form, which is decorated
with yellow garments (pītāmbara-dhārī) and a beautiful
forest garland (vana-mālā). In other words, remember Me
and engage your pure intelligence in Me, that is, think
of Me alone. This thinking should be in accordance with
the statements of śāstra that establish dhyāna
(meditation). Then you will live only with Me, who am
described in the Vedas .”




                           636
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here in these few ślokas Śrī Kṛṣṇa is explaining the
sādhana-praṇālī, or the process of practice adopted by
His ananya-bhaktas . First of all He said to Arjuna, “O
Arjuna, I very quickly deliver from the ocean of birth
and death, My ananya-bhakta who surrenders to Me and who
has given up varṇāśrama-dharma , and bestow upon him My
premamayī sevā. Therefore, you should fix your mind
exclusively on Me, parabrahma , the Supreme
Transcendental Reality. Removing all desires for sense
gratification from your citta (thoughts), absorb your
citta in Me alone.” The mind has the tendencies of
accepting (saṅkalpa ) and rejecting (vikalpa ), so to
fix it in objects related with Bhagavān, it is necessary
to surrender one’s intelligence to Him after disengaging
the mind from all sense objects. Acquiring knowledge of
Bhagavān’s svarūpa with one’s vyavasāyātmikā buddhi
(resolute intelligence), know Him alone to be the
supreme worshipable reality. Direct the functions of the
pure intelligence towards Him, by performing sādhana
such as śravaṇam , kīrtanam and smaraṇam. By doing so,
the mind will be under the control of such resolute
intelligence and will automatically become absorbed in
thoughts of Him. In such a state, you will always live
near Him.

Therefore, by making Arjuna His instrument, Śrī Bhagavān
is instructing us all that bhakti alone is the best
sādhana and the best sādhya . Thus it is imperative to
constantly remember the nitya-svarūpa of Śyāmasundara by
fixing the mind on Him and surrendering one’s inte
lligence exclusively to Him. When this is done, one will
attain the highest fruit of sādhana-bhakti and become
His associate, attaining nirupādhika-prema (unalloyed
love). There is no doubt about this. Thus, it is
explained that the destination achieved by bhakti-yoga
is superior to all others.




Śloka 9




atha cittaṁ samādhātuṁ

na śaknoṣi mayi sthiram

abhyāsa-yogena tato

mām icchāptuṁ dhanañjaya


dhanañjaya—O winner of wealth; atha—and if; na śaknoṣi —
you are unable; samādhātum —to fix; cittam —the mind;
sthiram —steadily; mayi —on Me; tataḥ—then; iccha —you
should desire; āptum —to attain; mām —Me; abhyāsa-yogena

                           637
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

—through abhyāsa-yoga .

O Dhanañjaya, if you are unable to fix your mind
steadily on Me, then try to seek Me by abhyāsa-yoga, the
practice of fixing the mind on Me while constantly
restraining it from worldly affairs.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




For the benefit of those who cannot directly remember
Him, Śrī Bhagavān explains the means whereby perfection
of such remembrance can be achieved. He says, “By time
and a gain controlling the mind, which runs from one
place to another, one should practise concentrating it
exclusively on My form. This is yoga . One should
gradually fix the mind’s course on My most beautiful
form, qualities and so forth, by this practice of
completely checking the flow of the mind which flows
like a river towards abominable mundane sense objects,
such as form and taste.”

The present śloka emphasises the word Dhanañjaya. Just
as Arjuna has accumulated a lot of dhana (wealth) by
conquering many enemies, in the same way, he is also
able to achieve the wealth of dhyāna (meditation on
Bhagavān) by conquering and controlling his mind.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the previous śloka, Śrī Bhagavān instructs everyone
to become one-pointedly devoted to Him by exclusively
fixing their minds and intelligence on Him. Thus, the
following question may be raised: Just as the Gaṅgā
flows towards the ocean, those whose mano-vṛtti
(attitude or flow of mind) is always running with great
speed towards Śrī Bhagavān can very quickly attain Him;
of this there is no doubt. By what means, however, can
Bhagavān be achieved by those who do not have such
strong citta-vṛtti (flow of thoughts or feelings)
towards Him? In response to this, Śrī Bhagavān has given
a second option. “Those who are unable to firmly and
steadily fix their mind on Me by the previously stated
means should try to achieve Me by abhyāsa-yoga . This
means that they should try to fix the mind on Me by
gradually curbing the tendency of the mind to become
attracted to various sense objects. Such endeavour is
called abhyāsa-yoga . By this abhyāsa-yoga , the mind
slowly becomes attached to Me, after which attaining Me
becomes easy.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “That
previously mentioned nirupādhika-prema is the eternal

                           638
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

function of a mind devoted to Me. To achieve this, one
needs to perform abhyāsa , constant practice. If you are
unable to steadily fix your mind on Me, then it is
better for you to engage in abhyāsa -yoga .”




Śloka 10



abhyāse ‘py asamartho’si

mat-karma-paramo bhava

mad-artham api karmāṇi

kurvan siddhim avāpsyasi


api—if, however; asi—you are; api —also; asamarthaḥ—
unable; abhyāse —to perform the practice of sādhana-
bhakti ; bhava —just be; paramaḥ—devoted; mat-karma —to
My work; kurvan —through performing; karmāṇi —
activities; mad-artham —for My sake; avāpsyasi —you will
obtain; siddhim —perfection.

If you are unable to engage in abhyāsa-yoga, just devote
yourself to acting for Me alone, because by performing
activities such as śr avaṇam and kīrtanam for My
pleasure, you will certainly attain perfection.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“O Arjuna, just as a person whose tongue is affected by
jaundice does not desire to taste miśrī, in the same way
a mind that is polluted by avidyā does not accept the
sweetness of My form. Consequently, if you think that
you are unable to engage in abhyāsa because you cannot
fight with this very powerful, formidable mind, then
listen. By performing virtuous and blessed activities
for My pleasure, such as hearing and chanting about My
pastimes, praying, worshipping, cleaning My temple,
watering Tulasī, collecting flowers and various other
services, you will achieve the perfection of becoming My
loving associate, even without smaraṇam of Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




In the previous śloka, Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructed Arjuna to

                           639
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

adopt abhyāsa -yoga , but with great humility Arjuna
said, “O Prabhu, because the mind is more flickering
than the wind and very difficult to control, I will not
have the strength to restrict it from sense objects by
the practice of abhyāsa -yoga. I have previously
submitted the same opinion at Your lotus feet (in the
śloka : cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa pram āthi balavad dṛḍham
, Gītā 6.34). Therefore, what shall I do?”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, smiling, gave a third option. “If one is even
unable to engage in abhyāsa-yoga , then he should
perform activities that are favourable to bhakti.” By
the influence of activities performed in the service of
Śrī Bhagavān, to His Deity and His temple, such as
building, maintaining and cleaning temples or making a
flower-garden and caring for Tulasī, which can be done
with very little effort, the mind easily becomes
controlled and fixed in meditating on activities which
are related to Bhagavān. Then, by practising the limbs
of śuddha-bh akti such as śravaṇam , kīrtanam and
smaraṇam under the guidance of pure Vaiṣṇavas, one
gradually attains the perfection of bhagavat-sevā.

In this regard, it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.11.34-41), “O Uddhava, a sādhaka gradually attains
the fruit of bhagavat-prema , which is to become My
associate, by engaging with śraddhā in activities such
as taking darśana of, touching, worshipping, serving,
glorifying and paying obeisances to My śrī-vigraha , as
well as My bhaktas , and always chanting about their
qualities and activities. That fruit is also attained by
always hearing about and meditating upon Me, offering
one’s possessions to Me, performing ātma-nivedana
(surrendering one’s very self) to Me in the mood of
dāsya-bhāva (servitorship), taking initiation according
to the processes mentioned in the Vedas and other
śāstras , observing vratas for Me, giving Me flowers and
fruits, cleaning and decorating My temple, watering the
Tulasī garden, and so forth. One should not doubt that
these sādhanas are related to śuddha-bhakti . These
instructions provide a simple means for persons of a
specific adhikāra .”




Śloka 11



athaitad apy aśakto ‘si

karttuṁ mad-yogam āśritaḥ

sarva-karma-phalatyāgaṁ

tataḥ kuru yatātmavān


atha api—if, however; asi—you are; aśaktaḥ—unable;
karttum —to perform; etat —this; (then) āśritaḥ—taking
shelter of; mat-yogam —My bhakti-yoga ; tataḥ—then;
yata-ātmavān —with a controlled mind; kuru —perform;

                            640
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

phalatyāgam —renunciation of the fruits; sarva-karma —of
all your activities.

If, however, you are unable to work for Me in this way,
then take shelter of My bhakti-yoga by renouncing the
results of all your actions and, with a controlled mind,
offer them to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān says, “If you are unable to do this, then
take shelter of My bhakti-yoga and renounce the results
of all actions by offering them to Me” (as described in
the first six chapters).

The first six chapters explain niṣkāma-karma-yoga ,
activities offered to Bhagavān, as the means to attain
mokṣa . The second six chapters describe bhakti-yoga as
the means to attain Bhagavān. This bhakti-yoga is of two
types: (1) the actions of the internal senses which are
steadily fixed on Bhagavān, and (2) the activities of
the external senses. The first type of bhakti-yoga is
further divided into three categories: (1) smaraṇa
(remembrance), (2) manana (meditation) and (3) abhyāsa ,
the practice of those who are unable to constantly
remember but who are attached to attaining such a stage.
These three practices are indeed very difficult for
those who are less intelligent, but they are easy for
those who are free from offences and devoted to pure
intelligence. However, the second type of bhakti -yoga ,
which engages the activities of the external senses (as
previously described) in hearing, chanting and so forth,
is an easy means for everyone. Those who are engaged in
either of these two types of bhakti-yoga are superior to
all others. This is described in the second six chapters
of Bhagavad-gītā. Those who are unable to perform either
of these , and who cannot worship Śrī Bhagavān
faithfully by controlling their senses and minds, are
qualified to perform niṣkāma -karma -yoga offered to
Bhagavān, as described in the first six chapters. They
are inferior to the above two types of bhakti-yogīs .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




In the previous śloka, in the statement mat-karma-paramo
bhava , Śrī Kṛṣṇa gave instructions to clean His temple,
water Tulasī and the flower-gardens, and so forth. After
hearing this, Arjuna wondered what should someone do who
considers these services to Bhagavān, which are simple,
easy and happily performed, to be insignificant and is
unwilling to perform them on account of having taken
birth in a high family or being a respected person in

                           641
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

society. In the present śloka , Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
understanding Arjuna’s mano-bhāva (mind), gives the
fourth option. “If one is unable to perform such simple
services for Śrī Bhagavān, then the only means is to
adopt the process of bhagavad-arpita niṣkāma -karma -
yoga , selfless work offered to Bhagavān.” However, it
is not proper to avoid the performance of services such
as cleaning the temple because of one’s material false
ego. Although King Ambarīṣa was the lord of the earth’s
seven islands, he constantly remained engaged in the
service of Śrī Bhagavān by cleaning the temple with his
own hands and performing other services. According to
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta , King Pratāparudra would sweep
in front of Śrī Jagannātha Deva’s chariot during the
Rathayātrā festival in Jagannātha Purī. Upon seeing such
a service attitude, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu became very
pleased with him. Therefore, according to the
instructions of our guru-varga , to perform even an
insignificant service to Śrī Bhagavān is most auspicious
for us. To think sevā, such as cleaning the temple, is
insignificant, and to consider oneself superior because
of material false ego, causes falldown from pursuance of
the transcendental goal.

If, because of such a superiority complex, one is unable
to engage in sevā as instructed by Bhagavān, then for
him the most compassionate Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is giving
another option. He should perform his prescribed duties
according to varṇāśrama-dharma , without desiring to
enjoy the fruits of his karma , and he should offer the
results to Bhagavān.

Śrī Bhagavān has given four sequential options in
descending order for persons possessing four types of
adhikāra: (1) By fixing one’s mind on the svarūpa of
Bhagavān, one should try to achieve nirupādhika-prema
through the process of śravaṇa , kīrtana and smaraṇa of
the nāma , rūpa , guṇa and līlā

of Bhagavān. This is the path of rāgānuga-bhakti ,
natural attachment.

(2) For those who are unable to absorb the mind in
Bhagavān through the path of attachment, it is better to
take shelter of abhyāsa -yoga by following the path of
vaidhi-bhakti .

(3) For those who are unable to perform even this
abhyāsa-yoga in the form of vaidhi-bhakti , it is
necessary to become devoted to performing work (service)
for Bhagavān. In this way, while being devoted to
working for Bhagavān, they w ill gradually attain
perfection in abhyāsa -yoga , and eventually the mind
will become fixed at the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān.

(4) For those who are unable to even perform karma
(action) in service to Śrī Bhagavān, it is better to
become surrendered to Him and perform that karma
prescribed in the Vedas , offering Him the fruits of all
their actions.

As a result of such actions, one will gradually (step by
step) attain the path leading to parā bhakti , which
imparts knowledge of one’s own svarūpa and that of Bh

                           642
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

agavān.




Śloka 12



śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj

jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate

dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas

tyāgāc chāntir anantaram


śreyaḥ—better; abhyāsāt—than the practice of sādhana ;
(is) jñ ānam —transcendental knowledge; dhyānam—
remembrance of Me; viśiṣyat e —is better; jñ ānāt —than
knowledge; karma-phala-tyāgaḥ—renunciation of the fruits
of action is better; dhyānāt —than remembrance; hi —
because; anantaram —after; tyāgāt —such renunciation;
(there is) śāntiḥ—cessation (of the search by the senses
for any object other than Me).

Better than abhyāsa is the jñāna that gives rise to
contemplation upon Me. Superior to jñ āna is dhyāna,
that meditation by which I am constantly remembered.
Such dhyāna then leads to renunciation of the fruits of
one’s actions, whereby one becomes freed from the
desires to enjoy Svarga and attain mokṣa, and thus
achieves peace of mind.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now, while explaining the gradation of abhyāsa, manana
and smaraṇa in ascending order, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with śreyaḥ. “Jñ āna means to absorb
your intelligence in Me, because such manana
(contemplation) of Me is superior to abhyāsa .” In
abhyāsa , dhyāna (meditation) requires endeavour and is
troublesome, as there are obstacles, but when one
reaches the stage of manana , d hyāna becomes easy. This
is the superiority of jñ āna . Superior to jñ āna ,
however, is dhyāna . If one asks why, the answer is that
dhyāna leads to karma-phala-tyāga , that is, it even
dispells the desires for the results of actions, such as
the pleasures of Svarga and attainment of the result of
niṣkāma-karma (mokṣa ). Even if they become available of
their own accord, one neglects them. Bhaktas who have
not achieved stablility in dhyāna , in whose hearts rati
has not been aroused, desire to give up the pursuit of
liberation (mokṣa-tyāga ). However, those who have
attained stability in dhyāna do not even have the desire
to give up mokṣa , because they disregard it naturally.

                             643
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Only bhakti of this type is called mokṣa-laghutā-kāriṇī
(that which derides even mokṣa ). It has been described
in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.12), in the śloka beginning
with the four words kleśa-ghnī śubhadā, “Devotional
service destroys miseries and bestows auspiciousness.”

It is also said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.14):


na pārameṣṭhyaṁ na mahendra-dhiṣṇyaṁ

na sārvabhaumaṁ na rasādhipatyam

na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā

mayy arpitātmecchati mad vinānyat


Those who have surrendered their hearts to Me do not
desire the positions of Brahmā or Indra, sovereignty
over the whole earth, the kingdom of the lower planets,
mystic perfections such as aṇimā, or even the state of
liberation. They desire nothing but Me.

The phrase mayy arpitātmecchati in the above quoted
Bhāgavatam śloka means, “To be steadfast in My dhyāna .”

The word tyāgāt in the present śloka means, “One becomes
peaceful only when he is free from material desires.
This means that besides being attracted to My form,
qualities and so on, one’s senses become detached from
all other sense objects.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Within these three types of bhakti—namely smaraṇa
(remembrance), manana (contemplation) and abhyāsa
(practice)—jñ āna in the form of manana (placing one’s
intelligence in Śrī Bhagavān), is superior to abhyāsa .

Superior to jñāna in the form of manana is dhyāna ,
which is characterised by smaraṇa (rememberance) . This
is because, in that jñ āna which is characterised by
manana , one only achieves dhyāna with great endeavour
and trouble. But when one becomes perfect in manana ,
then dhyāna (smaraṇa ) is achieved easily. When one
becomes perfect in dhyāna , his desires for the
pleasures of Svarga and mokṣa are dispelled. When
desires for sense enjoyment and mokṣa are dispelled, the
mind becomes attached to the form, qualities, etc., of
Bhagavān. In such a state, one beco mes detached from
all other sense objects, and thus one naturally attains
peace. But if one has not attained perfection in dhyāna
, then such a sādhaka who is also unable to perform
abhyāsa (the practice) of dhyāna should engage in
niṣkāma -karma -yoga which is offered to Bhagavān. By
this process one can gradually perform bhakti to
Bhagavān with a peaceful mind.

                           644
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, sādhana-bhakti is the only means to attain
nirupādhika-prema (unalloyed love) . This bhakti-yoga is
of two types: (1) the activities of the internal sense,
the mind that is fixed on Bhagavān; and (2) the
activities of the external senses. The activities of the
internal sense, the mind which is fixed on Bhagavān, is
of three types: smaraṇa (remembrance), manana
(contemplation) and abhyāsa (practice), but for less
intelligent people, these three types of activities are
very difficult to perform. The second type of bhakti ,
the actions of the external senses in the form of
hearing and chanting, is easily performed by everyone.
Therefore, manana , intelligence in relation to Me, is
the superior jñ āna , and is better than abhyāsa . Here,
jñ āna does not refer to jñ āna-yoga . During abhyāsa ,
one performs dhyāna with endeavour, but when one
achieves the result of abhyāsa , which is manana ,
dhyāna is easily performed. Dhyāna is superior to mere
jñ āna , because, when dhyāna becomes stable, one
becomes free from the desire to enjoy either the
pleasures of Svarga or the happiness of mokṣa . When
both of these desires are dispelled, one achieves peace
in the form of detachment from all sense objects, but
not detachment from My transcendental form, qualities,
etc.”




Ślokas 13—14




adveṣṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ

maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca

nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ

sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ kṣamī

santuṣṭaḥ satataṁ yogī

yatātmā dṛḍha-niścayaḥ

mayy arpita-mano-buddhir

yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ


saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; (is) adveṣṭā—non-envious; sarva-
bhūtānām —to all living beings; maitraḥ—friendly to all
persons; karuṇaḥ eva ca —and merciful to lowly persons;
(who is) nirmamaḥ—free from possessiveness; (who is)
nir-aham-kāraḥ—devoid of false ego; sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ—
even-minded in happiness and distress (considering them
the fruits of prārabdha-karma ); kṣamī—tolerant; satatam
—always; santuṣṭaḥ—fully satisfied; yogī—who is linked-
up in bhakti-yoga ; yata-ātmā—sense-controlled; dṛḍha-
niścayaḥ—firmly determined to perform ananya-bhakti ;

                           645
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

arpita —who has offered; mano-buddhiḥ—mind and
intelligence; mayi —to Me; (that) mat-bhaktaḥ—bhakta of
Mine; (is) priyaḥ—dear; me —to Me.

My bhakta who is non-envious, compassionate and friendly
towards all living beings, free from feelings of
possessiveness, devoid of false ego and even-minded in
both happiness and distress, who is forgiving, ever-
content, endowed with bhakti-yoga, in control of his
senses, resolutely determined and dedicated to Me in
both mind and intelligence, is very dear to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What is the nature of the bhaktas who have attained the
aforementioned stage of peace?” Expecting th is question
from Arjuna, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the various
qualities of His different types of bhaktas in eight
ślokas , the first of which begins with the word
adveṣṭā. A person who is not envious of one who envies
him, but instead maintains a friendly attitude towards
him, is called adveṣṭā. Desiring that such a
discontented person should not become degraded or fall
down due to his envious attitude, bhaktas feel only
compassion for him. If someone questions how, and with
what type of discrimination one can show friendship and
compassion towards an envious person, the answer is that
these moods exist naturally within the bhaktas , who do
not discriminate. “Because My bhakta is nirmamaḥ,
meaning that he does not have a feeling of
possessiveness towards son, wife and so forth, and does
not falsely identify with the body, he is free from envy
towards anyone.” Furthermore, why should he discriminate
when, by not doing so, he can avoid the misery arising
from envy? One may wonder if he would feel any bodily pa
in if another person ran at him or beat him with shoes
or a fist. In response Bhagavān says: sama-duḥkha-
sukhaḥ. “He remains even-minded both in happiness and in
misery.”

As Candrārdha Śekhara (Lord Śiva) says in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (6.17.28): nārārayaṇa-par ah sarve na .
“Those who are devoted to Śrī Nārāyaṇa do not fear
anyone because they see Svarga, mokṣa and naraka (hell)
as equal.” To see happiness and distress as equal is
called sama-darśitva . Moreover, they think that any
misery coming to them is the result of their prārabdha-
karma , it must be faced. Becoming equipoised, they
endure all misery with great tolerance. To convey this,
Śrī Bhagavān says that they are kṣamī, or forgiving. The
root word kṣam is used in the sense of tolerance.

If the question is raised as to how such bhaktas
maintain their lives, the response is santuṣṭaḥ, that
is, they remain satisfied with whatever eatables they
get by the will of providence or with little endeavour.
Arjuna asked, “But earlier You said that they are even-
minded both in misery and happiness, satisfied even if

                           646
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

they face the hardship of not getting any food, so how
can it be that they feel satisfaction when attaining
food for themselves? This seems contradictory.” In
response Śrī Bhagavān says: satataṁ yogī. “Being endowed
with bhakti-yoga , they want to maintain their bodies
simply to attain perfection in bhakti .” As it is said,
“One must endeavour to acquire food to maintain one’s
life. Such maintenance of the body is proper, because
only by keeping the body healthy can one think of the
Absolute, and by specific knowledge of the Absolute, one
can attain brahma .” If, by the will of providence, they
do not get anything to eat, they remain undisturbed
(yatātmā). And if they have to face a situation that
disturbs their minds, they still do not engage in the
practice of aṣṭāṅga-yoga to pacify it. For this reason,
they are known as dṛḍha-niścayaḥ, that is, they never
deviate from their sole purpose of attaining ananya-
bhakti to Bhagavān. They remain devoted to remembrance
of and contemplation on Bhagavān. “Such bhaktas are dear
to Me, as they act in such a way that is pleasing to
Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In previous ślokas, after explaining the various types
of sādhana practised by aikāntika (one-pointed) and sa-
niṣṭhita (steadfast) bhaktas , Śrī Bhagavān is
explaining their qualities in the next seven ślokas .
Here, the word adveṣṭā means that they do not even envy
those who are envious of them. They think that such envy
of them is the result of their prārabdha-k arma as given
by Parameśvara and therefore they envy no one. Rather,
considering everyone as the dwelling place of
Parameśvara, they maintain a friendly attitude towards
all. Upon seeing the misery of others, they try to
remove it, whatever the cause may b e; therefore, they
are compassionate. They consider the body and anything
related to the body as transformations of material
nature and different from their ātma-svarūpa (own self);
thus they do not even have a feeling of possessiveness
toward their own bodies, and while performing their
activities, they remain free from false bodily
identification. When they have to face material
happiness and distress, they become neither elated nor
disturbed as they are steady in both. Because they are
forgiving, they are also tolerant. Since they remain
content in all situations of loss or gain, fame or
infamy, victory or defeat, they are yogīs and remain
steadily fixed in the sādhana given to them by Śrī
Gurudeva. The word yatātmā means one who has control
over the senses. Since they cannot be disturbed by any
false logic, their determination is firm. In this
material world, no misery can deviate them from
bhagavad-bhakti . This is the special quality of
aikāntika-bhaktas. They are endowed with the firm faith
that, “I am the servant of Bhagavān,” and their mind,
body and everything else is surrendered unto the lotus
feet of Śrī Bhagavān. Therefore, such bhaktas are dear

                           647
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

to Him. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.11.29-32), Śrī Kṛṣṇa
describes these qualities to His devotee Uddhava. They
are also described in Caitanya-caritāmṛta , Madhyalīlā
(22.78-80).




Śloka 15



yasmān nodvijate loko

lokān nodvijate ca yaḥ

harṣāmarṣa-bhayodvegair

mukto yaḥ sa ca me priyaḥ


saḥ—one; yaḥ—who; yasmāt —by whom; lokaḥ—people; na
udvijate —are not disturbed; ca —and; yaḥ—who; na
udvijate —is not disturbed; lokāt—by (other) people;
muktaḥ—liberated; harṣa —from elation; amarṣa —
intolerance; bhaya —fear; ca udvegaiḥ—and anxiety; (is)
priyaḥ—dear; me —to Me.

The bhakta who neither disturbs anyone, nor is himself
disturbed by others, and who is free from mundane
happiness, intolerance, fear and anxiety is certainly
dear to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Moreover, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.18.12) it is said,
“The devas along with all their good qualities only
reside fully in those who have akiñcana-bhakti for
Bhagavān.” Such statements of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also
confirm that all the good qualities which please Śrī
Bhagavān arise naturally by continuous abhyāsa (practice
of His bhakti ). “Now hear those qualities in five
ślokas , the first beginning with yasmāt . My bhakta is
free from mundane elation, intolerance, etc.” While
explaining the rarity of qualities like these, Śrī
Bhagavān further says: yo na hṛṣyati , etc. (Gītā
12.17).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In these ślokas, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is describing other

                            648
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

qualities which naturally manifest in the bhaktas by the
influence of bhakti . “As I said previously, there is no
possibility of My bhaktas ’ behaviour causing anybody
any harm, since they are free from the tendency to be
violent towards any living being, and have a friendly
and compassionate disposition towards all. They do not
create any fear or anxiety in anyone. Nobody can agitate
them in any way, because they are even-minded both in
happiness and misery. When they attain their desired
goal, they do not feel elated; they do not become
envious by seeing the superiority or progress of others,
and their minds are never disturbed by fear or the
anxiety of losing a possession.” The import is this:
“Those bhaktas who are free from elation, envy, fear and
agitation are most dear to Me.”




Śloka 16



anapekṣaḥ śucir dakṣa

udāsīno gata-vyathaḥ

sarvārambha-parityāgī

yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ


saḥ—that; mat-bhaktaḥ—bhakta of Mine; yaḥ—who; (is)
anapekṣaḥ—indifferent; śuc iḥ—pure; dakṣaḥ—expert;
udāsīnaḥ—aloof; gata-vyathaḥ—free from agitation; (and
who) parityāgī—has fully renounced; sarva-ārambha —all
endeavours; (is) priyaḥ—dear; me —to Me.

That bhakta of Mine who is indifferent to all mundane
activities, who is internally and externally pure, who
is expert, aloof, free from all agitation and careful to
avoid any activity unfavourable to bhakti, is dear to
Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Anapekṣah means, “My bhaktas are unconcerned about all
mundane affairs.” Udāsinaḥ means that they remain
indifferent in their dealings with society. It becomes a
part of their nature to give up the seen (that which
they are conscious of) and unseen (that which they are
not aware of) fruits of their mundane activities and, if
spiritual endeavours such as teaching śāstra become
unfavourable to their bhakti , they naturally give them
up.



                           649
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Furthermore it is said, “My bhaktas — who are anapekṣa
(free from the desire for objects that become available
of their own accord), who are pure externally and
internally, expert in grasping the essence of the Vedic
literature, who are unbiased, indifferent, not agitated
even when mistreated by others, and who do not make the
slightest endeavour to perform any pious or impious work
which is unfavourable to their bhagavad-bhakti —are dear
to Me.”




Śloka 17



yo na hṛṣyati na dveṣṭi

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

śubhāśubha-parityāgī

bhaktimān yaḥ sa me priyaḥ


saḥ bhaktimān—that devoted person; yaḥ—who; na hṛṣyati —
neither becomes elated; na dveṣṭi —nor grieves; yaḥ—who;
na śocati —neither laments; na kaṅkṣati —nor hankers;
parityāgī—who fully renounces; śubha-aśubha—the results
of pious and impious actions; (is) priyaḥ—dear; me—to
Me.

He who neither delights in mundane pleasures nor
despairs in worldly sorrows, who does not lament for any
loss or hanker for any gain, who renounces both pious
and impious activities, and who serves Me with loving
devotion, is indeed My dear bhakta.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




“Those bhaktas who neither become overwhelmed with joy
when they have a dear son or get a good disciple, or
feel dejected over a wayward son or bad disciple, who do
not become absorbed in lamentation at the loss of some
lovable object, or desire some pleasing object which
they do not have, who do not engage in either pious or
sin-ful activities, and who are devoted unto Me, are
dear to Me.”


                             650
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Ślokas 18—19




samaḥ śatrau ca mitre ca

tathā mānāpamānayoḥ

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu

samaḥ saṅga-vivarjitaḥ


tulya-nindā-stutir maunī

santuṣṭo yena kenacit

aniketaḥ sthira-matir

bhaktimān me priyo naraḥ


bhaktimān—the devoted; naraḥ—man; (who is) samaḥ—equal;
śatrau—towards an enemy; ca —and; mitre —friend; ca
tathā—as well as; māna-apamānayoḥ—in honour and
dishonour; samaḥ—equal; śīta-uṣṇa —in cold and heat;
sukha-duḥkheṣu —happiness and unhappiness; saṅga-
vivarjitaḥ—free from attachment to (mundane)
association; tulya—equal; nindā-stutiḥ—in blame and
praise; maunī—silent; santuṣṭaḥ—fully satisfied; yena
kenacit —by whatever necessities for bodily maintenance
come to him (by the Lord’s grace); aniketaḥ—without
attachment to any residence; (and) sthira-matiḥ—whose
mind is fixed; (is) priyaḥ—dear; me —to Me.

Being blessed with My bhakti, he who looks equally upon
friends and enemies, who is equipoised in honour and
dishonour, heat and cold, joy and anguish, praise and
criticism; who is free from unfavourable association,
who practises silence by controlling his speech, who
remains satisfied with whatever comes to him, who is
without attachment to his place of residence and whose
intelligence is firmly fixed, such a bhakta is naturally
dear to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word aniketaḥ means without attachment to mundane
possessions such as a house.




                           651
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Kṛṣṇa now concludes His glorification of the natural
qualities of His dear bhaktas in the present two ślokas
. They behave equally towards enemies and friends, and
they remain equipoised in honour and dishonour, heat and
cold and happiness and distress. They are not attached
to any bad association, and do not feel unhappy when
criticised or happy when glorified. They do not speak
anything except bhagavat-kathā. They remain content with
either palatable or unpalatable foodstuffs which are
useful for the maintenance of the body a nd which come
by the will of Bhagavān. They do not reside in one
place, and their intelligence is fixed and focused on
the transcendental goal. Such bhaktas are dear to Him.




Śloka 20




ye tu dharmāmṛtam idaṁ

yathoktaṁ paryupāsate

śraddadhānā mat-paramā

bhaktās te’tīva me priyāḥ

tu—indeed; te—those; bhaktāḥ—bhaktas ; ye —who; (are)
śraddadhānāḥ—faithful; mat-paramāḥ—devoted to Me; (and)
paryupāsate —worship in every way; idam —this; dharma-
amṛtam —nectarean dharma ; yathā—as; uktam—described (by
Me); (are) atīva —extremely; priyāḥ—dear; me—to Me.

Certainly, those bhaktas who engage in My exclusive
bhajana with firm faith and worship this nectarean
dharma that I have described are exceedingly dear to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




While concluding His description of the characteristics
in which His bhaktas are steadily fixed, Śrī Bhagavān is
explaining the result for those who hear, study or
meditate on these instructions with a desire to attain
them. These characteristics are all born of bhakti and
bring peace. They are not material qualities. It is
said: bhaktyā tuṣyati kṛṣṇo na guṇaiḥ. “Kṛṣṇa is pleased
only by bhakti , not by any material qualities.” There
are unlimited statements like this in the śāstra .


                            652
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Here the word tu (but) is used to show a different
subject. Bhaktas who have the above-stated
characteristics are fixed in certain good qualities. But
bhakti sādhakas who desire all these qualities are
superior to perfected mystics and those who have
perfected jñ āna . The word atīva has been used here to
indicate this.

Bhakti is supreme, pleasurable and the most easily
achievable among all sādhyas (goals). In this chapter,
many such qualities of bhakti have been delineated. Jñ
āna has been described as nimba (a bitter lemon) and
bhakti as drākṣa (sweet grapes). Sādhakas who are greedy
for their respective tastes accept a particular one,
according to their desires.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on theTwelfth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In concluding this chapter, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa says,
“Those who are devoted to Me and endowed with faith
thoroughly worship this dharmāmṛta , the nectarean
dharma of immortality, as described by Me. Such bhaktas
of Mine are very dear to Me.” Bhagavān is only pleased
by bhakti , not merely by a person’s qualities. All good
qualities naturally manifest in bhaktas by the influence
of bhakti. There is no possibility of good qualities
arising in non-devotees who are averse to Hari.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.18.12) says:


yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā

sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ

harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā

manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ


All the devatās along with their superior qualities
become manifest in the body of one who has developed
unalloyed bhakti to Śrī Bhagavān. On the other hand, a
person who is devoid of bhakti and engaged in material
activities has no good qualities. He is driven by his
own mental speculations, and must submit to the Lord’s
external potency. How can there be any good qualities in
such a man?

Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has written that the intention of
the Twelfth Chapter is to determine which is the
superior worship of Śrī Bhagavān, nirguṇa (impersonal)
or saguṇa (personal).

                           653
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa writes, “Among the various
types of sādhana, only śuddha-bhakti , which is
supremely effective and performed without any trouble,
quickly bestows attainment of Bhagavān. This is the e
ssence of this chapter.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Those who are devoted to Me faithfully worship, hear,
study, contemplate and practise this dharmāmṛta as
described by Me from beginning to end. They are, indeed,
My bhaktas and therefore are very dear to Me. A jīva
attains nirupādhika-prema (pure love free from all
motivation) by following this gradual, step-by-step
process, as described by Me.”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Twelfth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Thirteen


Prakṛti-Puruṣa-Vibhāga-Yoga



Yoga Through Understanding the Distinction Between
Material Nature and the Enjoyer




Śloka 1



arjuna uvāca—

prakṛtiṁ puruṣaṁ caiva

kṣetraṁ kṣetrajñam eva ca

etad veditum icchāmi

jñānaṁ jñeyañ ca keśava


arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; keśava—O Keśava; icchāmi —I
desire; veditum —to understand; etat eva —these specific
things; prakṛtim —nature; ca —and; puruṣam —the enjoyer;
kṣetram —the field; ca —and; kṣetra-jñam —the knower of
the field; jñ ānam —knowledge; ca —and; jñeyam —the
object of knowledge.


Arjuna said: O Keśava, I would like to understand
prakṛti (nature), puruṣa (the enjoyer), kṣetra (the
field), kṣetra-jña (the knower of the field), jñ āna
(knowledge), and jñeya (the object of knowledge).

                            654
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




I pay my obeisances unto bhagavad-bhakti, a portion of
which is mercifully situated in processes such as jñ āna
Ç so as to make them successful. Bhakti-miśra-j ñ āna ,
or jñ āna which is mixed with bhakti is described in
this third set of six chapters. They also indirectly
refer to the supremacy of kevala-bhakti. The Thirteenth
Chapter specifically deals with the subjects of the body
(kṣetra ), the jīvātmā and Paramātmā (kṣetrajña ), the
sādhana to attain knowledge of them, the puruṣa
(enjoyer) and prakṛti (nature).

Bhagavān is attained only by kevala-bhakti. This is
described in the second set of six chapters. These
chapters also describe three types of worship, such as
ahaṅ-graha-upāsanā. A niṣkāma-karma-yogī attains mokṣa
by bhakti-miśra -jñ āna (jñ āna mixed with bhakti ),
which was described in brief in the first six chapters.
The third set of six chapters now begins. It explains in
detail kṣetra (the field), kṣetra-jña (the knower of the
field) and so forth.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā consists of eighteen chapters,
which have been divided into three divisions. The first
six chapters describe niṣkāma -karma -yoga , bhakti-
miśra-j ñ āna and topics which are relevant for
knowledge of the jīvātmā and Paramātmā. The second set
of six chapters explains the glory of kevala-bhakti ,
deliberates on parā and aparā bhakti , and describes the
glory of Śrī Bhagavān’s svarūpa , as well as the glory
of the svarūpa of the bhakta. It also explains the
speciality and supremacy of bhakti among various
processes, and gives details of other similar topics.
Tattvajñ āna is explained in detail in the third set of
six chapters. It was previously described only in brief.
The present description is part of a deliberation on
prakṛti (material nature), puruṣa (the enjoyer), kṣetra
(the field) and kṣetra-jña (the knower of the field).
The most confidential instruction of Śrī Gītā is finally
delivered in the Eighteenth Chapter.

In the first śloka of this chapter, Arjuna is inquiring
about the principles such as prakṛti , puruṣa , kṣetra ,
kṣetra-jña , jñ āna and jñeya , however, some
commentators have purposely omitted this first śloka
which raises these questions.



                           655
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 2




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya

kṣetram ity abhidhīyate

etadyo vetti taṁ prāhuḥ

kṣetrajña iti tad-vidaḥ


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Lord said; kaunteya—O
son of Kuntī; idam —this; śarīram —body; abhidhīyate —is
known; iti —as; kṣetram —the field; (he) yaḥ—who; vetti
—knows; etat —this; prāhuḥ—describe; tam —that (person);
iti —thus; (as) kṣetra-jñaḥ—the knower of the field;
(by) tat-vidaḥ—persons conversant with that truth.


Śrī Bhagavān said: O Kaunteya, this body is known as
kṣetra (the field), and one who knows this body is
called kṣetra-jña (the knower of the field), by those
endowed with knowledge of kṣetra and kṣetra-jña .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




What is kṣetra and who is kṣetra-jña? In reply to this
question, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with
the word idam . This body is the refuge of all sense
enjoyment through the medium of the senses and is indeed
called kṣetra. In other words, it is the origin of the
tree of material existence. Those in bondage are covered
by the misconception, of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ in relation to
their bodies. This is generated by the false ego. They
are freed from this misconception however, in the
liberated stage. In other words, they remain free from
attachment to the body when they are liberated. The jīva
situated in either of these stages is known as kṣetra-
jña . Like a farmer, he alone is kṣetra-jña , the knower
of his field, and the enjoyer of its fruits.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.12.23) Śrī Bhagavān says:


adanti caikaṁ phalam asya gṛdhrā

grāme-carā ekam araṇya-vāsāḥ

haṁsā ya ekaṁ bahu-rūpam ijyair


                           656
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

māyā-mayaṁ veda sa veda vedam


Those ignorant conditioned souls who are greedy to
acquire sense objects experience misery as one of the
fruits of this tree of material existence. Places like
Svarga are also ultimately miserable. However swan-like
mukta-jīvas (liberated souls) who live in the tree enjoy
another type of fruit, namely the happiness of muktiÇ
which is always blissful. Thus, the one tree of material
existence leads to various destinations such as Svarga,
Naraka (hell) and mukti. This tree, therefore, is seen
to be composed of māyā (illusion) and it has multiple
forms because it is born from māyā-śakti. Only those who
accept a sad-guru understand this secret, and it is they
who actually know kṣetra and kṣetra-jña .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After hearing Arjuna’s questions, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
describes the body of the conditioned jīva which, along
with his life air and senses, is the place of enjoyment
and is called the kṣetra . One who knows this body
understands that it is the means of enjoyment for those
in the conditioned state, and the means of attaining
liberation for those in the stage of mokṣa . The jīva
situated in either of these states is called kṣetra-jña.
However, Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa says: śarīrātmāvādī
tu kṣetraj ño na na kṣetratvena tat jñ ānābhāvāt. “That
jīva who identifies himself with this body does not
understand the tattva of the body. Therefore, he is not
kṣetra-jña .”

Those who accept this body as their self consider it to
be a means of enjoyment only. Intoxicated by the
material false ego, they become bound to saṁsāra
(material existence). Life after life, their only
attainment is misery. On the contrary, those who become
free from the materialistic ego while remaining in this
body, and who render service to Śrī Hari, gradually
attain the happiness of mokṣa. They become successful
after attaining the bliss of rendering service to
Bhagavān. This has been confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.12.23):


adanti caikaṁ phalam asya gṛdhrā

grāme-carā ekam araṇya-vāsāḥ

haṁsā ya ekaṁ bahu-rūpam ijyair

māyā-mayaṁ veda sa veda vedam


Those attached to family life and who hanker after
mundane pleasures, taste only the miserable fruit of
bodily enjoyment, while the wise and swan-like sannyāsīs

                           657
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

, who have renounced all material goals, taste only the
blissful fruit of transcendental happiness.


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes, “Śrī Bhagavān says:
‘O Arjuna! To make you clearly understand bhakti-tattva,
which is supremely confidential, I first explained the
svarūpa of the ātmā. I then explained the various types
of activities (karma ) of the baddha-jīvas and the
svarūpa (nature) of nirupādhika -bhakti (unalloyed
bhakti free from all designations). To realise the
highest end, I concluded with a presentation on the
three types of abhidheya (means): jñ āna , karma and
bhakti . At present, I am giving a special description
of jñ āna and vairāgya based on scientific reasoning.
You will become more fixed in nirupādhika bhakti-tattva
by hearing this.


jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me


yad vijñāna-samanvitam

sarahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca

gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.31


While instructing the catuḥ-ślokī

to Brahmā, I described four subjects: jñ āna
(knowledge), vijñ āna (realised knowledge), rahasya
(confidential or secret topics) and tad-aṅga (the limbs
or various aspects of those confidential topics). The
hidden meaning of bhakti-tattva does not manifest in the
heart without properly understanding these four
essential topics. Therefore, I am giving you the pure
intelligence which is needed to understand this rahasya
, along with instructions on vijñ āna . When viśuddha-
bhakti arises, causeless knowledge and renunciation
appear side by side. These are the two concomitant
fruits experienced while engaging in bhakti . O
Kaunteya, this body is called kṣetra and those who know
this kṣetra are called kṣetra-jña .




Śloka 3




kṣetrajñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi


sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata

kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ

                             658
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama


ca—and; bhārata—O scion of Bhārata; viddhi —know; mām —
Me; api —also; (to be) kṣetra-jñam —the knower of the
field; sarva-kṣetreṣu —within all the fields; (it is)
tat—that; jñ ānam —knowledge; kṣetra-kṣetra-jñayoḥ—of
the field and the knower of the field; yat —which; (is
actual) jñ ānam—knowledge; (this is) mama —My; matam —
opinion.


O Bhārata, know Me alone to be the knower in all kṣetras
(bodies). This knowledge of the body as kṣetra , and the
jīva and Īśvara as kṣetra-jña , is certainly true
knowledge in My opinion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Thus, the living entity is called kṣetra-jña because he
has knowledge of kṣetra (the body), but Paramātmā
completely kno ws all kṣetras , more so than the jīvas.
This śloka , beginning with the word kṣetra-jñam ,
explains His kṣetra-jñatva (quality of knowing the
kṣetra ). Śrī Bhagavān says, “Know Me, Paramātmā, to be
kṣetra-jñaÇ who is situated as the controller in all
kṣetras . The jīva is the kṣetra-jña only of his
individual kṣetra , and his knowledge of kṣetra is also
incomplete. I alone am the perfect and complete knower
of all kṣetras . Consider this to be My speciality.”

What is jñāna? Anticipating this question, Śrī Bhagavān
says, “Knowledge of kṣetra (the body) along with kṣetra-
jña (the jīvātmā and Paramātmā), is indeed called jñ āna
. I accept this as actual knowledge.”

Paramātmā is the superior of the two puruṣas, or kṣetra-
jñas. Some persons explain that there is only one ātmā.
This is rejected here, and it also contradicts a later
statement of the Gītā (15.17).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Although the word kṣetra-jña was used in the previous
śloka to indicate the embodied soul or the jīva situated
within the body, in the present śloka Śrī Bhagavān, who
is sarva-antaryāmī (the indwelling witness in all),
sarveśvara (the Lord of all), sarva-niyantā (the Supreme
Controller) and Paramātmā, explains the perfect kṣetra-
jña , not the jīva .


                            659
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

The essence of Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s commentary
on this śloka is as follows: “The jīva remains situated
in this body just as a subject is situated under a king,
even though he is kṣetra-jña and has knowledge of his
own kṣetra as a means of enjoyment and liberation.
However, I alone am his controller and maintainer, and,
thus, I am the perfect kṣetra-jña because I know all
kṣetras. Thus, I remain situated like a king.”

It is also seen in the smṛti:


kṣetrāṇi hi śarīrāṇi

bījaṁ cāpi śubhāśubhe

tāni vetti sa yogātmā

tataḥ kṣetra-jña ucyate


The entire body is like a kṣetra , and righteous and
unrighteous actions are like the seeds of that body in
that they are the cause. That yogātma puruṣa (Paramātmā)
knows the tattva (essence) of all bodies or kṣetras. He
is therefore called the perfect kṣetra-jña .


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (8.3.13) also says:


kṣetra-jñāya namas tubhyaṁ

sarvādhyakṣāya sākṣiṇe

puruṣāyātma-mūlāya

mūla-prakṛtaye namaḥ


In his commentary on this śloka, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes: kṣetraṁ dehadvayaṁ tattvena
jānātīti k ṣetrajño ‘antary āmī. “Antaryāmī knows the
tattva of both the subtle and gross bodies and is called
kṣetra-jña .” Furthermore, Śrī Bhagavān says in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (8.17.11): kṣetra-jñaḥ sarva bh ūtānām Ç “One
who knows all living beings is called kṣetra-jña .”

The import of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s statement is that true
knowledge means to have knowledge of kṣetra (the body),
its knower (the jīvātmāÇ conditioned or liberated) and
Paramātmā (the original kṣetra-jña ), who is situated
within all. However, Paramātmā svarūpa is different from
the baddha-jīvas (kṣara ) and the mukta-jīvas (akṣara )
and superior to them. Therefore, the imaginary
conception that the jīvātmā and Paramātmā are one is
against the conclusion of śāstra . Also the śruti
statement, nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām eko bahūnāṁ
yo vidadhāti kāmān , describes Paramātmā as being
superior to all living, conscious, eternal jīvas and
their controller and prompter. This conclusion is
verified throughout the Gītā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna,
“Because you are a jīva , you forget this fact again and
again, but as Parameśvara, I never forget it.” According

                             660
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

to the statement, mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke jīva-bhūtaḥ
sanātanaḥ, the jīva is an insignificant part of
Bhagavān. The jīva is eternally His part, and in no
state can he become one with Bhagavān by merging with
Him.

The statement that brahma Himself has become a jīva due
to ignorance and when freed from ignorance, the jīva
becomes brahma , is also incorrect from the perspective
of reasoning, logic and śāstra. Ignorance can never
touch parabrahma who remains jñ āna-svarūpa
(intrinsically qualified as knowledge) in all states. It
is said in the śruti : satyaṁ jñ ānam anantaṁ brahma.
“Parabrahma never falls into ignorance by being
overpowered by māyā.” Thousands of Vedic statements give
evidence of this. So in this material body there are two
kṣetra-jñas : the jīvātmā and Paramātmā. Paramātmā is
the controller, prompter and imminent witness of the
different jīvas who are situated in different bodies as
localised kṣetra-jñas . Paramātmā and the jīva can never
be one.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “In
regard to kṣetra (the field) and kṣetra-jña (the knower
of the field), there are three principles: Īśvara, the
jīva and jaḍa (inert matter). Just as there is one
kṣetra-jña (the jīvātmā) in each body, know Me, Īśvara,
to be the principal kṣetra-jña of this entire inert
world. By My aiśī-śakti (controlling potency) as
Paramātmā, I am the kṣetra-jña of all kṣetra-jñas and of
the universe. The jñ āna of those who have understood
these three principles by deliberating on kṣetra and
kṣetra-jña is indeed vijñ āna .”




Śloka 4



tat kṣetraṁ yac ca yādṛk ca

yad-vikāri yataś ca yat

sa ca yo yat prabhāvaś ca

tat samāsena me śṛṇu


śṛṇu—hear; tat—this; me —from Me; samāsena —in brief;
yat —what; tat —that; kṣetram —field (is); ca —and;
yādṛk —what its nature (is); ca —and; yat-vikāri —what
its transformations (are); yataḥ—whence; ca —and; yat —
for what reason (it is existing); ca —and; saḥ yaḥ—he
who (is the kṣetra-jña ); ca —and; yat-prabhāvaḥ—what
his influence (is).


Hear from Me a brief description of that   kṣetra, its
characteristics and transformations, why   and from whom
it has come into existence, and what the   svarūpa
(nature) and influence of the kṣetra-jña   is.

                            661
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this śloka beginning with the words tat kṣetram , Śrī
Bhagavān is beginning to elaborate on the meaning which
was previously only spoken of briefly. What is that
kṣetra or body? It is a combination of five elements
(mahābhūta ), the life air (prāṇa ) and the senses
(indriya ). “Hear from Me how this kṣetra (field
consisting of a gross and subtle body) possesses
different types of natures, desires and transformations
such as enmity and friendship. Hear how it is born from
the union of prakṛti (material nature) and puruṣa (the
enjoyer), and how it manifests differently in varieties
of moving and non-moving forms. That kṣetra-jña is the
jīvātmā and also Paramātmā.” According to the rules of
Sanskrit grammar, kṣetra-jña is in the neutral gender
here because the word kṣetra is used in the neutral
gender.




Śloka 5




ṛṣibhir bahudhā gītaṁ

chandobhir vividhaiḥ pṛthak

brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva

hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ


(this knowledge) gītam—has been described in song;
bahudhā pṛthak —in several distinct ways; ṛṣibhiḥ—by the
sages; vividhaiḥ—through various; chandobhiḥ—Vedic
ślokas ; ca —and; eva hetumadbhiḥ—with reasonable;
viniścitaiḥ—and perfectly ascertained conclusions;
brahma-sūtra-padaiḥ—through the sūtras of Vedānta-sūtra
and Brahmasūtra.


This tattva of kṣetra and kṣetra-jña has been explained
in several different ways by the ṛṣis in numerous Vedic
literatures, and it is sung with perfect logic and
definitive conclusions in the Brahmasūtra .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                            662
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



“Whose description of this subject matter are You going
to briefly explain to me?” Anticipating this question
from Arjuna, Śrī Bhagavān says, “Saints like Vasiṣṭha
and others have described this in their Yoga-śāstras.
Chandobhir means that it is also explained in the Vedas.
Moreover, it is described in the Brahmasūtra in sūtras
(aphorisms) such as, athāto brahma-jij ñ āsā. “Therefore
one should enquire about brahma ” (Brahmasūtra 1.1.1).
Since brahma , the Supreme Absolute Truth, is
substantiated by these sūtras , they are known as pada
(that which gives evidence to establish Him) . What is
the nature of that brahma ? In response to this
question, Śrī Bhagavān explains, “This specifically
addresses the objections of the hetuka-gana (seers who
investigate the cause and effect of the universe).” This
is evident by deliberating upon the truth of the
substantial imports of Brahmasūtra , ikṣhate nāśabdam ,
“The Supreme Lord is not indescribable,” (Brahmasūtra
1.1.5) and ānandamayo ‘bhyāsāt , “By nature the Supreme
Lord is blissful” (Brahmasūtra 1.1.12).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The tattva of kṣetra and its kṣetra-jña , as explained
by Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is accepted by all philosophers. This
siddhānta is clearly established in authoritative
śāstras such as the Vedas , the Upaniṣads and the
Brahmasūtras . The Vedas are apauruṣeya (not created by
a conditioned person) so they are accepted by everyone.
The essence of the Vedas is called Vedānta (the
Upaniṣads ).

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa, an avatāra of Bhagavān,
reconciled the seemingly contradictory statements of the
Vedas and presented them in the form of sūtras known as
the Vedānta-sūtra . Statements of the Vedānta-sūtras
such as ikṣate nāśabdam (Brahmasūtra 1.1.5) and
ānandamayo ‘bhyāsāt (Brahmasūtra 1.1.12) confirm this
conclusion. ‘Ikṣate nāśabdam means that brahma can be
seen and experienced only through śāstra because He is
na aśabdam. This means that He cannot be known (na )
other than through words (aśabdam ). That is to say, He
is knowable only through śabda (words) .’ This is
explained in Brahmasūtra (1.1.3): śāstra-yonitvāt.
“Brahma can be known and experienced through śāstra .”
Brahma is the subject matter established by the Vedas ;
therefore, He is not beyond śabda (words). How is He
experienced? In response to this question, it is further
said: ānandamayo ‘bhyāsāt. “Paramānandamaya brahma ,
whose very nature is supreme bliss, can be seen and
experienced by the practice of bhakti .” These
statements establish parabrahma as the perfect or
complete kṣetra-jña and the jīva who sees or experiences
Him, or who performs bhakti to that ānandamaya-puruṣaÇ
as the partial or secondary kṣetra-jña . Furthermore,
according to Brahmasūtra (2.3.16): nātmā śruter

                           663
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

nityatvāc ca tābhyaḥ. “The jīvas are described as the
partial kṣetra-jñas.” According to Brahmasūtra (2.3.39):
parāt tu tac chruteḥÇ “Parabrahma is accepted as the
complete kṣetra-jña and is superior to the jīvātmā.”

In this śloka, the chanda (Sanskrit metre) and the
literature written by ṛṣis like Vasiṣṭha and others
refer to Vedic literature. In the Ṛju branch of the
Vedas it is said: tasmād vā etasmād ātmana ākāśaḥ
sambhūtaḥ ity ādinā brahma pucchaṁ pratiṣṭhā ity
astenānnamayaṁ prāṇamaya-mano maya-vij ñ
ānamayānandamayāḥ pa ñca-puruṣāḥ paṭhitās teṣv
annamayādi-trayaṁ jaḍa-kṣetra-svarūpaṁÇ tato bhinno vijñ
ānamayo jīvas tasya bhokteti jīva-kṣetraj ña-svar ūpaṁÇ
tasm āc ca bhinnaḥ sarvāntara ānandamaya itīśvara-
kṣetraj ña-svar ūpam uktam (Taittirīya Upaniṣad 2.1.2).

“There are five puruṣas: annamaya (only being conscious
of food), prāṇamaya (only being conscious of life), jñ
ānamaya (being conscious of ātma-tatt va ), vijñ ānamaya
(being conscious of practical service to Kṛṣṇa) and
ānandamaya (only being conscious of blissful Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
sevā). The first three (annamaya , prāṇamaya and jñ
ānamaya ) represent the inert kṣetra (material body).
Different from them is the vijñ ānamaya-puruṣa , the
jīva Ç who, as the knower of the kṣetra (this material
body), is the secondary kṣetra-jña . Antaryāmī, the
Supersoul of everyone, is distinct from these two and He
is the ānandamaya-puruṣa . This ānandamaya -puruṣa is,
indeed, Parameśva ra (the Supreme Controller), sarva-
niyantā (the regulator of everything), sākṣī (the
witness) and the original kṣetra-jña.




Śloka 6-7



mahā-bhūtāny ahaṅkāro

buddhir avyaktam eva ca

indriyāṇi daśaikañ ca

pañca cendriya-gocarāḥ

icchā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ

sanghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ

etat kṣetraṁ samāsena

sa-vikāram udāhṛtam


mahā-bhūtāni—the five great elements; ahaṅkāraḥ—’I (am)
the doer’, false ego; buddhiḥ—intelligence; avyaktam eva
ca —and the unmanifest nature; daśa —the ten; indriyāṇi
—senses; ca —and; ekam —the one (mind); pañca ca
indriya-gocar āḥ—and the five sense objects (headed by
sound and touch); icchā—desire; dveṣaḥ—hate; sukham —

                           664
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

happiness; duḥkham —unhappiness; sanghātaḥ—the aggregate
of all these (the body); cetanā—the functions of the
mind for acquiring knowledge; dhṛtiḥ—patience; (all
these) sa-vikāram —together with their transformations;
udāhṛtam —are said; samāsena —in summary; (to be) etat —
this; kṣetram —field.


The five great elements, the false ego, the
intelligence, prakṛti, the eleven senses, the five sense
objects, desire, hatred, happiness, misery, the body,
knowledge and patience comprise a brief description of
the kṣetra , along with its mundane transformations.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is now explaining the nature of the kṣetra.
Earth, water, fire, air and sky, their cause (the false
ego), buddhiḥ (intelligence) in the form of scientific
reasonings, mahat-tattva (the cause of the false ego),
prakṛti (the cause of the mahat-tattva ), the ten
working and knowledge-acquiring senses, the mind and the
five sense objects (such as sound and touch) are all
referred to as the twenty-four elements. Desire, envy,
happiness, misery, the body as a combination or result
of the five mahābhūtas (great elements), consciousness
as a state of mind in the form of knowledge, forbearance
and determination are all functions of the mind, not the
soul. Therefore, these characteristics are all part of
the kṣetra and are also indicative of qualities such as
determination. In the śruti it is said that the
functions of the mind are desire, determination, doubt,
faith, lack of faith, forbearance, detachment, shyness,
intellect and fear. These functions exhibit the
qualities of kṣetra as described above, etat kṣetraṁ
savikāram . “This kṣetra goes through six types of
changes, such as birth and death.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The constituents of the kṣetra are the twenty-four
elements consisting of the five mahābhūtas (earth,
water, fire, air and sky), the false ego, the mahat-
tattva and its cause (prakṛti ), the ten external senses
(eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin, speech, feet, hands,
anus and genitals), the one internal sense (the mind),
and the five objects of the senses (form, taste, smell,
touch and sound). This is concluded from the statements
of ṛṣis like Vasiṣṭha, Devala and Asita, from the Vedic
mantras and from the Vedānta-sūtras. What the kṣetra is
and why it is known as such, can be understood by
analysing these twenty-four elements. Transformations of

                           665
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

kṣetra are desire, envy, happiness, distress, all the
activities of the body which is the interaction of the
five material elements, the various states of the mind
which are a semblance of the cit function (cid-ābhāsa )
and forbearance. Therefore, it should be understood that
they are a part of kṣetra . A chart depicting the
twenty-four elements is given on the next page.




Ślokas 8-12



amānitvam adambhitvam

ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavam

ācāryopāsanaṁ śaucaṁ

sthairyam ātma-vinigrahaḥ

indriyārtheṣu vairāgyam

anahaṅkāra eva ca

janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi—

duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam

asaktir anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ

putra-dāra-gṛhādiṣu


nityañ ca sama-cittatvam

iṣṭāniṣṭopapattiṣu

mayi cānanya-yogena


bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī

vivikta-deśa-sevitvam

aratir jana-saṁsadi

adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ

tattvajñānārtha-darśanam

etaj jñānam iti proktam

ajñānaṁ yad ato’nyathā


amānitvam—freedom from the desire for honour;
adambhitvam—being without pride; ahiṁsā—non-violence;
kṣāntiḥ—forgiveness; ārjavam —simplicity; ācārya-
upāsanam—worship of the sad-guru ; śaucam —internal and
external cleanliness; sthairyam —steadiness of mind;

                            666
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ātma-vinigrahaḥ—control over the body and senses;
vairāgyam —detachment; indriya-artheṣu —from sense
objects such as sound and touch; anahaṅkāraḥ eva ca —and
freedom from false ego; anudarśanam —considering
repeatedly in the light of the śāstra ; duḥkha-doṣa—
inconveniences caused by the sufferings; janma —of
birth; mṛtyu —death; jarā—old age; vyādhi —and disease;
asaktiḥ—detachment (from sense pleasures); anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ
—detachment; putra —from sons; dāra —wife; gṛha —home;
ādiṣu —etc.; nityam —always; ca sama-cittatvam —having
equipoised mind; upapattiṣu —in the midst of the
occurrences; iṣṭa-aniṣṭa —of desired and undesired
events; avyabhicāriṇī—unfailing; bhaktiḥ—devotional
service; ananya-yogena —with exclusive connection; mayi
—to Me; ca —and; sevitvam —resorting; vivikta-deśa —to
solitary places; aratiḥ—being without attachment; jana-
saṁsadi —to the association of people (sense-enjoyers);
adhyātma-j ñ āna-nityatvam —always hearing about
spiritual knowledge; artha-darśanam —investigating the
(inner) purpose; (of ) tattvajñ āna—the principles of
self-realisation; etat —that; iti —which; proktam —I
have spoken; (is) jñ ānam—knowledge; ataḥ—so; yat —what;
anyathā—is otherwise; (is) ajñ ānam—ignorance.


Having no desire for honour; freedom from pride; non-
violence; forbearance; simplicity; service to a
qualified guru ; purity both internally and externally;
steadiness of mind; control of the body and senses;
detachment from sense objects; absence of false ego;
constantly perceiving the misery of birth, death, old
age and disease; detachment from wife, children, home,
etc.; not being absorbed in the happiness and misery of
others; equanimity in attaining either favourable or
unfavourable objects; one-pointed, steadfast and
unswerving bhakti to Me; a liking for solitude; a
distaste for the association of materialistic people;
constant deliberation on knowledge of the self and on
the purpose of tattva -jñ āna , that is, mokṣa —I
consider all these to be jñ āna . Everything else is
ignorance.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the above five ślokas, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the
twenty means (sādhanas ) to attain the goal.The first of
these is humility. He also explains qualities of the
kṣetra-jñas Ç the jīvātmā and Paramātmā, who are to be
known separately from the previously mentioned
characteristics of kṣetra . Eighteen of these qualities
are general and apply to both the jñ ānīs and the
bhaktas . According to the statement of Bhagavān: mayi
cānanya-yogena bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī. It is obligatory
for devotees to sincerely endeavour in aikāntika-bhakti
in order to experience Him. The seventeen qualities,
beginning with humility, manifest naturally within such
devotees who practise avyabhicāriṇī bhakti , chaste
devotion. They have no need to make separate endeavours

                           667
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

to acquire these qualities. The last two qualities,
however, are unique to the jñ ānīs . This is the opinion
of the bhakta sampradāya (devotee community).

The meaning of the series of words beginning with
amānitvam in this śloka is quite clear. In the smṛtiÇ
śaucam means internal and external cleanliness. Therein
it is said, “Cleanliness is of two types, internal and
external. External cleanliness is achieved by the use of
earth, water, etc., and the cleanliness of consciousness
or bhāva is called cleanliness of the mind, the internal
sense.” The purport of the word ātma-vinigrahaḥ is
control of the body. To see the miseries of birth,
death, etc., means to be constantly aware of them as a
source of suffering. Asaktiḥ means to give up attachment
to son, family etc., and anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ means not
becoming absorbed in the happiness or misery of others.
Iṣṭāniṣṭopapattiṣu means to remain equipoised upon
receiving material objects deemed favourable or
unfavourable.

Mayi means ‘in Me, in My form as Śyāmasundara’, and
ananya-yogena means bhakti which is not mixed with jñ
āna -yoga , tapa-yoga , etc. The word ca (also)
indicates pradhānī-bhūtā bhakti , which is mixed with jñ
āna , etc. The bhaktas only perform the first type of
bhaktiÇ ananya-bhakti. Jñ ānīs adopt the second type of
bhaktiÇ pradh ānī-bhūtā bhakti. This is the opinion of
some bhaktas. Devotees say, “Just as ananya-bhakti is
the means to attain bhagavat-prema , it also helps to
give an experience of Paramātmā.” The glories of
avyabhicāriṇī bhakti (unswerving bhakti ) have also been
described in this final set of six chapters so as to
explain this secret.

Jñānīs, however, have a different opinion. They say that
ananya-yogena means to see the self everywhere and
avyabhicāriṇī means to perform that yoga every day.
According to Śrīpāda Madhusūdana Sarasvatī, the word
avya bhicāriṇī means that which cannot be checked by
anything. The word adhyātma-j ñ āna refers to the
knowledge that is situated in the self. In order to
purify the self, it should be practised constantly.
Tattva -jñ ānārtha-darśanam means to have a vision (aim)
of mokṣa , which is the prayojana (purpose) of tattva -
jñ āna , to deliberate upon it, and to discuss it,
considering it to be one’s cherished desire. These
twenty are the general means to attain jñ āna Ç basic
knowledge of the jīvātmā and Paramātmā. Advanced
(specific) Paramātmā jñ āna will be explained later.
Symptoms of ignorance (ajñ āna ) such as mānitva (the
desire for honour), are contrary to the above symptoms.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Humility; lack of false pride; non-violence;
forgiveness; simplicity; service to the spiritual

                           668
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

master; cleanliness; stability; control of the body and
mind; detachment from sense objects; lack of false ego;
realisation of the miseries of birth, death, old age and
disease; lack of attachment to son, family, etc.;
indifference to the happiness and distress of others;
even-mindedness under all circumstances; avyabhicāriṇi-
bhakti (unalloyed and unswerving bhakti unto Me);
residence in a solitary place; no interest in crowded
places; firm belief that spiritual knowledge is eternal
and deliberation upon mokṣa as the purpose of tattva -jñ
āna , are all considered by the ignorant to be twenty
interactions (transformations) of the kṣetra (body). In
reality, they comprise knowledge which destroys the
effect of the transformations on the kṣetra. One attains
viśuddha-tattva (the supremely pure Absolute Truth) by
taking shelter of them. They are not the transformations
of the kṣetra ; rather, they are the remedies that can
destroy the transformations of the kṣetra . “Of these
twenty, one should adopt ananya-avyabhicāriṇī bhakti
unto Me.” The other nineteen characteristics are
secondary fruits of bhakti. They purify the impure
kṣetra (body) and ultimately, after destroying the
impure kṣetra of the jīva Ç they help him to attain his
eternal, perfect kṣetra . These nineteen
characteristics, which are like the throne of Bhaktī-
devī, should be understood as true jñ āna (vijñ āna ).
Everything else is ajñ āna Ç ignorance.”

Ananya-avyabhicāriṇī bhakti is prominent among all types
of sādhana. The above qualities naturally manifest upon
taking shelter of bhakti . Therefore, pure devotees only
accept ananya-bhakti which is the svarūpa-lakṣaṇa
(intrinsic characteristic) of the jīva . The qualities
which are known as taṭastha-lakṣaṇa (marginal
characteristics) then manifest concomitantly. This is
described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.18.12): yasyāsti
bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā

sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ

harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā

manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ


All the devatās and their exalted qualities, such as jñ
āna and their performance of dharma , always reside in
the heart of those who have niṣkāma-bhakti (selfless
devotion) to Śrī Bhagavān. On the other hand, how can
one who is not a bhakta of Bha gavān possess any of the
good qualities of a mahā-puruṣa ? Such a person is
always hankering for petty worldly sense objects only.


Jñānīs practise good qualities such as saintly
behaviour, non-violence and control of the mind and ego,
but they do not endeavour for ananya-avyabhicāriṇī
bhakti to Śrī Bhagavān. They only perform bhakti to
attain perfection in jñ āna and mukti . Therefore, it
should be understood to be guṇī-bhūtā bhakti (bhakti
predominated by jñ āna and karma ), not svarūpa -siddhā
bhakti or śuddha-bhakti. Advaitavādīs (impersonalists)
fall into this category.


                           669
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 13



jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi

yaj jñātvā ‘mṛtam aśnute

anādimat paraṁ brahma

na sat tan nāsad ucyate


pravakṣyāmi—I shall explain; tat—that; yat —which;
jñeyam —is worth knowing; jñ ātvā—understanding; yat —
which; aśnute —one attains; amṛtam —immortality; brahma
—brahma ; (is) anādi —without beginning; mat-param —
dependent on Me; tat —that; ucyate —is said; (to be) na
—neither; sat —cause; na —nor; asat —effect.


Now I shall explain to you what is jñeya (that which is
to be known), for by understanding the knowable one
attains mokṣa (immortality). Brahma Ç who has no
beginning and is dependent on Me, lies beyond the cause
and effect of this creation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The jīvātmā and Paramātmā can be known by practising the
various sādhanas mentioned previously. Of the two,
Paramātmā alone has been indicated by the word sarvagata
, meaning the all-pervading brahma . (Note: the word
sarvagata is from Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s
original Sanskrit comme ntary.) This brahma is the
worshipable object of the jñ ānīs in His nirviśeṣa
aspect (without attributes), and of the bhaktas in His
saviśeṣa aspect (with attributes). Residing within the
body, He is known as Paramātmā because He is meditated
upon in His fo ur-handed form.

First, brahma is explained in this śloka beginning with
the word jñeyam . “Anādi means without a beginning, and
since brahma is My svarūpa , He is eternal.” Mat-param
means ‘I am the supreme (param ) shelter of brahma . As
will be said later on, brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham , “I am
the foundation or basis of brahma.” But what is that
brahma ? Expecting this question, Śrī Bhagavān says that
brahma is neither asat nor sat. In other words, He is
beyond both cause and effect.




                             670
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Previously, Śrī Bhagavān explained jñāna-sādhana (the
means of attaining jñ āna ) . Now, in the present śloka
, He is explaining the knowable para-tattva , which is
the sādhya (goal) of that jñ āna. The jñ ānīs think that
the para-tattva is nirviśeṣabrahma . They imagine this
para-tattva to be bereft of name, form, qualities,
activities, associates and so forth, a void that cannot
be described by any adjectives such as energetic,
variegated or active. Śuddha-bhaktas who take shelter of
ananya-avyabhicāriṇī bha kti see parabrahmaÇ para-tattva
, the Supreme Absolute Reality, as Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
embodiment of cid-vilāsa (transcendental sports), the
basis of all aprākṛta qualities, energies and mellows,
and who is devoid of petty material qualities. Although
some places in śruti describe this tattva as nirviśeṣa ,
these statements only deny the material features of Śrī
Bhagavān, not the transcendental qualities. The śāstras
themselves have illuminated this deep secret:


yā yā śrutir jalpati nirviśeṣaṁ

sā sābhidhatte sa-viśeṣam eva

vicāra-yoge sati hanta tāsāṁ

prāyo balīyaḥ sa-viśeṣam eva


Hayaśīrṣa-pañcarātra


Those very same Vedic mantras that first describe that
tattva as nirviśeṣa (without qualities) alternatively
establish it as saviśeṣa (with qualities). Both
nirviśeṣa and saviśeṣa are indeed eternal aspects of
Bhagavān, but deep deliberation reveals saviśeṣatattva
to be superior. This is because one experiences only
saviśeṣatattva in the material world, whereas there is
no experience of nirviśeṣatattva .


The only knowable object of the nirviśeṣa-jñānīs is
indicated in the present śloka by the word mat-param ,
meaning ‘sheltered in Me’.


brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham

amṛtasyāvyayasya ca

śāśvatasya ca dharmasya

sukhasyaikāntikasya ca


For I am the shelter of nirviśeṣabrahma and the sole
refuge of everlasting immortality, eternal dharma and
transcendental bliss in the form of prema related with

                           671
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

aikāntika-bhakti . (Gītā 14.27)


This subject will be described in detail in the
commentary on the above śloka. Sometimes in śāstra , the
jīva is also called brahma , but the jīva can never be
called parabrahmaÇ because he is different from brahma
in every respect. The jīva has atomic consciousness and
parabrahma is the infinite conscious entity.

The jīva is sometimes also called brahma because of his
partial qualitative similarity of being conscious. Some
people suffer from the misconception that the jīva
becomes brahma because they do not understand the deep
import of the Gītā’s use of words describing the jīva
such as brahmabhūta (Gītā 18.54) and brahmabhūyāya
kalpate (Gītā 14.26). This subject will be described in
detail in the śloka : brahmabhūtaḥ prasannātmā (Gītā
18.54).

Both the jīvātmā and Paramātmā are jñeyam (knowable),
yet one can only attain the understanding that jīva-
tattva i s dependent on Paramātmā by continuous
cultivation of devotional service unto Paramātmā. The
jīva is without beginning and, by constitution, devoted
to Bhagavān. He is only partly endowed with the
qualities of brahma and he is beyond sat and asat (cause
and effect).

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, I have explained the tattva of kṣetra-jña to
you. I have explained the nature of kṣetra (the body),
its transformations, and the process by which one can
become free from these transformations. I have also
explained that the jīvātmā and Paramātmā are the knowers
of this kṣetra . Now, please listen as I explain that
tattva which is knowable by vijñ āna (realisation). The
knowable, brahmaÇ is without beginning, dependent on Me
(mat-param ) and beyond both cause and effect. After
knowing this knowable principle, one tastes the nectar
of My bhakti .”




Śloka 14



sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat

sarvato’kṣi-śiro-mukham

sarvataḥ śrutimal loke

sarvam āvṛtya tiṣṭhati


tat—His (brahma’s); pāṇi —hands; (and) pād am—feet;
sarvataḥ—are on all sides; akṣi —His eyes; śiraḥ—heads;
(and) mukham—faces; sarvataḥ—are on all sides; śrutimat—
that person listens; sarvataḥ—on all sides; tiṣṭhati —He
resides; loke —in the world; āvṛtya —covering; sarvam —

                           672
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

everything.


His hands and feet are everywhere. His eyes, heads and
faces permeate all the directions and He hears
everything. Situated thus, brahma pervades the entire
universe.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Will it not contradict the statements of śruti such as,
sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahmaÇ “All this is brahmaÇ”
(Chāndogya Upaniṣad 3.14.1) and brahmaivedaṁ sarvamÇ
“Everything is brahmaÇ” to say that brahma is distinct
from both cause and effect? Anticipating such a
question, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining that, although by
nature brahma is beyond both cause and effect, brahma is
both the cause and the effect because the energy and the
energetic are non-different. Therefore, He is saying
that His hands and feet, etc., are everywhere. This
means that brahma has unlimited hands and feet in the
form of the hands and feet of every visible entity,
extending from Lord Brahmā down to a minute ant.
Similarly, His eyes, heads, mouths and ears are also
everywhere.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the previous ślokaÇ brahma was described as being
beyond sat and asat (cause and effect). NowÇ the
Vedānta-sūtra , śakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ, “The energy
and the energetic are non-different,” can be quoted in
response to one who questions the validity of such śruti
statements as, sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma and brahmaivedaṁ
sarvam . According to this sūtra , although the svarūpa
of Śrī Bhagavān is beyond both cause and effect, the
workings of śakti are indeed the work of śaktimān
because śakti (energy) and śaktimān (the energetic) are
non-different. One can thus, understand that all effects
such as this visible world are the svarūpa of Bhagavān
(non-different from Him), being transformations of śakti
. The present śloka is being spoken to make this point
clear. Brahma alone exists, pervading everything through
the medium of the hands, feet etc., of all jīvas who are
subject to Him and situated within Him. Since He is all-
pervading He has unlimited hands, eyes, feet and ears.
However, the jīvātmā is neither all-pervading, nor can
he have unlimited hands, heads, feet, etc.

Paramātmā is omnipotent, but the jīva is not.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “Just

                           673
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

as the sun’s rays illuminate due to their dependence on
the sun, in the same way, brahma-tattva has attained its
infinite and all-pervading aspect by depending upon My
potency. The existence of brahma , who is the foundation
for unlimited jīvas beginning from Brahmā down to the
ant, collectively encompasses unlimited hands, feet,
eyes, heads, mouths, ears, etc., and is visible
everywhere as His cosmic manifestation.”




Śloka 15




sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ

sarvendriya-vivarjitam

asaktaṁ sarva-bhṛc caiva

nirguṇaṁ guṇa-bhoktṛ ca


ābhāsam—He is the source; sarva-indriya—of all senses;
(and) guṇa —their functions; (yet) sarva-indriya-
vivarjitam —He is devoid of mundane senses; asaktam —He
is detached; ca —yet; eva —indeed; sarva-bhṛt —He is the
maintainer of all beings; nirguṇam —He is without
(material) qualities; ca—yet; guṇa-bhoktṛ—He is the
enjoyer of divine qualities.


That knowable parabrahma is the source of all senses and
their functions, yet He is devoid of mundane senses.
Although detached, He is the maintainer of all living
beings, and although nirguṇa , He is the enjoyer of six
transcendental qualities.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Moreover, He manifests all the sense objects and the
senses. Śruti says: tac cakṣuṣaś cakṣuḥÇ “He is the eye
of the eye,” (Kena Upaniṣad 1.2) and sarvendriyair
guṇaihÇ “He manifests the functions of the senses, such
as sound.” Yet He is sarvendriya-vivarjitam , which
means that He has no material senses because He has
transcendental senses. Śruti also says: apāṇi-pādo
javano grahītā. “Although He does not have material
senses, such as hands and feet, He accepts, moves and
sees” (Svetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.19).

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8) also states: parāsya śaktir
vividhaiva śrūyate svābhāvikī j ñ āna-bala-kriyā ca. “It

                           674
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

is heard that brahma has various types of transcendental
energies (parā śakti ). The śaktis : jñ āna (knowledge),
bala (strength) and kriya (action), are naturally
inherent in Him. That famous form of His as described in
the śruti is the source of all energy.”

He is devoid of attachment to the mundane plane and He
maintains everyone in His expansion as Śrī Viṣṇu. He is
nirguṇa , that is, He has a transcendental form which is
free from the guṇas (such as sattva ), and He is guṇa-
bhoktṛÇ beyond the guṇas. He is addressed as bhaga
because He is the enjoyer of six types of transcendental
opulences.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




That brahma is the source of the functions of one’s
senses as well as the sense objects. It is also seen in
śruti : tac cakṣuṣaś cakṣuḥ. “He is the eye of the eye”
(Kena Upaniṣad 1.2). Even though He is devoid of
material senses, He has transcendental senses.
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (3.9) also states:


apāṇi-pādo javano grahītā

paśyaty acakṣuḥ sa śṛṇoty akarṇaḥ


Although Bhagavān does not have material hands, feet,
etc., He accepts and walks. Even without material eyes
and ears, He sees and listens. In other words, He has
transcendental hands, feet, eyes, ears, etc.


Therefore, brahma is not nirviśeṣa, but saviśeṣa . He is
devoid of material qualities, yet He is endowed with six
types of transcendental opulences and He is the enjoyer
of them.




Śloka 16



bahir antaś ca bhūtānām

acaraṁ caram eva ca

sūkṣmatvāt tad avijñeyaṁ

dūra-sthaṁ cāntike ca tat


(He is) bahir—outside; ca—and; antaḥ—inside; bhūtānām —

                            675
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

of all beings; acaram —non-moving; ca eva —and indeed;
caram —moving; sūkṣmatvāt —because He is very subtle;
tat —He; avijñeyam—is incomprehensible (by the gross
senses); tat —He; dūra-stham —is situated far away; ca —
and; antike —very near.


That Absolute Entity (parabrahma-tattva) dwells within
and without all beings, and because of Him this world of
moving and non-moving beings exists. He is very
difficult to comprehend, being very subtle. He is
simultaneously far away and ever-present.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




He is situated everywhere, both inside and outside all
beings and elements of His creation, just as the sky is
situated inside and outside the body. He is everything,
all beings, both moving and non-moving, because He is
the cause of the effect (the creation). Yet He is not
the object of direct perception because His form and
other attributes are different from material forms and
qualities. Therefore, He is millions of miles away for
ignorant people, but for those who are enlightened in
transcendental knowledge He, as Antaryāmī, is more near
to them than a person living in the same house, being
situated in their bodies. He is farther away than the
farthest and nearer than the nearest. He is visible in
the cave of the heart for those who can see. As it is
said in the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (3.1.7): dūrāt sudūre tad
ihāntike ca paśyātsv ihaivaṁ nihitaṁ guhāyām. “In this
world, He is much farther away than the farthest thing,
and for those who are observant, He is also seated
secretly, very near in the midst of all .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




All moving and non-moving beings are born from
Parameśvara, that supreme tattva. He is situated within
the heart of all beings as Antaryāmī, and He exists
outside in His all-pervading aspect as Parameśvara.
Because this entire moving and non-moving world is an
effect of His energy, He is therefore everything.
Although He is described in śruti as, sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ
brahma , “All this is brahma ,” He has a personal form
different from all others. Only He is equal to Himself.
He is asamorddhva , meaning there is nobody who is equal
to Him, what to speak of greater than Him. However, not
everyone can know Him because He is very subtle. Only
His ananya-bhaktas can know Him by the influence of
ananya-bhakti . Therefore, He is very far away as well
as very near. He is near to His ananya-bhaktas , and

                           676
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

very far away from non-devotees.


tad ejati tan naijati

tad dūre tad v antike

tad antar asya sarvasya

tad u sarvasyāsya bāhyataḥ


Īśopaniṣad 5


The Supreme Lord walks, but does not walk, is far away
but very near, and He is within everything, yet outside
everything.




Śloka 17



avibhaktañ ca bhūteṣu

vibhaktam iva ca sthitam

bhūta-bharttṛ ca taj jñeyaṁ

grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu ca


ca—although; avibhaktam—He is undivided; ca —yet;
sthitam —He is situated; iva —as if; vibhaktam —divided;
bhūteṣu —within all beings; tat —He; jñeyam —should be
known; bhūta-bharttṛ—as the sustainer of all beings; ca
—as well as; grasiṣṇu —the annihilator; ca —and;
prabhaviṣṇu —creator.


Although undivided, He is situated within every being as
if divided. Know Him to be the sustainer, annihilator
and the creator of all beings.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Situated as the cause in the moving and non-moving
living entities, He is undivided or non-different, while
as the effect, He is divided or different. Only He, as
Śrī Nārāyaṇa, is the sustainer of all beings during the
period of maintenance. As Grasiṣṇu, He is the destroyer
during the time of annihilation, and at the dawn of
creation He is Prabhaviṣṇu, the creator of various
effects and forms.

                             677
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Although He appears differently in all living beings,
that parama tattva is situated in one undivided form.
This is also stated in śruti : ekaḥ santaṁ bahudhā
dṛśyamānaṁ. “He is seen in various forms, although He is
one.” Smṛti also says: eka eva paro viṣṇuḥ sarvatrāpi na
saṁśayaḥ. “Only one Paramātmā, Viṣṇu, exists everywhere.
There is no doubt about this.” Just as the same sun
appears differently to people in different places, He
appears in various forms by His inconceivable potency,
even though He is one. Only He exists as the individual
Antaryāmī within the hearts of all jīvas, while
externally He is all-pervading, the collective puruṣa Ç
Parameśvara. He is also the sustainer and the
annihilator of all that exists. Taittirīya Upaniṣad
(3.1) says: yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante yena jātāni
jīvanti yat prayanty abhisaṁviśanti tad vijij ñ āsasva
tad brahma . “You should understand brahma as He from
whom all living beings are born, by whose help they live
and progress throughout life, and in whom they again
enter.”




Śloka 18



jyotiṣām api taj jyotis

tamasaḥ param ucyate

jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ

hṛdi sarvasya dhiṣṭhitam


ucyate—it is said; tat—He (is); api —also; jyotiḥ—the
illumination; jy otiṣām —of luminaries; param —
transcendental; tamasaḥ—to ignorance; jñ ānam —
knowledge; jñeyam —worthy of being known; jñ āna-gamyam
—accessible through knowledge; (and) dhiṣṭhitam —
situated; hṛdi —in the heart; sarvasya —of all beings.


He is the source of light in all luminaries. He is
transcendental to ignorance. He is true knowledge (jñāna
), the true object of knowledge (jñeya ), and He can be
known through jñ āna (jñ āna-gamya ). He dwells within
the heart of all beings.




                             678
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




He is even the light that emanates from luminaries such
as the moon and sun. This is proven in śruti: sūryas
tapati tejasendraḥ. “By His radiance, the sun becomes
luminous and distributes heat.” The sun, moon, stars,
etc., do not appear beautifully radiant before Him, what
to speak of fire. Appearing effulgent, they all acquire
their glow from His. It is by His effulgence only that
they acquire their own unique qualities of illumination.
Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.2.15) states:


na tatra sūryo bhāti na candra-tārakaṁ

nemā vidyuto bhānti kuto ‘yam agniḥ

tam eva bhāntaṁ anu bhāti sarvaṁ

tasya bhāṣā sarvam idaṁ vibhāti


The sun, moon, stars or fire cannot illuminate lightning
what to speak of that self-effulgent parabrahma .
However, it is by that self-effulgent brahma alone that
all luminous objects such as the sun give light. In
fact, the whole universe exists only because of His
existence.


Therefore, He is beyond darkness. It can never touch
Him. Śruti also says, “His complexion is like the colour
of the sun and is beyond darkness.” His full
manifestation in the faculty of pure intelligence is
called jñ āna . He Himself has become modified as form,
etc., and is jñeya (the knowable) and jñ āna -gamyamÇ
accessible through knowledge. In other words, He is
attainable by the previously described means of jñ āna-
sādhana , such as humility. He alone is situated as
Paramātmā in the hearts of all beings.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Parameśvara, the complete kṣetra-jña, is the original
illuminator of all luminaries such as the sun, moon and
fire.


na tatra sūryo bhāti na candra-tārakaṁ

nemā vidyuto bhānti kuto ‘yam agniḥ


Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.15


                           679
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017


The sun, moon, stars or fire cannot illuminate
lightning, what to speak of that self-effulgent
parabrahma.


This is also confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.42):


mad-bhayād vāti vāto ‘yaṁ

sūryas tapati mad-bhayāt

varṣatīndro dahaty agnir

mṛtyuś carati mad-bhayāt


The wind blows and the sun shines out of fear of Me.
Furthermore, Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.3.3) states: bhayād
asyāgnistapati bhayāt tapati sūryaḥ. Out of fear of
parabrahma , fire burns and the sun heats.


That para-tattva is tamasaḥ param (beyond darkness) and
supremely pure, being transcendental to material nature.
Śruti also says: āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt. “He is
beyond prakṛti and has a golden effulgence (ād itya ).”
He is knowledge (jñ āna ), the knowable (jñeya ) and the
knower (jñ ātā).

Jñāna-svarūpa: Śruti says He is vijñāna ānanda-ghanaṁ
brahma. “The specific attributes of brahma are that He
is jñ āna-svarūpa , intrinsically qualified as knowledge
and ghanībhūta ānanda-svarūpa , the concentrated
embodiment of bliss.”

Jñeya-svarūpa: He is jñeya-svarūpa , the very form of
the knowable, therefore, He is the shelter of those who
desire liberation .


taṁ ha devam ātma-buddhi-prakāśaṁ

mumukṣur vai śaraṇam ahaṁ prapadye


Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.18


Being desirous of liberation, I surrender unto the
Supreme Lord who illuminates the ātmā’s intelligence.


According to this śruti statement, He is jñāna-gamya ,
approachable by knowledge.

Jñātā: He is also jñātā (the knower) because He is
situated in everyone’s heart as the witness, the
controller and Antaryāmī. In this regard, one should
refer to the śruti-ślokas of Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
(4.6-7): dvāsuparṇā, tam eva viditvā and antaḥ-praviṣṭaḥ
śāstā. “The ātmā and Paramātmā within t he body are
compared to two birds who are seated in the same tree.”

                             680
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 19




iti kṣetraṁ tathā jñānaṁ

jñeyañ coktaṁ samāsataḥ

mad-bhakta etad vijñāya

mad-bhāvāyopapadyate


iti—thus; kṣetram—the field; jñ ānam —knowledge; ca
tathā—and also; jñeyam —the object of knowledge; uktam —
have been spoken of; samāsataḥ—in summary; vijñ āya —
having fully comprehended; etat —this; mat-bhaktaḥ—My
bhakta ; upapadyate —attains; mat-bhāvāya —to My nature.


Thus the field, knowledge and the knowable have been
described by Me in brief. By understanding these, My
bhakta becomes qualified to attain My prema-bhakti .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, in the śloka beginning with the word itiÇ Śrī
Bhagavān is concluding His statements about knowledge of
kṣetra , etc., withan explanation about who is qualified
for this knowledge and its result. In this chapter, the
word kṣetra has been explained from the śloka : mahā-
bhūtāny ahaṅkāro (Gītā 13.6), to adhyātma in Gītā 13.12.
Jñ āna has also been described from Gītā 13.8, up to
adhyātma in Gītā 13.12. Jñeyaḥ and jñ āna-gamyam have
been described from the śloka beginning with jneyaṁ in
Gītā 13.13, up to the śloka beginning with jyotiṣām in
Gītā 13.18. That very same Absolute Reality is known as
brahma , Paramātmā and Bhagavān. This has been briefly
described.

Mad-bhāvāya means he attains sāyujya-mukti. The word
mad-bhakta refers to a jñ ānī who is endowed with bhakti
. Or mad-bhakta means “My unalloyed servant (aikāntika-
dāsa ), who knows ‘My Prabhu has so much aiśvarya ,’
becomes qualified to attain My prema.” In other words,
he becomes qualified to perform prema-bhakti .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti


                           681
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




In this śloka, Śrī Bhagavān clearly states that karmīs ,
jñ ānīs , yogīs , tapasvīs and nirviśeṣa-māyāvādīs
cannot understand the real essence (tattva ) of
Bhagavad-gītā. Only bhaktas of Bhagavān can understand
it. This is the deep meaning of the word mad bhakta .
One should first become a bhakta to understand the
tattva of jñeya (the knowable), jñ ātā (the knower) and
jñ āna (knowledge), as described in the Gītā. For this
reason, one must practise bhakti (anuśīlana ) by taking
shelter of the lotus feet of a sad-guru .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, I have briefly described these three tattvas:
kṣetra , jñ āna and jñeya . Vijñ āna is the jñ āna of
all three tattvas combined. Bhaktas who achieve this jñ
āna attain My unalloyed prema-bhakti . Those non-
devotees who merely accept the shelter of useless
monistic sampradāyas become bereft of real knowledge. Jñ
āna is nothing but the sitting place of Bhakti-devī. I t
is merely sattva-śuddhi , purification of the jīvātmā’s
existence which is sheltered by bhakti .” This topic
will be further clarified in Chapter Fifteen, wherein
puruṣottama-tattva is described.




Śloka 20



prakṛtiṁ puruṣañ caiva

viddhyanādī ubhāv api

vikārāṁś ca guṇāṁś caiva

viddhi prakṛti-sambhavān


viddhi—you should understand; eva—clearly; (that) ubhau
—both; prakṛtim —material nature; ca —and; puruṣam —the
living entity; (are) anādī—without beginning; api —also;
viddhi —understand; vikārān —their transformations; ca —
and; guṇān —the three qualties; eva —indeed; prakṛti-
sambhavān —arise out of material nature.


Know both prakṛti and puruṣa (the jīvā) to be without
beginning, and know their transformations and qualities
to be born of prakṛti .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           682
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

After explaining Paramātmā, Śrī Bhagavān is now
explaining the jīvātmā (the puruṣa ), who is also
kṣetra-jña . “Why did the relationship between this
kṣetra-jña and māyā (prakṛti ) occur, and when did it
start?”

Expecting this question, Śrī Bhagavān answers with this
śloka beginning with prakṛti. “Prakṛti (māyāÇ material
nature) and puruṣa (the jīva ) are both without
beginning. That is, their cause has no beginning.
Because they are the energy of Me, Īśvara, who am
without beginning, they are also without beginning. Know
it in this way.”

It is also said in Bhagavad-gītā (7.4-5):


bhūmir āpo ‘nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

apareyam itas tv anyāṁ

prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho

yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat


This material nature is divided into eight parts: earth,
water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect and ego, but it
is inferior to another nature of Mine. The jīvas are My
superior energy. They accept this material world to
enjoy the results of their actions (karma ).


“According to this statement of Mine, because both māyā
and the jīva are My energy, they are without beginning,
and therefore their relationship also is without
beginning. But, although they are related to each other,
they are in fact different.” Śrī Bhagavān therefore
says: vikārāṁś ca Ç “The body and the senses,” and
guṇāṁś caiva Ç “the transformations of guṇas such as
happiness, distress, lamentation and illusion,” are born
from prakṛti (prakṛti-sambhūtān ). The jīva Ç who is
modified in the form of the kṣetraÇ is different from
prakṛti .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After Śrī Bhagavān explains both the kṣetras, the
partial kṣetra-jña (the jīva ), the complete kṣetra-jña
(Parameśvara), jñ āna and jñeya , He explains the

                           683
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

transformations of kṣetra such as lust, anger, affection
and fear, and how the relationship between the kṣetra-
jña-j īva and māyā has occurred. Both prakṛti (māyā) and
the jīva are without beginning, being the energy of
Parameśvara. This means that they are also eternal.
Inert prakṛti is called aparā, and the jīva is called
parā prakṛti .

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta states in the teachings to
Sanātana Gosvāmī:


jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya—kṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’

kṛṣṇera ‘taṭasthā-śakti’ ‘bhedābheda-prakāśa


Madhyalīlā 20.108


sūryāṁśu-kiraṇaÇ yena agni-jvālā-caya

svābhāvika kṛṣṇera tīna-prakāra ‘śakti’ haya


Madhyalīlā 20.109


kṛṣṇera svābhāvika tīna-śakti-pariṇati

cicchaktiÇ jīva-śaktiÇ āra māyā-śakti


Madhyalīlā 20.111


kṛṣṇa bhuli’ sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha


Madhyalīlā 20.117


By his constitutional nature, the jīva is an eternal
servant of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa’s taṭastha-śakti (marginal
potency) transforms into unlimited jīvas . Since śakti
(energy) and śaktimān (the energetic) are non-different,
atomic conscious jīvas which are transformations of
śakti , are in some respects non-different from Kṛṣṇa.
But they are also eternally different in various ways.
Bhagavān is unlimitedly conscious, and the jīva is
atomically conscious. Both are non-different from the
perspective of consc iousness, but Bhagavān is the
complete conscious entity (pūrṇa cid-vastu ) and the
jīva is an atomic conscious entity (aṇucid-vastu ).
Bhagavān is the master of māyā

, and the jīva is subject to māyā. Bhagavān is the cause
of creation, sustenance and destruct ion, but the jīva
is not. The example is given that just as unlimited
atoms are visible in the rays coming from the sun, the
rays of Kṛṣṇa’s energy produce unlimited atoms in the
form of the jīvas . Similarly, just as unlimited minute

                           684
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

sparks come out of a fire, so unlimited atomic conscious
jīvas are emanating from Bhagavān.


These are partial examples to explain the relationship
between sac-cid-ānanda Bhagavān and the atomic conscious
jīva . This means that their purpose is to make this
reality understood by the principle of śākhā-candra-
nyāya , showing the moon by first pointing towards the
branch of a tree over which the moon is visible. In this
material world, no example can fully describe parabrahma
, but these examples give a partial understanding.

Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate limit of para-tattva. His inherent
parā śakti (transcendental potency) is also known as
antaraṅga-śakti , or cit-śakti . This cit-śakti is
Kṛṣṇa’s svabhāvikī (naturally inherent) svarūpa-śakti
and the actions of that śakti , manifest in three ways.
When it manifests the conscious creation (cit-jagat ),
it is called cit-śakti (spiritual creative potency).
When it manifests unlimited jīvas , it is called jīva -
śakti and when it manifests the material universe, it is
called māyā-śakti . By the will of Bhagavān, the jīvas
manifest from the jīva -śakti (marginal potency); thus,
their constitutional nature is to be eternal servants of
Kṛṣṇa. However, they can come under the influence of
māyā because they are atomic by nature. The jīvas
situated in this illusory world have misused their free
will. Thus, they have forgotten their own svarūpa and
Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa , due to their association with māyā
since time immemorial. Having become trapped in the
cycle of birth and death, they are suffering the various
types of threefold miseries. When the jīvas who have
become bound in this material world attain sādhu-saṅga
by some great fortune, they can realise their own
constitutional nature. Following the process of bhakti ,
they engage in the service of Bhagavān, by which they
become situated in their own svarūpa . This conclusion
is confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.37): bhayaṁ
dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo ‘smṛtiḥ

tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ

bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā


The jīva is the eternal servant of Bhagavān, but by
turning his face away from Bhagavān, he has forgotten
his own svarūpa . Therefore, his eternal svarūpa
(occupation), service to Kṛṣṇa, has become covered. By
associating with māyā, he identifies himself with the
body and, subsequently, always fears for the material
body, house, etc.

He undergoes various types of miseries, being bewildered
by Kṛṣṇa’s māyā. By some good fortune an intelligent
person who takes shelter of ananya-bhakti and performs
bhajana to Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of a sad-guru is
able to cross over māyā.


Furthermore it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.7.9):

                           685
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



seyaṁ bhagavato māyā

yan nayena virudhyate

īśvarasya vimuktasya

kārpaṇyam uta bandhanam


Some conditioned souls maintain that Śrī Bhagavān is
overcome by illusion and at the same time they proclaim
Him to be unconditioned. This opposes all logic.


Bhagavān’s yogamāyā is a special type of śakti that can
make the possible impossible, and the impossible
possible. This śakti of Bhagavān makes it possible for
the jīva to attain liberation from the bondage of the
material world, once he has attained the mercy of the
ever-liberated (vimukta ) Īśvara. It also makes the
jīva’s bondage to this world possible. This fact cannot
be understood merely on the strength of logic. Nor can
the influence of Bhagavān’s acintya-śakti be understood
merely by argument. This acintya-śakti of Bhagavān makes
the jīva become deluded by māyā, and he cannot realise
Bhagavān’s mercy.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I am
explaining the result of knowledge of kṣetra and kṣetra-
jña . Three tattvas manifest in the existence of the
jīva bound by matter: prakṛti , puruṣa and Paramātmā.
The kṣetra is known as prakṛti , the jīva as puruṣa ,
and My all-pervading manifestation in both of th em as
Paramātmā. Prakṛti and puruṣa are both without
beginning. They exist even before cosmic time (jaḍīya-
kāla ). In material time, neither of them take birth.
Rather, they have become manifest in spiritual time
(cinmaya-kāla ) by My śakti and they co-exist in My
supreme existence. Jaḍa-prakṛti (material nature) merges
into Me and again becomes manifest during creation under
the cover of mundane time (jaḍīya-kāla ). The jīva is a
tattva who emanates from My eternal taṭastha-śakti . He
has been enveloped by My jaḍa-prakṛtiÇ material potency,
because he has become averse to Me. In fact, the jīva is
pure, conscious tattva , but because his quality is
marginal, he has acquired a usefulness for jaḍa -prakṛti
. This took place by the arrangement of My
transcendental energy . That is, he tends to become
affected by material nature. How the conscious jīva
became entangled in inert matter cannot be ascertained
by human (conditioned) logic and knowledge because My
acintya-śakti is not under the influence of your limited
human intellect. It is important for you to know this
much only: all of the perverted transformations and
material modes of the baddha-jīva are born from material
nature and are not a part of his svadharma (eternal
constitution).”




                           686
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śloka 21



kārya-kāraṇa-karttṛtve

hetuḥ prakṛtir ucyate

puruṣaḥ sukha-duḥkhānāṁ

bhoktṛtve hetur ucyate


prakṛtiḥ—material nature; ucyate—is said to be; hetuḥ—
the cause; karttṛtve —in the workings; (of) kāraṇa —
cause; ca —and; kārya —effect; (and) puruṣaḥ—the jīva ;
ucyate —is said to be; hetuḥ—the cause; bhoktṛtve —in
the experiencing; sukha-duḥkhānām —of happiness and
distress.


Prakṛti is said to be the source of the workings of
material cause and effect, and puruṣa (the baddha-jīva )
is said to be the cause of the experience of material
happiness, distress, and so forth.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now Śrī Bhagavān is revealing the jīva’s relationship
with māyā. Kārya (effect) refers to the body, kāraṇa
(cause) refers to the senses, which are the means of
happiness and misery, and karttṛtva (agent), refers to
the presiding deities of the senses, the devatās . Due
to ignorance, the puruṣa (baddha-jīva ) imposes upon
himself the feeling that he is the doer or agent, but in
fact, prakṛti is the cause of such a feeling in him. It
is prakṛti alone which transforms into effect in contact
with the puruṣa . The tendency of māyā (avidyā or
ignorance) is to give illusory knowledge to the jīva .
However, only the puruṣa (jīva ) is the cause of the
experiences of happiness and misery produced by māyā.
Although kārya (effect), kāraṇa (cause), karttṛtva
(agency), and bhoktṛtva (enjoyment) are the
characteristics of prakṛti (material nature), prakṛti
predominates over the first three because she herself is
predominated by inertness (jaḍa ). And due to his
conscious nature, puruṣa (the jīva ) predominates over
bhokṛtva (the experience of happiness and distress).
Something (an entity or activity) is designated or named
according to its predominant aspects. According to this
logic, prakṛti is said to be the cause of kārya (the
body), kāraṇa (the senses) and karttṛtva (the devatās ).
Puruṣa (the jīva ) is said to be the cause of bhoktṛtva
.




                           687
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Prakṛti is the source of mundane kārya (effect, the
body), kāraṇa (cause, the senses), and karttṛtva
(working agency, the presiding deities of the senses),
while the baddha-jīva is said to be the cause of
bhoktṛtvaÇ the experience of mundane happiness and
misery. Here one should clearly understand that the
śuddha-jīva (the jīva in his pure state) is not the
enjoyer of material happiness, nor does he experience
distress. However, because the jīva is born from the
taṭastha-śakti , when he identifies himself with the
body, which is generated by contact with māyā, an ego
develops whereby he experiences material happiness and
distress.

In this regard, Lord Kapiladeva says in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (3.26.8):


kārya-kāraṇa-karttṛtve

kāraṇaṁ prakṛtiṁ viduḥ

bhoktṛtve sukha-duḥkhānāṁ

puruṣaṁ prakṛteḥ param


O Mother! Those who are tattvavit accept prakṛti
(material nature) to be the cause of kārya (the body),
kāraṇa (the senses) and karttṛtva (the presiding deities
of the senses, the devatās ).


Through his pure ego, the kūṭa-stha ātmā (the soul in
his constitutional position) is related to Paramātmā as
His eternal servant, and therefore Paramātmā dominates
the jīva’s existence. Thus, the kūṭa-stha ātmā is above
all material designations and unchanged by the effects
of prakṛti . Prakṛti predominates because the baddha-
jīva strongly identifies himself with the body, which is
born from the transformation of prakṛti . Therefore,
paṇḍitas say that prakṛti is the cause of karttṛtva (the
agency, the presiding deities of the senses), but in
terms of experiencing the results of karma such as
happiness and distress, the puruṣa (taṭastha-śakti ),
who is different from prakṛti , is said to be the cause.
Although both karttṛtva and bhoktṛtva are under one ego
(of the baddha-jīva ), prakṛti is the dominant factor in
them because the body and so forth are the effect of
inert matter. The experience of happiness and distress
is not possible without consciousness; therefore, puruṣa
(the baddha-jīva ), who is under the control of prakṛtiÇ
is the dominant factor here. However, it should also be
understood that the karttṛtva (agency) of both prakṛti
and puruṣa (the jīva ) is under the control of the
karttṛtva of Īśvara. Both māyā as well as the jīva are
under Īśvara’s control.



                            688
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 22



puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi

bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān

kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo’sya

sad-asad-yoni-janmasu


hi—indeed; puruṣaḥ—the jīva ; prakṛti-sthaḥ—situated in
material nature; bhuṅkte —enjoys; guṇān —the sense
objects; prakṛti-jān —born of material nature; (in)
guṇa-saṅgaḥ—association with the modes; (is) kāraṇam —
the cause; asya —of his; janmasu —entering births; sat-
asat-yoni —in higher or lower species.


Becoming situated in the prakṛti, the puruṣa (jīva )
enjoys the sense objects born of prakṛti. The cause of
his birth in higher and lower species is due to his
association with the modes of nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The jīva considers the qualities of prakṛti such as
karttṛtva (the presiding deities of the senses) and
bhoktṛtva (the experience of happiness and distress) to
be his own because of false knowledge born of ignorance
since time immemorial. This is the reason for his
bondage to the material world. The jīva is situated
within the body, which is the effect of prakṛti , and he
is fully absorbed in identifying the body as his own
self. Due to his false ego, he considers aspects of the
mind such as lamentation, delusion and misery, which are
prakṛti-jān (generated by the modes of prakṛti ), to be
his own and suffers because of them. This is all because
of guṇa-saṅga , association with the modes of material
nature. This means that his identification with the
body, which is made of the guṇas , is an assumption
based on ignorance because the jīva is in fact, free
from this association. Where does he enjoy? Expecting
this question, Śrī Bhagavān says, satīṣu (sat-asad ) .
“In the species who have higher consciousness such as
sādhus and devatās ” and, asatīṣu Ç “in the species
whose consciousness is lower such as animals and birds.”
He takes birth and experiences happiness and distress
according to his good and bad karma.




                            689
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Having turned their faces away from Kṛṣṇa, the jīvas,
who are of a marginal nature, consider the body to be
the self. They accept the ego of being the doers and the
enjoyers of inert (jaḍa ) matter. Thus, they become
bound to the material world and take birth in various
species of life, thereby experiencing happiness and
distress. Such jīvas Ç who are deluded by māyāÇ have
fallen into the cycle of birth and death. Consequently,
they suffer worldly miseries, sometimes taking birth in
Svarga, sometimes in Naraka (hell), sometimes as kings
and sometimes as subjects, sometimes as brāhmaṇas and
sometimes as śūdras , and sometimes as worms, asuras ,
servants or masters. Sometimes they are happy, and
sometimes distressed. The consciousness of the jīva is
atomic and although he is a servant of Bhagavān, he
becomes overpowered b y māyā who is close by. This is
because he harbours sensual material desires, which are
the result of his aversion to Kṛṣṇa. Just as the
intelligence of a person who is possessed by a hobgoblin
or ghost becomes covered, similarly, the intelligence of
the j īvas overpowered by māyā becomes covered. By the
mercy of Bhagavān and His bhaktas , he attains sat-saṅga
and becomes free from māyā. Becoming situated in his own
svarūpa , he enjoys the bliss of sevā to Śrī Bhagavān.


kṛṣṇa bhūli’ sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha

kabhu svarge uṭhāya kabhu narake ḍubāya


daṇḍya-jane rājā yena nadīte cubāya


Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhyalīlā 20.117-118


Because he has forgotten Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the jīva has been
absorbed in his attempts to enjoy the material energy
since time immemorial. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa’s māyā-śakti
awards the jīva the various sufferings of saṁsāra .
Sometimes he is elevated to Svarga-loka, and at other
times he is thrown in Naraka-loka. This is just like a
man who is punished by the king by being tied to a
wooden plank and dunked in a river. Sometimes he is
immersed till he nearly drowns, and sometimes he is
released for a few moments of apparent happiness.




Śloka 23



upadraṣṭānumantā ca

                           690
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


bharttā bhoktā maheśvaraḥ

paramātmeti cāpy ukto

dehe’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ


asmin—in this; dehe—body; uktaḥ—it is said; iti —that;
(there is) paraḥ puruṣaḥ—a superior transcendental
enjoyer; parama-ātmā—the Supersoul; (He is) upadraṣṭā—
the witness; ca —and; anumantā—permitter; bharttā—
master; bhoktā—enjoyer; ca api —and also; mahā-īśvaraḥ—
the Supreme Controller.


In this body, there exists a superior puruṣa, the
transcendental enjoyer. He is Paramātmā: the witness,
the permitter, the supporter, the maintainer, and also
the Supreme Controller.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




After explaining the jīvātmā, Śrī Bhagavān is now
explaining Paramātmā in this śloka beginning with
upadraṣṭā. From the śloka , anādi mat-paraṁ brahma (Gītā
13.13) to, hṛdi sarvasya viṣṭhitam (Gītā 13.18),
Paramātmā was explained in both a general and specific
manner. One fact in particular should be understood:
although Paramātmā remains close to the jīvātmā, He is
still separate from him. To clarify this, it is being
stated that Paramātmā is situated within this body. Para
refers to another puruṣa (enjoyer) within this body.
That puruṣa is Maheśvara (the Supreme Proprietor), or
Paramātmā. The very word ‘Paramātmā’ is evidence that He
is superior to the ātmā. In terms of absolute realityÇ
the word param refers to svāṁśa (a personal expansion of
Kṛṣṇa). Just to emphasise this, it is said that He is
situated separately from the jīva , yet is very close
(upa ) to him and He is the seer (witness). Anumantā
(the permitter) means that while residing close to the
jīva , He is anugrāhaka , kind and facilitating. It is
said in Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (Uttara 97): sākṣī cetāḥ
kevalo nirguṇaś ca. “Puruṣa is sākṣī (the witness),
cetāḥ (conscious), kevalā (exclusive) and nirguṇa
(beyond the modes).” Similarly, bhartā means supporter
and bhoktā means protector.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Paramātmā, who is situated as the witness in this body,
is different from the jīva. The advaitavādīs (monists)

                            691
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

consider the jīvātmā and Paramātmā to be one, but it is
clear from this śloka that within each body, Paramātmā,
who is the wi tness and permitter, is different from the
jīvātmā. Because He is superior to the jīvātmā, He is
called Paramātmā, or the superior ātmā. This Paramātmā
is an aṁśa of an aṁśa (portion of a portion) of Svayam
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Without His permission, the j īvātmā
can do nothing. There are unlimited jīvātmās , and
Paramātmā is eternally existing within each of them as
their friend and supreme well-wisher. Although He lives
with the jīva Ç Paramātmā is always the master of both
the jīva and māyā.

Bhagavān has bestowed an invaluable treasure upon the
jīva in the form of independence. By properly utilising
this independence, he can very easily relish the nectar
of premamayī sevā to Bhagavān in His eternal dhāma . But
by misusing this independence, he becomes bound by māyā
and, while suffering from the threefold miseries, he is
trapped in the cycle of birth and death. Therefore, how
can a jīva who is overpowered by māyā ever be Bhagavān,
the master of māyā? Such a conception is illusory and
opposed to the conclusions of śāstra .

Paramātmā is very clearly described in śruti as
different from the jīvātmā: nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś
cetanānām (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.13). He is the
supreme eternal among all eternals, that is, He is the
topmost eternal being and among all conscious beings He
is the bestower of consciousness, the original
consciousness. Moreover, it is said in the Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad (4.6) and the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (3.1.1):


dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyā

samānaṁ vṛkṣaṁ pariṣasvajāte

tayor anyaḥ pippalaṁ svādv atty

anaśnann anyo ‘bhicākaśīti


Kṣīrodakaśāyī-puruṣa and the jīva live together in this
temporary material world (the body) just like two
friends in a pippala tree. One, the jīva , is tasting
the fruits of the tree according to his karma , and the
other, Param ātmā, is the witness. He is not enjoying
the fruits, but watching His friend.


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.11.6) also states:


suparṇāv etau sadṛśau sakhāyau

yadṛcchayaitau kṛta-nīḍau ca vṛkṣe

ekas tayoḥ khādati pippalānnam

anyo niranno ‘pi balena bhūyān


Two birds in the form of the jīva and Īśvara have a

                             692
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

relationship, being equal in quality, that is
consciousness. They are living in the nest (heart) of
the tree (the body) by the will of providence. One bird
(the jīva ) is enjoying the fruits (karma ) of that tree
(the body). The other bird, Īśvara, is not enjoying the
fruits and is ever satisfied in eternal bliss, being
happily situated by the strength of His śaktis such as
jñ āna .


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “The
jīva is My constant companion. He becomes close to Me
when he becomes situated purely in his marginal nature.
This marginal nature is his independence. The perfection
of jaiva-dharma , the eternal occupation of the jīva Ç
is to achieve pure love for Me by using his marginal
(independent) nature. When the jīva misuses that
independent nature, he enters the material field. Even
then, I become his companion as Paramātmā. Therefore, I
alone am the witness, the permitter, the supporter and
protector, and Maheśvara, the Supreme Controller of all
the jīvas’ actions. Thus, by the name of Paramātmā, I am
always present in the body as parama-puruṣa . I award
the result of whatever karma is performed by the jīva in
his conditioned state.”




Śloka 24



ya evaṁ vetti puruṣaṁ

prakṛtiñ ca guṇaiḥ saha

sarvathā varttamāno’pi

na sa bhūyo’bhijāyate


saḥ—one; yaḥ—who; vetti —understands; evam —through this
process; puruṣam —paramātma-tattva and jīva-tattva ; ca
—and; prakṛtim —material nature (māyā); saha —together;
guṇaiḥ—with her three modes; na—never; abhijāyate—takes
his birth; bhūyo—again; sarvathā varttamāno’pi—
regardless of his present situation.


One who thus understands puruṣatattva, māyā with her
three modes, and jīva -tattva does not take birth again,
regardless of his present situation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning with the

                           693
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

word ya to explain the result of this jñ āna . “Although
overpowered by sleep and disturbance of mind, those who
know puruṣa (Paramātmā), prakṛti (the material energy)
and jīva-śakti (understood by the word ca ) do not take
birth again.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The sādhaka becomes qualified to achieve mukti when he
knows bhakti-tattva , jīva -tattva , paramātma-tattva
and their mutual relationships. Then, by the mercy of a
sad-guru and the Vaiṣṇavas, and by following the path of
śuddha-bhakti , he gradually attains the stages of
śraddhā, niṣṭhā, ruci , āsakti , bhāva and finally
bhagavat-prema , entering the abode of Bhagavān. It is
certain that he never fell from bhagavat-dhāma and never
will. The imaginary conception that the baddha-jīvas
were first engaged in the service of Bhagavān in His
dhāma and somehow or other fell into the material world
is completely against the conclusion of all śāstra . But
if this theory is accepted for the sake of argument, the
question arises as to the significance (glory) of bhakti
and prema if one again falls into the material world,
after performing rigorous sādhana to attain Śrī
Bhagavān’s dhāma. The examples of King Citraketu and
Jaya and Vijaya are not appropriate in this regard
because they are bhagavat-parikaras (eternal associates
of Bhagavān). They descended into this material world by
the will of Bhagavān for the welfare of the jīvas and
for the nourishment of Śrī Bhagavān’s līlā. It is a
grievous offense to consider th em to be ordinary
conditioned souls. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
explains this in Mādhurya-kādambinī. The jīva who
attains bhagavad-dhāma never becomes bound in this
material world, and if he ever does come here, it is as
an associate of Bhagavān a nd by His will. He is not
subject to material conditions. Gītā (15:6) states: na
tad bhāsayate sūryo

na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥ

yad gatvā na nivartante

tad dhāma paramaṁ mama


Neither sun, moon nor fire can illuminate that supreme
realm, attaining which surrendered persons do not return
to this world. That abode of Mine is illuminating and
self-effulgent.




Śloka 25



                           694
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


dhyānenātmani paśyanti

kecid ātmānam ātmanā

anye sāṅkhyena yogena

karma-yogena cāpare


kecit—some; paśyanti—see; ātmānam —the Supersoul; ātmani
—within their heart; ātmanā—by use of the mind; dhyānena
—in meditation; anye —others see Him; sāṅkhyena yogena —
through sāṅkhya-yoga ; ca apare —and others; karma-
yogena —by niṣkāma-karma-yoga .


By meditating on the Supreme Person, the bhaktas see Him
within their hearts. The jñ ānīs try to see Him by
sāṅkhya-yoga , the yogīs by aṣṭāṅga-yoga , and others by
the process of niṣkāma-karma-yoga .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the various means to attain
ātma-jñāna Ç knowledge of the selfÇ in this śloka
beginning with the word dhyānena and in the next śloka .
By dhyāna Ç meditation on Bhagavān, some bhaktas see Him
within their hearts. Gītā (18.55) bhaktyā mām abhijānāti
, will explain this . “But I am not visible to any other
types of worshippers. The jñ ānīs endeavour to see Me by
sāṅkhya (the analytical study of conscious and inert
matter), the yogīs by aṣṭāṅga-yoga , and karma-yogīs try
to see Me by niṣkāma-karma-yoga .” Here, sāṅkhya-yoga ,
aṣṭāṅga-yoga and niṣkāma-karma-yoga are not the direct
causes of receiving darśana of Paramātmā. This is
because they are all sāttvika and Paramātmā is guṇātīta
Ç beyond the modes. It is also said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.19.1) jñ ānaṁ ca mayi sannyaset. “One should
surrender that jñ āna to Me.” Moreover, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam states (11.14.21) bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ.
“I am attained only by aikāntika-bhakti .” It is clear
from the above statements of Bhagavān that He is
attained only by bhakti which is devoid of jñ āna .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa further explains how
one can attain viśuddha-ātma-j ñ āna (pure knowledge of
the self), which was described in the previous śloka .
Although śāstra mentions various processes such as
sāṅkhya -yoga , aṣṭāṅga-yoga and niṣkāma-karma-yoga ,

                           695
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

one can attain this viśudd ha-jñ āna in a simple and
natural way only by bhakti-yoga . In the dialogue
between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Uddhava in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.14.21), Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself says: bhaktyāham
ekayā grāhyaḥ. “I can be attained only by kevala-
bhakti.” Furthermore, He says in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.20.6-8): yogās trayo mayā proktā

nṛṇāṁ śreyo-vidhitsayā

jñānaṁ karma ca bhaktiś ca

nopāyo ‘nyo ‘sti kutracit

nirviṇṇānāṁ jñāna-yogo

nyāsinām iha karmasu

teṣv anirviṇṇa-cittānāṁ

karma-yogas tu kāminām

yadṛcchayā mat-kathādau

jāta-śraddhas tu yaḥ pumān

na nirviṇṇo nāti-sakto

bhakti-yogo ‘sya siddhi-daḥ


For the welfare of human beings, I have described three
types of yoga : karma-yoga , jñ āna -yoga and bhakti-
yoga . There is no other way to achieve Me. Those who
are completely detached from the material world become
eligible for jñ āna -yoga , but those who are neither
too detached from worldliness nor too attached to it,
and who, by the will of providence, have faith in
hearing about My līlās Ç

are qualified to engage in bhakti. By following the path
of bhaktiÇ they attain perfection very quickly.


“Bhakti-yoga is the best of these three types of yoga .
In fact, I am only fully attained by bhakti. This is a
very deep secret. Na sādhayati māṁ yogo Ç (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 11.14.20). ‘I am not controlled by sāṅkhya
etc.’ In other words, I do not become pleased by the
processes of karma -yoga , jñ āna-yoga , japa , tapa ,
yajña , self-study and so forth. I am conquered only by
bhakti .”

This is also said in Gītā (6.47):


yogīnām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ


                             696
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


He who constantly performs My bhajana with full faith,
always thinking exclusively of Me within himself, is, in
My opinion, the topmost of all yogīs .


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, with respect to the topmost goal (paramārtha ),
the baddha-jīvas are divided into two divisions:
bahirmukha (those averse to spiritual life) and antar-
mukha (those inclined to spiritual life). Atheists,
agnostics (those who are attached to inert matter),
skeptics and moralists are counted among the paramārtha-
bahir-mukha (those averse to the supreme transcendental
goal). An inquisitive and faithful person, a karma-yogī
and a bhakta are antar-mukha . Bhaktas are superior
because they take shelter of cit which is beyond prakṛti
, and meditate on Paramātmā within the self (ātma-tattva
). The sāṅkhya-yogīs who search after Īśvara (the
Controller) are the next best. After deliberating on
prakṛti , which consists of twenty-four elements, they
come to know that the twenty-fifth element, the jīva Ç
is a pure conscious entity. They gradually engage in
bhakti-yoga to the twenty-sixth element, Bhagavān. The
karma-yogīs are inferior to them. By the process of
niṣkāma-karma-yoga , they attain the facility to d
eliberate on and worship Bhagavān.”




Śloka 26




anye tv evam ajānantaḥ

śrutvānyebhya upāsate

te’pi cātitaranty eva

mṛtyuṁ śruti-parāyaṇāḥ


tu—but; anye—others; ajānantaḥ—do not know; evam —thus
(what was just taught); upāsate —who worship; śrutvā—
after hearing; anyebhyaḥ—from other (ācāryas ); śruti-
parāyaṇāḥ—being devoted to hearing; te —they; api ca —
also; atitaranti —transcend; mṛtyum —death; eva —this is
certain.


Others, however, who do not know this tattvaÇ begin
worshipping the Supreme after hearing from various
ācāryas . By such devotion to hearing, they too can
gradually transcend this mortal world. This is certain.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                           697
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




The word anye means those who hear the kathā (topics)
related to Bhagavān here and there at different places.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining a very
important process. “There are some people who are not
atheists, nor are they skeptical, or māyāvādīs , or
philosophers. Although they are only ordinary people in
society, they are quite faithful because they have good
past life impressions (saṁskāras ). When they hear
bhagavat-kathā in sat-saṅga and receive instructions
from various preachers, they try to worship Me somehow
or other. Later, when they have attained the association
of śuddha-bha ktas , they receive the opportunity to
hear pure hari-kathā, and by entering bhakti-tattva ,
they ultimately achieve Me.”

No education about ātma-jñāna is given in current so-
called cultured society, but Bhagavad-Gītā and Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam explain that the process of hearing about
ātma-j ñ āna is very powerful. Specifically, in recent
times, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu placed great emphasis on
hearing and chanting hari-nāma : Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma,
Hare Hare. His prime instruction is that by the
influence of hearing, chanting and remembering śrī-hari-
nāma and bhagavat-kathā, one can very easily attain
service to Bhagavān. Four-headed Brahmā, Śrī Nārada
Gosvāmī, Śrī Vedavyāsa, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, King
Parīkṣit and Prahlāda Mahārāja all attained direct
darśana of Bhagavān by following this process.

Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura was one of the associates of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Although he was born in a Yavana
family, he used to chant three lākhs (300,000) of Śrī
Hari’s names every day. All types of people, both rich
and poor, had great regard for him. Seeing this,
Rāmacandra Khan, the famous landlord of that area,
became envious of him. To defame Haridāsa, he lured a
beautiful young prostitute by promising her great
wealth, and one moonlit night he sent her to Haridāsa
Ṭhākura. Sitting in a solitary place on the bank of
Bhagavatī Gaṅgā, Haridāsa Ṭhākura, while keeping count
of his rounds, loudly and attentively chanted the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mahā mantra : Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.
The Tulasī plant stood on a nearby platform. The
prostitute approached him and expressed her mind by her
various bodily postures, but this had no influence on
Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Finallyspan>

, she openly propositioned him. He replied, “I have
taken a vow to chant ten million names of Hari. I will
fulfil all your desires within a very short period, when

                           698
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

I have completed this number.” Hearing this assurance,
the prostitute sat nearby for the ent ire night, waiting
for him to complete his chanting. In the morning, she
went back to her house out of fear of being seen by
other people. The next night, she again came and sat
near Haridāsa Ṭhākura. He again told her that he was
just about to complete his chanting. That night passed
like the previous one. When she arrived on the third
night, Haridāsa Ṭhākura again started chanting loudly.
Aho ! The effect of hearing hari-nāma from the mouth of
a śuddha-bhakta was so wonderful that it changed the
heart of t hat prostitute. She fell at his feet crying
and asked to be forgiven. Haridāsa Ṭhākura was very
pleased and said, “I would have gone to another place
the very first day you came, but I remained here only
for your sake. That your heart has changed is a matt er
of great pleasure to me. This is the unfailing glory of
hearing and chanting hari-nāma . Now you should
fearlessly remain in this āśrama and continuously chant
the name of Hari. You should render service to Tulasī
devī and Bhagavatī Gaṅgā.” She followed these
instructions and her life changed completely. Even great
bhaktas started coming to her āśrama to have darśana of
a parama-vaiṣṇavī. Remaining humble, lowly and without
possessions, she performed bhajana of Hari, and went to
the abode of Bhagavān within a very short time. In this
way, even an ordinary person can attain Bhagavān by
hearing and chanting.




Śloka 27



yāvat saṁjāyate kiñcit

sattvaṁ sthāvara-jaṅgamam

kṣetra-kṣetrajña-saṁyogāt

tad viddhi bharatarṣabha


bharata-ṛṣabha—O best amongst the lineage of Bharata;
viddhi—understand; tat —this; yāvat ki ñcit —whatever;
sattvam —beings (exist); (either) jaṅgamam —moving; (or)
sthāvara —non-moving; saṁjāyate —are produced; saṁyogāt
—from the combination; kṣetra —of the field; (and)
kṣetra-jña —the knower of the field.


O best of the Bharatas, know that whatever moving and
non-moving beings are born, all are produced from the
combination of kṣetra and kṣetra-jña .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                            699
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



The same subject matter which was described earlier is
being explained in detail until the end of this chapter.
Yāvat means either low or high, and sattvam means living
beings. All are born from the combination of kṣetra and
kṣetra-jña .




Śloka 28



samaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

tiṣṭhantaṁ parameśvaram

vinaśyatsv avinaśyantaṁ

yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati


(he) yaḥ—who; paśyati—sees; parama-īśvaram —the Supreme
Person; tiṣṭhantam —seated; samam —equally; sarveṣu —in
all; bhūteṣu —beings; avinaśyantam —imperishable;
vinaśyatsu —amongst the perishable; saḥ—he; (actually)
paśyati —sees.


Only one who sees Parameśvara equally in all beings as
the imperishable seated within the perishable actually
sees.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




To explain how Paramātmā is situated in all perishable
bodies, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning
with the word samam. “Know that Paramātmā is dwelling
within all perishable bodies. Those who see in this way
are real jñ ānīs .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Those who are jñānīs in the real sense simultaneously
experience the body, the embodied soul (the ātmā) and
the friend of the ātmāÇ Paramātmā, by the influence of
the association of a tattva-darśī (self-realised)
mahātmā. On the contrary, those who are bereft of such
saintly association are truly ignorant. They can only

                           700
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

see the perishable body and consider it to be their
self. When the body is destroyed, they think that
everything is lost. A jñ ānī, however, experiences the
existence of the ātmā and Paramātmā even after the body
is destroyed. When one body is destroyed, the ātmā
enters another body along with the senses and subtle
body. His frie nd, Paramātmā, also remains situated with
the jīvātmā as the witness. Those who actually
understand this are, indeed, jñ ānīs .




Śloka 29



samaṁ paśyan hi sarvatra

samavasthitam īśvaram

na hinasty ātmanātmānaṁ

tato yāti parāṁ gatim


paśyan—observing; īśvaram—the Lord, Īśvara;
samavasthitam —situated; samam —equally; sarvatra —
everywhere; (he) hi —certainly; na hinasti —does not
degrade; ātmānam —himself; ātmanā—through his mind;
tataḥ—thus; yāti —he goes; parām —to the supreme; gatim
—destination.


One who sees Parameśvara dwelling equally everywhere in
all beings, does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus
he attains the supreme destination.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Ātmanā means the mind which leads one to degradation.
Ātmānam means the jīva and na hinasti means it does not
lead to degradation. They do not degrade themselves
through the degrading mind.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The baddha-jīva is bound by various modes and actions of
material nature, and for this reason he is put into
various situations. But although Pa rameśvara is
situated in the hearts of different jīvas , He exists

                           701
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

everywhere equally. Those who understand this finally
achieve the supreme destination. On the contrary, those
whose minds do not meditate on the opulences, qualities
and glories of Bhagavān remain absorbed in sense
gratification. Being the killer of their own ātmā
(self), they fall down. This is also described in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.17) wherein Kṛṣṇa says: nṛ-
deham ādyaṁ sulabhaṁ sudurlabhaṁ

plavaṁ su-kalpaṁ guru-karṇadhāram

mayānukūlena nabhasvateritaṁ

pumān bhavābdhiṁ na taret sa ātma-hā


O Uddhava, this human body is the basis of the
attainment of all auspicious results, and although it is
very rare, it has been obtained easily. It is like a
strong boat in which to cross the ocean of material
existence. Simply by accepting the shelter of the guru ,
who becomes the captain and navigator of this boat, and
blown by the favourable winds of remembrance of Me, it
is propelled towards its destination. After acquiring
this human body, a person who does not endeavour to
cross this ocean of material existence, even after
getting so much facility, is certainly considered the
killer of his own ātmā.




Śloka 30



prakṛtyaiva ca karmāṇi

kriyamāṇāni sarvaśaḥ

yaḥ paśyati tathātmānam

akarttāraṁ sa paśyati


saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; paśyati —sees; karmāṇi —activities;
kriyamāṇāni —performed; ca sarvaśaḥ—in every way;
prakṛtyā—by material nature; tathā—and; ātmānam —
himself; akarttāram —a non-doer; eva —actually; p aśyati
—sees.


One who sees that all activites are only performed by
prakṛti and that the ātmā is not the doer, actually
sees.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           702
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Prakṛtyaiva means that prakṛti, transformed into the
body and senses, performs all work. The vision of those
jīva s who think that they are the doers, because they
identify the self with the inert body, is not real. They
are in ignorance. But one who sees that he is not the
doer of action sees properly.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The baddha-jīva is impelled by the actions and modes of
prakṛti because of the false ego which makes him think
that he is the doer of material actions. But in the true
sense, he is not the doer. Bhagavān has explained this
earlier. Parameśvara is also not the doer although He is
situated in the hearts of all beings as Antaryāmī, He
who gives inspiration. What to speak of Parameśvara,
even the jīvātmā in the pure state does not have the ego
of being the doer of material actions which are
performed by the material senses. Those who know this
are really in knowledge. It is also said in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.28.15): śoka-harṣa-bhaya-krodha—

lobha-moha-spṛhādayaḥ

ahaṅkārasya dṛśyante

janma-mṛtyuś ca nātmanaḥ


O Uddhava, the material ego is the only cause of
lamentation, happiness, fear, anger, greed, delusion,
desire, birth and death. The pure ātmā

has no connection with them.


It is also seen in the Tantra-bhāgavata: ahaṅkārāt tu
saṁsāro bhavet jīvasya na svataḥ. “It is only due to
material ego that this material existence of birth and
death occurs for the jīvas . The pure jīvas have no
relationship with such material ego.” However, in the
jīva’s pure state he has the ego of being kṛṣṇa-dāsa ,
with a human-like spiritual body, name, form, qualities
and activities which are all transcendental. He is not
formless or without qualities.




Śloka 31



yadā bhūta-pṛthag-bhāvam

eka-stham anupaśyati

                           703
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


tata eva ca vistāraṁ

brahma saṁpadyate tadā


yadā—when; anupaśyati—he sees by following the guidance
of previous authorities; pṛthag-bhāvam —the diverse
nature; bhūta —of the living beings; (to be) eka-stham —
situated in one nature; tataḥ tadā eva ca —then at that
very moment; saṁpadyate—he attains; brahma —to
realisation of brahma ; vistāram —in a very extensive
way (on all sides).


When he sees that the diverse natures of living beings
abide in prakṛti alone, and understands them all to be
born from that same prakṛti , he attains realisation of
brahma .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those who truly perceive that, during annihilationÇ all
moving and non-moving beings of various shapes merge
into one prakṛti , and later, at the time of creation,
again manifest from that same prakṛti , attain the state
of brahma .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Only because a person identifies himself with the body
does he see the various forms or bodies of others as
devatās, human beings, dogs, cats, śūdras , Hindūs,
Muslims and so on. The cause of this mundane
differentiation is ignorance, whereby a person falsely
identifies himself with the body. Due to this ignorance,
one forgets Bhagavān. When remembrance of Bhagavān
appears within him by the influence of the association
of śuddha Vaiṣṇavas, all his ignorance is dispelled and
his materialistic ideas of differentiation are removed.
At that time, he becomes situated in brahma , which is
endowed with eight qualities. He perceives everything
equally at all times and ultimately he attains parā
bhakti . Sometimes in the śāstra , a jīvātmā endowed
with these eight special qualities has been called
brahma or brahmabhūta . These eight qualities are: ya
ātmāpahata-pāpnā vijaro vimṛtyur viśoko vijighitso
‘pipāsaḥ

satya-kāmaḥ satya-saṅkalpaḥ so’nveṣṭavyaḥ sa
vijijñāsitavyaḥ


                           704
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


One should search for and know the ātmā

who is completely free from: 1) the miseries arising
from desires for sense objects, 2) the threefold
miseries such as old age, 3) death, 4) lamentation, 5)
an enjoying propensity and 6) mundane aspirations. That
ātmā is 7) endowed with favourable desires to serve
Kṛṣṇa (satya-kāma ), and 8) able to attain perfection in
whatever he desires (satya-saṅkalpa ).


This is also explained in Gītā (18.54): brahmabhūtaḥ
prasannātmā. “Ultimately, one who is a brahmabhūtātmā
achieves parā bhakti .” The jīva’s ultimate objective is
to achieve parā bhakti. It is improper to say, ‘Param
brahma achieves parā bhakti Ç’ because parā bhakti means
to render service to the feet of param brahma.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying: “When
a man of true wisdom sees that, during annihilation, all
moving and non-moving jīvas of various shapes are
situated in prakṛti only, and that at the time of
creation those varieties again manifest from the same
prakṛti , he becomes free from the tendency to
differentiate between material designations. He then
realises his real spiritual identity and his
relationship with brahma (the Absolute Reality). Now I
will explain how the jīva , having acquired this
knowledge of qualitative oneness, perceives Paramātmā,
who is present as the witness.”




Śloka 32



anāditvān nirguṇatvāt

paramātmāyam avyayaḥ

śarīra-stho’pi kaunteya

na karoti na lipyate


kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; anāditvāt—because He is without
beginning; (and) nirguṇatvāt —because He is free from
the three material modes; ayam —this; avyayaḥ—
imperishable; parama-ātmā—Supreme Soul; api —although;
śarīra-sthaḥ—situated in the body; na karoti —does not
perform karma ; (and) na lipyate —is unaffected (by
karma ).


O Kaunteya, because He is without beginning (anādi) and
free from the three modes (nirguṇa ), this imperishable
Paramātmā, though situated in the body, neither performs
karma nor becomes entangled in the results of karma .



                           705
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān said in Gītā (13.22): kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo
‘sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu. “The jīvātmā and Paramātmā
equally reside in the body, yet only the jīvātmā becomes
materially conditioned by his implication in the guṇas.
Paramātmā does not.” Someone may raise the question,
‘How is that?’ For this reason, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with the word anāditvān . That which has
no cause or origin is anādi . When a word ending in the
fifth case (ablative) is used with the word anuttama ,
it will read paramottama (than whom no one is higher,
the supreme). In the same way, here the word anādi means
the supreme cause. Since, in the original śloka ,
anāditvāt is used in the fifth case, the meaning is: He
is the Supreme Cause. Nirguṇatvāt means He who is free
from the guṇas , or from whom all qualities such as
creation emanate. He is that reality. Hence, Paramātmā
is distinct from the jīvātmā and is avyaya
(imperishable). That is, His knowledge and bliss never
diminish. Śarira-stho ‘pi means that although He is
situated in the body, He does not accept the
characteristics of the body, and na karoti means that
unlike the jīva , He does not become the doer (the
enjoyer), nor does He become implicated by the qualities
of the body, the modes of nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Being avyaya (imperishable), anādi (beginningless) and
nirguṇa (free from the guṇas ), Paramātmā, unlike the
jīva , does not become implicated in the characteristics
of the body even though He resides in the body. When the
pure jīva attains the state of brahma , which is
completely free from material vision (brahmabhūta ), he
understands that the complete kṣetra-jña , Antaryāmī,
Parameśvara, is not at all tainted by material
qualities. He, the jīva , then becomes totally aloof
from the qualities of the body also, although he resides
within it.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “When
the jīvas have attained brahma realisation, they can
understand that Paramātmā is avyaya , anādi and nirguṇa
. Although He exists in the body along with the jīvātmā,
He does not become implicated in the qualities of the
body (the modes of nature) like the baddha-jīva does.
Therefore, the jīvas who have attained the state of
brahma no longer become implicated in material affairs.
This is because they take shelter of this knowledge
(about the qualities of Paramātmā). Hear from Me how the
jīva who is not implicated by material qualities deals
with this body.”

                           706
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 33



yathā sarvagataṁ saukṣmyād

ākāśaṁ nopalipyate

sarvatrāvasthito dehe

tathātmā nopalipyate


yathā—as; sarva-gatam—the all-pervading; ākāśam —sky;
saukṣmyāt —due to its subtle nature; na upalipyate —is
untouched (by the things within it); tathā—so; ātmā—the
Supersoul; (although) avasthitaḥ—situated; sarvatra —
throughout; dehe —the material body; na upalipyate —is
unaffected (by it).


Just as the all-pervading sky does not mix with anything
due to its subtle nature, in the same way, the ātmā, who
has attained brahma realisation in the wake of
Paramātmā, is u naffected by the qualities or faults of
the material body, even though he pervades it.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, Śrī Bhagavān speaks the śloka beginning with the
words yathā sarva-gatam Ç in which He gives an example.
The sky pervades mud and other material objects due to
its subtle nature, yet it does not become contaminated
or mixed with them. In other words, it remains untouched
(asaṅga ) by mud and so forth. Similarly, the
brahmabhūta realised ātmā, who follows the path of
Paramātmā, does not become influe nced by the qualities
and defects related to the body although residing within
it.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The sky remains free from any contaminating association
or influence even though it is all-pervasive. Thus, it
remains aloof. Similarly, the pure jīva who has attained
the state of brahma also does not become influenced by
the qualities of the body even though he resides within

                             707
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

it. He always remains unaffected.




Śloka 34




yathā prakāśayaty ekaḥ

kṛtsnaṁ lokam imaṁ raviḥ

kṣetraṁ kṣetrī tathā kṛtsnaṁ

prakāśayati bhārata


bhārata—O scion of Bhārata; yathā—as; ekaḥ—the one;
raviḥ—sun; prakāśayati—illuminates; imam —this; kṛtsnam
—entire; lokam —universe; tathā—so; kṣetrī—the Supersoul
within the field (of the body); prakāśayati —
illuminates; kṛtsnam —the entire; kṣetram —field (body).


O Bhārata, just as one sun illuminates the whole
universe, in the same way, Paramātmā illuminates the
entire body with consciousness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




How does an object with the quality of illumination
remain unaffected by the qualities of the object it
illuminates? To explain this with an example, Śrī
Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning with the word
yathā. The sun is the illuminator, yet it is not
affected by the qualities of the objects it illuminates.
Similarly, kṣetrī, or Paramātmā, does not become
affected by the qualities of kṣetra (the body).

It is also said in Katha Upaniṣad (2.2.11):


sūryo yathā sarva-lokasya cakṣur

na lipyate cakṣuṣair bāhya-doṣaiḥ

ekas tathā sarva-bhūtāntarātmā

na lipyate loka-duḥkhena bāhyaḥ


The sun, like the eye of all beings, does not become
affected by the defects of another’s eye or any other
external defect. In the same way, the one Paramātmā is
not subject to the happiness or misery of anybody, even

                           708
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

though He is situated in all beings.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Just as the one sun illuminates the whole universe even
though it is situated in the one place, in the same way,
the ātmā, which is situated in one part of the body,
illuminates the entire body spreading consciousness
throughout. Brahmasūtra (2.3.25) also says: guṇād vā
lokavat. “Although the jīvātmā is atomic, it pervades
the whole body by its quality of consciousness.” Here,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura translates the word
kṣetrī as Paramātmā, because Paramātmā is the complete
kṣetra -jña and the jīva is the partial kṣetra-jña . The
conscious jīva is kṣetra-jña of a particular body, but
Parameśvara is the complete kṣetra-jña of all bodies
simultaneously.




Śloka 35



kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor evam

antaraṁ jñāna-cakṣuṣā

bhūta-prakṛti-mokṣañ ca

ye vidur yānti te param


evam-in this way; te-they; ye -who; viduḥ-comprehend; jñ
āna-cakṣuṣā-with the eye of knowledge; antaram -the
difference between; kṣetra-kṣetrajñayoḥ-the field and
the knower of the field; ca -and; prakṛti-mokṣam -the
liberation from material nature; bhūta -of the living
beings; yānti -attain; param -the Lord’s supreme abode.


In this way, those with the eye of spiritual knowledge,
who become conversant with the difference between kṣetra
and kṣetra-jña and the jīva’s means of deliverance from
prakṛti , attain the supreme abode.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now, Śrī Bhagavān is concluding this chapter. Those who
know kṣetra and kṣetra-jña , the jīvātmā and Paramātmā,

                           709
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

and the process such as dhyāna (meditation) by which the
living entities achieve mokṣa from prakṛti , attain the
supreme destination.

Of the two kṣetra-jñas, the jīvātmā becomes bound when
he enjoys the qualities (fruits) of kṣetra , but he
becomes liberated by the appearance of jñ āna . This is
the subject explained in the Thirteenth Chapter.




Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the
Thirteenth Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives
pleasure to the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly
persons.

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In concluding the subject of the kṣetra and kṣeta-jñaÇ
Śrī Bhagavān says that an intelligent person should
properly understand the distinguishing characteristics
of the body and the knowers of the body who are the
partial kṣetra-jña (the ātmā), and the friend of the
ātmā (Paramātmā), who is the complete kṣetra -jña. Those
who realise this attain the supreme destination.

Initially, faithful people should associate with bhaktas
who are tattva-darśīs . By hearing highly effectual hari
-kathā in their association, they can easily attain
knowledge of bhagavat-tattva , jīva -tattva , māyā-
tattva and bhakti-tattva . Then, when their
identification with the material body is removed, they
attain the supreme destination.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “All effects of the
material nature constitute kṣetra . There are two types
of tattva , paramātmā-tattva and ātma-tattva , and both
are kṣetra-jña . According to the process described in
this chapter, those who understand the difference
between kṣetra and kṣetra -jña with the eye of spiritual
knowledge by following the process by which all living
entities attain deliverance from mundane activities,
very easily understand para-tattva Śrī Bhagavān, who is
beyond both kṣetra and kṣetra -jña .”




Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāya ṇa Mahārāja, on the
Thirteenh Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Fourteen



                           710
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Guṇa-Traya-Vibhāga-Yoga



The Yoga of Understanding the Three Modes of Material
Nature




Śloka 1




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

paraṁ bhūyaḥ pravakṣyāmi

jñānānāṁ jñānam uttamam

yaj jñātvā munayaḥ sarve

parāṁ siddhim ito gatāḥ


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Supreme Lord said;
pravakṣyāmi—I shall speak; bhūyaḥ—further; param —the
best; jñ ānam —knowledge; uttamam —transcendental; jñ
ānānām —to all other forms of knowledge; jñ ātvā—having
understood; yat —which; sarve —all; munayaḥ—the sages;
gatāḥ—have attained; parām —supreme; siddhim —
liberation; itaḥ—from this (world of bondage to bodily
identification).

Śrī Bhagavān said: I shall impart to you further supreme
jñāna which transcends all other knowledge. The sages
who have understood and followed these instructions have
all attained parā mukti from this bondage to the body.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The three guṇas of māyā are indeed the cause of bondage.
This is inferred just by their result. Bhakti is the
cause of the symptoms which destroy the three guṇas .
This is being explained in the Fourteenth Chapter.

The previous chapter (Gītā 13.22) stated: kāraṇaṁ guṇa-
saṅgo ‘sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu. “The cause of the
jīva’s taking birth in auspicious and inauspicious
species is his attachment to the guṇas .” What are the
guṇas ? How does one associate with them? What is the
result of association with the different guṇas ? What
are the symptoms of a person who is influenced by the
guṇas , and how can he become free from them? Expecting
these questions, Śrī Bhagavān is making a declaration in
this śloka beginning with the words paraṁ bhūyaḥ in
order to introduce the subjects on which He will later

                           711
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

elaborate. The word jñ ānam means by which it is known,
or instruction, and param means the best.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




It is clearly described in the Thirteenth Chapter that
in saintly association even an ordinary person can
become liberated from the bondage of material existence
by knowing the tattva of the body, the jīva and
Paramātmā. The jīva has become bound in this material
world only by his association with the guṇas of material
nature (prakṛti ). In this chapter, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
explains to His bhakta Arjuna what the guṇas are in
detail, how they function, how they bind the jīva , and
how the jīva can attain parama-gati (the supreme
destination) by becoming free from these guṇas . With
this knowledge, many ṛṣis and munis have attained
perfection and the supreme destination. Even ordinary
people become transcendental to the guṇas after
acquiring this knowledge and can attain the supreme
status.




Śloka 2



idaṁ jñānam upāśritya

mama sādharmyam āgatāḥ

sarge’pi nopajāyante

pralaye na vyathanti ca


upāśritya—taking refuge in; idam—this; jñ ānam —
knowledge; āgatāḥ—they become; sādharmyam —endowed with
a similar nature; mama —to Mine; api —even; sarge —at
the time of creation; na upajāyante —they do not take
birth; ca —and; na vyathanti —they are undisturbed;
pralaye —at the time of devastation.

Taking refuge in this jñāna, the sages attain sārūpya-
dharma and acquire a transcendental nature like My own.
Thus, they do not take birth again, even at the time of
creation, nor does death disturb them at the time of
devastation.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                           712
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



The word sādharmyam means mukti characterised by
sārūpya-dharma (attaining a transcendental form like
that of Śrī Bhagavān). Na vyathanti means they do not
experience misery.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After acquiring ātma-jñāna (transcendental knowledge of
the self), the sādhaka-jīva acquires qualities similar
to that of Bhagavān, that is, many of his qualities
become partially equal to the qualities of Bhagavān.
Even after attaining mukti and becoming free from the
cycl e of birth and death, his individual existence
continues as an associate of Śrī Bhagavān. He remains
eternally engaged in premamayī sevā to the lotus feet of
Bhagavān, having become established in his svarūpa .
Therefore, the bhaktas do not give up their s varūpa ,
which is servitorship, even after mukti . The essence of
all Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s instructions is that the
jīvātmā does not completely become one with Paramātmā by
merging with Him. Rather, the jīva’s śuddha-svarūpa
(pure form) continues to exist se parately from that of
Śrī Bhagavān, and in this pure form the jīva always
remains engaged in premamayī sevā to Him. Great
personalities like Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
and Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī have accepted the meaning of
sādharmya as sārūpya-muk ti only. In the fourth prameya
of Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s commentary in the book
called Prameya-ratnāvalī, he has written that the words
sāmya in the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (3.1.3) and sādharmya in
Gītā (14.2) should be understood to mean that, even in
the liberated state of mokṣa , there is a difference
between the jīva and Īśvara. He explains that the
component brahmaiva in the śloka , brahma-vid brahmaiva
bhavati means ‘like brahma ’. The word eva has been used
in the sense of similarity. Therefore, brahmaiva means
to acquire qualities like that of Bhagavān, that is, to
become free from birth and death. But the jīva can never
carry out such functions as the act of creation.

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa comments on the present śloka
as follows: “When the faithful jīva acquires the above-
stated transcendental jñ āna by the worship of guru ,
while performing the sādhana of bhakti , he attains
qualitative equality with eight of Bhagavān’s eternal
qualities and becomes free from birth and death. The
śrutis state that the jīvas retain their individuality
even in the stage of mokṣa. They never merge. In other
words, more than one jīva is seen there. Tad viṣṇoḥ
paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ. “Liberated people
in the stage of mukti constantly see the abode of Śrī
Viṣṇu .” The word sāmya is also seen in the Muṇḍaka-
śruti , yadā paśyaḥ paśyate rukma-varṇaṁ . . . nira
ñjanaḥ paramaṁ s āmyam upaiti , and in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.5.48), tat-sāmyam āpuḥ. “They achieve a position on
the same level as Him (in His eternal spiritual abode).”

                           713
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Jñāna is generally saguṇa. Nirguṇa-jñ āna is called
uttama -jñ āna (topmost knowledge). By taking shelter of
this nirguṇa -jñ āna , the jīva attains My sādharmya ,
that is, qualities similar to Mine. Less intelligent
persons think that by giving up material qualities,
material form and material existence, the jīva himself
becomes bereft of all qualities, form and existence and
loses his identity. They are not aware that, just as all
objects in the material world are distinguished from
each other by their unique attributes (viśeṣa ),
similarly, the purest unique attributes and qualities
are situated in My Vaikuṇṭha dhāma , which transcends
this material nature (viśuddha -viśeṣa-dhāma ). That
pure, unique quality (viśuddha-viśeṣa ) makes an eternal
arrangement of transcendental form and existence which
is called My nirguṇa-sādharmya (sārūpya which is beyond
the guṇas ) . By nirguṇa -jñ āna , one initially
transcends the saguṇa material world, and attains the
state of nirguṇa -brahma. Transcendental qualities then
become manifest. When this occurs, the jīva never takes
birth again in the material world.”




Śloka 3




mama yonir mahad brahma

tasmin garbhaṁ dadhāmy aham

sambhavaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

tato bhavati bhārata

bhārata—O Bhārata; mama—My; mahat—great; brahma—spirit
(in the form of material nature); (is) yoniḥ—a womb;
tasmin—in that (womb); aham—I; dadhāmi—impregnate;
garbham—an embryo; (and) tataḥ—thereby; sambhavaḥ—the
birth; sarva-bhūtānām—of all living entities; bhavati—
comes about.

O Bhārata, My prakṛti (mahad brahma) is the womb which I
impregnate with the jīvas who are of the taṭasthā
nature. All beings are born from this mahad brahma
alone.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The cause of material bondage is association with the
guṇas, which is the consequence of ignorance since time

                           714
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

immemorial. To explain this, Śrī Bhagavān is describing
how kṣetra and kṣetra-jña are born. “Mahad brahma , the
great brahma , is My place of impregnation (mama yonir
).” That which cannot be divided by time and place and
whose limit cannot be ascertained is called mahat
(great). Here brahma refers to prakṛti because the
creation is an expansion of brahma. In this way, the
word combination mahad brahma is formed.

In the śrutis, the word brahma is also sometimes used
for prakṛti . Dadhāmi means ‘I place garbha (the seed in
the form of the jīva ) in that prakṛti , thereby
impregnating it.’ Itas tv anyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām
jīva-bhūtām (Gītā 7.5). This statement mentions the
source of the conscious entities, jīva-prakṛti , as the
marginal potency (taṭastha-śakti ), and as the life of
all beings. The word garbha (conception) describes this.
Tataḥ means, ‘All jīvas (sarva-bhūtānām ) beginning from
Brahmā are born as a result of My impregnation.’




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this material world, everything happens by the
combination of kṣetra and kṣetra-jña only, that is, by
deha (the body) and dehī (the jīvātmā).

This combination of prakṛti (material nature) and puruṣa
(the jīva ) happens by the will of Parameśvara. The
scorpion lays eggs in a pile of rice. People say that
scorpions are born from rice, but, in fact, rice is not
the cause of the scorpions’ birth. Scorpions are
actually born from eggs. In the same way, the birth of
the jīva is not caused by material nature. Bhagavān
places the jīva (seed) in prakṛti , but people think
that the jīva is born from prakṛti . Every jīva gets a
different type of body according to his past actions.
Prakṛti simply creates various material bodies under the
supervision o f Bhagavān. The jīvas who identify
themselves with their bodies enjoy happiness or undergo
misery according to their past karma . It should be
clearly understood that Parameśvara is the original
cause of the manifestations of the jīvas and the
universe.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “The
original tattva of prakṛti (mahad brahma ) is the source
of the universe. I impregnate that brahma (prakṛti ) and
all beings are born from that prakṛti . The material
aspect of My para-prakṛti (transcendental nature) is
that brahma (material nature), into which I place the
seeds of taṭastha , the jīvas . All the jīvas beginning
from Brahmā are born in this way alone.”




Śloka 4

                           715
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā


kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; mahat brahma—the great material
nature; (is) yoniḥ—the womb (mother); tāsām —for those;
mūrtayaḥ—bodies; yāḥ—which; sambhavanti —are born;
sarva-yoniṣu —in all species of life; (and) aham —I
(am); bīja-pradaḥ—the seed-giving; pitā—father.

O Kaunteya, the mahad brahma is the mother from whose
womb all species of life are born, and I am the seed-
giving father.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“It is not only at the time of creation that prakṛti is
the mother of all beings and I am the father; prakṛti is
always the mother and I am always the father. Mahad
brahma (prakṛti ) is the womb, or birth-giving mother,
of all varieties of bodies which are born in moving or
non-moving species from devatās to grass and creepers,
and I am the seed-giver, the father who impregnates.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka, it is clearly stated that Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the primeval father of all jīvas . All the
jīvas in this material world are born from the mother,
prakṛti , through the seed-giving fath er, Bhagavān. The
jīvas are everywhere, inside the earth and outside, in
the water and in the sky, and also in the seven lower
and seven upper planetary systems. There are jīvas
everywhere; in Vaikuṇṭha, in Goloka and also in other
abodes. In Vaikuṇṭha and so forth, there are mukta-jīvas
who are the associates of Bhagavān, and within this
universe, there are the baddha-jīvas who remain in
various situations and states of consciousness such as
covered (ācchādita ), contracted (saṅkucita ), budding
(mukulita ), bloomed (vikasita ) and blossoming (pūrṇa-
vikasita ).




                           716
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 5



sattvaṁ rajas tama iti

guṇāḥ prakṛti-sambhavāḥ

nibadhnanti mahā-bāho

dehe dehinam avyayam


mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed Arjuna; guṇāḥ—the three binding
forces; sattvam —goodness; rajaḥ—passion; (and) tamaḥ—
ignorance; iti —which; prakṛti-sambhavāḥ—are born of
material nature; nibadhnanti —bind; avyayam —the
ageless; dehinam —embodied soul; dehe —within his body.

O Mahā-bāho, it is the three guṇas: sattva, rajas, and
tamas, born of prakṛti, which bind the immutable jīva
who dwells within the body.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




After explaining how all jīvas are born from prakṛti and
puruṣa , Śrī Bhagavān is now explaining what the guṇas
are and how the jīvas become bound by their association.
Śrī Bhagavān is saying dehe , meaning that the jīva who
identifies himself as one with the functions of prakṛti
is situated in the body and becomes bound by the guṇas .
In fact the jīva is imperishable, immutable and free
from any material contact, but the guṇas bind him
because of his association with them. This association
is caused by his ignorance since time immemorial.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The three guṇas: sattva, rajas and tamas are born from
prakṛti and are manifest to perform the three functions
of creation, maintenance and annihilation of the
universe. Prakṛti remains unmanifest when these three
guṇas are in their state of equilibrium. At that time,
creation, sustenance and annihilation do not take place.


prakṛtir guṇa-sāmyaṁ vai

prakṛter nātmano guṇāḥ


                           717
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

sattvaṁ rajas tama iti

sthity-utpatty-anta-hetavaḥ


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.22.12

Nature exists originally as the equilibrium of the three
modes, which pertain only to nature, not to the
transcendental spirit soul. These modes are the
effective causes of the creation, maintenance and
destruction of this universe.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.23) also states: sattvaṁ rajas
tama iti prakṛter guṇāḥ. “The jīvas who manifest from
the taṭastha-śakti receive the association of material
nature (prakṛti ) due to becoming averse (vimukha ) to
Kṛṣṇa.” By constitutional nature, the jīvas are beyond
māyā, but due to the ego of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ caused by
association with māyā, they have fallen into the bondage
of this material existence in bodies generated by
prakṛti . Lord Kapiladeva clearly instruc ts His mother
Devahūti in this way in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.26.6-7):
evaṁ parābhidhyānena

karttṛtvaṁ prakṛteḥ pumān

karmasu kriyamāṇeṣu

guṇair ātmani manyate

tad asya saṁsṛtir bandhaḥ

pāra-tantryaṁ ca tat-kṛtam

bhavaty akartur īśasya

sākṣiṇo nirvṛtātmanaḥ


Because of his forgetfulness, the transcendental jīva
accepts the influence of the material energy as his
field of activities, and thus actuated, he wrongly
applies the activities to himself. Material
consciousness is the cause of one’s bondage, in which
the jīva is forced to accept the conditions placed by
the material energy. Although the jīva does not do
anything and is transcendental to such activities, he is
thus affected by conditional life.

In this way, due to the jīva’s forgetfulness of the
activities of prakṛti , he considers himself the
performer of the activities (karma ) born of the modes
of nature. In fact the jīva is only a witness. He is not
the performer of any action. He is the parā śakti of
Īśvara called īśa and himself is bliss personified. He
is in the clutches of this material existence of birth
and death because he acquired the ego of being the doer
or performer. He, thus, becomes bound and is controlled
by sense objects due to this bondage.


sa eṣa yarhi prakṛter


                             718
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

guṇeṣv abhiviṣajjate

ahaṅkriyā-vimūḍhātmā

kartāsmīty abhimanyate

tena saṁsāra-padavīm

avaśo ‘bhyety anirvṛtaḥ

prāsaṅgikaiḥ karma-doṣaiḥ

sad-asan-miśra-yoniṣu

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.27.2-3


Sometimes the jīva becomes excessively absorbed in the
modes of nature in the form of happiness, misery, etc.
At that time, he becomes bewildered because of his false
ego, and he identifies the body with the self, thinking,
‘I am the doer.’ The jīva helplessly wanders throughout
the higher and lower species of life, such as devatās,
humans and animals, because he has the ego of being the
doer and because he performs improper actions caused by
his association with material nature. Unable to become
free from the experience of mundane happiness and misery
caused by karma, he continuously receives bodies in the
material world.




Śloka 6




tatra sattvaṁ nirmalatvāt

prakāśakam anāmayam

sukha-saṅgena badhnāti

jñāna-saṅgena cānagha


anagha—O sinless Arjuna; tatra—of these; nirmalatvāt —
because of its pure faultless nature; sattvam —the
quality of goodness;(is) prakāśakam —illuminating; (and)
anāmayam —free from vice; badhnāti —it binds; sukha-
saṅgena —through attachment to happiness; ca —and; jñ
āna-saṅgena —through attachment to knowledge.

O Anagha, sinless one, of these three guṇas, sattva-guṇa
is auspicious, illuminating and free from vice, due to
its purity. It binds the jīva through his attachment to
happiness and knowledge.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī

                             719
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




This śloka beginning with the word tatra explains the
characteristics of sattva -guṇa and how it binds the
jīva. Anāmay am means calm, or free from agitation.
Because the jīva becomes calm, attachment to the
happiness of sāttvika activities causes him to possess
an ego of being materially satisfied. And because he is
illuminated, attachment to knowledge in the activities
of sattva -guṇa causes the jīva to possess an ego of
being knowledgeable. The happiness and knowledge in
these designated states is due to ignorance which forces
the jīva to have such conceptions based on the false
ego. It is this ego alone which binds the j īva .
“However, O Anagha, sinless one, you should not accept
this agha (sin), this characteristic of the false ego,
by which you think, ‘I am happy’ or ‘I am
knowledgeable.’”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




It was described in the previous śloka how the guṇas of
material nature (prakṛti ) bind the jīva in the body.
The present śloka explains how sattva-guṇa binds the
jīva. Of the three guṇas , sattva -guṇa is relatively
pure, illuminating and calm. It therefore binds the jīva
to happiness and knowledge. Some consider that mukti can
be achieved simply by taking shelter of sattva -guṇa
because it is superior to the other two guṇas. But this
is not true. In his commentary on this śloka , Śrīla
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa says that this mundane knowledge,
the discriminatio n between matter and consciousness,
comes from sattva-guṇa , as does the happiness of the
satisfied body and mind. Due to attachment to such
knowledge and happiness, one becomes engaged in
activities which lead to that calm state of existence.
However, the jīva has to accept another body to
experience the result of these actions and becoming
attached to that, he has to again perform action (karma
). In this way, the cycle goes on and he can never
become free from the cycle of birth and death. An ego in
sattva-guṇa is also sinful.This is the import of the
word anagha (sinless) that is used to address Arjuna in
this śloka. Therefore, Arjuna (the sādhaka ) is advised
not to accept a sāttvika ego.




Śloka 7




rajo rāgātmakaṁ viddhi

                           720
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam

tan nibadhnāti kaunteya

karma-saṅgena dehinam


kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; viddhi—know that; rajaḥ—the
quality of passion; rāga-ātmakam —(is) characterised by
attachment; tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam—(and is) born of
association with the desire for sense pleasure; tat —it;
nib adhnāti —binds; dehinam —the embodied being; karma-
saṅgena —with attachment to fruitive work.

O Kaunteya, know rajo-guṇa to manifest through
attachment to sense objects and the desire to enjoy
them. It binds the embodied jīva by attachment to
fruitive actions.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Know rajo-guṇa to be that which gives mundane pleasure.
To desire an object that one does not yet have is called
tṛṣṇā, and attachment to objects that have been already
attained is called saṅga . That rajo-guṇa , from which
both tṛṣṇā and saṅga are born, binds the embodied soul
by attachment to action knowingly or unknowingly, dṛṣṭa
(seen) or adṛṣṭa (unseen). Attachment to fruitive action
is solely due to tṛṣṇā (desire) and saṅga (association).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Since it imbues the baddha-jīva with attachment to sense
objects, it is called rajo -guṇa. The mutual attraction
between male and female is the specific quality of rajo
-guṇa . It generates a hankering in embodied beings to
enjoy material objects. Such a person wants honour in
society or nation, a beautiful wife, good progeny, and a
happy family. Such are the characteristics of rajo -guṇa
.

The reason why the whole universe has fallen into the
bondage of māyā is attachment to sense pleasures through
rajo -guṇa . The influence of rajo -guṇa is visible
everywhere in modern society, but in ancient times
sattva -guṇa predominated. Even a man in sattva-guṇa is
unable to achieve mukti , what to speak of one covered
by rajo -guṇa .




                           721
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 8




tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi

mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām

pramādālasya-nidrābhis

tan nibadhnāti bhārata


tu—however; bhārata—O scion of Bhārata; viddhi —know;
tamaḥ—the quality of darkness; (to be) ajñ āna-jam —born
of ignorance; mohanam —it brings about delusion; sarva-
dehinām —for all embodied beings; tat —it; niba dhnāti —
binds; pramāda-ālasya-nidrābhiḥ—through carelessness,
laziness and sleep.

However, O Bhārata, know that tamo-guṇa, which is born
of ignorance, is the cause of delusion for all jīvas. It
binds the embodied soul through carelessness, laziness
and sleep.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Ajñāna-jam means that tamas (darkness) is inferred or
perceived only by its result, which is ignorance.
Therefore, it is called ajñ āna-ja , or ajñ āna-janaka ,
meaning that it gives rise to ignorance. Mohana means
that which causes delusion; pramādaḥ means madness;
ālasyam means lack of endeavour, and nidrā means
depression of the mind. These are all symptoms of tamo -
guṇa .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Tamo-guṇa is the lowest of the three guṇas . It is
completely opposite to sattva -guṇa . A person in tamo -
guṇa considers the body and bodily pleasures as the all-
in-all. As a result, he loses all discrimination and
becomes almost mad. Everyone comes to see that our
father and grandfathers have died; we will die and our
progeny will also die. That means that death is certain.
Yet those in tamo-guṇa fail to search for the self
within. Simply to satisfy their senses, they collect
wealth by cheating, duplicity, violence and other
similar acts. This is madness. The specific

                             722
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

characteristic of tamo -guṇa is that it makes one mad
like this. Symptoms of a person in tamo -guṇa are that
he takes intoxicants, meat, fish, eggs, wine, etc. He
remains inactive, lazy, careless and heedless, and he
oversleeps. A sādhaka should totally abandon this mode.




Śloka 9



sattvaṁ sukhe sañjayati

rajaḥ karmaṇi bhārata

jñānam āvṛtya tu tamaḥ

pramāde sañjayaty uta


bhārata—O scion of Bhārata; sattvam—the quality of
goodness; sañjayati —binds one; sukhe —to happiness;
rajaḥ—passion; karmaṇi —to fruitive work; tu —but; tamaḥ
—darkness; uta —indeed; āvṛtya —by covering; jñ ānam —
knowledge; sañjayati —binds one; pramāde —to madness.

O Bhārata, sattva-guṇa binds one to happiness and rajo-
guṇa binds one to fruitive work, but tamo-guṇa covers
all knowledge and binds one to madness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is briefly repeating what He has already
said. Sattva-guṇa binds the jīva by creating attachment
to happiness, which is the result of sattva -guṇa . Rajo
-guṇa binds the jīva by attachment to karma (fruitive
activity), and tamo -guṇa engages the jīva in illusion,
covering jñ āna and giving rise to ignorance.




Śloka 10



rajas tamaś cābhibhūya

sattvaṁ bhavati bhārata

rajaḥ sattvaṁ tamaś caiva

tamaḥ sattvaṁ rajas tathā


                            723
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017


bhārata—O scion of Bhārata; eva—certainly; sattvam —
goodness; bhavati —becomes manifest; abhibhūya —
overwhelming; rajaḥ—passion; ca —and; tamaḥ—darkness;
rajaḥ—passion (manifests); (overwhelming) sattvam —
goodness; (and) tamaḥ—darkness; tathā—also; tamaḥ—
darkness; (overwhelms) sattvam —goodness; (and) rajaḥ—
passion.

O Bhārata,   when sattva-guṇa arises, it overwhelms rajas
and tamas.   When rajo-guṇa appears, it subdues sattva and
tamas, and   when tamo-guṇa manifests, it overpowers both
sattva and   rajas.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




How do the guṇas manifest their influence on their
effects such as happiness, as previously mentioned?
Expecting this question, Śrī Bhagavān says that sattva -
guṇa manifests and overpowers rajo -guṇa and tamo -guṇa
. Similarly, rajo -guṇa manifests, overpowering sattva
and tamas , and also tamo -guṇa manifests, overpowering
sattva and rajas . All this takes place by adṛṣṭa-vaśād
, which means the influence of the unseen.




Śloka 11



sarva-dvāreṣu dehe’smin

prakāśa upajāyate

jñānaṁ yadā tadā vidyād

vivṛddhaṁ sattvam ity uta


yadā—when; jñānam—knowledge; upajāyate —appears; (there
is) prakāśaḥ—illumination; sarva-dvāreṣu —in all the
gates (knowledge-acquiring senses); asmin —in this; dehe
—body; tadā—at that time; vidyāt —one should understand;
iti —that; sattvam —the quality of goodness; vivṛddham —
is predominating; uta —indeed.

When jñāna appears and there is illumination in all the
gates of the body’s knowledge-acquiring senses, and when
happiness becomes manifest, one should know for certain
that sattva-guṇa is predominating.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī

                            724
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017




Previously it was said that, when a mode increases, it
predominates over the other two weaker modes. Now, in
three consecutive ślokas , the first beginning here with
the word sarva , Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the symptoms
of the predominating mode. When the senses, such as the
ears, begin to acquire perfect know ledge of Vedic sound
and so forth, one should know that sattva -guṇa is
predominating. The word uta is emphasising that
illumination in the form of happiness is generated by
the self.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The symptoms by which one can understand which guṇa is
predominating are explained here. It is understood that
sattva-guṇa is predominating when one is in proper
knowledge of objects by the means of the senses (such as
the ears and nose) and when a feeling of happiness
manifests from the soul. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.13)
also states:


yadetarau jayet sattvaṁ

bhāsvaraṁ viśadaṁ śivam

tadā sukhena yujyeta

dharma-jñānādibhiḥ pumān


Sattva-guṇa is illuminating, pure and peaceful. The jīva
becomes qualified to have happiness, virtue and
knowledge, etc., when this quality increases by the
restraint of rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa.

Furthermore, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.9) it   is said:
puruṣaṁ sattva-saṁyuktam anumīyāc chamādibhiḥ.   “One
should recognise that a person who can control   his mind
and who has other similar qualities is endowed   with
sattva -guṇa .”

“When bhakti to Me is mixed with the material modes, it
is called saguṇa -bhakti .”

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.10):


yadā bhajati māṁ bhaktyā

nirapekṣaḥ sva-karmabhiḥ

taṁ sattva-prakṛtiṁ vidyāt


                             725
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

puruṣaṁ striyam eva vā


Any person, male or female, who is situated in sattva-
guṇa becomes indifferent towards prescribed karma and
engages in the bhajana of Bhagavān.


Gītā (9.27) refers to saguṇa-bhakti :


yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat

yat tapasyasi kaunteya

tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam


O Kaunteya, offer to Me whatever activities you perform,
whatever you eat or sacrifice, whatever charity you
give, and whatever austerities you practise.




Śloka 12




lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ

karmaṇām aśamaḥ spṛhā

rajasy etāni jāyante

vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha

bharata-ṛṣabha—O best of Bharata’s line; rajasi—when
passion; vivṛddhe —is in predominance; etāni —all these;
jāyante —become manifest; pravṛttiḥ—activity; lobhaḥ—
greed; ārambhaḥ—endeavour; karmaṇām —for fruitive
activity; aśamaḥ—restlessness; (and) spṛhā—desire.

O Bharata-ṛṣabha, when rajo-guṇa becomes prominent, the
symptoms of greed, fervent endeavour and constant
hankering for sense pleasure all appear.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Pravṛtti means various types of enterprises. Karmaṇām
ārambhaḥ means endeavours such as the building of a
house, and aśamaḥ means being unfulfilled in sense
enjoyment.


                            726
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




This śloka lists a number of symptoms which indicate an
increase in rajo-guṇa. Lobha means that even when wealth
from different sources increases, one still hankers to
collect more. Pravṛtti means the tendency to always
engage in action. Karmaṇām ārambhaḥ means endeavours
such as the building of mansions. Aśama means the cycle
of resolution and rejection, “I will perform this work
and then I will perform that other work.” Spṛhā means
the desire to obtain good or bad sense objects as soon
as one sees them (a thirst for sense enjoyment).

It is also said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.14):

yadā jayet tamaḥ sattvaṁ

rajaḥ saṅgaṁ bhidā calam

tadā duḥkhena yujyeta

karmaṇā yaśasā śriyā

When rajo-guṇa, which gives rise to attachment and
separatism and which has a restless nature, overpowers
sattva-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, a person works hard to
achieve fame and wealth but only receives misery.

Moreover, it is seen in Śrīmad-Bhāgvatam (11.25.9):
kāmādibhī rajo-yuktaṁ. “One should understand the
predominance of rajo -guṇa by his desire for sense
objects, etc.” While describing the guṇī-bhūtā bhakti of
a person in rajo -guṇa Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.11)
states: yadā āśiṣa āśāsya māṁ bhajeta sva-karmabhiḥ tāṁ
rajaḥ prakṛtiṁ vidyāt. “When a person prays for sense
objects through the worship of Bhagavān, he and his
worship are in rajo -guṇa .”




Śloka 13



aprakāśo’pravṛttiś ca

pramādo moha eva ca

tamasy etāni jāyante

vivṛddhe kuru-nandana


kuru-nandana—O descendant of Kuru Mahārāja; tamasi—when
darkness; vivṛddhe —predominates; (all) etāni —these;
jāyante —are manifest; aprakāśaḥ—lack of discrimination;

                           727
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

apravṛttiḥ—inertia; pramādaḥ—madness; ca —and; eva —
certainly; mohaḥ—illusion.

O Kuru-nandana, when tamo-guṇa predominates, it gives
rise to inertia, madness, illusion and a lack of
discrimination.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Aprakāśaḥ means lack of discrimination and to accept
what śāstra forbids. Apravṛttiḥ means lack of endeavour.
Pramādaḥ means to believe in the non-existence of
objects which are immediately in front of oneself. Moha
means to be absorbed in illusory objects.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the symptoms
arising in tamo-guṇa . Aprakāśa means loss of
discrimination or lack of knowledge. It is seen that in
such a condition there is the tendency to perform
activities that are forbidden in śāstra . Apravṛtti
means to have no inclination to understand the duties
recommended in the śāstra . One believes this is not his
fate and he remains indifferent towards his duties. Moha
means illusory absorption, that is, to become attached
to temporary objects, considering them to be eternal.
This is also stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.15):


yadā jayed rajaḥ sattvaṁ

tamo mūḍhaṁ layaṁ jaḍam

yujyeta śoka-mohābhyāṁ

nidrayā hiṁsayāśayā


Lamentation, delusion, sleep and the desire to commit
violence are seen to dominate the jīva when tamo-guṇa,
which covers discrimination and causes degradation,
overpowers rajo-guṇa and sattva-guṇa.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.9) also states: krodhādyais
tamasā yutam. “One can infer an excess of tamo-guṇa by
symptoms such as anger.” While describing the symptoms
by which a person in tamo-guṇa worships Bhagavān,
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.11) states: hiṁsām āśāsya
tāmasam. “A person who worships Me with the desire to
engage in violence is to be understood as tāmasika.”


                           728
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 14



yadā sattve pravṛddhe tu

pralayaṁ yāti deha-bhṛt

tadottama-vidāṁ lokān

amalān pratipadyate


yadā—when; deha-bhṛt—an embodied soul; yāti —enters;
pralayam—dissolution (death); (while) sattve —goodness;
pravṛddhe —is predominating; tu —indeed; tadā—at that
time; pratipadyate—he attains; amalān —the pure; lokān —
planets; uttama-vidām —of people who know transcendence.

When one leaves his body under the predominance of
sattva-guṇa, he attains the pure, higher planets, which
are the abodes of the great sages, the worshippers of
Hiraṇyagarbha, and which are free from the modes of
rajas and tamas.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




After death, people in sattva-guṇa such as those who
worship Hiraṇyagarbha, who are the knowers of
transcendence, go to the higher pleasure-giving planets.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




One takes another birth according to whatever mode
predominates at the time of death. A person attains the
pleasure-giving and spotless planets of the worshippers
of Hiraṇyagarbha, etc., if he dies when sattva -guṇa is
predominant. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also states (11.25.22):
sattve pralīnāḥ svar yānti. “If a person dies when
sattva -guṇa predominates, he attains Svarga-loka.”




Śloka 15



                           729
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



rajasi pralayaṁ gatvā

karma-saṅgiṣu jāyate

tathā pralīnas tamasi

mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate


gatvā—having entered; pralayam—dissolution (death);
rajasi —when passion (predominates); jāyate —one takes
birth; karma-saṅgiṣu —amongst fruitive workers; tathā—
and; pralīnaḥ—one dying; tamasi —when ignorance
(predominates); jāyate —takes birth; mūḍha-yoniṣu —in
the womb of a foolish animal.

One who dies when rajo-guṇa is predominant takes a human
birth among fruitive workers, while one who dies under
the predominance of tamo-guṇa takes birth among ignorant
animals.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Karma-saṅgiṣu means a person who is attached to karma,
fruitive activities.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




If a person dies when rajo-guṇa is predominant, he takes
birth in a family of those who are attached to fruitive
activities. If a person dies when tamo -guṇa is
extremely predominant, he takes birth in an animal
species. Some think that once the soul has taken birth
in a human species, he does not degrade to a lower
species. But from the present śloka it can be understood
that, even after receiving a human body, a person
receives an animal body after death if he is governed by
tamo -guṇa instead of sattva-guṇa . He even goes to hell
if he engages in activities such as violence. It is not
sure when he will again take a human birth after
returning from that place. Therefore, it is the duty of
every human being to rise gradually from tamo -guṇa to
rajo -guṇa , and from rajo-guṇa to sattva -guṇa . And
even beyond that, one should become nirguṇa , free from
the guṇas , by taking shelter of śuddha-bhakti in the
association of śuddha-bhaktas . Only that nirguṇa
sādhaka who takes shelter of nirguṇa bhakti directly
sees Śrī Bhagavān. In this way, his life becomes perfect
and successful. The specific rule is that a person
achieves a destination which corresponds to his

                           730
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

consciousness at the time of death: maraṇe yā matiḥ sā
gatiḥ. “Whatever one’s min d goes towards at the time of
death will determine one’s next destination and body.”
Therefore, it is imperative to only remember Bhagavān at
the time of death. One can make one’s life successful by
attaining nirguṇa bhakti through remembrance of
Bhagavān.




Śloka 16




karmaṇaḥ sukṛtasyāhuḥ

sāttvikaṁ nirmalaṁ phalam

rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham

ajñānaṁ tamasaḥ phalam


(the wise) āhuḥ—say; (that) karmaṇaḥ—for one who acts;
sukṛtasya —piously; (there is) sāttvikam —a good; (and)
nirmalam —pure; phalam —result; phalam —the result;
rajasaḥ—of passion; (is) duḥkham —grief; tu —verily;
(and) phalam —the fruit; tamasaḥ—of darkness; (is) ajñ
ānam —ignorance.

It is said by the wise that sāttvika karma brings pure
and pleasing results, rājasika karma incurs only misery,
and the only fruit of tāmasika karma is ignorance.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The result of virtuous sāttvika karma is sāttvika , pure
and free from disturbance. Ajñ āna refers to lack of
consciousness, dullness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Those situated in sattva-guṇa remain engaged in the
welfare of their personal life, society and people in
general. Their actions are called puṇya-karma (pious
activities). Those who perform puṇya-karma remain happy
in this material world, and they have more possibility
of gaining sādhu-saṅga . The karma performed by those in
rajo -guṇa causes misery. Actions performed for

                            731
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

momentary sense pleasure are useless. The lives of such
people are full of miseries, with no real happiness. The
actions of a person predominated by tamo -guṇa are
highly painful to him. After death, he has to take birth
as a worm, bird, animal and so forth. To kill animals
and eat their flesh is the chief symptom of those in
tamo -guṇa . Those who kill animals do not know that in
the future the same animal, in some form or othe r, will
kill them. This is the law of nature. In human society,
if a person kills another person, he is given the death
penalty. This is the law of the state. But ignorant
people do not know that Parameśvara is the original
controller of the entire univers e. He cannot tolerate
even the killing of an ant in His kingdom; therefore,
such people must certainly undergo punishment. To engage
in the killing of animals just for the sake of
satisfying the taste buds is a heinous offense. Among
such actions, the killing of a cow is severely
punishable. The cow and bull are like our mother and
father. Therefore, in the Vedas and Purāṇas , the
killing of cows is described as the most sinful act.

The cow with her milk is like a mother, and the bull by
his labour in farming is like a father. Thus, they
nourish us like parents. Due to ignorance, the present
so-called cultured human beings neglect this fact. In
this way, they clear the path for their own degradation
and for the degradation of society as a whole. Thus,
they are heading towards destruction and taking all of
society with them. In human society at present, there is
a predominance of rajo -guṇa and tamo-guṇa . This is
dangerous for everyone. It is imperative for intelligent
people to become situated in sattva-guṇa and take
shelter of bhagavad-bhakti and hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana to
protect humanity from this great danger. When one
remembers Bhagavān in sat-saṅga , all one’s ignorance is
removed, his worldly sectarianism and mundane
discrimination are all dispelled, and he s ees
Parameśvara everywhere.




Śloka 17




sattvāt sañjāyate jñānaṁ

rajaso lobha eva ca

pramāda-mohau tamaso

bhavato’jñānam eva ca


eva—certainly; jñānam—knowledge; sañj āyate —is born;
sattvāt —from goodness; ca —and; lobhaḥ—greed; rajasaḥ—
from passion; pramāda-mo hau —madness and delusion; ca
eva—as well as; ajñ ānam —ignorance; bhavataḥ—become
present; tamasaḥ—from the quality of darkness.


                           732
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Jñāna is born from sattva-guṇa, while rajo-guṇa gives
rise to greed. Carelessness, delusion and ignorance are
the products of tamo-guṇa.




Śloka 18




ūrddhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā

madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ

jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā

adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ


sattva-sthāḥ—those situated in goodness; gacchanti—go;
ūrddhva —upwards (to the upper planets); rājasāḥ—those
in the quality of passion; tiṣṭhanti —remain; madhye —in
the middle (planets); vṛtti-sthāḥ—those situated in
activities; (that are) jaghanya-guṇa —abominable;
tāmasāḥ—who are in the quality of darkness; gacchanti —
go; adhaḥ—down (to the lower planets).

Those situated in sattva-guṇa go to the higher celestial
planets. Those in rajo-guṇa remain within the earthly
planets, and those absorbed in the abominable activities
of tamo-guṇa descend into the lower hellish planets.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




According to this gradation, those in sattva-guṇa go up
to Satya-loka, and those in rajo -guṇa remain in the
middle, Manuṣya-loka. The word jaghanya means
abominable, and its tendencies are gross ignorance,
laziness, etc. Those who are thus situated go to hell.




Śloka 19




nānyaṁ guṇebhyaḥ karttāraṁ

yadā draṣṭānupaśyati

guṇebhyaś ca paraṁ vetti


                             733
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

mad-bhāvaṁ so’dhigacchati


yadā—when; draṣṭā—the seer (jīvātmā) ; anupaśyati —sees
in pursuance of the Vedic teachings; na —no; anyam —
other; karttāram —agent; (exists) guṇebhyaḥ—other than
the three qualities; ca —and; vetti —understands (the
ātmā to be); param —transcendental; guṇebhyaḥ—to those
qualities; saḥ—he; adhigacchati —attains; mat-bhāvam —My
nature.

When the jīva sees no agent of action other than the
three guṇas, and realises the ātmā to be transcendental
to those modes, he develops śuddha-bhakti to Me and
attains to My spiritual nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




After describing the material world which consists of
the guṇas, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining mokṣa (pure
devotion), which is quite distinct from the guṇas , in
this śloka beginning with the word nānyam and in the
next śloka . “When the jīva does not see any other
active agent except for the guṇas , which have been
modified to become the doer, the effect and the objects,
he sees and realises that the guṇas alone are the active
agents in every situation. He also realises that the
ātmā is superior to the guṇas and different from them .
Such a seer (the jīva ) attains love for Me (mad-bhāvam
) or sāyujya with Me. In other words, he attains to My
spiritual nature. At that time, even after he has
acquired this knowledge, he only attains Me by
performing bhakti .” This will become clear from the
meaning of the twenty-sixth śloka of this chapter.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




All jīvas in different species of life from rivers,
mountains and ants, up to creepers, trees and human
beings are working while helplessly bound by the guṇas .
In reality, there is no other active agent in all their
actions except the three guṇas of material nature.
Parameśvara is completely beyond material nature and the
guṇas , although He is their original controller. Those
who know this truth also cross over prakṛti and the
guṇas to attain the supreme destination, but no one can
understand this merely by his own intelligence and
discrimination. Therefore, it is of the utmost necessity
to have the association of mahā-puruṣas who are well-
versed in transcendental knowledge. No matter how
degraded a jīva may be, in the association of great
sādhus , he very quickly and easily becomes

                            734
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

transcendental to these three guṇas .




Śloka 20



guṇān etān atītya trīn

dehī deha-samudbhavān

janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair

vimukto’mṛtam aśnute


atītya—after transcending; etān—these; trīn —three;
guṇān —qualities; (he) aśnute —attains; amṛtam —
immortality; (and) vimuktaḥ—becomes fully liberated;
janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhaiḥ—from the miseries of birth,
death and old age; deha-samudbhavān —which produce the
body; dehī—the embodied being.

After transcending these three modes which produce the
body, the jīva attains mokṣa, pure devotion, becoming
free from birth, death, disease and old age.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




He then becomes free from the guṇas after attaining the
state of seeing material nature as the only active agent
. Śrī Bhagavān, therefore, speaks this śloka beginning
with the word guṇān .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




A person who has attained the nature of brahma is not
affected by the miseries of birth, death, old age and
disease. Even bhakti-miśra-j ñ ānīs who have attained
perfection in jñ āna give it up to attain parā bhakti
unto the lotus fe et of Bhagavān. Remaining engaged in
the bliss of that service, they finally taste the nectar
of prema . In contrast, the nirviśeṣa-j ñ ānīs , who
simply engage in the cultivation of jñ āna , achieve
nothing. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.4) it is stated:
śreyaḥ-s ṛtiṁ bhaktim udasya. “Only the śuddha-bhaktas
of Śrī Bhagavān transcend the guṇas of material nature,
not anyone else.”


                            735
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 21




arjuna uvāca—

kair liṅgais trīn guṇān etān

atīto bhavati prabho

kim ācāraḥ kathaṁ caitāṁs

trīn guṇān ativarttate


arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; prabho—O master; kaiḥ—by
which?; liṅgaiḥ—symptoms; bhavati —does someone become;
atītaḥ—known as transcendental; etān trīn guṇān —to
these three qualities; kim —what?; (is) ācāraḥ—his
behaviour; ca —and; katham —how?; ativarttate —does he
transcend; etān —these; trīn —three; guṇān —qualities.

Arjuna inquired: O Prabhu, what are the symptoms of one
who is transcendental to these three guṇas? How does he
behave? And how does he transcend the modes?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the Second Chapter, Arjuna received an answer to the
question: “What are the symptoms of one who is sthita-
prajñā?” Now, however, he is questioning further, being
eager for more specific knowledge about this subject:
(1) “By which symptoms are those who have transcended
the three guṇas to be known?” (2) “What is their
conduct?” and (3) “How can one transcend the three guṇas
, thereby attaining the state of transcendence?” In the
Second Chapter, when Arjuna asked, “What are the
symptoms of one who is sthita-prajñ ā?” he did not ask,
“How does he transcend the guṇas ?” But here he is
specifically asking this question.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka, Arjuna has questioned Śrī Bhagavān about
the symptoms of a person who is beyond the three guṇas.
What is his conduct and by what means did he attain that
stage? It is very important for every human being to ask

                            736
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

these questions. These questions are essential for those
who are really enthusiastic to follow the teachings of
the Gītā. Their answers give instructions on how to
transcend tāma sika , rājasika and sāttvika guṇas and
achieve the state of nirguṇa. Then, by cultivating
bhagavad-bhakti , one can attain the highest goal in the
form of bhagavat-prema.




Ślokas 22-25




śrī bhagavān uvāca—

prakāśañ ca pravṛttiñ ca

moham eva ca pāṇḍava

na dveṣṭi saṁpravṛttāni

na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati

udāsīna-vad āsīno

guṇair yo na vicālyate

guṇā vartanta ity evaṁ

yo’vatiṣṭhati neṅgate

sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ sva-sthaḥ

sama-loṣṭāśma-kāñcanaḥ

tulya-priyāpriyo dhīras

tulya-nindātma-saṁstutiḥ

mānāpamānayos tulyas

tulyo mitrāri-pakṣayoḥ

sarvārambha-parityāgī

guṇātītaḥ sa ucyate


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Supreme Lord said;
pāṇḍava—O son of Pāṇḍu; saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; eva na dveṣṭi —
certainly does not hate; saṁpravṛttāni —the appearance;
prakāśam —of illumination; pravṛttim —activity; ca —and;
moham —delusion; ca —and; na kāṅkṣati —does not hanker;
(when) nivṛttāni —they disappear; āsīnaḥ—seated;
udāsīna-vat —as if neutral; yaḥ—who; na vicālyate —is
unmoved; guṇaiḥ—by the qualities; iti evam —who
considers that (in all situations); guṇāḥ—the three
qualities; vartante —are following their cycles;
avatiṣṭhati —remains; na iṅgate —unmoved; sama —equal;
duḥkha-sukhaḥ—in happiness and distress; sva-sthaḥ—who

                           737
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

is situated in his svarūpa ; sama —who considers
equally; loṣṭa-aśma-kāñcanaḥ—dirt, stone and gold; tulya
—who is equal; priya-apriyaḥ—amidst pleasant and
unpleasant events; dhīraḥ—intelligent; tulya —
equipoised; ninda-ātma-saṁstutiḥ—in hearing praise and
defamation of himself; tulyaḥ—equal; māna-apamānayoḥ—in
honour and dishonour; tulyaḥ—equal; mitra-ari-pakṣayoḥ—
to parties of friends and enemies; sarva-ārambha-
parityāgī—who renounces all endeavours (except those for
bare bodily maintenance); ucyate —is said (to be); guṇa-
ātītaḥ—transcendental to the three qualities.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O son of Pāṇḍu, a person who is
guṇātīta, transcendental to the three modes, is one who
does not hate illumination, activity and delusion when
they occur, nor long for them when they cease, who is
therefore indifferent to, and unmoved by, the guṇas such
as happiness and misery, knowing that the modes alone
are acting, who remains undisturbed and even-minded, who
is situated in his svarūpa, who considers dirt, stone
and gold to be the same, who is situated equally amidst
pleasant and unpleasant events, who is intelligent, who
remains equipoised both in criticism and glorification
and in honour and dishonour, who treats friend and foe
equally, and who has renounced all karma except that
required to maintain the body.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




What symptoms indicate that one is guṇātīta? In response
to this first question, Śrī Bhagavān says, “The effect
of sattva-guṇa is that knowledge illuminates all the
senses of the body. The effect of rajo-guṇa is
passionate action, and the effect of tamo -guṇa is
delusion. These symptoms indicate the influence of the
three guṇas. When the guṇas perform their natural
functions, a person who is guṇātīta has no animosity
towards them, because he understands them to be
miserable. Similarly, when the modes are not acting, one
who is guṇātīta does not desire them with a yearning to
attain happiness. This śloka (14.22) is related to
14.25. In response to the second question: kim ācāraḥ,
“How do they behave?” Śrī Bhagavān speaks three ślokas
beginning with the words udāsīna-vat . Those who are not
disturbed by happiness and misery, which are the effects
of the guṇas , always remain fixed in their
constitutional svarūpa. They consider the guṇas to be
working in their respective functions, and have no
relationship with them. After careful deliberation, such
wise persons remain silent (maunī). Those who do not
endeavour for any bodily sense gratification are called
guṇātīta . A person can only be called guṇātīta when all
the symptoms of one who has transcended the modes are
seen in his behaviour. But garrulous people who proclaim
to have transcended the modes are not called guṇātīta .




                           738
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Upon hearing Arjuna’s three questions, Śrī Bhagavān
first explains the symptoms of a person who is guṇātīta.
The function of sattva -guṇa is to illuminate, of rajo -
guṇa is to engage in passionate action, and of tamo-guṇa
is to bewilder. A jīvātmā is said to be guṇātīta when he
is not averse to these three guṇas while they are
engaged in their respective functions, seeing them as a
cause of mi sery. Nor does he hanker for pleasure from
them when their functions cease. What is his conduct? In
response to this question, Śrī Bhagavān says that a
person who is beyond the guṇas does not become disturbed
in times of happiness or trouble, but remains
indifferently situated. He is equally disposed to
worldly happiness and misery, heat and cold, loss and
gain, victory and defeat and, remaining neutral,
understands that they have no relationship with the
ātmā. With this conception, he remains busy only in the
progressive development of the self (ātmā), and is not
the least concerned about bodily activities.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “After hearing Arjuna’s
three questions, Śrī Bhagavān said, ‘Your first question
is “What are the symptoms of a person who has
transcended the guṇas ?” The answer is freedom from envy
and desire. As long as one is situated in this material
world, the baddha-jīva is under the influence of the
guṇas of material nature: sattva , rajas and tamas .
These three guṇas are only destroyed when one attains
complete mukti . But until, by the will of Bhagavān, one
has attained mukti in the form of the destruction of the
subtle body, one should know that the process to become
nirguṇa is to give up envy and desire (material
hankerings). As long as one has a body, there will
certainly be illumination, action and delusion (the
functions of sattva , rajo and tamo-guṇa ), but one
should not yearn for them, nor should one try to
renounce them out of aversion. Those in whom these two
symptoms are visible are called nirguṇa . Those who
engage in materialistic activities with effort because
of the persistence of some selfish motive, or who
practise forced renunciation, considering this material
world to be illusory, are not nirguṇa .

‘Your second question is “What is the conduct of a
person who is guṇātīta?” His conduct is as follows: He
thinks, “The guṇas themselves are working within this
body.” He lets the guṇas perform their work, and does
not become implicated in them. He remains separate from
them, as an indifferent person who is nonetheless
conscious. Misery, happiness, a clod of earth, stone,
gold, favourable or unfavourable situations, criticism
or glorification, all appear as a result of his bodily
activities, but he keeps equal vision towards them and
treats them equally, being situated in his own self or
constitutional position. In his worldly dealings he
thinks, “As a conscious entity, I have no relationship
with honour and dishonour and the behaviour of enemies
and friends.” Giving up all feelings of attachment and

                           739
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

renunciation, he acquires the designation of guṇātīta .’




Śloka 26



māñ ca yo’vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahmabhūyāya kalpate


ca—and; saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; sevate —serves; mām —Me;
avyabhicāreṇa —with one-pointed; bhakti-yogena —
devotional connection; samatītya —fully transcends; etān
—these; guṇān —three qualities; kalpate —and becomes
eligible; brahmabhūyāya —to realise brahma .

One who renders service with aikāntika-bhakti to Me, in
My Śyāmasundara form, can transcend these guṇas and
become qualified to attain realisation of brahma, My
spiritual nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“How can one transcend these three guṇas?” In response
to this third question, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this
śloka beginning with the words māṁ ca . The word ca
means ‘Me alone’. “Only those who render service to Me,
Śyāmasundara, who am Parameśvara, become brahmabhūyāya
or qualified to experience My spiritual nature.” This is
proven by the use of the adjective ekayā in the
statement: bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ. “I am attained only
by aikāntika-bhakti .” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.14.21)
According to Gītā (7.14): mām eva ye prapadyante māyām
etāṁ taranti te.

“Only those who surrender unto Me, cross over māyā.” It
is also emphasised, by the use of the word eva , that
brahma cannot be experienced by any means except with
the help of bhakti . The import of the word
avyabhicāreṇa (undeviating) is that in bhakti-yoga there
should be no mixture of karma , jñ āna , etc.

Even niṣkāma-karma is to be given up. “Renounce even jñ
āna of Me.” In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.19.1), it is said:
jñanan ca mayi sannyaset . “One should surrender unto Me
both that knowledge and the means by which he achieved
it.” According to this statement, jñ ānīs renounce their
jñ āna even when they have cultivated jñ āna to its
highest degree, but it is never said that bhakti-yoga

                           740
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

has to be given up. There are many types of bhakti , not
all of which are avyabhicāra . Therefore, just as
niṣkāma-karma-yoga is given up by a jñ ānī, a jñ ānī can
become guṇātīta only when jñ āna -yoga is given up and
avyabhicāra (kevala-bhakti ) is performed. There is no
other means to attain the nirguṇa state. It is also said
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.26): “A performer of action
(kartta ) who has taken shelter of Me, is nirguṇa. In
other words, only aikāntika bhaktas are free from the
modes.”


sāttvikaḥ kārako ‘saṅgī

rāgāndho rājasaḥ smṛtaḥ

tāmasaḥ smṛti-vibhraṣṭo

nirguṇo mad-apāśrayaḥ


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.25.26

A person in sattva-guṇa is unattached. One who is in
rajo-guṇa is extremely attached, and a person in the
mode of tamas loses his memory and can no longer
discriminate. But one who has taken shelter of Me is
nirguṇa.

This śloka (11.25.26) describes the karmī and jñ ānī who
are detached as tat-sāhacarya-sādhakas (sāttvika
sādhakas ), while those who have taken shelter of
Bhagavān are described as nirguṇa . From this statement,
it is understood that Kṛṣṇa’s bhaktas are the only real
sādhakas .

After becoming perfect in jñāna and renouncing sattva-
guṇa , a jñ ānī becomes guṇātīta , transcend ental to
the modes. Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmīpāda says, “The word ca
in this śloka is used to indicate a conclusion.” Śrī
Madhusūdana Sarasvatī writes, “Only those who serve Me
alone, Īśvara Nārāyaṇa, with avyabhicāra-bhakti-yoga ,
exclusive devotion as described in the Twelfth Chapter,
become guṇātīta.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




How do the above-mentioned people who are guṇātīta cross
beyond the three guṇas ? In response to this third
question, Śrī Bhagavān says, “My bhaktas easily cross
over these guṇas and become qualified to experience My
svarūpa as a result of rendering service to Me in My
Śyāmasundara form, with avyabhicārī or aikāntikī bhakti-
yoga .” Those bhaktas who have taken shelter of Bhagavān
become nirguṇa. This is verified in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.25.26): nirguṇo mad-apāśrayaḥ. “Those who take
exclusive shelter of Me are nirguṇa .” The word mad-
apāśrayaḥ means mad-eka-śaraṇo bhaktaḥ. “Only a devotee

                             741
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

who takes exclusive shelter of Me is My āśritaḥ
(dependent on Me), and is nirguṇa .”

It is also seen in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.88.5):


harir hi nirguṇaḥ sākṣāt

puruṣaḥ prakṛteḥ paraḥ

sa sarva-dṛg upadraṣṭā

taṁ bhajan nirguṇo bhavet


Certainly Śrī Hari Himself is directly nirguṇa, beyond
the guṇas of material nature. He is the witness of
everyone. Those who perform bhajana to Him also become
nirguṇa.

Here, the word brahmabhūyāya means to become qualified
to realise brahma-tattva (the spiritual nature). Brahma
cannot be realised by any practice other than bhakti ,
and this realisation requires that the person who will
experience (the jīva ) must be eternally distinct from
that which is to be experienced (parabrahma) . In other
words, the jīva must have a separate existence. The
nirviśeṣa-vādīs (monists) do not accept that the jīva
and brahma exist separately after mukti . Therefore, it
is not possible for them to experience Him. On the
contrary, only bhaktas are qualified to realise brahma .
One gets the power to realise brahma (Śrī Bhagavān)
through bhakti alone, by the mercy of Śrī Bhagavān. This
has been state d very clearly in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.14.21): bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ. “I can be attained
only by bhakti.” One cannot attain mukti merely by jñ
āna . Only by the help of bhakti , in some way or
another, can one achieve mukti through jñ āna . This has
been stated very clearly in many ślokas in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam , such as (1.5.12): naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-
bhāva-varjitaṁ

na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam

Knowledge of self-realisation, even though free from all
material affinity, does not look well if devoid of a
conception of the Supreme Lord.

Even if that jñāna is niṣkāma (selfless) and nirmala
(pure), it is not auspicious if it is bereft of
bhagavad-bhāva (a service attitude to Bhagavān). In
other words, it is useless. What then to speak of kāmya-
karma (fruitive action), which is always miserable and
insignificant. Such jñ ānīs fall down even after
reaching the highest stage of jñ āna : sthānād bhraṣṭāḥ
patanty adhaḥ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.5.3). The following
ślokas from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam can be referred to in
this regard: 10.2.32, 10.20.32, 11.14.21, 10.23.46 and
4.31.12.

Some people translate the word brahmabhūyāya in the
present śloka to infer that the jīva becomes one with
brahma . But the jīva does not become one with brahma
even after he has attained mukti . In the Chandogya

                            742
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Upaniṣad , a brahmabhūta (realised person) is described
as having eight characteristics:


ātmā ‘pahata-pāpnā vijaro vimṛtyur viśoko vijighatso
‘pipāsuḥ

satya-kāmaḥ satya-saṅkalpaḥ so ‘nveṣṭavyaḥ


These are:


(1) Apahata-pāpa—He has no relationship with the sinful
tendencies of māyā, such as avidya.

(2) Vijara—He is free from old age, being eternally
youthful.

(3) Vimṛtyu—There is no possibility of him becoming
degraded.

(4) Viśoka—He is free from mundane happiness, misery,
etc.

(5) Vijighatsa—He has no desire to enjoy sense objects.

(6) Apipāsu—He has no desire other than for bhagavat-
sevā.

(7) Satya-kāma—He is endowed with desires which are
favourable for Kṛṣṇa sevā.

(8) Satya-saṅkalpa—He attains perfection in whatever he
desires.


According to the statement of Gītā (14.17): sattvāt sa
ñj āyate j ñ ānaṁ, jñ āna comes from sattva -guṇa ,
therefore jñ ānīs are sāttvika . After attaining
perfection in jñ āna , a jñ ānī gives up his sāttvika
nature and becomes free from all guṇas , that is, he
becomes nirguṇa . But the speciality of the bhaktas is
that they are free from the guṇas from the beginning of
their sādhana. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.29.34) states:


martyo yadā tyakta-samasta-karmā

niveditātmā vicikīrṣito me

tadāmṛtatvaṁ pratipadyamāno

mayātma-bhūyāya ca kalpate vai


A mortal person attains immortality and becomes most
dear to Me at the very moment he fully surrenders to Me,
having given up all types of karma (action), and having
become nirguṇa.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments on the
ślokas: jñ ānaṁ viśuddhaṁ paramārtham ekam , “The
nondual Absolute Truth being devoid of material

                             743
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

contamination gives us liberation” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
5.12.11), and martyo yadā tyakta-samasta-karmā, “That
surrendered mortal having given up all fruitive desires
and having offered Me his very life, achieves opulences
like My own” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.29.34). He writes:
“From the very beginning of the sādhana stage, when one
takes shelter of bhagavad-bhakti , Bhagavān begins the
treatment of the śaraṇāgata (surrendered) bhaktas. That
is, He starts to make them nirguṇa .” The meaning is
that a sādhaka while practising bhakti gradually becomes
situated in the stages of niṣṭhā, ruci and āsakti.
Eventually, he attains rati and becomes completely
nirguṇa . At that time, he has no relationship with
illusory objects (body, house, etc.). “By the
inconceivable power of bhakti , even while he is being
instructed in bhakti by Me, the transcendental body,
mind and senses of the bhakta are created in a way that
is hidden or invisible.” In other words, it is unknown
to the jīva. Similarly, his illusory body, mind and
senses are removed in a hidden way. This shows the glory
of bhakti. “At that time, after being situated in his
own svarūpa in My dhāma , that pure jīva becomes
qualified to taste the bliss of rendering service to
Me.”

In many places, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has
confirmed that a bhakta becomes free from the guṇas even
during the sādhana stage. Although objects such as a
leaf, flower, fruit, water and candana appear to be
material ingredients in the eyes of the non-devotees,
when offered to Bhagavān with devotion by the bhaktas
they become nirguṇa and attain a transcendental nature
(aprākṛta-bhāva ). How much more then is this true of
the bhaktas when they fully offer themselves? This is
also confirmed in Caitanya-caritāmṛta , Antya-līlā
(4.191): prabhu kahe—vaiṣṇava-deha ‘prākṛta’ kabhu naya
‘aprākṛta’ deha bhaktera ‘cid-ānandamaya

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said “The body of a bhakta is
never material. It is considered to be transcendental,
full of spiritual bliss.”




Śloka 27



brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham

amṛtasyāvyayasya ca

śāśvatasya ca dharmasya

sukhasyaikāntikasya ca


aham—I (am); hi—certainly; pratiṣṭhā—the shelter;
brahmaṇaḥ—for that (same) nirviśeṣabrahma ; ca —and (the
shelter); avyayasya —for everlasting; amṛtasya —
immortality; ca —and; śāśvatasya dharmasya —for the
eternal dharma ; ca —and; sukhasya —for the happiness of

                           744
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

prema ; eka-antikasya —which is achieved through one-
pointed (exclusive) devotion to Me.

I alone am the basis of that nirviśeṣabrahma and the
sole refuge of everlasting immortality, eternal dharma
and the transcendental bliss of prema arising from
aikāntika-bhakti.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




One may raise the question: “How can Your bhaktas attain
the state of nirguṇabrahma , which is possible only by
experiencing oneness with brahma ?” In response, Śrī
Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the word
brahmaṇo. “I am indeed the basis (parama-pratiṣṭhā) of
that brahma and am famous as the supreme basis of
everything. Since brahma depends upon Me, I am its
shelter, or basis. The word pratiṣṭhā (basis) has the
same meaning as this in all śruti statements such as
annamaya. And furthermore, I am also the basis
(pratiṣṭhā) of immortality (amṛta ). Is this amṛta
heavenly nectar? No! It means imperishable mokṣa :
śāśvatasya dharmasya. I am also the basis (parama-
pratiṣṭhā) of bhakti , the supreme eternal dharma
(sanātana-dharma ) which is eternally existing both in
the practice (sādhana ) and perfected (siddha ) stages,
and I am the prema which is attained by aikāntika-
bhakti. Thus, since everything depends on Me, one can
attain the platform of brahma (characterised by merging
with brahma ) by performing My bhajana performed with a
desire to attain kaivalya .” Kaivalya here refers to a
unique state of spiritual existence devoid of physical
and mental activities. While commenting on this śloka ,
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I am the
pratiṣṭhā (basis) of brahma , which means that I am
concentrated brahma . Although the sun is concentrated
light, it is known as the shelter of light. In the same
way, although I am the form of Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-svarūpa ), I
am the basis (brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham ) of
nirviśeṣabrahma .” The Viṣṇu-Purāṇa also proves this
point. “That Viṣṇu is the shelter (āśraya ) of all
auspiciousness. He is the shelter of citta
(consciousness) as well as of the all-pervading ātmā.”
While commenting on this śloka , Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī
also writes that Viṣṇu is the parama-pratiṣṭhā (supreme
shelter, or basis) of parabrahma , the omniscient ātmā.
“As Śrī Bhagavān says in Gītā, ‘I am the pratiṣṭhā
(basis) of brahma .’”

In Viṣṇu-dharma it is said, “Among prakṛti, puruṣa and
brahma , only puruṣa , Vāsudeva, is the Lord. This is
the conclusion.” The same śāstra also states, “Just as
Acyuta, para-tattva Śrī Bhagavān, is parabrahma , He is
also Paramātmā.”

In His pastime of bringing back the sons of the
brāhmaṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa tells Arjuna that parabrahma extends
Himself as various manifestations (vibhūtis ) throughout

                           745
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

the entire universe. “O Arjuna, that concentrated
effulgence should be considered to be My effulgent
svarūpa ” (Hari-vaṁśa-Purāṇa , Viṣṇu-parva 114.11.12).

In Brahma-saṁhitā (5.40) it is also said, “I perform
bhajana to that primeval Lord Govinda. Brahma , who is
born from His effulgence, divides the unlimited opulence
in unlimited brahmāṇḍas (universes).”

Also in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (8.24.38), Bhagavān Matsya
told King Satyavrata: “At that time, I will respond to
your questions, and by My mercy, My glory, popularly
known as parabrahma , will manifest in your heart and
you will be able to realise it completely.”

Śrī Madhusūdana Sarasvatī’s writes in his commentary:
“The following doubt may be raised: ‘How can Your
bhaktas, having attained to Your bhāva (transcendental
nature), become qualified to achieve that state of
brahma if You are different from brahma ?’ Anticipating
this doubt, Śrī Bhagavān says: brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham
(pratiṣṭhā implies ‘I alone am sufficient and
complete’). ‘Since I am the basis of brahma , if someone
realises Me, then his realisation is sufficient and
complete, and the realisation of brahma is also included
in that.’”

According to the Amara-koṣa dictionary, the word
paryāpti means the complete Absolute Reality. Śrīla
Madhusūdana Sarasvatī has composed a śloka to establish
that brahma is saviśeṣa :


parā-kṛta-mana-dvandvaṁ paraṁ brahman narākṛtim

saundarya-sāra-sarvasvaṁ vande nandātmajam aham


I worship the effulgent form of the essence of all
beauty, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, the parabrahma who
has a human form, and who has put aside the duality of
my mind.

The three guṇas alone create all the anarthas which are
obstacles on the path of perfection. This perfection for
the jīva is ananya-bhakti , which he can only achieve
when he is free from the three guṇas. This is what has
been explained in this chapter.


Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the
Fourteenth Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives
pleasure to the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly
persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




                           746
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Arjuna as saying, “If
You say that the attainment of brahma is the ultimate
goal of all types of sādhana , then how is it possible
for persons who have realised brahma to enjoy Your
nirguṇa-prema ?” In response, Śrī Bhagavān says, “In My
eternal nirguṇa state, in My svarūpa as Bhagavān, I
place the conscious seed, the jīva , who is of the
taṭastha-śakti , in the womb of My inert material energy
(jaḍa-śakti ). The mahad brahma , the self-effulgence of
My body, is the first manifestation of My spiritual
realm, and is My brahma feature. When a baddha-jīva
advances to higher and higher stages by cultivation of
jñ āna-yoga , he ultimately attains My feature of brahma
. This is the first step of the nirguṇa stage. Before
attaining this step he is bewildered by a nirviśeṣa
(featureless) feeling due to having given up all
attraction to mundane variety. This nirviśeṣa-bhāva is
removed by becoming situated in that nirguṇa stage and
by taking shelter of śuddha-bhakti-yoga. He then
realises the stage of cid-viśeṣa (transcendental
variety).

“Ṛṣis, such as Sanaka and Vāmadeva, who first
deliberated on nirviśeṣabrahma by following the path of
jñ āna , later achieved nectar in the form of nirguṇa -
bhakti-rasa by this process. Unfortunately, those who
are forced by their lower desire to achieve mokṣa
(salvation) cannot properly situate themselves in
brahma-tattva , and therefore they do not attain
nirguṇa-bhakti as their highest stage of attainment. In
the form of nirguṇa-saviśeṣatattva (the Supreme
Personality of Godhead), I am indeed the shelter
(pratiṣṭhā) of brahma , which is the supreme destination
of the jñ ānīs . Immortality, imperishability,
eternality, prema in the form of nitya-dharma (eternal
occupation) and the ever-blissful state of vraja-rasa
(the mellows of Vraja), are all attainable by taking
shelter of My kṛṣṇa-svarūpa , that para-tattva who is
nirguṇa (beyond the material modes) and full of variety
(saviśeṣa ).”

Mukti-pradātā sarveṣāṁ viṣṇur eva na saṁśayaḥ. “Viṣṇu
alone is the bestower of mukti.” Śruti also says: tam
eva viditvātimṛtyum eti. “Merely by knowing Him, one
becomes free from the clutches of death” (Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad 3.8). Padma Purāṇa also says: viṣṇor
anucaratvaṁ hi mokṣam āhur manīṣina ḥ. “The thoughtful
sages who have realised the Absolute (those who are
tattva-darśī), say that mokṣa means service to the lotus
feet of Bhagavān.” Skanda Purāṇa says: kaivalaya-daḥ
paraṁ brahma visnur eva sanātanaḥ. “Only Viṣṇu, who is
the supreme brahma , is beyond impersonal oneness and is
eternal.”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the
Fourteenth Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Fifteen


                           747
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017


Puruṣottama-Yoga



Yoga Through Understanding the Supreme Person




Śloka 1




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

ūrddhvamūlam adhaḥ-śākham

aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam

chandāṁsi yasya parṇāni

yas taṁ veda sa veda-vit


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Supreme Lord said;
prāhuḥ—they (the śāstras ) say; (there is) avyayam —an
imperishable; aśvattham —banyan tree; yasya —whose;
ūrddhvamūlam —roots grow upwards; (and) adhaḥ-śākham —
whose branches grow downwards; parṇāni —its leaves;
(are) chandāṁsi —the Vedic hymns; saḥ yaḥ—he who; veda —
knows; tam —that (tree); (is) veda-vit —the knower of
the Vedas .

Śrī Bhagavān said: The śāstras describe this material
world as an imperishable aśvattha tree, a special type
of banyan tree with its roots growing upwards and its
branches extending down, whose leaves are the Vedic
hymns that establish fruitive activities. He who knows
the tattva of this tree is the knower of the Vedas.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Kṛṣṇa cuts the bondage to material existence and is
also detached (aloof) from it. The ātmā, or jīva , is an
aṁśa (part) of Īśvara . Kṛṣṇa alone is the puruṣa who is
beyond both perishable (kṣara ) and imperishable (akṣara
) entities. All of this is described in the Fifteenth
Chapter.

In the last chapter it was said, “Those who worship Me
with ananya-bhakti transcend the guṇas and become
qualified to experience brahma ” (Gītā 14.26). Now one
may raise the question, “You have a human form, so how
will one attain brahmabhāva (a spiritual nature) through
bhakti-yoga by worshipping You?” In response Śrī
Bhagavān says, “In reality, I am indeed, a human being,

                            748
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

but I am also the supreme shelter and support
(pratiṣṭhā) of that brahma .” The Fifteenth Chapter
begins with an explanation of this point. In Gītā
(14.26) it was said, “After transcending the guṇas ,
they become qualified to realise brahma .” What then, is
the nature of this material world consisting of the
guṇas ? From where has it been generated? Who are the
jīvas who cross beyond this material world by the
performance of bhakti ? What is the meaning of brahma in
the statement ‘They become qualified to realise brahma
’? Who are You as the pratiṣṭhā (shelter and basis) of
brahma ? Expecting these questions, Śrī Bhagavān uses
highly ornamental language to describe this material
world by saying that it is a wonderful banyan (aśvattha
) tree. Satya-loka is its topmost region. “The mahat-
tattva is the first sprout of the seed impregnated by Me
into the womb of prakṛti.”

Adhaḥ means that the branches of this tree are extended
downwards to such planets as Svarga, Bhuvaḥ and Bhū, as
unlimited devatās , Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Asuras ,
Rākṣasas, Pretas, human beings and animals, such as
cows, horses, birds, swans, insects and non-moving
living entities. For the fruitive workers (non-
devotees), this tree gives the fourfold objects of
dharma , artha , kāma and mokṣa as its fruits. For this
reason, it is called uttama (the best).

Another meaning of the word aśvattha is, that according
to the perception of bhaktas , this material world will
not exist in the future. In other words, for them it is
temporary and subject to destruction. But for non-
devotees, it is avyayam , eternal. Statements which
establish fruitive activities are given in the Vedas .
Chandāṁsi means that those people who desire opulence
will perform yajña to Vāyu-deva (the devatā of air) by
offering a white goat, and those who desire progeny will
perform yajña to the eleven Indras. Since fruitive
activities make the material world expand, they are like
the leaves on the tree of the Vedas . The tree only
appears beautiful due to its leaves. Those who know this
are called the knowers of the Vedas . Also, it is said
in Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.3.1), “This material world is an
eternal aśvattha (banyan) tree which has its roots
upwards and branches downwards.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the previous chapter, it was explained that a jīva
becomes qualified to experience brahma only by bhakti to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is because only Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself is the
shelter (āśraya ) of brahma. In the present chapter,
puruṣottama-yoga is being explained to clearly express
information about Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa . Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
origin or root shelter of the material world, is the
supreme tattva . His vibhinnāṁśa (separated parts), the
jīvas , not recognising Him, have neglected His service,
and from time immemorial are bound in the cycle of

                           749
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

material existence, birth and death, while wandering
throughout various species of life, suffering the
threefold miseries. They are unable to get out of the
cycle of material existence because they repeatedly
become attached to the fruits of their actions. In this
chapter, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, by His causeless mercy, is
giving instruction in a very pleasing way about the
nature of this material world in order to bring these
helpless jīvas out of the cycle of karma and create in
them a feeling of renunciation towards the material
world. He explains this subject very simply by comparing
the material world to a banyan tree. Just as a banyan
tree expands enormously with unlimited branches, sub-
branches, leaves, flowers and fruits, in the same way,
this material world also expands itself, its various
branches being the Ṛg , Sāma , Yajuḥ and Atharva Vedas .
Its leaves are the Vedic hymns which establish instantly
pleasing fruitive activities. Thus, this tree of
material existence appears as the bestower of the fruits
of dharma , artha , kāma and mokṣa to the baddha-jīvas
who are bound by the results of their karma. The sight
of this tree is so instantly pleasing, that a baddha-
jīva cannot know that its fruits are poisonous and he
becomes attracted to it. However, bhaktas who realise
that its fruits are poisonous, describe it as a tree
that has to be cut with the weapon of renunciation. The
name of this tree, aśvattha , means na śvaḥ sthāsyāti
(it will not exist in the future). Those who have this
understanding that the material world is temporary, are
the knowers of the Vedas . Bhagavān has clearly refuted
the māyāvādī’s understanding that this material world is
false or a dream. All the statements of śāstra and Śrī
Bhagavān clearly establish the fact that this material
world is a reality, but that i t undergoes changes and
is periodically annihilated; therefore, it is
perishable.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Śrī Bhagavān as
saying, “O Arjuna, if you think that it is better to
take shelter of material life by following the
statements of the Vedas , then listen. This material
world, which is caused by karma (fruitive activities),
is a special type of aśvattha tree. For those who take
shelter of karma , this tree is imperishable (ever-
existing) and its roots spread upwards. The statements
of the Vedas which establish fruitive activities are its
leaves, and its branches spread downwards. This means
that this tree gives the results of the jīva’s karma
through Me, the Supreme Absolute Reality. Those who know
the temporary nature of this tree, indeed know its
reality.”




Śloka 2




adhaś corddhvaṁ prasṛtās tasya śākhā

guṇa-pravṛddhā viṣaya-pravālāḥ

                           750
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


adhaś ca mūlāny anusantatāni

karmānubandhīni manuṣya-loke


tasya—its; śākhāḥ—branches; prasṛtāḥ—are extended; adhaḥ
—downwards; ca —and; ūrddhvam —upwards; guṇa-pravṛddhāḥ—
nurtured by the three qualities; viṣaya-pravālāḥ—its
twigs are the sense objects; ca —and; mūlāni —its roots;
(also) anusantatāni—extend; adhaḥ—downwards; karma-
anubandhīni —generating fruitive activities; manuṣya-
loke —in human society.

The leaves on the branches of this tree of the material
world, in the form of various sense objects, are
nurtured by the three guṇas. Its branches spread to the
lower species of life, such as human beings and animals,
as well as to the higher species, such as the devas. The
roots of this banyan tree are the desires for sense
enjoyment, which spread downwards to generate the flow
of karma in human society.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The branches of this tree of the material world are
spread everywhere. Adhaḥ means in the lower species,
such as animals, and ūrddhva means in the higher
species, such as the devatās . As a tree is nourished by
pouring water on it, this tree of the material world is
nourished by the different tendencies of the guṇas ,
such as sattva-guṇa . Sense objects, such as sound, are
its shoots. Moreover, some believe that a great treasure
is hidden beneath the original roots of the tree. Like
the banyan tree, this tree also has branches and
external tangles. Although the origin of the roots is in
Brahma-loka, its other roots are in human society. These
roots, which take support from karma (fruitive
activities), are ever-expanding. After undergoing the
result of his actions by receiving a body in any of the
species, a jīva again engages in karma in the human form
of life.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “The many branches of
this tree take support from tamo-guṇa, and spread
downwards. Many branches are nourished by rajo-guṇa and
are situated in the intermediate state, meaning that
they spread outward. And many branches are supported by
sattva-guṇa and spread upwards. Material sense pleasures
are the shoots of these branches. The external long

                           751
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

tangles of this aśvattha tree, like that of the banyan
tree, search for the fruit of karma and spread
downwards.”




Ślokas 3—4




na rūpam asyeha tathopalabhyate

nānto na cādir na ca saṁpratiṣṭhā

aśvattham enaṁ su-virūḍha-mūlam

asaṅga-śastreṇa dṛḍhena chittvā

tataḥ padaṁ tat parimārgitavyaṁ

yasmin gatā na nivarttanti bhūyaḥ

tam eva cādyaṁ puruṣaṁ prapadye

yataḥ pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī


rūpam—the form; asya—of this (tree); tathā—as described
above; na upalabhyate—is not perceivable; iha—within
this world; na —nor; (is) antaḥ—its end; na—nor; ādiḥ—
its beginning; na—nor; saṁpratiṣṭhā—its foundation; ca—
and; chittvā—having cut down; enam—this; su-virūḍha-
mūlam—very firmly rooted; aśvattham—banyan tree; dṛḍhena
—with the intense (sharp); asaṅga-śastreṇa—axe of
detachment; tataḥ—then; parimārgitavyam—one must search
out; tat—that; padam—place; yasmin—whence; gatāḥ—having
gone; na nivartanti—they never return; bhūyaḥ—again; ca—
and; eva—indeed; prapadye —surrender; tam—to that; ādyam
—primeval; puruṣam—person; yataḥ—whence; prasṛtā—has
been expanded; purāṇī—this ancient; pravṛttiḥ—cycle of
birth and death.

The actual form of this tree of material existence, as
described above, is not perceivable within this world.
Its beginning, end and foundation can not be
ascertained. After cutting down this deeply rooted tree
of material existence (aśvattha) with the sharp axe of
intense detachment, it is imperative to search out the
lotus feet of that primeval person, Śrī Bhagavān, which
are the root of this beginningless tree of saṁsāra, and
take shelter of Him. Having surrendered to and attained
Him, from whom the cycle of birth and death in the
material world has expanded, one never returns to this
saṁsāra.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                           752
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



In this mortal world, the svarūpa (actual form) of this
tree, as described above, certainly cannot be
understood. Many opinions on this tree are found: ‘It is
true’; ‘It is false’; ‘It is eternal.’ Because this tree
has no limit, it is endless, and because it has no
beginning, it is beginningless. It also has no
substratum or support. What then, is its basis, or
foundation? What is it? A person bereft of tattvajñ āna
cannot understand it. However, whatever it may be,
knowing asaṅga , detachment, to be the only remedy for
the jīva’s endless misery, one should cut down this tree
with the weapon of detachment and search for the great
wealth present at its roo ts. Hence, Śrī Bhagavān speaks
this śloka describing the aśvattha tree. Here the word
asaṅga in the third śloka means detachment from
everything. Cutting down this tree with the axe of
detachment, one should search for brahma , which is the
great wealth and root (origin) of the tree.

“What is the nature of that origin?” In response to
this, Śrī Bhagavān says, “Having attained that
destination, that original state, one never returns to
this temporary material world.”

“How is one to search for this?” In response, He says,
“One must take shelter of that primeval puruṣa and
engage in bhajana to Him from whom this material world,
which is without beginning, has expanded. Therefore, it
is imperative to search for Him with bhakti .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Ordinary people cannot understand the reality of this
tree of material existence. That is, they are unable to
ascertain its beginning, end and foundation. Even after
understanding the sequence of how this material world
was created from the mahat-tattva to ahaṅkāra (the false
ego), etc., they still remain unaware of the fact that
the original support of material nature is Parameśvara,
the actual shelter of everyone. Because the jīva is
averse to Bhagavān, he is bewildered by māyā and is
bound to material existence consisting of the three
guṇas. Impelled by these guṇas , he wanders to the lower
and higher regions of this material world, and becomes
completely helpless and exhausted. He feels the need to
cut this tree of material existence, but he cannot find
its root. It is only possible to cut attachment to the
material world by practising bhakti in sat-saṅga ; this
enables one to develop intense detachment from the
world. With this understanding, a fortunate jīva
surrenders to the lotus feet of parama-tattva Śr ī Hari
and begins to perform bhajana to Him. As a result, he
becomes free from the clutches of the material world and
attains eternal service to Śrī Bhagavān in His abode.
This is also described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.18):
tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad

                           753
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

bhramatām upary adhaḥ

tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ

kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā

Intelligent people should endeavour only for that
transcendental happiness of the self, which cannot be
attained by wandering from Brahma-loka in the upper
planets to Sutala-loka in the lower planets. However, as
far as sense pleasures are concerned, they are
automatically obtained in due course of time, just as in
the course of time we receive miseries, even though we
do not desire them.

Moreover, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.37) it is said:


bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo ‘smṛtiḥ

tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ

bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā


The jīva has lost his memory due to his aversion to
Parameśvara. This aversion has directed the jīva to be
absorbed in sense objects. In other words, he
misidentifies his own self with the body in the external
illusory energy consisting of the three guṇas. The guṇas
arouse fear in him because of this absorption.
Conditioned jīvas are bound by māyā. Learned persons
should, therefore, take shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī
Guru, and perform bhajana with ananya-bhakti unto Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. In this way, they can cross over māyā.




Śloka 5




nirmāna-mohā jita-saṅga-doṣā

adhyātmanityā vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ

dvandvair vimuktāḥ sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñair

gacchanty amūḍhāḥ padam avyayaṁ tat


amūḍhāḥ—those who are unbewildered (liberated
personalities); nirmāna-mohāḥ—who are free from pride
and delusion; jita-saṅga-doṣāḥ—who have conquered
degrading attachments; adhyātmanityāḥ—who are always
engaged in spiritual practices following the examples of
saintly persons; vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ—who have abandoned the
pursuit for sense pleasure; vimuktāḥ—who are fully
liberated; dvandvaiḥ—from the dualities; sukha-duḥkha-

                           754
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

saṁjñaiḥ—known as happiness and distress; gacchanti —
enter; tat —that; avyayam —imperishable; padam —abode.

Only those liberated personalities—who are free from
pride and delusion, who have overcome the degradation of
false attachment, who are engaged in searching for
Paramātmā, who are freed from the desire to enjoy the
senses and the dualities of happiness and misery—attain
that unchangeable, eternal abode.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




What are the symptoms of people who attain the abode of
the primeval puruṣa, Śrī Bhagavān, having attained
bhakti to Him? In response to this question, Śrī
Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the words
nirmāna-mohā. Adhyātmanityāḥ means that those who are
concerned with understanding what is eternal and what is
temporary remain engaged in deliberation upon Paramātmā
and the search for Him.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here the word padam avyayam means the eternal position
of bliss. Premamayī sevā to the lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān is the only eternal position. To obtain service
to the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān in any one of the
rasas in His dhāma , it is first compulsory to surrender
to His lotus feet. But it is not easy to surrender to
Him. As long as a jīva remains intoxicated by the false
ego related to the subtle and gross body, he thinks
himself to be the controller of prakṛti . In such a
state, he disregards Śrī Bhagavān and His bhaktas , and
does not accept their instructions. But when, by the
mercy of Bhagavān or His bhakta , the jīva is punished
by material nature in the form of va rious miseries, he
begins to realise that Parameśvara is the master of
prakṛti and that he himself is completely powerless and
helpless. Birth and death, loss and gain, fame and
infamy are all under the control of Parameśvara alone,
and the jīva is just li ke a puppet in His hands.
Realising this fact, he surrenders to the feet of
Bhagavān. At that time, his path of bhakti becomes
blessed and excellent. The present day non-devoted
person thinks that this land, country and earth belong
to him, and that human society is their controller, but
this is an illusory conception. Such an illusory
conception is the root cause of bondage and of all
miseries. Śaraṇāgati (surrender) alone is the doorway to
spiritual life, the realm of bhakti .



                           755
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 6



na tad bhāsayate sūryo

na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥ

yad gatvā na nivarttante

tad dhāma paramaṁ mama


na—neither; sūryaḥ—the sun; na —nor; śaśāṅkaḥ—the moon;
na —nor; pavakaḥ—fire; bhāsayate —can illuminate; tat —
that; paramam —supreme; dhāma —abode; mama —of Mine; tat
—that (place); yat —whence; gatvā—having gone; na
nivarttante —one does not return.

Sun, moon and fire cannot illuminate that supreme realm,
which is self-effulgent and illuminates everything else.
When surrendered persons attain that abode of Mine, they
do not return to this world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What is the nature of that supreme realm?” In response
to this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with
the words na tad . That place is free from miseries,
such as heat and cold, and is self-luminous. “That
supreme dhāma of Mine is topmost, conscious and beyond
the scope of the material senses. It is tejaḥ, all-
illuminating.” It is said in the Hari-vaṁśa Purāṇa that
parabrahma , who is superior to brahma , has divided the
universe and made it appear in various forms. “O
Bhārata! You must know about that concentrated
effulgence of Mine (brahma ).” It is also said in Kaṭha
Upaniṣad (2.2.15): na tatra sūryo bhāti na candra
tārakam

nemā vidyuto bhānti kuto ‘agni

What to speak of fire, the effulgence of the sun, the
light of the moon and stars, and the splendour of
lightning, all do not exist there. Everything is
illuminated by His self-effulgence only.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




                           756
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

The svarūpa of Bhagavān’s dhāma is explained in the
present śloka . After reaching that abode, one does not
have to come back again to the material world. That
abode is not illuminated by the sun, moon, fire or
lightning. It is self-effulgent. That supreme abode is
called Goloka, Kṛṣṇa-loka, Vraja, Gokula or Vṛndāvana.
Svayam Bhagavān, Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, eternally
performs blissful pastimes in His supreme dhāma along
with His associates. One can only obtain that dhāma by
the cultivation of prema-bhakti , that is, rāgānuga-
bhakti which specifically follows the footsteps of the
Vraja gopīs . It is impos sible to achieve it by any
other means. Śrī Kṛṣṇa has indicated that very dhāma by
the words paramaṁ mama .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “Sun,
moon or fire cannot illuminate that immutable dhāma of
Mine. After reaching that dhāma , the jīva attains
eternal bliss. In reality, the jīva is either baddha
(bound) or mukta (liberated). Due to falsely identifying
the body with the self, the jīva in his bound state
desires to associate with matter. In the liberated
state, the pure jīva always tastes the nectar of My
blissful sevā. To attain this state, it is imperative
for a person situated within this world to cut the
aśvattha tree in the form of the material world with
asaṅga , the weapon of detachment. Attachment to mundane
objects is called saṅga . The nature of those who are
able to give up attachment, even while situated within
this mundane world, is nirguṇa , and only they achieve
nirguṇa-bhakti . Sat-saṅga is also called asaṅga .
Therefore, a jīva who is bound in this material world
should give up attachment to mundane objects and, with
the help of sat-saṅga (the association of bhaktas ), cut
his bondage to the material world at the very root. The
mundane existence of those who pretend to practise
vairāgya (detachment) by merely accepting the dress of a
sannyāsī does not cut their material entanglement. When
a jīva adopts My supremely blissful bhakti and gives up
all desires that are separate from Me, a secondary
result is that he attains mukti , or the destruction of
his bondage to the material world. Therefore, that
bhakti which I have described (in the Twelfth Chapter)
is the ultimate goal of the jīvas who desire eternal
auspiciousness.”

In the previous chapter, it was explained that all types
of empirical jñāna are saguṇa , and that only pure jñ
āna which acts as an assistant to bhakti is nirguṇa . In
this chapter, it is shown that all types of vairāgya are
saguṇa , except for that vairāgya which arises as a
concomitant result of bhakti. That vairāgya is nirguṇa .




Śloka 7



mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke

jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

                           757
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi

prakṛti-sthāni karṣati


eva—certainly; mama—My; sanātanaḥ—eternal; aṁśaḥ—
separated part and parcel; jīva -bhūtaḥ—who experiences
conditioned life; jīva-loke —in the world of conditioned
living beings; karṣati —struggles; manaḥ—with the mind;
(and) ṣaṣṭhāni —the six; indriyāṇi —senses; prakṛti-
sthāni —which are subject to the influences of material
nature.

The eternal jīvas in this material world are certainly
My separated parts and parcels (vibhinnāṁśa). Bound by
material nature, they are attracted by the six senses
including the mind.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What is the nature of the jīvas who, by performing Your
bhakti , cross beyond this material world and obtain
Your dhāma ?” In response to this question, Śrī Bhagavān
speaks this śloka beginning with the word mamaivāṁśaḥ.
In the Varāha Purāṇa it is said, “The aṁśas of Bhagavān
are of two types, svāṁśa (a personal expansion or part)
and vibhinnāṁśa (a separated expansion or part). The
jīvas are vibhinnāṁśa , separated parts.” The jīvas are
eternal, but while living in material bodies, they are
bound by mundane attraction through the mind and the
five senses. Due to such an ego whereby they think, ‘All
these things are mine,’ they become attracted to
worldliness as if pulled by a chain bound to their feet.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the present śloka, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining jīva-
tattva . The jīva is an aṁśa (part) of Bhagavān, but
what type of aṁśa should be understood. Śrī Bhagavān’s
aṁśas are of two types: svāṁśa and vibh innāṁśa . Within
the svāṁśa category is viṣṇu-tattva . Avatāras such as
Matsya, Kūrma, Nṛsiṁha and Rāma are svāṁśatattva . Jīvas
are vibhinnāṁśatattva . When sac-cid-ānanda Bhagavān is
parted from all other energies and is only endowed with
His taṭastha-śakt i , His separated parts are called
vibhinnāṁśatattva .

This is also explained in the following manner: The
jīvas who are generated from the jīva-śakti or taṭastha-
śakti , which is non-different from Bhagavān, are
vibhinnāṁśa -tattva . Some of their characteris tics are

                           758
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

qualitatively the same as Bhagavān’s, and other
qualities are different. Hence, their relationship with
Bhagavān is inconceivably and simultaneously one and
different, acintya-bheda-abheda-tattva .

Jīvas have two states: bound and liberated. In the
liberated state, the jīva is free from illusory
designations and remains engaged in service to Bhagavān,
but in the bound state, he remains entangled in the
material world, being covered by the illusory
designations of gross and subtle bodies. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.11.4), this has been explained in the
following way: ekasyaiva mamāṁśasya

jīvasyaiva mahā-mate

bandho ‘syāvidyayānādir

vidyayā ca tathetaraḥ


O most intelligent Uddhava, the jīvas are the separated
parts of Me, who am advitīya-svarūpa (one without a
second, the nondual Absolute Reality). Due to avidyā,
they have become bound, and by vidyā they attain mukti.

And moreover, it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.7.5):
yayā sammohito jīvaḥ. “Due to this external energy, the
jīva , although transcendental to the guṇas , thinks
himself a material product and, thus, undergoes the
reactions of material suffering.

By speaking this śloka, mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke, “The jīva
is My separated part,” Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa herein refutes
the illusory conception of th ose who say that the jīva
himself is brahma .

Besides this, by using the word sanātanaḥ (eternal), Śrī
Bhagavān refutes the opinion of the māyāvādīs. They say
that, when brahma accepts the shelter of māyā, brahma is
known as the jīva , and when freed from māyā, he again
becomes brahma . From this śloka , it is clear that the
jīva is an eternal entity, sanātana-tattva . He can
never merge into the existence of anything else, or be
destroyed. The existence of the jīva is eternal, both in
his liberated and in his bound state. The jīva always
remains a jīva. He never becomes brahma . This fact has
been established in Gītā (2.23-24). If the jīva had ever
been brahma , or if he were non-different from brahma in
all respects, he would not have had to become bound in
the material world. In other words, he would not have to
suffer material miseries. Satyaṁ jñ ānam anantam. “The
Absolute Reality is truth, knowledge and limitless.”
According to this statement of śāstra , it is impossible
for brahma to be in illusion or ignorance . Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, therefore told the famous advaitavādī,
Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, “Parameśvara is the controller
of māyā, and the jīvas are under the control of māyā.
This has been established in śāstra. But you are saying
that the jīva and Īśvar a are the same, which is
completely against the injunctions of śāstra .”

The śrutis very clearly declare that the jīva is not
brahma : vasanti yatra puruṣāḥ sarve vaikuṇṭha-mūrtayaḥ

                           759
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.15.14). “People who are free from
māyā can acquire a fo rm suitable to reside in Vaikuṇṭha
and serve Śrī Nārāyaṇa, the master of Vaikuṇṭha.” In
other words, after obtaining sārūpya-mukti (a spiritual
nature and form) they serve Śrī Nārāyaṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
words in the present śloka such as jīva-bhūtaḥ, mamāṁśah
and sanātanaḥ also show the futility of the opinion of
those who say that this material world is false, and
that the jīva and brahma are one.

Other māyāvādīs (pratibimba-vādīs) accept the jīva and
inert matter to be a reflection of brahma , but this
conception is also speculative and futile for the
following reasons. (1) If brahma is all-pervading, what
possibility is there of His having a reflection? (2) Who
is the person who sees the reflection, and where exactly
is He reflected? If the jīva is considered to be the
seer, and avidyā (ignorance) the place of reflection,
one has to accept the existence of two objects which are
separate from brahma , that is, the jīva and māyā in the
form of ignorance. How, then, can brahma be ekam
evādvitīyam , ‘one without a second’, and how can He be
all-pervading? (3) Brahma is not the object of
perception, in other words, He is without energy,
transformation or qualities and is nirguṇatattva. How
can transcendental brahma be divided if even the
material element sky, cannot be divided? Therefore, the
māyāvāda philosophy, that brahma has divided into parts
as the jīva (pariccheda-vāda ), is also completely
baseless. Śāstra says that brahma is avikārī, without
any transformations. This means He cannot be transformed
into a jīv a or into matter. We see, therefore, that
both the concepts of the māyāvādīs : pratibimba-vāda
(that the jīva and inert matter are a reflection of
brahma) and pariccheda-vāda (that brahma has divided
into parts as the jīva ) are illusory. One may argue
that this assertion contradicts Vedic statements such as
sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma , “Everything is brahma ,” and
tat tvam asi , “You are that” (meaning that the jīva is
brahma ). However, all śāstras , including the Upaniṣads
and Vedānta , explain that it is Bhagavān ’s śakti , and
not Bhagavān Himself, which has transformed into the
jīvas and the universe. Bhagavān (brahma ) is non-
different from His śakti , so the jīva and this material
world, which are transformations of the śakti of brahma
, are also non-different from brahma . That there is a
difference between the jīva , brahma and Bhagavān has
been established from the statements of the śrutis ,
such as nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām , and in
various statements in Gītā. For example, Gītā (15.18)
states: “I am puruṣottama-tattva , the Supreme Person,
beyond both perishable and imperishable entities.”

Thus, everything consists of brahma, but parabrahma is
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, and is indeed beyond everything. The
māyāvādīs falsely assert that the statement tat tvam asi
in the Upaniṣads means ‘you are that’, but this
speculation is against the injunctions of śāstra . The
real import of this statement is, ‘you belong to Him;
you are the servant of Bhagavān.’ All Vedic statements
have established this to be the meaning of tat tvam asi.

Śaṅkarācārya explains the following two statements:


                           760
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

ṛtaṁ pibanto sukṛtasya loke guhāṁ

praviṣṭau parame parārdhe

Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.3.1

Having entered within the cave of the heart, both
Paramātmā and the vijñānātmā (self-realised soul) drink
the nectar of the truth for a very long time.

And:

guhām praviṣṭāv ātmānau hi tad-darśanāt

Brahmasūtra 1.2.113

Certainly the two souls have entered the cave so that
the Supreme Lord may reveal His glories to the jīvātmā.

Śaṅkarācārya, what to speak of others, has accepted the
existence of two separate puruṣas due to the grammatical
construction of the word ātmānau . These two puruṣas are
vijñ ānātmā (the jīva ) and Paramātmā. In various places
in the śrutis , the difference between the jīva and
brahma h as been shown by explaining that Parameśvara is
vibhu (all-pervading), and the jīva is aṇu (atomic).
Some examples of this are as follows: (i) yathāgneḥ
kṣudrā visphulingā (Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.1.20).
“...just as tiny sparks from a fire fly in all
directions.”

(ii) bālāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca
(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 5.9). “A particle one hundredth
the size of the tip of a hair and again divided by one
hundred is considered to be the size of the jīva , and
such jīvas are declared to be eternal.”

(iii) eṣo ‘ṇur ātmā cetasā veditavyo (Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad
3.1.9). “This tiny ātmā, who reposes on the five kinds
of vital airs, should be understood through the mind.
The entire consciousness of the living beings is
extended throughout by those life airs, and in the fully
pure state of consciousness, that ātmā becomes
manifest.”

(iv) yathā samudre vahavaś taraṅgā

(Tattva-muktāvali 10). “... as in the ocean there are
many waves.”

(v) aṇu hi jīvaṁ prati-deha-bhinnam (Daśa-ślokī by
Nimbarka). “The jīvātmās are certainly of atomic
dimensions and are situated in every body.”

(vi) hlādinyā saṁvidāśliṣṭah sac-cid-ānanda īśvaraḥ
svāvidyā-samvṛto jīvaḥ saṅkleśa nikarākaraḥspan>

(Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī). “The Supreme Lord, who is the
embodiment of eternity, cognisance and bliss, is
embraced by full cognisance of His pleasure potency.”

(vii) yah sarveṣu bhuteṣu tiṣṭhan sarvebhyo
bhūtebhyo’ntaro (Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 3.7.15). “The
jīvātmā, being immersed in ignorance of his true nature,

                            761
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

experiences helplessness amidst a multitude of
sufferings.”


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “If
you doubt how the jīvas attain these two states, then
listen. I am Bhagavān, the complete sac-cid-ānanda . I
have two types of aṁśa : svāṁśa and vibhinnāṁśa . As
svāṁśa , I perform līlās in forms such as Rāma and
Nṛsiṁha. As My vibhinnāṁśa , I have manifested jīvas ,
who are My eternal servants. In svāṁśatattva the ego of
My Supreme Lordship fully exists (ahaṁ-tattva ). In My
vibhinnāṁśa , however, I do not have ahaṁ-tattva , the
ego of being Parameśvara, and therefore a separate,
individual ahaṁ-tattva ego appears. This jīva ,
vibhinnāṁśatattva , has two states: mukta (liberated)
and baddha (bound). In both states, the jīva is eternal.
In the liberated state, the jīva is completely dependent
upon Me and has no relationship with the material
nature. In the bound state the jīva accepts the six
senses (the mind and the five external senses) as his
own and identifies with them while being situated in the
material body (prakṛti ), which is his designation.”




Śloka 8



śarīraṁ yad avāpnoti

yac cāpy utkrāmatīśvaraḥ

gṛhītvaitāni saṁyāti

vāyur gandhān ivāśayāt


iva—just as; vāyuḥ—the wind; (takes) gandhān —scents;
āśayāt —from a container (of flowers); īśvaraḥ—the lord
(of the senses of the material body, jīvātmā) ; yat yat
—from whatever (object of contemplation); utkrāmati —
passes over (at death); āpnoti —he accepts; (a new)
śarīram —body; ca —and; gṛhītvā—taking; etāni —these
(the mind and the six senses); saṁyāti —he travels.

Just as the wind carries the aroma of flowers, so the
embodied jīva carries the six senses and their desires
from whichever body he abandons to whichever body he
achieves.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What does he do when he is attracted by the senses?”
Expecting this question, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka

                           762
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

beginning with the words śarīraṁ yad avāpnoti . Whatever
gross body is attained by the jīva , the master of the
body and senses, is controlled by karma. From whichever
body he leaves, he carries these senses along with the
subtle elements from his previous body. He then enters a
new body, just as the wind carries an aroma along with
subtle elements from its source, such as a flower
garland or sandalwood, to another place.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān is explaining how a baddha-jīva achieves
another body. After death, his bound state does not
cease. Until a jīva becomes free from the material world
by performing bhagavad-bhajana , he has to take repeated
births according to the impressions of his previous
actions. By using an exam ple, Śrī Bhagavān is
explaining how he gets a new body. Vāyu (the wind)
carries the aroma from flowers but does not carry the
flower, which remains where it is. Similarly, the jīva
gives up his gross body at the time of death and accepts
the shelter of another gross body, carrying the mind
with its desires and the senses along with him. In this
way, he repeatedly accepts different bodies according to
the actions he performs, based on his desires. This is
also described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.22.36):


tan mamākhyāhi govinda

durvibhāvyam anātmabhiḥ

na hy etat prāyaśo loke

vidvāṁsaḥ santi vañcitāḥ


It is only the mind which has the impressions of karma,
and along with the five senses, travels from one body to
another. The ātmā is different from that, but he follows
the mind because of ahaṅkāra, the false ego.

This is also stated by Kapiladeva in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.31.43):


dehena jīva-bhūtena

lokāl lokam anuvrajan

bhuñjāna eva karmāṇi

karoty avirataṁ pumān


Due to his particular type of body, the conditioned jīva
wanders from one planet to another, following his
material desires. In this way, he involves himself in

                           763
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

fruitive activities and enjoys the result incessantly.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “It is not that one’s
bound state of life ends after death. The jīva gets
another gross body according to his past actions, and in
due course of time, he will also give that up. While
going from one body to another, he carries with him
desires for activities related to the body. Just as the
wind travels to another place carrying the aroma from
its source, such as flowers or sandalwood, the jīva
travels from one gross body to another gross body along
with the subtle elements and the senses.”




Śloka 9




śrotrañ caksuḥ sparśanañ ca

rasanaṁ ghrāṇam eva ca

adhiṣṭhāya manaś cāyaṁ

viṣayān upasevate


adhiṣṭhāya—while taking shelter; śrotram—of ears; caksuḥ
—eyes; sparśanam —the sense of touch; rasanam —the
tongue; ghrāṇam—the nose; ca —and; eva —especially;
manaḥ—the mind; ayam —this (jīvātmā); upasevate—enjoys;
viṣayān —sense objects.

Taking shelter of the ears, eyes, tongue, nose, sense of
touch and also the mind within different bodies, the
jīva enjoys various sense objects.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What does the jīva do after reaching the next body?” In
response to this question, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this
śloka beginning with the word śrotram . Taking shelter
of the senses such as the ears and mind, he enjoys sense
objects such as sound.




Śloka 10



utkrāmantaṁ sthitaṁ vāpi

                           764
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


bhuñjānaṁ vā guṇānvitam

vimūḍhā nānupaśyanti

paśyanti jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ


vimūḍhāḥ—fools; na anupaśyanti—do not perceive in
accordance with śāstra , sādhu and guru ; (the jīvātmā)
utkrāmantam—leaving (the body); sthitam —situated (in
the body); vā api vā—or even; bhuñj ānam —while
enjoying; guṇa-anvitam —through his senses; (but)
cakṣuṣaḥ—those who have eyes; jñ āna —of divine
knowledge; (actually) paśyanti —see.

The foolish, who are bereft of discrimination, cannot
perceive with their senses the jīva when he leaves the
body, while he dwells in the body, or even while he
enjoys through his senses. Those who are wise, however,
can see all this.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If Arjuna says, “I have not understood properly the
tattva of how the jīva leaves his body, how he dwells in
it, and how he enjoys the sense objects while staying in
it,” in re sponse, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka
beginning with the word utkrāmantam. “People bereft of
wisdom cannot understand the ātmā along with the senses,
either when he leaves the body, while he lives in the
body, or while he enjoys the sense objects. But those
with the eyes of knowledge, jñ āna-cakṣu , can realise
the bound state of the jīva .




Śloka 11




yatanto yoginaś cainaṁ

paśyanty ātmany avasthitam

yatanto’py akṛtātmāno

nainaṁ paśyanty acetasaḥ

yatantaḥ—endeavouring; yoginaḥ—persons engaged in bhakti
; ca —indeed; paśyanti—perceive; enam —him (the ātmā);
avasthitam —situated; ātmani —in the body; akṛta-ātmānaḥ
—those whose minds are not purified; (and) acetasaḥ—are
unconscious; api —even though; yatantaḥ—endeavouring; na
paśyanti —do not perceive; enam —him.

                             765
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Endeavouring yogīs can perceive this ātmā which is
situated within the body, but those whose thoughts are
impure and who are bereft of wisdom cannot see the ātmā,
even though striving to do so.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Only the striving yogīs who have wisdom know the ātmā;
not those with impure hearts.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Endeavouring yogīs who have wisdom can experience or
perceive the ātmā situated within the body by practising
bhakti-yoga in the form of hearing and chanting. But
those whose thoughts are impure and who are bereft of
bhagavad-bhakti cannot know ātma-tattva , the science of
the self. This is incomprehensible to them.




Śloka 12




yad āditya-gataṁ tejo

jagad bhāsayate’khilam

yac candramasi yac cāgnau

tat tejo viddhi māmakam


tejaḥ—the splendour; yat—which; āditya-gatam —comes from
the sun; (and which) bhāsayate —illuminates; akhilam —
the entire; jagat —universe; tat —that; tejaḥ—splendour;
yat —which; candramasi —is in the moon; ca —and; yat —
which; agnau —is in fire; viddhi —you must understand;
(to be) māmakam —Mine.

Know that the splendour of the sun which illuminates the
entire universe, as well as the splendour of the moon
and fire are coming from Me alone.




                            766
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“I alone favour the jīva in his bound state, in the form
of the sun, moon and so forth, enabling him to obtain
all his necessities.” This is explained here beginning
with the words yad āditya-gatam , and further explained
in the following two Gītā ślokas. “Being the splendour
of the rising sun in the morning from the Udaya
mountain, I illuminate the universe for the commencement
of karma (action), which fulfils the jīvas ’ overt and
latent desires for sense enjoyment. The splendour of the
moon and fire is also Mine. I, Myself, have the names
Sūrya, Candra, etc. They have been counte d as My
vibhūtis because they are parts of My splendour.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




A person who is bereft of bhakti, and is thus ignorant,
mistakes the body for the self. He cannot understand
that Parameśvara is the original cause behind the existe
nce or manifestation of all entities, feelings,
elements, actions and qualities of this world. He thinks
that the root cause of all existence is earth, water,
fire, air, sky, moon, sun, electricity and so on. Here
Śrī Kṛṣṇa clearly says that the sun, moon, fire and
electricity manifest from Him alone. Bhagavān alone is
the bestower of enjoyment and liberation upon the jīva.
He creates seen and unseen varieties of enjoyment for
the jīvas by making His partial splendour enter the sun,
moon, etc.

A jīva can easily comprehend the above tattva by
practising bhakti-yoga. In this way, He can understand
this aspect of Śrī Bhagavān’s splendour (vibhūti-yoga )
that He is explaining. However, a jīva who is bewildered
by māyā can never realise this reality. Being
overpowered by the mundane false ego, he endeavours in
vain to establish his control over all things, such as
water, air, sun, moon and wind, in order to exploit them
for his own material enjoyment. It is best for him to
give up these futile endeavours and follow the process
of bhakti by surrendering to Bhagavān. By this simple
and easy process, he can attain eternal peace and
happiness, otherwise not.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “If
you say, ‘A jīva situated in this material world is
unable to deliberate on anything except matter, so how
is it possible for him to deliberate on conscious
reality?’ then the answer is that the splendour of My
spiritual existence is also in this material world. By
taking support from it, it is possible to gradually
attain a pure spiritual state which results in the
destruction of the material state. The splendour in the
sun, moon and fire which illuminates the whole world is

                           767
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

indeed only Mine.”




Śloka 13




gām āviśya ca bhūtāni

dhārayāmy aham ojasā

puṣṇāmi cauṣadhīḥ sarvāḥ

somo bhūtvā rasātmakaḥ


ca—and; ojasā—by My potency; āviśya —infusing; gām —the
earth; aham —I; dhārayāmi—sustain; (all) bhūtāni —
beings; ca —and; bhūtvā—becoming; rasa-ātmakaḥ—the
nectarean; somaḥ—moon; puṣṇāmi —I nourish; sarvāḥ—all;
auṣadhīḥ—plant life.

By infusing the earth with My potency, I alone sustain
all living beings. Becoming the nectar-filled moon, I
supply nourishment to all plant life.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“By infusing the earth with My śakti, I support all
moving and non-moving living entities. I alone become
Candra, the moon, nourishing all plant life.”




Śloka 14




ahaṁ vaiśvānaro bhūtvā

prāṇināṁ deham āśritaḥ

prāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ

pacāmy annaṁ catur-vidham


āśritaḥ—taking shelter; deham—of the bodies; prāṇinām —
of living entities; (and) bhūtvā—becoming; vaiśvānaraḥ—
the fire of digestion; prāṇa-apāna-samāyuktaḥ—conjointly
with the out-going and incoming airs; aham —I; pacāmi —

                            768
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

digest; catuḥ-vidham—the four kinds; annam —of food.

As the fire of digestion in the bodies of the living
entities, I combine with the out-going and incoming airs
to digest the four types of foodstuffs.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“I, in the form of the digestive fire combined with its
stimulator, the prāṇa and apāna airs, digest the four
types of foodstuffs that are chewed, drunk, licked and
sucked.” Foods that are broken with the teeth, such as
chickpeas, etc., are called chewed. Sugar candy is
licked, sugar cane is sucked and sugar cane juice is
drunk.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




All embodied beings, from the worm to humans, do not
even have the independent power to digest their
foodstuffs. Śrī Bhagavān says, “In the form of the fire
of digestion, I digest the food in the body of the jīvas
.” What, therefore, is one who is even unable to digest
his food capable of doing? It is ess ential that one
surrender to the lotus feet of Bhagavān and give up the
false ego of depending on his own strength and
intelligence. It should also be understood that it is
only Parameśvara who enters the earth and sustains all
living entities by His poten cy. Nothing is possible
without His potency.


Śloka 15


sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanañ ca

vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham


aham—I; sanniviṣṭaḥ—am situated; hṛdi —in the hearts;
sarvasya —of all; ca —and; mattaḥ—from Me come; smṛtiḥ—
remembrance; jñ ānam —knowledge; ca —and; apohanam —
forgetfulness; sarvaiḥ—by all; vedaiḥ—the Vedas ; eva —
only; aham —I; vedyaḥ—am to be known; ca —and; eva —
certainly; aham —I (am); vedānta-kṛt —the compiler of
the Vedānta-sūtras ; ca —and; veda-vit —the knower of
the Vedas .

                           769
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


I am situated as Antaryāmī in the hearts of all living
entities. From Me come remembrance, knowledge and
forgetfulness. By all the Vedas I alone am to be known.
Indeed, I am the originator and the compiler as well as
the knower of Vedānta.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Just as I am vaiśvānara, the digestive fire in the
stomach, I, Antaryāmī, have entered the hearts of all
moving and non-moving living entities as the principle
of memory. From Me, one remembers those objects he has
previously experienced, and when the senses contact
sense objects, knowledge comes. Loss of memory and
knowledge also occur because of Me.” After Śrī Bhagavān
explains the assistance He provides to the jīva in his
bound state, He goes on to explain how He arranges for
the jīva to attain the liberated state. “I am the
compiler of Vedānta through My avatāra Veda-Vyāsa,
therefore, I alone know the meaning of the Vedas. In
other words, nobody except Me knows the meaning of the
Vedas .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I am
situated as Īśvara in the hearts of all jīvas. According
to the results of the jīvas ’ past actions, they acquire
memory, knowledge to continue their deeds, and also
forgetfulness of their past lives. Therefore, I am not
only brahma , who pervades the whole universe, I am also
Paramātmā, situated in the hearts of the jīvas , giving
them the fruit of their karma. Furthermore, I am not
just the jīva’s worshipable brahma and Paramātmā, but I
am also the instructor of the jīvas , bestowing eternal
auspiciousness upon them through the Vedas . I am
Bhagavān, and I alone am to be known by all the Vedas. I
am the compiler and knower of Vedānta . Therefore, I
manifest as brahma for the highest eternal
auspiciousness of all jīvas , and as Īśvara or
Paramātmā, I reside within their hearts and also pervade
prakṛti . As Bhagavān, I bestow the supreme
transcendental goal. In these three manifestations, I
deliver the baddha-jīvas .”




Śloka 16


                           770
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



dvāv imau puruṣau loke

kṣaraś cākṣara eva ca

kṣaraḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni

kūṭa-stho’kṣara ucyate

loke—in this world; (there are) eva—only; imau —these;
dvau —two; (kinds of) puruṣau —persons; kṣaraḥ—the
fallible; ca —and; akṣaraḥ—the infallible; ca —and;
ucyate —it is said; sarvāṇi —all; bhūtāni —living
entities; (are) kṣaraḥ—fallible; (and) kūṭa-sthaḥ—the
unchangeable (brahma or Paramātmā); (is) akṣaraḥ—
infallible.

In the fourteen planetary systems, two puruṣas are
famous: kṣara (the fallible) and akṣara (the
infallible). All moving and non-moving living entities
are called kṣara, and the immutable puruṣa (kūṭa-stha)
is called akṣara.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Since I alone am the knower of the Vedas, I will speak
the essence of the Vedas briefly. Listen carefully.” To
explain this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this and the next two
ślokas beginning here with the words dvāv imau . In this
universe consisting of the fourteen planetary systems,
there are two conscious puruṣas (beings). Who are they?
In answer to this, Śrī Bhagavān says, “One who fails to
act according to his constitutional identity is kṣara
(the fallible) jīva , and He who never falls from His
own svarūpa is akṣara (the imperishable) brahma .” Śruti
says, “Brāhmaṇas , the knowers of brahma , call Him
akṣara .” Also in smṛti , only brahma is called akṣara :
akṣaraṁ brahma paramam . Again, to specifically explain
the meanings of the words kṣara and akṣara , Śrī
Bhagavān says: sarvāṇi bhūtāni . Only the jīva fails to
act according to his original, spiritual identity due to
ignorance since time immemorial. Being bound by his
karma , he wanders throughout all species of life
beginning from Brahmā, the aggregate self, down to the
non-moving beings. However, the second puruṣa is akṣara
(infallible), and is kūṭa-stha , that is, in His same
infallible svarūpa , He is all-pervasive. According to
the Amara-koṣa dictionary, kūṭa-stha means one who is
all-pervading, who does not change His eternal svarūpa
and who remains in one form.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti



                           771
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “If
you say that prakṛti is one, then you, Arjuna, have
understood. But if you have not understood how many
conscious puruṣas there are, then listen. In reality,
there are only two types of puruṣas in this world: kṣara
and akṣara . The conscious jīvas emanating as the
vibhinnāṁśa are kṣara-puruṣa . The jīva is called kṣara-
puruṣa because his nature is taṭastha ; hence, he has
the tendency to fall down from his constitutional
position. The svāṁśatattva , who never fall from Their
svarūpa , are called akṣara-puruṣa .” Another name for
akṣara puruṣa is kūṭa-stha (the unchangeable) puruṣa .
The kūṭa-stha puruṣa manifests in three ways: (1) That
akṣara-puruṣa who pervades the whole universe, and is
the negative aspect of the manifested universe, is
brahma . Therefore, brahma is a tattva only related with
the universe. It is not an independent tattva .

(2) The partial manifestation of transcendence, the
refuge and indwelling witness of the conscious jīva in
the universe, is Paramātmā. He is also a tattva relative
only to the universe, and is thus not an absolute tattva
.

(3) The third manifestation of kūṭa-stha is bhagavat-
tattva , Śrī Bhagavān Himself. This will be explained in
the eighteenth śloka .




Śloka 17




uttamaḥ puruṣas tv anyaḥ

paramātmety udāhṛtaḥ

yo loka-trayam āviśya

bibharty avyaya īśvaraḥ


tu—however; (there is) anyaḥ—another; uttamaḥ—
transcendental; puruṣaḥ—personality; udāhṛtaḥ—described;
(by the sages) iti —as; parama-ātmā—the Supersoul; (He
is) īśvaraḥ—controller; avyayaḥ—the immutable; yaḥ—who;
āviśya —entering; loka-trayam —the three worlds;
bibharti —maintains (them).

There is, however, another superior akṣara-puruṣa known
as Paramātmā. He is Īśvara, the unchanging controller
who enters and sustains the three worlds.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                           772
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




After explaining brahma, the worshipable reality of the
jñ ānīs , in this śloka beginning with the word uttamaḥ,
Śrī Bhagavān explains Paramātmā, the worshipable object
of the yogīs. The word tu (but) indicates a
characteristic which is distinctly different from the
previously described akṣara-puruṣa (brahma ). It was
said in Gītā (6.46) that yogīs are superior to jñ ānīs :
jñ ānibhyo’pi mato ‘dhikaḥ karmibhyaś cādhiko yogī. From
this statement, it is understood that the Absolute
Reality manifests in a superior and specific way
according to the advancement and speciality of the
worshipper.

Paramātma-tattva is being explained as He who is Īśvara,
the controller, and who is avyayaḥ, without
transformation, who enters, supports and maintains the
three worlds. This is Paramātmā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “The second akṣara
(infallible) puruṣa , Paramātmā, is superior to the
first akṣara-puruṣa , brahma . He is Īśvara. Entering
the three worlds, He is situated as their maintainer.”




Śloka 18



yasmāt kṣaram atīto’ham

akṣarād api cottamaḥ

ato’smi loke vede ca

prathitaḥ puruṣottamaḥ

yasmāt—because; aham—I; (am) atītaḥ—transcendental;
kṣaram —to the fallible; ca —and; api —even; uttamaḥ—
transcendental; akṣarāt —to the infallible; ataḥ—
therefore; asmi —I am; prathitaḥ—renowned; ca —both;
loke —in the world; (and) vede —in the Vedas ; (as)
puruṣa-uttamaḥ—the Supreme Person.

Since I am beyond kṣara-tattva (the fallible jīva), and
even excel akṣara-tattva (the two fold puruṣa, brahma
and Paramātmā), I am well known both in this world and
in the Vedas as Puruṣottama, the Supreme Person.




                           773
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




After explaining Paramātmā, the worshipable object of
the yogīs, Śrī Bhagavān describes bhagavat-tattva , the
worshipable Deity of the bhaktas. Of the bhagavat-tattva
forms, only His own Kṛṣṇa svarūpa is renowned as
Puruṣottama. Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning
with the word yasmāt to explain the term Puruṣottama and
His supremacy. This svarūpa -tattva , the reality of His
form, is transcendental to the kṣara (fallible) puruṣa ,
the jīvātmā. He is also superior to akṣarabrahma , and
to the immutable, nirvikāra Paramātmā. According to Gītā
(6.47): yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntarātmanā. “He
who constantly performs My bhajana with full faith,
always thinking exclusively of Me within himself is, in
My opinion, the topmost of all yogīs .” The advancement
of the sādhaka’s worship is established by the
superiority and speciality of his worshipable Deity.
Since Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the supreme manifestation of Absolute
Reality, one wh o worships Him is the topmost yogī.
Among all supermost worshipable realities (bhagavat -
tattva ), the superiority of Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is established over Vaikuṇṭha-nātha Nārāyaṇa by the word
ca. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28) Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī says:
“Some personalities are His portions and parts of His
portions, but Kṛṣṇa alone is Svayam Bhagavān.” According
to this statement of Sūta Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Reality.

Although the three words brahma, Paramātmā and Bhagavān
explain the one Transcendental Reality, who is sat , cit
and ānanda , there is no difference in Their svarūpa ,
true constitutional nature. Also, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(6.9.35), it is said: svarūpa-dvayābhāvāt , “You do not
have two svarūpas .” Yet, due to the differences in
sādhana and in the results obtained by those who worship
brahma , Paramātmā and Bhagavān, there seems to be a
difference in that one transcendental reality. Jñ āna ,
yoga and bhakti are the respective means for the jñ ānīs
, yogīs and bhaktas to attain their particular goals of
brahma , Paramātmā and Bhagavān. In fact, the result of
jñ āna and yoga is only mokṣa , whereas the result of
bhakti is to become a loving associate of Bhagavān. In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.12), it is said: “Brahma-jñ āna
in the form of naiṣkarmya (freedom from material
affinity) does not appear very beautiful or auspicious
when it is bereft of bhakti to Bhagavān.” And in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.14.5), it is said: “O great personality,
in the past there were many yogīs in this world who
offered all their activities to Your lotus feet when
they could not achieve You by the processes of yoga and
so forth. Only then could they achieve bhakti to You, by
which they realised Your svarūpa , and very easily
attained Your supreme abode.”

From these statements, it is understood that without
bhakti one cannot attain mokṣa by the processes of jñ
āna and yoga . It is imperative for the worshippers of
brahma and Paramātmā to perform bhagavad-bhakti in order
for them to achieve perfection in the results of their

                           774
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

respective practices . There is no need, however, for
the worshippers of Bhagavān to worship brahma or
Paramātmā to attain perfection in their goal. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.20.31), it is said: “The processes of jñ
āna and vairāgya in this world are not considered as the
means to attain the highest perfection for a person who
is engaged in bhakti-yoga to Me.” Furthermore, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.20.32-33) states: “Whatever results one
attains by the performance of such processes as karma ,
tapasyā, jñ āna and vairāgya , My bhaktas can easily
attain by the process of bhakti , be it Svarga, mokṣa ,
My Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma, or whatever. A person who takes
shelter of Śrī Nārāyaṇa achieves the four goals of human
life (dharma , artha , karma and mokṣa ) without
performing separate sādhanas to achieve them.”

It is seen that by the worship of Bhagavān, one can
achieve the results of Svarga, mukti or prema , but one
cannot attain prema by the worship of brahma and
Paramātmā. Even though brahma and Paramātmā do not
differ from Bhagavān on the basis of tattva , only the
supremacy of Bhagavān is being glorified here.

A flame, a lamp and a big fire are all luminous objects
and thus, non-different in nature, yet the large fire is
the most effective in removing the miseries of those
suffering from cold. A nd superior to the big fire is
the sun. Similarly, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the topmost
Absolute Reality. Mokṣa , in the form of nirvāṇa ,
attained by perfectly worshipping brahma , is granted by
Śrī Kṛṣṇa to even those people who are envious of Him
and who are highly sinful, such as Aghāsura, Bakāsura
and Jarāsandha. Therefore, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has
appropriately commented on the statement, “I am the
support of nirviśeṣabrahma .” Śrīla Madhusūdana
Sarasvatī has also established the supremacy of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa thro ugh the following statements: “Sādhakas who
want to begin their eternal good fortune should
constantly perform the bhajana of Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, whose
form is described in the śrutis as sac -cid-ānanda ,
whose complexion is the hue of fresh rainclouds, who is
the very garland of the Vraja gopīs , who is the means
for intelligent people to cross over the ocean of the
material world, and whose avatāras perform līlās to
remove the burden of the earth. I do not know any other
reality superior to lotus-eyed Śrī Kṛṣṇa , who has a
face like a full moon, who is adorned with a flute in
His hands, who wears yellow garments, and whose lips are
reddish like the bimba fruit. Various śāstras give
evidence of the wonderful glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Those
who cannot tolerate this are fools and destined for
hell.” By these statements, Śrīla Madhusūdana Sarasvatī
has established the excellence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore,
it is improper to voice one’s disagreement with this
explanation of these three Gītā ślokas beginning from
dvāv imu (15.16).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




                           775
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017


This subject has been described more clearly in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (1.2.11):


vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ

yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate


Those who are   tattvavit call the Absolute Reality
advaya-jñāna,   nondual knowledge. Some know that very
advaya-jñ āna   as brahma , some call Him Paramātmā, and
some call Him   Bhagavān.

Jñānīs experience that same para-tattva as brahma
through their practice of jñ āna -yoga. Yogīs realise
the same reality as Paramātmā, and by bhakti-yoga ,
bhaktas see Him as Bhagavān. By aiśvarya-mayī bhakti
(majestic devotion), bhaktas realise and render service
unto that para-tattva as Vaikuṇṭha-nātha Nārāyaṇa, and
by mādhurya-mayī-prema bhakti , the process of worship
in the moods of Vraja (vraja-bhāva ), they see Him as
Svayam Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara.
Realisation of brahma , Paramātmā, and Bhagavān is not
the same. There is a gradation. By constitutional
nature, water, ice and mist are one (water), although
water is not called ice or mist, nor is ice called mist
or water. In the same way, Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the pinnacle of para-tattva . The first realisation of
that para-tattva is brahma , the second realisation is
Paramātmā, and the third realisation is Svayam Bhagavān.
These three perceptions are not the same. Therefore, in
śāstra , parabrahma is described as superior to brahma .
This has been very clearly explained in Gītā (14.27):
brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham . “I alone am the basis of that
nirviśeṣa-brahm a.” The adjective param before brahma
and before ātmā establishes the superiority of
parabrahma and Paramātmā over brahma and the ātmā
respectively. But the adjective param is never used
before the word Bhagavān. Therefore, Svayam Bhagavān
alone is the top most limit of para-tattva ; Paramātmā
and brahma are just His two manifestations. The bodily
effulgence of Kṛṣṇa is called brahma , and the portion
of His portion is called Paramātmā.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “The
third and topmost akṣara-puruṣa is called Bhagavān. I am
that very bhagavat -tattva . I am transcendental to
kṣara -puruṣa (the jīva ), and even superior to the two
other akṣara-puruṣas : brahma and Paramātmā. I am,
therefore celebrated as Puruṣottama, both in this world
and in the Vedas . This siddhānta should be understood:
there are two puruṣas , kṣara and akṣara . Akṣara-puruṣa
has three manifestations. The general manifestation is
brahma , a higher manifestation is Paramātmā, and the
supreme manifestation is Bhagavān.”




                            776
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 19




yo mām evam asammūḍho

jānāti puruṣottamam

sa sarva-vid bhajati māṁ

sarva-bhāvena bhārata


bhārata—O scion of Bhārata; saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; (is) asam-
mūḍhaḥ—undeluded; (and) jānāti —knows; mām —Me; evam —
thus; (as) puruṣa-uttamam —the Supreme Person; (is)
sarva-vit —a knower of all (truths); (and) bhajati —he
worships; mām —Me; sarva-bhāvena —wholeheartedly.

O Bhārata, one who is not deluded by various opinions
knows Me in this way as Puruṣottama. Such a person is
the knower of everything, and he, therefore, engages
wholeheartedly in bhajana to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




If someone disagrees with the meaning that Śrī Bhagavān
has established, in response He says, “They argue
because they are bewildered by My māyā. Sādhus ,
however, are not deluded.” To explain the
characteristics of such saintly persons, He speaks this
śloka beginning with the words yo mām. Asammūḍhaḥ means
those who are not deluded by the opinions of different
philosophers. “Although those who know Me as
Puruṣottama, the Supreme Person, may not have studied
the śāstras , they know everything (sarva-vid ) because
they know the actual meaning and tattva of all śāstra.
However, those who study all the śāstras and teach it to
others, without understanding Me in this way, are
deluded and completely foolish. Only those who actually
know Me as Puruṣottama engage in My bhajana with every
part of their being. Others are not really engaged in My
bhajana , although it seems that they are.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After explaining Paramātmā-tattva, the worshipable
object of the yogīs, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself now
explains His Puruṣottama-tattva and its glories. He is

                           777
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017

well-known as Puruṣottama, being transcendental to
kṣara-puruṣa (the jīva ), and also superior to the other
two akṣara-puruṣas ; brahma and Paramātmā. He is
therefore the shelter of both the jīvātmā and of
Paramātmā. This has been established in different places
in the Gītā. The supremacy of the worshipable Deity
(upāsya ) is established by the excellence of the
worshipper (upāsaka ). Gītā (6.47) also states:
śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ sa me yuktatamo mataḥ. “Those
bhakti-yogīs who engage in the bhajana of Bhagavān with
faith are said to be superior to all types of yogīs .”
Therefore, the supremacy of Bhagavān, the worshipable
object of the bhaktas , is established over the others.
In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28) also it is said: ete
cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. “Kṛṣṇa is
the original Personality of Godhead.”

Also in Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu it is said that,
although from the point of view of tattva there is no
difference between the svarūpa of Śrī Nārāyaṇa and that
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, from the perspective of rasa , the svarūpa
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is superior.


siddhāntatas tv abhede ‘pi

śrīśa-kṛṣṇa svarūpayoḥ

rasenotkṛṣyate kṛṣṇa-

rūpam eṣā rasa-sthitiḥ


Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Eastern Division 2.32

Although in siddhānta there is no difference between Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Nārāyaṇa, from the point of view of rasa
the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is superior. This is the glory of
rasa.




Śloka 20




iti guhyatamaṁ śāstram

idam uktaṁ mayānagha

etad buddhvā buddhimān syāt

kṛta-kṛtyaś ca bhārata


anagha bhārata—O sinless Bhārata; iti—thus; idam —this;
guhyatamam —most confidential; śāstram—śāstra ; uktam —
has been spoken; mayā—by Me; syāt —one becomes;
buddhimān —enlightened; ca —and; kṛta-kṛtyaḥ—fulfilled;
buddhvā—having understood; etat —this.


                             778
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

O sinless Bhārata, I have hereby revealed the most
confidential secret of śāstra. One with pure
intelligence becomes fully enlightened and blessed by
knowing this.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is concluding this chapter with this śloka
beginning with the word iti . Śrī Bhagavān says, “In
these twenty ślokas , I have fully expounded the most
secret doctrine of śāstra .” This chapter establishes
the distinction between spirit and matter, and shows
that among the threefold manifestations of the akṣara
puruṣas , the svarūpa of Puruṣottama puruṣa Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the Supreme Reality.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Fifteenth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In concluding this subject, Śrī Bhagavān has said that
Puruṣottama-yoga as described in this chapter, is that
part of śāstra which contains the most confidential
knowledge. The import of this statement is that no one
except the bhaktas can comprehend knowledge of this
tattva . Since Arjuna is a very dear bhakta of Bhagavān,
Śrī Bhagavān is revealing knowledge of this most
confidential reality only to him. By the mercy of the
bhaktas , the lives of those who are able to attain
knowledge of this confidential tattva are blessed.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
sinless one, this Puruṣottama-yoga is, indeed, the most
confidential instruction in śāstra . After knowing this,
an intelligent jīva becomes enlightened and blessed. O
Bhārata, all impurities in connection with āśraya (the
abode, the jīva ) and viṣaya (the object of bhakti ) are
dispelled upon understanding this yoga . Bhakti is the
blissful activity of the ātmā. To correctly execute the
process of bhakti , two factors are most necessary: the
purity of the jīva who is its āśraya , and the complete
manifestation of Bhagavān, who is its viṣaya . As long
as the jīva has the conception that brahma and Paramātmā
are equal to Bhagavān (bhagavat-tattva ), he cannot
attain the process of viśuddha-bhakti (the function of
his unalloyed existence). The process of bhakti is
executed in its purest form only when he realises
Puruṣottama-tattva as para-tattva .


                           779
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

“During the sādhana stage of bhakti-yoga, three great
anarthas (unwanted things) are to be removed by the
power of sādhu-saṅga and by surrendering to the limbs of
śuddha-bhajana. The jīva’s first weakness of heart is
the desire to enjoy māyā by misusing the freedom which
was bestowed upon him in his pure stage by Bhagavān.
Later on, while wandering in the material world, he
developed his second weakness of heart, which is the
attachment for sense objects. Among these weaknesses of
the heart, hṛdaya-daurbalya , attachment to the material
world is the third anartha . All the other anarthas are
generated from these three weaknesses of heart.”

The first five ślokas explain that pure renunciation is
the symptom that destroys the above weaknesses.
Deliberation on Puruṣottama-tattva along with yukta-
vairāgya generated from bhakti is given from the sixth
śloka to the end of this chapter. This chapter describes
the difference between inert matter and spirit, and the
deliberation on different manifestations of conscious
reality.

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Fifteenth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Sixteen


Daivāsura Sampada-Yoga



The Yoga of Discerning the Divine and Demonic Qualities




Ślokas 1-3




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir

jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ

dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś ca

svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam


ahiṁsā satyam akrodhas

tyāgaḥ śāntir apaiśunam

dayā bhūteṣv aloluptvaṁ


                            780
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

mārdavaṁ hrīr acāpalam

tejaḥ kṣamā dhṛtiḥ śaucam

adroho nāti-mānitā

bhavanti sampadaṁ daivīm

abhijātasya bhārata


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Supreme Lord said;
bhārata—O scion of Bhārata; abhaya —freedom from fear;
sattva-saṁśuddhiḥ—purification of one’s existence; jñ
āna-yoga-vya vasthitiḥ—the steadfast study of divine
knowledge; dāna —charity; damaḥ—subduing the external
senses; ca —and; yajñaḥ—performance of sacrifice; ca —
and; svādhyāyaḥ—reading the Vedas ; tapaḥ—austerity;
ārjavam —simplicity; ahiṁsā—non-violence; satyam —
truthfulness; akrodhaḥ—freedom from anger; tyāgaḥ—giving
up possessiveness towards wife, sons and so forth;
śāntiḥ—peacefulness; apaiśunam —avoiding fault-finding;
dayā—mercy; bhūteṣu —to all beings; aloluptvam —freedom
from greed; mārdavam —gentleness; hriḥ—modesty; acāpalam
—without fickleness; tejaḥ—vigour; kṣamā—forgiveness;
dhṛtiḥ—determination; śaucam—cleanliness (both internal
and external); adrohaḥ—absence of hatred; na atimānitā—
freedom from conceit; bhavanti —these (qualities)
manifest; abhijātasya —for one born; d aivīm —having
divine; sampadam —qualities.

Śrī Bhagavān said: Fearlessness, joyfulness of heart,
steadfastness in the process of acquiring knowledge,
charity, control of the senses, performance of yajña,
study of śāstra, penance, simplicity, non-violence,
truthfulness, lack of anger, detachment from wife and
family, peacefulness, avoidance of fault-finding,
kindness to all beings, freedom from greed, gentleness,
modesty, lack of fickleness, vigour, forgiveness,
patience, internal and external cleanliness and complete
absence of hatred and conceit—these are the daivika
qualities, O Bhārata, which become manifest in a person
who appears in this world at an auspicious moment, that
is, one who is born with divine qualities.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the Sixteenth Chapter, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa describes
daivika (divine) and āsurika (demonic) qualities. He
also describes the disposition of two sorts of created
beings which correspond to these two qualities, the deva
and the asura .

The first śloka of the Fifteenth Chapter, ūrdhva-mūlam
adhaḥ-śākham , describes the aśvattha tree of the
material world, but does not mention its fruits.
Considering this, in the present chapter Śrī Bhagavān
explains the tree’s two types of fruits: one which

                            781
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

liberates and one which binds. In the fir st three
ślokas , Śrī Bhagavān explains the fruit that gives
mokṣa.

“How will I maintain my life alone in a solitary forest
without my wife and family?” Being free from this type
of fear is called fearlessness. Happiness of the citta
(heart) is called sattv a-saṁśuddhiḥ. Jñ āna-yoga-
vyavasthitiḥ means being steadfast in the process of
acquiring knowledge, not being proud, for example, of
one’s learned status. Dānam means offering one’s own
foodstuffs to others after dividing it properly. Damaḥ
means to control the external and internal senses.
Yajñaḥ means worship of the Deity and the devas .
Svādhyāyaḥ means study of the Vedas . Tyāgaḥ means to
give up possessiveness towards wife and family.
Aloluptvam means being free from greed. The meaning of
the rest of the words is clear.

These twenty-six qualities, beginning with fearlessness,
indicate a sāttvika disposition. They are attained by a
person who takes birth at a time that illuminates that
sāttvika nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The daivika and āsurika qualities and propensities that
were described briefly in the previous chapter are now
being explained in detail. Being trapped in the network
of māyā, persons of an āsurika nature take birth in
various āsurika species of life which results in misery
and pain. On the other hand, those of a daivika nature,
being endowed with divine qualities, cross over the
miserable ocean of birth and death, and gradually
advance on the most auspicious path through the process
of bhagavad-bhakti. Finally they taste the bl iss of
service to Bhagavān in His dhāma . Such liberated
persons never again become bound by this material world.
The host of divine qualities mentioned herein can only
manifest in exalted persons who take birth at an
auspicious time from parents who have auspicious
qualities, and who underwent the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra ,
the process of conceiving progeny according to Vedic
injunctions. This is the secret meaning of the word
abhijātasya in the above śloka . Parents should at least
not produce children as cats a nd dogs do. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself has said in the Gītā that He is that sex life
which gives rise to good children. Therefore, sex life
is not forbidden, but when it is only for sense
enjoyment like that of the animals, it is of a hellish
nature.

In the varṇāśrama system, a sannyāsī is considered to be
the foremost guru of society’s four varṇas and āśramas .
The brāhmaṇa is the guru of the other three varṇas :
kṣatriya , vaiśya , and śūdra . Only a real sannyāsī who
possesses all divine qualities is the guru of the b
rāhmaṇa.

                           782
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


All such good qualities are visible in śuddha-bhaktas. A
surrendered sādhaka of bhakti must be fearless and have
the firm conviction, “Bhagavān is my protector and He is
always with me. He sees and knows everything and He
sustains me.” When a devotee develops faith like this,
he remains completely fearless wherever he may live, in
the home or in the forest. Prahlāda Mahārāja, Draupadī,
the five Pāṇḍavas and Haridāsa Ṭhākura are examples of
this. Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura remained fearless, even while
being beaten by low-class, cruel persons in twenty-two
market places in Navadvīpa, which was under the strict
rule of fanatical Muslims. After beating him, they threw
him in the Gaṅgā, but he emerged from there with a
healthy body and returned to his bhajana -kuṭīra .
Seeing this, the Kāzī and others became amazed.
Therefore, the bhaktisādhaka should always be fearless.

Sattva-saṁśuddhi means the purity of the ātmā. The
conduct of the bhaktisādhaka is pure. The sannyāsīs and
brahmacārīs in particular, who hav e given up home, wife
and family, should not keep intimate relationships with
women. It is forbidden for them to joke with or even
talk with a woman in a solitary place. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu was very strict in this regard. This does not
mean that He fel t malice towards women in general; He
made this restriction for sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs who
have renounced their family lives. For men, the
association of women is forbidden, and for women, the
association of men is forbidden. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
gave up His dear Choṭa Haridāsa forever because he
associated with a woman. In one sense, to look at any
object with the desire to enjoy it is considered
associating with women (strī-saṅga ). Kṛṣṇa is the
Supreme Enjoyer of everyone, and everyone is meant for
His enjoyment. A sādhaka should always remain pure and
consider himself to be kṛṣṇa dāsa .

To remain engaged in the cultivation of tattvajñāna is
called jñ āna-yoga -vyavasthitiḥ. Saṅkīrtana-yaj ña has
been accepted as the foremost of all yajñas . Hiṁsā
means violence to the jīva . To not cause pain to any
jīva , either by body, mind or words is ahiṁsā.
Specifically, one should not be violent to animals. It
is violence to block any jīva’s progress to the higher
levels of consciousness. When an embodied being
experiences an untimely death, he has to take birth
again in the same species of life and, after completing
his remaining period in that body, he enters another
species. One should not stop the progress of any living
entity for the satisfacton of the tongue or any other
selfish purpose. This is non-violence.

The twenty-six qualities described above are called
daivika. By developing these qualities, one can
gradually reach the highest platform of self-
realisation.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes, “Now, Arjuna may
doubt the validity of various statements of śāstra that
one should attain jñ āna while cultivating sāttvika
qualities. To dispel this doubt Śrī Bhagavān says, ‘The
aśvattha tree in the form of the material world has two
fruits. One fruit strongly binds the jīva to the

                           783
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

material world, and the other gives liberation from it.
Sattva-saṁśuddhi , the purification of one’s existence,
is the only fearless path for the jīva . The jīva’s very
existence is composed of śuddha-sattva , but in the
bound state his śuddha -sāttvika nature is dominated by
the three guṇas. All śāstras indicate that the
cultivation of jñ āna-yoga purifies one’s existence.
Sattva-guṇa is conducive for the cultivation of
knowledge which leads to liberation. All these qualities
are a divine opulence (daivī-sampad ) and assist the
jīva in realising his pure existence. That which blocks
the jīva’s sattva-saṁśuddhi is called āsurī-sampad
(demonic qualities). Fearlessness, purity of existence
(sattva-saṁśuddhi ), jñ āna-yoga , charity, control of
the senses, yajña , penance, simplicity, study of the
Vedas , non-violence, truthfulness, lack of anger,
renunciation, peacefulness, giving up criticism of
others, kindness, absence of greed, gentility, shyness,
lack of fickleness, vigour, forgiveness, fortitude,
cleanliness and lack of envy and pride are the twenty-
six qualities called daivī-sampad . If one takes birth
at an auspicious moment, he receives these qualities.’”




Śloka 4



dambho darpo’bhimānaś ca

krodhaḥ pāruṣyam eva ca

ajñānaṁ cābhijātasya

pārtha sampadam āsurīm


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; eva—certainly; dambhaḥ—hypocrisy;
darpaḥ—arrogance; abhimānaḥ—conceit; ca —and; krodhaḥ—
anger; pāruṣyam—heartlessness; ca —and; ajñ ānam—lack of
discrimination (are manifest); abhijātasya —for one
born; āsurīm —having demonic; sampadam —qualities.

O Pārtha, hypocrisy, arrogance, conceit, anger, hard-
heartedness and lack of discrimination are found in
those born with āsurika qualities. Those who are born at
an inauspicious moment receive these āsurika qualities.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the fruits that bind one
to material existence. To pose as a religious person
while being irreligious is called dambha , hypocritical.
Pride in wealth and education is called darpaḥ, or
arrogance. Desire to be respected by others and

                           784
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

attachment to wife and family is called abhimānaḥ,
conceit. The meaning of the word krodha (anger) is
clear. Pāruṣyam means being hard-hearted. Ajñ ānam means
lack of discrimination. Āsurī-sampad also indicates
rākṣasī-sampad. One who takes birth at a time that gives
rise to rājasika and tāmasika qualities receives such
qualities accordingly.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Those who are born at an extremely inauspicious time,
having not undergone auspicious purificatory rites
(saṁskāras), have an āsur ika nature. It is people of
such a nature who make a show of religion and
advancement in spiritual life. Thus, they cheat simple
and innocent people. They consider that acquiring
wealth, women and prestige is the perfection of life.
They do not follow the instructions of śāstra , yet they
have great pride. They become angry over petty matters.
There is not a scent of humility in them. They are hard-
hearted and devoid of discrimination. All these
qualities are āsurika. One should always remain at a
distance from such qualities.




Śloka 5




daivī sampad vimokṣāya

nibandhāyāsurī matā

mā śucaḥ sampadaṁ daivīm

abhijāto’si pāṇḍava


daivī—the divine; sampat—qualities; matā—are considered;
vimokṣāya —to lead to liberation; āsurī—the demonic;
nibandhāya —to bondage; mā śu caḥ—do not lament; pāṇḍava
—O son of Pāṇḍu; asi —you are; abhijātaḥ—born; daivīm —
having divine; sampadam —qualities.

Daivika qualities are the cause of mokṣa, and āsurika
qualities are the cause of bondage. O son of Pāṇḍu, do
not lament, for you are born with daivika qualities.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                           785
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Now in this śloka beginning with daivī, Śrī Bhagavān is
showing how these two natures function. First of all, if
Arjuna laments, “Alas! Alas! I must possess āsurika
qualities such as hard-heartedness and anger, for I d
esire to kill my relatives with arrows,” Śrī Bhagavān
says mā śucaḥ, “Do not lament,” to give him solace. “You
are born in a dynasty of kṣatriyas. Dharma-śāstra
approves of you being hard-hearted and angry while at
war. However, to be violent in other circumstances is
āsurika .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “It
is only by daivika qualities that one can attain mokṣa ,
and it is by āsurika qualities that one becomes bound to
this world. O Arjuna, by cultivating jñ āna-yoga while
following varṇāśrama dharma , one achieves sattva-
saṁśuddhi (the purification of one’s existence). You are
blessed with daivī-sampad (divine qualities), being born
in a noble kṣatriya caste. It is not āsurika to kill
one’s relatives in a dharmika battle by shooting them
with arrows, and engaging in other aggressive activities
in accordance with the injunctions of śāstra . Having
heard this instruction, you should give up your grief.”


Śloka 6


dvau bhūta-sargau loke’smin

daiva āsura eva ca

daivo vistaraśaḥ prokta

āsuraṁ pārtha me śṛṇu


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; asmin—in this; loke —world;
(there are) eva —certainly; dvau —two; bhūta-sargau—
created beings; (the) daivaḥ—divine; ca —and; (the)
āsuraḥ—demonic; daivaḥ—the divine; proktaḥ—have been
spoken of; vistaraśaḥ—at length; śṛṇu —now hear; me —
from Me; āsuram —of the demonic.

O Pārtha, in this world there are two types of created
beings: the daivika and the āsurika. The daivika
qualities have been described at length. Now hear from
Me about the āsu rika nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                           786
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017




Śrī Bhagavān is giving a detailed description of āsurika
qualities to the despondent Arjuna, even though Arjuna
was born with daivika qualities. The daivika qualities
have been described in detail in the series of ślokas
beginning with abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhi .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is giving a detailed description of
āsurika qualities so that after knowing them, one can
completely give them up. The Padma Purāṇa states: dvau
bhūta-sargau loke ‘smin daiva āsura eva ca

viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ

Bhaktas who perform bhajana to Bhagavān are called
devatās . Conversely, those who are envious of Bhagavān
and His bhaktas are called asuras. Those who follow the
instructions of śāstra, becoming free from mundane
attachment and hatred, and who engage in bhagavad-
bhakti, should be considered as devatās. Those who
violate the instructions of śāstra due to being guided
by material attachment and envy, and who engage in
adharmika activities, are called asuras.




Śloka 7



pravṛttiñ ca nivṛttiñ ca

janā na vidur āsurāḥ

na śaucaṁ nāpi cācāro

na satyaṁ teṣu vidyate


āsurāḥ—demonic; janāḥ—persons; na viduḥ—do not
comprehend; pravṛttim —the tendency to virtue; ca —and;
nivṛttim —refraining from vice; na —neither; śaucam —
cleanliness; na —nor; api —even; ācāraḥ—good conduct; na
—nor; satyam —truthfulness; vidyate —exists; teṣu —in
them.

Those who are āsurika do not comprehend virtue, nor
indeed how to abstain from vice. Cleanliness, proper
conduct and truthfulness are not to be found in them.




                           787
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word pravṛtti means inclination to virtue (dharma ),
and nivṛtti means abstaining from vice.




Śloka 8




asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te

jagad āhur anīśvaram

aparaspara-sambhūtaṁ

kim anyat kāma-hetukam


te āhuḥ—they say; jagat—the world; (is) asatyam —unreal;
apratiṣṭham —without a basis; anīśvaram —without a
controller; aparaspara -sambhūtam —born of sexual union;
(and) kim —what?; anyat —other; kāma-hetukam —cause than
lust.

Asuras describe the world as unreal, without basis, and
godless. They say it is the product of sexual union, or
that it is self-generated. Not only this, they even say
that it is the result of selfish desires.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is describing the philosophy of the asuras.
“They say that the material world is asatyam , unreal,
and a result of illusion. That which has no basis is
called apratiṣṭha . They say that just as a flower in
the sky has no basis, in the same way this material
world has no basis.” Anīśvaram means that since the
world is unrea l, it has not been created by Īśvara;
rather, it has come about accidentally without any
mutual union, like living entities born from
perspiration. “Not only this, they say that this world
is only the result of kāma , the selfish desire of the
creator, if there is one. Since they claim that this
world is unreal, they feel that they have licence to
give speculative explanations about it.” Furthermore,
some say that the evidence given in the Vedas and
Purāṇas is false. The asuras say: trayo vedasya karttāro
muni-bhaṇḍa-niśācarāḥ. “Thinkers, jesters and demons who
are selfish and whose views differ, have composed the

                           788
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Vedas .”

Apratiṣṭha means that dharma and adharma are not defined
in the Vedas and that they are the result of illusion.
Anīśvaram means that even Īśvara has been concocted as a
result of illusion. “If somebody says that this material
world seems to manifest from the union of male and
female, then in response the asuras say, aparaspara-
sambūtam , there is no such cause and effect behind it,
and that the birth of a child from parents is also an
illusion. They say that when a potter makes a pot from
mud, he knows what he is doing, but when parents
procreate a child, they do not know how it happens,
therefore, the process of begetting a child is also
illusion. O Arjuna, what more can I say? Asuras say that
the only cause of the universe is selfish desire.
According to their logic, atoms, māyā, Īśvara, or
whatever are the cause behind the creation of the
world.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the present śloka, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the
philosophy of those who possess an āsurika nature. The
essence of Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s commentary on
this śloka is as follows:


(1) According to the opinion of the māyāvādīs, this
material world is asatya , apratiṣṭhita and anīśvara .
They say it is asatya because it is an illusion, just as
a rope can be taken for a snake; apratiṣṭhita because it
has no basis, like a flower in the sky, and anīśvara ,
because Īśvara is not the cause behind creation.

(2) According to the svabhāva-vādī

Buddhists, the material world is aparaspara-sambūtam ,
that is, not born of mutual union between male and
female, but comes from svabhāva , and that the natural
and necessary action of substances according to their
inherent properties produce and sustain the universe.

(3) According to Cārvāka, this material world is kāma-
haitukam , born from the flow of lust between male and
female.

(4) According to the Jains, kāma (selfish desire) is the
cause of this world. On the basis of their speculative
logic, they disregard the authoritative Vedic
literatures and engage in useless endeavour to ascertain
the cause of this material world.


Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s statement, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-
carācaram (Gītā 9.10), very clearly explains that this
entire material world, consisting of moving and non-
moving beings, has been created by prakṛti under His

                           789
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

supervision. Since this world has been created by the
will of satya-saṅkalpa Bhagavān (He whose desires must
come to pass), this world is also real, but c hangeable
and perishable. The asuras imagine various types of
temporary atheistic conclusions because they are bereft
of pure and perfect wisdom.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “Those of an āsurika
temperament call this world asatya , apratiṣṭhita and
anīśvara . Their philosophy is that there is no purpose
in accepting the existence of Īśvara, since the
relationship of cause and effect is not the basis of the
creation of the universe. Some say that Īśvara does
exist, but, when He created the world, He was i
nfluenced by His selfish desires, therefore He is not
qualified to be the object of our worship.”




Śloka 9




etāṁ dṛṣṭim avaṣṭabhya

naṣṭātmāno’lpa-buddhayaḥ

prabhavanty ugra-karmāṇaḥ

kṣayāya jagato’hitāḥ


ahitāḥ—the harmful asuras; alpa-buddhayaḥ—who are of
meagre intelligence; naṣṭa -ātmānaḥ—without knowledge of
ātma-tattva ; avaṣṭabhya —taking shelter; etām —of this;
dṛṣṭim —philosophy; ugra-karmāṇaḥ—absorbed in violent
acts; prabhavanti —take birth; kṣayāya —for the
destruction; jagataḥ—of the world.

Asuras are bereft of ātma-tattva. They take shelter of
this atheistic view and, thinking their bodies to be
their real selves, engage in violent acts. They are the
personification of inauspiciousness and take birth
solely to destroy this world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this way, some of these asuras have completely lost
themselves. Some have very little intelligence, and
others engage in wicked acts, are frivolous and destined
for hell. For this reason, Śrī Bhagavān is speaking
eleven consecutive ślokas , the first of which begins
here with the word etām . Avaṣṭabhya means taking
shelter.


                            790
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Asuras are bereft of ātma-jñāna. They invent various
types of machines on the pretext of advancing human
civilization. Many weapons and machines are being
devised to kill the maximum amount of people in the
minimum amount of time, even if they are in distant
continents. The asuras are very proud of such
inventions. Due to these weapons, this world can be
destroyed at any moment. Because āsurika society has no
faith in Īśvara and the Vedas , they are working to
destroy the world.




Śloka 10




kāmam āśritya duṣpūraṁ

dambha-māna-madānvitāḥ

mohād gṛhītvā ‘sad-grāhān

pravarttante ‘śuci-vratāḥ


āśritya—taking shelter; duṣpūram—of insatiable; kāmam —
lust; anvitāḥ—filled with; dambha —hypocrisy; māna —
pride; mada —and arrogance; mohāt —out of delusion;
gṛhītvā—accepting; asat-grāhān —temporary objects;
aśuci-vratāḥ—taking a vow of depravity; pravarttante —
they engage (in the worship of the insignificant
upadevatās ).

Driven by insatiable desires and filled with hypocrisy,
pride and arrogance, the deluded asuras always hanker
after temporary objects. Sworn to depravity, they engage
in the worship of insignificant devatās.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Asad-grāhān pravartante means that they become inclined
to follow bogus ideology, and aśuci-vratāḥ refers to
those who have given up pure conduct and behave in an
abominable manner.



                            791
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Those of an āsurika temperament, who do not accept
Īśvara and the Vedic conclusions, consider that the
success of human life is only to accumulate wealth and
fulfil their selfish desires. For this reason, they
remain attached to impure activities such as drinking
wine, eating meat, having illicit sex and gambling. They
deride the Vedic si ddhānta , being completely
intoxicated by false prestige and the false ego. These
are the only people glorified in modern atheistic
society. Although they are pushing society to the
threshold of destruction, they proudly consider
themselves to be highly intelligent.




Ślokas 11-12




cintām aparimeyāñ ca

pralayāntām upāśritāḥ

kāmopabhoga-paramā

etāvad iti niścitāḥ

āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ

kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ

īhante kāma-bhogārtham

anyāyenārtha-sañcayān


upāśritāḥ—engaged; aparimeyām—in unlimited; cintām —
anxiety; pralaya-antām —until the dissolution of the
body; etāvat —such; niścitāḥ—is their determination; iti
—that; paramāḥ—the highest (goal of life); kāma-upabhoga
—is to delight the senses; ca —and; baddhāḥ—bound;
śataiḥ—by hundreds; pāśa —of ropes; āśā—of desire;
parāyaṇāḥ—absorbed; kāma-krodha —in lust and anger;
īhante —they endeavour; anyāyena —by unjust means;
sañcay ān —for accumulation; artha —of wealth; artham —
for the purpose; kāma-bhoga —of sensual pleasures.

They are beset with unlimited anxieties until the time
of death, believing that sense enjoyment is the highest
purpose of life. Bound by the ropes of unlimited
desires, and always overpowered by lust and anger, they
endeavour to secure wealth by any unjust means for the
sake of indulging in sensual pleasures.


                           792
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Pralayāntām means until death. Etāvad iti refers to
those who have concluded from śāstra that the senses
should remain drowned in sense enjoyment. ‘Why should we
worry for anything else?’




Śloka 13




idam adya mayā labdham

idaṁ prāpsye manoratham

idam astīdam api me

bhaviṣyati punar dhanam


adya—today; idam—this; labdham —has been obtained; mayā—
by me; (and) prāpsye —I shall realise; idam —this;
(other) manaḥ-ratham —desire; idam —this; asti —is
(mine); (and) api —also; idam —this; punaḥ—increase;
dhanam —of wealth; bhaviṣyati —will be; me —mine.

Asuras think, “Today I have attained so much and I will
fulfil my cherished desires. So much wealth is now mine,
and it will increase in the future more and more.”




Śloka 14



asau mayā hataḥ śatrur

haniṣye cāparān api

īśvaro’ham ahaṁ bhogī

siddho’haṁ balavān sukhī


asau—this; śatruḥ—enemy; hataḥ—has been slain; mayā—by
me; ca —and; haniṣye —I shall slay; aparān —the others;
api —also; aham —I (am); īśvaraḥ—the lord; aham —I (am);
bhogī—the enjoyer; aham —I (am); siddhaḥ—perfect;
balavān —powerful; (and) sukhī—happy.


                           793
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

“I have killed this enemy and I will kill others. I am
the lord and the enjoyer. I am perfect, powerful and
happy.”




Śloka 15



āḍhyo’bhijanavān asmi

ko’nyo’sti sadṛśo mayā

yakṣye dāsyāmi modiṣya

ity ajñāna-vimohitāḥ


asmi—I am; āḍhyaḥ—wealthy; abhijanavān —of noble birth;
kaḥ—who?; anyaḥ—else; asti —is there; sadṛśaḥ—compared;
mayā—with me; yakṣye —I shall sacrifice; dāsyāmi —I
shall give in charity; modiṣye —I shall enjoy; iti —thus
(are); ajñ āna -vimohitāḥ—persons illusioned by
ignorance.

“I am wealthy and of noble birth. Who is there to
compare with me? I will perform yajña, I will give in
charity and thus I will enjoy great happiness.” Deluded
by ignorance, they speak in this way.




Śloka 16




aneka-citta-vibhrāntā

moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ

prasaktāḥ kāma-bhogeṣu

patanti narake’śucau


vibhrāntāḥ—perplexed; aneka—by many; citta —anxieties;
samāvṛtāḥ—caught; jāla —in a net; moha —of delusion;
prasaktāḥ—addicted; kāma-bhogeṣu —to sense enjoyments;
patanti —they fall; aśucau —into an unclean; narake —
hell.

Perplexed by many desires and anxieties, entangled in a
net of delusion, and excessively addicted to sense
enjoyment, they fall into situations that are impure and
hellish.




                           794
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Aśucau narake means in the hells such as Vaitaraṇī.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Āsurika persons consider themselves to be Īśvara, even
though they are agitated by various useless anxieties
and bound in a net of delusion. They become instructors
and teach their followers, “You yourself are Īśvara. You
can do whatever you like. Only a fool believes in any
other Īśvara. There is no such entity.” These people
imagine that they can manufacture a special airplane by
which they can go to any higher planet. They do not have
faith in Vedic yajñas and rituals or in the process of
bhakti . Among such asuras , Rāvaṇa was prominent. He
had a plan to build a staircase to Svarga, by which even
an ordinary person could go there without performing any
Vedic yajña . But he was killed by Śrī Rāmacandra, and
his p lan was thus thwarted.

At present, those with an āsurika disposition are
endeavouring to reach higher planets in various types of
spacecraft. They do not know they are on a path of
destruction. Here the words moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ mean
that, due to the intense greed of the tongue, a fish
becomes caught in a net and loses its life. In the same
way, those with an āsurika nature fall into a network of
delusion, from which there is no escape. Thus, they are
destroyed.




Śloka 17




ātma-sambhāvitāḥ stabdhā

dhana-māna-madānvitāḥ

yajante nāma-yajñais te

dambhenāvidhi-pūrvakam


ātma-sambhāvitāḥ—those overwhelmed by self-esteem;
stabdhāḥ—arrogance; māna-mada-anvitāḥ—filled with
intoxication of personal honour; dhana —due to wealth;
te —they; yajante nāma-yaj ñaiḥ—perform sacrifices in
name only; dambhena —ostentatiously; avidhi-pūrvakam—

                           795
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

without following the vidhi (injunctions prescribed in
śāstra ).

Full of their own self-importance, arrogant, and
intoxicated with false prestige due to wealth, these
asuras perform ostentatious yajñas in name only,
disregarding all the injunctions of śāstra.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Ātma-sambhāvitāḥ means that they consider themselves to
be worshipable; therefore, they are stabdhāḥ, not
humble, but arrogant. However, no sādhu gives them
respect. Nāma-y ajñaiḥ means acts which are yajñas in
name only.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Having understood the symptoms and activities of those
with daivika and āsurika natures, Arjuna asked Kṛṣṇa,
“Some people give up the rules and regulations of śāstra
and whimsically worship some insignificant devatās
according to their own speculative ideas. In which
category is their worship?” At the present time, the
majority of persons worshipping the devatās and other
personalities do so according to their own speculative
whims, disregarding the injunctions of śāstra. In this
regard, we must hear the instructions given by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.




Śloka 18




ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ

kāmaṁ krodhañ ca saṁśritāḥ

mām ātma-para-deheṣu

pradviṣanto’bhyasūyakāḥ


saṁśritāḥ—taking shelter; ahaṅkāram—of the false ego;
balam —false (physical) strength; darpam —insolence,
pride; kāmam —selfish desires; ca —and; krodham —anger;
pradviṣantaḥ—they hate; abhyasūyakāḥ—and envy

                             796
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(attributing faults to the good qualities of the sādhus
); mām —Me; deheṣu —in the bodies; ātma-para —of those
who are dedicated to the Supreme Soul.

Bewildered by false ego, bodily strength, pride, lust
and anger, they direct their envy and criticism towards
Me through the devoted sādhus within whose hearts I,
(Paramātmā), always dwell.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“They envy Me, Paramātmā, by disregarding Me. They
despise Me, who am situated in the body of ātma-paraḥ
sādhus devoted to Paramātmā, because to envy a sādhu is
indeed to envy Me.” Abhyasūyakāḥ means to see the good
qualities of sādhus as faults.




Śloka 19



tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān

saṁsāreṣu narādhamān

kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān

āsurīśv eva yoniṣu


aham—I; ajasram—forever; kṣipāmi —cast; tān —those;
dviṣataḥ—envious of sādhus ; krūrān —who are cruel;
aśubhān —inauspicious; nara-adhamān —degraded men; eva —
certainly; saṁsāreṣu —into materialistic; āsurīsu —
demonic; yoniṣu —wombs (species).

Those who are envious of sādhus, cruel-hearted and
malevolent, are the most degraded of human beings. I
perpetually cast them into mundane existence among the
various species of asuras.




Śloka 20




āsurīṁ yonim āpannā

mūḍhā janmani janmani


                           797
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

mām aprāpyaiva kaunteya

tato yānty adhamāṁ gatim


kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; mūḍhāḥ—those fools; āpannāḥ—
receiving; āsurīm —demonic; yonim —births; janmani
janmani —birth after birth; eva —certainly; aprāpya —not
attaining; mām —Me; tataḥ—then; yānti —go; adhamām —to
the vilest; gatim —destination.

O Kaunteya, accepting birth after birth in the āsurika
species, such fools can never attain Me. Thus, they
descend further into the lowest and most vile forms of
life.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Mām aprāpyaiva means that by not attaining Me, they
fall into a degraded species. However, when I appear at
the end of the Dvāpara-yuga in the twenty-eighth catur
yuga of Vaivasvata manvatara , those who envy Me, such
as Kaṁsa, attain mukti when they come before Me. I, who
am an ocean of unlimited compassion, bestow that rare
mukti attained in the matured stage of bhakti-miśra-j ñ
āna (jñ āna mixed with bhakti ), even to sinners such as
Kaṁsa. It is said in the prayers of the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.87.23): ‘O Prabhu! Simply by constantly
thinking of You, even Your enemies have attained the
same Supreme Absolute Reality as the munis who are fixed
in yoga and who worship You by controlling their breath,
mind and senses.’ Therefore, My supremacy, as described
earlier, is established.” This is also found in a śloka
from the Laghu-Bhāgavatāmṛta , which states that, as
long as those who envy Kṛṣṇa do not attain Him, they
remain in a degraded species of life. This is very
clear.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the nineteenth śloka, Śrī Kṛṣṇa said that He throws
people who are envious of sādhus , who are cruel and the
most degraded of human beings, into a miserable āsurika
species of life. From this statement, someone may
question such behaviour of Bhagavān, saying that it is
not equanimous but an indication of partiality. However,
although Īsvara is able to do anything and everything,
karttum akarttum anyathā karttum samarthaḥ (‘The Lord is
able to do or undo anything He wishes’), usually the jīv
a only gets the result of his own karma (action).
Therefore, in order to undergo the result of their own
karma , sinful people who are opposed to the Vedas ,

                           798
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

bhaktas and Bhagavān again and again enter the āsurika
species of life. Due to repeated demonic births, they do
not get a chance to become free from their offences. If
the offences and sins that are committed in human life
are not atoned for in human life, a person does not get
the chance to clear them when he goes to lower species,
such as birds and beasts. A birth in all species, except
the human species, is only meant for reaping the results
of past karma (bhoga-yoni ). In this regard, Śrīla
Madhusūdana Sarasvatī writes: ihaiva naraka-vyādheś
cikitsāṁ na karoti yaḥ

gatvā nirauṣadhaṁ sthānaṁ sarujaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati

If a person cannot cure the disease of sinking to
hellish life while living in this human body, what will
he do when he goes where there is no remedy, namely, a
lower species of life?

Īśvara is never partial. This was explained in detail
earlier. Here, one should note that those such as
Hiraṇyakaśipu, Hiraṇyākṣa, Rāvaṇa, Kumbhakarṇa, Śiśupāla
and Dantavakra took birth in kṣatriya dynasties because
they were cursed to do so, and directly opposed
Bhagavān’s avatāras such as Śrī Nṛsiṁha, Śrī Varāha, Śrī
Rāma and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, considering Them to be their
enemies. But because they were killed by these avatāras
, they attained a virtuous destination and gave up their
āsurika life. Those who were killed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa
specifically attained the highest destinat ion.
Furthermore, it should be noted that they all had faith
in the Vedas and Vedic activities, and had performed
Vedic yajñas. They indirectly believed in a supreme
controller, kāla-śakti (the potency of time), and in the
Supreme Lord.

The supremacy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the glory of His supreme
tattva and His specific quality of bestowing mukti upon
those whom He kills is established by studying these
avatāras . When the asuras who are envious of Bhagavān
are killed by avatāras other than Kṛṣṇa Himself, they
attai n immense enjoyment in Svarga and other places, or
birth in a high family. But when they are killed by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Himself, who is the source of all avatāras , they
attain mukti : sārūpya , sālokya , sārṣṭi or sāmīpya.
They may even attain service to Bhagavān as one of His
associates. Therefore, Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is said to be the
fountainhead of all avatāras : ete cāṁśa-kalā puṁsaḥ
kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayaṁ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.28).
“All the avatāras mentioned are either plenary portions,
or portions of the plena ry portions of Svayam Bhagavān,
the original Personality of Godhead.” Kṛṣṇa even gave
Pūtanā the position of acting as a nurse to Him. When He
descended in the form of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He
even bestowed bhagavat-prema on Jagāi, Madhāi and the
Chānd Kāzī.

In the phrase mām aprāpyaiva, Kṛṣṇa Himself is
expressing this deep secret by the word eva , which
means certainly. “It is certain that as long as a person
does not attain Me, Kṛṣṇa (or the path which leads to
Me), there is no chance of him being completely
liberated from miserable material life.”


                           799
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 21




tri-vidhaṁ narakasyedaṁ

dvāraṁ nāśanam ātmanaḥ

kāmaḥ krodhas tathā lobhas

tasmād etat trayaṁ tyajet


idam tri-vidham—there are three kinds; dvāram—of gates;
narakasya —to hell; kāmaḥ—lust; krodhaḥ—anger; tathā—
and; lobhaḥ—greed; nāśanam —they cause the destruction;
ātmanaḥ—of the soul; tasmāt —therefore; tyajet —one
should give up; etat —these; trayam —three.

There are three gates leading to hell: lust, anger and
greed. They cause the destruction of the ātmā, and
therefore, one should completely abandon them.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The āsurika qualities have now been explained in detail.
“O Arjuna, do not grieve, since you have been born with
daivika qualities” (Gītā 16.5). This statement is
certainly correct. These evil effects (lust, anger and
greed) are natural only for the asuras , therefore, Śrī
Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the word tri-
vidham .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The āsurika qualities described above are both self-
destructive and the gateways to hell. Three of these
qualities—lust, anger and greed—are the root of all
other āsurika qualities. Therefore, every human being
who desires his own welfare should give them up
completely. Despite their various endeavours, it is not
even possible for the karmīs , jñ ānīs or yogīs to
control these tendencies, but a śuddha-bhakta , by the
influence of sādhu-saṅga , easily engages these three
enemies in the service of Śrī Hari, and displays an
extraordinary example of controlling them.


                             800
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 22



etair vimuktaḥ kaunteya

tamo-dvārais tribhir naraḥ

ācaraty ātmanaḥ śreyas

tato yāti parāṁ gatim


kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; naraḥ—a man; vimuktaḥ—
liberated; etaiḥ—from these; tribhiḥ—three; tamo-dvāraiḥ
—gates to hell; ācarati—practises; śreyaḥ—welfare work;
ātma naḥ—for the soul; tataḥ—thereafter; yāti —he
enters; parām —the supreme; gatim —destination.

O Kaunteya, one who is liberated from these three
gateways to hell acts for the welfare of his own ātmā.
Thereafter, he attains the supreme destination.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “Becoming free from
these three gateways to darkness, a person should act
for the upliftment of his ātmā. Only then will he
achieve the supreme destination.” The import is that by
practising dharma and following a regulated life as a
means of self-purification, one attains kṛṣṇa-bhakti ,
the supreme destination. The jīva can only attain a
fearless position as a result of his purified existence
(freedom from material bondage) when there is a proper
relationship between pure work (karma ) and pure
knowledge as a means and an end, as described in śāstra.
This is how mukti functions as a maidservant of Bhakti-
devī.”




Śloka 23



yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya

varttate kāma-cārataḥ

na sa siddhim avāpnoti

na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim

                             801
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



saḥ—he; yaḥ—who; utsṛjya —puts aside; śāstra-vidhim —the
codes of śāstra ; varttate —behaving; kāma-cārataḥ—by
the influence of desire; na avāpnoti —neither attains;
siddhim —perfection; na —nor; sukham —happiness; na —
nor; parām —the supreme; gatim —destination.

He who discards the injunctions of śāstra, and acts
according to his whimsical desires, attains neither
perfection, happiness, nor the supreme destination.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




To be devoted to Bhagavān is most auspicious. For this
purpose, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with
the word yaḥ. Kāma-cārataḥ means to act whimsically, and
it leads one to hell. Only the theists are sādhus and
only they attain the supreme destination. Those who are
atheists go to hell. This is the essence of this
chapter.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the Sixteenth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives pleasure to
the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly persons.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Unrestrained people who disregard the codes of śāstra
cannot attain the highest destination. It is stated in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.101): śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-
pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir utpātāyaiva kalpate

Although engaged in aikāntika-bhakti to Śrī Hari, if one
transgresses the regulations mentioned in the śruti,
smṛti, Purāṇas, and the Nārada-Pa ñcar ātra, great
misgivings (anarthas) are produced.




Śloka 24



tasmāc chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te

kāryākārya-vyavasthitau

                           802
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


jñātvā śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ

karma karttum ihārhasi


tasmāt—therefore; śāstram—śāstra (is); te —your;
pramāṇam —authority; vyavasthita —related to; kārya —
proper; (and) akārya —improper duty; jñ ātvā—by knowing;
uktam —what is spoken; vidhāna —concerning the precepts
of spiritual practice; śāstra —in the Vedic scriptures;
arhasi —you should; karttum —perform; karma —your work;
iha —in this world.

Śāstra, therefore, is the only authority concerning what
is correct and incorrect behaviour. Regarding your
dharma, you should perform all your actions in
realisation of the essence of śāstra.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Having learned the injunctions of śāstra, it is proper
for those who desire eternal auspiciousness to cultivate
bhakti to Śrī Hari under the guidance of the guru-varga
, according to their respective adhikāra . It is not
spiritually favourable for an intelligent person to act
against the codes of śāstra , and consider as
authoritative the imaginary ideas of so-called
instructors who are glorified by non-devotees. Only the
śrutis are authoritative in verifying what is correct or
incorrect behaviour, because they are apauruṣeyā (not
composed by any human being), and are free from the four
defects such as bhrama (illusion) and pramāda
(negligence). The instructions of a person who has the
four defects, of illusion, negligence, imperfect senses
and the desire to cheat others are not authoritative.

Special Instruction: The root offence of the jīva is the
misuse of his free will, and his subsequent aversion to
the service of Śrī Bhagavān. Th erefore, māyā, who is
like a maidservant of Bhagavān, causes the jīva’s
bondage. Being bound by māyā, the jīva gives up that
sāttvika nature which enables him to understand
Bhagavān. Thus, by accepting tāmasika qualities, the
jīva becomes āsurika . At that time, many offences
manifest, such as criticising sādhus ; maintaining the
conception that there are many gods, or that there is no
God; disobeying the guru ; disregarding the śāstra ;
thinking that the glory of bhakti as described in śāstra
is false; proposing that karma and jñ āna are bhakti ;
not having faith in bhakti ; and instructing bhakti to
unqualified people.

This chapter teaches that, after giving up this āsurika
nature, it is obligatory to engage in the practice of
the nine types of bhakti with faith, following the
principles described in śāstra .


                            803
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Therefore, only śāstra is authoritative in determining
correct and incorrect behaviour. The conclusion of
śāstra is that one should perform bhakti . Knowing t
his, you will become qualified to lead an active
devotional life. Theists attain the supreme destination
by having faith in Bhagavān, and the faithless atheist
goes to hell. This is the meaning of this chapter.”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the Sixteenth
Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Seventeen




Śraddhā-Traya-Vibhāga-Yoga

Yoga Through Discerning the Three Types of Faith




Śloka 1




arjuna uvāca —

ye śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya

yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

teṣāṁ niṣṭhā tu kā kṛṣṇa

sattvam āho rajas tamaḥ


arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; kā—what; tu —
indeed (is); niṣṭhā—the attachment; teṣām —of those; ye
—who; utsṛjya —giving up; śāstra-vidhim —the injunctions
of śāstra ; yajante —worship; śra ddhayā anvitāḥ—with
faith; (is it?) sattvam —goodness; rajaḥ—passion; āho —
or; tamaḥ—darkness.

Arjuna inquired: O Kṛṣṇa, what is the position of those
who ignore the injunctions of śāstra, but still perform
worship with faith? Are they sāttvika, rājasika or
tāmasika?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                             804
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



In this Seventeenth Chapter, Śrī Bhagavān gives an
explanation about that which is sāttvika, rājasika and
tāmasika , in response to Arjuna’s question. Arjuna
says, “After You described the nature of the asuras ,
You said that those who transgress the injunctions of
śāstra and act whimsically do not attain perfection,
happiness, or the supreme destination (Gītā 16.23). Now
I have a question. What is the niṣṭhā (basis of faith)
of those who stop following the injunctions of the śāstr
a and whimsically perform yajñas such as tapa , jñ āna
and japa , with a mood that is free from enjoyment and
endowed with faith? What is their niṣṭhā? Is it sāttvika
, rājasika or tāmasika ? Please explain this.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura comments that upon hearing
the conclusion of the last chapter, Arjuna said, “O
Kṛṣṇa, I have a doubt. Previously (in Gītā 4.39), You
said that only men with faith achieve jñ āna . Then (in
Gītā 16.23), You said that those who give up following
the injunctions of śāstra and engage in karma , impelled
by mundane desiresÇ do not attain perfection, happiness,
or the supreme goal. My question is: what is their
position if the faith they cultivate is opposed to
śāstra ? Do people whose faith is so whimsical achieve
sattva-saṁśuddhi (the purification of their existence),
which is the result of jñ āna-yoga and other yogic
processes? Please tell me clearly about the niṣṭhā of
those who give up the injunctions of śāstra , but who
worship with faith. Is it sāttv ika , rājasika or
tāmasika ?”




Śloka 2




śrī bhagavān uvāca —

tri-vidhā bhavati śraddhā

dehināṁ sā svabhāva-jā

sāttvikī rājasī caiva

tāmasī ceti tāṁ śṛṇu


śrī bhagavān uvāca—the all-opulent Supreme Lord said;
śraddhā—the faith; dehinām —of embodied beings; bhavati
—is; tri-vidhā—of three kinds; (in) sāttvikī—goodness;

                            805
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

rājasī—passion; ca —and; eva —certainly; tāmasī—
ignorance; sā—that (faith); (is) svabhāva-jā—born of
one’s own nature; ca —and; śṛṇu —now hear; iti —about;
tām —that.

Śrī Bhagavān said: The faith of embodied beings is of
three types: sāttvika, rājasika or tāmasika. It is
determined by past life impressions. Now hear about
this.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“O Arjuna, first hear about the niṣṭhā of those who
perform bhajana in accordance with the codes of śāstra .
I will then speak about the niṣṭhā of those whose
worship is in violation of those rules. The word sva-
bhāva-jā means śraddhā which is born of past
impressions. It is also of three types.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Some think that it is painful and difficult to follow
the injunctions of śāstra, while others give up
following them out of laziness and whimsically worship
various devas with laukika-śraddhā (mundane faith) which
has arisen from past life impressions. The faith of
these people is of three types: sāttvika , rājasika and
tāmasika . However, faith which is aimed at cultivating
bhagavad-bhakti under the guidance of śuddha-bhaktas ,
who are well versed in śāstra , is nirguṇa. There is
something to consider in this regard. In the initial
stages, the faith of a bhaktisādhaka may be in sattva-
guṇa , but by the influence of sādhus , it very quickly
becomes firmly fixed as nirguṇa-śraddhā. At that time,
while meticulously following the rules and regulations
of śāstra , if one engages with strong faith in śra vaṇa
, kīrtana and smaraṇa of hari-nāma and hari-kathā, he
begins his progress on the path of bhakti .




Śloka 3



sattvānurūpā sarvasya

śraddhā bhavati bhārata

śraddhāmayo ‘yaṁ puruṣo

                           806
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva saḥ


bhārata—O scion of Bhārata; śraddhā—faith; bhavati —is
(determined); anurūpā—in accordance; sattva —with the
state of existence; sarvasya —of all beings; ayam —the;
puruṣaḥ—person (soul); (is known as) śraddhāmayaḥ—filled
with faith; (he) yaḥ—who; (has) yat-śraddhaḥ—whichever
object of faith; saḥ—he; (has) eva saḥ—that very same
(nature).

O Bhārata, everyone’s faith is determined by the
disposition of his mind. All people possess faith, and
in whatever worshipable object they place that faith,
they develop a corresponding disposition.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Sattvam refers to the internal sense, citta (the heart).
It is of three types: sāttvika , rājasika and tāmasika .
The faith of a person whose citta is sāttvika is also
sāttvika ; the faith of one whose citta is rājasika is
rājasika , and one whose citta is tāmasik a has tāmasika
faith. Yac-chraddhaḥ means that one’s nature develops
according to his worshipable object. This means that a
person’s nature corresponds with the nature of those he
worships, be they devas , asuras or rākṣasas .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




A jīva’s inherent asset is the śraddhā or rati he has in
his śuddha-svarūpa (constitutional position). That
inherent śraddhā in his svarūpa is related to Bhagavān
only, and is unquestionably nirguṇa. However, in the
bound state, the constitutional nature of the jīva
becomes distorted. When the jīva associates with prakṛti
, the result is that he performs either auspicious or
inauspicious activities. That distorted faith, known as
sāttvika , rājasika or tāmasika , corresponds to
whichever worshipable deity his faith is directed
toward.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Bhārata, everyone has faith. A person expresses his
faith according to the disposition of his mind, and his
nature develops according to the nature of the deity he
has placed his faith in. The reality is that because the
jīva is constitutionally My aṁśa (part), he is
therefore, nirguṇa. That jīva who has forgotten his
relationship with Me has become saguṇa (bound by the
guṇas ). He has acquired that saguṇa nature as a result

                           807
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

of his aversion to Me since time immemorial. It is this
aversion which forms the nature or disposition of his
citta (heart). This citta is called sattva , and when it
is purified, fearlessness results. The faith of the
purified citta is the seed of nirguṇa-bhakti. The faith
of the impure heart is saguṇa , bound by the modes. As
long as this faith does not become nirguṇa or aim at
nirguṇa (Bhagavān), it is called kāma , or passion,
which is saguṇa . I am now explaining saguṇa-śraddhā
(faith within the guṇas symptomised by material
desires). Please listen.”




Śloka 4



yajante sāttvikā devān

yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ

pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye

yajante tāmasā janāḥ


sāttvikāḥ—those in goodness; yajante—worship; devān —the
devas ; rājasāḥ—those in passion; (worship) yakṣa-
rakṣāṁsi —witches and demons; janāḥ—persons; ca —and;
anye —others; tāmasāḥ—in darkness; yajante —worship;
pretān —ghosts; (and) bhūta-gaṇān —spirits.

Persons in sattva-guṇa worship the devas, who are of a
similar mode. Those in rajo-guṇa worship the yakṣas and
rākṣasas, who also have similar passionate natures, and
those in tamo-guṇa worship ghosts and spirits, who are
similar in nature to themselves.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the guṇas in detail.
Previously, He only briefly mentioned them. Those with a
sāttvika citta (mind) are endowed with sāttvika śraddhā
and worship the sāttvika devatās according to the
injunctions of sāttvika śāstras . They have faith in the
devas and for this reason they are also called devatās
(because they develop the same nature and qualities).
The same principle applies to those whose minds are
rājasika and tāmasika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti


                            808
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




In this śloka, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the varieties
of laukikī (mundane) śraddhā of persons who worship the
various devas. According to śāstra , Śrī Bhagavān is the
only worshipable entity. However, the faith of those who
worship various devas and other entities is impelled by
various types of laukikī desires, and is of three kinds:
sāttvika , rājasika and tāmasika . Those who have
sāttvika śraddhā worship devas such as Brahmā, Śiva,
Indra, Candra and Sūrya. Similarly, those whose śraddhā
is rājasika worship Durgā, yakṣas , rākṣasas and so on,
and those who possess tāmasika śraddhā worship ghosts
and spirits. Sometimes it is seen that the three types
of people in the three different modes worship the same
deva . For example, Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛṣi’s worship of Lord
Śiva at the time of devastation was sāttvika.
Kāgabhuṣuṇḍijī’s worship of Śiva was also sāttvika. As a
result of their sātt vika worship, Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛṣi
remained alive for one kalpa and acquired knowledge of
the creation of the universe, etc., and Kāgabhuṣuṇḍi
attained bhakti unto Bhagavān Śrī Rāmacandra. The
worship of Lord Śiva performed by Bāṇāsura and Rāvaṇa,
etc., is rājas ika , and the worship by Bhasmāsura,
etc., is tāmasika . Durgā devī is also worshipped by
those with sāttvika , rājasika or tāmasika śraddhā.
However, by the influence of saintly association,
tāmasika śraddhā can be transformed into rājasika
śraddhā, rājasika into sāttvika and sāttvika into
nirguṇa śraddhā.

The śraddhā of nirviśeṣa-vādīs is also sāttvika . They
consider brahma to be formless and featureless.
Therefore, they accept the forms of five devatas to be
imaginary and worship them. In this way, they endeavour
to purify their citta and attain jñ āna .




Ślokas 5-6




aśāstra-vihitaṁ ghoraṁ

tapyante ye tapo janāḥ

dambhāhaṅkāra-saṁyuktāḥ

kāma-rāga-balānvitāḥ

karśayantaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ

bhūta-grāmam acetasaḥ

māṁ caivāntaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ

tān viddhy āsura-niścayān



                             809
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

janāḥ—persons; ye—who; (are) saṁyuktāḥ—engaged; dambha -
ahaṅkāra —in pride and false ego; (and) anvitāḥ—absorbed
in; kāma —desire; rāga —attachment; bala —strength;
acetasaḥ—who are not discriminating; tapyante—perform;
ghoram —terrible; tapaḥ—austerity; aśāstra—vihitam —not
enjoined in śāstra ; karśayantaḥ—they inflict pain;
bhūta-grāmam —on the elements; śarīra-stham —situated
within the body; ca —and; mām —to Me; antaḥ śarīra-stham
—situated within the body; eva —certainly; viddhi —you
should know; tān—those; (to be) āsura-niścayān —
certified as demons.

Out of pride and egotism, some people perform severe
austerities which are not recommended in śāstra.
Motivated by lust, mundane attachment and desire for
power, they inflict pain not only on the elements of the
body, but also upon Me situated within. Such persons are
to be recognised as asuras.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Kṛṣṇa said, “O Arjuna! You have asked about the status
of those who discard the injunctions of śāstra, yet
perform worship endowed with śraddhā; are they sāttvika
, rājasika or tāmasika ? Now hear My reply in the two
ślokas beginning with the word aśāstra . Faith and the
renunciation of selfish desires are visible in those who
perform severe, tortuous austerities, which create fear
within all living beings, and other acts such as
unauthorised japa-yajña , but such people are bereft of
tattvajñ āna . Those who are proud and egotistical will
surely violate the rules of śāstra . Kāma refers to
desires such as remaining young forever, being immortal
and desiring a kingdom. Rāg a means attachment to one’s
austerities, and bala means the capacity to perform
austerities like Hiraṇyakaśipu. From the very beginning
of their austerities, such persons torture the bhūta-
grāmam (group of elements such as earth) which are
situated in the body, and cause unnecessary pain to Me
as well as to My aṁśa , the jīva . Such persons have
āsurika dispositions.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here Śrī Kṛṣṇa is telling Arjuna that those who
disregard śāstra and perform severe austerities, such as
fasting to fulfil their material desires, are not
included amongst those who perform the sāttvika ,
rājasika and tāmasika activities explained previously.
Such people are very unfortunate. Being influenced by
the association of pretenders, they perform severe
austerities which intimidate common people, and which

                           810
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

are not recommended in the śāstra. Austerities such as
worthless, painful fasts, offering one’s body or flesh
in yajña , offering a human being in yajña (nara-bali ),
offering animals in yajña (pa śu-bali ) and other such
violent acts cause pain to one’s self (ātmā) and also to
Paramātmā. Such people who possess a cruel nature should
be considered āsurika . At the present time, some people
observe fasts which are not recommended in śāstra out of
selfish or political interests. The provision for fasts
given in the śāstra is only for the purpose of attaining
the transcendental goal, and not for political or social
purposes. On ekādaśī, there is a provision to fast from
everything, even from water (nirjala-vrata) , and to
remain awake performing hari-kīrtana throughout the
night (rātri-jāgaraṇa ). Nowadays, people perform rātri-
jāgaraṇa by eating flesh, drinking wine and singing
vulgar and contemptible songs. In this way, they violate
the rules of śāstra . Such rātri-jāgaraṇa is not
included within the three types of śraddhā, and is
miserable. These fasts and jāgaraṇas do not benefit
anyone. In fact, such activities are performed out of
the pride and ego born from excessive attachment to
material desires and sense enjoyment. They also cause
unnecessary pain to the body and disturb one’s inner
peace as well as the peace of others. Sometimes persons
even die from performing these fanatical austerities and
fasts. While wandering repeatedly in the āsurika species
of life, they receive only misery. But, if by the will
of providence, they receive the association of a śuddha-
bhakta , they can receive some benefit. Examples of this
are Nalakūvera and Maṇigrīva.




Śloka 7



āhāras tv api sarvasya

tri-vidho bhavati priyaḥ

yajñas tapas tathā dānaṁ

teṣāṁ bhedam imaṁ śṛṇu


tu—indeed; api—even; āhāraḥ—the food; sarvasya —of all
living beings; bhavati —is; priyaḥ—dear; tri-vidhaḥ—
according to the three qualities; (this is) tathā—also;
(true of) yajñaḥ—sacrifice; tapaḥ—austerity; (and) dānam
—charity; śṛṇu —now hear; imam —this; bhedam —division;
teṣām —of them.

The food which different people like is of three kinds,
depending on their qualities. The same is true of
sacrifice, austerity and charity. Now hear of the
distinctions between them.




                           811
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those who discard the injunctions of śāstra and act
whimsically enter the āsurika species of life. This was
mentioned in the previous chapter. Those of an āsurika
nature who worship yakṣas , rākṣasas and spirits, also
enter the āsurika species of life as stated in this
chapter. One can categorise people as divine or demoniac
according to the type of food they eat. This will be
explained in thirteen consecutive ślokas beginning here
with the words āhāras tu.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Having explained the three categories of śraddhā,
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa describes specific food, yajñas and
so forth corresponding to each of them. Those who are of
a particular mode are inclined to food, sacrifices,
austerities and charities in the same mode. Nowadays,
some people imagine that food has no relationship with
dharma , while others think that protecting and
maintaining the body is the basis of all dharma :
śarīram ādyaṁ khalu dharma sādhanam. Hence, one should
note that those who accept sense enjoyment as the only
purpose of human life feel great satisfaction in
drinking wine and eating meat, eggs and even cow-flesh.
Fortunately, some people have understood that the
tendency for sense enjoyment has caused the jīvas’
bondage to māyā, and because of it they are undergoing
so much misery, life after life. For those who want to
become free from all miseries, it is imperative that
they give up their desire to indulge in sense enjoyment.
Only people who have developed such awareness in this
human life understand the need to accept pure, sāttvika
food. In order to cross beyond the three guṇas of māyā,
they first try to overcome tamo-guṇa with rajo-guṇa ,
then rajo-guṇa with sattva-guṇa , and finally mundane
sattva-guṇa with nirguṇa (śuddha-sattva ). Sādhu and
śāstra state that control of the mind is indeed the root
of all dharma . The body’s nearest relative is the mind,
and thus one’s inclination of mind becomes good or bad
depending on the type of food one takes. This is visible
everywhere. Most people in the world today consume
inedible and āsurika foodstuffs and indulge in acts of
illicit sex, cheating, duplicity and violence. At
present, proper moral conduct (sad-ācāra ) is rarely
seen. Therefore, after careful consideration, those who
are wise should only accept such foodstuffs which
nourish the body and the function of the pure
intelligence. For this reason, Śrī Bhagavān has
described the three types of foodstuffs which represent
the three modes. Those who aim to adopt sattva-guṇa ,
are seen to become disinterested in rājasika and
tāmasika food and interested in sāttvika foods only.


                           812
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

While commenting on this śloka, Śrī Rāmānujācārya has
cited two evidences from śruti. (1) Annamayam hi saumya-
manaḥ. “One who eats grains will have a peaceful mind.”
(2) Āhāra-śuddhau sattv a-śuddhiḥ. “If one’s food is
pure, then one’s existence becomes purified.” The śrutis
have also cautioned us that the purity of the mind
depends upon the purity of the food. This can be easily
understood by these proofs. We must, therefore, give up
all food which śāstra prohibits. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself has
explained this very clearly in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.25.28): pathyaṁ pūtam anāyas tam

āhāryaṁ sāttvikaṁ smṛtam

rājasaṁ cendriya-preṣṭhaṁ

tāmasaṁ cārtti-dāśuci


Food which is wholesome, pure and obtained without
difficulty is sāttvika. That which is very pungent, sour
and salty and meant only for the gratification of the
senses is rājasika, and food which is impure is
tāmasika. But that food which is approved of by śāstra
and offered to Me is nirguṇa.

From the word ca in this śloka (11.25.28), both Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī
have concluded that food which is offered to Bhagavān is
nirguṇa. Those who violate these instructions and accept
any type of impure food based on their fancy must be in
the āsurika class.




Śloka 8




āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya—

sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ

rasyāḥ snigdhāḥ sthirā-hṛdyā

āhārāḥ sāttvika-priyāḥ


āhārāḥ—foods; vivardhanāḥ—which augment; āyuḥ—life;
sattva —enthusiasm; bala —strength; ārogya —good health;
sukha —happiness; prīti —satisfaction; (and which are)
rasyāḥ—tasty; snigdhāḥ—fattening; sthirāḥ—sustaining;
(and) hṛdyāḥ—heartening; (are) sāttvika-priyāḥ—dear to
those situated in goodness.

Foods which augment life, enthusiasm, strength, good
health, happiness and satisfaction, which are tasty,
fattening, substantially nourishing and agreeable to the
heart and stomach, are dear to sāttvika people.



                            813
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                        5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In this world, it is a well-known fact that by eating
sāttvika food, one’s duration of life increases. The
word sattvam means enthusiasm. Rasyā refers to
substances like guḍa (gur ) which although tasty (rasyā)
are dry. Śrī Bhagavān then refers to foods like milk and
cream, which are both tasty (rasyā) and fatty (snigdhā)
but not solid (sthirāḥ). He then refers to foods that
are rasyā, snigdhā and sthirāḥ, such as jackfruit.
Although jackfruit fits into the above categories, it is
not good for the heart and stomach; therefore, Śrī
Bhagavān specifically mentions food that is beneficial
for the heart as wel l as the belly. Cow products like
milk and yogurt, as well as wheat, sugar and rice have
the characteristics of sattva and are liked by sāttvika
people. This should be understood. Sāttvika people do
not like impure food, even if it has the above-mentioned
characteristics, so the adjective pavitra (pure) applies
to this śloka. In Gītā (17.10), the adjective amedhya
(impure) is used for people who like food in tamo-guṇa .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the present śloka, Śrī Bhagavān is informing Arjuna
that according to the grade of foodstuffs consumed,
there is a corresponding guṇa . Generally, a person who
desires his own welfare accepts only sāttvika food.
Sāttvika food is favourable for the execution of dharma
because it is pure. It is not only good for the health
but it increases the duration of life. Such pure food is
auspicious in every respect as it purifies the body and
mind. It is easy to distinguish the difference between
the effect on the mind of drinking milk and that of
drinking wine. People are giving up taking sāttvika food
due to bad association, improper knowledge and lack of
proper saṁskāras.




Śloka 9




kaṭv-amla-lavaṇāty-uṣṇatīkṣṇa-rukṣa-vidāhinaḥ

āhārā rājasasyeṣṭā

duḥkha-śokāmaya-pradāḥ


                           814
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


āhārāḥ—foods; (that are very) kaṭu—bitter; amla —sour;
lavaṇa —salty; aty-uṣṇa —very hot; tīkṣṇa —pungent;
rukṣa —dry; vidāhinaḥ—burning; pradāḥ—they give; duḥkha
—pain; śoka —grief; (and) āmaya —disease; iṣṭāḥ—dear;
rājasasya —to the person in passion.

Foods which are very bitter, sour, salty, spicy,
pungent, dry and burning, and which give rise to pain,
grief and disease, are liked by people of a rājasika
nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word ati (very) is used with seven words, the first
being kaṭu . Foods that are very bitter (like neem),
very sour, very salty, very spicy and very pungent (like
radish), spices such as black pepper or those which are
very dry (like asafoetida), or very burning (like
roasted black gram ) are the cause of pain, disease and
grief. Here, the word duḥkha (pain) refers to the
instant misery caused to the eyes, throat and so forth
while eating, and the word śoka (grief) refers to the
anxiety about reactions to come. The word āmaya means
disease.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




One immediately gets a burning sensation in the tongue,
throat and belly by eating rājasika foodstuffs, and wind
and indigestion follow. Later, the mind becomes restless
due to unpleasant thoughts and anxiety, and various
types of diseases develop. In this way, life becomes
miserable. Aside from this, the mind becomes distracted
from dharmika activities and disinterested in them as a
result of eating these rājasika foodstuffs. People of a
sāttvika nature, therefore, do not accept such food.




Śloka 10




yātayāmaṁ gata-rasaṁ

pūti paryuṣitaṁ ca yat

ucchiṣṭam api cāmedhyaṁ

                           815
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


bhojanaṁ tāmasa-priyam


bhojanam—food; yat—which; (is) tāmasa-priyam —dear to
those in the quality of darkness; (is) yāta-yāmam —
spoiled; gata-rasam —without taste; pūti —putrid;
paryuṣitam —stale; ca —and; ucchiṣṭam —partly eaten; api
ca —and also; amedhyam —impure.

Tāmasika people like food which is cooked more than
three hours before being eaten and which is cold,
tasteless, putrid, stale, partly eaten or rejected and
impure.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word yāta-yāmam means food that has been cooked
three hours prior to being eaten and that has become
cold. Gata-rasam means that which has lost its natural
taste, or that from which the juice has been extracted,
like the peel or stone of a mango. Pūti means putrid.
Paryuṣitam means that which was cooked the previous day.
Ucchiṣṭam means someone’s remnants. This does not refer
to the remnants of highly respected people such as those
in the guru-varga . Amedhya means that which is not fit
to be consumed, like meat or tobacco. Therefore, those
who are concerned about their own welfare should eat
only sāttvika food. Vaiṣṇavas, however, should not even
accept sāttvika food if it is not offered to Bhagavān.
It is understood from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that food which
is offered to Bhagavān is nirguṇa. This alone is dear to
the bhaktas .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The purpose of food is to keep the body healthy and
strong, make the mind pure, increase the lifespan and
engage a person in his spiritual welfare. In ancient
times, those who were learned and wise would accept only
food that kept them healthy and increased their life
span. Milk, yogurt, sugar, rice, wheat, fruit and
vegetables are dear to sāttvika people.

Many people think that there is no harm in eating foods
such as meat and wine that they have offered in their
worship of the devatās . Although śāstra makes provision
for such acts, people do not perform them in accordance
with these provisions. The provision in śāstra for
killing animals or drinking wine in yajña is actually
for extremely tāmasika people who are completely
attached to sense indulgence. It is a temporary

                           816
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

arrangement to expertly bring them to the platform of
abstention from such acts. This is also confirmed in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.11):


loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā

nityā hi jantor na hi tatra codanā

vyavasthitis teṣu vivāha-yajña

surā-grahair āsu nivṛttir iṣṭā


It is seen that people in the material world have a
natural inclination towards drinking wine, eating meat
and having sex. Yet śāstra never encourages these
activities. To some extent, provision has been granted
for sex-life within a sanctified marriage, and for
eating meat and drinking wine in a yajña called
śautrāmaṇi. The purpose is to control such people’s
unrestrained natures, and fix them within the boundary
of morality. The actual, deep import of the Vedas is to
encourage people to completely give up these activities.

Furthermore, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.13) says:

yad ghrāṇa-bhakṣo vihitaḥ surāyās

tathā paśor ālabhanaṁ na hiṁsā

Śāstra ordains the smelling of wine at the time of a
yajña, but not the drinking of it, and only for the
above-mentioned purpose of gradually attaining complete
renunciation. In the same way, śāstra does not authorise
anyone to kill an animal and eat meat. It permits one to
touch the animal only and then release it.

Some people think that, although it is sinful to eat
meat, no sin is incurred in eating fish because fish are
like the flowers or fruits of the water. However, Manu-
saṁhitā completely forbids the eating of fish:


yo yasya māṁsam aśnāti

sa tan-māṁsād ucyate

matsyādaḥ sarva-māṁsādas

tasmān matsyān vivarjayet


Those who eat the meat of a particular animal are known
as eaters of that particular animal, but those who eat
fish eat the meat of everything, because a fish eats the
meat of all living entities such as cows and pigs. It
even consumes rotten things. Those who eat fish actually
eat the meat of all beings.

Eating fish should, therefore, be abandoned entirely.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.14) further states:


                            817
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


ye tv anevaṁ-vido ‘santaḥ

stabdhāḥ sad-abhimāninaḥ

paśūn druhyanti visrabdhāḥ

pretya khādanti te ca tān


Intoxicated by their false ego, those who are ignorant
of dharmika principles are not perceptive. Such tāmasika
people who fearlessly eat animals after killing them
will be eaten by those same animals in their next life.

Regarding the meaning of the word māṁsa (meat), Manu-
saṁhitā says:


māṁ sa bhakṣayitāmutra

yasya māṁsam ihādmy aham

etan māṁsasya māṁsatvaṁ

pravadanti manīṣiṇaḥ


The word māṁsa means: ‘That which I am eating here, will
eat me in my next life.’ For this reason, the learned
say that meat is called māṁsa (a repeated act: I eat
him; he eats me).

Here it should also be understood that eating sāttvika
food enhances one’s sattva , goodness. But even this
mode is not completely free from sin, because there is
also life in creepers, vegetables, plants and trees. A
touch of sin also remains in the preparation of
vegetarian food because, to some degree, it involves
violence. For this reason, śuddha-bhaktas accept only
food which has been offered to Bhagavān (mahāprasāda ).
Mahāprasāda is the only food fit to be eaten, because it
is nirguṇa and completely free from sin. Food that has
not been offered should be shunned totally. This is also
written in the Brahma-vaivarta and the Padma Purāṇa :
annaṁ viṣtḥā jalaṁ mūtraṁ yad viṣṇor anivedanam. “Taking
food and water which is not offered to Śrī Viṣṇu is
compared to eating stool and drinking urine.”




Śloka 11



aphalākāṅkṣibhir yajño

vidhi-diṣṭo ya ijyate

yaṣṭavyam eveti manaḥ

samādhāya sa sāttvikaḥ

                             818
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



saḥ—that; yajñaḥ—sacrifice; yaḥ—which; ijyate —is
performed; samādhāya —resolving; (in) manaḥ—the mind;
iti —that; yaṣṭ-avyam —sacrifice is obligatory; vidhi-
diṣṭaḥ—which is directed by the injunctions of śāstra ;
(and) aphala-ākāṅkṣibhiḥ—without desires for results;
(is) eva —certainly; sāttvikaḥ—in goodness.

The performance of yajña is obligatory. With such
resolution of mind, yajña which is executed according to
the direction of śāstra, and without expectation of
reward, is sāttvika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now Śrī Bhagavān is describing the three types of yajña.
If one questions how one will engage in yajña without
expecting the results, then Śrī Bhagavān says, “He
performs the yajña by concluding that because it is his
duty and is also prescribed in the śāstra , its
performance is imperative.”




Śloka 12




abhisandhāya tu phalaṁ

dambhārtham api caiva yat

ijyate bharata-śreṣṭha

taṁ yajñaṁ viddhi rājasam


tu—however; bharata-śreṣṭha—best of Bharata’s line;
viddhi —you should understand; tam —that; yajñam —the
sacrifice; yat —which; ijyate —is performed;
abhisandhāya —with attachment; phalam —for the results;
api ca —and also; dambha-artham —out of pride; (is) eva
—certainly; rājasam —in the quality of passion.

O best of the Bharata dynasty, that yajña which is
executed with the desire for its fruit, and which is
pretentiously and pompously performed, is rājasika.




Śloka 13


                            819
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




vidhi-hīnam asṛṣṭānnaṁ

mantra-hīnam adakṣiṇam

śraddhā-virahitaṁ yajñaṁ

tāmasaṁ paricakṣate


yajñam—that sacrifice; vidhi-hīnam—disregarding the
precepts of śāstra ; asṛṣṭa —where there is no
distribution; annam —of grains (prasādam ); mantra -
hīnam —without the utterance of mantras ; adakṣiṇam —
where no gifts are given to the priests; śraddhā-
virahitam —which (is performed) without faith;
paricakṣate —is condemned; tāmasam —in the quality of
darkness.

That yajña which disregards the injunctions of śastra,
where no prasādam is distributed, no Vedic mantras are
chanted, no gifts are given to the priests, and which is
performed without śraddhā, is condemned by the learned
as tāmasika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Asṛṣṭānnam means without distribution of prasādam.




Śloka 14




deva-dvija-guru-prājña-

pūjanaṁ śaucam ārjavam

brahmacaryam ahiṁsā ca

śārīraṁ tapa ucyate


tapaḥ—austerity; śārīram—of the body; ucyate —is said to
be; pūjanam —worship; deva —of the gods; dvija —the
brāhmaṇas ; guru —the spiritual preceptors; prāj ña —the
wise; śaucam —cleanliness; ārjavam —simplicity;
brahmacaryam —celibacy; ca —and; ahiṁsā—non-violence.

Austerities related to the body include worship of the
devatās, the brāhmaṇas, gurus, persons with a thorough
understanding of the Absolute, and observance of

                           820
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and non-violence.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Tapasya is of three types. To explain this, Śrī Bhagavān
first explains sāttvika tapasyā in three consecutive
ślokas , the first beginning with deva-dvija.




Śloka 15




anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ

satyaṁ priya-hitaṁ ca yat

svādhyāyābhyasanaṁ caiva

vāṅ-mayaṁ tapa ucyate


vākyam—speech; yat—which; anudvega-karam —does not cause
agitation; satyam —which is true; ca —and; priya-hitam —
beneficial; ca —also; abhyasanam—the practice; svādhyāya
—of recitation of the Vedas (and related śāstra ); eva —
certainly; ucyate —is said to be; tapaḥ—austerity; vāṅ-
mayam —of speech.

Words which cause no agitation and which are truthful,
pleasing and beneficial, as well as the practice of
reciting the Vedas, are all said to be austerities of
speech.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Anudvega-karam means speech which does not cause
agitation to others.




Śloka 16




                            821
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

manaḥ-prasādaḥ saumyatvaṁ

maunam ātma-vinigrahaḥ

bhāva-saṁśuddhir ity etat

tapo mānasam ucyate


etat—the; tapaḥ—austerity; mānasam —of the mind; ucyate
—is said to be; iti —as follows; manaḥ-prasādaḥ—
satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam —gentleness; maunam
—silence; ātma-vinigrahaḥ—discipline of the mind; bhāva
-saṁśuddhiḥ—purity of behaviour.

Austerities of the mind consist of satisfaction,
gentleness, gravity, mental discipline and purity of
behaviour.




Śloka 17




śraddhayā parayā taptaṁ

tapas tat tri-vidhaṁ naraiḥ

aphalākāṅkṣibhir yuktaiḥ

sāttvikaṁ paricakṣate


iha—in this world; tat—this; tri-vidham —threefold;
tapaḥ—austerity; taptam —executed; naraiḥ—by men;
yuktaiḥ—connected with the Supreme Lord; aphala-
ākāṅkṣibhiḥ—without desire for results; parayā—through
transcendental; śraddhayā—faith; paricakṣate —is said to
be; sāttvikam —in the quality of goodness.

This threefold austerity performed by men with
transcendental faith, who are free from the desire for
any mundane reward, is said to be sāttvika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word tri-vidham refers to austerities of body,
speech and mind endowed with the symptoms described
above.




                            822
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śloka 18




satkāra-māna-pūjārthaṁ

tapo dambhena caiva yat

kriyate tad iha proktaṁ

rājasaṁ calam adhruvam


tat—that; tapaḥ—austerity; yat —which; kriyate —is
performed; dambhena —with pride; ca —and; artham —for
the purpose of achieving; satkāra —recognition; māna —
honour; (and) pūjā—adoration; eva —certainly; proktam —
is declared; (to be) rājasam —in the quality of passion;
(it is) calam —temporary; (and) adhruvam —unstable.

That austerity which is performed with pride for the
sake of recognition, honour and adoration is called
rājasika. It is both temporary and uncertain.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word satkāraḥ means to worship someone by flattery,
by telling them that that they are saintly, or honouring
them with flowery words. Māna means bodily worship, such
as standing up to greet a person when he arrives and
following him to the door when he leaves. Pūjā means
mānasī pūjāi.e. when someone accepts one as a sadhu
within his mind, seeing his austerities and thus
worships him by offering wealth, gifts, etc.

The austerities which are performed for these purposes
with pride, are rājasika . The word calam means that
which stays only for a short period, and adhruvam means
that which is temporary.




Śloka 19



mūḍha-grāheṇātmano yat

pīḍayā kriyate tapaḥ

parasyotsādanārthaṁ vā

tat tāmasam udāhṛtam



                           823
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

tat—that; tapaḥ—austerity; yat —which; kriyate —is
performed; mūḍha -grāheṇa —foolishly; pīḍayā—by giving
pain; ātmanaḥ—to one’s self; vā—or; artham —with the
purpose; utsādana —of bringing ruin; parasya —to
another; udāhṛtam —is said to be; tāmasam —in the
quality of darkness.

That austerity which is performed foolishly, which gives
pain to the self, or is intended to cause another’s
ruin, is known as tāmasika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Mūḍha-grāheṇa means foolishly performed. Parasya
utsādanārtham means that the tapasya which is performed
to destroy others is tāmasika .




Śloka 20




dātavyam iti yad dānaṁ

dīyate ‘nupakāriṇe

deśe kāle ca pātre ca

tad dānaṁ sāttvikaṁ smṛtam


dānam—charity; dātavyam—should be given; iti —thus; tat
—that; dānam —charity; yat —which; dīyate —is given;
anupakāriṇe —to one who gives nothing in return; deśe —
at a (proper) place; ca —and; (proper) kāle —time; ca —
and; pātre —to a worthy recipient; smṛtam —is
considered; sāttvikam —in the quality of goodness.

‘Charity should be given as a matter of duty.’ With this
resolve, charity given with no expectation of return, at
a holy place, at an auspicious time and to a worthy
person, is considered to be sāttvika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word dātavyam means charity given out of a sense of
duty to a qualified person at the proper time. Charity
given with expectation of return is not charity.

                             824
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the present śloka, Śrī Bhagavān explains the three
types of charity. He says that charity is sāttvik a if
it is given out of duty and without expectation of any
reward to a person who is selfless and who never
performs activities for his own welfare, or who does not
have the ability to perform welfare for others. In this
regard, it is also necessary to consider the proper
time, place, and person.




Śloka 21




yat tu pratyupakārārthaṁ

phalam uddiśya vā punaḥ

dīyate ca parikliṣṭaṁ

tad dānaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam


tu—but; tat—that; dānam —charity; yat —which; dīyate —is
given; artham —with the purpose; pratyupakāra —of
getting a return; vā—or; uddiśya —demanding; phalam —
some benefit; ca —and; punaḥ—furthermore; parikliṣṭam —
begrudgingly; smṛtam —is said to be; rājasam —in the
quality of passion.

But that charity which is offered with the expectation
of gaining some return or benefit, or which is given
begrudgingly, is said to be rājasika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Parikliṣṭam means that after giving in charity a person
repents, ‘Why have I given so much?’ It also means to
give on the order of superiors, such as the guru ,
although not willing to give. Here the word parikliṣṭam
means that a charitable object or act which is tainted
by such unbeneficial feelings is rājasika .




                           825
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 22



adeśa-kāle yad dānam

apātrebhyaś ca dīyate

asat-kṛtam avajñātaṁ

tat tāmasam udāhṛtam


tat—that; dānam—charity; yat —which; dīyate —is given;
adeśa-kāle —at an improper place and time; ca —and;
apātrebhyaḥ—to unworthy recipients; asat -kṛtam —without
respect; (and) avajñ ātam —with contempt; udāhṛtam —is
said to be; tāmasam—in the quality of darkness.

Charity given at an impure place and an improper time to
an unworthy recipient, in a mood of contempt and
disrespect, is said to be tāmasika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Asat-kāraḥ means the result of disrespect.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Charity which is given at an impure place and improper
time to an unqualified person, like a dancer or
prostitute, to one who does not need it, or to a sinful
person, is tāmasika . Charity which is disrespectfully
given to a worthy person is also tāmasika .




Ślokas 23-24



oṁ tat sad iti nirdeśo

brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥ

brāhmaṇās tena vedāś ca

yajñāś ca vihitāḥ purā

                           826
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


tasmād oṁ ity udāhṛtya

yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ

pravartante vidhānoktāḥ

satataṁ brahmavādinām


smṛtaḥ—it is considered; iti—that; oṁ tat sat —oṁ, tat
and sat ; (are) tri-vidhaḥ—a threefold; nirdeśaḥ—
indication; brahmaṇaḥ—of Supreme brahma ; purā—in
ancient times; brāhmaṇāḥ—the brāhmaṇas ; vedāḥ—the Vedas
; ca —and; yajñ āḥ—sacrifices; vihitāḥ—were created;
tena —by this utterance; tasmāt —therefore;
brahmavādinām —for those who preach the Vedic version;
kriyāḥ—activities; yajña —of sacrifice; dāna —charity;
tapaḥ—and austerity; vidhāna-uktāḥ—as proclaimed
according to ancient precept; iti —thus; satatam —
always; pravartante —take place; udāhṛtya —while
uttering; oṁ—the sacred syllable oṁ.

It is said that oṁ, tat and sat are the three words used
to indicate brahma, the Supreme Absolute Reality.
Brāhmaṇas, the Vedas and yajñas were originally created
from these three words. Therefore, dedicated followers
of the Vedas always commence the performance of
sacrifices, charities, austerities and activities
prescribed in śāstra by uttering the sacred syllable oṁ.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




It is generally explained that every human being can
perform one of the three types of yajña, tapasyā, etc.,
according to his adhikār a . Those who are sāttvika and
those who are brahmavādīs , begin their performance of
yajña with an invocation to brahma . Therefore, Śrī
Bhagavān says that the sādhus remember and honour Him by
the threefold invocation of brahma : oṁ, tat , sat . The
renowned sacred syllable oṁ is prominent amongst these
invocations in all the Vedas , and is certainly the name
of brahma . Tat (brahma ) is well known as the cause of
the universe and it also removes atat (māyā). Sat is
described in the śruti (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.2.1) as
follows: “O gentle one, in the beginning there was only
sat (The Supreme Absolute Eternal Reality).” The
brāhmaṇas , Vedas and a host of yajñas were created
solely from brahma who is represented by the names oṁ,
tat and sat.” Consequently, the current followers of the
Vedas perform yajñas by uttering the sacred syllable oṁ.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti



                           827
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Please listen as I explain the import of these ślokas.
Tapasyā, yajña , dāna and food are each of three types:
sāttvika , rājasika and tāmasika. The faith with which
the conditioned jīvas perform these activities may be
first, second or third class, but it remains
contaminated by the modes and is worthless. These
activities only become purposeful in attaining the stage
of fearlessness (the purification of sattva , existence)
when they are performed with nirguṇa -śraddhā, that is,
with that śraddhā which gives rise to bhakti. It is
ordained throughout śāstra that prescribed duties should
be performed with such transcendental śraddhā. In śāstra
there are three principles which indicate brahma : oṁ,
tat and sat . These three names, which are indicative of
brahma , also describe the brāhmaṇas , the Vedas and
yajñas . Śraddhā in which one neglects the codes of
śāstr a is saguṇa (contaminated by the modes). It does
not aim at nirguṇabrahma in any way and will only give a
material result. Therefore, the essence of śāstra is
transcendental śraddhā. Your doubt about śāstra and
śraddhā is born of ignorance. Followers of the Vedas
perform all their activities as prescribed in śāstra ,
such as yajña , tapasyā and dāna , by chanting the
sacred syllable oṁ which indicates brahma .”




Śloka 25




tad ity anabhisandhāya

phalaṁ yajña-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ

dāna-kriyāś ca vividhāḥ

kriyante mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ


iti—thus; (uttering) tat—the syllable tat ; mokṣa -
kāṅkṣibhiḥ—those desirous of liberation; vividhāḥ—
various kinds; kriyāḥ—of practices; yajña -tapaḥ—of
sacrifice, austerities; ca —and; dāna-kriyāḥ—charity;
kriyante —are done; anabhisandhāya —without attachment;
phalam —to the fruit.


Thus uttering the word tat, those desirous of attaining
mokṣa perform various types of yajña , tapasya and dāna
, renouncing the fruits of their activities .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                            828
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



The activities of yajña, etc., should be performed by
uttering the word tat as described in the previous śloka
. The word anabhisandhāya means that one should perform
various prescribed duties without desiring their fruits.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The word idam refers to this visible world, and tat
refers to brahma (reality) which is beyond this world.
Yajñas must only be performed for the purpose of
attaining para-tattva .




Śloka 26




sad-bhāve sādhu-bhāve ca

sad ity etat prayujyate

praśaste karmaṇi tathā

sac-chabdaḥ pārtha yujyate


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; etat—this (word); sat—the word
sat ; prayujyate —is used; iti —thus; sat-bhāve —in the
sense of brahma (the Supreme Absolute Truth); ca —and;
sādhu-bhāve —in the sense of the sādhu , the devotee of
brahma ; tathā—also; sat-śabdaḥ—the word sat ; yujyate —
is used; praśaste —in auspicious; karmaṇi —activities.

O Pārtha! The word sat (eternality) refers to the
Supreme Absolute Truth and to the worshippers of brahma.
In the same way, the word sat is also used in connection
with auspicious acts.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




The word sat represents brahma, and is used in
auspicious or praiseworthy acts. It can also be used in
all auspicious acts which are material as well as
transcendental. Śrī Bhagavān is speaking these two
ślokas , the first beginning with the word sad-bhāve to

                             829
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

explain this. Sad-bhāve (having the nature of eternal
reality) is an appropriate meaning for brahmatva
(spiritual quality) and brahmavāditva (worshippers of
brahma ).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The sacred syllable oṁ is the name of para-tattva brahma
. He is also called tat . In the same way, the word sat
indicates that He exists eternally and that He is the
cause of everything. He alone is sad-vastu , or the real
entity. This is also stated in the Vedas : sad eva
saumya idam agra āsīta. “O gentle one, previously this
material world existed in the form of sat , one without
a second, and before the creation there was only sat ”
(Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.2.1). Sādhus are those in whose
hearts only this sat exists. It is also said in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (3.25.25): s atāṁ prasaṅgān . Here also the
word sat is used for those bhaktas of Śrī Bhagavān who
have realised the Absolute Truth. In general, auspicious
acts in this material world are also known as sat-kārya
, blessed acts. In Sat-kriyā-sāra-dīpikā, Śrīla Gopāla
Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, a prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācārya and
the protector of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava conceptions, defines
sat as follows: “The one-pointed bhaktas of Śrī Govinda
are devoted to sat thoughts. Since all their activities
are performed for the pleasure of Bha gavān, their
activities are called sat . All other activities are
asat , and are forbidden.”

In this regard, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is explaining the
meaning of the word sat in these two ślokas , the first
beginning with the word sad-bhāve. “O Pārtha, the word
sat is used for sad-bhāva (that which aims at brahma )
and sādhu-bhāva (the supremely virtuous nature and
activities of the one-pointed surrendered bhaktas of
Kṛṣṇa). In the same way, the word sat is also used for
auspicious acts.”

The word sat is used for brahma. Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa who is omnipotent, the cause of all causes and the
support and basis of all rasa , is Himself the complete
sat entity. The word sat is also used for His
associates, His dhāmas , all His avatāras , the dhāmas
of those avatāras , His aikāntika-bhaktas , the
presiding Deity of the gāyatrī-mantra , brāhmaṇas ,
bhakti and so forth. It is also used for Śrī Bhagavān’s
nāma , guṇa , rūpa , līlā, etc.

Oṁ tat sat is uttered while giving dīkṣā to a faithful
person, or while giving him the sacre d thread. Śrī
Gurudeva who bestows the gāyatrī-mantra and hari-nāma is
also called sat (sad-guru ) . The disciple who accepts
these mantras is called sat-śiṣya , and the process of
dīkṣā is called sat (sad-anuṣṭhāna) , meaning spiritual
rite or ceremony. In this way, śāstra approves the use
of the word sat in all objects, services, activities and
manifestations of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

                           830
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 27




yajñe tapasi dāne ca

sthitiḥ sad iti cocyate

karma caiva tad-arthīyaṁ

sad ity evābhidhīyate


sthitiḥ—steadiness; yajñe—in sacrifice; tapasi —
austerity; ca —and; dāne —charity; ca ucyate —is also
described; iti —as; sat —spiritual, virtuous, or
eternal; ca —and; eva —certainly; karma —action; tat-
arthīyam —for the sake of tat (the Supreme Lord); eva
abhidhīyate —is certainly described; iti —as; sat —sat .

Being steadfast in the performance of yajña, tapasya and
dāna, and knowing their real purpose, is called sat. And
activities such as cleaning the temple to please brahma
(Śrī Bhagavān), are also called sat.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Sthitiḥ means being steadfast in the performance of
yajña, etc., after knowing their real purpose. Tad-
arthīyaṁ karma means activities such as cleaning the
temple as service to brahma (Śrī Bhagavān).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “The import of the word
sat can also be applied to yajña , tapasyā and dāna ,
because all these activities become sat when they are
performed for the satisfaction of brahma , otherwise,
they are all asat (useless). All mundane activities are
contrary to the s varūpa of the jīva . When one resolves
to serve the very cause of brahma , one engages in those
activities which arouse parā bhakti. They then become
useful in purifying the jīva’s existence, sattva-
saṁsuddhi. In other words, they become useful in
bestowing kṛṣṇa-dāsyam upon the jīva. This is the
perfection of his svarūpa .”

                           831
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 28




aśraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ

tapas taptaṁ kṛtaṁ ca yat

asad ity ucyate pārtha

na ca tat pretya no iha


tapaḥ—austerity; taptam—undergone; (sacrifice) hutam —
offered; (charity) dattam —given; aśraddhayā—without
faith; ucyate —is described; iti —as; asat —impermanent;
pārtha —O son of Pṛthā; ca —and; tat —that (has
benefit); no —neither; iha —in this world; na —nor;
pretya —in the next.

Yajña, dāna, tapasya or any other actions performed
without faith are called asat , O son of Pṛthā. Such
activities have no benefit, either in this world or the
next.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“I have heard about sat-karma, but what is asat-karma ?”
Expecting this question from Arjuna, Śrī Bhagavān is
speaking this śloka beginning with the word aśraddhayā.
All fire yajñas (hutam ), charity (dattam ), penances
(tapaḥ) , and anything else which is done without
śraddhā, is asat . This means that although yajña may be
performed, it is not actually a yajña ; charity may be
given, but it is not charity; tapasyā may be performed,
but it is not tapasyā, and whatever else may be done is
in fact useless, if performed without faith. It does not
even give good results in this world, what to speak of
it fructifying in the other world: tat na pretya no iha
.

Various types of prescribed activities that are
performed with sāttvika śraddhā lead to mokṣa . This is
explained in the present chapter.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the
Seventeenth Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives
pleasure to the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly
persons.



                            832
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




All activities performed with the purpose of serving
Bhagavān, guru and Vaiṣṇavas, such as collecting alms ,
digging wells and ponds, making flower and Tulasī
gardens, planting trees and building temples are tad-
arthīyaṁ karma , activities done for His satisfaction,
and they are sat .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, all activities, yajñas, dāna , tapasyā, etc.,
that are performed without nirguṇa -śraddhā are asat
(temporary and useless). Such activities never bring any
benefit either now in this world, or in the future, in
the next world. Therefore, śāstra instructs us in
nirguṇa-śraddh ā. If one discards the injunctions of
śāstra , it means that he has given up nirguṇa-śraddhā.
Nirguṇa-śraddhā is the only seed of the bhakti-latā.”

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the
Seventeenth Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Eighteen


Mokṣa-Yoga



The Yoga of Liberation




Śloka 1




arjuna uvāca —

sannyāsasya mahā-bāho

tattvam icchāmi veditum

tyāgasya ca hṛṣīkeśa

pṛthak keśi-niṣūdana


arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed;
hṛṣīkeśa—O Master of the senses; keśi-niṣūdana —O slayer
of the asura Keśī; icchāmi—I desire; veditum —to know;
tattvam —the truth; pṛthak —distinctly; sannyāsasya —of

                           833
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the renounced order; ca —and; tyāgasya—of renunciation.

Arjuna said: O Mahā-bāho, O Hṛṣīkeśa, O Keśi-niṣūdana, I
wish to know the true nature of both sannyāsa and tyāga,
and the distinction between the two.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




This chapter describes the following subjects: the three
types of sannyāsa, jñ āna and karma , the conclusive
understanding of mukti , and the most confidential
essence of bhakti.

In the previous chapter, Śrī Bhagavān said, “After
becoming free from all material desires, those who seek
mokṣa perform various types of yajña , give in charity
and engage in penances while uttering the word tat ”
(Gītā 17.25). Śrī Bhagavān uses the word mokṣa-kāṅkṣī (a
seeker of mokṣa ) in this statement to indicate the
sannyāsī only. But, if this word refers to someone other
than the sannyāsī, then who is that person? Śrī Bhagavān
says in Gītā (12.11): sarva -karma-phala-tyāgaṁ tataḥ
kuru yatātmavān. “Being situated in the self, you should
engage in your prescribed duties, renouncing the fruits
of action.” Arjuna is now inquiring, “The words sarva-
karma-phalatyāgam (in Gītā 12.11), refer to tyāga
(renunciation) . I wish to know about the symptoms of a
tyāgī (renunciant). I also want to know about the
symptoms of sannyāsa (the renounced order of life) that
are found in sannyāsīs (those who have formally taken
the renounced order) .” Arjuna is inquisitive and
intelligent, and he spoke this śloka beginning with
sannyāsasya in order to understand these topics clearly.
Arjuna has used the word pṛthak to mean, “If sannyāsa
and tyāga have different meanings, then I wish to know
their true separate natures. Even if they have the same
meaning in Your opinion, or in the opinion of others, I
still wish to understand the difference between the two.
O Hṛṣīkeśa, You alone are the prompter of my
intelligence, therefore, this doubt has arisen only by
Your inspiration. O Keśi-niṣūdana, killer of the asura
Keśi! Kindly destroy this doubt of mine in the same way
that You killed the asura Keśi. O Mahā-bāho! You are
supremely powerful, whereas I have a minute amount of
power. I have a friendly relationship with You because
we have some similar qualities, but my qualities cannot
equal Your qualities, such as omniscience. I am only
able to ask You this question without hesitation because
You have bestowed upon me a little of Your sakhya-bhāva
.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




                           834
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


In some parts of the Gītā, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has given
instructions pertaining to karma-sannyāsa (the
renunciation of activities), and in other parts He has
instructed Arjuna not to completely abandon karma
(action), but to renounce the desire for the fruits of
all types of karma . From a superficial perspective,
there seems to be a contradiction between these two
instructions. Arjuna wants Kṛṣṇa to remove the doubts of
people whose intelligence is mundane, so he is asking
these questions about the real meaning of tyāga and
sannyāsa , about the difference between them, and about
their unique characteristics. The names Keśi-niṣūdana,
Hṛṣīkeśa and Mahā-bāho used by Arjuna in this śloka have
specific meanings. Kṛṣṇa killed an asura called Keśi who
had a furious āsurika nat ure; therefore, He is called
Mahā-bāho, supremely powerful. For this reason, Arjuna
says, “O Śrī Bhagavān, You are fully capable of
annihilating the asura of my doubts. This doubt has
arisen in my heart only by Your inspiration because You,
Hṛṣīkeśa, are t he prompter and master of all my senses.
Only You can completely remove all my doubts and
illuminate ātma-tattva , bhagavat-tattva and bhakti-
tattva within my heart.” This is the hidden meaning
behind these three terms of address. If, like Arjuna, a
person surrenders to Bhagavān and prays to Him for
transcendental knowledge (prema-bhakti ), then Śrī
Bhagavān will surely fulfil his desire.




Śloka 2




śrī bhagavān uvāca—

kāmyānāṁ karmaṇāṁ nyāsaṁ

sannyāsaṁ kavayo viduḥ

sarva-karma-phalatyāgaṁ

prāhus tyāgaṁ vicakṣaṇāḥ


śrī bhagavān—the all-opulent Supreme Person; uvāca —
said; vicakṣaṇāḥ—perceptive; kavayaḥ—sages; viduḥ—
understand; nyāsam —the renunciation; kāmyānām —of
fruitive; karmaṇām —activities; sannyāsam —as sannyāsa ;
(and) tyāgam —the renunciation; sarva-karma -phala—of
the fruit of all activities; prāhuḥ—they declare; (to
be) tyāgam —renunciation.

Śrī Bhagavān said: According to expert paṇḍitas,
complete renunciation of kāmya-karma (fruitive
activities) is called sannyāsa, whereas the renunciation
of the results of all activities is called tyāga.




                           835
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




This explanation is based on the opinion presented by
Śrī Bhagavān to Arjuna in previous chapters. He begins
by explaining the different meanings of the two words
sannyāsa and tyāga in this śloka beginning with kāmyānām
. The term sannyāsa applies to one who completely gives
up all kāmya-karma , such as performing a yajña to
fulfil the desire of having a son or attaining Svarga,
but who does not give up nitya-karma (obligatory
activities), such as sandhyā-upāsanā (remembering
gāyatrī mantras , etc.) . The term tyāga applies to one
who dutifully performs all kāmya-karma (fruitive
activities) and nitya-karma (obligatory activities)
while renouncing the fruits of these activities, but who
does not abandon the activities themselves. The results
of performing nitya-karma are expounded throughout the
śrutis . For example, it is stated therein that one
attains pitṛ-loka (the planet of the forefathers) by
performing prescribed karma , and one becomes free from
sins by performing particular dharmika activities.
Therefore, tyāga means to perform all activities without
desiring the fruits. The word sannyāsa refers to one who
performs all nitya-karma without desiring the results
and gives up kāmya-karma altogether. This is the
difference between these two terms.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān gives the opinion of the tattvavit mahā-
puruṣas on the above subject matter. Sannyāsa refers to
one who does not abandon nitya-karma (obligatory duties)
or naimittika-karma (occasional dharmika duties incurred
by specific circumstances), but who completely gives up
sakāma-karma . And tyāga is performed when one does not
abandon sakāma-karma and nitya-naimittika-karma , but
gives up their fruits. Various places in śāstra describe
both these understandings. This chapter reveals the
opinion of Śrī Bhagavān and His tattvavit bhaktas
regarding this subject. One will only be able to
perfectly reconcile these concepts after properly
understanding their opinion.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructs Uddhava, who
is the instrument for His teachings. He describes the
three types of yoga , namely karma , jñ āna and bhakti ,
according to the eligibility (adhikāra ) of different
individuals. He instructs karma-yoga for those who are
attached to karma and its results, and He instructs jñ
āna-yoga for those who have completely renounced the
results of karma . But He gives instructions on bhakti-
yoga for those moderate persons who are not overly
attached to the results of karma , nor are they dry
renunciants.

                           836
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Generally, in the initial stage of yoga practice, a
baddha-jīva only has sufficient adhikāra to perform
karma . Śrī Bhagavān then gives instructions about
giving up the results of karma (tyāga ) and about the
renunciation of karma (sannyāsa ), in order to bestow
upon him the adhikāra to enter into the path of jñ āna .
In the early stages, while practising to completely give
up sakāma-karma , he should renounce the fruits of nitya
and naimittika-karma . A person’s heart is purified
after performing this practice for some time and he
becomes situated on the higher platform of jñ āna . His
adhikāra to only perform karma ceases at this stage. In
other words, he rises above karma . In that state, it is
possible for him to give up all karma completely.
According to the statement, jñ ānam ca mayi sannyaset
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.19.1), even jñ āna should be
renounced upon achieving perfection in it. When they
attain perfection in these practices, the karmīs have to
renounce karma and the jñ ānīs have to renounce jñ āna.
The sādhakas of bhakti however, do not need to renounce
bhakti upon attaining perfection in it. Rather, it is
then that they start to execute bhakti in its purest,
most developed manner. Therefore, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself has made the following statemen ts: tāvat
karmāṇi kurvīta , “As long as one has not satiated his
fruitive desires, or awakened his taste for bhajana ,
one has to follow the Vedic injunctions” (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 11.20.9), jñ āna-niṣṭho virakto vā, “The
conduct of those dedicated to cultivating transcendental
jñ āna , as well as My liberated bhaktas , is beyond the
range of rules and regulations” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
11.18.28); yas tv ātma-ratir eva syād , “A person who
delights in the self, however, who remains contented and
satisfied in the self, has no duties to perform” (Gītā
3.17), and: sarva-dharmān parityajya , “Completely
abandoning all bodily and mental dharma , such as varṇa
and āśrama , take exclusive shelter of Me alone” (Gītā
18.66). The Yoga-vāśiṣṭha also states: na karmāṇi
tyajeta yogī karmabhist yajyate hy asāv iti. “A yogī
should not give up karma because the karma itself will
renounce the yogī when he has attained an elevated level
.” Generally, śāstra does not instruct baddha-jīvas to
give up karma ; rather, it suggests that they give up
kāmya-karma or the results of karma . This is because
generally the jīva in his bound state is very much
attached to performing sakāma-karma . If he is
instructed to give up karma completely in the beginning
stage of his practice, he will not be able to do it.
Therefore, such instructions are given to gradually
bring the jīva to a higher platform.

The heart becomes purified by following this gradual
process in which one initially practises renouncing the
fruits of karma . It is only possible to give up karma
completely when one achieves ātma-rati (the happiness of
the self). For this reason, Bhagavān gives the
instruction: na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayet (Gītā 3.26). “One
should not instruct less intelligent people, who are
attached to karma , to give it up . Due to their
immature intelligence, they will become confused and
deviate from the spiritual path.” But it should be noted
that only a person who develops the adhikāra to engage
in kevala-bhakti can give up all karma —nitya ,

                           837
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

naimittika and kāmya. The śloka , sarva-dh armān
parityajya , is spoken at the end of this chapter for
this reason only. In his commentary on this śloka ,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes, “When a
person acquires the qualification to perform ananya-
bhakti , there is no possibility of sin or fault if he
does not perform any nitya-karma. This is the result of
his good fortune which has come about through the mercy
of the great saints. However, in that state, if he
continues to engage in nitya and naimittika-karma , he
incurs sin because he is not following My instruction.
In other words, the performance of nitya-naimittika-
karma is unfavourable to the execution of kevala-bhakti
.” Here, nitya-karma refers to daily obligatory
activities such as the worship of various devas and
devīs , as described in the karma-mārga section of the
Vedas . Naimittika -karma means occasional religious
activities such as the worship of the forefathers and
devas in the śrāddha ceremony. A person enters into the
realm of ananya-bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa only when one
completely a bandons these activities. By studying Sat-
kriyā-sāra-dīpikā, by Śrīmad Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, the
great Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācārya and protector of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava conceptions, we can understand that there are
no injunctions in any authoritative śāstra for the
aikāntika-bhaktas of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to worship the
forefathers and devas , regardless of which varṇa or
āśrama these bhaktas belong to. Rather, if the ananya-
bhaktas of Śrī Kṛṣṇa engage in the worship of the
forefathers or devas , it becomes sevāparādha and
nāmāparādha . Śrīmad Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī uses evidence
from śāstra to prove that, when Kṛṣṇa is pleased by a
person’s ananya-bhakti , that bhakta does not incur any
sinful reaction, even if he gives up all other karma .
Such aikāntika-bhaktas attain an auspicious position,
whether they are situated in this universe or beyond it.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Śrī Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Sannyāsa means to give up all kāmya-karma completely
and perform nitya and naimittika-karma without desiring
the fruits. Tyāga means to give up the fruits of all
types of karma —nitya , naimittika and kāmya -karma.
Learned people explain this to be the difference between
sannyāsa and tyāga .”




Śloka 3



tyājyaṁ doṣa-vad ity eke

karma prāhur manīṣiṇaḥ

yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma

na tyājyam iti cāpare


eke—some; manīṣiṇaḥ—thinkers; prāhuḥ—say; iti —that;
karma —action; (is) doṣavat —filled with faults; (and)

                           838
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

tyājyam —should be renounced; ca —and; apare —others
(say); iti —that; yajña-d āna-tapaḥ-karma —sacrifice,
charity, austerity and action; na tyājyam —should not be
given up .

Some thinkers, such as the sāṅkhya-vādīs, propound that,
since every action is faulty, action should be
relinquished. Others, like the mīmāṁsakas, hold the
opinion that acts of sacrifice, charity and austerity
should never be given up.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is again discussing the different opinions
regarding tyāga in this śloka beginning with the word
tyājyam . Some sāṅkhyā-vādīs have the opinion that karma
should be completely given up because it possesses
faults, such as violence. Others, like the mīmāṁsakas ,
say that activities such as yajña are not to be
relinquished, because they are prescribed in śāstra .




Śloka 4



niścayaṁ śṛṇu me tatra

tyāge bharata-sattama

tyāgo hi puruṣa-vyāghra

tri-vidhaḥ saṁprakīrtitaḥ


bharata-sattama—O best of Bharata’s line; śṛṇu—hear; me
—from Me; niścayam —positively; tatra —on this point;
tyāge —concerning renunciation; puruṣa-vyāghra —O
foremost among men; tyāgaḥ—renunciation; (is) hi —
indeed; saṁprakīrtitaḥ—declared (to be); tri-vidhaḥ—of
three kinds.

O best of the Bharatas, hear My definite opinion about
tyāga. O foremost among men, tyāga is said to be of
three kinds.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now Śrī Bhagavān is stating His opinion in this śloka

                            839
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

beginning with the word niścayam. Tyāga is of three
kinds: sāttvika , rājasika and tāmasika . Śrī Bhagavān
says in Gītā (18.7) that it is not appropriate to
renounce nitya-karma . The tyāga of those who give up
nitya -karma due to bewilderment is described as
tāmasika . In Gītā (18.7), tyāga is referred to as
sannyāsa . Therefore, according to the opinion of Śrī
Bhagavān, tyāga and sannyāsa are synonymous.




Śloka 5



yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma

na tyājyaṁ kāryam eva tat

yajño dānaṁ tapaś caiva

pāvanāni manīṣiṇām


karma—action; (in the form of) yajña—sacrifice; dāna —
charity; tapaḥ—and austerity; na tyājyam —should not be
given up; tat —they; eva kāryam —should be performed;
eva —indeed; yajñaḥ—sacrifice; dānam —charity; ca —and;
tapaḥ—austerity; pāvanāni —are purifiers; (even)
manīṣiṇām —of the wise.

Action in the form of sacrifice, charity and austerity
should by no means be relinquished, because they are
obligatory duties. Sacrifice, charity and austerity
purify the hearts of even those who are thoughtful and
wise.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




According to the opinion of Śrī Bhagavān, even within
kāmya-karma , the sāttvika acts of yajña , dāna and
tapasyā should all be performed, without desiring their
results. He says that the performance of yajña and so
forth is obligatory because they purify the heart.




Śloka 6



etāny api tu karmāṇi

saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalāni ca

                            840
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


kartavyānīti me pārtha

niścitaṁ matam uttamam


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; etāni—these; karmāṇi —activities;
kartavyāni —should be performed; api tu —however;
tyaktvā—giving up; saṅgam —attachment; phalāni —to the
results; iti —such; (is) me —My; niścitam —definite; ca
—and; uttamam —supreme; matam —opinion.

O Pārtha, one should perform all of these activities
having given up the ego of being the doer and abandoning
attachment to the fruits. This is My definite and
supreme opinion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is now explaining how these activities can
purify the heart, in this śloka beginning with etāny api
. The word saṅgam means that one should perform
prescribed duties without any fruitive desires, and
without maintaining the false ego of being the doer.
Tyāga is when both the fruitive desires and the ego of
being the doer are relinquished. It is also called
sannyāsa .




Śloka 7




niyatasya tu sannyāsaḥ

karmaṇo nopapadyate

mohāt tasya parityāgas

tāmasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ


tu—certainly; sannyāsaḥ—renunciation; niyatasya —of
obligatory; karmaṇaḥ—work; (is) na —not; upapadyate —to
be done; parityāgaḥ—renunciation; tasya—of that (work);
mohāt —out of delusion; parikīrtitaḥ—is described;
tāmasaḥ—as governed by the quality of darkness.

But the renunciation of nitya-karma (obligatory work) is
not proper. To renounce such work out of delusion is
described as tāmasika.




                           841
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Of the three types of tyāga, tāmasika tyāga is being
explained here in relation to this subject. Mohāt refers
to the performance of tyāga without knowing the purport
of śāstra. Such tyāga is called tāmasika tyāga . A
sannyāsī can give up kāmya -karma (fruitive activities),
thinking them to be unnecessary, but it is not proper
for him to give up nitya-karma . This is implied by the
word tu . Mohāt means out of ignorance. The result of
tāmasika tyāga is also ignorance, and the desired jñ āna
is not achieved.




Śloka 8



duḥkham ity eva yat karma

kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajet

sa kṛtvā rājasaṁ tyāgaṁ

naiva tyāga-phalaṁ labhet


saḥ—one; tyajet—may give up; karma —work; iti —as;
duḥkham —misery; yat kāya-kleśa-bhayāt —out of fear of
bodily suffering; kṛtvā—having performed; tyāgam —
renunciation; rājasam —in the quality of passion; na eva
labhet —he certainly does not obtain; tyāga-phalam —the
result of renunciation.

If one considers nitya-karma to be a source of misery
and relinquishes it out of fear of bodily discomfort,
then his tyāga is rājasika and he fails to obtain its
result.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Nitya-karma is compulsory. Its performance incurs only
good; no fault is incurred. Despite knowing this, some
persons think, “But why should I unnecessarily give pain
to my body?” The tyāga of such persons is rājasika ; jñ
āna is not the result of their tyāga.




                            842
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śloka 9



kāryam ity eva yat karma

niyataṁ kriyate ‘rjuna

saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalaṁ caiva

sa tyāgaḥ sāttviko mataḥ


arjuna—O Arjuna; eva—certainly; niyatam —obligatory;
karma —work; yat —which; kriyate —is performed; iti —as;
kāryam —a duty; tyaktvā—giving up; saṅgam —attachment;
ca —and; phalam —the result; saḥ—that; tyāgaḥ—
renunciation; (is) eva —certainly; mataḥ—considered;
sāttvikaḥ—in the mode of goodness.

O Arjuna, the tyāga of one who performs nitya-karma
simply as a matter of duty, and who renounces all
attachment to the fruits of action as well as to the ego
of being the doer, is considered to be sāttvika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




‘It is imperative to do this.’ The nitya-karma performed
with such a disposition is sāttvika . Such people attain
jñ āna , which is the desired result of their tyāga.




Śloka 10



na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma

kuśale nānuṣajjate

tyāgī sattva-samāviṣṭo

medhāvī chinna-saṁśayaḥ


medhāvī—the intelligent; tyāgī—renunciant; sattva-
samāviṣṭaḥ—absorbed in the quality of goodness; chinna-
saṁśayaḥ—whose doubts are dispelled; na dveṣṭi —does not
hate; akuśalam —troublesome; karma —work; na —nor;
anuṣajjate —is he attached; kuśale —to work that gives
happiness.

The tyāgī who is endowed with sattva-guṇa, whose
intelligence is steady and who is free from all doubts,
neither hates work that is troublesome nor becomes

                           843
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

attached to work that gives happiness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the characteristics of a
person who is steadfast in sāttvika tyāga in this śloka
beginning with the words na dveṣṭy. Akuśalam means that
they do not dislike painful activities, such as taking a
morning bath in winter, and kuśale means they do not
become attached to activities which give pleasure, such
as taking a bath in cold water during the summer time.




Śloka 11




na hi deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ

tyaktuṁ karmāṇy aśeṣataḥ

yas tu karma-phala-tyāgī

sa tyāgīty abhidhīyate

hi—certainly; na śakyam—it is not possible; deha-bhṛtā—
by an embodied being; tyaktum —to renounce; karmāṇi —
activities; aśeṣataḥ—completely; tu —however; saḥ—he;
yaḥ—who; karma-phala-tyāgī—renounces the results of his
activities; abhidhīyate —is known; iti—as; tyāgī—a
renunciant.

An embodied being cannot entirely relinquish action, but
he who gives up the fruits of all actions is truly a
tyāgī.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Since it is impossible for the embodied jīva to
completely renounce all activity, the activities that
śāstra prescribes should not be given up. To emphasise
this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks the śloka beginning with the
words na hi . It is not possible to give up all
activities. Śrī Bhagavān says earlier in Gītā (3.5): na
hi kaścit kṣaṇam api jātu tiṣṭhaty akarma-kṛt. “One
cannot exist even for a moment without performing work.”



                           844
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 12



aniṣṭam iṣṭaṁ miśrañ ca

tri-vidhaṁ karmaṇaḥ phalam

bhavaty atyāgināṁ pretya

na tu sannyāsināṁ kvacit

atyāginām—for those who are not renounced; tri-vidham —
the threefold; phalam —results; karmaṇaḥ—of action;
bhavati —exist; pretya —after death; aniṣṭam —undesired
(hell); iṣṭam —desired (heaven); ca —and; miśram —mixed
(the middle planets such as earth); tu —but; na kvacit —
never; sannyāsinām —for the renounced.

Those who do not perform tyāga as previously described
attain three types of destinations after giving up the
body: a hellish existence (hell), a place where the
devas reside (celestial planets), or as humans in this
world. Sannyāsīs, however, never attain such results.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




When a person does not perform tyāga like this, he
incurs fault. It is due to the lack of such tyāga that
one receives misery in hell (aniṣṭam ), temporary
happiness in the higher planets (iṣṭam ), or the
combined happiness and misery of human life (miśram ).
This happens only to those who are not tyāgīs . It does
not happen to the tyāgīs (renunciants). Pretya means the
next world.




Śloka 13



pañcaitāni mahā-bāho

kāraṇāni nibodha me

sāṅkhye kṛtānte proktāni

siddhaye sarva-karmaṇām


mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed Arjuna; nibodha—be informed; me
—from Me; etāni —these; pañca —five; kāraṇāni —causes;

                             845
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

siddhaye —for the accomplishment; sarva-karmaṇām —of all
actions; (they are) proktāni —described; sāṅkhye —in
sāṅkhya philosophy; kṛta-ante —for ending action and
reaction.

O Mahā-bāho! Now hear from Me about the five causes
which are involved in the accomplishment of any action.
They are described in Vedānta-śāstra (sāṅkhya
philosophy), which explains how to stop the reactions of
karma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




How can a person who performs karma not receive the
result of that karma ? Expecting this question, Śrī
Bhagavān is now speaking five ślokas to establish that
people who are free from ahaṅkāra , the false ego of
being the doer, do not become implicated in the results
of karma . The first of these ślokas begins with the
word pañcait āni. “Hear from Me about the five causes of
action which are responsible for the completion of all
activities.” That which fully explains Paramātmā is
called sāṅkhya . Sāṅkhya (saṅ—completely; khy ā—
describes) is also known as Vedānta-śāstra , which
explains how to nullify the reactions of actions that
have already been performed.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




It is impossible for the embodied baddha-jīvas to give
up all work. Furthermore, it is detrimental for those
who are unqualified to give up all types of work out of
obstinacy. Therefore, those in the initial stage of yoga
practice, who only have the adhikāra to engage in karma
, are instructed to give up akarma and vikarma and
perform nitya and naimittika -karma . When a person’s
attachment to the fruits of karma has gradually ceased,
it is beneficial and auspicious for him to perform the
karma prescribed in śāstra as a matter of duty, without
desiring the results. According to Kṛṣṇa, the symptom of
a sannyāsī and a yogī is that they perform karma only as
a duty, without desiring to enjoy the results. Such
persons are real sannyāsīs and yogīs . Upon obtaining
the association of Vaiṣṇavas, such individuals can enter
the realm of bhakti very quickly and attain the supreme
destination.




Śloka 14

                           846
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017




adhiṣṭhānaṁ tathā kartā

karaṇaṁ ca pṛthag-vidham

vividhāś ca pṛthak ceṣṭā

daivaṁ caivātra pañcamam


adhiṣṭhānam—the place (body); tathā—also; kartā—the doer
(the soul and dull matter bound together by false ego);
karaṇam —the senses; pṛthag-vidham —the various; ca —
and; vividhāḥ—manifold; pṛthak —distinct; ceṣṭāḥ—
endeavours (such as the actions of the incoming and out-
going breaths); ca —and; eva —certainly; ca atra —amidst
these other causes; (is) pañcamam —the fifth; daivam —
Antaryāmī.

The body, the agent   (doer), the senses, the various
types of endeavours   and the indwelling prompter
(Antaryāmī) are the   five causes of the success of karma
which are mentioned   in Vedānta.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān now enumerates those causes. Adhiṣṭhānam
means the body, and karttā (the agent or doer) refers to
the false ego in the form of a knot which ties the
conscious (cit or soul) to the inert (jaḍa or dull
matter). Karaṇam means the senses such as the eyes and
ears, pṛthag-vidham means various types of endeavours,
that is, the function of the life-airs such as prāṇa and
apāna , and daivam means Antaryāmī, the indwelling
prompter of everyone. These are the five causes of
action.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The five causes of action mentioned in the previous
śloka are explained here in detail. It should be
understood that the word adhiṣṭhānam in this śloka means
this body, because action can only be performed when a
baddha-jīva becomes situated in this body. The ātmā
situated in this body is called the doer, because it is
he who performs the action (karma ). The pure ātmā has
nothing to do with this karma , but he becomes the
enjoyer of the results of karma due to his false ego of
being the doer. Therefore, the ātmā itself is called

                            847
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

both the knower and the doer. This is also mentioned in
the śrutis : eṣa hi draṣṭā sraṣṭā, “It is actually the
soul who sees and is the doer” (Praśna-Upaniṣad 4). The
Vedānta-sūtra also states, jño’ ta eva. “It is truly the
soul who is the knower” (Brahmasūtra 2.3.17), and:
karttā śāstrārthavattvāt Ç “The jīvātmā is understood as
the doer because this fact is confirmed in the śāstra ”
(Brahmasūtra 2.3.31) and so on. All these statements
substantiate the above conclusion. The senses are the
instruments used to perform karma. The ātmā accomplishes
various types of work only with the help of these
senses. There is a separate endeavour for each activity,
but every activity depends on the sanction of
Parameśvara, who is situated within everyone’s heart as
a witness, friend and controller. Thus, Parameśvara
alone is the supreme cause. Those persons who are
inspired by a śāstrā-vit , tattvavit mahā-puruṣa , and
also by Parameśvara, who is situated within their
hearts, are able to ascertain what is obligatory for
them and what is not. Thus, they engage in the
performance of bhakti and very quickly attain the
supreme destination. They are not bound by the reactions
of their good or bad karma .




Śloka 15



śarīra-vāṅ-manobhir yat

karma prārabhate naraḥ

nyāyyaṁ vā viparītaṁ vā

pañcaite tasya hetavaḥ


ete—these; pañca—five; (are) hetavaḥ—the causes; tasya —
for; yat —whatever; nyāyyam —virtuous; vā—or; viparītam
—improper; karma —activity; naraḥ—a man; prārabhate —
undertakes; śarīra-vāk-manobhiḥ—with his body, words or
mind.

These are the five causes behind whatever virtuous or
improper actions a person may perform by body, speech or
mind.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śarīra-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. There are three types of action
(karma): that performed by the body (kāyika ), that
performed by speech (vāci ka ), and that performed by
the mind (mānasika ). Karma is of another two types:
dharmika (virtuous) and adharmika (unvirtuous). Their

                           848
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

causes are the above-mentioned five factors.




Śloka 16



tatraivaṁ sati kartāram

ātmānaṁ kevalan tu yaḥ

paśyaty akṛta-buddhitvān

na sa paśyati durmatiḥ


tatra—then; evam sati—such being the case; saḥ durmatiḥ—
that foolish person; yaḥ—who; paśyati —sees; ātmānam —
himself; (to be) kevalam —the only; kartāram —doer; tu —
indeed; na paśyati —does not see; akṛta-buddhitvāt —due
to impure intelligence.

As such, a foolish person who ignores these five factors
and considers the ātmā alone to be the doer of all these
works cannot see things as they are due to his impure
intelligence.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān says that although these five causes are
behind all karma, he who sees the pure ātmā (the jīva
who has no association with matter) as the only doer is
to be understood to be durmatiḥ, foolish. He does not
see properly because he lacks purified intelligence.
Such an ignorant person, is indeed, blind.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




An ignorant person cannot understand that a separate,
individual entity, known as Paramātmā, is situated in
his heart as a witness, controller and friend, and is
regulating all his activities. The body, the doer, the
various endeavours and the senses are all material
causes of action. The prominent cause, however, is
Paramātmā. Thus, one should see that Paramātmā, who is
situated within the heart, is the supreme cause of
action; one should not just consider tha t these four
material causes accomplish an action. Those who are
unable to see in this way think of themselves as the

                           849
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

only doers; thus, they always remain agitated.




Śloka 17



yasya nāhaṅkṛto bhāvo

buddhir yasya na lipyate

hatvāpi sa imā˚ lokān

na hanti na nibadhyate


api—even though; hatvā—killing; saḥ—he; yasya—whose;
bhāvaḥ—consciousness; (is) na ahaṅkṛtaḥ—not taken by
false ego; (and) yasya —whose; buddhiḥ—intelligence; na
lipyate —is unattached; na hanti —does not slay; imān —
these; lokān —people; na—nor; nibadhyate —is he bound.

Even if he kills living beings, he who is free from the
ego of being the doer, and whose intelligence is not
attached to the fruits of karma, does not in reality
kill, nor does he become bound by the result of his
actions.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Who, then, has purified intelligence and who actually
sees?” In response to this, Śrī Bhagavān speaks the
śloka beginning with the words yasya nāhaṅkṛto bhāvaḥ.
“Those who do not possess the false ego of being the
doer do not become attached to thinking, ‘This is
pleasing; this is not pleasing.’ Such persons do not
become bound by the results of karma . What more can I
say in this regard? Whether the work they perform is
auspicious or inauspicious, in reality, they are not the
doers of that work. From a material perspective, it may
seem that they kill all of these people, but from the
spiritual perspective they do not actually kill because
they are free from any selfish motivations. Therefore,
they do not become bound by the results of karma .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-v ṛtti




People who know themselves to be subservient to
Parameśvara, and who perform karma without fruitive

                           850
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

desire and without the false ego of being the doer, are
certainly intelligent. The results of karma cannot bind
them.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “O
Arjuna, you were only in illusion about this battle
because of the false ego. If you had been aware that the
five factors I have described are the cause of all karma
, then you would not have become so bewildered.
Therefore, those whose intelligence is not implicated by
the false ego of being the doer do not kill, even if
they kill all of humanity; nor do they become bound by
the result of such killing.”




Śloka 18




jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā

tri-vidhā karma-codanā

karaṇaṁ karma karteti

tri-vidhaḥ karma-saṅgrahaḥ


jñānam—knowledge; jñeyam—the knowable; (and) parijñ ātā—
the knower; (are) tri-vidhā—the threefold; karma-codanā—
impulses of action; karaṇam —the instrument; karma —the
activity; (and) kartā—the agent; (are) iti —thus; tri-
vidhaḥ—the threefold; karma-saṅgrahaḥ—basis of action.

Knowledge, the knowable and the knower constitute the
impulse to perform karma. The instrument, the activity
and the agent form the threefold basis of karma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Hence, in the opinion of Śrī Bhagavān, sannyāsa in the
form of renunciation (tyāga ) in sattva-guṇa is
instructed for the jñ ānīs , but for bhaktas , complete
renunciation of karma-yoga is recommended. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.11.32), Śrī Bhagavān says, “O Uddhava,
those who have carefully analysed the positive and
negative aspects of dharma and adharma , but give up
their svadharma prescribed by Me in the Vedas to engage
in bhajana to Me, are indeed sattamaḥ, the best among
men.” Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has explained the meaning of
this śloka as follows: “Those who perform bhajana to Me,
completely giving up their svadharma as instructed by Me
in the Vedas , are sattamaḥ, the best.” Here a question
arises. “If someone gives up his prescribed svadharma

                             851
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

out of ignorance or an atheistic propensity, will he
still be considered sattamaḥ?” In response, Śrī Bhagavān
says, “No. Those who are sattamaḥ understand that
favourable qualities such as purity of existence
resulting from the performance of dharmika activities
(prescribed duties according to varṇa and āśrama ), and
discrepancies caused by the neglect of such activities,
distract one from meditating upon Me. Those who
understand this are sattamaḥ. They possess the firm
determination that everything can be achieved by
performing bhakti to Me, and they solely engage in
bhajana to Me, giving up all other dharmika activities.”

The words, dharmaṁ santyajya in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
śloka quoted above (11.11.32), does not mean to give up
the results of dharma , but to give up dharma itself.
One should understand that there is no discrepancy
involved in giving up the results of dharma . This
opinion is given in the statements of Śrī Bhagavān and
is supported by those who have explained those
statements. Jñ āna certainly requires purification of
the heart. The performance of niṣkāma-karma enables one
to achieve different levels of such purification, and jñ
āna rises in proportion to the degree that the heart is
purified. There is no other way for jñ āna to appear.
Therefore, it is imperative for even the sannyāsīs to
practise niṣkāma-karma for complete jñ āna to appear in
their hearts. When the performance of karma has
completely purified the heart, at that time karma is no
longer required. As it is also said in Gītā (6.3),
“Karma is the sādhana for those who desire jñ āna-yoga ,
but for those who are already situated on the stage of
jñ āna , the means is renunciation of this karma , as it
causes a distraction.” However Gītā (3.17) says, “There
is no prescribed karma for those who derive pleasure
from the self and who are satisfied and happy in the
self alone.” But bhakti is supremely independent and
extremely powerful. It does not depend upon purity of
heart. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.39) states: “Those who
with transcendental faith hear Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes wit
h the gopīs of Vraja, attain para-bhakti to Him, and
thus very quickly become free from the disease of the
heart, which is mundane lust.” How can this happen?
First para-bhakti enters into the heart of a person who
is suffering from material lust and purifies it;
consequently, the lust and anarthas of such a qualified
person are destroyed.” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.8.5) further
states: “Kṛṣṇa enters into the lotus-like hearts of the
bhaktas through the ear, and removes all their
impurities, just as the autumn season purifies the
rivers.”

Why then, should the bhaktas engage in karma if the
heart becomes purified by performing bhakti alone? To
clarify this point, the present śloka is now spoken.
Simply knowing that the ātmā is separate from the body
does not comprise jñ āna. Rather, one is to understand
ātma-tattva , the truth of the ātmā. The only real jñ
ānīs are those who have taken shelter of such knowledge.
But the three constituents of jñ āna , namely knowledge
(jñ āna ), the knowable (jñeya ), and the knower (jñ
ātā) also have a relationship with karma . To understand
this is the duty of the sannyāsīs . For this purpose,
Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning with the

                           852
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

word jñ ānam . Here the word codanā means injunction or
process. Śrīla Gopala Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī says that the words
codanā, upadeśa (instruction) and vidhi (rules and
regulations) are synonymous.

Now Bhagavān Himself is explaining the second half of
this śloka, starting with the words karaṇaṁ karma . Jñ
āna is that which helps us to know something . According
to this definition: jñ āna is the instrument, jñeya ,
the knowable (jīvātma-tattva ) is the object, and one
who knows this truth about the jīvātmā is jñ ātā, the
subject . The instrument (karaṇa ), the object (karma )
and the subject (karttā) are the three factors known as
karma -saṅgrahaḥ that are related to niṣkāma-karma. This
is the explanation of the compound word karma -codanā.
In other words, the performance of niṣkāma -karma-yoga
is based on these three: the principle of knowledge (jñ
āna ), the knowable (jñeya ) and the knower (jñ ātā).




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The ātmā is a nirguṇa entity, devoid of any material
qualities. The inspiration for karma (karma-preraṇā),
the basis of karma (karma-āśraya ) and the result of
karma (karma-phala ) are all products of the three guṇas
. Therefore, they have no constitutional relationship
with the ātmā. Aikāntika-bhaktas of Śrī Bhagavān, who
are completely surrendered to Him, know the ātmā
perfectly. Although they perform all activities either
by the will of Kṛṣṇa or for His pleasure, they are never
called karmīs (materialists). The only designation which
adorns them is that of bhakta ; thus, they do not get
entangled in the web of karma .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Knowledge (jñāna), the knowable (jñeya ) and the knower
(jñ ātā) are the three impulses of action known as karma
-codanā. The instrument (karaṇa ), the object (karma )
and the doer (karttā) are the threefold basis of karma
known as karma -saṅgrahaḥ. Whatever action a person
performs has two states: codanā (inspiration) and
saṅgrahaḥ (basis). The process which precedes karma is
called codanā. Inspiration is the subtle existence of
action, and it is the faith that exists in the mind
before the gross state of action manifests. The stage
which precedes action is divided into three parts: (1)
knowledge of the instrument of action; (2) the knowable
object of action and; (3) the performer of action. The
execution of action has three divisions: (1) karaṇatva
(the instrument), (2) karmatva (the object), and (3)
karttṛtva (the subject) .”




Śloka 19


                           853
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



jñānaṁ karma ca kartā ca

tridhaiva guṇa-bhedataḥ

procyate guṇa-saṅkhyāne

yathāvac chṛṇu tāny api


guṇa-saṅkhyāne—in the śāstra which describes the three
qualities of material nature; jñ ānam —knowledge; karma
—action; ca —and; kartā—the agent; procyate —are
declared to be; tridhā—threefold; guṇa-bhedataḥ—
according to the divisions of the material qualities;
eva —certainly; api śṛṇu —you should also hear; tāni —of
these; yathāvat —as they are.

Sāṅkhya-śāstra describes the different modes of nature,
knowledge, action and the performer of action. Each is
said to be of three types: sāttvika, rājasika and
tāmasika. Now hear of them from Me.




Śloka 20




sarva-bhūteṣu yenaikaṁ

bhāvam avyayam īkṣate

avibhaktaṁ vibhakteṣu

taj jñānaṁ viddhi sāttvikam


viddhi—you should understand; sāttvikam—the quality of
goodness; (is) tat —that; jñ ānam —knowledge; yena —by
which; īkṣate —one sees; ekam—one; avyayam —
imperishable; avibhaktam —undivided; bhāvam —nature;
vibhakteṣu —among the divided; sarva-b hūteṣu —living
beings.

Sāttvika-jñāna is that knowledge by which one sees that
the jīvātmās in various bodies such as humans, devatās,
animals and birds are indivisible and imperishable, and
that they all possess the same quality of consciousness,
although they are experiencing various types of fruits.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining sāttvika jñāna . Ekaṁ

                           854
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

bhāvam means that the same jīvātmā sequentially accepts
different forms, such as those of devatās , human
beings, and lower species, such as animals and birds, in
order to undergo the various results of his karma .
Although the ātmā lives in the midst of that which is
perishable, he is not perishable. Although the various
jīvātmās are different (vibhakteṣu ), they are one (eka-
rūpam ) because they possess the same conscious nature.
Sāttvika j ñ āna is that jñ āna arising from karma by
which one perceives in this way.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




This śloka has a very deep meaning. The cause of all
causes, the controller of all controllers, and the
source of everyone is the primeval Svayam Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Although He is one, He manifests in this universe
as various avatāras . They are all one in Their essence
(svarūpa ) and in Their tattva . There is some gradation
of vaiśiṣṭya (unique characteristics) amongst Them based
on rasa and vilāsa (pastimes). Yet They are one. The
jīvas manifest from Him as vibhinnāṁśa (separated parts)
and are very subtle entities. They are unlimited in
number. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (5.9) states:


bālāgra-śata-bhāgasya

śatadhā kalpitasya ca

bhāgo jīvaḥ sa vijñeyaḥ

sa cānantyāya kalpate


It is said that the size of the jīva is one-hundredth
the tip of a hair which is again divided into a hundred
parts. Such jīvas are declared to be eternal.

As explained earlier, these jīvas are of two types:
baddha (bound) and mukta (liberated). Although they are
unlimited in number, they are all one in tattva in
regard to their conscious nature (cit-tattva ). They are
all Kṛṣṇa dāsa by constitutional nature, although they
take birth in various species such as devas , humans,
animals and birds. To establish this siddhānta , Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is explaining that through sāttvika j ñ āna one
sees that unlimited jīvas exist in various bodies such
as devas , asuras , humans, animals and birds in order
to experience the various fruits of their karma. From
the perspective of cit-tattva (conscious reality), by
sāttvika j ñ āna , one also perceives them as
indivisible, immutable and without any difference in
nature.




                           855
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Śloka 21




pṛthaktvena tu yaj jñānaṁ

nānā-bhāvān pṛthag-vidhān

vetti sarveṣu bhūteṣu

taj jñānaṁ viddhi rājasam


tu—however; tat—that; jñ ānam—knowledge; yat—by which;
(one) vetti —considers; pṛthaktvena —variously; nānā-
bhāvān —many natures; pṛthag-vidhān —of distinct
varieties; sarveṣu bhūteṣu—in all living entities; (is)
rājasam—governed by the quality of passion.

However, that knowledge by which one sees different
types of jīvas in different bodies, such as devas and
humans, and by which one perceives the jīvas as
belonging to different classifications and existing for
different purposes, is known as rājasika jñ āna.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Here Śrī Bhagavān is explaining rājasika jñāna . In the
opinion of the asuras , there are characteristic
differences between the jīvātmās in all beings. They
also say that the ātmā is destroyed when the body is
destroyed. Thus, they see that there are separate types
of ātmās in different bodies. By the influence of
rājasika jñ āna , one may conclude that the soul is the
cause of happiness and distress, or that happiness and
misery are without any basis. In other words, one sees
that their occurence is merely accidental. The jñ āna by
which one sees the oneness of all conceptions of
existence, such as the inert, the conscious, the all-
pervading, or the atomic particles, is known as rājasika
jñ āna .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Rājasika jñāna determines different understandings. This
means that those who do not believe in the existence of
a transcendental world say that the body itself is the
ātmā. The Jains say that although the ātmā is different
from the body, it is limited by the body, that is, it
has no existence separate from it. The Buddhists say

                            856
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

that the ātmā is conscious for a limited period of time.
The logicians say that the ātmā is the basis of nine
types of special qualities, that is, it is different
from the body, and is not inert. The jñ āna by which
these various understandings arise in relation to the
ātmā is rājasika j ñ āna .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “Those who have
rājasika jñāna say that the jīvātmās which exist in
different species, such as humans, animals and birds,
belong to different classes and that their
constitutional natures are also different.”




Śloka 22



yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin

kārye saktam ahaitukam

atattvārtha-vad alpaṁ ca

tat tāmasam udāhṛtam


tu—but; tāmasam—knowledge governed by the quality of
darkness; udāhṛtam —is said to be; tat—that knowledge;
yat —by which; (one is) kṛtsna-vat —completely; saktam —
attached; ahaitukam —without any reason; ekasmin —to
one; kārye —work (bodily maintenance); atattva-artha-vat
—which is without an understanding of the purpose of
reality; ca —and; (is) alpam —meagre (like that of an
animal).

And tāmasika jñāna is that knowledge which causes one to
be absorbed in activities related to the temporary body,
such as bathing and eating, considering them to be the
ultimate perfection. This is irrational, devoid of any
spiritual substance or reality, and meagre like that of
the animals.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now Śrī Bhagavān is explaining tāmasika jñāna . Tāmasika
j ñ āna is that knowledge which is devoid of any
spiritual basis, and which only fosters attachment to
the natural acts of the body, such as bathing, eating,
drinking, and enjoying women, as well as to the various
ways of attaining such enjoyment. Nor does it foster
attachment to Vedic activities such as yajña and dāna.
Tāmasika j ñ āna also lacks any essential meaning in
relation to tattva and is insubstantial and unimportant
like the knowledge or instincts of animals. In brief,

                            857
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

knowledge of the Absolute Reality, which is beyond the
body (ta t-padārtha ), is sāttvika ; knowledge of nyāya-
śāstras , for example, which are full of various
arguments and counter-arguments, is rājasika ; and
materialistic knowledge, which is simply related to the
demands of the body, such as bathing and eating, is
tāmas ika .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “The jñāna of those who
consider bodily activities such as bathing and eating to
be most important, and which encourages attachment to
such activities, is inferior and is called tāmasik a jñ
āna. Although this jñ āna is improper and does not
contain any essential tattva , it appears to be natural
and of value. The conclusion is that knowledge of tat-
padārtha (the Absolute Reality), which is separate from
the body, is called sāttvika jñ āna. Knowledge of
various śāstras such as nyāya , which establish
different argumentative philosophies, is called rājasika
jñ āna. And the knowledge which deals with bodily
activities, such as bathing and eating, is called
tāmasika j ñ āna.”




Śloka 23



niyataṁ saṅga rahitam

arāga-dveṣataḥ kṛtam

aphala-prepsunā karma

yat tat sāttvikam ucyate


tat—that; karma—work; yat —which; (is) kṛtam —performed;
niyatam —steadily; saṅga -rahitam —with detachment;
arāga-dveṣata ḥ—free from desire and hate; aphala-
prepsunā—without desiring the result; ucyate —is said to
be; sāttvikam —governed by the quality of goodness.

The obligatory duty (nitya-karma) which a person
performs without fruitive desires and attachment, and
which is free from any personal attraction or aversion,
is called sāttvi ka.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                           858
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Having explained the three types of jñāna, Śrī Bhagavān
explains the three types of karma . When that karma
which is described in śāstra as nitya-karma , is
performed without attachment or absorption, that is,
without feelings of attraction or aversion and without
any desire for its fruits, it is called sāttvika .




Śloka 24



yat tu kāmepsunā karma

sāhaṅkāreṇa vā punaḥ

kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ

tad rājasam udāhṛtam


tu—but; tat—that; karma —work; yat —which; kriyate —is
performed; bahula-āyāsam —with great trouble; sa-
ahaṅkāreṇa —with conceit; vā punaḥ—and also; kāma-ipsunā
—with fruitive desire; udāhṛtam —is said to be; rājasam—
governed by the quality of passion.

However, that karma which is performed with great
trouble by a conceited person who seeks to fulfil his
fruitive desires, is called rājasika karma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Kāmepsunā means having little false ego, and sāhaṅkāreṇa
means having an immense false ego.




Śloka 25



anubandhaṁ kṣayaṁ hiṁsām

anapekṣya ca pauruṣam

mohād ārabhyate karma

yat tat tāmasam ucyate


                           859
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


tat—that; karma—activity; yat —which; ārabhyate —is
undertaken; mohāt —out of delusion; anapekṣya —without
considering; pauruṣam —one’s own ability; anubandham —
the consequent; kṣayam —destruction (of virtue); ca —
and; hiṁsām —gives misery (to others or oneself); ucyate
—is said to be; tāmasam —governed by the quality of
darkness.

That activity performed out of delusion, without
considering one’s own ability, which will bring misery
in the future, and which causes the destruction of
dharma and jñ āna as well as loss to one’s self or
trouble to others, is called tāmasika karma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the word anubandham, anu means that which will come
in the future, after the karma has been performed. In
other words, it means its consequential results. Bandha
means the bondage enforced by people such as state
police or Yamadūtas. Any materialistic endeavour (karma
) which is commenced out of delusion, without properly
considering resultant future miseries, loss of dharma
and jñ āna , or loss to one’s own self, is called
tāmasika .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the above three ślokas, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining
the three types of karma . In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.25.23), it is also said:


mad-arpaṇaṁ niṣphalaṁ

vā sāttvikaṁ nija-karma tat

rājasaṁ phala-saṅkalpaṁ

himsā-prāyādi tāmasam


Only that nitya-karma which is selflessly performed as
an offering to Bhagavān is called sāttvika. Karma
performed with the desire to enjoy its fruits is
rājasika, and that karma which is performed with
violence and out of envy is tāmasika.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “Tāmasika karma is that
activity which is only a materialistic endeavour; which
is performed in a bewildered state of mind, without

                           860
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

properly considering the future misery it may cause, the
loss to dharma and jñ āna it may incur; or which is
violent (meaning at a loss to one’s self).”




Śloka 26




mukta-saṅgo ‘nahaṁ-vādī

dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ

siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikāraḥ

kartā sāttvika ucyate


karttā—the performer of action; mukta-saṅgaḥ—who is free
from attachment; anah aṁ-vādī—free from false ego;
samanvitaḥ—endowed; dhṛti —with determination; utsāha —
and enthusiasm; nirvikāraḥ—who is unaffected; siddhi-
asiddhyoḥ—by success and failure; ucyate —is said to be;
sāttvikaḥ—governed by the quality of goodness.

That karttā (performer of action) who is free from
fruitive desire and conceit, endowed with fortitude and
enthusiasm, and who remains unaffected by the success or
failure of his actions, is said to be sāttvika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




First, Śrī Bhagavān explained the three types of karma,
and now He is explaining the three types of karttā,
performers of action.




Śloka 27



rāgī karma-phala-prepsur

lubdho hiṁsātmako ‘śuciḥ

harṣa-śokānvitaḥ kartā

rājasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ


karttā—a performer of action; rāgī—who is very attached;

                           861
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

prepsuḥ—who very much hankers; karma-phala —for the
results of his work; lubdhaḥ—who is greedy; hiṁsa-
ātmakaḥ—envious; aśuciḥ—unclean; anvitaḥ—absorbed in;
harṣa —jubilation; śoka —and tribulation; parikīrtitaḥ—
is described; (to be) rājasaḥ—governed by the quality of
passion.

That karttā who    is attached to action and hankers for
the fruits, who    is addicted to sense objects, who is
always ready to    indulge in violence, who is unclean, and
is carried away    by elation and sorrow, is said to be
rājasika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Rāgī means attached to action. Lubdhaḥ means addicted to
sense objects.




Śloka 28




ayuktaḥ prākṛtaḥ stabdhaḥ

śaṭho naiṣkṛtiko ‘lasaḥ

viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca

kartā tāmasa ucyate


karttā—the performer of action; ayuktaḥ—who is not
connected (through sādhu , śāst ra or guru ); prākṛtaḥ—
identifies with his material nature; (is) stabdhaḥ—
obstinate; śaṭhaḥ—deceptive; naiṣkṛtikaḥ—insulting to
others; alasaḥ—lazy; viṣādī—despondent; ca —and; dīrgha-
sūtrī—procrastinating; ucyate —is said to be; tāmasaḥ—
governed by the quality of darkness.

That karttā who always neglects the injunctions of
śāstra and endeavours according to his own acquired
nature, who is obstinate, deceptive, insulting to
others, lazy, despondent and procrastinating, is said to
be tāmasika.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                             862
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Ayuktaḥ means one who performs improper acts. Prākṛtaḥ
means one who is situated in his own acquired nature.
Such persons act according to the dictates of their
minds. They do not even follow the orders of their guru
. Naiṣkṛtikaḥ means one who insults others. “Jñ ānīs ,
therefore, should perform sāttvika tyāga which possesses
the characteristics described earlier. One should only
take shelter of the jñ āna that arises when one is fixed
in sāttvika karma . Indeed, sāttvika karma is
obligatory. One should be a s āttvika karttā. This is
the sannyāsa of the jñ ānīs.This is the jñ āna of the jñ
ānīs. It is related to the self, and is the essence of
this subject matter.”

“However, the jñāna of the bhaktas is tri-guṇātīta ,
beyond the three guṇas . The karma which is performed
for Me is tri-guṇātīta and is called bhakti , and its
doer (karttā) is also tri-guṇātīta .” As Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.25.24) states, “Kaivalya-jñ āna ,
knowledge of the self, is sāttvika ; jñ āna which is
based on duality or manifold variety is rājasika ;
mundane jñ āna which is related to the body is tāmasika
; and that jñ āna which is fixed in Me is nirguṇa .”
This nirguṇa-jñ āna is said to be the characteristic of
nirguṇa -bhakti-yoga as stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.29.12). “Pure bhajana is exhibited by one whose mind
is at once attracted to hearing an uninterupted flow of
hari-kathā, just as the Gaṅgā flows to the ocean.”
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.26) states: “That karttā who is
unattached is sāttvika , he who is attached is rājasika
, and he who has lost his sense of discrimination is
tāmasika , but that karttā who is surrendered to Me is
nirguṇa .” Furthermore, not only the jñ āna , karma and
karttā related to bhakti are nirguṇa , but, from the
perspective of bhakti , anything related to bhakti is
nirguṇa . In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.27), there is also
a statement concerning śraddhā: “Śraddhā related to
ātma-j ñ āna is sāttvika , śraddhā that is based on
karma is rājasika , and śraddhā based on adharma is
tāmasika , but śraddhā in service to Me is nirguṇa .”
Concerning residence, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.25)
states: “To live in the forest is sāttvika , to live in
the village is rājasika , and to live in the gambling
house (the city, which is the centre of various
deceitful activities) is tāmasika , but My residence
(the place of My worship) and the association of My
bhaktas is nirguṇa .” Concerning happiness, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.25.29) states: “The happiness arising
from the self is sāttvika , that arising from sense
objects is rājasika , that arising from delusion and
mean-spiritedness is tāmasika , while the happiness that
results from surrendering unto Me is nirguṇa .”

“Therefore, the personal happiness that My guṇātīta-
bhaktas derive from that jñ āna , karma and śraddhā
which are related to bhakti is guṇātīta. Everything
related to the jñ āna of sāttvika j ñ ānīs is sāttvika.
Everything related to rājasika karmīs is rājasika , and
everything related to unrestrained tāmasika people is
tāmasika .” This is discerned from the statements of
Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam . The Fourteenth
Chapter also states that the jñ ānīs ultimately attain
freedom from the material guṇas by the performance of
kevala-bhakti , which manifests only after jñ āna has

                           863
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

been relinquished.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25-26) also describes the
performer of action (karttā) to be of three types:


sāttvikaḥ kārako ‘saṅgī

rāgāndho rājasaḥ smṛtaḥ

tāmasaḥ smṛti-vibhraṣṭo

nirguṇo mad-apāśrayaḥ


That karttā who is detached is sāttvika, he who is
excessively attached to karma and its results is rājasik
a, he who has no discrimination is tāmasika, and he who
is surrendered unto Me is nirguṇa.




Śloka 29



buddher bhedaṁ dhṛteś caiva

guṇatas tri-vidhaṁ śṛṇu

procyamānam aśeṣeṇa

pṛthaktvena dhanañjaya


dhanañjaya—O winner of wealth; eva—indeed; śṛṇu —now
hear; tri-vidham —the threefold; bhedam —division;
buddheḥ—of intelligence; ca —and; dhṛteḥ—of
determination; procyamānam —described; pṛthaktvena —
individually; aśeṣeṇa —and completely; guṇataḥ—according
to the qualities of material nature.

O Dhanañjaya, please listen, the three divisions of
intelligence and determination pertaining to the
different guṇas, are being described individually and
completely.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           864
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Everything related to the jñānīs is sāttvika and
therefore, beneficial. Śrī Bhagavān is now describ ing
the three divisions of intelligence and determination in
this śloka beginning with buddheḥ.




Śloka 30



pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca

kāryākārye bhayābhaye

bandhaṁ mokṣaṁ ca yā vetti

buddhiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; sā—that; buddhiḥ—intelligence; yā
—which; vetti —understands; pravṛttim —when to engage;
ca —and; nivṛttim —when to disengage; kārya-akārye —what
is proper and improper action; bhaya-abhaye —what is to
be feared and what is not to be feared; bandham —what is
bondage; ca —and; mokṣam —what is liberation; (is)
sāttvikī—governed by the quality of goodness.

O Pārtha, intelligence is sāttvika if it is able to
distinguish between proper and improper engagement,
between what is to be feared and what is not to be
feared, and between what is binding and what is
liberating.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Bhayābhaye refers to the cause of entanglement in the
material world, and liberation from it.




Śloka 31



yayā dharmam adharmaṁ ca

kāryaṁ cākāryam eva ca

ayathāvat prajānāti

buddhiḥ sā pārtha rājasī


                             865
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; sā—that; buddhiḥ—intelligence;
yayā—by which; prajānāti —one discerns; ayathāvat —
imperfectly; dharmam —virtue; ca —and; adharmam —vice;
kāryam —that which is to be doneÇ duty; ca —and; akāryam
—that which is not to be done; (is) eva —certainly;
rājasī—governed by the quality of passion.

O Pārtha, intelligence is rājasīka if it distinguishes
imperfectly between dharma and adharma, and between that
which is to be done and that which is not to be done.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Ayathāvat means imperfectly.




Śloka 32




adharmaṁ dharmam iti yā

manyate tamasāvṛtā

sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca

buddhiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; sā—that; buddhiḥ—intelligence; yā
—which; manyate —considers; adharmam —irreligion; (to
be) dharmam —religion; ca —and; iti —thus; (considers)
sar va-arthān —all things; viparītān —perversely; tāmasī
—is governed by the quality of darkness.

O Pārtha, that intelligence is tāmasika which considers
adharma to be dharma, and which endeavours in a perverse
manner, being covered by ignorance and illusion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Yā manyate refers to an intelligence which sees that an
axe cuts independently. In other words, a person who
only perceives the external function (e.g., the axe
cutting) cannot enter the internal understanding that
the ātmā, he who is wielding the axe, is the actual
performer of the act of cutting, not the instrument, the

                           866
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

axe.




Śloka 33



dhṛtyā yayā dhārayate

manaḥ-prāṇendriya-kriyāḥ

yogenāvyabhicāriṇyā

dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī


pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; sā—that; dhṛtiḥ—determination;
dhṛtyā—by determining; yayā—which; dhārayate —one
sustains; kriyāḥ—the activities; manaḥ—of the mind;
prāṇa —life airs; indriya —and senses; avyabhicāriṇyā—
through undeviating; yogena—practice of union with the
Supreme Lord; (is) sāttvikī—governed by the quality of
goodness.

O Pārtha, the unswerving determination that is attained
by the practice of yoga and by which a person controls
the functions of the mind, life air and senses is called
sāttvika dhṛti.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now Śrī Bhagavān is describing the three types of dhṛti
(determination or fortitude).




Śloka 34



yayā tu dharma-kāmārthān

dhṛtyā dhārayate ‘rjuna

prasaṅgena phalākāṅkṣī

dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha rājasī


pārtha arjuna—O Arjuna, son of Pṛthā; tu —but; sā—that;
dhṛtiḥ—determination; phala-ākāṅkṣī—to enjoy the
results; dhṛtyā—by determining; yayā—which; dhārayate —
one sustains; prasaṅgena —through strong attachment;

                            867
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

dharma-kāma-arthān —the activities of dharma , sense
gratification and economic development; rājasī—is
governed by the quality of passion.

O Pārtha, O Arjuna, the determination by which one
adheres to dharma, sense gratification and economic
development, driven by attachment to enjoy the fruits,
is called rājasika dhṛti.




Śloka 35




yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ

viṣādaṁ madam eva ca

na vimuñcati durmedhā

dhṛtiḥ sā tāmasī matā


sā—that; durmedhā—unintelligent; dhṛtiḥ—determination;
yayā—by which; na vimuñcati —one cannot surpass; svapnam
—sleep; bhayam —fear; śokam —lamentation; viṣādam —
depression; ca madam —and madness; (is) eva —certainly;
matā—considered; tāmasī—governed by the quality of
darkness.

But the unintelligent determination which cannot go
beyond sleep, fear, lamentation, depression and madness,
is called tāmasika dhṛti.




Śloka 36




sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ

śṛṇu me bharatarṣabha

abhyāsād ramate yatra

duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati


bharata-ṛṣabha—O best of Bharata’s line; tu—but; idānīm
—now; śṛṇu —hear; me —from Me; tri-vidham —the three
kinds; sukham —of happiness; yatra —which; ramate —one
relishes; abhyāsāt —through (constant) cultivation; ca —
and; nigacchati —brings one; duḥkha-antam —to the end of
suffering (is happiness in the quality of goodness).

O best of the Bharata dynasty, now hear from Me about

                            868
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the three types of happiness. The happiness which a jīva
relishes by constant cultivation, and which brings an
end to the misery of material existence, is known as
sāttvika happiness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is describing sāttvika happiness, its
nature and how, by constant cultivation, one becomes
attached to it. This differs from the happiness which is
derived from sense objects and which appears due to the
excitement of sensual stimulation. Duḥkhāntaṁ ca
nigacchati means being attached to that by which one can
cross over the misery of material existence.




Śloka 37



yat tad agre viṣam iva

pariṇāme ‘mṛtopamam

tat sukhaṁ sāttvikaṁ proktam

ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam


tat—that; sukham—happiness; yat —which; (is) iva —like;
viṣam —poison; agre —in the beginning; (and) amṛta-
upamam —like nectar; pariṇāme —in the end; jam —which is
generated; prasāda—from purity; buddhi —of intelligence;
āt ma —directed to the self; tat —that; proktam —is
declared; (to be) sāttvikam —governed by the quality of
goodness.

That happiness which is like poison in the beginning,
but nectar in the end, and which is generated from the
purity of intelligence related to the self, is sāttvika
happiness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Viṣam iva indicates that, in the beginning, it is quite
troublesome to control the senses and the mind.




                           869
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



Śloka 38



viṣayendriya-saṁyogād

yat tad agre ‘mṛtopamam

pariṇāme viṣam iva

tat sukhaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam


tat—that; sukham—happiness; yat —which; (is) saṁyogāt—
from the contact; indriya —of the senses; viṣaya —with
the sense objects; (and which is) amṛta-upamam —like
nectar; agre —in the beginning; (and) iva —like; viṣam —
poison; pariṇāme —in the end; tat —that (happiness);
smṛtam —is considered; rājasam —governed by the quality
of passion.

Rājasika happiness is produced by the contact of the
senses with the sense objects. It is like nectar in the
beginning, but poison in the end.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Yad amṛta-upamam refers to the happiness experienced
while enjoying with women other than one’s wife and so
forth.




Śloka 39



yad agre cānubandhe ca

sukhaṁ mohanam ātmanaḥ

nidrālasya-pramādotthaṁ

tat tāmasam udāhṛtam


tat—that; sukham—happiness; yat —which; (is) mohanam —
delusion; ātmanaḥ—for the ātmā; (both) agre —in the
beginning; ca —and; anubandhe —in the end; ca —and;
uttham —is born out of; nidrā—sleep; ālasya —laziness;
(and) pramāda —carelessness; udāhṛtam —is said; (to be)
tāmasam —governed by the quality of darkness.

That happiness which covers the nature of the self from

                            870
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

beginning to end, and which arises from sleep, laziness,
negligence and indifference, is called tāmasika
happiness.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Happiness is also of three types. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.25.29) states:


sāttvikaṁ sukham ātmotthaṁ

viṣayotthaṁ tu rājasam

tāmasaṁ moha-dainyotthaṁ

nirguṇaṁ mad-apāśrayam


Happiness derived from realisation of the self is
sāttvika; happiness derived from sense pleasure is
rājasika; happiness that arises from a deluded, wretched
condition is tāmasika; and the happiness that comes from
the performance of kīrtanam, śravaṇam , etc., of Śrī
Bhagavān is nirguṇa.




Śloka 40




na tad asti pṛthivyāṁ vā

divi deveṣu vā punaḥ

sattvaṁ prakṛti-jair muktaṁ

yad ebhiḥ syāt tribhir guṇaiḥ


pṛthivyām—on the earth; vā—or; punaḥ—even; deveṣu —
amongst the gods; divi —in Svarga; tat —there; na asti —
does not exist; sattvam —a being; yat —who; syāt —can
be; muktam —free; ebhiḥ—from these; tribhiḥ—three;
guṇaiḥ—binding qualities; prakṛti-jaiḥ—born of material
nature.

Among humans and other earthly species, or even among
the devas in Svarga, no object or entity anywhere in
this creation is free from these three guṇas, which are
born of material nature.




                             871
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is concluding this subject by explaining
what He has not yet described. Tat sattvam means that no
living being or object in the creation is free from the
three guṇas , which are born of material nature.
Therefore, everything is composed of the three guṇas of
material nature, and only that which is sāttvika is
useful; that which is rājasika or tāmasika is not. This
is the purport of this topic.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Bhagavān is concluding this subject by stating,
“Everything that is related to this material world is
composed of the three guṇas of material nature. The
superiority of that which is sāttvika has been
established. One is instructed to ardently take shelter
of and accept only what is sāttvika . However, in order
to become free from the bondage of this material world,
it is necessary to take shelter of that which is nirguṇa
. Bhagavān, bhakta , bhakti , and all the instruments,
bhāvas and so forth, for sevā, are nirguṇa . Without
adopting them, a jīva cannot achieve his ultimate
benefit. Therefore, it is the supreme duty of all
intelligent individuals to endeavour to rise above the
three guṇas of material nature by the influence of
sādhu-saṅga. Being thus situated in their nirguṇa
nature, they should enter into the nirguṇa-prema-mayī
sevā of Bhagavān.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.30-31) describes the above-
mentioned subjects that are within the three guṇas and
beyond them. Śrī Bhagavān says to Uddhava:


dravyaṁ deśaḥ phalaṁ kālo

jñānaṁ karma ca kārakaḥ

śraddhāvasthākṛtir niṣṭhā

trai-guṇyaḥ sarva eva hi

sarve guṇa-mayā bhāvāḥ

puruṣāvyakta-dhiṣṭhitāḥ

dṛṣṭaṁ śrutam anudhyātaṁ

buddhyā vā puruṣarṣabha


Various objects, places, results of activities, kāla

                            872
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(time), jñāna, karma, the performers of action, śraddhā,
form and allegiance, all consist of the three guṇas of
material nature. O best among men, all that is seen,
heard or conceived of within the mind is situated within
prakṛti and puruṣa, and is, therefore, composed of the
three guṇas.

How can one conquer the three guṇas? In this regard, Śrī
Bhagavān says in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.25.32):


etāḥ saṁsṛtayaḥ puṁso

guṇa-karma-nibandhanāḥ

yeneme nirjitāḥ saumya

guṇā jīvena citta-jāḥ

bhakti-yogena man-niṣtḥo

mad bhāvāya prapadyate


O gentle one, because the jīva mistakes the body for the
self, he is bound by the guṇas and by karma. Thus, he
wanders throughout the various species of life. Those
who are influenced by the association of bhaktas,
practise bhakti-yoga. Consequently, they conquer the
material modes that manifest in the mind as the false
ego (considering the body to be the self) and they
become firmly devoted to Me. Thus, they attain bhagavat-
sevā to Me in My dhāma.

Śrī Bhagavān is nirguṇatattva. The bhaktas who take
shelter of Him are also nirguṇa . Ananya-bhakti and its
associated limbs are also nirguṇa . The various objects
and moods that the bhaktas accept as useful instruments
in bhakti , and with which they engage in the service of
Bhagavān, become nirguṇa by His inconceivable power.
This principle has been established in various places
throughout śāstras , such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam .




Śloka 41




brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśāṁ

śūdrāṇāṁ ca parantapa

karmāṇi pravibhaktāni

svabhāva-prabhavair guṇaiḥ


parantapa—O chastiser of the foe; karmāṇi—the
activities; brāhmaṇa —of the priestly or intellectual
class; viśām —of the mercantile or cow protecting class;

                             873
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

kṣatriya —of the warrior or administrative class; ca —
and; śūdrāṇām —of the labourer class; (are)
pravibhaktāni —divided; guṇaiḥ—according to those (same)
binding qualities; prabhavaiḥ—which are born; svabhāva —
of their respective natures.

O Parantapa, the prescribed duties of the brāhmaṇas,
kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras are divided according to
the dispositions born of their respective natures.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Furthermore, the jīvas, who are subject to the influence
of the three guṇas of mater ial nature, become
successful and perfect by worshipping Parameśvara
through the performance of activities which are
prescribed in śāstra , according to their respective
qualifications. Śrī Bhagavān now speaks the next six
ślokas beginning with brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśām , in order
to explain this principle.

Svabhāva-prabhavair guṇaiḥ means work born of one’s own
nature in accordance with the guṇas such as sattva . The
various types of karma are appropriately divided
according to these guṇas and prescribed for the
brāhmaṇas , kṣatriyas and so forth. This determines
their obligatory duties.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In order to elevate humans beyond the three guṇas of
material nature and gradually raise them to a higher
adhikāra , Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa establishe s varṇadharma
by dividing their prescribed duties according to their
respective guṇas (qualities) and karma (actions). The
arrangement of the pure varṇa system is very beneficial,
auspicious and scientific for human life. With the
passing of time, however, the common man has lost faith
in this system, having witnessed various defects in its
so-called followers. This faith is lost to such an
extent that, now, even common people in Indian society
blame the varṇāśrama system for the divisions and
hostility created by its castes. They also assert that
varṇadharma is the main cause of India’s social,
political and economic collapse. They say that Indian
people are less advanced than those of other countries
because of varṇāśrama-dharma . The majority of India’s
population is becoming determined to completely destroy
the varṇadharma and establish an atheistic society
without any varṇa . It is easy to destroy a useful
thing, but it is extremely difficult to initiate and
propagate, in this case, an ideal system. May Śrī

                           874
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhagavān bestow good intelligence upon such people. Are
they taking this stance after careful deliberation? Or
are they simply being carried away by their sentiments,
thus developing firm resolve to completely destroy the
individual, as well as societ y as a whole, at the
roots? In this regard, we are quoting some meaningful
portions from Śrī Caitanya-Śikṣāmṛta by Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. We humbly request the faithful
reader to carefully examine and understand it.

“One’s inclinations or qualities depend only upon one’s
nature, sva-bhāva. A person should work according to
that individual nature. Work which is not executed in
accordance with his nature is not fruitful. The English
word ‘genius’ is used to refer to a particular part of
one’s nature. It is not easy for a person to change his
matured nature, therefore, he should endeavour for his
livelihood and spiritual perfection by working in
accordance with his nature. People in India are divided
into four varṇas in accordance with four types of
nature. As a result of people being properly situated in
society, having followed the injunctions of the varṇa
system, all social activities naturally become fruitful
and humanity attains all auspiciousness. The varṇa
system is based on solid scientific understanding. A
society which has such a foundation is worthy of respect
by all of humanity.

“Some people may doubt the varṇāśrama system, saying,
‘No one in Europe and America follows these injunctions
which are based on varṇa divisions, yet the people of
those lands are more advanced and respected than the
Indian people in economy, science and other ways.’ They
conclude that it is useless to accept such a system. But
such doubts are baseless, because the European societies
are quite new. People of such modern societies are
generally stronger and more courageous. With that
courage and strength, they perform various activities in
the world and accept portions of the knowledge, science
and arts which have been preserved by the older
societies. But all these new societies will gradually
become extinct because their social arrangement has no
scientific foundation. However, symptoms of the original
varṇa system that existed in ancient India’s Āryan
society can still be observed in current Indian society,
even though it is now so old and weak.

“Previously, the Roman and Greek societies were more
powerful and advanced than those of modern European
countries, but what is their present plight? They have
lost their own ancient caste system, and have embraced
the religions and systems of modern societies to such an
extent that the people of those castes do not even boast
the glory of their noble ancestors. Although the Āryan
society of India is much older than the Roman and Greek
societies, the present Āryans feel proud of their great
heroic forefathers. What is the reason for this? It is
because the foundation of Āryan society was so strongly
based on the varṇāśrama system that their social or
caste traits still remain. The descendants of Rāma, who
were defeated by the mlecchas , still consider
themselves to be the heroic descendants of Śrī
Rāmacandra. As long as the varṇa arrangement is existing
in India, people will undoubtedly remain Āryan; they can

                           875
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

never become non-Āryan, no matter how fallen they become
due to the time-worn and antiquated condition of the
society.

“The European Āryan descendants, such as the Romans,
have intermingled and become integrated with the lowest
castes such as the Hāna and Bhāṇḍāla. By studying the
structure of the present European societies, we will
find that whatever charm exists in them is due to the
fact that they have in some way embraced the principles
of the varṇa system, which has manifested through their
own natural propensities. In Europe, those people who
have a vaiśya nature consider it beneficial to engage in
business, and because of that alone, they are making
economic progress. Those who have the nature of a
kṣatriya will voluntarily become soldiers, and those who
have the nature of a śūdra generally prefer to perform
menial services. In fact, no society can exist without
accepting the varṇadharma in some form or other. Even
when a marriage is arranged, the higher or lower state
of the bride and groom’s varṇa and nature are examined
and considered.

“Although varṇadharma is partially accepted in Europe,
it has not been established in its full, scientifically-
based form. Wherever knowledge and civilization make
progress, varṇa -dharma will proportionately manifest in
a more complete form. Two types of methods are effective
in every activity: the unscientific and the scientific.
An activity is performed unscientifically until the
scientific process is accepted. For example, before the
invention of power driven ships, people used to travel
in boats designed to depend on the winds. But, when
scientifically manufactured ships were introduced, all
voyages were made on them. The same principle can also
be applied to society. Until the varṇa system becomes
properly established in a country, its society will be
run by some unscientific, rudimentary system. Such an
elementary and primitive arrangement of varṇa is
currently operating and controlling societies in all
countries of the world, save and except for India. India
has therefore been called karma -kṣetra , the land for
the proper execution of karma.

“At this point in our discussion, the question may be
raised as to whether or not the varṇa system is actually
functioning properly in India today. The answer is that
it is most definitely not. Although previously this
varṇa system was fully established, in course of time it
became diseased. Consequently, degradation of this
system is now visible in India. What, we may ask, is
that disease? The answer is given in the following
explanation.

“At the beginning of Tretā-yuga, the Āryan society had
reached the pinnacle of its progressive development. At
that time, the varṇāśrama system was established. An
arrangement was made to determine the varṇa of every
person according to his nature. Upon acquiring the
requisite qualifications set forth, he would perform his
prescribed work in that varṇa only. The activities of
the world were thus very comfortably managed with the
labour divided according to the qualification and nature
of the individual. A person whose father had no varṇa

                           876
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

was accommodated by being placed in the appropriate
varṇa after his nature was examined. The Vedic histories
about Jābālī and Gautama, Jānaśruti and Citraratha,
etc., give evidence of this. A person’s varṇa was
ascertained on the basis of his own nature and on the
basis of his family lineage in cases where his father’s
varṇa was known. In the dynasty of Nariṣyanta, Agniveśa
himself became the great sage known as Jātukarṇa. It is
from him that the famous brāhmaṇa dynasty known as
Agniveśyāyana originated. In the Aila dynasty, Jahnu,
the son of Hotra, attained the status of a brāhmaṇa . In
the dynasty of Bharadvāja, who was born in the dynasty
of Bharata and who was known as King Vitatha, there came
two progenies, the one from Nara became kṣatriyas , and
the progeny of Garga became brāhmaṇas . In the dynasty
of King Bharyasva, maudgalya gotra brāhmaṇas , such as
Śatānanda and Kṛpācārya were born. There are many such
examples in śāstra , of which only a few have been
cited.

“When the varṇa system was functioning in a cultured
manner, India’s fame spread all over the world like the
powerful glow of the midday sun. People from all
countries of the world paid homage to India and accepted
their rulers, controllers and spiritual masters as their
own. People of countries such as Egypt and China would
hear and receive instructions from the Indians with
great faith and reverence.

“The above-mentioned varṇāśrama-dharma continued in its
pure form in India for a long time. Later, through the
influence of time, Jamadagni and his son Paraśurāma, who
had the nature of kṣatriyas , were unlawfully accepted
as brāhmaṇas , but they gave up their caste as brāhmaṇas
, as it was opposed to their nature. This caused a
disturbance to the peace of the world order by creating
a dispute between the brāhmaṇas and the kṣatriyas . The
unfavourable result of this quarrel was that within the
varṇa system more emphasis was placed on birth. In
course of time, this perverted varṇa system was covertly
introduced, even infiltrating śāstras such as the Manu-
smṛti. The kṣatriyas lost all hope of attaining a higher
varṇa and they revolted. They supported the Buddhist
dharma and focused all their energy on destroying the
brāhmaṇas . The degree to which a new activity or
opinion is propagated, is opposed to in a proportionate
degree. When the Buddhist dharma , which was opposed to
the Vedas , arose to confront the brāhmaṇas , the varṇa
arrangement based upon birth became even more deeply
rooted. A disagreement ensued between this ill-conceived
system and a spirit of nationalism, which gradually led
to a virtual disintegration of the Āryan civilization in
India.

“Driven by selfish motives, the so-called brāhmaṇas, who
were bereft of any brāhmiṇical qualities, composed their
own religious scriptures and began to cheat the other
varṇas . The so-called kṣatriyas who had lost their true
kṣatriya spirit and qualities, became averse to engaging
in battle and, thus began to lose their kingdoms.
Finally, they started to preach the comparatively
insignificant and inferior Buddhist dharma . The vaiśyas
, who did not possess any real business qualities and
acumen, began propogating religions such as Jainism.

                           877
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Under these circumstances, the worldwide business
ventures of India gradually declined, and the śūdras who
had no real śūdra qualities, became almost like dacoits,
being unable to find work befitting their nature. As a
result, the cultivation of knowledge of and discussions
on sat-śāstras such as the VedasÇ gradually came to a
halt. The rulers of the mleccha countries then attacked
India at an opportune time and esta blished their
control. India’s shipping industry suffered and finally
ceased due to improper management. In this way, the
influence of Kali intensified. Alas! The Āryan race of
India, which once was the ruler and guru of all other
societies on earth, deteriorated to the pitiable
condition we see today. The reason for this unfortunate
development is not the aging of Indian civilization, but
the numerous defects that have permeated the varṇa
system.

“Parameśvara is the original controller of all systems
and living entities. He has the ability to remove all
inauspicious elements and bestow all auspiciousness. If
He so desires, He may send His empowered representative
to re-establish varṇāśrama -dharma . Even the writers of
the Purāṇas assert that Śrī Kalki-deva w ill make His
advent and reinstate the pristine glory of varṇāśrama-
dharma . The story of King Maru and Devāpi describes a
similar expectancy. We will now discuss the vidhis
(rites) within varṇāśrama-dharma .

“Dharma-śāstra gives a detailed explanation about the
karma (duties) that a person in each varṇa has the right
to perform. It is not possible to present the full
details of that subject in the context of this book.
Activities such as serving food to guests, bathing
thrice a day for purity, worshipping dev atās and devīs
, studying the Vedas , giving instructions, performing
pūjā, observing vratas such as upanayana (accepting the
sacred thread), brahmacarya and sannyāsa are the
activities prescribed for brāhmaṇas. Kṣatriyas have the
right to perform activities such as fighting for dharma
, ruling a kingdom, protecting the subjects and
generously distributing charity. Vaiśyas have the right
to perform such activities as protecting animals and
executing business endeavours. The right of the śūdras
is to perform service to the devatās without the
utterance of mantras , and to render various services to
the above-mentioned three varṇas .

“Apart from the activities that are exclusive to their
own varṇas, all men and women have the common right to
perform activities such as marriage, īśvara-bhakti ,
welfare activities, general charity, service to the guru
, honouring guests, purificatory rites, celebrating
festivals, serving the cows, producing progeny and
following prescribed codes of conduct. Women have the
special right to engage in the service of their
husbands. The basic principle is that a person has the
right to perform duties which are conducive to his or
her own nature. With simple intelligence, everyone can
ascertain his or her particular right to perform work.
If a person does not have the ability to do that, then
he should approach a bona fide guru to ascertain his
nature and rights. Those Vaiṣṇavas who are nirguṇa and
who are interested to know more about this subject,

                           878
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

should study Sat-kriyā-sāra-dīpikā, by Śrīla Gopāla
Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.”




Śloka 42




śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ

kṣāntir ārjavam eva ca

jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ

brahma-karma svabhāva-jam


śamaḥ—control of the mind; damaḥ—control over the
senses; tapaḥ—austerity; śaucam —cleanliness; kṣāntiḥ—
tolerance; ārjavam —simplicity; ca —and; eva —certainly;
jñ ānam —transcendental knowledge; vijñ ānam —realised
knowledge; (and) āstikyam —firm faith in the
philosophical conclusions of śāstra ; (are) karma —the
duties; brahma —of the brāhmaṇas ; svabhāva-jam —born
out of their own nature.

Control of the mind and senses, penance, purity,
tolerance, simplicity, knowledge of the self and of
bhajana, and firm faith in and realisation of śāstra are
the characteristic qualities and duties (karma) of the
brāhmaṇas born of their own nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now the karma (prescribed duties) of brāhmaṇas , who are
influenced predominantly by sattva-guṇa , are being
described. Śamaḥ refers to control of the internal
sense, the mind. Damaḥ means control of the external
physical senses. Tapaḥ refers to the prescribed work
performed by the body. Jñ āna-vij ñ āne means knowledge
and realisation of the śāstra . Āstikatā means firm
faith in the meaning and purport of śāstra . All of
these are the natural karma of the brāhmaṇas .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.11.21), the qualities of the
brāhmaṇas are described. They are: control of the mind

                            879
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

and senses, penance, cleanliness, satisfaction,
tolerance, simplicity, knowledge, mercy, truthfulness
and bhagavad-bhakti.


śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ

santoṣaḥ kṣāntir ārjavam

jñānaṁ dayācyutātmatvaṁ

satyaṁ ca brahma-lakṣaṇam


Also in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.17.16), Śrī Kṛṣṇa tells
Uddhava that control of the mind and senses, performance
of penance, cleanliness, satisfaction, tolerance,
simplicity, bhagavad-bhakti , mercy and truthfulness are
the qualities of the brāhmaṇas .

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.5.24), Rṣabhadeva says:


dhṛtā tanūr uśatī me purāṇī

yeneha sattvaṁ paramaṁ pavitram

śamo damaḥ satyam anugrahaś ca

tapas titikṣānubhavaś ca yatra


Who can be superior to the brāhmaṇas? By their study
they are sustaining My very beautiful and primeval form
of the Vedas, which are the avatāra of transcendental
sound, and they are endowed with the eight supremely
pure qualities of sattva-guṇa: control of the mind,
control of the senses, truthfulness, mercy, penance,
tolerance, knowledge and realisation (bhakti).

Here, it should be understood that a real brāhmaṇa who
is endowed with such qualities cannot be the cause of
harm or violence to any person, society, communit y or
nation. Undoubtedly, such individuals are the well-
wishing friends of every living being. This statement is
most definititely true. But those who are bereft of
brāhmiṇical qualities will only cause great harm to
society although pretentiously proclai ming themselves
to be brāhmaṇas ; of this there is no doubt. At the same
time, it is not correct to envy the whole varṇa system
because of this defect and make efforts to destroy it
completely. The proper course of action to correct the
defects that have crept into this system is for society
to honour those who truly possess such good qualities.

According to the Gītā, a person should be appropriately
honoured after ascertaining his varṇa based on his
qualities, actions, nature and his impressions from
previous lives. This will make it possible for brāhmaṇas
like Vasiṣṭha, Nārada and Vyāsa to make their appearance
in our society. Peace and happiness will be established
throughout the world if such elevated brāhmaṇas and
great kṣatriya heroes like Śrī Rāma, Arjuna, Bhīma and
Mahārāja Bharata take birth here.

                            880
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


The atheistic society that is taking shape today is
without any concern for caste or divisions. It is simply
giving rise to murder, looting, dacoitry, cheating and
other sinful activities. Agitation and fear are all-
pervading. The world has never before seen such a
miserable condition. It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(7.11.35): yasya yal-lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ

puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam

yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta

tat tenaiva vinirdiśet


A person’s varṇa can be ascertained by noting in him
particular symptoms that have been described for
establishing the varṇas of humans. A person should be
assigned to a varṇa according to these particular
symptoms. Varṇa cannot be decided merely by birth.

In the present age, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda
aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura Prabhupāda, the founder of the worldwide Gauḍīya
Mission, re-established and preached daiva-varṇāśrama -
dharma based on various evidences from śruti and smṛti
as well as time-honoured customs.




Śloka 43




śauryaṁ tejo dhṛtir dākṣyaṁ

yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam

dānam īśvara-bhāvaś ca

kṣatraṁ karma-svabhāva-jam


śauryam—heroism; tejaḥ—boldness; dhṛtiḥ—firmness;
dākṣyaḥ—dexterity; ca —and; api —also; apalāyanam —not
fleeing; yuddhe —in battle; dānam —generosity; ca —and;
īśvara-bhāvaḥ—leadership; (comprise) kṣatra-karma —the
work of the administrative or warrior class; jam —born;
(which are) svabhāva —of their own nature.

Heroism, boldness, firmness, dexterity, not fleeing from
a battle, generosity and leadership are the prescribed
actions of the kṣatriyas which are born of their own
nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī


                             881
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




This śloka describes the activities of kṣatriyas , in
whom rajo-guṇa predominates over sattva-guṇa . Śaurya
means valour or heroism, tejaḥ means aggressiveness or
courage, dhṛtiḥ means patience (determination), and
īśvara-bhāvaḥ means the ability and tendency to control
people. These are the innate duties of a kṣatriya .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




It is also stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.11.22):


śauryaṁ vīryaṁ dhṛtis tejas

tyāgaś cātma-jayaḥ kṣamā

brahmaṇyatā prasādaś ca

rakṣā ca kṣatra-lakṣaṇam


Enthusiasm in battle, heroism, firmness, boldness,
sacrifice, control of the mind, forgiveness, devotion to
the brāhmaṇas, mercy and protection of the subjects are
the characteristics of the kṣatriyas.




Śloka 44




kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ

vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam

paricaryātmakaṁ karma

śūdrasyāpi svabhāva-jam


karma—the work; vaiśya—of the vaiśyas ; sva-bhāva-jam —
which is born of their own nature; (is) kṛṣi —
agriculture; go-rakṣya —cow protection; (and) vāṇijyam —
commerce; api —and; karma —the work; śūdrasya —of the
śudras ; svabhāva-jam —born of their own nature; (is)
ātmakam—of the nature; paricarya —of rendering service.

The prescribed karma of the vaiśyas, which is born of
their own nature, is agriculture, protecting cows,
commerce and trade. The karma of the śūdras, which is
born of their own nature, is to render service to the

                            882
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

other three varṇas.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




In the vaiśyas, rajo-guṇa predominates; tamo-guṇa is
less prominent. Agriculture, protection of the cows and
trade, etc., are the natural and inborn karma of the
vaiśyas . They are called go-rakṣaka (protectors of the
cows) because they rear and protect the cows. Tamo-guṇa
is predominant in śūdras , not rajo-guṇa . Their natural
karma is to render service to brāhmaṇas , kṣatriyas and
vaiśyas.




Śloka 45




sve sve karmaṇy abhirataḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ labhate naraḥ

sva-karma nirataḥ siddhiṁ

yathā vindati tac chṛṇu


abhirataḥ—being attached; sve sve—to his respective;
karmaṇi —activities; naraḥ—a man; labhate —attains;
saṁsiddhim —full perfection (eligibility to acquire jñ
āna ); śṛṇu —now hear; tat —that (information); yathā—
how; vindati —he finds; siddhim —perfection; nirataḥ—
while being attached; sva-karma —to his work.

Men are devoted to their own karma according to their
respective qualifications. Thus, they attain the
perfection of being eligible to acquire jñ āna. Now hear
how a person who is engaged in his prescribed duty can
attain perfection.




Śloka 46




yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ

yena sarvam idaṁ tatam

sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya

                            883
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ


mānavaḥ—a man; vindati—attains; siddhim —perfection;
sva-karmaṇā—through performance of his prescribed
duties; abhyarcya —by worshipping; tam —Him; yataḥ—
whence; (arises) pravṛttiḥ—the manifestation; bhūtānām —
of all beings; (and) yena —by whom; idam —this; sarvam —
entire (world); tatam —is pervaded.

A man attains perfection through the performance of his
own prescribed karma (work) by worshipping Parameśvara,
from whom all jīvas have come into existence, and by
whom this world is pervaded.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




One should attain Parameśvara, from whom all living
entities are born, by performing pūjā and arcana to Him
with the prayerful entreaty: “May Parameśvara be pleased
by my rendering thi s work (karma ) .” To perform arcana
to Parameśvara with such feeling is proper worship of
Him.




Śloka 47




śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ

para-dharmāt svanuṣṭhitāt

svabhāva-niyataṁ karma

kurvan nāpnoti kilbiṣam


śreyān—better; (than) svadharmaḥ—one’s own occupational
duty; (is) viguṇaḥ—imperfectly performed; para-dharmāt —
than another’s duty; su-anuṣṭhitāt —very nicely
performed; kurvan —by performing; karma —work; svabhāva-
niyatam —regulated by one’s own nature; na āpnoti —one
does not incur; kilbiṣam —sin.

It is more beneficial to perform one’s own occupational
duty (svadharma), even though inferior or imperfectly
performed, than to perfectly execute the higher duty of
another (para-dharma). By performing his svadharma, a
man incurs no sin.




                            884
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“It is not proper to engage in sāttvika acts, having
lost interest in one’s own dharma , considering it to be
rājasika .” Thus, Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka
beginning with the word śreyān . Even though one is
unable to perform one’s lowly, inferior svadharma
properly, it is better than properly performing para-
dharma , which may appear to be superior. “Therefore, O
Arjuna, it is improper for you to renounce your
svadharma of fighting just because you see the killing
of relatives as detrimental, in order to perform para-
dharma , the occupation of others who wander and beg.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here it should be understood that one can accept the
conclusion of the present śloka only when the word
svadharma implies varṇāśrama-dharma. But when the word
svadharma is used to imply ātma-dharma , bhakti to Śrī
Hari, then one must accept the conclusions of the ślokas
such as sarva-dharmān parityajya . Where svadharma means
ātma-dharma , the word para-dharma means activities
related to the body and mind. Until a person develops
faith in ātma-dharma , it is beneficial to perform
prescribed duties according to his innate nature. As it
is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.9): tāvat karmāṇi
kurvīta

na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā

śraddhā yāvan na jāyate


As long as one is not satiated by fruitive activity and
has not awakened his taste for bhajana by śravaṇam,
kīrtanam, etc., one has to follow the principles of
śāstra.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “It is better to
perform svadharma even improperly than to engage in
para-dharma expertly. Svadharma means the duties
prescribed according to one’s natural aptitude and
innate qualities. Therefore, even if svadharma is
sometimes not executed expertly, it is always
beneficial. There is no possibility of incurring sin by
performing duties which are prescribed according to
one’s own nature.”




                           885
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Śloka 48



saha-jaṁ karma kaunteya

sa-doṣam api na tyajet

sarvārambhā hi doṣeṇa

dhūmenāgnir ivāvṛtāḥ


kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; na tyajet—one should not give
up; karma —the work; saha-jam —born of one’s nature; api
—even though; sa-doṣam —faulty; hi —indeed; sarva-
ārambhāḥ—all endeavours; (are) avṛtāḥ—covered; doṣeṇa —
by fault; iva —as; agniḥ—fire; (is covered) dhūmena —by
smoke.

O Kaunteya, one should not relinquish duty that is in
accordance with one’s nature even if that duty has some
defect, because all undertakings are covered by some
fault, just as fire is covered by smoke.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




It is not proper to think that there is only fault in
one’s svadharma, as there is certainly some fault in
para-dharma also. To clarify this point, Śrī Bhagavān
speaks this śloka beginning with the word saha-jam. One
should perform the duty that is in accordance with one’s
nature, because all work (karma ), be it seen (manifest)
or unseen (unmanifest) is tinged with some defect, just
as fire is covered by smoke. A person overlooks the
defect of a fire’s smoke while utilising its light and
heat to dispel darkness and cold. In the same way, one
must accept the positive aspect of one’s prescribed duty
for the purification of one’s existence, and neglect the
defective aspect.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Generally, duties that are prescribed according to one’s
nature are called svadharma. By performing such duties a
person can maintain his life very easily, and he may
also possibly gradually enter spiritual life. If a
person accepts the prescribed duties of others, having
observed some fault in his own svadharma , there is a
possibility that he may incur even more sin. If one
gives up one’s kṣatriya-dharma , considering it to be

                           886
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

violent, and accepts the duty of a brāhmaṇa , thinking
that it is free from such faults, then there is the
possibility of impropriety, because even the duties that
are prescribed according to the nature of the brāhmaṇas
are subject to the three guṇas . Since the instruments
for performing brāhmiṇical acts are material, there
always remains some fault or other in activities
performed with them. For example, there is always the
possibility of killing living entities while performing
a fire yajña . For this reason, the example of fire is
given here. Fire remains covered by smoke. This is a
defect of fire, but the fire is still accepted in order
to dispel cold, to cook and serve other purposes.
According to this same reasoning, it is beneficial to
engage only in one’s prescribed activities. A person
utilises the fire he lights after removing some portion
of the smoke. In the same way, after overcoming the
defects of his karma by offering that karma to Śrī
Bhagavān, one should accept that aspect of it which
gives rise to jñ āna for the purpose of self-
realisation.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Śri Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“O Kaunteya, even if the duties that are prescribed
according to one’s nature are defective, they should by
no means be relinquished. Eve ry endeavour is covered by
some defect. Just as fire is always covered by smoke,
defects cover and contaminate every action. A man should
accept the positive part of the karma which is
prescribed according to his nature for the purpose of
purifying his existence, and should discard the
defective part.”




Śloka 49



asakta-buddhiḥ sarvatra

jitātmā vigata-spṛhaḥ

naiṣkarmya-siddhiṁ paramāṁ

sannyāsenādhigacchati


buddhiḥ—one whose intelligence; (is) asakta—detached;
sarvatra —in all situations; jita-ātmā—whose mind is
self-controlled; (and) vigata-spṛhaḥ—who is devoid of
desire; adhigacchati —attains; paramām —supreme; siddhim
—perfection; naiṣkarmya —in the form of action free from
reaction; sannyāsena —through renunciation (of the
results of his work) .

One whose intelligence is not attached to anything
material, whose citta (mind) is under control, and who
is free from all desires, even for achieving the
happiness of Brahma-loka, attains supreme perfection in
the form of naiṣkarmya (reaction-free action) by
completely renouncing karma.

                             887
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Action (karma) becomes defective when, due to false ego,
a person considers himself to be the doer and desires
the fruit of that activity. The first stage of sannyāsa
is to give up these defects and remain engaged in karma
. Gradually, however, when the sādhana of such a
sannyāsī matures and he becomes firmly situated in yoga
(yogārūḍha ), he may completely renounce all karma. This
is the second stage of sannyāsa . Asakta-buddhiḥ refers
to one whose intelligence is free from all attachment to
material objects. Jitātmā means one whose mind is under
control and vigata-spṛhaḥ means one who does not even
desire the happiness of Brahma-loka. Such persons attain
supreme perfection in the form of naiṣkarmya by giving
up all karma completely. In the yogārūḍha stage, their
naiṣkarmya (reaction-free or desireless action) attains
perfection in the highest sense.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining how one can accept the
positive aspect of karma by giving up the defective
aspect. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “Those whose
intelligence is completely free from attachment to
material objects, whose minds are under control, and who
do not even desire the happiness of Brahma-loka, achieve
the supreme perfection in the form of naiṣkarmya by
completely renouncing their karma-niṣṭhā (adherence to
action).”




Śloka 50



siddhiṁ prāpto yathā brahma

tathāpnoti nibodha me

samāsenaiva kaunteya

niṣṭhā jñānasya yā parā


tathā—also; nibodha—be informed; me —by Me; samāsena —in
brief; kaunteya —O son of Kuntī; yathā—how; prāptaḥ—one
who has attained; siddhim —perfection; eva —indeed;

                           888
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

āpnoti —attains; brahma —spiritual realisation; yā—
which; (is) parā—the highest; niṣṭhā—stage of
steadiness; jñ ānasya —in transcendental knowledge.

Hear from Me in brief, O Kaunteya, the means by which a
person who has achieved perfection in the form of
naiṣkarmya attains brahma, which is the highest
culmination of jñ āna.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“And now, hear from Me how he then attains and realises
brahma.” Niṣṭhā parā refers to complete cessation of
ignorance through the practice of various types of yoga
. According to the Amara-koṣa dictionary, niṣṭhā means
completion, destruction or end. “Understand how, when
ignorance subsides, jñ āna is progressively superseded
by vijñ āna. Then finally, when jñ āna is entirely
relinquished, brahma will be realised.”




Ślokas 51-53



buddhyā viśuddhayā yukto

dhṛtyātmānaṁ niyamya ca

śabdādīn viṣayāṁs tyaktvā

rāga-dveṣau vyudasya ca

vivikta-sevī laghv-āśī

yata-vāk-kāya-mānasaḥ

dhyāna-yoga-paro nityaṁ

vairāgyaṁ samupāśritaḥ

ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ

kāmaṁ krodhaṁ parigraham

vimucya nirmamaḥ śānto

brahmabhūyāya kalpate


yuktaḥ—one engaged (in bhakti); viśuddhayā—with fully
purified; buddhyā—intelligence; ca —and; niyamya —
controlling; ātmānam —the mind; dhṛtyā—with
determination; tyaktvā—giving up; viṣayān —sense
objects; śabda-ādīn —such as sound; ca —and; vyudasya —

                            889
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

putting aside; rāga-dveṣau —attachment and aversion;
vivikta-sevī—resorting to solitary places; laghu-āśī—
eating lightly; yata —controlling; kāya —body; mānasaḥ—
mind; vāk—and speech; paraḥ—being absorbed; dhyāna-yoga
—in contemplative yoga ; nityam —always; samupāśritaḥ—
taking shelter; vairāgyam —of the philosophy and
principles of renunciation; vimucya —being freed from;
ahaṅkāram —false ego; balam —false (physical) strength;
darpam —arrogance; kāmam —desire; krodham —anger;
parigraham —unnecessary accumulation of possessions;
(being) nirmamaḥ—free from possessiveness; (and) śāntaḥ—
peaceful; kalpate —is eligible; brahmabhūyāya —for
brahma realisation.

Being blessed with pure intelligence, controlling the
mind with forbearance, relinquishing the objects of
sense enjoyment such as sound, being freed from
attachment and aversion, living in a sanctified solitary
place, eating little, controlling the body, mind and
speech, constantly taking shelter of yoga by meditation
on Bhagavān, being completely detached and free from
false ego, false attachment, arrogance, desire, anger,
and unnecessary accumulation of possessions, being free
from the notion of ‘mine’, and situated peacefully, such
people are qualified to realise brahma.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Those who are able to control their mind with sāttvika
intelligence and sāttvika forbearance, and who take
shelter of the supreme yoga , becoming situated in
medita tion upon Śrī Bhagavān, become qualified to
realise brahma . Here, the word bala does not mean
strength or ability, but attachment to kāma , material
desires. After giving up the false ego and material
desires, they become qualified to realise brahma . This
is called cessation of ignorance. In such a state, even
sattva -guṇa becomes quiet and subdued. This alone is
called renunciation of jñ āna . It is also stated in the
Eleventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam : “Renounce even jñ
āna in Me.” One cannot realise brahma without renouncing
both ajñ āna and jñ āna . Brahmabhūyāya kalpate means to
become capable of realising brahma .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




A sādhaka’s heart becomes purified by offering Bhagavān
the results of one’s sāttvika actions which are born of
one’s nature. By subduing their senses, such sādhakas
remain fixed in a state of trance. Their senses are
satisfied because they are detached from sense objects.
This dispels all mundane attachments and aversions. In

                           890
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

such a state, they become free from the false ego of
considering the body to be the self. They do not seek
material happiness, nor are they ever overpowered by
lamentation. They are constantly equipoised. In this
state, which is called brahmabhūta , they even give up
the subtle body and become situated in the ātma-svarūpa
, the true self.




Śloka 54




brahmabhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām


brahmabhūtaḥ—one who is spiritually realised; (is)
prasanna-ātmā—a fully joyful soul; na śocati —he never
laments; na —nor; kāṅkṣati —hankers; samaḥ—he is equal;
sarveṣu —to all; bhūteṣu —beings; labhate —he attains;
mad-bhaktim —My bhakti ; parām —which is blessed with
the symptoms of prema .

A person thus situated in brahma becomes fully joyful.
He never laments or desires anything. Being equally
disposed to all beings, he attains bhakti to Me, which
is blessed with the symptoms of prema.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“A sādhaka-jīva attains the nature of brahma
(brahmabhūta ) when he becomes free from the impure
designations of sattva-guṇa , rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa.
That means he attains a state of pure consciousness,
free from any covering, and thus becomes prasannātmā
(fully joyful). Having achieved this higher state, he
neither laments for what he has lost, nor hankers for
what he does not have. In such a state, he is free from
the false ego of considering the body to be the self.
Sarveṣu bhūteṣu means in all beings, good or bad. Samaḥ
means that he develops equal vision like that of a
child, thereby becoming free from any external
identification. His desire for jñ āna becomes satiated,
just like a fire that has been extinguished due to lack
of fuel. He then attains My imperishable bhakti in the
form of śravaṇam and kīrtanam (which is vested in jñ āna
). Bhakti is a function of My s varūpa-śakti and even
continues to exist when ajñ āna and jñ āna cease,

                            891
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

because it is separate from My illusory potency.
Therefore, the word parām means separate, or superior to
jñ āna. In other words, parām means kevala-bhakti ,
which is devoid of niṣkāma-kar ma , jñ āna , etc.

The word labhate means that previously, bhakti , which
was partially situated in jñ āna and vairāgya and
practised for the purpose of achieving mokṣa , was not
intelligibly realised, just as Antaryāmī, situated in
all beings, cannot be realise d very easily. Therefore,
the word labhate (obtain) has been used instead of the
word kurute (does). A golden gem that has become mixed
with grains such as mūng or urad dāl can be retrieved
even when the grains are destroyed by grinding. This is
because the gem is comparatively imperishable. In the
same way, bhakti , which is partially situated in jñ āna
and vairāgya , can be achieved independently when jñ āna
and vairāgya are dispelled. This is the most opportune
time to attain pure prema-bhakti. The result of such
bhakti is never sāyujya-mukti . Therefore, the word
parām here must mean prema-lakṣaṇā bhakti , or bhakti
endowed with the symptoms of prema .




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Para-bhakti is necessary to understand parabrahma Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, even after one h as attained the state of
brahmabhūta . This is explained in the present śloka .
Various commentators give different explanations of the
word brahmabhūta which convey almost the same meaning.
Only a jīva who is free from all the material guṇas and
situated on the platform of brahma is called brahmabhūta
. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes that
brahmabhūta is the pure state of transcendental nature
attained by a jīva when he has become free from all
gross and subtle designations. This refutes the
understanding that brahmabhūta means to lose one’s
existence completely by merging into and becoming one
with brahma . Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī, Śrī Rāmānujācārya,
Śrī Madhvācārya, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura,
Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa and others have unanimously
refuted the above opinion which is against siddhānta .

The kevalā advaitavādīs (impersonalists) say that the
following four statements are the supreme axioms of the
Vedas : ahaṁ brahmāsmi (I am brahma ); tat tvam asi (You
are that); sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma (Indeed everything
is brahma ); and prajñ ānaṁ brahma (Real knowledge is
brahma realisation) . They attempt to establish māyāvāda
philosophy by erroneously interpreting these statements,
but they are simply cheating the common people by such
deceptive propaganda. The above four statements of the
Vedas are actually only peripheral statements. Oṁ alone
is the supreme statement and it is the svarūpa of brahma
. Tat tvam asi actually means, ‘You belong to Him,’ or
‘you are His servant.’ This was also clarified earlier.
The māyāvādīs , however, explain it to mean, ‘You are
also that (Him).’ This explanation is completely

                           892
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

distorted and misleading. Also, in regard to the
statement ahaṁ brahmāsmi , the jīva is designated as
brahma simply because he has some qualitative similarity
with brahma. Because the jīva is the separated part of
brahma , he is also cit-svarūpa (conscious by nature),
but he can be controlled by māyā because he is only a
separated part. Parabrahma , however, is the controller
of māyā. The jīva is atomic and parabrahma is an
infinite entity, therefore, these two can never become
one.

The entire creation containing both conscious and inert
energies has manifested from parabrahma. Inert matter
and consciousness are the transformations of brahma’s
potency, and are partially one with Him; they are not
completely one with Him. A person can thus understand
the true import of the Vedas only after he first
considers the precise meaning of each and every Upaniṣad
mantra individually, after which he deliberates upon
them collectively to comprehend their meaning as a
whole. If a person unnecessarily speculates and
interprets the peripheral statements of the Vedas , he
will only arrive at false conclusions. One must,
therefore, properly understand Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
definitive instructions on acintya-bheda-abheda-tattva
in order to avoid any misinterpretation.

There are abundant mantras in the Vedas which establish
the difference between the jīva and brahma . Some of
those mantras are cited below: (1) pradhāna-kṣetra-jña-
patir guṇeśaḥ (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.16). “He is the
controller of the guṇas and master of the kṣetra-jña
living entities.”

(2) tam āhur agryam puruṣaṁ mahāntam (Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad 3.19). “Sages declare Him to be the foremost
and greatest of persons.”

(3) yāthātathyato ‘rthān vyadadhāt (Īśopaniṣad 8). “It
is He who awards the many jīvas’ necessities.”

(4) tenedaṁ pūrṇaṁ puruṣeṇa sarvam (Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad 3.9). “By that Person’s arrangement, this
universe is complete in every respect.”

(5) nityo nityānāṁ (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 5.13, Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad 6.13). “He is supreme among all eternal
beings.”


It can be clearly understood from the above quotations
that the jīva can never merge with brahma and become one
with Him. Therefore, brahmabhūta actually means that the
jīva becomes situated in his eternal constitutional
position. The symptoms of jīvas who have achieved the
brahmabhūta stage are explained as follows: (a)
prasannātmā: The first characteristic is that they
remain always joyful due to being freed from the effects
of the subtle body, which is composed of the three
material guṇas .

(b) na śocati : They never lament for that which has
been lost.


                           893
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(c) na kāṅkśati : They do not hanker for what they do
not have.

(d) samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu : Like a child, they possess
equal vision towards all beings, good or bad.

(e) mad bhaktiṁ parām : They have an intense desire to
attain My para-bhakti .


Mahātmās who have attained the brahmabhūta stage, which
is endowed with the above mentioned symptoms, in the
association of sādhus , attain para-prema-bhakti unto
Śrī Bhagavān. It is also appropriate at this point to
understand the true meaning of the word para-bhakti.

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ

bhaktir uttamā

Uttamā-bhakti means the cultivation of activities which
are meant exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa or,
in other words, the uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa performed in all endeavours of the body, mind and
speech and through the expression of various spiritual
sentiments (bhāvas), which is not covered by jñ āna,
knowledge of oneness with brahma or nitya and
naimittika-karma, yoga, tapasyā and so forth, and which
is devoid of all desires other than the aspiration to
bring happiness to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

This uttamā-bhakti is certainly the very essence of all
śāstras . Famous kevala-advaita-vādī commentators, such
as Ācārya Śaṅkara, Ānandagiri and Madhusūdana Sarasvatī,
have stated in their commentaries on this present śloka
that para-bhakti is bhakti characterised by jñ āna. But
it is worth noting that the para-bhakti described in
this śloka is only achieved after attaining the
brahmabhūta stage. In other words, it is achieved by a
person who has become situated on the brahmabhūta
platform. Para-bhakti is therefore superior even to the
brahmabhūta state. It can be easily understood that it
does not refer to bhakti which is mixed with jñ āna and
aimed at achieving brahma-jñ āna . A person still needs
to acquire tattvajñ āna of parabrahma Śrī Kṛṣṇa, even
afte r he has attained brahma-jñ āna . Thus, a brahma-jñ
ānī will achieve tattvajñ āna of Śrī Kṛṣṇa if he has the
good fortune to perform para-bhakti in the association
of bhaktas . It should be clearly understood here that
there is a difference between the para-bhakti , which
gives knowledge of kṛṣṇatattva , and the bhakti which is
used to achieve brahma-jñ āna . The word parā has been
used to clarify this point. There is a confidential
meaning also behind the use of the word labhate
(obtains), instead of the word kurute (does) . There is
a possibility of achieving para-bhakti only when a
person has realised the insignificance and inferior
nature of the brahma-jñ āna attained by a brahma-jñ ānī.
This takes place by the causeless mercy of Bhagavān or
His bhaktas. The word labhate has therefore been used

                            894
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

because para-bhakti is achieved only by the mercy of
Bhagavān or His bhaktas . The word kurute (does or
makes) would have been used if it were achievable by
one’s own endeavour; but Śrī Bhagavān has not used the
word kurute . This observation clarifies that the word
para-bhakti only aims at śuddhā, kevalā or ananya-bhakti
and not at jñ āna-miśra-bhakti.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that even this brahmabhūta
stage is external, because one who is situated in that
stage cannot realise or attain Goloka or Vaikuṇṭha
although he has become free from the guṇas . Goloka or
Vaikuṇṭha can only be realised when one acquires para-
bhakti . Therefore, the brahmabhūta platform is not the
highest step. Rather, it is the initial stage in the
process of acquiring that supreme level.

Here it should also be understood that those who acquire
the brahmabhūta stage are of two types. The first type
endeavour for sāyujya-mukti , even after they have
attained the brahmabhūta stage. They disregard the
bhaktas of Bhagavān and Śrī Bhagavān’s nāma , rūpa ,
guṇa and līlā and do not listen to hari-kathā. They are
offenders and never achieve mukti but continue to wander
in the bodies of āsurika species in this material world.
The second type respect the bhaktas as well as
Bhagavān’s nāma , rūpa , guṇa and līlā. Taking shelter
of the bhaktas , they easily achieve para-bhakti due to
their non-offensive attitude .




Śloka 55



bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā

viśate tad-anantaram


bhaktyā—through bhakti; abhijānāti —one can fully know;
mām—Me; tattvataḥ—in truth; yāvān —how great My opulence
is; ca yaḥ asmi —and what My svarūpa (original form) is;
tataḥ—then; jñ ātvā—having understood; tattvataḥ—in
truth; tat-anantaram —after that; viśate —one can enter;
mām —Me (My nitya-līlā).

It is only by bhakti that one can know the tattva of My
glories and svarūpa. He then enters My eternal pastimes
through that tattva on the strength of prema-bhakti.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                            895
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



“What is the result of attaining bhakti to You?” Śrī
Bhagavān answers this with the śloka beginning with
bhaktyā. “Jñ ānīs and various types of bhaktas who have
attained bhakti understand the tattva of My opulences
and svarūpa (tat-padārtha ), and thus enter My nitya-
līlā. As I have also said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.14.21): ‘I am attainable only by kevala-bhakti.’
Thus, the vidyā of the jñ ānīs can cease on the strength
of that bhakti alone. They can enter into Me and realise
the bliss of sāyujya when they come to know Me in tattva
. Because I am beyond māyā and since avidyā is māyā, I
am known only by vidyā.”

The five divisions of vidyā are stated in the Nārada-pa
ñcar ātra. They are: jñ āna , yoga , vairāgya , tapa and
bhakti to Keśava. Bhakti is a special function of vidyā.
Furthermore, only a portion of bhakti , which is a
function of Śrī Bhagavān’s hlādinī-śakti , enters into
vidyā to enable its success. Sometimes, a portion of
bhakti enters karma to facilitate the success of karma-
yoga . The practice of karma , yoga and jñ āna , etc.

is simply unnecessary labour without bhakti , and does
not bear fruit. In truth, bhakti is nirguṇa , so it
cannot manifest from vidyā, which is in sattva-guṇa.
Ignorance is removed by vidyā, whereas Śrī Bhagavān
(tat-padārtha ) is known by bhakti . Furthermore, it is
said in Gītā (14.17): “Jñ āna arises from sattva-guṇa .”
Therefore, the jñ āna which comes from sattva-guṇa is
also in sattva-guṇa . Vidyā refers to sattva-jñ āna ,
but the jñ āna arising from bhakti is bhakti Herself.
That bhakti is denoted in some places by the word bhakti
, and in other places by the word jñ āna . In this way,
it is necessary to understand that jñ āna is also of two
types.

One achieves brahma-sāyujya only after giving up the
first type of jñ āna which manifests from sattva-guṇa ,
and adopting the second type of jñ āna arising from
bhakti . This can be clearly seen in the Eleventh Canto
of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , Chapter Twenty-Five . Some
people, who are bereft of bhakti , try to attain sāyujya
through jñ āna . Such persons, who are proud of their jñ
āna , unfortunately only become distressed and are
condemned. There are those who understand that mukti
cannot be achieved solely through jñ āna. Thus they
engage in some practices of bhakti with their jñ āna (jñ
āna miśra-bhakti ). Such persons think that the
existence of Bhagavān is material and temporary, and
that His body consists of the material guṇas . Even
after attaining the platform of yoga called yogārūḍha ,
such persons, who falsely think that they are liberated,
are only worthy of being condemned. As it is said in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.2): “According to their
respective guṇas , the four āśramas along with the four
varṇas , originated separately from the mouth, arms,
thighs, and feet of the puruṣa , Bhagavān. Those who
disrespect this self-born puruṣa , Bhagavān Himself, and
do not render service to Him, fall from their position.”
This means that those who do not perform bhajana to Him
as well as those who disrespect Him, even while
worshipping Him, fall down after losing their vidyā,

                           896
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

even though they are sannyāsīs. Śrīmad-Bhāga vatam also
states (10.2.32): ye ‘nye aravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho ‘nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

O Kamala-nayana (lotus-eyed Lord)! One who is falsely
proud of being liberated, and does not perform bhakti to
You due to his polluted intelligence, falls down because
he disrespects Your lotus feet, even after he has taken
great trouble to attain the highest position of
renunciation.

The word anye in the above Bhāgavatam śloka refers to a
person other than a bhakta of Śrī Mādhava, and the word
aṅghri refers to bhakti . To disrespect Śrī Bhagavān’s
lotus feet, therefore, means to disrespect bhakti.

Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ means that it is disrespectful
to consider that Śrī Bhagavān’s body is composed of the
three guṇas . This was also stated earlier in Gītā
(9.11): “Foolish people deride Me when I appear in My
human form.” In reality, that human form is sac-cid-
ānandamaya , composed of eternality, knowledge and
bliss. Only by the influe nce of Śrī Bhagavān’s
inconceivable kṛpā śakti does that body become visible.
It is said in Nārāyaṇa-ādhyātma-vacana , “Although the
svarūpa of Śrī Bhagavān is ever unmanifest, He becomes
visible only by the influence of His own śakti . Who can
see His supremely blissful svarūpa without the help of
that potency?” Thus, the sac-cid-ānanda nature of
Bhagavān’s body is established.

Even though hundreds of śruti and smṛti statements such
as kliptaṁ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaṁ śrī vṛndāvana sura-
bhūruha-talāsīnam , “The Lord is described as He who has
a transcendental form of eternality, cognisance and
bliss, and is seated at the base of a desire-tree”
(Gopāla-tāpini Upaniṣad ), and śābdaṁ brahma dadhad
vapuḥ, “The Lord displayed His transcendental form,
which can only be understood through the Vedas .”
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.21.8) further establishes the sac-
cid-ānanda nature of Bhagavān’s body, still some
conclude that His name, form, qualities, etc., are
materially designated on the basis of one solitary
statement in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.10): māyāṁ tu
prakṛtiṁ vidyān māyinaṁ tu maheśvaram. “The phenomema of
material nature is māyā (a temporary illusion), and
Parameśvara is mayī, made up of māyā.” However, there is
a śruti statement quoted in Śrī Madhva-bhāṣya , ato
māyāmayaṁ viṣṇuṁ pravadanti sanātanam , “Therefore, they
declare Śrī Viṣṇu, the eternal supreme Lord to be
māyāmaya , constituted of māyā.” According to this
statement, Bhagavān is eternally endowed with an
internal potency called svarūpa-bhūta-māyā, which is
part of His own svarūpa . In the word māyāṁ tu , in this
śloka from Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad , māyā refers to His
svarūpa-bhūta , cit or conscious potency, which
originates from His svarūpa . It does not refer to the
material energy consisting of the guṇas , which is not
part of His svarūpa. However, they do not accept this

                           897
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

meaning. They do not even accept the interpretation that
māyā is the prakṛti and Maheśvara or Śambhu Śiva is the
master of that māyā. Therefore, they fall down due to
their offensive attitude t o Bhagavān, even after
attaining the state of jīvan mukta , liberation while
living within this material body. It is also said in the
supplementary statement of Vāsanā-bhāṣya , that even a
person who is jīvan mukta becomes entrenched in material
lusty desires and again has to enter saṁsāra if he
somehow offends the inconceivable, supremely powerful
Bhagavān. When he has attained the result of his
practice, he thinks that the means are of no further
use; hence he falls down. Therefore, in the stage of jñ
āna -sa nnyāsa , he abandons not only jñ āna , but
guṇībhūtā bhakti (bhakti which is present in jñ āna to
some degree). Thus he maintains the false conception
that he is experiencing direct realisation of brahma .
Because he commits offenses to the śrī-vigraha of Bhaga
vān, bhakti also disappears along with jñ āna , and he
is not able to attain bhakti again. Without bhakti , the
Supreme Absolute Truth cannot be realised . It should be
understood that the meditation such a person performs at
that time is useless, and his pride in being jīvan mukta
, liberated while in this body, should also be
recognised as baseless.

Supporting this view, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.32)
states: ye ‘nye aravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. “There are
two types of jīvan muktas who properly engage in the
practice of bhakti-miśra-j ñ āna (jñ āna mixed with
bhakti ) . Both of them recognise the śrī-mūrti of
Bhagavān to be sac-cid-ānandamayī, and they achieve
para-bhakti after gradually giving up vidyā and avidyā.
The first perform bhakti with the aim of attaining
sāyujya , becoming one with Him. With the assistance of
this bhakti , they achieve tat-padārtha , direct
realisation of the Supreme Absolute Truth, thus
attaining oneness with Him. Those individuals are worthy
of honour. In the second group are highly fortunate
persons who give up the desire for mukti and remain
absorbed in tasting the sweetness of bhakti-rasa by the
influence of the association of calm and composed mahā-
bhāgavatas like Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Such personalities are
to be most highly honoured. As it is said in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (1.7.10): “The qualities of Śrī Hari are so
wonderful that even the great munis who are ātmārāma ,
and who have completely cut the knot of avidyā, are
attracted by His attracting potency. Hence, they perform
selfless bhakti to Ur ukrama Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who performs
wonderful feats.”

Therefore, out of these four types of jñānīs, the first
two are worthy of reproach and they remain bound, while
the other two are respectable and cross beyond the
material world.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




                           898
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

In the present śloka, Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the
result of para-bhakti (kevala-bhakti characterised by
prema ). By some good fortune, by the mercy of a great
personality, a person who has achieved the stage of
brahmabhūta attains para-bhakti. At that time, he loses
his desire for mokṣa. Having become free from jñ āna ,
he achieves nirguṇā bhakti and realises kṛṣṇatattva.
This takes place when he realises his svarūpa-siddhi.
Then, at the time of attaining vastu-siddhi , he enters
into the pastimes of Bhagavān. It is stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (1.7.10): ātmārāmāś ca munayo nirgranthā apy
urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīm bhaktim

itthaṁ-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ

Those ātmārāmas who are very fortunate can become
attracted by the qualities of Śrī Bhagavān if they
receive the causeless mercy of Śrī Bhagavān and His
bhaktas. They can then become absorbed in relishing the
sweetness of bhakti-rasa by engaging in ahaitukī bhakti
to Him.

The examples are the four Kumāras, who received the
mercy of Bhagavān, and Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who
received the mercy of Śrī Vyāsadeva.

In Gītā ślokas, such as 11.54, 8.14 and 9.22, it is
stated that Śrī Bhagavān can only be attained by bhakti
. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.21) also states: bhaktyāham
ekayā grāhyaḥ. “Only by pure devotio nal service am I to
be known.” While answering the questions of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, Rāya Rāmānanda said that bhakti which is
free from jñ āna , is the essence of all perfection. But
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu did not even accept this as the
highest goal of life, and requested him to explain
further. At this point, Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda prabhu
presented a Bhāgavatam śloka as evidence: jñ āne
prayāsam udapāsya . This śloka states that not all
perfected and liberated persons can realise kṛṣṇatattva
. This has been discussed in the ślokas , manuṣyāṇāṁ
sahasreṣu , “Only an extremely rare person comes to know
Me in truth” (Gītā 7.3), muktānām api siddhānām , “Among
millions of liberated souls, only one knows Me in truth”
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam : 6.14.5), and koṭi-mukta-madhye
‘durlabha’ eka kṛṣṇabhakta , “Among millions of souls
who are actually liberated, it is very difficult to find
one who is My pure bhakta ” (Caitanya-caritāmṛta
Madhyalīlā 19.148).

Śāstras such as the śrutis, smṛtis , Vedānta-sūtra ,
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the Gītā give numerous proofs to
show that even after a jīva has achieved mukti , he can
become situated in his own pure constitutional svarūpa
and taste the bliss of service to Śrī Bhagavān. In Śrīla
Śrīdhara Svāmī’s Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam commentary called
Dhṛta-sarvajña-bh āṣya-kāra , he has commented on śloka
10.87.21 as follows: muktā api līlayā vigrahaṁ kṛtvā
bhagavantaṁ bhajante. “Even the liberated beings
constantly render voluntary service to Bhagavān with
their transcendental (aprākṛta ) bodies.” In the śruti s
, we find references such as āprāyaṇāt tatrāpi hi ḍṛṣṭam
, “What one does throughout one’s life is evident at the

                             899
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

time of death” (Brahmasūtra 4.1.12), and mokṣe ca
bhaktir anuvarttate , that describe the presence of
bhakti , even in the state of mokṣa .

Viśate tad anantaram (Gītā 18.55) has a deeper, more
confidential meaning. Having known and realised
Bhagavān, one does not enter into Him and become one
with Him, but rather one enters into His līlā. For
example, when a person enters a city, or a bird enters
its nest, it does not mean that the person becomes the
city, or that the bird becomes the nest. The actual
meaning is that they enjoy great happiness in meeting
with their family members. The nirviśeṣa-vādīs normally
use the example of rivers flowing into the ocean to
express the oneness of the jīva with brahma. They say
that, just as the rivers lose their name and form when
they merge into the ocean (having given up their
separate existence), in the same way, the jīva merges
with brahma and becomes one with Him. However, the
saviśeṣa-vādī bhaktas say that, even after mukti , a
pure jīva maintains his own individual existence, just
as the aquatics living in the ocean have their separate
existence from the ocean. Living beings live happily in
the ocean with their family members. To know the ocean,
mere knowledge of the ocean’s surface is not adequate.
It is necessary also to know the various aquatics that
live deep down in the ocean, as well as the pearls,
jewels and various types of useful mines there. Similar
ly, to know Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as He who is
complete with six opulences and full of bhakti-rasa , is
to know Him in tattva and in full. Only when a sādhaka
or bhāva-bhakta has attained this knowledge can he then
enter into the līlā of Bhagavān in hi s state of vastu-
siddhi and taste the bliss of rendering sevā to Him.

If one deeply deliberates on the statements of śāstra,
it becomes clear that one cannot attain mukti merely by
jñ āna , without the help of bhakti : śreyaḥ sṛtiṁ
bhaktim udasya , “I can be attained by bhakti alone, not
by speculative knowledge” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.4).
The jñ ānīs are of two types: the kevala-jñ ānī (who
cultivates jñ āna only) and the bhakti-miśra-j ñ ānī
(who mixes bhakti with his cultivation of jñ āna ).

Bhakti-miśra-jñānīs are also of two types: those who
consider the form of Bhagavān as illusory, and those who
accept the form of Bhagavān as sac-cid-ānanda . The
first category of jñ ānīs do not become mukta
(liberated) because of their offence at the lotus feet
of Bhagavān. The y only maintain a false ego of being
liberated. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.32) makes the
following statement about such jñ ānīs who are falsely
proud and think that they are liberated: ye ‘nye
aravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy astabhāvād aviśuddha buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho anādṛta yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

O Kamala-locana (lotus-eyed Bhagavān)! He who has
cultivated jñāna and who is falsely proud calls himself
liberated. It should be understood that he possesses a

                           900
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

polluted intelligence because he has no conception that
bhakti is an eternal activity. In his cultivation of jñ
āna, he has given up material objects (atat) through the
process of negation and only reaches a supreme position
near tat, the Absolute Reality, where he remains
stagnant. However, because he has failed to attain the
shelter of Your lotus feet, he eventually falls down.

Gītā (9.12) also states:


moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo

mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ

rākṣasīm āsurīṁ caiva

prakṛtiṁ mohinīm śritāḥ


With frustrated hopes, futile actions, ineffectual
knowledge and a distracted mind, he only takes shelter
of an illusory, tāmasika and āsurika nature.

The second type of jñānī who follows the path of bhakti-
miśra-j ñ āna accepts the śrī-mūrti of Bhagavān as sac-
cid-ānandamayī. Such a jñ ānī attains sāyujya-mukti
after his vidyā and avidyā has been removed, but he does
not attain para-bhakti. Some of these jñ ānīs have the
good fortune to receive the mercy of a mahā-puruṣa. They
are able to give up the desire for mukti , and thus
attain para-bhakti . The following Bhāgavatam śloka
(1.7.10) is spoken in reference to such ātmārāmas (self-
satisfied jñ ānīs ) .


ātmārāmāś ca munayo

nirgranthā apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim

itthambhūta guṇo hariḥ


Śrī Kṛṣṇa has such an attractive potency that even the
ātmārāma-munis who have completely cut the knot of
avidyā become attracted to Him and start performing
ahaitukī-bhakti to Urukrama, the performer of wonderful
activities. What to speak, then, of a person absorbed in
attraction to mundane matter?

All of the above ślokas that have been cited clarify
this subject.




Śloka 56




                             901
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

sarva-karmāṇy api sadā

kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ

mat-prasādād avāpnoti

śāśvataṁ padam avyayam


mat-vyapāśrayaḥ—one who always takes shelter of Me;
avāpnoti—attains; śāśvatam —the eternal; (and) avyayam —
imperishable; padam —abode; mat-prasādāt —by My grace;
api —even though; sadā—always; kurvāṇaḥ—performing;
sarva-karmāṇi —all sorts of activities.

One who is My aikāntika-bhakta attains the eternal and
imperishable Vaikuṇṭha abode by My grace, even though he
is always engaged in various types of activities.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“It was explained earlier that a jñānī ultimately
achieves the result of My sāyujya by gradually giving up
the results of karma. He then gives up the karma itself
and finally he abandons jñ āna . But how can My bhaktas
attain Me? To explain this, Srī Bhagavān is speaking
this śloka beginning with sarva. If even those who are
specifically sakāma , and who maintain inferior desires
can attain the supreme destination by taking shelter of
Me, then what to speak of those who are niṣkāma-bhaktas
? And furthermore, what can be said about the
destinations of ananya-bhaktas who give up their
adherence to karma , yoga , jñ āna and the worship of
various devas , as well as all other material desires
and worship Me exclusively, although engaged in all
types of karma , such as nitya and naimittika , as well
as fruitive or social activities for the maintenance of
sons, daughters and so on?”

Here the statement āśrayate (takes shelter) means that
he performs sevā properly and wholeheartedly. The prefix
āṅ to the word śraya certainly implies the predominance
of sevā. The word api (also) in the phrase karmaṇy api
indicates the inferiority of karma , thereby implying
that karma is secondary for such people. In other words,
these people perform bhakti which is mixed with karma ,
not karma which is mixed with bhakti. This means that
they are not excessively engrossed in the karma which
was described in the first six chapters. The words
śāśvataṁ padam mean, “They attain My eternal abodes such
as Vaikuṇṭha, Mathurā, Dvārakā and Ayodhyā.” But how
will these abodes survive the mahā-pralaya , total
annihilation? In response to this, Śrī Bhagavān says
avyayam. “My abodes are not destroyed during the
complete annihilation; they remain unaffected. This is
possible only by the influence of My inconceivable
potency.”


                           902
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


One may raise the following doubt: “On the one hand, a
jñānī attains sāyujya after achieving the state of
naiṣkarmya , action without reaction. This occurs as a
result of his giving up all sense enjoyments, as well as
undergoing great pains in the performance of austerities
and so forth for many lifetimes. Your bhaktas , however,
attain Your eternal abode, even though they are engaged
in karma with material desires . Does this occur merely
by taking shelter of You?” In response to this Śrī
Bhagavān says, “This takes place by My mercy. Know that
the influence of My sweet will is beyond reason.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




This śloka illustrates the speciality of bhakti and of a
bhakta . The heart becomes progressively purified as a
result of performing niṣkāma-karma as an offering to
Bhagavān, and gradually one attains jñ āna . “Such jñ
ānīs then become qualified to attain bhakti to Me. By My
causeless mercy, however, My aikāntika-bhaktas can
attain My supreme abode in any state, simply by taking
shelter of ananya-bhakti . My aikāntika-bhaktas are not
bound by the results of any karma , even while
performing nitya (obligatory), naimittika (causal) and
kāmya (fruitive) ac tivities. By My mercy, they quickly
attain My eternal abodes such as Vaikuṇṭha and Goloka.”
This indicates the supremely merciful nature of Bhagavān
in relation to His aikāntika-bhaktas. Bhagavān Himself
says in Gītā (9.30): api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām
ananya-bhāk. “Even if a man’s conduct is most
abominable, if he engages in My ananya-bhakti , he
should be accepted as a bhakta .”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “It
has been explained that the confidential path to attain
Me is by the Vedic process of first performing niṣkāma-
karma-yoga by which one attains jñ āna. Bhakti is then
attained through that jñ āna . This is the first of the
three processes I am lucidly describing. Now, please
listen as I explain how I am attained by the second
process, namely worship of Me. It is by My mercy that a
person finally attains nirguṇa-bhakti , the imperishable
and eternal position. This occurs when he takes
exclusive shelter of Me, even in an unfavourable manner
because of his material desires. He still offers all of
his activities to Me however, considering Me to be
Īśvara.




Śloka 57



cetasā sarva-karmāṇi

                           903
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


mayi sannyasya mat-paraḥ

buddhi-yogam upāśritya

mac-cittaḥ satataṁ bhava


sannyasya—having renounced; sarva-karmāṇi—all
activities; cetasā—through your mind; mayi —unto Me;
mat-paraḥ—being dedicated to Me; upāśritya —taking
shelter; buddhi-yogam —of the yoga of intelligence;
bhava —be; satatam —always; mat-cittaḥ—in consciousness
of Me.

With your mind free from the false ego of being the
doer, wholeheartedly offering Me all your activities,
and taking shelter of resolute intelligence filled with
dedication to Me, remain always absorbed in full
consciousness of Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“So what are You finally ordering me to do? Do you want
me to become an ananya-bhakta, or a sakāma-bhakta ,
possessing the symptoms You have already described?” Śrī
Bhagavān responds to Arjuna’s question as follows: “You
will not be able to become the topmost bhakta , nor
should you become the inferior type of sakāma-bhakta .
Rather, you should become a madhyama-bhakta (a bhakta
situated in the intermediate stage).” Śrī Bhagavān
speaks this śloka beginning with the word cetasā to give
this instruction . Sarva-karmāṇi indicates, “You should
become a niṣkāma-bhakta by offering all your activites
to Me, whether they are related to āśrama -dharma or to
varṇadharma . I am the only goal of such niṣkāma-
bhaktas. I have already explained this in Gītā (9.26),
yat karoṣi .” The word buddhi-yogam means, “You should
become constantly absorbed in Me with resolute
intelligence. In other words, you should always remember
Me while performing work, or in any situation.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here, Arjuna wants to clearly understand the obligations
of a bhakta whose adhikāra is to practise bhakti on the
intermediate level, between that of the aikāntika-bhakta
who has attained para-bhakti , and the inferior sakāma-
bhakta . Understanding Arjuna’s inner feeling, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
now instructs the devotee who has a similar adhikāra.
“Such a person should give up the false ego of being the
doer and the enjoyer of all actions, and offer all that

                           904
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

karma to Me, remembering Me always.” This was also
stated earlier: yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi . It is
noteworthy, however, that the activity itself should be
performed as an offering, not that the results alone be
offered after the action is performed. Influenced by
sādhu-saṅga , such a person finally attains para-bhakti
by acting in this way .

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I
have already explained that brahma, Paramātmā and
Bhagavān are My three manifestations. Through buddhi-
yoga , fix your citta (thoughts) on My manifestation of
Paramātmā, and with your mind, offer all your works to
Me. In this way, become devoted to Me.”




Śloka 58



mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi

mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi

atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān

na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi


mat-cittaḥ—fixing your mind on Me; mat-prasādāt—by My
grace; tariṣyasi —you will cross over; sarva-durgāṇi —
all obstacles; atha cet —if however; ahaṅkārāt —out of
egoism; tvam —you; na śroṣyasi —do not listen;
vinaṅkṣyasi —you will be lost.

By constantly remembering Me with wholehearted devotion,
you will, by My grace, cross over all obstacles. But if,
out of false ego, you neglect My instructions, you will
be ruined.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What would occur as a consequence of that?” In
response, Śrī Kṛṣṇa speaks this śloka beginning with the
word mac-cittaḥ.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “By

                           905
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

fixing your mind upon Me in this way, you will be able
to cross over all obstacles which may arise during your
lifetime. However, if you do not act in this way, and
instead consider yourself to be the doer, due to the
false ego of identifying your self with the body, then
you will fall from your immortal svarūpa and incur
destruction by remaining in this material world.”




Śloka 59



yad ahaṅkāram āśritya



na yotsya iti manyase

mithyaiva vyavasāyas te

prakṛtis tvāṁ niyokṣyati

te—your; vyavasāyaḥ—resolution; yat —out of which;
manyase —you are thinking; iti —that; na yotsye —I shall
not fight; āśritya —having taken shelter; ahaṅkāram —of
false ego; eva —certainly; (will be) mithyā—in vain;
(because) prakṛtiḥ—My illusory energy; niyokṣyati —will
engage; tvām —you.

This resolution not to fight is only due to your self-
conceited indulgence, and it will only go in vain, for
My māyā in the form of rajo-guṇa will compel you to
fight anyway.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“I am a kṣatriya and to fight is my highest duty
(parama-dharma ). However, I do not wish to fight
because I am fearful of incurring great sin as a result
of killing so many people.” In response to this
argument, Śrī Bhagavān reprimands Arjuna by speaking
this śloka beginning with the words yad ahaṅkāram . The
word prakṛtiḥ means sva-bhāva or nature. “You are not
accepting My i nstructions now, O Mahā-vīra, but when
your formidable natural enthusiasm for fighting
manifests, you will make Me laugh by engaging yourself
in this battle and killing worshipable personalities
like Bhīṣma.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti


                           906
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sādhakas should never misuse their independence and
engage in frivolous acts. According to the instructions
of Śrī Bhagavān, they should give up the false ego of
being the doers and the enjoyers, and perform karma as
His servants. One should receive this instruction of
Bhagavān either from Bhagavān Himself as caitya-guru
within, or from the śāstra spoken by Him. Or,
considering the instructions of the bhaktas to be non-
different from His own instructions, one should perform
work only for the purpose of serving Him. Howev er, if
one performs work with the conception of being the doer
and the enjoyer, which is opposed to the instruction of
Bhagavān, one becomes bound to undergo the good and bad
results of those actions, life after life.




Śloka 60



svabhāva-jena kaunteya

nibaddhaḥ svena karmaṇā

kartuṁ necchasi yan mohāt

kariṣyasy avaśo ‘pi tat


kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; (you are) nibaddhaḥ—bound;
karmaṇā—by your work; yat —which; na icchasi —you do not
wish; kartum —to do; mohāt —out of delusion; api —still;
kariṣyasi —you will do; tat —that; avaśaḥ—against your
own will; svena svabhāva-jena —born of your own nature.

O Kaunteya, that action, which in your present deluded
state you now wish to avoid, will nevertheless be forced
upon you, because you are bound by the activities born
of your own nature.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




This śloka further explains the previous one. “Due to
saṁskāras (impressions from your past lives), you
possess the nature of a kṣatriya. You will certainly
engage in battle, being compelled by your natural inborn
qualities, such as chivalry.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti

                            907
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




The import of Śrī Bhagavān’s statement in this śloka is
as follows: “Now, you are not accepting My instructions
because you are bewildered; that is why you are not
engaging in battle. But when your enthusiasm to fight
gains strength, in accordance with your own nature, you
will not be able to suppress it. You will be bound to
undergo the results of those actions, thinking yourself
to be an agent of this battle, a warrior. Therefore, it
is beneficial for you to fight in pursuance of My
instruction.” According to this injunction, the sādhakas
who have the same adhikāra as Arjuna (as discussed in
the previous ślokas ) should become free from both gross
and subtle egos in order to serve Bhagavān. They should
al so perform activities which are favourable to bhakti
.




Śloka 61




īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe ‘rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā


arjuna—O Arjuna; īśvaraḥ—the Lord; tiṣṭhat i—is
situated; hṛt-deśe —in the area of the heart; sarva-
bhūtānām —of all beings; māyayā—by His illusory energy;
bhrāmayan —He is motivated to wander; sarva-bhūtāni —all
the living beings; yantra-ārūḍhāni —who are mounted upon
machines.

O Arjuna, Sarvāntaryāmī Paramātmā is situated in the
heart of all jīvas and is causing them to wander in the
cycle of birth and death by His māyā, as if they are
mounted on a machine.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is now giving His own conclusion, having
explained the opinion of the svabhāva-vādīs (those who
worship the tendencies born of their natures) in the
previous two ślokas . Śrī Nārāyaṇa is Antaryāmī, who
dwells within all jīvas . Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad
(3.6.3) states that He resides within the earth but the

                           908
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

earth does not know Him. The earth is His body and by
residing within the earth, He controls and moves it. The
śrutis also state: “Śrī Nārāyaṇa pervades whatever is
seen or heard in this universe, whatever is within or
beyond it.” From these Vedic statements, it is
established that Īśvara is situated within the heart as
Antaryāmī. What does He do there? In response to this,
Śrī Bhagavān says, “He makes all the jīvas wander within
this material world by His māyā-śakti , engaging them in
various activities.” Just as a puppeteer manoeuvres
puppets that are mounted on a platform by a device which
controls the threads, similarly, māyā controls all the
jīvas in a particular way. Yantrārūḍhāni also means the
jīvas who are situated in various bodies.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Parameśvara is the Supersoul of the entire moving and
non-moving world. He has already stated this earlier in
Gītā (15.15): sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo . “I am
seated within everyone’s heart; all remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness come from Me alone.”

The śrutis also say:


eko devaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu gūḍhaḥ

sarva-vyāpī sarva-bhūtāntarātmā

karmādhyakṣaḥ sarva-bhūtādhivāsaḥ

sākṣī cetā kevalo nirguṇaś ca


Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.11

He is omnipresent and omnipotent. Under His control the
jīva, influenced by māyā, is wandering throughout this
material world, riding the machine of the subtle and
gross body.


Some think that Īśvara controls all beings and prompts
their actions. ‘Therefore, all of our good and bad
actions are performed by His inspiration.’ They presume
that the jīva is just like a puppet. Therefore, they
think, instead of the jīva getting the results of all
his good and bad works, Īśvara alone should and, in
fact, does receive the results. But such understanding
is completely illusory. One should properly appreciate
the meaning of the word yant rārūḍhāni . Those jīvas who
are averse to Bhagavān are given a subtle and a gross
body by māyā according to the impressions of their karma
, which have accumulated since time immemorial. The jīva
wanders throughout the cycle of karma , riding on the
body give n to him according to his previous actions.
This takes place on the inspiration of Īśvara, under the

                             909
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

control of māyā. Īśvara does not directly engage the
bound jīvas in their karma . The baddha-jīva does not
want to give up his independence completely and b e
controlled by Bhagavān; therefore, he does not receive
this good fortune. Thus, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu clearly
states in Caitanya-caritāmṛta , (Madhyalīlā 20.117):
kṛṣṇa bhūli’ sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha ataeva māyā tāre
deya saṁsāra-duḥkha

Having forgotten Kṛṣṇa, the jīva has been attracted by
māyā since time immemorial. Thus, māyā gives him all
kinds of misery in his material existence.

Parameśvara merely acts as a witness to such rebellious
jīvas, and through māyā He makes them undergo the
results of all their good and bad activities. In the
case of His bhaktas , however, He does not remain
indifferent towards them like a witness, but rather He
engages them in His service. This is His great mercy.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I
alone am situated in the heart of all jīvas as
Paramātmā, and Paramātmā is indeed, the controller and
master of all jīvas . Īśvara gives the jīvas the fruit
of whatever activities they perform. Just as an object
that is situated on a machine rotates, similarly, the
jīvas continue to wander in the material world, as
arranged by the all-controlling quality of Īśvara.
According to your previous karma , your nature will
continue to function by the inspiration of Īśvara.”




Śloka 62



tam eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha

sarva-bhāvena bhārata

tat prasādāt parāṁ śāntiṁ

sthānaṁ prāpsyasi śāśvatam


bhārata—O scion of Bhārata; gaccha śaraṇam—take shelter;
eva —exclusively; tam —of Him; sarva-bhāvena —in every
respect; (and) tat-prasādāt —by His mercy; prāpsyasi —
you will attain; parām śānti m —transcendental peace;
(and) śāśvatam sthānam —His eternal abode.

O Bhārata, surrender exclusively to that Īśvara in every
respect. By His grace, you will attain transcendental
peace and the supreme eternal abode.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī



                             910
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



For the purpose of explaining the significance of
surrender to Him, Śrī Bhagavān is now speaking this
śloka beginning with the words tam eva . Parām means,
“When both avidyā and vidyā cease, you will attain the
eternal abode, Vaikuṇṭha.” Some people think that those
who worship An taryāmī attain this result. However, the
result of those who worship and surrender unto Bhagavān
will be explained later. Others constantly think, “My
iṣṭa-deva , Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is my only guru . He alone will
bestow bhakti-yoga upon me and offer me beneficial i
nstructions. I surrender unto Him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself is
my Antaryāmī; may He alone engage me in His service. I
take exclusive shelter of Him.” As Uddhava also says in
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (11.29.6), “O Īśa, even those who are
greatly learned, who have acquired a duration of life
equivalent to that of Brahmā, and who blissfully
remember You, always feel indebted to You. This is
because You illuminate the embodied entities with the
process of attaining You. You do this externally as
ācārya-guru and internally as caitya-guru .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Here, Śrī Bhagavān instructs Arjuna to fully surrender
to Antaryāmī who is within everyone. He is the
causelessly merciful Parameśvara who was described in
the previous śloka . Parameśvara is influenced by suc h
one-pointed surrender which pleases Him. By His mercy,
one can easily attain supreme transcendental peace and
go to His imperishable abodes such as Vaikuṇṭha or
Goloka. Bhagavān manifests Himself in five forms in this
world for the welfare of the jīvas , according to the
service attitude of His bhaktas . These five forms are:
arcā-vigraha (the Deity), Antaryāmī (the Supersoul),
vaibhava (avatāras of the Lord), vyūha (expansions) and
parā (Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself).

kṛṣṇa yadi kṛpā kare kono bhāgyavāne

guru-antaryāmī-rūpe sikhāye āpane

Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhyalīlā 22.47

To bestow His mercy upon the jīvas who possess the type
of sukṛti that directs them towards bhakti , Bhagavān
gives instructions about surrendering to Him, both
externally as the spiritual master and internally as the
caitya-guru.




Śloka 63



                           911
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



iti te jñānam ākhyātaṁ

guhyād guhyataraṁ mayā

vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa

yathecchasi tathā kuru

iti—thus; ākhyātam—has been described; mayā—by Me; te —
to you; jñ ānam —knowledge; guhyataram —more
confidential; guhyāt —than the confidential knowledge;
vimṛśya —after reflecting; etat—on this; aśeṣeṇa —
completely; yathā—as; icchasi —you wish; tathā—so; kuru
—do.

Thus, I have instructed you in knowledge which is more
confidential than the secret knowledge of brahma.
Reflect on this knowledge properly, and then act as you
wish.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka beginning with the
word iti to conclude the entire Gītā. “One can know
karma-yoga , aṣṭāṅga-yoga and jñ āna-yoga by this
knowledge. That is, it is even more confidential than
the secret knowledge of jñ āna-śāstra . This being the
topmost secret, even sages such as Vasiṣṭha, Veda-vyāsa
and Nārada have not revealed it in śāstras composed by
them. In other words, their omniscience is relative and
My omniscience is complete. They do not know this tattva
fully, because it is highly confidential. Since it is
highly secret, I do not even instruct it to these
exalted sages. After reflecting deeply on My
instructions regarding this knowledge, act as you
desire, according to your discretion.”

In this way, the last set of six chapters have been
completed. This Gītā-śāstra, consisting of eighteen
chapters, is the crest-jewel of all vidyās (education).
It is comprised of three sets of six chapters and is
like a treasure chest that contains the most precious
and unrivalled gem, namely that of highly confidential
bhakti. The first set of six chapters, called karma-
ṣaṭkas , is like the gold-covered lower foundation of
this chest. The last set of six chapters, jñ āna-ṣaṭka ,
is like the gem-studded cover of the chest. BhaktiÇ the
set of six chapters situated in between these two ṣaṭkas
, is the most precious wealth within the three worlds.
Bhakti , which has the power to control and overpower
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is situated within this chest like an
excellent, great and beautiful gem. The forthcoming two
ślokas , the first beginning with the words man-manā
bhava (18.65-66), which consists of sixty-four
syllables, should be considered as the pure maidservant
of this bhakti , being situated in the upper covering of

                           912
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

the chest.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this present śloka, Śrī Bhagavān is presenting His
conclusion to Bhagavad-gītā. He says that the brahma-jñ
āna He previously described is confidential; paramātma-j
ñ āna is more confidential and bhagavat-jñ āna is the
most confidential. He will clearly explain this in the
following śloka . Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is alone
advaya-jñ āna-svarūpa and the highest limit of para-
tattva . He has three manifestations: brahma , Paramātmā
and Bhagavān. As Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11) states:
vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ

yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

Those who are tattvavit realise that nondual Absolute
Truth in three aspects. Brahma only has the
characteristic of cit or consciousness and is the first
realisation (manifestation) of that tattva. Paramātmā,
the extension of that cit consciousness, is the second
manifestation, and Bhagavān, who manifests as cid-
vilāsa-rūpa (He who performs transcendental amorous
pastimes), is the third realisation of that tattva. That
tattva is known by three names in these three states.

These three manifestations of Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa
are brahma, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. Of these,
realisation of brahma (the effulgence emanating from His
body) is the perverted reflection of the cid-aṁśa , the
conscious part of the para-tattva. This is called
incomplete realisation. Paramātmā realisation is a
partial realisation of sat and cit , and Bhagavān
realisation is the complete realisation of the Absolute
in the form of sat , cit and ānanda . Here brahma-jñ āna
is called confidential (guhya ), paramātma-j ñ āna more
confidential (guhyatara ) and bhagavat-jñ āna the most
confidential (guhyatama ).

This most confidential bhagavat-jñāna also has three div
isions: Śrī Kṛṣṇa is complete in Dvārakā, more complete
in Mathurā and most complete in Vṛndāvana or Gokula.
Arjuna, who is a friend of Kṛṣṇa in His pastimes in
Dvārakā, only knows His complete feature.

There are eighteen chapters in the Gītā and they are
divided into three divisions of six chapters. The first
six chapters describe niṣkāma-karma-yoga which is
offered to Bhagavān. The second six chapters describe
bhakti-yoga and the third six chapters describe jñ āna-
yoga . One should not think that jñ āna-yoga is the
highest and final conclusion just because it comes at
the end. Rather, the hidden meaning is that bhakti-yoga

                           913
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

, which is situated in between karma-yoga and jñ āna-
yoga , gives strength to them both, thus making karma
and jñ āna qualified to give their results. Karma-yoga
and jñ āna-yoga are useless without the shelter of
bhakti . In this way, the Gītā is like a box, its base
is karma-yoga , its upper lid is jñ āna-yoga and the
great wealth of Bhakti-devī is situated like a precious
gem within. In this way, people in general can
understand that the first six chapters are confidential,
the last six chapters are more confidential and the
middle six chapters are the most confidential.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying,
“Brahma-jñāna, which was explained to you earlier, is a
secret. Paramātma-j ñ āna , which is explained now, is
more secret. Reflect on this thoroughly and do as you
wish. This means that if you want to achieve brahma by
taking shelter of jñ āna through niṣkāma -karma-yoga and
gradually achieve My nirguṇa-bhakti , then perform your
actions in this battle as niṣkāma-karma . And if you
want to surrender to Paramātmā, then engage in battle
while offering your actions to Īśvara, performing the
occupation which is born of your kṣatriya nature, as
prompted by Him. Then Īśvara, who is My avatāra , will
gradually bestow nirguṇa-bhakti upon you . Whatever your
conclusion, understand that to fight is certainly
beneficial for you.”




Śloka 64




sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ

śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

iṣṭo ‘si me dṛḍham iti

tato vakṣyāmi te hitam


śṛṇu—hear; bhūyaḥ—again; me —My; paramam —supreme; vacaḥ
—instruction; sarva-guhyatamam —the most confidential of
all instructions; tataḥ—therefore; vakṣyāmi—I shall
speak; te —for your; dṛḍham —complete; hitam —welfare;
iti —since; asi —you are; iṣṭaḥ—very dear; me —to Me.

Hear once more My supreme instruction, the most
confidential of all knowledge. I am speaking this for
your highest benefit, because you are very dear to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




                           914
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw that His dear friend Arjuna had
fallen silent while deliberating on the deep and grave
meanings of this Gītā-śāstra , His heart, which is as
soft as butter, melted and He said, “O Arjuna, My dear
friend, now I will speak the very essence of all śāstra
to you in these concluding eight ślokas .” If Arjuna
asks, “Why will You take further trouble to explain
this?” then in answer Śrī Bhagavān speaks this śloka
beginning with the words sarva-guhyatamam . “I am again
giving you the essence of the Ninth Chapter, rāja vidyā
rāja guhyam , in the śloka beginning with the words man-
manā bhava mad-bhakto. This statement is indeed the
supreme statement, for it is the essence of the Gītā-
śāstra , which is the summum bonum of all śāstras . The
word guhyatamam means that there is nothing more
confidential than this to be found anywhere. It is
absolute. I am speaking this again for your greatest
benefit because You are My very dear friend (iṣṭo ‘si me
dṛḍham iti ). Why not? After all, a person does not tell
the most confidential secrets to anyone except his
dearest friend.” Some versions of the Gītā use the
phrase iṣṭo ‘si me dṛḍha-matiḥ instead of dṛḍham iti.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Gītā is called an Upaniṣad. It is the essence of the
Vedas and of the Upaniṣads . One can only understand its
inn ermost intention by the mercy of Bhagavān and His
bhaktas . These confidential instructions cannot be
understood merely on the strength of one’s intelligence,
nor through the medium of karmīs , jñ ānīs , or non-
devotees who consider the form of Bhagavān to be
illusory and devoid of potency. Only the exclusive,
fully surrendered bhaktas of Kṛṣṇa can, by His grace,
become aware of these most confidential instructions.
This śloka is spoken by Śrī Bhagavān for the explicit
purpose of explaining this secret.

Arjuna is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s full aikāntika-bhakta, and is very
dear to Him. He is, therefore, qualified to hear this
most confidential instruction. In the same way, only
aikāntika-kṛṣṇabhaktas are capable of comprehending this
most secret instruction of the Gītā, not others. The
aikāntika-bhaktas are exclusively surrendered to Kṛṣṇa,
knowing Him to be sac-cid-ānanda-parabrahma , and are
thus actively engaged in following His instructions and
directions, being freed from any doubt or controversy.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I
spoke guhya (confidential) brahma-jñ āna to you, and
guhyatara (more confidential) īśvara-j ñ āna . Now, I am
instructing guhyatama (most confidential) bhagavat-jñ
āna . Please listen. This is superior to all the other
instructions I have given in this Gītā-śāstra . I am
imparting it to you for your eternal welfare, because
you are very dear to Me.”



                           915
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Śloka 65



man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te

pratijāne priyo ‘si me


mat-manāḥ—offer your mind to Me; bhava—become; mat-
bhaktaḥ—My bhakta (engaged in hearing and chanting about
My nāma , rūpa , etc.); (become) mat-yājī—My worshipper;
namaskuru —offer your obeisances; mām —to Me; evaiṣyasi
—you shall come; mām —to Me; pratijāne —I promise;
satyam —truthfully; te —to you; (because) asi —you are;
priyaḥ—dear; me —to Me.

Offer your mind to Me; become My bhakta by hearing and
chanting, etc. about My names, forms, qualities and
pastimes; worship Me and offer obeisances to Me. In this
way, you will certainly come to Me. I promise you this
truthfully because you are very dear to Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Man-manā bhava means that you should meditate on Me by
becoming My exclusive bhakta . Do not become a jñ ānī or
a yogī and think of Me as they do. Alternatively, man-
manā bhava means that you should become like one who has
offered his mind to Me, Śyāmasundara, who am showering
upon you a sweet, merciful glance from My very beautiful
moon-like face that is adorned with exquisite arched
eyebrows and soft curly hair. Mad-bhaktaḥ means to offer
your senses to Me. In other words, perform bhajana to Me
by engaging all your senses in My sevā, that is, by
performing śravaṇam and kīrtanam , seeing My śrī-mūrti ,
cleansing and decorating My temple, collecting flowers
and making garlands, decorating Me with ornaments,
offering Me an umbrella, cāmara and performing other
services. Mad-yājī means to worship Me and offer
articles such as fragrant flowers, incense, a ghee lamp
and bhoga . Māṁ namaskuru means offering dandavat
praṇāmas , falling down on the ground and offering
obeisances with either eight or five limbs of your body.
Mām evaiṣyasi means you will surely achieve Me by
performing the four activities of thinking, serving,
worshipping and offering obeisances, or by performing
even one of them. Offer your mind to Me, and all your
senses, such as the ear and tongue, and in return I will
give Myself to you. This is the truth; do not doubt it.”
According to the Amara-koṣa Dictionary, the words satya

                            916
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

(truth), śapatha (vow) and tathya (fact) are sy
nonymous. If Arjuna says, “The people of Mathurā take
vows at every step (but in fact are unable to maintain
them), so how can I have faith in Your vow since You are
Mathureśa Kṛṣṇa?” then in response Śrī Bhagavān says,
“This is true, but I am making this promise because you
are very dear to Me. A person does not deceive those who
are dear to him.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Man-manā bhava means to absorb one’s mind in Kṛṣṇa
exclusively. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself has accepted the gopīs as
the highest ideal of man-manā bhava devotees and
expresses this to Uddhava in sweet words (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 10.46.4-6):


tā man-manaskā mat-prāṇā

mad-arthe tyakta-daihikāḥ

mām eva dayitaṁ preṣṭham

ātmānaṁ manasā gatāḥ

ye tyakta-loka-dharmāś ca

mad-arthe tān bibharmy aham

mayi tāḥ preyasāṁ preṣṭhe

dūra-sthe gokula-striyaḥ

smarantyo ‘ṅga vimuhyanti

virahautkaṇṭhya-vihvalāḥ

dhārayanty ati-kṛcchreṇa

prāyaḥ prāṇān kathañcana

pratyāgamana-sandeśair

ballavyo me mad-ātmikāḥ


Dear Uddhava, the minds of the gopīs are always absorbed
in Me. I am their very life and their all-in-all. It is
for My sake alone that they have relinquished
everything, including their homes, husbands, sons,
relatives, shyness, dharmika principles and so forth.
They constantly remain absorbed in thoughts of Me alone.
It is by their trust in My statement, ‘I will come,’
that they are maintaining their lives somehow or other,
with great difficulty, and are waiting for Me.

This description of the gopīs who are feeling anxiety in

                            917
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

separation from Kṛṣṇa is the highest example of man-manā
bhava . Now hear about a gopī’s absorption in Kṛṣṇa
while she was in pūrva-rāga , that state prior to
meeting with Him.

Once, a newly married gopī came to live in Nandagāon.
This gopī had heard of Kṛṣṇa’s name and His supremely
attractive and wonderful activities, yet she had never
had the good fortune to see Him directly. Every day,
Kṛṣṇa played on His flute as He entered the forest to
tend the cows with His friends. Hearing the sound of His
flute-playing, all the residents of Vraja would gather
on the royal path, being very eager to see the
unparalleled sweetness of His beauty. Some stood on the
balconies and some climbed trees. Some stood near the
path and some peeped through windows. That newly-married
gopī also longed to go there and see Kṛṣṇa, but her
mother-in-law forbade her, saying, “That black snake out
there will bite you, so it is not proper for you to go.”

The newly-wedded bride argued, “Your daughter has gone
there, so why are you not allowing me to go?” But the
mother-in-law still did not give her permission.

Despite this restriction, the gopī went to a bush near
the royal path and stood behind it. In this way, she
could see Kṛṣṇa. Understanding her mind, Kṛṣṇa slightly
twisted the tail of a calf who started running and
jumping over to that new gopī and stood near her. Kṛṣṇa
ran after the calf and arrived at the same spot.
Standing there for a moment in His beautiful tribhaṅga-
lalita form, He touched the chin of that gopī with His
flute, and then ran off to rejoin His friends. The new
gopī, now absorbed in the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful
form, lost her external consciousness and remained
standing there, motionless, as Kṛṣṇa entered the forest.

A considerable amount of time passed by. Her mother-in-
law came searching for her when she did not return home.
Shaking the gopī’s body, her mother-in-law cried, “What
I feared has happened! You have been bitten by that
black snake.” She brought the gopi back to the house and
ordered her to make buttermilk from yogurt kept in a
clay pot. The bride still had not regained her external
consciousness, so she took a pot full of mustard seeds
instead and began to churn them, mistaking it for the
pot of yogurt. Because she had not returned to her
external consciousness, she would sometimes churn the
mustard seeds and sometimes not, so sometimes there was
a harsh sound and sometimes no sound. When the mother-
in-law noticed this, she stopped her from churning and
instead ordered her to bring water from the well.
Placing three pots on her head, one on top of the other
and giving her a rope to hold in one hand and a little
baby to hold in the other, she sent her for water. The
bride went to the well and prepared the rope to haul
water, but because she was not in her natural state of
mind, she began to tie the rope around the neck of the
baby. The other gopīs , who had come there to fetch
water, stopped her, crying out, “Alas, alas! What has
happened to her? It seems that she is possessed by a
ghost!” Some gopīs who knew the reality of the situation
said, “No, she is not possessed by a ghost, but by the
son of Nanda Mahārāja.” This is an example of man-manā

                           918
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

bhava .

The instruction, mad-bhakto bhava, is given for those
who cannot become as absorbed in Kṛṣṇa as the gopīs can.
Mad-bhakto bhava means to offer on eself in all respects
unto the lotus feet of Bhagavān. How can a bhakta render
service continuously? In this regard, the story of
Prahlāda has been described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(7.5.23-24):


śrī-prahlāda uvāca

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau

bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā

kriyeta bhagavaty addhā

tan manye ‘dhītam uttamam


Prahlāda Mahārāja said, ‘O my dear father, bhakti to Śrī
Viṣṇu is performed in nine ways: hearing, chanting and
remembering His name, form, qualities, pastimes, etc.,
rendering service to His lotus feet, worshipping Him,
praying to Him, serving Him, making friendship with Him
and surrendering one’s self to Him. If these nine types
of bhakti are performed to Bhagavān in a mood of
surrender, then I consider that to be the best of all
education.

Mahārāja Ambarīṣa is the illuminating example of
complete surrender. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (9.4.18-20)
describes how he performed bhakti to Kṛṣṇa.


sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor

vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane

karau harer mandira-mārjanādiṣu

śrutiṁ cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane dṛśau

tad-bhṛtya-gātra-sparśe ‘ṅga-saṅgamam

ghrāṇaṁ ca tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe

śrīmat-tulasyā rasanāṁ tad-arpite

pādau hareḥ ksetra-padānusarpaṇe

śiro hṛsīkeśa-padābhivandane

                            919
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


kāmaṁ ca dāsye na tu kāma-kāmyayā

yathottama-śloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ


He fixed his mind on the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra,
his speech in glorifying the qualities of Bhagavān, his
hands in cleansing the temple of Śrī Hari and his ears
in hearing the auspicious pastimes of Bhagavān Acyuta.
He engaged his eyes in seeing the śrī mūrti and the
temples of Mukunda, his body and limbs in touching the
bodies of His bhaktas, his nose in smelling the
transcendental fragrance of Tulasī offered at His feet,
and his tongue in honouring the prasāda which had been
offered to Bhagavān. He utilised his feet for walking to
the holy abodes of Bhagavān, and his head in offering
obeisances to the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He offered
all paraphernalia, such as garlands and sandalwood, in
the service of Bhagavān. He did all this, not to acquire
material enjoyment, but to attain bhagavat-prema which
only resides in the bhaktas of Bhagavān, glorification
of whom purifies everyone.

Bilvamaṅgala is an example of a bhakta belonging to this
class. He was born in a village on the bank of the
Kṛṣṇā-veṇṇā River in South India. He was a great scholar
of the Vedas and Vedānta , yet he was very much attached
to a prostitute named Cintāmaṇi. One evening it was
raining heavily, but his desire to meet Cintāmaṇi made
him so restless that he set out to meet her, not caring
for the bad weather. On the way, he had to cross a
river, which on that terrifying night was flooded and
looked like the very form of death. Because there were
no means to cross that river, in desperation
Bilvamaṅgala crossed it using a floating corpse. When he
reached Cintāmaṇi’s home, her gate was closed. A snake
was hanging from her boundary wall and Bilvamaṅgala used
it to scale the wallÇ mistaking it for a rope. While
climbing down the other side of the wall, however, he
slipped and fell to the ground, making a loud crash, and
lost consciousness. Hearing that sound, Cint āmaṇi and
her friends ran out to see what had happened. Flashes of
lightning illuminating the scene enabled her to
recognise Bilvamaṅgala, and she understood everything.
Reproaching herself, Cintāmaṇi chastised Bilvamaṅgala
severely. “If only you were as attached to the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as you are to me, then ce rtainly you
would become a supremely blessed man.”

Bilvamaṅgala heard the heart-piercing words of Cintāmaṇi
as he regained consciousness. At that very moment, he
saw the folly of his activities and immediately decided
to end his sinful ways and journey on foot to Vṛndāvana.
As he proceeded on his way, he felt thirsty, so when he
passed a village where he saw a young woman hauling
water from a well, he went there to quench his thirst.
When he saw the beauty of that young woman, however, he
became attracted t o her. He even followed the woman to
her home.

The husband of the woman, assuming Bilvamaṅgala to be a
saint by his dress and demeanor, showed him respect and
invited him to accept a seat inside his home.

                           920
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Bilvamaṅgala requested the man to call his wife. On the
call of her husband, that woman came out, and
Bilvamaṅgala asked her for her two hairpins. Taking
those hairpins, Bilvamaṅgala immediately pierced both
his eyes with them. As he did this, he lamented
grievously, crying out, “These eyes have become the
cause of my degraded wretched condition, being attracted
by their sense objects in the form of beautiful women.
Where there is no cause there can be no effect!” Having
thus lost his eyesight, and with blood flowing profusely
from his eyes, he again starte d for Vṛndāvana. But now,
his heart had become purified. After only walking a
short distance, a boy came to him and in a very sweet
voice asked, “O Bābā, where are you going?”

Bilvamaṅgala replied, “I am going to Vṛndāvana.”

The boy said, “I am also going to Vṛndāvana. Please hold
on to My stick.” That boy was none other than Muralī-
Manohara Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, who captivates the mind by
playing His muralī flute.

Mad-yājī means to perform My arcana. The niṣṭhā (steady
practice) of arcana is on a slightly lower level than
that of mad-bhakto. Śrī Bhagavān therefore, says that if
you cannot be a bhakta (mad-bhakto ) like Bilvamaṅgala,
then perform My arcana . What should be the niṣṭhā of
one who performs arcana to Śrī Bhagavān? To illustrate
this, I will relate a story from our own experience that
took place here in Mathurā, India.

There used to be a bābā (saintly person) in Mathurā who
performed arcana of his śālagrāma-śilā with great
niṣṭhā. He did not have complete knowledge of the
various limbs of arcana , but whatever arcana he
performed, he did with niṣṭhā. He had taken a vow to
bathe in Yamunā every day during brahma-muhūrta , and to
worship his śālagrāma with Yamunā water only. Once, on
the amāvasyā (new-moon day) in the month of Māgha, the
cold winter month f rom mid-January to mid-February, it
rained the entire night and a heavy cold wind blew. On
that pitch-dark morning he had no idea of the time
because no stars were visible in the sky. He woke long
before the brahma-muhūrta hour and set out to take his
bath . Although Yamunā’s waters were as cold as ice and
he was shivering due to the extreme cold, he
nevertheless took bath just to maintain his vow. He then
started back for his home, carrying the Yamunā water for
his worship. He faced severe difficulty becaus e of the
dense darkness, heavy rain and the weak condition of his
shivering body. He was anxiously wondering how it would
be possible to return home to worship his Deity when,
suddenly, he saw somebody holding a lantern coming
towards him. As the person came closer, he saw that it
was a young boy carrying a blanket on His head to
protect Him from the rain. Coming close to the bābā the
boy asked, “Bābā, where are you going?” When the man
told Him where he lived, the boy said, “I am also going
that way. Come with Me and I will take you to your
house.” He started walking with that boy and reached his
house very quickly. Just as he was about to enter, he
thought, “Let me ask this boy His name.” But what a
wonder! The bābā could not see Him anywhere. He looked
all around but there was no trace of Him. Standing there

                           921
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                          5/5/2017

like a stone, he lamented, “Alas! That chaliyā
(transcendental cheater) Himself came to protect my vow,
and upon cheating me, He has gone away.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.3.29) illustrates the meaning of
māṁ namaskuru with Yamarāja’s instructions to the
Yamadūtas:


jihvā na vakti bhagavad-guṇa-nāmadheyaṁ

cetaś ca na smarati tac-caraṇāravindam

kṛṣṇāya no namati yac-chira ekadāpi

tān ānayadhvam asato ‘kṛta-viṣṇu-kṛtyān


O Yamadūtas, bring me only those sinful people whose
tongues do not chant the name of Kṛṣṇa, whose minds do
not remember the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, and whose heads
have not bowed even once before Śrī Kṛṣṇa, because they
have never performed a single act of bhakti.

Daśāśvamedhi punar eti janma kṛṣṇapraṇāmī na punar
bhavāya. “A person who performs ten aśvamedha-yaj ñas
has to take birth again, but those who offer obeisances
to Kṛṣṇa even once never take birth again.”

Sakṛt praṇāmī kṛṣṇasya mātuḥ stanyaṁ piben nahi. “One
who bows down to Kṛṣṇa does not have to drink a mother’s
breast-milk again.”

While explaining the word namaḥ in Bhakti-sandarbha
(169), Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī writes vandanaṁ namaskāram.
“Akrūra attained bhakti to Kṛṣṇa by paying obeisances.”

The Skanda-Purāṇa describes the glory of paying
obeisances in the following way:

śāṭhyepi namaskāraṁ kurvataḥ śārṅga-dhanvine

śata janmārjitaṁ pāpaṁ tat-kṣaṇād eva naśyati

Even if one deceitfully bows down to Śrī Viṣṇu, who
carries in His hand the bow called śārṅga, his sins
accumulated from one hundred lives are immediately
destroyed.




Śloka 66



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

                           922
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



parityajya—abandoning; sarva-dharmān—all other dharmas ;
vraja —take; ekam —exclusive; śaraṇam —shelter; mām —of
Me; aham —I; mokṣayiṣyāmi —shall free; tvām —you; sarva-
pāpebhyaḥ—from all sinful reactions; mā śucaḥ—do not
grieve.

Completely abandoning all bodily and mental dharma, such
as varṇa and āśrama, fully surrender to Me alone. I
shall liberate you from all reactions to your sins. Do
not grieve.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“Should I perform activities such as meditation (dhyāna)
on You and fulfil my āśrama-dharma as well, or should I
exclusively perform dhyāna , etc., without depending on
any other dharma ?” In response to this questi on, Śrī
Bhagavān speaks this śloka beginning with the words
sarva-dharmān. “Renouncing all types of varṇāśrama-
dharma , take exclusive shelter of Me.” It is incorrect
to translate the word parityajya as sannyāsa (complete
renunciation of karma ) because, as a kṣatriya , Arjuna
did not have the adhikāra to take sannyāsa . Someone may
ask that, if Kṛṣṇa is making Arjuna an instrument in His
teachings to show that Arjuna does not have the adhikāra
to take sannyāsa , is He, in fact, indicating that this
instruction regarding sannyāsa is for common people who
may consider that they have that adhikāra , and not for
Arjuna, who was a kṣatriya ? In answer to this, it is
said that, if this instruction regarding sannyāsa had
been applicable to Arjuna, who is the prime object of
Kṛṣṇa’s instructions, it would be applicable to all
others, and not otherwise. Furthermore, it is also not
proper to translate the word parityajya to mean
renouncing the fruits of one’s activities. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.5.41) states:


devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṛṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam


One who gives up the false ego of being the doer, and
accepts the shelter of the supreme shelter Śrī Mukunda
within the core of his being (ātmā), becomes free from
any obligations to the devas, ṛṣis, living entities,
family members and forefathers.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.29.34) also states:



                           923
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017

martyo yadā tyakta-samasta-karmā

niveditātmā vicikīrṣito me

tadāmṛtatvaṁ pratipadyamāno

mayātma-bhūyāya ca kalpate vai


When a person renounces all types of karma and
completely surrenders himself unto Me, by My will he
becomes more opulent than a yogī or a jñ ānī. And in the
course of time, when he has attained immortality
(mukti), he becomes qualified to attain opulences like
My own.

Another śloka from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.9) states:


tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta

na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā

śraddhā yāvan na jāyate


Until a person develops detachment from sense objects
and attains faith in hearing narrations about Me, he
should continue to perform his nitya (obligatory) and
naimittika (incidental) duties.

Also, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.11.32) it says:


ājñāyaivaṁ guṇān doṣān

mayādiṣṭān api svakān

dharmān santyajya yaḥ sarvān

māṁ bhajeta sa tu sattamaḥ


Those who render service unto Me, having abandoned all
types of dharma, and having understood the inherent
positive and negative aspects of the prescribed duties
instructed by Me in the Vedas, are counted among the
best of sādhus.

It is necessary to explain the meaning of this Gītā
śloka in accordance with the above profound statements
of Śrī Bhagavān, and to reconcile their meanings. The
word pari (parityaja ) indicates that the highest
objective of these instructions is not to renounce the
fruits of karma. “Rather, it means that you should take
absolute shelter of Me, and not surrender to dharma , jñ
āna , yoga or any of the devas . Previously, it was
stated that you do not have the adhikāra to perform My
supreme ananya-bhakti . Therefore, I have described that
your a dhikāra is to perform karma-miśrā bhakti in
statements such as yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi (Gītā 9.26) .
Now, however, by My boundless and causeless mercy, I am

                             924
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

bestowing upon you the adhikāra to perform ananya-bhakti
. This ananya-bhakti is attained by some great fortune,
only by the mercy of My aikāntika-bhaktas . This is My
vow. But I am breaking this vow to personally bestow
upon you the adhikāra to perform ananya-bhakti . Now, if
you give up your nitya and naimittika duties in
pursuance of My order, you will not have to face any
reaction. I alone, in the form of the Vedas , have given
the instruction to perform nitya-karma and now I Myself
am ordering you to give it up. By accepting My order,
where is the possibility of you incurring sin as a
consequence of abandoning your nitya-karma ? Rather, if
you choose to ignore My direct order and continue to
perform nitya-karma , then the result will be that you
will incur sin. This you should know to be a fact. If a
person surrenders to someone, he remains under that
person’s ownership and control, just like an animal who
has been purchased. Whatever the master commands him do,
he must do; wherever he keeps him, he stays; whatever
food he gives him, he eats. This is the essence of
dharma as understood by one who is fully surrendered,
śaraṇāgata . The Vāyu-Purāṇa lists the six aspects of
śaraṇāgati : ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ

prātikūlyasya varjanam

rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso

goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā

ātmā-nikṣepa-kārpaṇ

ye ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ

1) To accept with determination everything that is
favourable for bhakti, 2) to give up everything that is
unfavourable for bhakti , 3) to have the staunch faith
that ‘Bhagavān will protect me’, 4) to accept Him as
one’s maintainer 5) to offer oneself completely and 6)
humility.

To remain devotedly engaged for the pleasure of one’s
worshipable Deity, as established in the bhakti-śāstras,
is ānukūlya , favourable, and any acts contrary to this
are prātikūlya , unfavourable. Varaṇa , choosing Him as
one’s maintainer, means to feel, ‘He alone is my
protector; I have none other than Him.’ Rakṣiṣyati
refers to the faith seen in those such as Gajendra and
Draupadī: ‘Whenever I am threatened by some unfavourable
situation, He will surely protect me.’ Nikṣepaṇa means
to devote one’s gross and subtle body as well a s one’s
own self for the purpose of serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa. kārpaṇya
means to exclusively express one’s humility and
submission to Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone. When these six activities
are performed with the intention of attaining prema for
Bhagavān, it is called śaraṇāga ti .

“If I surrender unto You alone, beginning from today, my
only duty is to remain surrendered, whether I attain
auspiciousness as described by You, or inauspiciousness.
In this way, if You engage me in dharmika activity,
there is obviously no cause for a nxiety. But what will
my destination be if You, the supremely independent
Īśvara, engage me in an adharmika act?” In response to

                           925
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Arjuna’s doubt, Śrī Bhagavān says, “I will liberate you
from all your accumulated sins, past and present, as
well as from any s ins I may cause you to perform.
Unlike other masters, I am capable of liberating you
from sin. Having made you My instrument, I am giving
this instruction from śāstra to you for the benefit of
every human being.”

Mā śucaḥ means, “Do not grieve for yourself or others. I
am bound by My vow to carry the burden of freeing any
person like you from all his sins and deliver him from
the cycle of birth and death. If such a person fixes his
mind upon Me, completely giving up all his svadharma or
para-dharma and remains happily situated having
surrendered to Me, I am also bound to carry the burden
of providing him with the means to achieve Me. What more
can I say? I am even ready to accept the burden of
maintaining his material life, as I stated when I spoke
ananyāś cintayanto mām (Gītā 9.22).

“Do not grieve by thinking, ‘Alas! I have placed such a
heavy burden on my Lord and master!’ There is absolutely
no labour involved in accepting this burden for Me, who
am bhakta-vatsala and satya-saṅkalpa , whose vows always
hold true. Having given this instruction, there is no
need to give any further instruction. I therefore
conclude this śāstra here.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Kṛṣṇa gave the most confidential instruction of
Bhagavad-Gītā concerning śuddha-bhakti in the previous
śloka. Now, in this present śloka , He states that it is
first necessary to exclusively surrender to Him to
become qualified to receive this śuddha-bhakti . Here
the word sarva-dharmān means that varṇāśrama-dharma and
its limbs—karma , jñ āna , yoga , worship of other devas
and religious faiths other than kṛṣṇa-bhajana are all
based on the bodily or mental platform. It is not
correct to think that the word parityajya only means
giving up the attachment to karma and the fruits of
karma . The innermost i ntention of Bhagavān’s statement
is to completely give up karma-niṣtḥā (adherence to
karma ). This is the deeper meaning of the prefix pari .
Someone may think that there is a possibility of
incurring sin or reaction by giving up all other dharma
as describe d above, to exclusively surrender to Kṛṣṇa.
To remove this doubt from the minds of common faithful
persons, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has bestowed fearlessness upon them
through His declaration: sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā
śucaḥ. “Do not grieve, I will certainly free you from
all types of sins.”

eta saba chāḍi āra varṇāśrama-dharma

akiñcana haīya laya kṛṣṇaika-śaraṇa

Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhyalīlā 22.93

                           926
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


One should give up the bad association of impersonalists
who are bereft of bhakti, as well as karmīs, yogīs,
materialists, womanisers and those who associate with
such womanisers. One should even give up varṇāśrama-
dharma and take full shelter of Kṛṣṇa, becoming humble,
meek and possessionless.

One cannot embrace the bhāvas described in the previous
śloka without doing this . However, as long as one
falsely identifies the body as his true self, he fears
incurring sin as a result of giving up dharma .
Therefore, Śrī Bhagavān has to take the vow that He will
free one from all sins incurred as a result of giving up
all types of dharma. Even after taking this vow, He is
again lifting His hand to bestow fearlessness and
telling Arjuna, “Do not grieve.” In this way, He
reassures him.

In the Rāya Rāmānanda-Saṁvāda, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
has said that even the stage of sarva-dha rmān
parityajya is external. This is because it has no
relationship with ātma-rati , the constitutional loving
function (bhāva ) of the self. It is merely the initial
qualification required to understand the bhāva of the
previous śloka (18.65). Unless a person fully realises
the purport of the present śloka and practises it in his
life by becoming firmly fixed in the spirit of it, it
will be as impossible for him to understand the deeper
meaning of the previous śloka as it is to catch an
imaginary flower in the sky. The pure ego, ‘I am a
servant of Kṛṣṇa’, is natural in śuddha-bhaktas and,
therefore, varṇāśrama-dharma is renounced of its own
accord. At that time, no sin or irregularity affects
them because they are completely renounced. Such bhaktas
are uttama -adhikārīs and qualified for the highest type
of bhakti.

ājñāyaivaṁ guṇān doṣān

mayā diṣṭān api svakān

dharmān santyajya yaḥ sarvān

māṁ bhajeta sa ca sattamaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.11.32

Those who render service unto Me, having abandoned all
types of dharma, and having understood the inherent
positive and negative aspects of the prescribed duties
instructed by Me in the Vedas, are counted among the
best of sādhus.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes Kṛṣṇa as saying, “I
have instructed you in the various types of religions
such as varṇāśrama-dharma , yati-dharma (the renounced
order of life), vairāgya (detachment), sense and mind
control, dhyāna-yoga and the controlling opulences of
Īśvara, so you can attain brahma-jñ āna and īśvara-j ñ
āna .” Now, in His con clusion, Śrī Bhagavān is telling
Arjuna to completely give up all these dharmika
processes and exclusively surrender to Him. “Only if you
surrender in this way will I deliver you from all types

                             927
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

of sins, whether they are caused by your material
conditioning or by renouncing these dharmika processes.
You should consider that you are not the performer of
these activities, and you should not grieve for
anything. The true constitutional nature of the jīvas is
easily awakened from its dormant state by the
performance of nirguṇa-bhakti to Me. At that time, it is
not required that one perform dharma , prescribed duties
or atonements, etc., or to practise jñ āna , yoga ,
dhyāna or any other process. One should perform bodily,
mental and spiritual activities, even in the bound
stage, but he should give up brahma-niṣṭhā (adherence to
the impersonal feature), being attracted by the beauty
and sweetness of Bhagavān in an exclusively surrendered
mood. The meaning is that whatever karma an embodied
jīva performs for his livelihood should be performed
with these types of higher niṣṭhā: brahma-niṣṭhā,
īśvara-niṣṭhā, and bhagavad-niṣṭhā. Lower niṣṭhā refers
to akarma and vikarma , which create anarthas . All
processes, such as varṇāśrama and vairāgya , assume
their respective natures (bhāvas ) by adopting one of
these types of niṣṭhā. When action is performed in
subordination to brahma-niṣṭhā, the bhāva of karma and
jñ āna manifests. When action is performed under īśvara-
niṣṭhā, the bhāva of karma offered to Īśvara (dhyāna-
yoga , etc.,) manifests. And when it is performed with
bhagavad-niṣṭhā, it transforms into śuddhā or kevala -
bhakti . Hence, this bhakti alone is the most
confidential tattvaÇ and prema is the supreme aim of
life. This is, indeed, the principal teaching and
innermost intention of Bhagavad-Gītā. The lifestyles of
karmīs , jñ ānīs , yogīs and bhaktas appear to be the
same, but when we observe their respective types of
niṣṭhā, it is clear that there is a vast difference
between their styles of worship in terms of their
sādhana practice, as well as their ultimate goal.”




Śloka 67



idaṁ te nātapaskāya

nābhaktāya kadācana

na cāśuśrūṣave vācyaṁ

na ca māṁ yo ‘bhyasūyati


idam—this; na kadācana vācyam—should never be explained;
te —by you; atapaskāya —to one who is not an ascetic; na
—nor; abhaktāya —to a non-devotee; ca —and; na —not;
aśuśrūṣave —to one who is unsubmissive; ca —and; na —
not; yaḥ abhyasūyati —one who is envious; mām —of Me.

You should never explain this essence of Gītā-śāstra to
anyone whose senses are uncontrolled, who is a non-
devotee, who is devoid of a serving mood, or who is
envious of Me.

                           928
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Thus, having completed His instructions on Gītā-śāstra,
Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the principle of continuing
the sampradāya. In other words, He is giving the
criteria by which one can ascertain who is qualified to
receive these instructions. One whose senses are not
under control is called atapaska. Smṛti also states:
“Tranquility, or control of the mind and the senses, is
the highest penance.” These instructions of the Gītā
should not be imparted to a non-devotee, even if he has
control over his senses. Nor should they be given to a
bhakta who is self-controlled but who is not interested
in submissive hearing (aśuśrūṣu ). “A further
prohibition is given for a person who fulfils the above
three qualifications (self-controlled, a bhakta , and
interested in hearing), but who is envious of Me, māṁ
yo’ bhyasūyati , considering Me, the nirupādhika-
pūrṇabrahma (the Supreme Absolute Truth, transcendental
to any material designations) to be one with māyā, and
My existence to be illusory and temporary. This message
of the Gītā must never be given to such a person, at any
cost.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In the present śloka, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is establishing the
necessary qualifications to hear the instructions of the
Gītā. The tattvas of the Gītā should never be instructed
to those who are envious of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who consider His
transcendental form to be illusory, who are devoid of
bhakti to the guru and the Vaiṣṇavas, who have no
control o ver their senses, and who do not render any
service to Śrī Hari, guru or the Vaiṣṇavas. None of them
are qualified to receive the Gītā’s instructions.
Because some people are unable to fully realise the
essence of Kṛṣṇa’s instruction, they narrate the Gītā in
an unauthorised manner to unqualified persons. They
think that this is a symptom of their magnanimous and
compassionate nature. However, by performing such
activities in disobedience to Kṛṣṇa’s orders, they
become offenders. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself knows mos t clearly
the harmful effects of giving this knowledge to an
unqualified person. Ignorant persons cannot understand
nor retain this jñ āna . Some people may say that it
shows a lack of compassion to consider a recipient’s
qualification or disqualification in the matter of
giving him dharmika instructions. However, this is not
correct because the good results of having received
dharmika instructions are observed only in a qualified
person. An unqualified person however, disobeys such

                           929
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

instructions after receiving them and, becoming an
offender, falls down even further.

Once, the king of the devas, Indra, and the chief of the
asuras , Virocana, went to Lord Brahmā to receive
instruction on ātma-tattva . Brahmā instructed Indra who
was a qualified recipient of this knowledge, and who was
able to comprehend tattvajñ āna . However, Virocana, who
was unqualified, was not able to follow the instructions
given by Brahmā. He understood the self to be his gross
body only, and the maintenance of it to be the goal of
life. In this way, Virocana remained bereft of true
tattvajñ āna . Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.23) also states:
yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāh

prakāśante mahātmānaḥ

The conclusive essence of the śrutis is only revealed to
those great souls who have para-bhakti unto Śrī Bhagavān
and who have an equal amount of bhakti for Śrī Gurudeva.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructs Uddhava in a
similar way:

naitat tvayā dāmbhikāya

nāstikāya śaṭhāya ca

aśuśrūṣor abhaktāya

durvinītāya dīyatām

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.29.30

You must never give this jñāna to persons who are proud,
atheistic, wicked, faithless, devoid of bhakti or
unsubmissive.

The Padma-Purāṇa also says: aśraddhadhāne vimukhe py
aśṛṇvati yaś copadeśaḥ śiva-nāmāpārādhaḥ, “By giving
this instruction to a person who is faithless and averse
to Bhagavān, one causes him to become an offender. It
does not benefit him.”




Śloka 68




ya imaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ

mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati

bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā

mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ

                             930
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017



(he) yaḥ—who; abhidhāsyati—teaches; imam—this; paramam—
supremely; guhyam—confidential knowledge; mat-bhakteṣu—
to My bhaktas; kṛtvā—attaining; parām—the highest
(premamayī); bhaktim—bhakti; mayi—unto Me; (and)
asaṁśayaḥ—becoming free from all doubts; eva eṣyati—will
come; mām—to Me.

He who instructs this most confidential knowledge of
Gītā-śāstra to My bhaktas will attain para-bhakti unto
Me, and, upon becoming free from all doubts, will
finally attain Me.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Śrī Bhagavān is describing the results attained by those
who give instruction on this Gītā-śāstra , in two ślokas
, the first starting with the word yaḥ. “They first
attain My para-bhakti and later they attain Me.”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




In this śloka, Śrī Bhagavān is describing the symptoms
and destiny of the genuine qualified preachers and the
genuine qualified hearers or students of the Gītā. While
giving Arjuna the most secret instruction of the Gītā
(18.65), Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “You are very dear to Me. That
is why I am e xplaining this highly confidential truth
to you.” In the previous śloka , Kṛṣṇa also instructed
that one should give this knowledge of the Gītā only to
a person who is self-controlled, faithful, endowed with
a service attitude and who has love for Him. Therefore,
it is essential for the preacher of Gītā-śāstra to have
strong śraddhā in Kṛṣṇa and aikāntika-bhakti for Him. He
must be fully conversant with tattvajñ āna and free from
any doubts. If a preacher of the Gītā has theoretical
knowledge, but does not practise it, or if he is bereft
of the above-mentioned qualities, then he is not a bona
fide preacher and one must never hear the instructions
of the Gītā from him. The result will simply be that
both the listener and the preacher will remain deprived
of the Gītā’s true jñ āna .

Śāstra describes the qualifications and the
characteristics of a sincere listener. Śrī Kṛṣṇa says to
Uddhava:

etair doṣair vihīnāya

brahmaṇyāya priyāya ca


                           931
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

sādhave śucaye brūyād

bhaktiḥ syāc chūdra-yoṣitām

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.29.31

One should give these teachings to those who are free
from the defects of conceit, atheism, wickedness,
faithlessness, arrogance, or who are devoid of bhakti.
They should be dedicated to the welfare of the
brāhmaṇas, strive for bhagavat-prema, have a saintly
nature and, above all, they should be bhaktas. But these
instructions can be given to a śūdra or a woman who has
śraddhā in Me and possesses bhakti to Me.

From this it is clear that one’s caste, creed, age,
activities, etc,. are not to be considered in the matter
of deciding who is fit to receive the tattva of the
Gītā. Anyone who has the above-mentioned qualities is
qualified to hear it. In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhyalīlā 22.64), this principle has been
substantiated: śraddhāvān jana haya bhakti adhikārī. “A
faithful bhakta is a truly eligible candidate to perform
service to the Lord.” Śrī Kapiladeva has also said:
śraddadhānāya bhaktāya

vinītāyānasūyave

bhūteṣu kṛta-maitrāya

śuśrūṣābhiratāya ca

bahirjāta-virāgāya

śānta-cittāya dīyate

nirmatsarāya śucaye

yasyāham preyasāṁ priyaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.32.41—42

Only narrate this to faithful, devout bhaktas who are
submissive, free from malice, well-wishing to all living
entities, engaged in sevā, renounced from external sense
pleasures, peaceful, free from envy, and for whom I am
the only beloved.

The essence of this instruction is that any person who
has śraddhā and bhakti for Kṛṣṇa is qualified to hear
the Gītā-śāstra . Those who impart the instructions of
the Gītā to such qualified persons attain para-bhakti
and finally attain Kṛṣṇa, without a doubt. Similarly,
the qualified listeners also attain the same supreme
destination.




Śloka 69




                             932
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu

kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ

bhavitā na ca me tasmād

anyaḥ priyataro bhuvi


ca—and; (there is) na kaścit—no one; manuṣyeṣu —in human
society; priya-kṛttamaḥ—who performs a more pleasing
service; me —to Me; tasmāt —than him; ca —and; na
bhavitā—there will never be; anyaḥ—another; bhuvi —on
the earth; priyataraḥ—more dear; me —to Me; tasmāt —than
him.

There is no one in human society who performs a more
pleasing service to Me than one who explains this
message of the Gītā to others. Nor will there be anyone
in the entire world more dear to Me than him.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“There is no one in this world who performs such a
pleasing service to Me, nor is there anyone as dear to
me as he who preaches this Gītā-śāstra .”




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The bona fide instructors or preachers of this Gītā-
śāstra are very dear to Bhagavān. Therefore, the duty of
śuddha -bhaktas is to preach the message of the Gītā.
However, those who entertain people on the pretext of
preaching the Gītā, do not preach the confidential, more
confidential and most confidential tattva of the Gītā.
Instead, they teach māyāvādā, karma, jñ āna and yoga .
Such persons become offenders at the lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān. One does not benefit by hearing the Gītā from
such preachers.




Śloka 70




adhyeṣyate ca ya imaṁ

dharmyaṁ saṁvādam āvayoḥ

                           933
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


jñāna-yajñena tenāha

iṣṭaḥ syām iti me matiḥ


ca—and; aham—I; syām —can be; iṣṭaḥ—worshipped; jñ āna-
yaj ñena —through the sacrifice of transcendental
knowledge; tena —by he; yaḥ—who; adhyeṣyate —studies;
imam —this; dharmyam —sacred; saṁvādam —conversation;
āvayoḥ—between us; iti —such; (is) me —My; matiḥ—
opinion.

I shall be worshipped by those who study this sacred
dialogue between us, through jñāna-yajña, the principle
of true knowledge. This is My opinion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now, in the śloka beginning with the word adhyeṣyate ,
Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the results of studyi ng this
Gītā.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Simply by engaging in the faithful study of this
dialogue between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, one performs
jñāna-yoga . Kṛṣṇa is pleased by this effort. Here, jñ
āna means that one practises the essence of Gītā after
understanding it. The essence of the Gītā is ananya-
bhakti to Śrī Bhagavān. Therefore, one who practises
such bhakti is very dear to Bhagavān. Others, such as
the karmī, jñ ānī and yogī are not as dear to Him.




Śloka 71



śraddhāvān anasūyaś ca

śṛṇuyād api yo naraḥ

so ‘pi muktaḥ śubhā˚ lokān

prāpnuyāt puṇya-karmaṇām


ca—and; saḥ—that; śraddhāvān —faithful; (and) anasūyaḥ—

                             934
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

non-envious; naraḥ—man; yaḥ—who; api —even; śṛṇuyāt—
hears; api —also; (becomes) muktaḥ—liberated; (and)
prāpnuyāt —attains; śubhāl —the auspicious; lokān —
planets; puṇya-karmaṇām —where those who have performed
pious deeds reside.

And one who merely hears this Gītā with faith, and
without envy, also becomes liberated from sins and goes
to the auspicious planets that are attained by the
pious.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




Now Śrī Bhagavān is explaining the results of hearing
Gītā in this śloka beginning with the word śraddhāvān .




Śloka 72



kaccid etac chrutaṁ pārtha

tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā

kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ

pranaṣṭas te dhanañjaya

pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; dhanañjaya—O winner of wealth;
kaccit —has; etat —this (teaching of the Gītā); śrutam —
been heard; tvayā—by you; eka-agreṇa —with one-pointed;
cetasā—attention; kaccit —is; te —your; ajñ āna-sammohaḥ
—delusion born of ignorance; pranaṣṭaḥ—dispelled.

O Pārtha, O Dhanañjaya, have you heard this Gītā with
undivided attention? Having heard it, has your delusion
born of ignorance been dispelled?




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“If you have not understood the superlative essence of
this teaching, then I will instruct it to you again.”
Śrī Bhagavān is speaking this śloka with this intention
only.




                             935
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




After concluding the instructions on the Gītā and
describing the results of hearing it and preaching its
purport, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is asking Arjuna, “Do you have any
fur ther questions? If you do, then I will answer them
again.” From this it is indicated that one should hear
the instructions of the Gītā with fixed attention.
Another point is that, even after hearing the
confidential tattva of Gītā from Śrī Gurudeva or tatt
va-darśī bhaktas , until the student fully realises such
tattva , he should continue to repeatedly hear it
through the process of submissive inquiry and by
rendering service. He will not be able to understand
these teachings otherwise.




Śloka 73




arjuna uvāca —

naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā

tvat prasādān mayācyuta

sthito ‘smi gata-sandehaḥ

kariṣye vacanaṁ tava


arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; acyuta—O infallible Lord;
mayā—my; mohaḥ—illusion; (is) naṣṭaḥ—dispelled; tvat-
prasādāt —by Your mercy; (and) smṛtiḥ—my spiritual
remembrance; (is) labdhā—regained; asmi —I am; gata-
sandehaḥ—free from doubt; (and) sthitaḥ—situated (in
transcendental jñ āna ); kariṣye —I shall do; tava —
Your; vacanam —will.

Arjuna said: O Acyuta, my delusion is dispelled by Your
grace and I have regained the memory of my true self. My
doubt has gone and I am situated firmly in true jñ āna.
I will now carry out Your order.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




“What further questions should I ask? I have become free
from all anxiety because I have given up all types of
dharma (prescribed duties) and have surrendered unto
You. Now I have complete faith in You.” Arjuna is

                            936
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

speaking this śloka beginning with the word naṣṭaḥ, to
present the actual condition of his heart to Kṛṣṇa.
“From now on, You are my sole refuge. I have completely
surrendered My dharma unto You, and will remain fixed in
Your order; I will not follow varṇāśrama -dharma , jñ
āna-yoga or any other process . From today, I have
abandoned them all.” When Arjuna, who carries the
Gāṇḍīva bow, heard Śrī Bhagavān say, “O My dear friend
Arjuna, I still have to perform some acts to remove the
burden of the earth. I will accomplish them through
you,” he prepared to fight.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Arjuna became very pleased to understand the intention
of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa and, with folded hands, he said,
“O Acyuta, by Your instruction and mercy, all my
ignorance and delusion have been dispelled. I have
perfectly understood that You are the guru and Lord of
all beings within the entire universe, both moving and
non-moving. I am Your servant and I fully surrender at
Your lotus feet. I will execute whatever order You give
me.” Having said this, Arjuna prepared to fight, having
understood Kṛṣṇa’s intention.

We learn from Arjuna’s example that this human form of
life will yield perfection if we become free from all
doubts by studying this Gītā-śāstra , engaging in
Kṛṣṇa’s service, surrendering exclusively to Him and
giving up all other philosophies.




Śloka 74




sañjaya uvāca —

ity ahaṁ vāsudevasya

pārthasya ca mahātmanaḥ

saṁvādam imam aśrauṣam

adbhutaṁ roma-harṣaṇam


sañjaya uvāca—Sañjaya said (to King Dhṛtarāṣṭra); iti —
thus; aham —I; aśrauṣam —have heard; imam —this;
adbhutam —wonderful; saṁvādam —conversation; vāsudevasya
—between Vāsudeva; ca —and; mahā-ātmanaḥ—the great soul;
pārthasya —Pār tha (Arjuna); roma-harṣaṇam —which causes
my hair to stand on end.


                           937
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Sañjaya said: O King, thus I have heard this wonderful
dialogue between mahātmā Vāsudeva and Pārtha, which
causes my hair to stand on end.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī




It so happens that the two papers on which I had written
the explanation of the five final ślokas summarising the
essence of the complete Gītā have disappeared. I take it
that Gaṇeśajī had those papers stolen by his mouse
carrier. After that, I did not again write those
purports. May Gaṇeśajī be pleased with me. I offer my
obeisances unto him.

Thus ends the Bhāvānuvāda of the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Ṭīkā,
by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, on the
Eighteenth Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which gives
pleasure to the bhaktas and is accepted by all saintly
persons.

Thus ends the Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary of Śrīmad
Bhagavad-gītā. May it increase the pleasure of saintly
people.

May the sweetness of this Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary,
which is beneficial for entire humanity, completely
satisfy the bhaktas who are like cātaka birds. And may
its sweetness manifest in our hearts.




Śloka 75



vyāsa-prasādāc chrutavān

imaṁ guhyam ahaṁ param

yogaṁ yogeśvarāt kṛṣṇāt

sākṣāt kathayataḥ svayam

vyāsa-prasādāt—by the mercy of Vyāsa; aham—I; (have)
śrutav ān —heard; imam —this; param —most; guhyam —
confidential; yogam —science of union with the Supreme
Lord; sākṣāt —directly; kṛṣṇāt —from all-attractive Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; yoga-īśvarāt —the Master of yoga ; kathayataḥ—as
He was speaking; svayam —Himself.

By the grace of Śrīla Vyāsadeva, I have heard this most
confidential yoga explained directly by Yogeśvara, the
all-attractive Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.




                           938
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Dvaipāyana Vyāsadeva was the guru of Sañjaya.
Sañjaya acknowledges that he heard and understood the
divya-jñ āna of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, which manifested
from the dialogue between Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, only by the
grace of his guru , Śrīla Vyāsadeva. Without the grace
of guru , the tattva of Gītā (bhagavat-tattva ) cannot
be understood. The guru must be as well versed in tattva
as Śrīla Vyāsadeva was, and endowed with realisation of
Bhagavān. The disciple should be like Sa ñjaya, capable
of rendering attentive service to the guru , as well as
desiring to hear from him and to follow his teachings
and instructions without argument. Only such a faithful
disciple can achieve perfection after understanding
bhagavat-tattva . It should also be understood that,
just as Arjuna became supremely blessed after hearing
the deep secret of the Bhagavad -gītā directly fro m the
lotus mouth of Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Sa ñjaya also,
by the grace of Śrīla Vyāsadeva, became supremely
blessed after hearing and understanding it, although he
was sitting far away from Kurukṣetra. And just as Arjuna
and Sa ñjaya were blessed and became perfect, any person
who wants to make his life perfect can do so by taking
shelter of a bona fide guru-paramparā, and surrendering
to a self-realised guru or a Vaiṣṇava. It is impossible
to attain bhagavat-tattva unless one accepts a śuddha-
bhakti-par amparā.




Śloka 76



rājan saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya

saṁvādam imam adbhutam

keśavārjunayoḥ puṇyaṁ

hṛṣyāmi ca muhur muhuḥ


ca—and; rājan—O king; saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya —remembering
again and again; imam —this; adbhutam —astonishing;
puṇyam —sacred; saṁvādam —dialogue; keśav a-arjunayoḥ—
between Keśava and Arjuna; hṛṣyāmi —I rejoice; muhuḥ
muhuḥ—at every moment.

O King, as I repeatedly recall this wonderful and sacred
dialogue between Śrī Keśava and Arjuna, I rejoice again
and again.




                            939
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

Śloka 77



tac ca saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya

rūpam atyadbhutaṁ hareḥ

vismayo me mahān rājan

hṛṣyāmi ca punaḥ punaḥ


ca—and; rājan—O king; saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya —remembering
repeatedly; tat —that; ati adbhutam —most wonderful;
rūpam —form; hareḥ—of Śrī Hari; me—my; vismayaḥ—
amazement; (is) mahān —great; ca —and; hṛṣy āmi —I
rejoice; punaḥ punaḥ—again and again.

O King, as I remember that most wonderful form of Śrī
Hari, I am struck with great amazement, and am thrilled
at every moment.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




From this śloka, it appears that the viśvarūpa of Śr ī
Kṛṣṇa which Arjuna saw at Kurukṣetra was also seen by Sa
ñjaya, by the grace of Śrīla Vyāsadeva, as he sat in the
royal palace in Hastināpura. This took place by the
grace of Śrīla Vyāsadeva. Śrī Kṛṣṇa had explained to
Arjuna that He had not shown that fo rm to anyone
before, and that He was showing it to Arjuna for the
first time. However, by thoroughly deliberating upon
this point, it can be understood that both Sañjaya and
Vy āsa most definitely saw the viśvarūpa along with
Arjuna. And from Arjuna’s statement, it can be
understood that even ṛṣis , maharṣis and devatās also
saw it. Śrī Vedavyāsa is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s parama-bhakta . Not
only that, he is also a śaktyāveśa-avatāra of Bhagavān
Himself. It follows, therefore, that only those who are
in the paramparā of Śrīla Vyāsa are capable of realising
the essence of Bhagavad-gītā.




Śloka 78



yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇo

yatra pārtho dhanurdharaḥ

tatra śrīr vijayo bhūtir

dhruvā nītir matir mama

                             940
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                         5/5/2017



yatra—wherever; (there is) yoga-īśvaraḥ—the Master of
all yoga ; kṛṣṇaḥ—Śrī Kṛṣṇa ; yatra —wherever; (there
is) dhanurdharaḥ—the bow-wielder; pārthaḥ—Pārtha; tatra
—there; (will be) dhruvā—constant; śrīḥ—wealth; vijayaḥ—
victory; bhūtiḥ—opulence; (and) nītiḥ—dedication to
morality; (this is) mama—My; matiḥ—opinion.

Wherever there   is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the master of all yoga, and
wherever there   is Pārtha, the wielder of the bow, there
will surely be   opulence, victory, prosperity and
righteousness.   This is My definite opinion.




Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti




The Eighteenth Chapter briefly describes the essence of
the entire Gītā. One division describes karma-yoga
predominated by dhyāna-yoga , which results in ātma-j ñ
āna. The other division describes śuddha-bhakti-yoga
that originates from śraddhā related to Bhagavān. This
is indeed the essence of the Gītā. Within these two
divisions, the confidential instruction is to gradually
achieve the path of jñ āna by performing niṣkāma-karma ,
while adopting varṇāśrama-dharma based on one’s own
nature. The more confidential instruction is to
cultivate ātma-j ñ āna within this life, through dhyāna-
yoga. And the most confidential instruction is to engage
in bhakti-yoga by exclusively surrendering unto Svayam
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is the essence of the
Eighteenth Chapter.

The purport of the entire Bhagavad-gītā is that advaya-
vastu , the nondual Absolute Entity, is the only tattva
. Śrī Bhagavān is the complete manifestation of that
tattva . All other tattvas have emanated from Him. From
His cit-śakti , bhagavat-svarūpa and cid-vaibhava , the
spiritual opulences emanate. Two types of infinite jīvas
manifest from his jīva-śakti : the liberated (mukta )
and the bound (baddha ). And the twenty-four elements,
from pradhāna to the blade of grass, manifest from His
māyā-śakti . Creation, maintenance and annihilation of
different states comes from the kāla-śakti , time
potency. All types of manifestations emanate from the
kriyā-śakti .

The five elements—Īśvara, prakṛti, jīva, kāla and karma—
have manifested from bhagavat-tattva only. Brahma ,
Paramātmā, etc., are all within Bhagavān, as are all
other conceptions of the Absolute Truth. Although the
five elements listed above are separate, they are
simultaneously one element under the control of
bhagavat-tattva , and although they are one, they are
eternally different because they have different
characteristics. This explanation of bhedābheda-tattva ,
or simultaneous oneness and difference, given in the
Gītā is beyond human logic. Therefore, the previous
mahājanas have called this tattva , acintya-bhed-ābheda-

                            941
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017

tattva , and the jñ āna related to it, tattvajñ āna .

Jīva: The jīvas are pure conscious entities by
constitutional nature, and they are a special tattva
which exist as atomic particles in the rays emanating
from cit-sūrya , the transcendental conscious sun,
Kṛṣṇa. By nature, they are qualified to exist in the
spiritual and in the material worlds. They are situated
on the border of the cit (spiritual) and the acit
(material) world. Because they are conscious, they are
independent by nature. If they are favourable to Kṛṣṇa
and attracted to the spiritual world, then they can
relish pure ānanda with the help of the hlādinī-śakti ,
Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure potency. On the other hand, if they
turn away from Kṛṣṇa, being attracted to the illusory
world, due to the influence of the māyā-śakti , then
they have to undergo material happiness and distress.
The jīvas who have cid-rati , affinity for the conscious
world, are nitya-mukta , eternally liberated, and those
who have jaḍa-rati , affinity towards the world of
unconscious matter, are nitya-baddha. Both types of
jīvas are unlimited in number.

Forgetting his pure constitutional nature, the jīva
suffers various types of miseries in the ocean of
material existence in higher and lower forms of life,
such as devas , humans, and perfection in dhyāna through
karma-yoga. Thus realising his pure svarūpa , he attains
prema for the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān. Or, if he
develops śraddhā in topics of Bhagavān, he takes shelter
of a proper guru and performs sādhana-bhakti. He then
attains bhāva-bhakti and finally prema-bhakti. There are
no paths other than these two for the ātmā to realise
his pure svarūpa .

Of the two paths of ātma-jñāna mentioned above, the path
of karma-yoga predominated by dhyāna-yoga is suitable
for the common man, because it is under the control of
one’s own efforts. Bhakti-yoga , which arises from
śraddhā, is superior to karma-yoga and also easier to
perform, but it cannot be attained without receiving the
good fortune of the grace of Bhagavān or His bhaktas .
Therefore, most people in the world are inclined to
perform karma-yoga . Among such karma-yogīs , those who
are fortunate develop śraddhā in bhakti-yoga , and thus
they attain the stage of exclusive surrender to Bhagavān
as described in the concluding śloka of the Gītā. This
is the abhidheya (process) described in all the Vedas .

The path of karma is based on material desires. Its
goals: attainment of material happiness, enjoyment in
the fourteen planetary systems, and mukti—are all devoid
of true value for the conscious jīva . The very
beginning of the Gītā describes fruitive karma and its
result, bhukti (sense enjoyment), as being worthless.
Even the attainment of sāyujya-nirvāṇa , which is the
perfection of monism, and is attained when one has
become liberated from birth and death, is not the
ultimate purpose of the jīva . This has also been stated
in various places. The supreme prayojana of the jīva is
to rise above impersonal realisation and the four types
of mukti , such as sālokya , and achieve nirmala-prema
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa by entering into the topmost spiritual real
m where His līlās are performed.

                           942
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt                       5/5/2017


Having compiled the siddhānta of all the Vedas and
Vedānta in the Gītā, it has been determined that the
supreme goal is to attain prema for Bhagavān by
performing bhakti-yoga with knowledge of one’s
relationship with Him. A person should always practise
bhakti-yoga by hearing, chanting, etc.Ç as well as by
following his dharma according to his qualifications. He
should maintain his life by performing his occupation
while remaining favourable to the cultivation of bhakti-
yoga. With great śraddhā in the higher process, he
should gradually give up his niṣṭhā in the lower
process. Then he should become firmly fixed in bhakti-
yoga , through śaraṇāgati , full surrender, and thus
live his life in this way. Then Bhagavān will quickly a
ward him śuddha-prema . Merely by entering into the
process of purifying his existence, a person achieves
the mercy of Bhagavān. This mercy makes him fearless,
immortal and free from lamentation, and he becomes
eternally absorbed in His prema .

Thus ends the Sārārtha-Varṣiṇī Prakāśikā-vṛtti, by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, on the
Eighteenth Chapter of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā..



Table of Contents

Chapter One

Chapter Two

Chapter Three

Chapter Four

Chapter Five

Chapter Six

Chapter Seven

Chapter Eight

Chapter Nine

Chapter Ten

Chapter Eleven

Chapter Twelve

Chapter Thirteen

Chapter Fourteen

Chapter Fifteen

Chapter Sixteen

Chapter Seventeen

Chapter Eighteen

                           943
Srimad Bhagavad-gita.txt         5/5/2017




Table of Contents

Chapter One

Chapter Two

Chapter Three

Chapter Four

Chapter Five

Chapter Six

Chapter Seven

Chapter Eight

Chapter Nine

Chapter Ten

Chapter Eleven

Chapter Twelve

Chapter Thirteen

Chapter Fourteen

Chapter Fifteen

Chapter Sixteen

Chapter Seventeen

Chapter Eighteen




                           944
