Tota-Gopinath & Gadadhar Pandit.txt              5/5/2017

Tridandisvami Sri Srimad Bhaktivedanta Narayana Maharaja

PARIKRAMA of TOTA-GOPINATHA MANDIRA and

THE GLORIES of SRI GADADHARA PANDITA




Sri Jagannatha Puri: October 7, 2001




Typists: Srimati Radhika devi dasi and Srimati
Premanidhi devi dasi

Editor: Srimati Syamarani dasi




[On Oct.7th Srila Narayana Maharaja took the parikrama
pilgrims to Tota Gopinatha Mandira. Tota Gopinatha is
the Deity manifested by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
given charge to Sri Gadadhara Pandita. He is the Deity
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu entered at the time of His
disappearance from this world. Outside and to the left
of the Mandira, as one approaches, is the enchanting
garden where Mahaprabhu heard Srimad Bhagavatam from
Gadadhara Pandita. Srila Narayana Maharaja spoke in the
Mandira in Hindi, Bengali and English. The following
transcription was made from notes taken of Srila
Maharaja's English, as well as the English translations
of his Hindi:]



If anyone thinks that when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took
Srimati Radhika's bhava, She became zero, it is not
correct. In a drama, someone may take the part of
someone else, and that second person is still present.
He has not become zero. Someone may play Radha and
Krsna, and Radha and Krsna may also be present,
watching. Similarly, when Krsna 'took' the bhava of
Radhika and became Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, She was also
present, watching, as Sri Gadadhara Pandita.



Radhika came in the form of Sri Gadadhara. You should
try to know Gadadhara-tattva. There is no difference
between Sri Gadadhara Pandita and Srimati Radhika, but
the activities are different in Krsna's pastimes and
Gaura's pastimes. In Gaura-lila Sri Gadadhara Pandita is
a sevaka.



No gopi, including Candravali, Lalita and Visakha, can
experience Srimati Radhika's madanakya-mahabhava. Krsna

                           1
Tota-Gopinath & Gadadhar Pandit.txt            5/5/2017

has rudha and adirudha, but not madana-bhava. Sri
Gadadhara Pandita, on the other hand has madanakya-
mahabhava. In Gaura-lila, however, it is covered, so
that he can help Krsna to play the part of Srimati
Radhika. In the form of Sri Gadadhara Pandita, Srimati
Radhika is looking and examining, and if there is
something wrong in Krsna (as Mahaprabhu), She corrects
it.



Gauranga is not nagara. No one can serve Gauranga by
thinking himself a gopi and thinking of Gauranga as
Krsna. Everyone has to serve Him in dasya-bhava. No one
should think, "I am Lalita, Visakha, or any other gopi."
This is called gauranga-nagari-vada. It is possible for
Krsna to be the enjoyer of conjugal mellows, but not
Mahaprabhu. He is always in the role of a gopi, Srimati
Radhika. Anyone can serve Mahaprabhu in dasya-rasa, but
not in madhurya-rasa. In this pastime, this would be
absurd. Sri Caitanya-caritamrta says that this vada,
gauranga-nagari-vada, is sahajjia. Caitanya-bhagavat and
our guru-parampara also reject this idea, and Srila
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura has cut their arguments.



[From Srila Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada: "A similar
example is Lord Caitanya. Although He is Krsna Himself,
He appeared as a devotee, not as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. We should accept the Lord's mood in
particular appearances and we should worship Him in that
mood. Because Lord Caitanya is Krsna Himself, somebody
may worship Him in the same manner as Krsna. But Krsna
was in the role of enjoyer, and Lord Caitanya was is in
the role of being enjoyed. The party known as gauranga-
nagari is therefore considered to be deviated from pure
devotional service. This is on account of them giving
Lord Caitanya the same facility as Krsna, which He did
not like. Our service mood should be compatible to the
attitude of the Lord. It is not that we should overlap
the attitude of Krsna upon Lord Caitanya, or Lord
Caitanya upon Krsna, or Krsna upon Ramacandra, or
Ramacandra upon Krsna.]



Sri Gadadhara Pandita is Srimati Radhika, and he
therefore has up to madanakya mahabhava, but he wants to
serve Mahaprabhu. He wants to do what Krsna wants, and
thus he covers this madhurya-bhava. Sri Gadadhara
Pandita knows what Mahaprabhu wants: Mahaprabhu wants to
play the part of Srimati Radhika. Right from the
beginning He is in Srimati Radha's mood, and He is
chanting "Krsna prana-natha!" He therefore came here to
Tota-Gopinatha to hear Srimad Bhagavatam from Sri
Gadadhara Pandita, Srimati Radhika, to learn how to play
Her part. In its deepest understanding, Srimad
Bhagavatam is really the glories of Srimati Radhika's
moods.



vande nanda-vraja-strinam

                            2
Tota-Gopinath & Gadadhar Pandit.txt            5/5/2017


pada-renum abhiksnasah

yasam hari-kathodgitam

punati bhuvana-trayam



"I repeatedly offer my respects to the dust from the
feet of the women of Nanda Maharajaâ€™s cowherd village.
When these gopis loudly chant the glories of Sri Krsna,
the vibration purifies the three worlds." (Srimad
Bhagavatam 10.47.63)



Why did Mahaprabhu come here to hear from Sri Gadadhara
Pandita? Because Sri Gadadhara Pandita is Srimati
Radharani, he will be able to explain Her mood in Srimad
Bhagavatam. The explanations of Gadadhara Pandita will
be the highest explanations and glorification of Her
mood. It will be greater than that of Vyasa, Sukadeva,
and Krsna Himself. Mahaprabhu came here to know the
glories of all the gopis and especially Srimati
Radharani:



sri-gopya ucuh

aksanvatam phalam idam na param vidamah

sakhyah pasun anuvivesayator vayasyaih

vaktram vrajesa-sutayor anuvenu-justam

yair va nipitam anurakta-kataksa-moksam



"The gopis began to speak among themselves: O sakhis! We
think that for those who have eyes, there is but one
thing which is a suitable object of vision. Success of
the eyes lies in beholding this object alone; we know of
no other. And what is that most precious object of
attachment for the eyes? It is the vision of the two
sons of Maharaja Nanda, Sri Krsna and Baladeva,
accompanied by the gopas, as They enter the forest
taking the cows, or as They bring them back to
Vrndavana. They hold Their flutes to Their lips and look
upon us with mild smiles and amorous sidelong glances
filled with love. At that time we drink the sweetness of
Their faces." (Venu-gita, text seven)



This verse in Venu-gita of Srimad Bhagavatam is spoken
by Srimati Radhika and the gopis when Krsna goes
cowherding. Krsna is behind and Baladeva is ahead. Krsna
is playing on His flute and searching for Srimati
Radhika. Srimati Radhika comes and takes His flute, and
He begins looking at Her with sidelong glances. If
Srimati Radhika explains this pastime Herself, saying,

                           3
Tota-Gopinath & Gadadhar Pandit.txt              5/5/2017

"My mood was such and such," it will be the best
explanation.



mrgayur iva kapindram vivyadhe lubdha-dharma

striyam akrta virupam stri-jitah kama-yanam

balim api balim attvavestayad dhvanksa-vad yas

tad alam asita-sakhyair dustyajas tat-katharthah



"Like a hunter, He cruelly shot the king of the monkeys
with arrows. Because He was conquered by a woman, He
disfigured another woman who came to Him with amorous
desires. And, even after consuming the gifts of Bali
Maharaja, He bound him up with ropes as if he were a
crow. So let us give up all friendship with this dark-
complexioned boy, even if we canâ€™t give up talking
about Him." (Srimad Bhagavatam 10.47.17)



This verse and the one below were uttered by Srimati
Radhika at Uddhava Kyeri when Krsna was residing in
Mathura. The deepest meanings of these verses were
revealed to Mahaprabhu by Gadadhara Pandita Prabhu.



yad-anucarita-lila-karna-piyusa-viprut-

sakrd-adana-vidhuta-dvandva-dharma vinastah

sapadi grha-kutumbam dinam utsrjya dina

bahava iha vihanga bhiksu-caryam caranti



"To hear about the pastimes that Krsna regularly
performs is nectar for the ears. For those who relish
just a single drop of that nectar, even once, their
dedication to material duality is ruined. Many such
persons have suddenly given up their wretched homes and
families and, themselves becoming wretched, traveled
here to Vrndavana to wander about like birds, begging
for their living." (Srimad Bhagavatam 10.47.18)



Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came here to hear, and when He
heard He fainted. Both He and Gadadhara Pandita fainted.
Gadadhara Pandita knew that by hearing from him,
Mahaprabhu would be more perfect to play 'Her' part.
Srimati Radhika is the principal in the school of Srimad
Bhagavatam, in the course of tasting its meanings.



There were three and a half confidential associates of

                           4
Tota-Gopinath & Gadadhar Pandit.txt            5/5/2017

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in

Gambhira. Why was Sri Gadadhara Pandita not one of them?
He is superior to these other three and a half
confidential associates. This is a hidden secret. If Sri
Gadadhara Pandita was there, Mahaprabhu's separation
mood would not have come. In the association with
Srimati Radhika He would have thought Himself to be
Krsna.



One day, after hearing Srimad Bhagavatam, Mahaprabhu was
siting on the sand here at Cataka Parvata, which He
considered to be Govardhana. He told Gadadhara Pandita,
"Gadadhara, I want to give you my most valuable
property. Will you accept it?" When Gadadhara Pandita
agreed, Mahaprabhu said, "This is the property of My
heart." He began removing the sand and said, "My prana-
dhana is here." In the mood of Srimati Radhika. He
exposed Gopinatha's head and crown, and others then
began to help to reveal His form. Mahaprabhu then
requested Sri Gadadhara Pandita, "You should take Him
and serve Him throughout your life."



At the time of His disappearance Mahaprabhu entered
Tota-Gopinatha. Mahaprabhu left the world at 48 years,
when Sri Gadadhara Pandit was 47. Out of great
separation, Gadhadara Pandita quickly became like an old
man, and he also disappeared. We see in Krsna's pastime
that the wife of Sudama Vipra appeared like an old
person. She was young, but she was very lean and thin
like an old person, with practically no breasts and no
shape. She was almost like a skeleton. Similarly, in his
mood of separation from Mahaprabhu, Sri Gadadhara
Pandita may have also appeared like that.




MORE ABOUT SRI GADADHARA PANDITA PRABHU

Puri: Oct 13, 2001 Darsana (p.m.)



[Srila Narayana Maharaja:] Gadadhara Pandita is always
serving Krsna. In Krsna-lila, whatever Krsna wishes,
Srimati Radhika always serves more than Candravali,
Lalita, Visakha, and others. Her whole mood is to
satisfy Krsna. In Mahaprabhu-lila, because Krsna wants
to taste Himself, He will take Radhika's mood, and She
responds accordingly: "He wants that, so I should not
disturb Him. If I help Him in this, this will be my
service." Do you understand?



When Mahaprabhu was calling, "Krsna! Krsna! O Prana-
natha!" Radhika was there, but as an obedient servant.
She was in a daksina (submissive) mood. The relationship

                             5
Tota-Gopinath & Gadadhar Pandit.txt            5/5/2017

of dasa is always in a daksina mood. Sri Gadadhara
Pandita was even more daksina than Rukmini. Rukmini
sometimes had some maan (transcendental loving anger),
but Sri Gadadhara Pandita was not like that. If he had
been in a vamya (left-wing or unsubmissive) mood, it
would have been unfavorable to the mood of Krsna as
Mahaprabhu. Gadadhara Pandita was always thinking, "I am
His servant."



If he would have said, "My dear Krsna, my dear beloved,
Mahaprabhu's mood would have been disturbed.



[Tunga-vidya dasi:] That was in Puri? But what was the
mood in Navadvipa?



[Srila Narayana Maharaja:] In Navadvipa also. At that
time Gauranga was also calling out, "Krsna, Krsna," not,
"Radha, Radha." But at that time He was untrained. He
was not yet admitted in the school of Visakha, Sri
Svarupa Damodara. At that time also, Gadadhara Pandita
always served as an obedient servant, covering all his
moods as Srimati Radhika.



[Sripad Bhaktivedanta Aranya Maharaja:] In nitya-
Navadvipa Dhama? Then Mahaprabhu's abistha is there in
nitya-Navadvipa Dhama, Gadadhara Pandita is also in the
same mood?



[Srila Narayana Maharaja:] Same mood. Gauranga was not
nagari. We never accept Him as nagari.




                           6
