Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

Sri Upadesamrita of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:    ★★★★★




* * *




* * *




Śrī Upadeśāmṛta



Contents

Preface

Verse One

Verse Two

Verse Three

Verse Four

Verse Five

Verse Six

Verse Seven

Verse Eight

Verse Nine

Verse Ten

Verse Eleven




Preface


[translated from the Hindi edition]

                           1
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017




Śrī Upadeśāmṛta is highly revered in the Śrī Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava spiritual community (sampradāya). Resplendent
with the inner sentiment (bhāva) and outer complexion of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the
inaugurator of the congregational chanting of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s holy names (śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana) and the
bestower of that most elevated, radiant divine love for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa which had never been given before. For the
benefit of all living beings, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī churned
the ocean of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s instructions and
extracted the essence in the form of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta.
The instructions given in this book are indispensable
for practitioners (sādhakas) of the devotional path
(bhakti). Without following these instructions, entering
the realm of pure devotion and especially following the
intricate and elevated path of spontaneous devotion
(rāgānuga-bhakti) is not only difficult, but impossible.

We learn from the diary of Govinda dāsa, the personal
servant of the prema-avatāra (incarnation of divine
love), Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that prior to returning
to His eternal, unmanifest pastimes, Mahāprabhu remained
constantly overwhelmed in a highly inflamed (sūddīpta)
mood of divine separation (vipralambha). At that time
Mahāprabhu’s two intimate, eternal servitors, Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara and Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, would try to
pacify Him by singing verses that were relevant to His
mood. On one occasion Mahāprabhu was sitting with His
devotees on the shore of the ocean engaged in hearing
narrations concerning Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-kathā). Seeing the
dense grove of trees lining the shore of the blue ocean
and the tall sand dunes, remembrance of Govardhana Hill
and the Yamunā River with the many beautiful gardens and
groves (kuñjas) situated on her banks suddenly sprang up
inside Him. Then He began bitterly weeping in separation
from Kṛṣṇa. When after some time His excitement subsided
and He became peaceful, He gave the assembled devotees
some instructions in a soft and sweet voice. Those
instructions comprise the verses of this Śrī
Upadeśāmṛta.

From the very beginning it is compulsory for sādhakas
desirous of entering the realm of bhakti to renounce
activities that are unfavourable for progress in
spiritual life. These include the urges of mind, speech,
anger, tongue, stomach and genitals, as well as avoiding
overeating, unnecessary endeavours, useless
conversation, improper compliance with the rules and
regulations of devotion, bad association, and either
greed or the restlessness of the mind to adopt worthless
opinions. Simultaneously it is imperative to adopt those
things that nourish one’s bhakti, such as enthusiasm,
determination, patience, the good behaviour associated
with bhakti and the ideals for devotional life that have
been established by pure devotees.

After progressing somewhat, one should engage in the six
kinds of devotee association, give appropriate respect
to the three levels of Vaiṣṇavas and serve them
accordingly. Finally, while residing either physically
or mentally in Vraja and following in the footsteps of

                           2
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

devotees who possess deep love for Kṛṣṇa and who are
adept at relishing the devotional mellows of Vraja
(vraja-rasa), one should constantly engage his tongue
and mind in chanting and remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names
(nāma), form (rūpa), qualities (guṇa) and pastimes
(līlā). Just as Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the most dear to
Kṛṣṇa, similarly Her pond (kuṇḍa) is also the most dear
to Him. Therefore practitioners of bhakti must certainly
take shelter of the embodiment of the ultimate
devotional ecstasy (mahābhāva), Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and Her
pond, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
completely preserved this topmost essence of all
instructions within the verses of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta.

The Eminently Glorious Author of

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī

Who does not know the author of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī? His ancestry was a royal dynasty of
bhāradvāja-gotrī brāhmaṇas from Karnataka, South India,
who were particularly knowledgeable in the Yajur Veda.
Impelled by some special circumstances, his great-
grandfather Śrī Padmanābha left his ancestral home and
settled in Bengal in a village named Naīhāṭī, which is
situated on the banks of the Bhāgīrathī River.
Padmanābha’s grandson Śrī Kumāradeva had three sons:
Amara, Santoṣa and Vallabha. Later they became famous as
Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī Anupama.
Impressed with their extraordinary scholarship,
qualifications and virtuous conduct, the Muslim ruler of
Bengal at that time, Hussain Shah, gave Rūpa and
Sanātana the titles Sākara Mallika and Dabīra Khāsa and
made them his prime minister and personal secretary. But
after some time they came into contact with the saviour
of Kali-yuga, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Renouncing their
colossal wealth and all worldly relationships, they
became distinguished ascetics, fully dedicating
themselves to serving the internal desire of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa. On the order of Mahāprabhu they restored the
forgotten holy places of Vraja-maṇḍala, re-established
the proper methods for deity worship, composed
authoritative scriptures on bhakti and established the
codes of good conduct for devotional life.

Again manifesting the famous Śrī Govindajī deity in
Vṛndāvana, constructing a massive, beautiful temple and
establishing an opulent standard of worship for the
deity is all accredited to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī alone. He
appeared in the year 1489 and disappeared in 1564. In
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī’s Laghu-vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī commentary on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, we find the following authoritative
list of the literatures he composed: (1) Śrī Haṁsadūta,
(2) Śrī Uddhava-sandeśa, (3) Śrī Kṛṣṇa-janma-tithi-
vidhi, (4) Śrī Bṛhat-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā, (5) Śrī
Laghu-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā, (6) Śrī Stava-mālā, (7)
Śrī Vidagdha-mādhava-nāṭaka, (8) Śrī Lalita-mādhava-
nāṭaka, (9) Śrī Dāna-keli-kaumudī, (10) Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu, (11) Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, (12) Śrī
Prayuktākhya-candrikā, (13) Śrī Mathurā-māhātmya, (14)
Śrī Padyāvalī, (15) Śrī Nāṭaka-candrikā, (16) Śrī Laghu-
bhāgavatāmṛta, (17) Śrī Sāmānya-virudāvalī-lakṣaṇa and
(18) Śrī Upadeśāmṛta.


                           3
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa dāsa Gosvāmī,

Author of the Upadeśa-prakāśikā Commentary

Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa dāsa Gosvāmī composed a Sanskrit
commentary on Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, named Upadeśa-prakāśikā,
which is brief, yet essential. He appeared in the
dynasty of the Vṛndāvana gosvāmīs who serve Rādhā-
ramaṇa, the deity who was established and served by Śrī
Gopāla-bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. His father’s name was Śrī
Govardhana-lāla Gosvāmī and his grandfather’s name was
Śrī Jīvana-lāla Gosvāmī. Śrī Jīvana-lāla Gosvāmī was his
initiating spiritual master (dīkṣā-guru) and also his
instructing spiritual master (śikṣā-guru). Rādhā-ramaṇa
dāsa Gosvāmī was a great scholar, author and poet in
Sanskrit and Hindi. His Dīpikā-dīpanī commentary on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is highly respected amongst scholars.
Similarly his Upadeśa-prakāśikā commentary is highly
revered in Vaiṣṇava society.

Śrī Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura,

Author of the Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti Commentary

By composing hundreds of books on bhakti, Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura re-established in this modern era, which is
degraded by excessive sensual pleasure, the flow of pure
devotion (śuddha-bhakti), which had temporarily stopped.
He is an intimate, eternal devotee of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Due to his having propagated in different
ways the pure philosophy of divine love (prema-dharma)
exhibited and preached by Śrīman Mahāprabhu, he is
famous as the Seventh Gosvāmī. Because he manifested
Mahāprabhu’s holy names (śrī gaura-nāma), Mahāprabhu’s
holy land (śrī gaura-dhāma), Mahāprabhu’s innermost
desire (śrī gaura-kāma) and the narrations of
Mahāprabhu’s pastimes (śrī gaura-līlā), he is considered
the incarnation of Vyāsa in Mahāprabhu’s pastimes.

He appeared in an educated and cultured family on 2nd
September, 1838, in the village of Vīranagara, which is
near the place of Mahāprabhu’s appearance, Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura, in West Bengal. His childhood name was Śrī
Kedaranātha Datta. He was a scholarly and ingenious
student. During his household life, he held a high
position as a government official under the rule of the
British Rāja. During that time he served the innermost
desire of Śrī Gaurasundara by translating the Upaniṣads,
the Brahma-sūtra, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā and
the commentaries of the Gosvāmīs, by composing his own
devotional books, and by publishing weekly and monthly
spiritual journals. In addition, he established nāma-
haṭṭa programmes for the distribution of harināma-
saṅkīrtana and hari-kathā from village to village and
town to town, and he revived many forgotten holy places.

In the end he renounced his wealth and family and took
up permanent residence at Śrī Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja, a
garden in Śrī Godruma that is situated on the banks of
the divine Bhāgīrathī River within the boundary of
Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa. There he remained possessionless and
established the ideal of the system for practising
spontaneous devotional worship (rāgānuga-bhajana). If he
had not appeared in this world, Mahāprabhu’s birthplace,

                           4
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

the places where Mahāprabhu performed pastimes and
Mahāprabhu’s instructions would still be concealed.
Today, in all corners of the world, harināma-saṅkīrtana
is being joyously celebrated and the very high waves of
śrī gaura-kṛṣṇa bhakti are inundating the entire world.
Thousands of educated Western youths are drinking the
mellows of devotion (bhakti-rasa) and dancing, being
overcome with spiritual joy. It is none other than
Bhaktivinoda hākura who again inaugurated this flow of
bhakti.

He composed approximately one hundred books in Sanskrit,
Bengali, Hindi, English, Oriya and other languages. The
names of a few of them are as follows: commentaries on
ancient scriptures such as the Brahma-sūtra, Bhagavad-
gītā, some of the Upaniṣads, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta; and his own compositions such as
Jaiva-dharma, Śrī Caitanya-śikṣāmṛta, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhura Śikṣā, Datta-kaustubha, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṁhitā,
Tattva-viveka, Śrī Bhajana-rahasya, Daśa-mūla-śikṣā,
Śaraṇāgati, Gītāmālā, Kalyāṇa-kalpataru, Harināma-
cintāmaṇi, Prema-pradīpa and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu —
His Life and Precepts. He disappeared from this world on
23rd June, 1914.

Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī

Gosvāmī Prabhupāda,

Author of the Anuvṛtti Commentary

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda
appeared in Jagannātha Purī on Friday, 3rd February,
1874, the day of kṛṣṇa-pañcamī in the month of Māgha.
His father and śikṣā-guru was the famous eternal devotee
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, Śrī Bhaktivinoda hākura. His
childhood name was Śrī Vimalā Prasāda. From childhood he
was an extraordinary scholar, a spiritual genius and
righteous in his conduct. At the age of fifteen, due to
his expertise in all branches of knowledge, the
community of elevated Vaiṣṇavas of that time adorned him
with the title “Śrī Siddhānta Sarasvatī”, which means he
who personifies the wisdom of all established truths.

In 1918, he accepted the renounced order (sannyāsa) and
became known as parivrājakācārya Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī. His dīkṣā-guru was the supremely worshipful
Śrīmad Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. In Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s birthplace of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura he
established his original monastery (maṭha), the Śrī
Caitanya Maṭha. He went on to establish approximately
sixty-four maṭhas in Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Madras,
Mumbai, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and throughout the whole of
India, as well as in Western and Eastern countries. In
these he taught educated and cultured youths the
premamayī (saturated with divine love) instructions of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Attracting them by his heart-touching
instructions and his ideal devotional character, he
initiated them into the renounced order (tridaṇḍa-
sannyāsa), sent them to preach both domestically and
internationally, and inspired them to publish spiritual
journals in various languages.

He also established the Vaiṣṇava system of occupational

                           5
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

duties known as daiva-varṇāśrama. Travelling throughout
India, with profound enthusiasm he preached śuddha-
bhakti and inspired others to do the same. By publishing
his own devotional books and periodicals as well as the
Upaniṣads, the Purāṇas, the Brahma-sūtra, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, the books of the Gosvāmīs and
authoritative books of the four sampradāyas, he further
expanded the enormous storehouse of Śrī Gauḍīya
devotional literature. The world will remain forever
indebted to this great personality.

My supremely worshipful Śrī Gurudeva, the crest jewel of
topmost swan-like (paramahaṁsa) Vaiṣṇavas, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, is his devoted
disciple, a guardian of the Śrī Gauḍīya sampradāya and
founding preceptor (ācārya) of the Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti and all the maṭhas throughout India under its
jurisdiction. Besides publishing his own books, he re-
published many of Bhaktivinoda hākura’s writings. By his
special mercy and inspiration, devotional literatures
are steadily being published by the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti.

Lastly, I am especially obliged to the present day head
and ācārya of the Gaudīya Vedānta Samiti,
parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja. It is only by his special enthusiasm and
inspiration that this Hindi edition of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta
is now being published, and I am most indebted to him
for this. May he kindly deliver this edition into the
lotus hands of our revered śrī gurudeva and thus fulfil
his innermost desire. This is my fervent prayer at his
respectful feet.

I am fully confident that by reading this book, faithful
persons who are desirous of bhakti will become qualified
to obtain the prema-dharma taught by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and that venerable devotees will be greatly
delighted. May Śrī Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga-Rādhā-Vinoda-
bihārījī bestow Their plentiful, merciful blessings upon
us. At Their lotus feet I offer this humble prayer (from
Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s Śrī Muktā-caritra,
Concluding Prayers (1)):

ādadānas tṛṇaṁ dantair

idaṁ yāce punaḥ punaḥ

śrīmad-rūpa-padāmbhoja-

dhūliḥ syāṁ janma-janmani

Clasping a straw between my teeth, repeatedly I beg to
obtain the dust of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s lotus feet birth
after birth.

A servant of the servant of the Vaiṣṇavas,

Tridaṇḍi-bhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



the holy day of Akṣaya-tṛtīyā, 1984


                            6
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha

Mathurā, Uttar Pradesh, India



śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ

Verses




Verse One


Six Urges Unfavourable to Bhakti and Worthy of Rejection



vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ

jihvā-vegam udaropastha-vegam

etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ

sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt

Anvaya

dhīraḥ — a wise and self-controlled person, free from
desires for material enjoyment, liberation and mystic
perfection; yaḥ — who; viṣaheta — can subdue; etān — all
these; vegān — overwhelming passions; vācaḥ vegam — the
impetus of speech; manasaḥ vegam — the agitation of the
mind; krodha-vegam — the onset of anger; jihvā-vegam —
the vehemence of the tongue; udara-upastha-vegam — the
urge of the belly and the agitation of the genitals; saḥ
— he; śiṣyāt — can instruct; imām — this; sarvām —
entire; pṛthivīm — world; api — even.

Translation

A wise and self-composed person who can subdue the
impetus to speak, the agitation of the mind, the onset
of anger, the vehemence of the tongue, the urge of the
belly and the agitation of the genitals can instruct the
entire world. In other words, all persons may become
disciples of such a self-controlled person.

Maṅgalācaraṇa

I first of all offer repeated obeisances (praṇāmas) unto
my most worshipful śrī-gurudeva, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī, unto my parama-gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who wrote
the Anuvṛtti commentary, unto my parātpara-gurudeva, Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivinoda hākura, who wrote the Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī
commentary, unto Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa dāsa Gosvāmī, the
servant of the Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa deity, who wrote the
Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā, unto Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who wrote
this Śrī Upadeśāmṛta and whose only wealth is the

                             7
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

amorous mellow of devotion (śṛṅgāra-rasa), and to his
worshipful deity, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is
decorated with the inner sentiment and bodily complexion
of Śrī Rādhā. Falling at their feet again and again, I
am beginning this translation of the Upadeśa-prakāśikā-
ṭīkā.

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

by Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa dāsa Gosvāmī

Let there be all victory for Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa. I offer
prayers unto Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is accompanied
by the unfettered ascetic (avadhūta) Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu, the identical manifestation of Śrī Baladeva, by
Śrī Advaita Ācārya, the incarnation of Mahā-Viṣṇu, by
His potencies such as Śrī Gadādhara and by His
associates like Śrīvāsa. I take shelter of that
Mahāprabhu, who is the fountainhead of all potencies of
the world. I offer prayers with great respect and
affection unto Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, whose entire wealth is
śṛṅgāra-rasa. This means that the sole purpose of his
life is to describe śṛṅgāra-rasa, also known as
unnatojjvala-prema-rasa, the highest and most radiant
divine love of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. He is always immersed in
the service of the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda. He
has purified all the living entities of this world by
giving instructions on the methodology by which this
type of prema may be obtained. I offer praṇāma unto Śrī
Gopāla-bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who is very merciful to the
destitute and wretched living entities, who are
enamoured with the external energy. I offer praṇāma once
more unto the ocean of mercy Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
the incarnation who sanctifies this Kali-yuga, who
distributes śrī-harināma and love of God (bhagavat-
prema) and who delivers the souls (jīvas) of this Earth.
I offer prayers unto Śrī Gopīnātha dāsa, a disciple of
Śrī Gopāla-bhaṭṭa and servant of Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa, who
has benedicted innumerable living entities by bestowing
śrī gaura-bhakti. I offer praṇāma unto my gurudeva, Śrī
Jīvana-lāla, of whom I am the grandson and servant.
Offering praṇāma unto all of them, I am beginning this
brief explanation of the verses of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta,
written by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī for the benefit of the
sādhakas.

In Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has
defined uttama-bhakti as the cultivation of activities
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, performed with a favourable mood, which
is devoid of all other desires and which is not covered
by knowledge aiming at the oneness of the jīvas with the
Lord (jñāna) or by activity not meant exclusively for
the Lord’s pleasure (karma). How can such uttama-bhakti
manifest in persons whose hearts are filled with
shortcomings such as lust and anger? In the Padma Purāṇa
it is said:

śokāmarṣādibhir bhāvair

ākrāntaṁ yasya mānasam

kathaṁ tatra mukundasya

sphūrti-sambhāvanā bhavet

                            8
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017


How can Śrī Mukunda ever be manifest to a person whose
heart is invaded by lamentation, anger and other
agitations?

The purport of this statement is that when
contaminations such as lust, anger and greed arise
within the mind, the six overwhelming passions mentioned
in the original verse cause the mind to become
thoroughly engrossed in fleeting objects of sensual
gratification. The cultivation of unalloyed bhakti is
never possible in such a contaminated heart. Therefore
the instruction is given here to subdue these passions,
which impede the development of bhakti. The sādhaka who
can tolerate these passions can instruct the entire
world. The conclusion is that a sādhaka who has
conquered his senses and subdued these passions can
purify all the jīvas of the world by his resolute and
pure uttama-bhakti. Everyone may become the disciple of
such a great personality.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.24) it is said:

vāg gadgadā dravate yasya cittaṁ

rudaty abhīkṣṇaṁ hasati kvacic ca

vilajja udgāyati nṛtyate ca

mad-bhakti-yukto bhuvanaṁ punāti

My dear Uddhava, My devotee whose voice becomes choked
up with prema, whose heart softens and begins to flow
with spiritual emotion, who cannot cease from crying
even for an instant, who sometimes bursts into laughter,
sometimes begins to sing very loudly, abandoning all
shyness, and sometimes dances, purifies not only himself
but the entire world.

It is essential to note here that by subduing the six
passions described already, what is obtained is merely
the qualification to enter the realm of bhakti. These
are not direct limbs of devotional practice (sādhana-
bhakti) but, rather, the doorway through which one may
enter the realm of bhakti. Because bhakti is the self-
manifest function of the Lord’s internal potency
(svarūpa-śakti), when it makes its appearance these six
passions automatically become pacified.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti (Commentary in the form of a
nectarean shower)

by Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura

śrī godruma-candrāya namaḥ

Obeisance unto Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the moon of Śrī
Godruma.

yat kṛpā-sāgarodbhūtam

upadeśāmṛtaṁ bhuvi

śrī-rūpena samānītaṁ

                              9
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017


gauracandraṁ bhajāmi tam

I worship Śrī Gauracandra, the ocean of mercy from which
arose a stream of nectar collected by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
and brought forth in this world as Śrī Upadeśāmṛta.

natvā grantha-praṇetāraṁ

ṭīkā-kāraṁ praṇamya ca

mayā viracyate vṛttiḥ

pīyūṣa-pariveśanī

Bowing down with great humility, I offer praṇāma unto
the author of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, and
unto the commentator, Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa dāsa Gosvāmī.
Thus I begin this commentary, which is an offering of
nectar.

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11)

The cultivation of activities that are meant exclusively
for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or in other words the
uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, performed
through all

endeavours of the body, mind and speech, and through the
expression of various spiritual sentiments (bhāvas),
which is not covered by knowledge aimed at impersonal
liberation (jñāna) or by reward-seeking activity
(karma), and which is devoid of all desires other than
the aspiration to bring happiness to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is
called uttama-bhakti, pure devotional service.

Adopting all those things mentioned in the above verse
as favourable and renouncing all that is unfavourable,
one adopts the cultivation of activities meant
exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It is this
cultivation, or bhagavad-anuśīlana, which is the primary
objective of persons intent on bhajana. The acceptance
of that which is favourable and the rejection of that
which is unfavourable are not direct limbs (aṅgas) of
śuddha-bhakti. Rather, they are aspects of that faith
which is characterised by surrender (śaraṇāgati), which
in turn bestows qualification for bhakti. This is
expressed as follows in the Vaiṣṇava-tantra (quoted in
Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 236)):

ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ

prātikūlyasya varjanam

rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso


                           10
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā

ātma-nikṣepa-kārpaṇye

ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ

There are six symptoms of self-surrender: (1)
Ānukūlyasya saṅkalpa — fully surrendered sādhakas should
accept only those things that are favourable for prema-
bhakti. (2) Prātikūlya-vivarjana — they should
completely reject those things that are unfavourable to
prema-bhakti. (3) Rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāsa — they have firm
faith that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is their only protector, that there
is no protector other than Kṛṣṇa, and that one cannot
obtain protection by any other activity. (4) Goptṛtve
varaṇa — surrendered devotees have absolutely no doubt
that Kṛṣṇa is their only guardian and maintainer. (5)
Ātma-nikṣepa — offering the self to the Lord is
expressed in this attitude: “I am incapable of doing
anything independently. Unless Kṛṣṇa desires, no one can
do anything.” Devotees who have no other resort (ātma-
nikṣepa) have this kind of faith. (6) Kārpaṇya —
humility is expressed as follows: “I am very fallen and
insignificant.” Unalloyed devotees are possessed of this
very firm and simple faith. To possess all these
attitudes is called śaraṇāgati.

In this verse the instruction is given to abandon that
which is unfavourable. One who is able to tolerate the
overwhelming passions of speech, mind, anger, tongue,
belly and genitals can instruct the entire world.

In the Padma Purāṇa it is said:

śokāmarṣādibhir bhāvair

ākrāntaṁ yasya mānasam

kathaṁ tatra mukundasya

sphūrti-sambhāvanā bhavet

How can Śrī Mukunda ever be manifest to a person whose
heart is invaded by lamentation, anger and other
agitations?

The purport of this verse is that lust, anger, greed,
illusion, intoxication, envy and other irritations
always arise within the mind and thus attract the mind
towards material sense objects. This is effected through
six agencies: (1) by the urge to speak or the use of
words that create distress for others; (2) by the
agitation of the mind or the innumerable desires and
plans fabricated within the mind; (3) by anger or the
use of harsh words; (4) by the vehemence of the tongue
or the greed to relish six kinds of taste, namely sweet,
sour, bitter, pungent, salty and astringent; (5) by the
urge of the belly or the drive to eat more than
necessary; and (6) by the agitation of the genitals or
the desire for cohabitation between men and women. Thus
agitated, the cultivation of śuddha-bhakti is not
possible. In order to make the hearts of those who are
pursuing the path of bhajana intent on bhakti, Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī has composed this verse first.

                            11
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017


The attempt to restrain these six urges does not
constitute bhakti-sādhana, rather it is a staircase to
ascend to the platform of eligibility through which one
may enter the temple of bhakti. On the paths of fruitive
activity (karma) and the cultivation of knowledge
(jñāna), one is instructed to curb these six urges.
These instructions, however, are not applicable for pure
devotees. In the scriptures, hearing, chanting and
remembrance of the names, form, qualities and pastimes
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are described as actual bhakti.

These six urges present various types of obstacles in
the immature stage for the practitioner entering the
path of bhakti. At that time the devotee, by taking
shelter of the mood of exclusive śaraṇāgati and by
avoiding the ten kinds of offences to the holy name
(nāma-aparādha), becomes fit to dispel these obstacles
through the power of harināma-

kīrtana and so on. The association of spotless saints
(sādhus) plays a very significant role in this matter.
The Padma Purāṇa says:

śrutvāpi nāma-māhātmyaṁ

yaḥ prīti-rahito ‘dhamaḥ

ahaṁ mamādi paramo

nāmni so ‘py aparādha-kṛt

Those who, in spite of hearing the astonishing glories
of the holy name, maintain the conception that “I am
this material body” and that worldly objects are “mine”
and who display no persistence in or love for the
utterance of the holy name are also offenders to the
holy name.

The devotees are intent on practical renunciation
(yukta-vairāgya) and thus they remain aloof from dry
renunciation. Therefore the regulation to abandon all
contact with the sense objects does not pertain to them.
When the agitation of the mind is withdrawn or, in other
words, when one is devoid of thirst for material
enjoyment, the impetuosity of the eyes, the life air,
the hearing propensity and all other drives become
pacified.

Therefore persons who have gained victory over these six
overwhelming passions can conquer the entire world. The
instruction to tolerate these urges is given only for
householder devotees, because before giving up
householder life one must first have abandoned all types
of urges.

Anuvṛtti

by Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda

The supremely compassionate Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari,
who purifies the fallen souls, displayed unlimited mercy
towards the jīvas, who are ravaged by the influence of
Kali and averted from the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, by

                            12
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

manifesting the instructions known as Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka. In
these verses He has very succinctly propounded in the
form of codes all the instructions regarding the truths
of sambandha,1 abhidheya2 and prayojana3 for the living
entities. His most beloved Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī heard all
these extremely confidential truths of devotional tenets
(bhakti-tattva) from His lotus mouth at Jagannātha Purī
and Prayāga. Not only did he hear these teachings, but
the all-powerful embodiment of prema, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, invested his heart with the potency by which
he could realise these confidential truths of bhakti.
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī revealed these instructions in simple
and straightforward Sanskrit language in his books such
as Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Lalita-
mādhava, Vidagdha-mādhava, Stava-mālā and others. These
sacred jewels of literature are a mine of good fortune
filled with the priceless gems of prema. Śrī Upadeśāmṛta
is one such invaluable jewel of prema. It is a necklace
for the devotees of Mahāprabhu (gaura-bhaktas). Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī collected the essence of all the instructions of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and offered it as a gift to the
genuine sādhakas.

In Śrī Upadeśāmṛta two kinds of instruction are given.
The first is to give up things that are unfavourable to
bhakti, and the second is to adopt things that are
favourable to bhakti. As long as the sādhaka fails to
apply these two kinds of instruction in his life, there
is no possibility that bhāva-bhakti4 will manifest in
his heart, what to speak of prema-bhakti.5 At present
there are many persons who adhere to various types of
fabricated views, to doctrines that display only an
external veneer of religion but are actually opposed to
bhakti, to ideas that are contrary to the Vedas, to
opportunistic views, and to the doctrines of
imitationism (sahajiyā), impersonalism (māyāvāda) and
other diverse and contrary opinions. All such persons
fear the instructions given in the form of this
Upadeśāmṛta, considering them to be the personification
of Yamarāja, he who administers punishment to the
deceased. But faithful persons who study and recite this
Upadeśāmṛta with great love and apply it in their lives
will become free from all kinds of doubt in regard to
bhakti and will easily attain first bhāva-bhakti and
finally the most rare prema-bhakti. Therefore, holding
the dust of the lotus feet of the gurus following in the
line of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī upon my head, this Śrī
Varṣabhānavī-dayita dāsa, the servant of the lord of the
life (prāṇanātha) of Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
is setting down this commentary of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta named
Anuvṛtti. The purpose of doing so is to immerse the
jīvas in Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, which was revealed
by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and which was practised and preached
by the Vaiṣṇava preceptors who follow Śrī Rūpa
(rūpānuga-vaiṣṇava-ācāryas), such as Śrī Gaura-kiśora
dāsa Bābājī and Śrī Bhaktivinoda hākura.

There are three kinds of overwhelming passions observed
in worldly living entities attached to material sense
enjoyment: the urges of speech, mind and body. When one
falls into the powerful current of these three impetuous
demands, it is very difficult to gain deliverance.
Falling into the stream of repeated birth and death,
such living entities are deprived of their spiritual

                           13
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

well-being. But self-controlled persons who tolerate
these demands are not overwhelmed by material sense
enjoyment. They are competent to vanquish this material
world.

The demands of speech refer to the speculations of the
followers of impersonalism (nirviśeṣa-vādīs), which are
opposed to bhakti; to the logical deliberations of the
result-oriented workers ensnared in material activities,
which stress the fruits of action; and to all talk not
related to the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa but related to
varieties of desire for material enjoyment. The demands
of speech do not refer to those words that apply to the
service of the Lord. On the contrary, such talks should
be considered as the fruit of tolerating the demands of
speech. Sometimes, although one adopts a vow of silence,
he expresses desires for material enjoyment and so on
simply by his bearing or by writing. These are also
included within the demands of speech.

The agitations of the mind are of two types: (1)
avirodha-prīti — unimpeded attachment and (2) virodha-
yukta-krodha — anger arising from impediments.
Attachment for the faith of the māyāvādīs, veneration
towards the adherence to result-oriented activity and
belief in the ideas of those who have many desires not
related to the service of Kṛṣṇa, are three kinds of
avirodha-prīti. Mere indifference to the activities of
the jñānīs, karmīs and persons possessing other desires
is but the unmanifest or undeveloped stage of unimpeded
attachment. When there is an impediment to the
fulfilment of material desires, when one fails to obtain
the cherished fruit of one’s work, and when in spite of
all endeavour one does not obtain liberation (mukti),
anger comes about. To meditate upon the pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is not a form of mental agitation, rather it is
the means by which all mental agitation becomes
pacified.

The demands of the body are also of three types: the
urges of the tongue, belly and genitals. Anxiousness to
relish any of the six kinds of taste6 and greed to enjoy
animal flesh, fish, eggs, wine, excessive ghee, milk,
rabaḍī (a condensed milk-sweet), cream and so on is
known as the impetuosity of the tongue. Sādhus also
avoid eating foods that are overly bitter or spiced with
hot chili. Consumption of betel nut, the mixture of
betel with various spices (pāna), cigarettes, marijuana,
hemp, opium and other intoxicating substances, as well
as onions and garlic, are also counted as impetuous
demands of the tongue. Sādhakas of bhakti must never
indulge in these intoxicants. One should very carefully
save oneself from the vehemence of the tongue by
honouring the food remnants (mahā-prasāda) of Bhagavān
and His devotees. Although mahā-prasāda may be very
tasteful, it is not included within the demands of the
tongue. By honouring it with great faith one can conquer
the demands of the tongue. But if on the pretext of
accepting prasāda one desires one’s own enjoyment and
cunningly relishes its taste, that is also included as
the passion of the tongue. To eat very costly and
delicious food items such as rabaḍī and cream offered to
the demigods (devatās) at the houses of wealthy persons
is detrimental for renounced (niskiñcana) Vaiṣṇavas. In

                           14
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

order to satisfy the lust of the tongue one may become
ensnared in various types of reprehensible behaviour and
bad association. In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā
6.227, 236) it is said:

jihvāra lālase jei iti-uti dhāya



śiśnodara-parāyaṇa kṛṣṇa nāhi pāya



bhāla na khāibe āra bhāla nā paribe



Persons who are prone to carnal pleasure and eating too
much and who run here and there to satisfy the greed of
the tongue never obtain Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One should not wear
elegant and expensive clothes, nor should one eat
delicious food.

Sādhakas should very carefully avoid these things.
Gluttonous persons usually suffer from different types
of diseases. By eating too much, many difficulties
ensue. Persons who eat excessively generally become
subservient to the demands of the genitals and thus
become debauchees. By accepting bhagavat-prasāda in a
suitable manner, by observing Ekādaśī in accordance with
the regulations and by serving Kṛṣṇa, the demands of the
belly are mitigated.

The demands of the genitals are of two types: in
accordance with scripture and not sanctioned by
scripture. When a person who has attained maturity
marries in accordance with scriptural regulations and
observes the prescribed dharma for a householder
(gṛhastha) by following the proper behavioural codes for
begetting good progeny, he regulates the demand of the
genitals. This is classified as sex indulgence in
accordance with scripture. There are many different
types of illicit sexual indulgence, such as
transgressing scriptural and social codes and accepting
another man’s wife, lusting after eight types of
conjugal exchanges and enjoying the senses by artificial
and licentious means contrary to scriptural codes. Both
householders and renunciant who are sādhakas of bhakti
should always remain aloof from the demands of the
tongue, belly and genitals.

In his book Prema-vivarta (7.3.1—4), the associate of
Śrī Caitanyadeva, Śrī Jagadānanda Paṇḍita, has said:

vairāgī bhāī grāmya kathā nā śunibe kāne

grāmya-vārtā nā kahibe jabe milibe āne

svapne o nā kara bhāī strī sambhāṣaṇa

gṛhe strī chāḍiyā bhāī āsiyācha vana

yadi cāha praṇaya rākhite gaurāṅgera sane


                           15
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

choṭa haridāsera kathā thāke jena mane

bhāla nā khāibe āra bhāla nā paribe

hṛdayete rādhā-kṛṣṇa sarvadā sevibe

O Vaiṣṇava mendicant, O brother, whomever you should
meet, do not hear from him nor speak with him about
mundane subjects. Do not speak intimately with a woman
even in your dreams. O brother, you should give up your
wife and household and retire to the forest. If you wish
to develop love for the lotus feet of Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari, then you should always remember the example
of Choṭa Haridāsa. If you desire bhagavad-bhakti, then
you should not eat delicious food nor dress yourself
very luxuriously. In this way you should always serve
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa within your heart.

Only one who is fully able to tolerate the six urges of
body, mind and words that have already been described is
fit to be addressed by the title of “Gosvāmī”, or one
who is the master of his senses. Such gosvāmīs are the
true servants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Those who, on the contrary,
are controlled by these six demands should be called go-
dāsa, servant or slave of the senses, and not gosvāmī.

Those who are go-dāsa, servants of the senses, are
actually servants of the illusory energy (māyā). If,
therefore, they desire to become servants of Kṛṣṇa, they
should follow in the footsteps of those who are truly
gosvāmīs. There is no means other than this. Those whose
senses are not controlled can never become devotees of
Śrī Hari. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.30) Śrī Prahlāda
Mahārāja has said:

matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā

mitho ‘bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām

adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ

punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām

O Father, materialistic persons are simply milling over
that which has already been milled and chewing that
which has already been chewed. Because their senses are
not controlled they are proceeding towards the dreadful
hell of this material existence, repeatedly trying to
enjoy that which has already been consumed. The
intelligence of such materially attached persons cannot
be turned towards Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa either by their own
endeavour, by the instruction of others or by the
association of similar materialistic persons.




Verse Two


Six Impediments to Bhakti



                            16
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017


atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca

prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ

jana-saṅgaś ca laulyaṁ ca

ṣaḍbhir bhaktir vinaśyati

Anvaya

atyāhārāḥ — eating too much or accumulating more than
necessary; prayāsaḥ — endeavours opposed to bhakti; ca —
and; prajalpaḥ — unessential and mundane talks;
niyamāgrahaḥ — abandoning the rules prescribed for one’s
eligibility or adopting those rules that are meant for
others; ca — and; jana-saṅgaḥ — association with worldly
and sensualistic persons, association with women or men
who are attached to women, association with māyāvādīs,
atheists and other non-devotees; ca — and; laulyam —
greed, or the restlessness of the mind to adopt
worthless opinions; ṣaḍbhiḥ — by these six faults;
bhaktiḥ — pure devotion; vinaśyati — is destroyed.

Translation

Bhakti is destroyed by the following six kinds of
faults: (1) eating too much or collecting more than
necessary, (2) endeavours that are opposed to bhakti,
(3) useless mundane talks, (4) failure to adopt
essential regulations or fanatical adherence to
regulations, (5) association with persons who are
opposed to bhakti and (6) greed, or the restlessness of
the mind to adopt worthless opinions.

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

In the beginning stage of the practice of bhakti the
material proclivity is prominent in the hearts of the
sādhakas. Therefore they are unable to subdue the six
overwhelming passions described in the first verse.
Consequently, in this condition, many tendencies that
are very harmful to bhakti develop in the hearts of the
sādhakas. In this verse those injurious tendencies are
being described for the benefit of the sādhakas. The
word atyāhāra means to eat more than required or to
accumulate material objects. The word prayāsa means to
endeavour for worldly objects or to be engaged in
activities that are opposed to bhakti. The word prajalpa
means to uselessly criticise and gossip about others,
which is a gross misuse of time. The word niyamāgraha,
when broken into its constituent parts, has two
meanings: (1) niyama + āgraha — over-zealousness in
following rules and (2) niyama + agraha — failure to
accept rules. When the first meaning is applied, it
refers to enthusiasm for those rules that yield an
inferior result, such as promotion to the heavenly
planets, leaving aside the endeavour for the superior
attainment of the service of the Lord. When the second
meaning is applied, it refers to indifference towards
those rules that nourish bhakti. The words jana-saṅga
mean to give up the association of pure devotees and
keep company with others. In the conversation between
Devahūti and Kardama Muni in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

                            17
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

(3.23.55), there is a very nice instruction about giving
up worldly association:

saṅgo yaḥ saṁsṛter hetur

asatsu vihito ‘dhiyā

sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto

niḥsaṅgatvāya kalpate

O Deva, association is the cause of both material
bondage and liberation from material existence. When due
to ignorance one keeps company with worldly-minded
persons who are diverted from the path of bhakti, that
association brings about one’s material entanglement.
When, however, one keeps company with pure devotees of
the Lord, that association liberates one from material
existence and causes one to obtain the lotus feet of the
Lord.

Furthermore, Bhagavān Kapiladeva gives the following
instructions to Devahūti:

saṅgaṁ na kuryāt pramadāsu jātu

yogasya pāraṁ param ārurukṣuḥ

mat-sevayā pratilabdhātma-lābho

vadanti yā niraya-dvāram asya

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.31.39)

Those who desire to obtain kṛṣṇa-prema, which is the
ultimate fruit of bhakti-yoga, should never indulge in
illicit association with women. Learned sages who know
the absolute truth say that for those who desire
liberation from material existence and attainment of the
lotus feet of the Lord, illicit connection with women
opens wide the door to hell.

teṣv aśānteṣu mūḍheṣu

khaṇḍitātmasv asādhuṣu

saṅgaṁ na kuryāc chocyeṣu

yoṣit-krīḍā-mṛgeṣu ca

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.31.34)

One should never associate with foolish, agitated,
materialistic men, who identify the body as the self,
who are most deplorable and who are dancing dogs in the
hands of women.

Having pointed out the defects of material association,
the revealed scriptures (śāstra) forbid it. The
agitation of the mind for compatible objects and the
unsteadiness of the mind that results from associating
with persons of many different opinions is known as
laulya. Such unsteadiness of the mind is like an
unchaste woman, wandering sometimes upon the path of

                              18
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

karma, sometimes on the path of yoga, sometimes on the
path of jñāna and sometimes upon the path of bhakti. By
this the predilection for bhakti is destroyed.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti

Atyāhāra, prayāsa, prajalpa, niyamāgraha, jana-saṅga and
laulya are six faults that are directly opposed to
bhakti. (1) The word atyāhāra is a compound word formed
by combination of the prefix ati, which means too much
or excessively, with the word āhāra, which means to
seize, grasp or consume for one’s own enjoyment.
Excessive enjoyment of sense objects through any one of
the senses and the endeavour to accumulate in excess of
one’s requirements are known as atyāhāra. Devotees who
have renounced householder life are forbidden to
accumulate material goods. Gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas must
acquire goods sufficient for their maintenance, but if
they accumulate beyond their needs it is known as
atyāhāra. Those who are eager to perform bhajana should
not accumulate worldly goods like materialistic sense
enjoyers. (2) The word prayāsa refers to activities that
are opposed to bhakti or performed for the enjoyment of
the senses. (3) To waste time in useless, mundane talks
is called prajalpa. (4) The word niyamāgraha has two
meanings. When one has obtained a progressively higher
qualification but remains over-zealous to adhere to the
rules pertaining to a lower qualification, it is known
as niyama-āgraha. Failure to observe the rules that
nourish bhakti or, in other words, an absence of firm
faith is known as niyama-agraha. (5) To associate with
persons other than Bhagavān’s devotees is known as jana-
saṅga. (6) The word laulya means both unsteadiness and
greediness. In the first sense it refers to the
fickleness of the mind to accept many different kinds of
false doctrines or uncertain conclusions. In the second
sense it refers to attachment for worthless material
sense enjoyment. By prajalpa one indulges in criticising
sādhus, and by laulya one awakens a taste for many
different temporary, uncertain conclusions. Both of
these lead to nāma-aparādha. Therefore one should very
carefully give them up.

Anuvṛtti

Excessive acquisition of knowledge, which is the
preoccupation of the jñānīs; accumulation of the fruits
of work, which is undertaken by the fruitive workers;
and amassing too many material objects, which is the
business of those who are plagued with many desires, are
all known as atyāhāra. The cultivation of knowledge,
which is taken up by jñānīs, the austerities and vows
undertaken by karmīs and the hard labour done by those
possessed of many desires to obtain wife, children and
wealth, are called prayāsa. The dry scholarship of the
jñānīs, which amounts to nothing more than useless
scriptural argumentation; praise of the benefits of
pious deeds, which generates fondness for religious
rituals in the karmīs; and the talks pleasing to the
senses of those who are possessed of many desires, are
called prajalpa. To accept the rules of the jñāna-
śāstras in order to obtain liberation is called āgraha,
over-zealousness. Attachment for the rules outlined in
the scriptures promoting pragmatism (practical as

                           19
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

opposed to idealistic results) with a desire for sensual
enjoyment both in this world and the next is known as
niyama-āgraha. Establishment of certain rules of conduct
appropriate for one’s own status in order to achieve
immediate happiness as advocated by the utilitarians or
those who promote the greatest happiness for the
greatest number is also known as niyama-āgraha. To
remain indifferent to the rules that are prescribed for
the attainment of bhakti is known as niyama-agraha. Such
persons are so audacious that they try to pass off even
their detestable wantonness and depravity as the most
sacred and elevated path of spontaneous devotion (rāga-
mārga). In Hari-bhakti-vilāsa the disposition of such
persons has been explained in the following words:

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

Although engaged in single-minded devotion to Lord Hari,
if one transgresses the regulations mentioned in the
Śruti, Smṛti, Purāṇas and the Nārada-pañcarātra, great
misgivings (anarthas) are produced.

In the Kalyāṇa-kalpataru also, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda hākura
has said, “My dear mind, what have you done? Being in a
very immature stage you have cheated yourself
unknowingly by perpetrating the fault of narrow-
mindedness upon the pure Vaiṣṇava sampradāya. You have
supposed the pure conceptions and validity of the
sampradāya to be hypocrisy and thus abandoned them. You
have given up wearing the Vaiṣṇava tilaka markings and
neck beads (tulasī-mālā) and put aside your chanting
beads (bhajana-mālā). You think, ëWhat is the use of
wearing tilaka? I can chant within my mind, so what need
is there of beads? One’s diet has nothing to do at all
with bhajana. So don’t think that you have to give up
eating meat, fish or eggs. Don’t think that you must
stop drinking wine or tea and taking intoxicants such as
pāna, tobacco, marijuana, hemp or opium.’ You have cast
aside the need for taking initiation (dīkṣā). You have
begun to refer to yourself as an incarnation. You have
begun to propagate your new theories very powerfully
through different agents. You are criticising the
opinions of the previous great personalities (mahājanas)
and ācāryas of the path of bhakti, considering them to
be mistaken. Some cunning persons put on tilaka and
tulasī-mālā and cheat others. Therefore you avoid the
association of anyone who wears tilaka and mālā,
considering them all to be cheaters. But, my dear
brother mind, please consider, what have you gained by
this? You have given up gold for ashes. Your present
life and the next have both been utterly ruined. You
address everyone as a hypocrite, knave and cheater. But
you have failed to attain bhagavad-bhakti. What will be
your fate at the time of death?

“O mind, what should I tell you? You utter the words
ëprema, prema’ but what good will it avail? Prema is a
rare and priceless jewel. You will have to undertake

                           20
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

arduous sādhana to attain it. By deceitful practice you
make a show of tears, trembling, horripilation and
fainting at the time of kīrtana or hearing spiritual
discourses, yet your real business is simply to
accumulate wealth, women and prestige. When you have not
even a trace of attachment for pure sādhana-bhakti,
which is essential for the acquisition of prema, then
how will you obtain such pure bhagavat-prema? You will
have to first give up the ten offences against the holy
name and chant harināma continuously. You should hear
hari-kathā in the association of pure Vaiṣṇavas. Then,
by the mercy of Śrī Nāma Prabhu, unalloyed prema will
arise automatically in your heart.

“You have not performed bhajana in a regulated manner;
you have not performed saṅkīrtana in the association of
pure devotees. You have not withdrawn your mind from
sense objects and engaged it in remembering the Lord in
a secluded place. Without first climbing the tree, your
attempt to pluck the fruit with your own hand has simply
gone in vain. The most sacred and pure kṛṣṇa-prema is
extremely rare. By misleading others you will simply
cheat yourself. First make yourself fit by performing
sādhana. Then prema will become easily accessible to
you.

“O brother, although lust (kāma) and love (prema) appear
identical by external indications, they are not at all
the same. Kāma is like rusted iron, whereas prema is
like pure gold. You have seized kāma, imagining it to be
gold. Can anyone obtain prema by such absurd means?

“O foolish mind, you have become intoxicated by
uselessly considering kāma to be prema. The lust for
bones and flesh appears alluring for the time being.
That lust chases endlessly after the objects of the
senses. But unalloyed love is the natural disposition of
the jīva. That prema is fully sentient and spiritual by
nature. The object of that prema is Śrī Hari alone — not
a dressed-up doll of bones and flesh. At present prema
is in a dormant condition being covered by kāma.
Therefore you must endeavour to dispel this lust and to
initiate the awakening of love.

“First, by good fortune due to the devotional pious
credits (sukṛti) accumulated over many previous
lifetimes, pure faith (śraddhā) arises. Then, by hearing
hari-kathā and performing harināma-kīrtana in the
association of pure devotees, śraddhā is matured and
evolves successively into steadfastness (niṣṭhā), taste
(ruci) and deep attachment (āsakti). From āsakti, bhāva
makes its appearance, and from bhāva, prema is
manifested. This is the order of development by which
prema is awakened. Prema may be obtained only by taking
support of this progressive evolution and never by any
other means.

“O wicked mind, why do you fear to take up this step-by-
step method of sādhana? By mere imitation of prema you
will not obtain anything. By such an imitative display
you will attain only the temporary happiness of sense
enjoyment, which will also result in misery in the end.
With this understanding, you should give up all offences
and impediments (anarthas) and engage yourself in pure

                           21
Upadesamrita.txt                                   5/5/2017

sādhana-bhakti. In this lies your good fortune.”

The association of jñānīs, whose aim is voidism or
liberation; of fruitive workers, who covet the fruits of
their work; and of hedonistic enjoyers, who are attached
to sensual enjoyment, which is momentarily pleasing but
ultimately culminates in distress, is known as jana-
saṅga. When one obtains the association of Bhagavān’s
pure devotees, detrimental materialistic association
automatically disappears.

The word laulya literally means greed or restlessness.
This restlessness refers to the tendency of the mind to
run after various pursuits with greed to taste their
fruits. With a desire to enjoy worldly sense enjoyment
or to attain liberation, the mind sometimes runs in the
direction of the eightfold yoga system, sometimes
towards the process of meditation, sometimes towards the
performance of sacrifices, and sometimes towards the
practice by which one can attain impersonal Brahman.
This is known as laulya.

Thus one should give up the six kinds of faults —
atyāhāra, prayāsa, prajalpa, niyamāgraha, jana-saṅga and
laulya — and engage in pure sādhana-bhakti. If one fails
to do so, then the power to understand that kṛṣṇa-bhakti
bestows the highest good for all living entities will be
lost and one will be forever deviated from the path of
bhakti.




Verse Three


Six Vows Favourable for Bhakti



utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt

tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt

saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ

ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

Anvaya

utsāhāt — enthusiasm to carry out the rules which
enhance bhakti; niścayāt — firm faith in the statements
of śāstra and the guru, whose words are fully in line
with śāstra; dhairyāt — fortitude in the practice of
bhakti, even in the midst of obstacles, or patience
during the practice stage of bhakti even when there is
delay in attaining one’s desired goal; tat-tat-karma-
pravartanāt — following the limbs of bhakti such as
hearing and chanting and giving up one’s material sense
enjoyment for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; saṅga-tyāgāt —
giving up illicit association with women, the
association of those who are overly attached to women
and the association of māyāvādīs, atheists and pseudo-

                              22
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

religionists; sato vṛtteḥ — adopting the good behaviour
and character of pure devotees; ṣaḍbhiḥ — by these six
types of practice; bhaktiḥ — pure devotion; prasidhyati
— is effected.

Translation

Progress in bhakti may be obtained by the following six
practices: (1) enthusiasm to carry out the rules that
enhance bhakti, (2) firm faith in the statements of
śāstra and the guru, whose words are fully in line with
śāstra, (3) fortitude in the practice of bhakti, even in
the midst of obstacles, or patience during the practice
stage of bhakti, even when there is delay in attaining
one’s desired goal, (4) following the limbs of bhakti
such as hearing (śravaṇa) and chanting (kīrtana) and
giving up one’s material sense enjoyment for the
pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, (5) giving up illicit connection
with women, the association of those who are overly
attached to women and the association of māyāvādīs,
atheists and pseudo-religionists, and (6) adopting the
good behaviour and character of pure devotees.

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

The word utsāha, enthusiasm, refers to eagerness to
perform the limbs of sādhana, which enhance bhakti. The
word niścaya, conviction, signifies firm faith. Dhairya
means not slackening one’s execution of the limbs of
bhakti, even when there is delay in obtaining the
desired goal. The meaning of tat-tat-karma-pravartana is
to fully renounce one’s material enjoyment while
endeavouring exclusively for the attainment of Bhagavān.
In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.19.24) Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa says
to Uddhava:

evaṁ dharmair manuṣyāṇām

uddhavātma-nivedinām

mayi sañjāyate bhaktiḥ

ko ‘nyo ‘rtho ‘syāvaśiṣyate

Devotion that is saturated with love for Me arises in
the hearts of those who offer their very souls unto Me
and who follow the religious principles favourable for
bhakti. What other object remains to be obtained for
those who have attained bhakti for Me?

The meaning of sato-vṛtti is to adopt the exalted
conduct of devotees.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti

Maintaining one’s existence by appropriate means and
cultivating bhakti are two essential activities for
devotees. The first half of this verse indicates
attitudes that are favourable for the cultivation of
bhakti, and the second half describes how a devotee
should conduct his life. Enthusiasm, optimism, patience,
executing activities that nourish bhakti, renouncing bad
association and adopting the good behaviour of devotees
are the means of obtaining success in bhakti.

                              23
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017


(1) Utsāha — eagerness to follow the rules and
regulations of bhakti is called utsāha. Without this
enthusiasm, one’s bhakti will vanish. Following the
limbs of bhakti with great respect is real utsāha.

(2) Niścaya — the meaning of niścaya is firm faith.

(3) Dhairya — not slackening one’s execution of the
limbs of bhakti, even when there is delay in obtaining
the desired goal, is called dhairya, patience.

(4) Bhakti-poṣaka-karma — there are two types of
activities that nourish bhakti: regulations (vidhi) and
prohibitions (niṣedha). Performing the limbs of bhakti,
headed by śravaṇa and kīrtana, is the prescribed
regulation. Renouncing one’s personal enjoyment for the
purpose of giving pleasure to Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the primary
prohibition.

(5) Saṅga-tyāga — one should renounce the association of
non-devotees, women and those attached to women. “Non-
devotees” here means sense enjoyers, māyāvādīs and those
who make a pretentious display of religiosity.

(6) Sad-vṛtti — one should adopt the virtuous conduct of
pure devotees and thereby maintain one’s life in a
suitable manner. Renunciant devotees should beg alms,
preferably by performing mādhukarī. This is a process of
begging where, like a bee (madhukara) taking nectar from
many different flowers, they accept very little alms
from many different households. Householder devotees
should sustain their lives by means that are favourable
to the regulations pertaining to the Vedic system of
social order (varṇāśrama).

Anuvṛtti

Utsāha means to remain indifferent to the cultivation of
jñāna, the activities of karma, spiritual practices that
have any aim other than to please Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and one’s
preferred variety of material enjoyment, while
resolutely executing the limbs of sādhana-bhakti.
“Bhagavad-bhakti alone is the ultimate objective of all
living beings” — such firm faith is called niścaya.
Sometimes wandering onto the paths of karma, jñāna and
so forth makes one’s mind restless, and following their
sādhanas will only produce suffering in the end.
“Therefore, the path of bhakti is the sole
constitutional path for all jīvas” — such firm
conviction is called dhairya, fortitude. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.2.32—3) describes those jñānīs who commit
offence at Bhagavān’s lotus feet by falsely considering
themselves liberated, and also the steadfastness of
loving (premī) devotees upon the path of bhakti:

ye ‘nye ‘ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho ‘nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ


                           24
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

O lotus-eyed Lord, those who do not take shelter of Your
lotus feet vainly consider themselves to be liberated.
Because they are devoid of affection and devotion for
You, their intelligence is impure. Even though such
persons approach the platform of liberation by
undergoing severe austerities and following spiritual
practices, they fall from that position due to
neglecting Your lotus feet.

tathā na te mādhava tāvakāḥ kvacid

bhraśyanti mārgāt tvayi baddha-sauhṛdāḥ

tvayābhiguptā vicaranti nirbhayā

vināyakānīkapa-mūrdhasu prabho

O Mādhava, the jñānīs who imagine themselves to be
liberated may fall from their so-called position of
liberation, but Your devotees who are bound to You by a
tie of intimate affection never fall from the path of
bhakti. Because such devotees are fully protected by
You, they fearlessly cross over all obstacles by placing
their feet upon the heads of the predominating deities
who are empowered to instigate the most severe types of
impediments.

Concerning the path of bhakti, Haridāsa hākura took a
steadfast vow to chant in the face of all obstacles.
This ideal in the realm of bhakti is related in this
verse from Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavata (Ādi-khaṇḍa 16.94):

khaṇḍa-khaṇḍa hai deha jāya yadi prāṇa



tabu āmi vadane nā chāḍi harināma



Regardless if my body is cut to pieces and the life-air
exits my body, I will never abandon the chanting of
harināma.

Such determination to remain upon the path of bhakti is
called dhairya, fortitude. To execute the limbs of
bhakti, such as hearing hari-kathā, performing kīrtana
of bhagavan-nāma and meditating on Bhagavān’s names,
form and pastimes with such determination, is tat-tat-
karma-pravartanāt.

The association of Bhagavān’s devotees is very
desirable. One should never associate with karmīs,
jñānīs or those who are filled with extraneous desires,
knowing them to be less intelligent and of an enjoying
tendency. What to speak of approaching them to fulfil
any type of desire for prestige, to maintain any type of
relationship with them is not proper. Keeping such bad
association at a safe distance, one should adopt the
ways of those saintly devotees who are always immersed
in chanting harināma. Karma, jñāna, aṣṭāṅga-yoga and so
forth, which are devoid of the desire to please Kṛṣṇa,
are not steps along the path of bhakti. Even if one
possesses all good qualities, if he is devoid of bhakti,

                           25
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

those very qualities merely transform into faults. But
all virtuous qualities certainly reside within one who
possesses bhakti. Therefore the path of bhakti is
characterised by saintly conduct.

Enthusiasm to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa, full faith and
steadfastness in that service, ensuring that all
endeavours are solely for Kṛṣṇa’s service, renouncing
the company of all others except Kṛṣṇa’s devotees and
following in the footsteps of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees — these
six practices enhance bhakti.




Verse Four


Association That Nourishes Bhakti



dadāti pratigṛhṇāti

guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati

bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva

ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ prīti-lakṣaṇam

Anvaya

dadāti — offering pure devotees those objects that are
in accordance with their requirements; pratigṛhṇāti —
accepting remnant items given by pure devotees; guhyam
ākhyāti — revealing to devotees one’s confidential
realisations concerning bhajana; pṛcchati — inquiring
from devotees about their confidential realisations;
bhuṅkte — eating with great love the prasāda remnants
given by devotees; ca — and; bhojayate — lovingly
serving prasāda to devotees; ca — and; ṣaḍ-vidham eva —
are specifically of these six kinds; prīti-lakṣaṇam —
the symptoms of loving association with devotees.

Translation

Offering pure devotees items in accordance with their
requirements, accepting prasādī or remnant items given
by pure devotees, revealing to devotees one’s
confidential realisations concerning bhajana, inquiring
from them about their confidential realisations, eating
with great love the prasāda remnants given by devotees
and lovingly feeding them prasāda — these are the six
symptoms of loving association with devotees.

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

In this fourth verse, the extrinsic symptoms of loving
exchanges with pure devotees are described. As the
meaning of this verse is perfectly clear, it does not
require elaboration.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti

                            26
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017


Bad association is unfavourable to bhakti; therefore it
is imperative to abandon such association. Those who are
intent on progressing in bhakti should associate with
pure devotees, who possess the power to free one from
the tendency to fall into bad association. A description
of the loving exchanges shared between devotees, which
nourish one’s bhakti, is found in this fourth verse.
Lovingly giving another devotee that which he requires
and lovingly accepting those items that are mercifully
given by other devotees, revealing one’s confidential
realisations to devotees and hearing descriptions of
confidential tenets (tattva) from pure devotees,
lovingly serving devotees prasāda and accepting prasāda
offered by devotees — these six kinds of exchanges
constitute association with saintly persons (sādhu-
saṅga) in its pure form. These six activities are the
symptoms of love. One should serve sādhus by the
performance of these activities.

Anuvṛtti

Bhakti appears by the association of Bhagavān’s
devotees, but since one may not know how to associate
with Vaiṣṇavas, this topic is explained in this verse.
By the negative effect of maintaining affectionate
relationships with the jñānīs, who desire liberation
from material existence, with the karmīs, who desire to
enjoy the fruits of their actions, and with gross sense
enjoyers, one’s bhakti is harmed. One should not give
these three types of persons any advice or any item. To
do so would be offensive, because describing the glories
of harināma to those devoid of faith is included within
the category of nāma-aparādha. Also one should never
accept any advice regarding the attainment of liberation
or material enjoyment from such persons, because it will
lead one to develop affectionate attachment for them.
One should not instruct them on how to perform kṛṣṇa-
bhajana. One should not hear from them anything
concerning the confidential aspects of bhakti. One
should also not accept food that has been touched by
them. By eating food prepared by them, their
predilection for either material enjoyment or liberation
will be transmitted within one’s heart.

viṣayīra anna khāile malina haya mana



malina mana haile nahe kṛṣṇera smaraṇa



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 6.279)

When one eats food offered by a materialist, one’s mind
becomes contaminated. When the mind is contaminated, one
is unable to remember Kṛṣṇa.

Also, one should not feed these three types of persons
who possess an enjoying spirit. Eating food prepared by
them or feeding them increases one’s affection for them.
Exchanging love with devotees who are of the same
aspiration as oneself and who are affectionate to

                           27
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

oneself enhances one’s bhakti. Offering and accepting
items, revealing confidential realisations to one
another, and serving and accepting food are all
activities that increase affection. One should not
perform these activities with those of different
aspirations in life than one’s own.




Verse Five


Service Rendered by an Intermediate Devotee to the Three
Kinds of Vaiṣṇava



kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta

dīkṣāsti cet praṇatibhiś ca bhajantam īśam

śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya-

nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā

Anvaya

ādriyeta — one should respect; manasā — within the mind;
tam — that person (a neophyte devotee); yasya giri — in
whose speech; iti — thus (appears); kṛṣṇa — one name of
Kṛṣṇa; (one should offer respect) praṇatibhiḥ — by
offering praṇāma; ca — also; bhajantam — an intermediate
devotee who, being endowed with the correct
understanding of reality and illusion, performs bhajana
in accordance with Vaiṣṇava conventions; īśam — Śrī
Bhagavān; cet — if; asti — he has; dīkṣā — accepted
initiation from a qualified guru; (and) labdhyā — having
obtained; īpsita-saṅga — the association for which one
hankers (the association of a topmost devotee whose
heart is established in the particular mood of service
to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa for which one aspires and who is
affectionately disposed towards oneself); śuśrūṣayā —
with all types of service (such as offering daṇḍavat-
praṇāma, making relevant inquiry and rendering service);
(one should respect) bhajana-vijñam — a self-realised,
expert mahā-bhāgavata Vaiṣṇava who performs bhajana of
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s eightfold daily pastimes by rendering
service mentally; ananyam — who is an exclusive devotee
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; anya-nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam — and whose
heart, due to his undeviating absorption in Kṛṣṇa, is
free from faults such as the tendency to criticise
others.

Translation

One who takes kṛṣṇa-nāma just once by calling out “O
Kṛṣṇa!” is a neophyte devotee (kaniṣṭḥa-adhikārī). One
should consider him to be his family member and silently
respect him. One who, fully understanding the principle
of dīkṣā, has accepted initiation from a qualified guru
and performs bhajana of Bhagavān in accordance with
Vaiṣṇava conventions is an intermediate devotee

                           28
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

(madhyama-adhikārī). One should respect such a devotee
who is endowed with the correct understanding of reality
and illusion by offering praṇāma unto him and so forth.
One who is conversant with the science of bhajana as
described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other Vaiṣṇava
scriptures and who performs exclusive bhajana of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is a mahā-bhāgavata devotee. Due to his
undeviating absorption in Kṛṣṇa, the pure heart of such
a devotee is free from faults such as the tendency to
criticise others. He is expert in bhajana, meaning that
he mentally renders service (mānasa-sevā) to Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes that take place during the eight
segments of the day (aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā). Knowing him to
be a topmost devotee whose heart is established in the
particular mood of service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa for which
one aspires and who is also affectionately disposed
towards oneself, one should honour him by offering
daṇḍavat-praṇāma (praṇipāta), making relevant inquiry
(paripraśna) and rendering service (sevā) with great
love.

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

This verse gives instruction on svarūpa-siddha-bhakti.
We should respectfully offer praṇāma to those who have
accepted initiation from a qualified guru. In all ways
we should lovingly serve those who perform exclusive
bhajana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa by mānasa-sevā and who are expert
in the procedure of worshipping Kṛṣṇa’s aṣṭa-kālīya-
līlā, knowing them to be the most desirable association.
The meaning of “exclusive bhajana” is to be solely
devoted to the worship of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja,
without attachment for Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa or other
incarnations of Bhagavān. It says in Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu that amongst the exclusive devotees of
the many different incarnations of Bhagavān, those whose
hearts have been stolen by Śrī Nanda-nandana are the
best because even the favour of the master of Lakṣmī,
Śrī Nārāyaṇa, cannot attract their minds. Because such
exclusive devotees are forever alert to cultivate bhakti
in the company of those topmost devotees who are expert
in relishing devotional mellows (rasika), as well as
being like-minded and affectionate, their hearts are
always free from contaminations such as the tendency to
criticise others. Knowing these topmost devotees to be
the most desirable association, one should respect them
mentally, offer praṇāma unto them and render service to
them with great love.

Another meaning of this verse can be given. One should
respect within the mind those who have accepted
initiation from a qualified guru and chant kṛṣṇa-nāma.
One should respect those who have accepted initiation
from a bona fide spiritual master (sad-guru), who have
developed an understanding of sambandha-jñāna8 and who
perform bhajana purely, by offering praṇāma to them and
so forth. The best devotees are those who are devoid of
the tendency to blaspheme others and who, being
exclusively devoted to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, are forever
alert to render service mentally to Their aṣṭa-kālīya-
līlā. Knowing such devotees to be established in the
particular mood of service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa for which
one aspires, affectionately disposed towards oneself and
the topmost association, one should honour them in all

                           29
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

respects by offering prostrated obeisance (praṇipāta),
making relevant inquiry (paripraśna) and rendering
service (sevā) with great affection. One should
understand the eminence of Vaiṣṇavas according to this
gradation.

In the original verse by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, the word ādi,
meaning “and so forth”, has been used after the word
ninda, which means to criticise. We should understand
this to indicate envy, aggression and other faults that
generally accompany the tendency to criticise others. In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.24) Kapiladeva says:

ta ete sādhavaḥ sādhvi

sarva-saṅga-vivarjitāḥ

saṅgas teṣv atha te prārthyaḥ

saṅga-doṣa-harā hi te

O Sādhvi (virtuous lady), the only desirable association
is that of pure-hearted sādhus who always remain aloof
from all varieties of bad association. By the influence
of their association, the contaminations accrued through
bad association can be eradicated.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti

According to the instruction given in this verse, as
long as a sādhaka remains within the madhyama-adhikārī
stage, he is obliged to render service to devotees. The
topmost devotee (uttama-bhakta) sees all living entities
with equal vision. Therefore he does not discriminate
between devotees and non-devotees. The intermediate
devotee (madhyama-bhakta) is one who sincerely
endeavours to perform bhajana. This fifth verse
indicates how madhyama devotees should behave towards
the topmost class of devotees. If one remains aloof from
the association of non-devotees, sense enjoyers, and men
who are attached to women, their faults will not come
within him. Still, understanding neophyte devotees
(kaniṣṭha-bhaktas) to be ignorant due to their lack of
knowledge of sambandha-tattva, the madhyama devotee
should be merciful to them. Hearing such neophyte
devotees uttering kṛṣṇa-nāma, a madhyama devotee will
respect them within his mind. If a kaniṣṭha devotee
accepts initiation and engages in hari-bhajana, a
madhyama devotee will show him respect by offering
praṇāma to him. Understanding the association of mahā-
bhāgavata Vaiṣṇavas, who are free from the tendency to
criticise others, to be most beneficial, one should
honour them by rendering service to them. This service
alone is the root cause of all spiritual perfections.

Anuvṛtti

In Bhakti-sandarbha (868) Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī defines the
procedure known as vaiṣṇava-dīkṣā in the following
statement:

divyaṁ jñānaṁ yato dadyāt

kuryāt pāpasya saṅkṣayam

                            30
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017


tasmād dīkṣeti sā proktā

deśikais tattva-kovidaiḥ

That process which bestows transcendental knowledge
(divya-jñāna) and destroys sinful desires for material
sense enjoyment is called dīkṣā by learned authorities
in the absolute truth.

One should silently respect a devotee who, knowing that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma are non-different and
transcendental and that the holy name alone is the
supreme object of worship, takes exclusive shelter of
kṛṣṇa-nāma and is devoted to chanting. The mantras that
the disciple receives at the time of dīkṣā consist
entirely of śrī-nāma, and the names that form the basis
of those mantras are endowed with specific knowledge of
the disciple’s relationship with the Lord. Without
taking shelter of harināma, one cannot become hari-jana,
a member of Kṛṣṇa’s family. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
determined the gradations in Vaiṣṇavas through showing
the gradations in their faith in harināma. One who has
chanted the holy name just once is a (kaniṣṭha)
Vaiṣṇava. One who constantly chants the holy name is a
superior (madhyama) Vaiṣṇava. The topmost Vaiṣṇava
(uttama- or mahā-bhāgavata) is he at the mere sight of
whom others automatically begin chanting the holy name.
One should respect the kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇava within one’s
mind. One should respect the madhyama Vaiṣṇava by
offering praṇāma to him and so forth. Knowing the uttama
Vaiṣṇava to be the topmost devotee who is established in
the particular mood of service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa for
which one aspires and to be affectionately disposed
towards oneself, one should serve him with great love.

(1) Because the mahā-bhāgavata devotees see everything
as being related to Kṛṣṇa, they see all living entities
with equal vision. Like madhyama-adhikārī devotees, they
are intent on performing bhajana, and like kaniṣṭha-
adhikārī devotees, they are devoted to chanting
harināma.

(2) Madhyama-adhikārīs possess prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
they respect the three levels of Vaiṣṇavas — uttama,
madhyama and kaniṣṭha — by rendering service, offering
praṇāma and offering respect within the mind,
respectively. They always endeavour to turn the living
entities who are averse to Kṛṣṇa towards Him. They are
indifferent to those who are inimical to Him. They do
not see all living entities with equal vision as the
uttama-adhikārī mahā-bhāgavata devotees do. If they
fraudulently imitate the mahā-bhāgavata devotee, they
will very quickly fall down from their position.

(3) The kaniṣṭha-adhikārī devotees take full shelter of
the chanting of śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma, knowing it to be
supremely beneficial. But they don’t realise that the
position of the madhyama-adhikārī is above their present
position and that they should strive to reach that
position at sometime in

the future. Sometimes the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī falls down
due to considering himself a guru. Therefore, carefully

                           31
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

giving appropriate respect to the uttama devotees, they
should take full shelter of the holy name.




Verse Six


It is Forbidden to View the Transcendental Vaiṣṇavas
with Material Vision



dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca doṣair

na prākṛtatvam iha bhakta-janasya paśyet

gaṅgāmbhasāṁ na khalu budbuda-phena-paṅkair

brahma-dravatvam apagacchati nīra-dharmaiḥ

Anvaya

napaśyet — one should not consider a devotee to be an
ordinary mundane person; prākṛtatvam dṛṣṭaiḥ — seeing
with material vision; svabhāva-janitaiḥ — due to the
defects stemming from his nature, such as birth in a low
caste, harshness, lethargy and so forth; ca — and;
doṣaiḥ — due to the faults; vapuṣaḥ — of the body, such
as ugliness, disease, deformities and so forth; bhakta-
janasya — the devotee of Bhagavān; iha — situated in
this world; brahma-dravatvam — (just as) the nature of
liquified transcendence; gaṅgāmbhasām — of the water of
the Ganges; na khalu apagacchati — is never lost;
budbuda-phena-paṅkaiḥ — by the presence of bubbles,
foam, mud and so on; nīra-dharmaiḥ — which exist simply
due to the nature of water.

Translation

Devotees situated in this material world should not be
viewed with material vision; in other words one should
not consider them to be ordinary conditioned souls. The
imperfections visible in their natures, such as birth in
a low caste, harshness, lethargy and so forth, and the
imperfections visible in their bodies, such as ugly
features, disease, deformities and so on, are precisely
like the appearance of bubbles, foam and mud in the
Ganges. Despite such apparent pollution in the water of
the Ganges, she retains her nature as liquified
transcendence. Similarly the self-realised Vaiṣṇavas
always exist on the transcendental plane and one should
not attribute material defects to them.

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

Due to their residing within the material world, pure
devotees seem to have some apparent defects from the
mundane perspective. Nevertheless, we should not
consider such devotees to be material or, in other
words, to be ordinary conditioned souls. If one notices
imperfections in their natures, such as harshness,

                           32
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

anger, greed and so forth, or imperfections in their
bodies, such as lack of cleanliness, ugliness, aging and
so on, he should never assign mundane attributes to
them. It is impossible for these mundane imperfections
to exist within devotees’ spiritually perfected bodies.
Therefore to perceive these mundane defects in elevated
devotees is offensive. This point has been made clear by
the example of Ganges water.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti

The instruction of this sixth verse is that it is
improper to perceive mundane defects in pure devotees
and to consider them to be mere conditioned souls. It is
impossible for pure devotees to fall into bad
association or to commit offences to the holy name.
Perhaps there can be some imperfections in their bodies
and in their natures. Lack of cleanliness, deformity,
ugliness, old age and so forth are bodily imperfections.
Birth in a low caste, harshness, lethargy and so forth
are imperfections in one’s character. The water of the
Ganges is considered to be pure despite the natural
appearance of bubbles, foam, mud and so on within it,
and its nature as liquefied transcendence is not lost.
Similarly, Vaiṣṇavas who have realised their eternal
identities are not contaminated by the natural
transformations of the physical body such as birth,
aging, death and so on. Therefore even upon observing
imperfections in a pure Vaiṣṇava, one intent on
performing bhajana should never disrespect him. By
disrespecting such a personality, one becomes an
offender (aparādhī).

Anuvṛtti

One should not perceive the apparent defects in the
bodies or characters of pure devotees by viewing such
devotees with mundane vision. Just as the water of the
Ganges forever remains transcendental though it is mixed
with bubbles, foam and mud, similarly, pure devotees are
always transcendental. To view them on the basis of
mundane considerations is offensive. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in
Bhagavad-gītā (9.30—1), has also warned to beware of
this:

api cet sudurācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā

śaśvac chāntiṁ nigacchati

kaunteya pratijānīhi

na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

If even the most ill-behaved person intently engages in
exclusive devotional service unto Me, he is worthy of
being considered a saintly person due to his

                            33
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

intelligence being fixed on that devotion. He quickly
becomes righteous and attains eternal peace. O son of
Kuntī, attest that My devotee never perishes.

Even though a devotee of Kṛṣṇa may not be born in a
brāhmaṇa family or a gosvāmī line, to not refer to him
as “Gosvāmī” or “Prabhu” is considered viewing him with
mundane vision. Devotees born in gosvāmī lines and those
born in any other caste should be treated equally.
Regardless of the caste in which a devotee has taken
birth, to assign material attributes to him is
offensive. But if any person who has made any degree of
progress along the path of bhakti considers himself a
devotee and begins engaging in material misconduct, he
will certainly fall from the path of bhakti. By coming
into contact with such persons, one’s bhakti is
destroyed.

Some people, being proud of their birth in a brāhmaṇa
family or similarly high lineage, are unable to grasp
either the impeccable conduct or the elevated spiritual
thought of perfected devotees (siddha-bhaktas). Due to
this, they disrespect Vaiṣṇavas in varieties of ways and
become offenders at the feet of Vaiṣṇavas (vaiṣṇava-
aparādhīs). Therefore, in this matter, sādhakas should
remain very careful.




Verse Seven


The Process of Performing Bhajana

of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Names and Pastimes



syāt kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi-sitāpy avidyā-

pittopatapta-rasanasya na rocikā nu

kintv ādarād anudinaṁ khalu saiva juṣṭā

svādvī kramād bhavati tad-gada-mūla-hantrī

Anvaya

nu — aho!; sitā api — even the delightfully sweet sugar-
candy; kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi — of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names, form,
qualities and pastimes; na syāt — is not; rocikā —
tasteful; rasanasya — to the tongue; upatapta — that is
afflicted; pitta — by the jaundice; avidyā — of
ignorance (or, in other words, he who is afflicted by
the ignorance born of being indifferent to Kṛṣṇa from a
time without beginning); kintu — but; khalu — certainly;
sā eva — that very sugar-candy of Kṛṣṇa’s names,
activities and so forth; juṣṭā — when taken
therapeutically; anudinam — constantly; ādarāt — with
respect or faith; kramāt — then gradually; bhavati — it
becomes; svādvī — very tasteful; hantrī — and destroys;
mūla — to the root; tad-gada — that disease of

                           34
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

indifference to Kṛṣṇa, which is expressed in the form of
absorption in mundane sense enjoyment.

Translation

Aho! Those whose tongues are afflicted by the jaundice
of avidyā (or, in other words, those who are afflicted
by the ignorance born of being indifferent to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
from a time without beginning) cannot relish the
nectarean names, form, qualities and pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, which are compared to the sweetest sugar-candy.
Instead, these attributes taste bitter to them. But if
with great faith one regularly takes this sugar-candy of
chanting and hearing the transcendental names, form,
qualities and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it gradually
becomes relishable to him and destroys at the root his
disease, the jaundice of avidyā, or indifference to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. In other words he becomes spontaneously attached
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

When sādhakas are still affected by the obstacles that
impede progress in devotional life (anarthas), their
minds are restless and disturbed. For this reason it is
not easy for them to develop a taste for Bhagavān’s name
and so forth. Still, they should not relent even a
little in their determination to continue performing
nāma-bhajana. Being indifferent to Śrī Kṛṣṇa since
beginningless time is called avidyā, ignorance. In this
verse such avidyā is compared to the disease of
jaundice. When one is afflicted with this disease, his
tongue’s sense of taste is warped. Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
names, form, qualities and pastimes are like the
sweetest sugar-candy, a person afflicted by ignorance
does not find them tasteful. By regularly taking sugar-
candy, one’s jaundice is gradually mitigated and the
candy also begins to become tasteful to him. Similarly,
by daily cultivating in a regulated manner the limbs of
bhakti, headed by performing kīrtana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
names and hearing narrations of His pastimes, a
sādhaka’s anarthas, beginning with the tendency to
commit offences, are eradicated and natural love for śrī
nāma and hari-kathā awakens within him.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti

In the third verse of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, qualities and
activities that nourish bhakti were given. In addition
to those qualities and activities, this verse describes
the procedure for the cultivation of chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma
and so forth with sambandha-jñāna. The tongue afflicted
with the jaundice of avidyā cannot narrate Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes or chant His name. But regularly taking the
sugar-candy of hearing and chanting Kṛṣṇa’s nāma, rūpa,
guṇa and līlā with great respect is capable of
eradicating the disease of ignorance. Each and every
jīva, like a minute conscious particle within a ray of
the complete conscious Kṛṣṇa-sun, is by nature an
eternal servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. When the jīva forgets this
fact, he is seized by the disease of ignorance. Due to
this, he is devoid of taste for devotional activities,
headed by the chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s name. But by taking
good association and by the resultant mercy received

                           35
Upadesamrita.txt                                   5/5/2017

from the sādhu, guru and Vaiṣṇava, he becomes capable of
remembering Kṛṣṇa’s names, form, qualities and pastimes
and he gradually obtains realisation of his eternal
self. As realisation of his eternal nature gradually
expands, his taste for devotional activities like
chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma increases accordingly.
Simultaneously his ignorance is dispelled step by step.
This is the basis for the comparison to sugar-candy. The
tongue of one afflicted with jaundice will not find
sugar-candy tasteful. But by taking this candy
regularly, his jaundice is gradually cured and that
sugar-candy will begin to become tasteful to him.
Therefore, with enthusiasm, firm faith and patience, one
should always continue to hear and chant Kṛṣṇa’s names,
form, qualities and pastimes.

Anuvṛtti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names, form, qualities and pastimes are
compared to sugar-candy, and ignorance is compared to
jaundice. Just as delectably sweet sugar-candy does not
appeal to the tongue that is afflicted by jaundice, the
delightful and delicious sugar-candy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
names, form, qualities and pastimes does not appeal to
the jīva who is engulfed by ignorance, due to his
indifference to Kṛṣṇa, which has no beginning in time.

If, however, one continuously takes the medicine of this
sugar-candy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names, form, qualities and
pastimes with great honour and faith, the sweet taste of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name will gradually increase and the disease
of material enjoyment, which is rooted in the desire to
be aloof from Kṛṣṇa, will be dissipated.

In the Padma Purāṇa (Svarga-khaṇḍa 48.56) it is
confirmed that the principal effect of the holy name
will not be immediately experienced when taken by those
who are materially engrossed:

tac-cad deha-draviṇa-janatā-lobha-pāṣaṇḍa-madhye

nikṣiptaṁ syān na phala-janakaṁ śīghram evātra vipra

O brāhmaṇa, if the Lord’s holy name is cast among the
atheists, who are lustful towards the body, material
possessions and family members, it will not quickly
produce the fruit of love for Him.

Due to the influence of ignorance, the jīva thinks
highly of his material body, family members and material
attachments. He mistakenly considers the illusory
energy, which is active only where there is an absence
of awareness of the Lord, as the supreme controlling
entity, Bhagavān. Thus he is unable to understand his
true spiritual identity. By the power of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
name, the false egoism arising from the jīva’s ignorance
is dispelled like fog. At that time the jīva acquires a
taste for performing kṛṣṇa-bhajana.




Verse Eight

                           36
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017



The Process of Bhajana and the Best Place for Performing
Bhajana



tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

Anvaya

tiṣṭhan vraje — living in Vraja; anugāmī — as a
follower; anurāgi-jana — of the eternal residents of
Vraja, who possess inherent spontaneous love; tat — for
Him (Śrī Kṛṣṇa); kālam nayet — one should utilise all
his time; niyojya — by engaging; rasanā — the tongue;
manasī — and the mind; krameṇa — sequentially;
sukīrtana-anu-smṛtyoḥ — in meticulous chanting and
remembrance; nāma-rūpa-caritādi — of the names, form,
qualities and pastimes; tat — of Him (Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa); iti — this only; sāram — is the essence;
akhilam — of all; upadeśa — instruction.

Translation

While living in Vraja as a follower of the eternal
residents of Vraja, who possess inherent spontaneous
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one should utilise all his time by
sequentially engaging the tongue and the mind in
meticulous chanting and remembrance of Kṛṣṇa’s names,
form, qualities and pastimes. This is the essence of all
instruction.

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

At this point, these questions may arise in the mind of
a new sādhaka: “Where should one reside to cultivate the
devotional activities, headed by the chanting of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s name, and how should one go about it?” This
verse, which constitutes the essence of all instruction,
has been composed to answer these questions. The
conventional meaning of the name of Kṛṣṇa is drawn from
the verbal root kṛṣ, which means to attract or draw
towards oneself. Thus Kṛṣṇa is famed as the attractor of
the hearts of all living entities in the entire world.
In Vraja He is known also as Yaśodā-nandana, He who
gives delight to Yaśodā. Therefore, all devotees should
utilise the entirety of their time in engaging their
tongues in performing kīrtana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names,
form, qualities and pastimes and their minds in
remembrance of Him. They should reside only in Śrī
Vraja-maṇḍala and follow elevated devotees.

How should one follow devotees? By two types of
devotion: vaidhī (devotion performed in conjunction with
the rules and regulations of the scriptures) and
rāgānugā (spontaneous devotion). Accordingly there are
also two types of sādhakas: those who follow the path of

                           37
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

vaidhī and those who follow the path of rāgānugā. Among
these two, it is especially desirable to follow a
rāgānuga-bhakta. The meaning of tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī
is to follow the intimate, eternal devotees in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s vraja-līlā. One should cultivate kṛṣṇa-bhakti
under the guidance of those rasika-gurus who are
themselves followers of the intimate eternal devotees of
Śrī Vrajendra-nandana, the enactor of human-like
pastimes.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti

This verse describes the method of bhajana as well as
the topmost place for performing bhajana. With the
intention of incessantly executing the gradual process
of sādhana, one should utilise every moment of his life
by engaging the tongue in nicely performing kīrtana of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names, form, qualities and pastimes and then
the mind in smaraṇa, or remembrance, upon them. This
process should be executed while residing in Vraja and
under the guidance of devotees who are immersed in
vraja-rasa. The performance of this mānasa-sevā, service
rendered within the mind, is dependent solely upon
residing mentally in Vraja.

Anuvṛtti

By following the rules and regulations prescribed in the
previous verses, a sādhaka should draw his mind away
from everything unrelated to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and engage his
tongue in performing kīrtana of Kṛṣṇa’s nāma, rūpa, guṇa
and līlā. Then, eventually, his mind will be able to
enter into constant remembrance (smaraṇa) of Kṛṣṇa.
While residing in Vraja, he should utilise all his time
executing these activities under the guidance of
devotees who are adept at relishing vraja-rasa. This is
the essence of all instruction.

In the devotional life of a sādhaka, sravaṇa-daśā, or
the stage of hearing, comes first. In this stage, he
hears kṛṣṇa-nāma and narrations of Kṛṣṇa’s form,
qualities and pastimes. By doing this more and more, he
gradually becomes more mature; then the stage of varaṇa-
daśā begins. In this stage he begins performing kīrtana
of those topics he was hearing. By performing kīrtana
with the specific devotional mood one is cultivating, he
enters smaraṇa-daśā, the stage of remembrance. Within
the category of smaraṇa there are five stages: smaraṇa,
dhāraṇā, dhyāna, anusmṛti and samādhi. Meditation where
the mind sometimes becomes distracted is called smaraṇa.
Smaraṇa that is devoid of such distraction is called
dhāraṇā. Unbroken contemplation upon the object of
meditation is called dhyāna. When dhyāna is performed
constantly, it is called anusmṛti. When one’s meditation
becomes entirely free from impediments and wholly
uninterrupted, it is called samādhi. After smaraṇa-daśā,
one enters the stage known as āpana-daśā. In this stage
the sādhaka achieves realisation of his pure spiritual
identity. After this, in the stage known as sampatti-
daśā, he attains vastu-siddhi. At this time he finally
obtains a spiritual form and is appointed to his eternal
service in the spiritual realm.

When a devotee following the path of vaidhī-bhakti

                           38
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

abandons his many varieties of material desires and
performs bhajana in accordance with the instructions of
śāstra, sad-guru and Vaiṣṇavas, ruci (taste) arises in
his bhajana. Upon the appearance of this ruci, he
abandons the path of vaidhī-bhakti and enters the path
of rāgānuga-bhakti.

rāgātmikā-bhakti — ëmukhya’ vraja-vāsī-jane

tāra anugata-bhaktira ërāgānugā’-nāme

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.149)

That devotion whose very essence is constituted of
eternal spontaneous attachment (rāga) is known as
rāgātmikā-bhakti. That devotion is pre-eminent amongst
all forms of bhakti and is splendidly manifest in the
residents of Vraja. Devotion that follows in the wake of
this rāgātmikā-bhakti is known as rāgānuga-bhakti.

iṣṭe svārasikī rāgaḥ

paramāviṣṭatā bhavet

tan-mayī yā bhaved bhaktiḥ

sātra rāgātmikoditā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.272)

An unquenchable loving thirst (premamayī-tṛṣṇā) for the
object of one’s affection (Śrī Kṛṣṇa) that gives rise to
spontaneous and intense absorption (svārasikī
paramāviṣṭatā) in that object is called rāga. Such
rāgamayī-bhakti, or the performance of services — such
as stringing garlands — with intense rāga, is called
rāgātmikā-bhakti.

rāgamayī-bhaktira haya ërāgātmikā’ nāma

tāhā śuni’ lubdha haya kona bhāgyavān

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.152)

Bhakti that consists of rāga is called rāgātmikā. If,
upon hearing of this, a devotee becomes intensely
anxious to obtain such devotion, he is considered to be
most fortunate.

lobhe vraja-vāsīra bhāve kare anugati

śāstra yukti nāhi mane — rāgānugāra prakṛti

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.153)

When one follows in the footsteps of the residents of
Vraja by cultivating their devotional moods with intense
hankering, he does not care for the injunctions of the
scriptures or for logical arguments. This is the nature
of spontaneous devotion.

bāhya, antara — ihāra dui ta’ sādhana

ëbāhya’ sādhaka-dehe kare śravaṇa-kīrtana

                             39
Upadesamrita.txt                                 5/5/2017


ëmane’ nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana

rātri-dine kare vraje kṛṣṇera sevana

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.156—7)

The sādhana of rāgānuga-bhakti is of two types: external
(bāhya) and internal (antara). Externally one performs
hearing and chanting in the sādhaka-deha, the outer
feature of a practitioner of bhakti. Internally, while
contemplating one’s own perfected spiritual form, one
renders service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja day and night.

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa

siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.295)

A sādhaka who has “greed” (lobha) for rāgānuga-bhakti
should serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa both in the sādhaka-rūpa and the
siddha-rūpa in accordance with the bhāva of the eternal
devotees residing in Vraja (vraja-parikaras) who possess
the same mood for which he aspires. The sādhaka-rūpa
refers to the physical body in which one is presently
situated, and the siddha-rūpa refers to the internally
contemplated spiritual form that is suitable to serve
Kṛṣṇa according to one’s cherished desire.

nijābhīṣṭa kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha pācheta’ lāgiyā



nirantara sevā kare antarmanā hañā



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.159)

The eternal residents of Vraja are known as kṛṣṇa-
preṣṭha, very dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Among Kṛṣṇa’s various
devotees, those who possess the mood of service towards
Him for which one intensely hankers are known as
nijābhīṣṭa-kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha. Following in the footsteps of
those beloved devotees of Kṛṣṇa for whose mood of
service one hankers, one should constantly serve Kṛṣṇa
within the mind through one’s internally conceived
spiritual form.

kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya

preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam

tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau

kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.294)


                            40
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

The essential meaning of this verse is that in
accordance with one’s own specific bhāva, the sādhaka
should remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa and a particular eternal
devotee of Kṛṣṇa who possesses the serving mood for
which he aspires. He should be immersed in chanting the
names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that are related to His pastimes in
Vraja and in hearing narrations of those pastimes. Also,
those names and pastimes should be favourable to the
sādhaka’s specific service aspirations. Finally, these
activities should be performed while residing in Vraja.

dāsa-sakhā-pitrādi-preyasīra gaṇa



rāga-mārge nija-nija-bhāvera gaṇana



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.161)

There are four moods of service included in the path of
spontaneous devotion: those of the servants, friends,
parents and conjugal lovers.

Those desiring to serve in the devotional mellow of
neutrality (śānta-rasa) should aspire to be like the
cows, sticks, buffalo horns, the flute, kadamba trees
and so forth. Those aspiring to serve in the mellow of
servitude (dāsya-rasa) should follow servants in Vraja
such as Raktaka and Patraka. Devotees aspiring to serve
in the mellow of fraternity (sakhya-rasa) should follow
Śrī Baladeva, Śrīdāmā, Sudāmā and so forth. Devotees
aspiring to serve in the mellow of parenthood (vātsalya-
rasa) should follow Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā, and those
aspiring to serve in the amorous mellow (mādhurya-rasa)
should follow cowherd girls (gopīs) like Lalitā and
Viśākhā. While residing in Vraja, one should immerse
himself in hearing narrations of the eternal devotees
who serve in the mood for which he aspires.

There is no greater place than Vraja-maṇḍala to perform
bhajana of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Therefore even such exalted
devotees as Brahmā and Uddhava pray to take birth there
as a blade of grass or a shrub.




Verse Nine


What is the Topmost Holy Place?




vaikuṇṭhāj janito varā madhu-purī tatrāpi rāsotsavād

vṛndāraṇyam udāra-pāṇi-ramaṇāt tatrāpi govardhanaḥ

rādhā-kuṇḍam ihāpi gokula-pateḥ premāmṛtāplāvanāt

                           41
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017


kuryād asya virājato giri-taṭe sevāṁ vivekī na kaḥ

Anvaya

janitaḥ — due to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s having taken birth there;
madhu-purī — the abode of Mathurā; varā — is superior;
vaikuṇṭhāt — than Vaikuṇṭha, the realm of spiritual
opulence; vṛndāraṇyam — the forest of Vṛndāvana; (is
superior) tatra api — even than that (the abode of
Mathurā); rāsa-utsavāt — because the festival of the
rāsa dance took place there; govardhanaḥ — Govardhana
Hill; (is superior) tatra api — even than that
(Vṛndāvana forest); ramaṇāt — because of the playful
pastimes (because Śrī Kṛṣṇa raised it with His lotus
hand and performed many pastimes there with His
devotees); udāra-pāṇi — of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose hand is
mercifully disposed to bestow prema upon His beloved
devotees; rādhā-kuṇḍam — Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa; (is superior)
iha api — even than this (Govardhana); āplāvanāt — due
to immersing those (who bathe in its waters); premāmṛta
— in the nectar of divine love; gokula-pateḥ — of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the master of Gokula; kaḥ — what; vivekī —
intelligent person; na kuryāt — would not render; sevām
— service; asya — to this magnificent pond; virājitaḥ —
splendidly situated; taṭe — at the base; giri — of the
hill known as Govardhana.

Translation

Due to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s having taken birth there, the abode
of Mathurā is superior even to Vaikuṇṭha, the realm of
spiritual opulence. Superior to Mathurā†is the forest of
Vṛndāvana because there the festival of the rāsa dance
took place. Superior to Vṛndāvana forest is Govardhana
Hill because Śrī Kṛṣṇa raised it with His lotus hand and
performed many pastimes there with His devotees. Yet
superior even to Govardhana Hill is Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa
because it immerses one in the nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
divine love. What intelligent person would not desire to
render service to this magnificent pond, which is
splendidly situated at the base of Govardhana Hill?

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

The previous verse instructed us to perform bhajana
while residing in Vraja. This verse very clearly answers
precisely where one should reside within Vraja. Due to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s having taken birth there, the abode of
Mathurā is superior even to Vaikuṇṭha, the realm of
great spiritual opulence. Superior even to the abode of
Mathurā is the forest of Vṛndāvana because there the
festival of the rāsa dance took place. Superior to the
Vṛndāvana forest is Govardhana Hill because it playfully
rested on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus hand, and because there
Kṛṣṇa freely enjoyed many pastimes with His devotees.
Yet superior even to this Govardhana Hill is the super-
excellent Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa because it immerses one in the
nectarean divine love that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the moon of
Gokula, feels for Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The scriptures
declare that Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is as dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, Śrīmatī Rādhikā
Herself.


                           42
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

All the above-mentioned spiritual realms or locations
where Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed pastimes are manifest from His
internal potency (svarūpa-śakti) and are therefore
purely spiritual. However, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is superior
to them all because it manifests the highest display of
the inherent variegated pastimes of svarūpa-śakti.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī vṛtti

This ninth verse informs us that Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is the
best amongst all worshipful places. Because Śrī Kṛṣṇa
took birth in the city of Mathurā, it is superior to
Vaikuṇṭha, the realm of immense opulence in the
spiritual sky. Within the district of Mathurā, the
Vṛndāvana forest is the best location. Govardhana Hill
is the best place within the entire area of Vraja due to
Udāra-pāṇi Śrī Kṛṣṇa having performed various pastimes
there. Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is splendidly situated just near
Śrī Govardhana. It is the best place of all due to being
the special storehouse of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nectarean divine
love (premāmṛta). Is there any person intent upon
performing bhajana who would not desire to render
service to Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa? In other words, the devotees
of Bhagavān most certainly render service to Śrī Rādhā-
kuṇḍa. Either in their material bodies or in their
spiritually perfected forms, devotees should execute the
aforementioned process of bhajana while constantly
residing at Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

Anuvṛtti

Amongst all holy places, the Vaikuṇṭha realm situated in
the spiritual sky is the best. Superior even to
Vaikuṇṭha is the district of Mathurā because Bhagavān
took birth there. Within Mathurā-maṇḍala, the forest of
Vṛndāvana is the best because there the rāsa dance took
place. Of all places within Vṛndāvana, Govardhana Hill
is greater still due to being the site where Śrī Kṛṣṇa
freely enjoyed various pastimes. Superior even to
Govardhana Hill is Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Because it overflows
with the nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s divine love, it is the
best place of all. There is no place greater than Rādhā-
kuṇḍa. Therefore, what intelligent person would not
render service to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is so splendidly
situated at the base of Govardhana? In other words,
anyone endowed with true spiritual intelligence serves
Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s eternal devotee Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī, being fully conversant with the most elevated
devotional sentiments within Gaurahari’s heart, has
described service to Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa as the topmost. The
glories of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa are incomprehensible and
inaccessible even for loving devotees who may have taken
shelter of mādhurya-rasa, yet are devoid of devotion to
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.




Verse Ten



                           43
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

Who is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Dearmost Beloved?



karmibhyaḥ parito hareḥ priyatayā vyaktiḿ yayur jñāninas

tebhyo jñāna-vimukta-bhakti-paramāḥ premaika-niṣṭhās
tataḥ

tebhyas tāḥ paśu-pāla-pańkaja-dṛśas tābhyo 'pi sā
rādhikā

preṣṭhā tadvad iyaḿ tadīya-sarasī tāḿ nāśrayet kaḥ kṛtī



Anvaya

jñāninaḥ — the brahma-jñānīs, who by dint of their
spiritual knowledge are transcendental to the three
modes of material nature; yayuḥ — have attained; vyaktim
— distinction (have been ascertained in the scriptures);
priyatayā — as being more dear; paritaḥ — in all
respects; hareḥ — to Śrī Hari; karmibhyaḥ — than the
pious followers of the path of karma, who are forever
occupied in performing virtuous deeds; jñāna-vimukta —
those who have abandoned the pursuit of knowledge, like
Sanaka; bhakti-paramāḥ — and who are dear devotees of
Kṛṣṇa, considering bhakti alone to be the best path;
(have attained distinction as being more dear to Śrī
Hari) tebhyaḥ — than them (the jñanīs); prema eka-
niṣṭhāḥ — pure devotees of Śrī Kṛṣṇa such as Nārada who
are resolutely fixed in prema for Him; (have attained
distinction as being more dear to Śrī Hari) tataḥ — than
them (those dear devotees); tāḥ — those; paśu-pāla —
maintainers of the cows (the gopīs); dṛśaḥ — whose eyes;
paṅkaja — are like the fully blossomed petals of a lotus
flower; (have attained distinction as being more dear to
Śrī Hari) tebhyaḥ — than them (those loving devotees);
sā — that; rādhikā — Śrīmatī Rādhikā; (has attained
distinction as being more dear to Śrī Hari) api — even;
tābhyaḥ — than them (the gopīs); iyam — this; sarasī —
pond (Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa); tadīya — of Hers (Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s); preṣṭhā — is more dear (to Śrī Kṛṣṇa); tad-
vat — just as She is; (therefore) kaḥ — what; kṛtī —
highly fortunate, spiritually intelligent person; na
āśrayet — would not take shelter (would not reside on
the banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa in a state of
transcendental consciousness, performing bhajana of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s eightfold daily pastimes); tām — of that Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

Translation

One who selflessly performs virtuous acts in accordance
with the path of karma-yoga is superior to those who
merely seek to fulfil their selfish desires. The brahma-
jñānīs, who by dint of their spiritual knowledge are
transcendental to the three modes of material nature,
are more dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa than those pious followers of
the karma path, who are forever occupied in performing
virtuous deeds. More dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa than the brahma-
jñānīs are His devotees like Sanaka, who have abandoned
the pursuit of knowledge and who consider bhakti alone

                           44
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

to be the best path. In doing so, they have followed the
statement in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.3): “jñāne
prayāsam udapāsya — one should abandon the endeavour for
knowledge.” Pure devotees like Nārada, who are
resolutely fixed in prema for Kṛṣṇa, are even more dear
to Him than all such devotees. The vraja-gopīs, whose
very lives belong solely to Kṛṣṇa, are even more beloved
to Him than all such loving (premī) devotees. Amongst
all those beloved gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is more dear to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa than His own life; in precisely the same way,
He dearly loves Her pond, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Therefore,
what highly fortunate, spiritually intelligent person
would not reside on the banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa in a
state of transcendental consciousness, performing
bhajana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eightfold daily pastimes?

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

In this tenth verse, yet another reason for taking
shelter of and worshipping Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is being
shown. A follower of the path of karma-kāṇḍa, who is
interested solely in enjoying the fruits of his actions,
is actually indifferent to Bhagavān. More dear to
Bhagavān are jñānīs, who are inclined towards nirviśeṣa-
brahma, His impersonal aspect, which is merely a non-
specific manifestation of undifferentiated spirit. More
dear to Bhagavān than such jñānīs are His devotees such
as the four Kumāras, who are devoid of nirviśeṣa-jñāna,
inclination towards His impersonal aspect, yet possess
aiśvarya-jñāna, awareness of His supreme majesty.
Devotees such as Śrī Nārada who possess prema-niṣṭhā, a
resolute and exclusive fixation in love for Him, are
even more dear to Śrī Hari than such jñāni-bhaktas.
Superior to such loving devotees are the vraja-gopīs,
who possess an indescribable and unprecedented love for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and are therefore exceedingly dear to Him.

In the Padma Purāṇa it is said:

yathā rādhā priyā viṣṇos

tasyāḥ kuṇḍaṁ priyaṁ tathā

sarva-gopīṣu saivaikā

viṣṇor atyanta-vallabhā

Just as Śrīmatī Rādhikā is most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Her
pond, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, is equally dear to Him. Among all
the beloved gopīs, none are as dear as Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

This verse, quoted in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (4.5), proves
that, amongst all the gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhikā alone is
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost beloved. In precisely the same way
Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Her pond — which is actually non-
different from Her — is exceedingly dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and is also the topmost place of residence for devotees.
Therefore what spiritually insightful person desirous of
performing bhajana would not take shelter of that pond?
Certainly any such person would take shelter of Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti


                             45
Upadesamrita.txt                                 5/5/2017

Among the many varieties of sādhakas found in this
world, the devotee of Bhagavān who performs bhajana
while residing on the banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is the
best and the most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is described
in this tenth verse. More dear to Kṛṣṇa than the
followers of the path of karma are the jñānīs, who
search after the impersonal aspect of the absolute
truth. More dear to Kṛṣṇa than all the varieties of
jñānīs is a pure devotee, who has abandoned the attempt
to understand the absolute truth through the cultivation
of knowledge. Amongst all varieties of pure devotees,
the premi-bhakta, or one who dearly loves Kṛṣṇa, is the
most dear to Him. Amongst all varieties of such loving
pure devotees, the vraja-gopīs are the most dear to
Kṛṣṇa. Of all the vraja-gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost, and Her pond, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, is
similarly dear to Him. Therefore the intelligent person
who possesses sufficient accumulated devotional merit
(sukṛti) will most certainly reside on the banks of Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and within the mind render service to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s eightfold daily pastimes.

Anuvṛtti

More dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa than those who simply act to
fulfil their selfish desires is one who is firmly
established in the mode of goodness and is therefore
dedicated to performing virtuous deeds. Even more dear
to Kṛṣṇa than all such sat-karmīs is a brahma-jñānī, who
is transcendental to the modes of nature altogether.
More dear to Kṛṣṇa than all such jñānīs is a pure
devotee. More dear to Kṛṣṇa than all such pure devotees
is a premi-bhakta, who loves Him dearly. Even more dear
to Kṛṣṇa than all such premi-bhaktas are the vraja-
gopīs. Amongst all the vraja-gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost. In the same way that Kṛṣṇa loves Her,
He loves Her pond, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa’s
devotees, who are the most fortunate people, take
shelter of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa.




Verse Eleven


The Glories of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa



kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ praṇaya-vasatiḥ preyasībhyo ‘pi rādhā-

kuṇḍaṁ cāsyā munibhir abhitas tādṛg eva vyadhāyi

yat preṣṭhair apy alam asulabhaṁ kiṁ punar bhakti-bhājāṁ

tat premedaṁ sakṛd api saraḥ snātur āviṣkaroti

Anvaya

rādhā — Śrīmatī Rādhikā; preyasībhyaḥ api — even more
than the other beloved gopīs; uccaiḥ — is the foremost;
vasati — object; praṇaya — of love; kṛṣṇasya — of Śrī

                           46
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa; asyāḥ — Her (Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s); kuṇḍam — pond;
ca — also; abhitaḥ — in every respect; tādṛk eva — is
just so (the topmost object of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s love);
vyadhāyi — this has been established (in the
scriptures); munibhiḥ — by the sages; idam — this; saraḥ
— pond (Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa); āviṣkaroti — bestows; tat —
that; prema — gopī-prema; yat — which; alam — is
immensely; asulabham — difficult to attain; preṣṭhaiḥ
api — even for such dear devotees of Bhagavān as Nārada;
kim punar — what to speak of; bhakti-bhājām — other
reservoirs of bhakti (the sādhaka-bhaktas); snātuḥ —
upon one who simply bathes in its waters with great
devotion; sakṛt api — only once.

Translation

After thorough deliberation on the matter, the sages
have unanimously declared (in the Padma Purāṇa) that
just as amongst all the gopīs Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the
foremost object of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s great love, in precisely
the same way this pond of Hers is also the topmost
object of His love. Upon one who simply bathes in its
waters just once with great devotion, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa
bestows that rare treasure of gopī-prema which is so
immensely difficult to attain even for such dear
devotees of Bhagavān as Nārada — what to speak of
ordinary sādhakas.

Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā

It is only natural at this point to become eager to
learn what special commodity can be attained by taking
exclusive shelter of the limitlessly glorious Śrī Rādhā-
kuṇḍa. “The fruit of such exclusive devotion is the
topmost variety of kṛṣṇa-prema” — Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī is
concluding his composition by affirming this
philosophical principle (siddhānta). The prema being
spoken of here is extremely difficult to achieve even
for such exalted and dear devotees of Bhagavān as
Nārada. In other words this most elevated, radiant
divine love (unnatojjvala-prema) that the vraja-gopīs
possess for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not only difficult for such
dear devotees to attain, it is actually impossible. Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa bestows this very prema upon one who bathes
in its waters with a mood of special love and devotion.
Here, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is both the svayaṁ-kartā, the one
who directly bestows that prema upon the devotees, and
also the viṣaya, the object of the devotees’ love. Who
would not take shelter of this Rādhā-kuṇḍa? In other
words, any devotee skilled in the art of performing
bhajana and sincerely desirous of achieving the topmost
prema would certainly do so.

Relying upon a particle of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
mercy, I have composed this commentary as far as my
intelligence allows in order to increase the
transcendental pleasure of His devotees. This servant of
the Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa deity and son of Śrī Govardhana-
lāla, named Rādhā-ramaṇa dāsa, hereby concludes his
commentary named Upadeśa-prakāśikā on Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
Śrī Upadeśāmṛta.

Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti


                           47
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

Having described the natural glory of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa in
the previous verse, this eleventh verse has been
composed with the intention of making steadfast faith in
Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa arise within the hearts of sādhakas.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā†is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost beloved and in
all respects more exalted than all His other beloveds.
In the scriptures, the sages (munis) have described Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa’s eminence in the same way. Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa
easily bestows upon one who bathes in its waters that
rare prema which is not only immensely difficult for
sādhakas to attain, but also difficult for premi-bhaktas
like Nārada to achieve.

Therefore Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa alone is the most suitable
place of residence for those endeavouring for perfection
in their bhajana. The jīva who has overcome the
influence of matter and who has attained his inner
perfected spiritual form as a gopī (aprākṛta-gopī-deha)
should reside, in the mood of a maidservant (pālyadāsī)
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, on the banks of transcendental Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa in the divine land of Vraja (aprākṛta-vraja)
in the resplendent grove (kuñja) of the spiritual
master, who is situated in his eternal form as a female
friend (guru-rūpā-sakhī) of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Living
there, the pure spirit soul (aprākṛta-jīva) should
externally take constant shelter of chanting harināma.
Internally, in his spiritually perfected eternal form as
a gopī, he should render service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā
while deeply meditating on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eightfold daily
pastimes (aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā). This is the culmination of
bhajana for the devotees who have taken shelter of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s feet.

Anuvṛtti

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost beloved and the
crest jewel of those who are dear to Him. In the
scriptures, devotee sages have described Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa
as being Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s foremost beloved object, as dear to
Him as Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself. The topmost love for
Bhagavān, gopī-prema, is exceedingly difficult even for
dearly beloved devotees of Bhagavān such as Nārada to
attain. So what to speak of how difficult it is for
devotees still in the practitioner stage (sādhaka-
bhaktas) to achieve that rare prema! But very easily Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa bestows this prema upon one who bathes in
its waters just once.

Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is full of prema and, indeed, is
actually comprised of waters of nectarean prema. By
transcendentally residing (aprākṛta-vāsa) on the banks
of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and by transcendentally bathing
(aprākṛta-snāna) in its waters, one will obtain the
topmost prema. What is meant by aprākṛta-vāsa and
aprākṛta-snāna? Remaining thoroughly aloof from all
desires for material sense enjoyment, one should
constantly perform deep meditational worship (mānasa-
bhajana) in strict devotion to Śrīmatī Rādhikā for the
duration of one’s life. After shedding this material
body, one will attain an eternal spiritual body and be
intently engaged in direct, eternal service to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Only one who bathes in Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa in this
way attains the topmost prema.


                           48
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

Obtaining such good fortune is exceedingly difficult
even for such exalted premī devotees as Nārada. It is
extremely difficult even for the perfected devotees who
eternally serve Kṛṣṇa in the devotional mellows (rasas)
of servitude (dāsya), friendship (sakhya) and parenthood
(vātsalya) to bathe in Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, what to speak of
worldly-minded persons. What more can possibly be said
of the glories of taking aprākṛta-snāna in Śrī Rādhā-
kuṇḍa? Those who bathe there obtain good fortune that
extends all the way up to becoming maidservants of Śrī
Vārṣabhānavī (Śrīmatī Rādhikā).

Śrī Govinda dāsa was Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s dear
servant. Always accompanying Mahāprabhu as if he were
His shadow, he served Mahāprabhu with great love.
Simultaneously he would also record in his own words
descriptions of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s especially
significant pastimes. The collection of verses he wrote
became famous by the name of Govinda-kaḍacā. Having
heard these verses directly from Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī explained them
in his own words in his Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Through
the medium of those verses, light was shed upon Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s transcendental character.

The following is a narration from the time when Śrīman
Mahāprabhu was residing in Jagannātha Purī: Mahāprabhu
had already fulfilled the objectives for which He
descended upon this Earth. Now He desired to wind up His
pastimes. One day He took His intimate devotees and went
to the shore of the ocean. Seeing the blue ocean,
remembrance of Śyāmasundara immediately arose within
Him. Becoming overwhelmed in devotional ecstasy (bhāva),
He was oblivious to all else. With great difficulty His
devotees gradually brought Him back to external
consciousness. At that very time Śrī Gaurasundara slowly
began instructing those devotees. In that assembly
Mahāprabhu’s very dear disciple Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī was
also present. Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote those instructions down
in verse form, and these verses became famous as Śrī
Upadeśāmṛta, nectarean instructions. For spiritual
practitioners, this Upadeśāmṛta is like their very lives
and a necklace to be worn at all times.

A servant of the famous Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa deity in
Vṛndāvana, named Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa dāsa Gosvāmī, composed
a beautiful commentary entitled Upadeśa-prakāśikā-ṭīkā
on the eleven verses of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta. After some
time, the condition of the residents of this world
became critical, due to the doctrine of prema-bhakti
having been substantially covered by the frightful
influence of the present age of Kali-yuga. Seeing this,
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu sent His dear, eternal devotee
Śrī Bhaktivinoda hākura to this world. In simple and
comprehensible language, he composed a brief yet
essential commentary on the verses of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta.
This commentary is famous as Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti.

Śrī Gaurasundara is the personification of aprākṛta
vipralambha-rasa, the mellow constituted of sentiments
of divine separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. To nourish the rasa
of sambhoga, which is when the devotee is meeting
together with Kṛṣṇa, He tasted that vipralambha-rasa,
and for the benefit of human society He taught how it

                           49
Upadesamrita.txt                                5/5/2017

can be attained. It is compulsory for sincere sādhakas
to accept these instructions; otherwise it will be
impossible for them to ever achieve kṛṣṇa-prema.

In modern times, Kali Mahārāja, the personification of
the present degraded age, has assumed the bogus dress of
a devotee of Śrī Gaura. Sometimes he adopts the name of
imitationist (sahajiyā) cults such as Āula, Bāula, Neḍā
or Neḍī. With great intensity he propagates these false
philosophies, as well as other doctrines such as
māyāvāda and gaura-nāgarī9, which are opposed to the
path of bhakti. Aho! Just see the influence of Kali
Mahārāja! Some say, “I am Gaurahari Himself,” some
declare themselves to be glorious spiritual masters,
some consider themselves to be the Creator, and others
say that they are Śiva. Very enthusiastically they cheat
human society by propagating their bogus philosophies
that they were taught by Kali Mahārāja. Being pleased
with their preaching, Kali Mahārāja blesses them and
bestows upon them abundant wealth (kanaka), women
(kāminī) and notoriety (pratiṣṭhā). Being bewildered by
their propaganda, most people ignore śuddha-bhakti and
bhagavad-bhajana and instead advance along the path of
these new, depraved philosophies that are based on
material enjoyment. They become so intoxicated in this
mundane enjoyment that they are completely unaware of
just how they are ascending the peak of thorough self-
destruction.

O faithful devotees, don’t move in that direction.
Become steadfastly situated upon the path of bhakti that
was shown by great personalities such as Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
and Śrī Narottama hākura. This devotional path enables
one to relish the pure kṛṣṇa-prema that was practised
and preached by Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda. Reside in Vraja
and always perform kīrtana and smaraṇa of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s nāma, rūpa, guṇa and līlā. The doctrine of
gaura-nāgarī is a bogus philosophy that is opposed to
bhakti. Remain aloof from such bogus philosophies. The
embodiments of prema-bhakti, Śrī Viṣṇupriyā and Śrī
Lakṣmīpriyā, as well as the embodiment of the holy
dhāma, Śrī Nīlā-devī, perpetually serve Śrī
Gaurasundara, who is the combined form of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa. Knowing this to be true, take shelter of Him and,
following in the footsteps of the vraja-gopīs, day and
night render devotional service within the mind. By
doing so, even that prema-sevā of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa which
is extremely difficult to obtain will become easily
attainable.

Śrī Bhaktivinoda hākura revealed the holy dhāma of
Māyāpura. There he established the regular worship of
deities, including Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda, Śrī Gaura-
Gadādhara, Śrī Gaura-Viṣṇupriyā and Śrī Gaura-
Lakṣmīpriyā. Everywhere he preached the holy names of
Śrī Gaura and Śrī Kṛṣṇa as well as the doctrine of
śuddha-bhakti. Besides composing many of his own books
on śuddha-bhakti, he translated many ancient devotional
scriptures and wrote numerous commentaries, essays and
articles.

Towards the end of his life, upon seeing the dearth of
bhakti in society, he deprived the people by ceasing his

                           50
Upadesamrita.txt                               5/5/2017

attempts to deliver them. On the pretext of old age, he
adopted a vow of silence and remained immersed in
mānasa-sevā, devotional service performed within
meditation. Overwhelmed with compassion for the souls
suffering in this world, with tearful eyes he looked
towards me and ordered me to preach the doctrine of
śuddha-bhakti that was revealed by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and His eternal devotees. He also instructed
me to compose this Anuvṛtti commentary illuminating his
Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti commentary on Śrī Upadeśāmṛta.
Taking the dust of his divine feet upon my head, I have
followed his command. But just when I had completed
commenting on eight verses of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, he
departed this world from Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja at Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and entered into Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
pastimes.

O Śrī Bhaktivinoda hākura, intimate devotee of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā! On this day of completing my Anuvṛtti
commentary on the verses of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, this
destitute servant of yours offers it into your lotus
hands. May you be pleased. All glories unto you!



Remembering Śrī Gauracandra, on this twenty-second day
of the lunar month of Bhādrapada in the year 1914, at
Candraśekhara-bhavana in Māyāpura, I have completed this
Anuvṛtti commentary.



Table of Contents

Preface

Verse One

Verse Two

Verse Three

Verse Four

Verse Five

Verse Six

Verse Seven

Verse Eight

Verse Nine

Verse Ten

Verse Eleven




Table of Contents


                           51
Upadesamrita.txt        5/5/2017

Preface

Verse One

Verse Two

Verse Three

Verse Four

Verse Five

Verse Six

Verse Seven

Verse Eight

Verse Nine

Verse Ten

Verse Eleven




                   52
