Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017

Utkalikā-vallarī



Rūpa Gosvāmī

GVP (2011)



Tags: Utkalikā-vallarī rūpa gosvāmī

Utkalikā-vallarī rūpa gosvāmīttt



* * *




* * *




Utkalikā-vallarī

(from Stava-mālā)

A Vine of Intense Longings with Śrī Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇapāda’s commentary

Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa bhāṣya



Contents

Introduction

Verses

Verse    1 Verse 2 Verse 3 Verse 4 Verse 5 Verse 6 Verse 7
Verse    8 Verse 9 Verse 10 Verse 11 Verse 12 Verse 13
Verse    14 Verse 15 Verse 16 Verse 17 Verse 18 Verse 19
Verse    20 Verse 21 Verse 22 Verse 23 Verse 24 Verse 25
Verse    26 Verse 27 Verse 28 Verse 29 Verse 30 Verse 32
Verse    34 Verse 36 Verse 38 Verse 40 Verse 42 Verse 44
Verse    46 Verse 48 Verse 50 Verse 52 Verse 54 Verse 56
Verse    58 Verse 60 Verse 62 Verse 64 Verse 66 Verse 68
Verse    70 Verse 71




Introduction




                              1
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

It is a matter of great happiness to present to the
faithful readers this edition of Utkalikā-vallarī,
written by the crown jewel of pure rasika devotees,
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is the eternal associate of Śrī
Śacī-nandana Gaurahari.



Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmīpāda, one of the Six Gosvāmīs, has
written in the beginning of Śrī Stava-mālā (1):



śrī madīśvara-rūpeṇa rasāmṛta-kṛtā kṛtā

stava-mālānu-jīvena jīvena samagṛhṛta



“My worshipable Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu and many poetic tributes [Śrī Caitanya-
deva, Śrī Premanadu-sāgar-saṁjñaka, Śrī Kṛṣṇera-
aṣṭottara-śata-nāma, Śrī Kuñja-biharī-aṣṭaka, Śrī
Rādhikā-stava, Cātu-puṣpāñjali, etc.]. All these
unparalleled prayers are meant to be the ornaments of
the devotees, who should wear them as a garland around
their necks. With this aim, I, his disciple Jīva,
collected all his lyrical poems, which had been in
disarray, and wove them into a proper sequence in the
form of Stava-mālā.”



Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhu, being Śrī Gaurahari’s topmost
associate, was saturated with His mercy. As the ācārya
of transcendental rasa-śāstras, he wrote invaluable
literatures, including the most exceptional Śrī Stava-
mālā, “A Garland of Prayers,” which was actually
compiled later by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. Utkalikā-vallarī,
one of the flowers in this garland, is a poetic entreaty
for the service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmīpāda’s sweet devotion to unnata-ujjvala-mādhurya-
mayī-bhakti – the brilliantly shining amorous mellow –
is a honeybee whose delightful humming, here at its
finest, has fully blossomed in this prayer. Utkalikā
means ‘very intense eagerness mixed with extreme
restlessness,’ and vallarī means ‘creeper;’ hence
Utkalikā-vallarī means “The Vine of Intense Longings.”



Every verse in this composition is complete in itself.
At the same time, there is a development in the
presentation of the emotions. Thus, the reader and
listener will continue to drink of it once, twice and
more, never getting enough, living for the next drop
until finally they become completely liberated from
material miseries, and greed arises to become the
kiṅkarī, the maidservant, of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa. Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī sinks beneath the waves of wondrous visions
and revelations in the ocean of effulgent sweet
devotion, then floats back up to the surface where,
bitterly sobbing, he laments and loses consciousness
time and again. After experiencing such visions, Śrīla

                           2
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

Rūpa Gosvāmī expresses his longing to obtain the
merciful sidelong glance of the charming Divine Couple
in his prayers to Vraja-bhumī, the Vraja associates and
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s beloved sakhīs. In these prayers
he cries out piteously, yearning for entrance into the
ever-fresh, sublimely transcendental and variegated
amorous playful pastimes enacted between Līlā-
puruṣottama Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrī Rādhā.
This poem is the fruit of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhu’s
pain-filled separation. In it he dives into the depths
of mellows in the Divine Couple’s love to retrieve and
distribute the unprecedented pearls of his realizations,
ripe with heart-wrenching lamentation. Aspirants for
vraja-rasa will obtain a semblance of the luster of
these pearls, whereas the living entities who are bereft
of the wealth of bhajana cannot even imagine this. With
each successive verse Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s prayers
become more confidential, more developed and more
ardent.



In the days preceding his disappearance from this realm,
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī was wholly absorbed in his spiritual
identity. He was burning so intensely in endless
separation that his throat was choked up and he could
hardly speak. With an incessant flow of tears he
proclaimed:



udgīrṇābhūd utkalikā-vallarir agre

vṛndāṭavyāṁ nitya-vilāsa-vratayor vām

vāṅ-mātreṇa vyāharato ’py ullalam etām

ākarṇyeśau kāmita-siddhiṁ kurutaṁ me

Utkalikā-vallarī (70)




“O possessors of my life, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rādhā, this
Utkalikā-vallarī, this “Vine of Longings,” has sprouted
up in front of You, who are absorbed in Your eternal
amorous enjoyment in this Vṛndāvana. Simply reciting it
sets me atremble. Once You hear my heartfelt request, be
gracious to this lowly person – answer my prayers and
give me the service for which I yearn so deeply.”



In this way, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda established the
confidential conclusions of bhakti as the essence of all
the scriptures, and in this prayer, he ushered the flow
of the elevated amorous devotional mellow filled with
the nectar of separation.



This poem is especially wonderful because it is written

                           3
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

in a great variety of meters, such as upendra-vajrā; it
describes the bhāvas of the amorous mellow, like
kilakiñcita, kuṭṭamita and bibboka; and it is filled
with poetic ornaments such as śleṣa (witty double
meanings), rūpaka (metaphors) and anuprāsa
(alliteration). For his revolutionary presentation of
the voice of rasa, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhu is celebrated
as the supreme craftsman of this mode of expression. His
poetic artistry and articulation of emotion are
extraordinary and unprecedented.



If those who are suffering, impoverished, inquisitive or
seeking knowledge have sufficient sukṛti, or spiritual
merit, they can worship Bhagavān. But unless they
achieve a state of consciousness that is saturated
through and through with pure mellows of loving devotion
to Kṛṣṇa, or kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ, they
cannot obtain the greed for the happiness that comes
with serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa – not by a million lifetimes of
piety and merit. Therefore Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhu has
shown the method to attain that greed:



tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

ŚrīUpadeśāmṛta (8)



“A devotee should remove his tongue and mind from all
matters unrelated to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and, living in Vraja-
maṇḍala under the guidance of those persons who have
deep, spontaneous love for Him, engage his senses full-
time in remembering and glorifying Kṛṣṇa’s names, forms,
qualities and pastimes. This is the essence of all
advice.”



This verse makes it clear that for devotees who are
eager for vraja-rasa, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has recommended
living in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Residence in Vraja – in
any manner at all – is extolled by the śāstras. However,
the reader should note that merely staying in Vraja
physically is not enough to attain this viśuddha bhakti-
rasa, the transcendental mellow of devotion, as
specified by Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
who established Śrī Gaurāṅga’s innermost desires.
Therefore Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhu has described the
method for living in Vraja.



One finds different types of persons living in Vraja.
Some engage in a duplicitous performance of bhajana to

                           4
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

secure name and fame, when the truth is they indulge
their senses in luxurious eating, sleeping and
recreation. What to speak of being taken in by such
imposters, even by following those dedicated to vaidhī-
bhakti one will not become rūpānuga and one will not be
able to attain the unnata-ujjvala-rasa-maya prema-
bhakti, which is practiced and preached by Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī and afforded only by his followers. The only way
to cultivate śrī kṛṣṇa-bhakti is to accept the guidance
of rasika-gurus who have followed Śrī Vrajendra-
nandana’s intimate associates, who participate in His
pastimes.



Therefore, mere physical presence in Vraja does not
qualify one as a true Vrajavāsī. Rather, residence in
Vraja is successful when one fully dedicates the mind
and sentiments of the heart to continuously remain under
the guidance of the devotees who are absorbed in the
mellows of Vraja. This was confirmed by Śrīman
Mahāprabhu when He referred to Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara
Gosvāmī as a pure Vrajavāsī even though he never once
visited Vraja.



The neophyte practitioner must be very careful that, at
the beginning stage of sādhana, while still full of
unwanted impulses and vices, he does not, on the pretext
of doing solitary bhajana, engage in immature practice
of remembrance of the pastimes as this will simply
foster lethargy. Rasa-ācārya Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the
master of transcendental mellows, has established the
method for performing rāga-bhajana, spontaneous
devotion. Transgressing this method and endeavoring to
exhibit lofty devotional sentiments far above one’s
qualification is nothing but an unruly, inauspicious and
ill-founded pursuit that is destructive to society. We
must always remember the instruction of our worshipable
Parama-gurudeva Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda: kīrtana-prabhāve, smaraṇa hoibe, se-kāle
bhajana-nirjana sambhava. “By the power of
congregational chanting, remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
His pastimes (smaraṇam) will automatically awaken. Only
then will it be possible to go off to a solitary place
and engage in the confidential service of Śrī Yugala-
kiśora.”



If a sādhaka has even a slight desire to attain the
happiness of service afforded by unnata-ujjvala-bhakti-
rasa as prescribed by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, he must remain
in the shelter of those who are supportive, like-minded
and affectionate, and under their guidance become free
from any ulterior desire. And at the same time he must
cultivate the topmost level of bhakti, performing
activities meant exclusively for Kṛṣṇa’s happiness.



The Illustrious Author of Utkalikā-vallarī


                           5
Utkalika-vallari.txt                             5/5/2017

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhu



Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhu is one of the Six Gosvāmīs in
Śrī Gaurāṅga-līlā, and in Vraja-līlā he is Śrī Rūpa
Mañjarī. His forefathers came from Karnataka in South
India. One of his ancestors, for some reason, left their
native place and settled in Bengal. Śrī Rūpa was born
into a line of Yajurvedi brāhmaṇas descending from
Bhāradvāja Ṛṣi (son of Bṛhaspati) in approximately 1411
Śakābda (1489 A.D.) in Moragrām (Mādhāipura) in Bengal.
His father’s name was Kurmāra-deva. His older brother
was Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī and his younger brother was
Anupama, or Vallabha, who was the father of Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī. From childhood these three brothers were very
much attached to the lotus feet of Bhagavān.



After they finished their education in their youth, the
king of Bengal, Hussein Shah, impressed by their keen
intelligence, generosity and other outstanding
qualities, appointed Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī as prime
minister and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī as deputy prime
minister. In 1514 A.D. on His first journey to Vraja,
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu met them in the village of
Rāmakeli. At that point Śrīman Mahāprabhu turned back
and went to Jagannātha Purī. After this meeting Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s eagerness to attain Kṛṣṇa increased so
much that he gave up his government post and left
everything. The second time, when Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu was returning from Śrī Vṛndāvana, He met Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī in Prayāga, and infused His potencies in
the heart of His beloved Rūpa by presenting an
unprecedented explanation of bhakti-rasa-tattva. This
episode is described in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta

(Madhya 19.136-137):



prabhu kahe,-śuna, rūpa, bhakti-rasera lakṣaṇa

sūtra-rūpe kahi, vistāra nā yāya varṇana

pārāpāra-śūnya gabhīra bhakti-rasa-sindhu

tomāya cākhāite tāra kahi eka ‘bindu’



“Śrīman Mahāprabhu said, ‘O my beloved Rūpa, I will tell
you the symptoms of bhakti-rasa in a nutshell, because
the vast ocean of bhakti-rasa, being boundless and
fathomless, cannot be described in full. From that ocean
I am giving you one drop to taste.’ ”



For ten days in Prayāga, Mahāprabhu delivered to him the
original concept of bhakti-rasa-tattva. Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī has explained all this in his books, including
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Lalita-mādhava

                            6
Utkalika-vallari.txt                             5/5/2017

and Vidagdha-mādhava.



Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī is celebrated for his renunciation from
material life and for his humility, which were inspired
by his extraordinary attachment for Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. His life is elaborately described in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Bhakta-mālā and other books. Śrīla
Narottama Ṭhākura Mahāśaya has awarded him the befitting
title śrī caitanya mano ’bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpaka – he who
established Śrī Caitanya’s innermost desire. Śrīman
Caitanya Mahāprabhu had given him two instructions in
particular: to uncover Vraja-maṇḍala’s hidden holy
places and to write devotional literatures. From Prāyaga
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī went to Vṛndāvana, and from there he
returned to his home in Bengal to arrange his family
affairs and the education of Jīva Gosvāmī. After this he
went to Nīlācala where he joined Mahāprabhu.



While in Bengal Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī started to write
outlines of the dramas Vidagdha-mādhava and Lalita-
mādhava. To pacify his separation from Vraja, he had
desired to write the Vraja-līlā and Dvārakā-līlā in one
volume, but in Satyabhāmāpura in Orissa, Śrī Satyabhāmā-
devī appeared in his dream, ordering him to present the
dramas in two separate volumes. And in Nīlācala,
Mahāprabhu directly gave him this same instruction.
Śrīman Mahāprabhu, with His devotee associates, heard
him recite his compositions and became most pleased.
Only the rasika devotee will understand the joy they
experienced. Mahāprabhu infused Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī with
all potency and, appointing him as ācārya, sent him to
Vṛndāvana to fulfill His innermost desire. That is why
Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura Mahāśaya writes:



śrī caitanya mano’bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhūtale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam



Literatures written by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī include Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Laghu-bhagavatāmṛta,
Lalita-mādhava, Vidagdha-mādhava, Nikuñja-rahasya-stava,
Stava-mālā, Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇodeśa-dīpikā, Mathura-
māhātmya, Padyāvalī, Uddhava-sandeśa, Haṅsadūta, Dān-
keli-kaumudī, Kṛṣṇa-janma-tithi-vidhi, Prayuktākhyāta-
mañjarī and Nāṭaka-candrikā.



The Commentator

Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu



My supremely worshipable Gurudeva nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna

                           7
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja demonstrated his veneration for
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta and for śrī-gauḍīya-vedāntācārya
Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu by using Prabhu’s
name in establishing the society ‘Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti’ and also in awarding his sannyāsa disciples the
title ‘Śrī Bhaktivedānta.’ He wrote an article entitled
Gauḍīya-vedāntācārya Śrī Baladeva, in which he says,
“Śrī-gauḍīya-vedāntācārya Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has an
unbreakable relationship with Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti, and because he is a rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava, the
Samiti has completely embraced his conduct and concepts
and his method of bhajana. His stature as a follower of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī is proven in his voluminous writings.”
He also writes, “When we talk about Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu, the first thing that comes to our
mind is his commentary on Vedānta called Śrī Govinda-
bhāṣya, for which he is held in great repute by the
Vaiṣṇavas of the four sampradāyas.”



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who is non-different from
śrī gaura-śakti Gadādhara, has proclaimed, “Vidyābhūṣaṇa
Mahāśaya is a special luminous star in the Gauḍīya
Samprādaya. After the Six Gosvāmīs, no one has done
welfare for the sampradāya as he has. By this, we
understand he must be one of the eternal associates of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu.” Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu,
in Jaipur at Galtā-pahāḍ, hoisted the victory flag for
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Samprādaya, and in doing so he
established its eminent position within the Madhva
Sampradāya. This service to the sampradāya proves that
he is indeed a rūpānuga-gauḍīya-vaiṣṇava.



Śrī Baladeva Prabhu was the initiated disciple of Śrī
Rādhā-Dāmodara, who is in the family of Śyāmānanda, the
follower of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Śyāmānanda Prabhu was
under the guidance of the one-pointed rūpānuga Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī; this connection proves that Śrīla Baladeva
Prabhu is also a rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava. Furthermore, Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was the prominent śikṣā disciple
of Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, who is well-known
as ‘the second Śrī Rūpa.’ Therefore, there is no doubt
about Śrī Baladeva being rūpānuga. Attaining the mercy
of Śrī Govinda-deva, who is the treasure of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s life, he was able to keep the Deity’s sevā
going without break. What doubt can remain regarding Śrī
Baladeva’s position as rūpānuga when he has attained the
mercy of both Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī as well as his
worshipable Śrī Govindajī? He belonged to both the
pañcarātrika- (dīkṣā) and bhagavat-paramparās (śikṣā),
the two streams flowing together in him; yet he
established the authenticity and the charm of bhagavat-
paramparā, which, as it is founded on the degree of
proficiency in bhajana, is superior to pañcarātrika.



Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu has delineated the
system of disciplic succession in his Prameya-ratnāvalī.
By this it is clearly seen that the commentator, Śrī
Baladeva, is immersed in the Vedic teachings accepted in

                           8
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

the Gauḍīya line, and he is the emperor of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas. Our worshipable śrīla gurupāda-padma
oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja has written a verse in praise of
him:



śrī madhva sampradāya śrī-caitanya-kula-rakṣakaḥ

vedāntācārya-śārdūlo baladevo mahāmatiḥ



“All glories to Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, who is the
opulence of the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya, the decoration of
Śrī Caitanya-deva’s dynasty, the protector of the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Samprādaya, and a great-minded, lion-
like ācārya.”



Śrīla Gurupāda-padma also said that any sampradāya that
is reluctant to accept Śrīla Baladeva as rūpānuga is
actually in error and is making an offense to a
Vaiṣṇava. Therefore, understanding such sampradāya to be
bad association one should reject it and in this way
show his real faith to Śrīla Baladeva Prabhu. It has
also been told that Mahāprabhu’s associate, Śrī
Gopinātha Miśra, who along with Sarvabhauma had heard
Mahāprabhu speak His commentary on Vedānta-sutra, later
on appeared as Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, the Brahmā
Sampradāya’s commentator.




Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s writings include Śrī
Govinda-bhaṣya; Sukṣma-ṭikā; Siddhānta-ratnam and its
commentary Bhāṣya-pīṭhakam; Sāhitya-kaumudī; Vyākaraṇa-
kaumudī; commentaries on Tattva-sandarbha and
Iśopaniśad; Siddhānta-darpaṇam; Kāvya-kaustubha; Gopāla-
tāpanī-bhāṣya; commentaries on Sāhitya-kaumudī
(Kṛṣṇānandinī), Chanda-kaustubha, Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta
and Candra-loka; Natya-candrikā; commentary on Śrīmad-
Bhāgavat (Vaiṣṇava-ānandinī); Vedānta-syamantaka;
Prameya-ratnāvalī; Gītā-bhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya; Viṣṇu-
sahasranāma-bhāṣya (Nāmārtha-sudhā); Saṅkṣepa-
bhāgavatāmṛta-ṭippaṇī (Sāraṅga-raṅgadā); Stava-mālā-
vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya; Pada-kaustubha; and commentary on Śrī
Śyāmānanda-śataka.



The readers who desire to know more about Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s transcendental life and philosophy should
read the second and third articles in Prabandha-pañcakam
published by myself. All the information in these
articles came from four different sources: the
introduction my senior godbrother, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja, wrote for his publication of
Siddhānta-ratnam; Gauḍīya-vedāntācārya Śrī Baladeva
written by my gurupāda-padma Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna

                           9
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja; Bhāṣya-kārakā Vivaraṇa
published by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda;
and Gauḍīya-vedāntācārya Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa
written by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. I request the
readers to refer to all of these books.



The translation of the main verses of this Utkalikā-
vallarī was first presented by Śrīman Rādheśa dāsa
(Gāṇgulī Dādu). My learned daughter Madhu Khaṇḍelavāla
(M.A., Ph.D.) took his translation and rendered it in
simple, tasteful Hindi; she also translated Śrīla
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s commentary. As she thus
increased the beauty of this book, she is to be
commended.



I pray to Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga-Gāndharvikā-Girirdhārī to
shower Their blessings upon everyone who helped with
this publication.



The mood and the language of this book have been
purposely kept simple so that it will be accessible to
the general public. I have full faith that this book
will be very much appreciated by cultured persons who
are yearning for rūpānugā-bhakti. When the Vaiṣṇavas
read this book and become elated, this will be proof
that my endeavors have been successful.



Praying for the mercy of Hari-Guru-Vaiṣṇava,

The humble servant,



Tridaṇḍi-bhikṣu

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



Guru-pūrṇimā

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s disappearance day

Śrī Caitanyābada 523

7 July 2009




Verses




                             10
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017


Verse 1



prapadya vṛndāvana-madhyam ekaḥ

krośann asāv utkalikākulātmā

udghāṭayāmi jvalataḥ kaṭhorāṁ

bāṣpasya mudrāṁ hṛdi mudritasya



(When one finds himself unable to fulfill his heart’s
most cherished desire, and still is desperate to achieve
his goal, his heart melts. At this point, feeling
unworthy he begins to experience humility. In such a
state, the devotee suffers in separation and cries an
incessant flood of tears. In these prayers, the greatest
of poets, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, portrays these feelings
through his own moods, and in this first verse he speaks
with overwhelming conviction.)



Intent upon attaining my cherished desire, I take
shelter of Vṛndāvana-dhāma. All alone and loudly
lamenting, I openly display the severe burns branded in
my heart by scorching tears of separation.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“With a morose heart and a sense of loneliness, I take
shelter of Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Grievously weeping, I reveal
the open wound in my heart caused by the scalding tears
of separation.” Indeed, this pitiful condition of the
devotee will ensure that he achieves his desired goal.
It is said in the Smṛti: without performing bhakti
characterized by ecstatic symptoms such as hairs
standing on end, a melted heart and tears of bliss, how
will the heart be purified of material desires?



Because the meters (chanda) are evident as we progress
through the text, I will not venture into any detailed
descriptions for fear of making the book too long.




Verse 2




                              11
Utkalika-vallari.txt                             5/5/2017

aye vṛndāraṇya tvaritam iha te sevana-parāḥ

parām āpuḥ ke vā na kila paramānanda-padavīm

ato nīcair yāce svayam adhipayor īkṣaṇa-vidher

vareṇyaṁ me cetasy upadiśa diśaṁ hā kuru kṛpām



(Now, absorbed in his spiritual identity as a
maidservant, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī prays to Śrī Vṛndāvana-
dhāma, where ‘she’ has taken shelter.)




O Vṛndāvana forest, was there ever anyone in this world
who did not quickly attain supreme transcendental bliss
by serving you? Therefore I surrender to you and most
humbly petition you. Be kind and personally disclose to
me the best way to receive the darśana of your
worshipful Lords, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



Aye means ‘alas!’ This word indicates lamentation.
According to the Hemacandra-koṣa dictionary, aye implies
both anger and regret.



“O Vṛndāvana forest, has there ever been anyone immersed
in serving you who did not quickly attain the topmost
joy? All such persons have indeed achieved supreme
happiness. Therefore I humbly prostrate myself before
you and petition you.”



“What is it that you want?”



“I am praying that you mercifully instruct me on the
best way to attain the darśana of my Master and
Mistress, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava.”




Verse 3



tavāraṇye devi dhruvam iha murārir viharate

                              12
Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017


sadā preyasyeti śrutir api virautī smṛtir api

iti jñātvā vṛnde caraṇam abhivande tava kṛpāṁ

kuruṣva kṣipraṁ me phalatu nitarāṁ tarṣa-viṭapī



(Next, she addresses the presiding goddess of Vṛndāvana
forest, Vṛndā-Devī.)



O Vṛndā-devī, all the Śrutis and Smṛtis proclaim that
Murārī eternally roams about your forest of Vṛndāvana
enjoying with His beloved. Knowing this, I pray at your
lotus feet. Kindly bless me that the tree of my desires
will quickly bear the supreme fruit.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Goddess Vṛndā, Śrī Murārī is always enjoying Himself
with His beloved Śrī Rādhā and Their companions in your
forest. It is said in the Śruti: ‘Rādhā with Mādhava,’
and elsewhere, ‘in Vṛndāvana, within Mathurā-maṇḍala,
which is also known as Gokula, They enjoy eternally.’
The Smṛtis and other scriptures (in this case Bṛhad-
gautamīya-tantra) also present Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s words: ‘The
cowherd maidens eternally reside here in My abode
Vṛndāvana. These gopīs are eternal yoginīs, forever
united with Me, always absorbed in serving Me and never
separated from Me.’ Śrī Yamala-tantra says: ‘Gopāla
always has two arms. He never assumes a four-armed form.
The son of the king of the gopas, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is always
enjoying amorous pastimes with Śrī Rādhā, who is the
crown jewel of all the gopīs.’ Knowing this and having
full faith in the śāstras, I am praying at your lotus
feet. You should be gracious to me. By your mercy the
tree of my desires should shortly and surely yield fruit
– quickly I should attain Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.”




Verse 4



hṛdi cira-vasad-āśā-maṇḍalālambi-pādau

guṇavati tava nāthau nāthituṁ jantur eṣaḥ

sapadi bhavad-anujñāṁ yācate devi vṛnde

mayi kira karuṇārdrāṁ dṛṣṭim atra prasīda


                              13
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017



(Having pleased the presiding goddess of Vṛndāvana, Śrī
Vṛndā-devī, Śrī Rūpa now prays to her for sanction.) O
virtuous Vṛndā-devī, the very same Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda, whose lotus feet I have long desired to behold,
are your Lord and Lady. This fallen maidservant begs you
to quickly grant me permission to approach and
supplicate Them. Be pleased with me and look upon me
kindly.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



He guṇavatī – Vṛndā-devī is addressed here as virtuous
for she is endowed with the ideal of compassion. “This
fallen person is petitioning you to quickly grant me
permission to pray to your Masters, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda. Be pleased with me and bestow upon me your
affectionate, merciful glance. Without your mercy it is
very rare to achieve the grace of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda,
who are under your control.”



It is as if Vṛndā-devī inquires, “Who are your Masters?”

And Śrī Rūpa replies, “They are the focus of all the
desires long cherished in my heart. By the grace of
Their lotus feet, the creeper of my hopes should soon
bear fruit.”

The Amara-koṣa (3.4.1) states that the words drāk,
maṅkṣu, sapadi and drutam mean ‘quick, soon, etc.’




Verse 5



dadhataṁ vapur aṁśu-kandalīṁ

dalad-indīvara-vṛnda-bandhurām

kṛta-kāñcana-kānti-vañcanaiḥ

sphuritāṁ cāru-marīci-sañcayaiḥ



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Your effulgence is more charming than a
blossoming blue lotus. O Śrī Rādhā, Your enchanting
complexion belittles the luster of gold.




                              14
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017



Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



The next ten verses, from 5 (dadhataṁ) through 14 (kvāpy
ānuṣaṅgīka), are to be read in conjunction with verse
15. Ballava-puraṅdarātmaja (from verse 15) means ‘the
son of the king of the gopas,’ and gokula-vareṇya-
nandinī means ‘the daughter of Śrī Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja.’
“This maidservant is bowing down to the two of You and
offering You prayers.”



One might ask, “O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, what are You like? O
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, what are You like?” This question is
answered in the next ten verses, each line of which
employs a host of adjectives to describe the two of
Them, as in this verse: “O Kṛṣṇa, Your hue is more
captivating than a mass of fully blossomed blue
lotuses.” According to the Viśva-koṣa the word kandala
has three meanings: rows upon rows (kalāpa), brightly
colored (uparāga) and freshly blossoming (navāñkura).



“O Śrī Rādhā, You are embellished with a beautiful
effulgence that humiliates the luster of gold.”




Verse 6



nicitaṁ ghana-cañcalātater

anukūlena dukūla-rociṣā

mṛga-nābhi-rucaḥ sanābhinā

mahitāṁ mohana-paṭṭa-vāsasā



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You appear so incredibly beautiful in Your
pītāmbara brilliant as a flash of lightning. O Śrī
Rādhā, You are decorated with a charming, dark silky
garment that shines like musk.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Your dazzling cloth shimmers like a
barrage of lightning flashes against a thick bank of

                              15
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

dark clouds. O Śrī Rādhā, You are decorated with
captivating dark silk as lustrous as musk.”According to
the Hemacandra-koṣa, sanābhi means ‘of kindred blood,
like-minded, resembling and so on.’




Verse 7



mādhurīṁ prakaṭayantam ujjvalāṁ

śrī-pater apī variṣṭha-sauṣṭhavām

indirā-madhura-goṣṭha-sundarī-

vṛnda-vismaya-kara-prabhonnatām



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Your splendid body emanates a radiant
sweetness that surpasses the elegance of Lakṣmī-pati Śrī
Nārāyaṇa. O Rādhikā, Your loveliness astounds the
beautiful maidens of Vraja, in whose wake even Śrī
Lakṣmī pales.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Kṛṣṇa, Your splendid body emanates a radiant
sweetness that is more glorious than the elegance of
Lakṣmī-pati Śrī Nārāyaṇa. O Rādhikā, Your sublime beauty
astounds the attractive Vraja maidens, whose beauty far
surpasses that of Śrī Lakṣmī.”




Verse 8



itara-jana-su-durghaṭodayasya

sthira-guṇa-ratna-cayasya rohaṇādrim

akhila-guṇavatī-kadamba-cetaḥ-

pracura-camatkṛti-kāri-sad-guṇāḍhyām



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You are a solid mountain of jewel-like
traits inaccessible to others. O Śrī Rādhikā, You are a
treasure-trove of virtues that stuns the hearts of all

                              16
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

noble maidens.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“ ‘Others’ refers to outsiders, those who are not Your
associates, like Indra and other demigods, in whom
omniscience, friendliness and tenderness are seldom
found. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You are a mountain of those
perpetual gem-like qualities. O Rādhikā, Your affection,
friendliness, beauty and other such distinguished
attributes thoroughly surprise upright ladies who
themselves possess such qualities.”




Verse 9



nistula-vraja-kiśora-maṇḍalī-

mauli-maṇḍana-harinmaṇīśvaram

viśva-visphurita-gokulollasan-

navya-yauvata-vataṁsa-mālikām



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, among all the matchlessly handsome youths
of Vraja, You are the crown emerald. O Śrī Rādhā, of all
the young maidens of Gokula, the place most revered in
the whole world, You are the crowning jasmine flower
ornament.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, of all the peerless youths of Vraja,
including Śrīdāma and Subala, You are the best, the
crowning emerald. O Śrī Rādhikā, You are that special
jasmine flower locket ornamenting the garland made of
Śyāmalā, Pālikā and all the other joyful fresh damsels
of Gokula, a place that sets the whole world trembling
in the face of its excellence.”




Verse 10

                              17
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017




svānta-sindhu-makarī-kṛta-rādhaṁ

hṛn-niśākara-kuraṅgita-kṛṣṇām

preyasī-parimalonmada-cittaṁ

preṣṭha-saurabha-hṛtendriya-vargām



(Now, the moods in each of Their hearts are described.)

O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You keep Śrī Rādhikā like a makarī, Cupid’s
dolphin-like carrier, in the ocean of Your heart. O Śrī
Rādhā, You keep Kṛṣṇa transfixed like a deer in the
glowing moon of Your heart. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Your beloved’s
fragrance maddens You. O Śrī Rādhikā, Your darling’s
aroma excites Your senses.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You keep Śrī Rādhikā like a makarī in Your
ocean-like heart. O Śrī Rādhikā, You hold Śrī Kṛṣṇa like
a deer in Your shining moon-like heart. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
scent of Your beloved Śrī Rādhā inebriates You, leaving
You tipsy. O Śrī Rādhikā, the fragrance of Your
sweetheart adbucts Your senses.” This verse testifies to
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda’s attachment for each other.




Verse 11



prema-mūrti-vara-kārtika-devī-

kīrti-gāna-mukharī-kṛta-vaṁśam

viśva-nandana-mukunda-samajñā-

vṛnda-kīrtana-rasajña-rasa-jñām



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Your flute is always singing the glories of
Ūrjeśvarī Kārtika-devī Śrī Rādhikā, the foremost of all
the cowherd maidens, who themselves are the embodiment
of pure love. O Śrī Rādhikā, Your tongue is always
relishing the glories of Mukunda Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who gives
pleasure to the whole world.



                              18
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Your flute is always celebrating the famed
reputation of Kārtika-devī Śrī Rādhikā, who is the crown
jewel among Lalitā and the other cowherd maidens, who
themselves are the embodiment of pure love. O Śrī
Rādhikā, Your tongue knows how to praise Mukunda Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who bestows pleasure upon the entire world.” In
the Amara-koṣa (1.6.11) the words yaśa, kīrti and
samajñā all mean ‘glorification.’




Verse 12



nayana-kamala-mādhurī-niruddha-

vraja-nava-yauvata-mauli-hṛn-marālam

vraja-pati-suta-citta-mīna-rāja-

grahaṇa-paṭiṣṭha-vilocanānta-jālām



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the sweetness of Your lotus eyes traps the
swan-like heart of She who is the best of the Vraja
damsels. O Śrī Rādhikā, the dragnet of your sidelong
glance expertly catches the king of fish, the heart of
the prince of Vraja.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the sweetness of Your lotus eyes controls
the swan-like heart of She who is the crown of the young
girls of Vraja. O Śrī Rādhikā, the heart of Nanda
Mahārāja’s son is the king of fish, and the net of Your
sidelong glance is expert in catching it.” The Amara-
koṣa (3.3.200) states that the word ānāyaḥ, which
connotes ‘bringing in’ or ‘near,’ also means ‘net.’ This
verse describes how through the glances of Their
beautiful, shining eyes They express the many flavors of
Their attachment for each other.




Verse 13

                              19
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017




gopendra-mitra-tanayā-dhruva-dhairya-sindhu-

pāna-kriyā-kalaśa-sambhava-veṇu-nādam

vidyā-mahiṣṭha-mahatī-mahanīya-gāna-

sammohitākhila-vimohana-hṛt-kuraṅgām



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the song of Your flute is the Agastya Muni
that swallows the ocean of Śrī Rādhā’s unyielding self-
restraint. O Śrī Rādhikā, Your skill at playing the vīṇā
is so extraordinary that Your music bewitches the deer-
like heart of He who enchants the entire world.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Your flute song is the Agastya Muni that
guzzles up the oceanic self-control of the daughter of
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, King Nanda’s friend. O Śrī Rādhikā,
Your expertise at playing the vīṇā is so remarkable that
it enchants the deer-like heart of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
mesmerizer of the universe.” This verse indicates that
They are dedicated to pleasing each other through the
expert playing of Their instruments.




Verse 14



kvāpy ānuṣaṅgi-katayodita-rādhikākhyā-

vismāritākhila-vilāsa-kalākalāpam

kṛṣṇeti varṇa-yugala-śravaṇānubandha-

prādurbhavaj-jaḍima-ḍambara-samvṛtāṅgīm



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, if by chance You hear the syllables of Śrī
Rādhikā’s name, You immediately forget everything You
are doing. O Śrī Rādhikā, simply by hearing the two
syllables ‘Kṛ-ṣṇa,’ You become stunned as aṣṭa-sāttvika-
bhāvas spread throughout Your body.




                              20
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as soon as You hear Śrī Rādhikā’s name,
You forget all other forms of enjoyment. O Śrī Rādhikā,
just by hearing the two syllables ‘Kṛ-ṣṇa,’ Your body
becomes frozen. You are both controlled by the sweetness
of each other’s names.”




Verse 15



tvāṁ ca ballava-purandarātmaja

tvāṁ ca gokula-vareṇya-nandini

eṣa mūrdhi racitāñjalir naman

bhikṣate kim api durbhago janaḥ



O Prince of the gopas Śrī Kṛṣṇa! O Śrī Rādhā, daughter
of the best among men in Gokula, Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja!
Bowing down and folding my hands over my head, this
wretched maiden earnestly petitions the two of You.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



In this verse ballava-purandara means ‘the king of the
gopas’ and gokula-vareṇya means ‘Śrī Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja.’




Verse 16



hanta sāndra-karuṇā-sudhā-jharī-

pūrṇa-mānasa-hradau prasīdatam

durjane ’tra diśataṁ rater nija-

prekṣaṇa-pratibhuvaś chaṭām api



(After greeting Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rūpa is praying

                              21
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

for a blessing.)



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! O Śrī Rādhā! Your hearts are flooded by
heavy torrents of mercy. Therefore, be pleased with this
fallen soul. Bestow upon me just a drop of real love for
You, thus guaranteeing me Your audience.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



Hanta (ah!) expresses joy. “Your hearts are lakes
overflowing with condensed ambrosial mercy,” says Śrī
Rūpa, directly addressing Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. “This
wretched person begs You to be pleased with me. Give me
but one drop of genuine love, or rati, for You.”



Their Lordships inquire, “What is the nature of this
love you seek?”



Śrī Rūpa replies, “It is said that the glories of this
rati are such that upon attaining it one is assured of
receiving Your darśana.”



The Halāyudha-koṣa states that pratibhū and lagnaka both
mean ‘guarantee.’




Verse 17



śyāmayor nava-vayaḥ-suṣamābhyāṁ

gaurayor amala-kānti-yaśobhyām

kāpi vām akhila-valgu-vataṁsau

mādhurī hṛdi sadā sphuratān me



(Now she is describing the effects of the intense love
between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.)



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! O Śrī Rādhikā! The two of You, being the
topmost of all that is attractive, captivate the minds

                              22
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

of every living entity. You, Rādhikā, blossoming with
ever-fresh youth, exhibit qualities possessed only by
the most excellent of women. Therefore, You are called
Śyāmā. And You, Kṛṣṇa, the ultimate of all handsome
youths, are called Śyāma because of Your dazzling
emerald-like brilliance. What is more, one of You is
spotlessly effulgent, Your body radiant like molten gold
(gaurī), and the other blazes like gold (gaura) in Your
widespread fame. May Your sweet beauty ever illuminate
my heart.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa, You are the crown jewels of all
that is attractive to everyone. May Your special
sweetness and beauty forever radiate within my heart.”
Should someone ask what They are like, this verse
contains the answer: nava-vayaḥ-suṣamābhyāṁ…. In this
case, nava means ‘glorification.’ Here, nava is plural;
it refers to Them both – ‘blossoming with tender youth’
and ‘supreme, fresh beauty.’ The Amara-koṣa (1.3.17)
states that suṣamā (f.) is a word for extreme beauty.
According to Pāṇinī’s grammar, when the same word refers
to a male and a female, in this case, Śyāma and Śyāmā,
the plural form śyāmayoḥ is used. The word gaurayoḥ
should be understood in the same way: gaurīś-ca and
gauraś-ca are combined as gaurayoḥ. Thus, navīna-vayasa
śyāmā refers to Śrī Rādhā at the tender young age of
sixteen, and navīna-vayasa-suṣamā-suśobhita-śyāma refers
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, that dark complected, exceedingly handsome
fresh youth, radiant like a blazing sapphire. Should
someone ask what They are like, the answer is that Śrī
Rādhā is spotlessly effulgent with a golden complexion
(gaurī) and Śrī Kṛṣṇa shines with universal renown
(gaura). According to the Amara-koṣa, gaura has three
meanings: golden (pīta), the color of daybreak (aruṇa)
and white (sveta).




Verse 18



sarva-ballava-vareṇya-kumārau

prārthaye bata yuvāṁ praṇipatya

līlayā vitarataṁ nija-dāsyaṁ

līlayā vitarataṁ nija-dāsyam



(To suggest how They may act in her favor, she now
addresses They who are absorbed in each other’s

                              23
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

sweetness.)



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You are the son of Śrī Nanda, the king of
Vraja. O Śrī Rādhā, You are the daughter of the
respected head of the Vrajavāsīs, Śrī Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja. Bowing down before the two of You I beg,
“Kindly grant me Your service, for You can easily do so.
Let me serve You; it is a simple request.”




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



Sarva-ballava-vareṇya-kumārau refers to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, the children of Śrī Nanda Mahārāja and Śrī
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, who are the best of the gopas. The
rest of the verse is clear: “Your service is the only
interest in life for this fallen and miserable
maidservant.”




Verse 19



praṇipatya bhavantam arthaye

paśupālendra-kumāra kākubhiḥ

vraja-yauvata-mauli-mālikā-

karuṇā-pātram imaṁ janaṁ kuru



(In this verse and the next, Śrī Rūpa, having pleased
Śrī Yugala-kiśora, now petitions Them for mercy.)



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, son of the gopa king, I prostrate before
You and beg in a choked voice, “Please induce that crown
jewel of the Vraja gopīs, Śrī Rādhā, to make me the
recipient of Her compassion.”




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O paśupālendra-kumāra, O son of the king of the gopas!
I fall down before You and plaintively pray at Your

                              24
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

lotus feet for mercy.”



“What sort of mercy do you seek?” He asks.



Śrī Rūpa replies, “Please make this maidservant the
object of the benevolence of Śrī Rādhā, the crown jewel
of the young maidens of Gokula.”




Verse 20



bhavatīm abhivādya cāṭubhir

varam ūrjeśvari varyam arthaye

bhavadīyatayā kṛpāṁ yathā

mayi kuryād adhikāṁ bakānkataḥ



O Ūrjeśvarī Śrī Rādhikā, with folded hands I beg You
with sweet words for this benediction: May the killer of
Bakāsura, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, heap His kindness upon me, knowing
me to be Yours.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Ūrjeśvarī, I place my head at Your feet and sweetly
request You for the supreme boon.”



“What blessing do you want?” She asks.



“Consider me Your property. Accept me as Your
maidservant so that the killer of Bakāsura, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
will inundate me with His mercy.”




Verse 21




                              25
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

diśi vidiśi vihāram ācarantaḥ

saha paśupāla-vareṇya-nandanābhyām

praṇayi-jana-gaṇās tayoḥ kurudhvaṁ

mayi karuṇāṁ bata kākum ākalayya



(Next she prays to Śrī Yugala-kiśora’s associates for
their mercy.)



O intimate companions of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, you roam
throughout Vraja with the son and daughter of the gopa
kings. Please hear my tale of woe and be gracious
towards me.



Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O beloved sakhīs of Śrī Rādhā and dear sakhās of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, after listening to my wistful petitions please be
merciful to me. Who are all of you? You are the friends
of the son and daughter of the respected topmost kings
of the gopa community, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja and Śrī
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja. You are eternal associates in Their
pastimes, always wandering with Them throughout
Vṛndāvana.”




Verse 22



girī-kuñja-kuṭīra-nāgarau

lalite devi sadā tavāśravau

iti te kila nāsti duṣkaraṁ

kṛpayāṅgī-kuru mām ataḥ svayam



(First she has offered a general prayer to all Their
associates. Now, in this verse and the next two, she
addresses them individually by name.)



O Lalitā-devī, because you always control the Hero and
Heroine in the nikuñjas at Govardhana, there is nothing
you cannot achieve. You are free to do as you like;
therefore mercifully accept me and engage me in Śrī
Yugala’s service.

                              26
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Devī Lalitā, the Hero and Heroine of the nikuñjas at
Govardhana, Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava who are expert in romantic
intrigue, are always submissive to you; therefore
nothing is impossible for you. Hence, you are free to
accept me.” According to the Amara-koṣa (3.1.24) āśrava
and vacanesthita are synonyms meaning ‘obedient
servant.’




Verse 23



bhājanaṁ varam ihāsi viśākhe

gaura-nīla-vapuṣoḥ praṇayānām

tvaṁ nija-praṇayinor mayi tena

prāpayasva karuṇārdra-kaṭākṣam



O Viśākhā, in this Vṛndāvana the golden Śrī Rādhā and
the bluish Śrī Mādhava have chosen you, out of all Their
intimate associates, as the main object of Their favor.
Please help me to attain your beloved Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s merciful affectionate glance.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Viśākhā, in this Gokula the golden Śrī Rādhā and the
bluish Śrī Mādhava have chosen you, out of all Their
confidential friends, as the greatest recipient of Their
grace. Please help me to attain your beloved couple’s
glance, which flows with compassion.”




Verse 24



subala ballava-varya-kumārayor

                              27
Utkalika-vallari.txt                             5/5/2017


dayita-narma-sakhas tvam asi vraje

iti tayoḥ purato vidhuraṁ janaṁ

kṣaṇam amuṁ kṛpayādya nivedaya



O Subala, in Vraja-maṇḍala you are a priya-narma sakhā,
bosom friend of Śrī Nanda Mahārāja’s son and Śrī
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja’s daughter. On this day, extend but a
slight gesture of mercy to me and relate my sad story to
your two friends.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Subala, in this Vraja you are the confidant of Śrī
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja’s daughter and Śrī Nanda Mahārāja’s
son, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mukunda. Because you are so close to
Them, you can petition Them with great empathy on behalf
of Their maidservant, who is suffering in separation.”




Verse 25



śṛṇuta kṛpayā hanta prāṇeśayoḥ praṇayoddhurāḥ

kim apī yad ayaṁ dīnaḥ prāṇī nivedayati kṣaṇam

pravaṇita-manāḥ kiṁ yuṣmābhiḥ samaṁ tilam apy asau

yugapad anayoḥ sevāṁ premṇā kadāpi vidhāsyati



(Now she is addressing Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda’s
maidservants.)



O beloved maidservants of the Masters of my life, Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, you are completely intoxicated with
prema. Please lend your ear for a moment to hear this
lowly dāsī’s humble request. Will I ever be able to
serve the Divine Couple’s lotus feet alongside you, even
if only briefly?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya

                              28
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017




“O beloved maidservants of the Masters of my life, Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, all of you, please hear me out.”



“What do you want?” they ask.



“Hear this fallen dāsī’s request.”



They repeat, “What is your request?”



She replies, “This miserable dāsī is humbly asking if
ever, for even a moment, she might engage in the loving
service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda together with all of
you.”




Verse 26



kva jano ’yam atīva pāmaraḥ

kva durāpaṁ rati-bhāgbhir apy adaḥ

iyam ullalayaty ajarjarā

gurur uttarṣa-dhurā tathāpi mām



Where am I, a wretched and helpless maidservant,
compared with the exalted devotees in whom divine love
has already sprouted? Knowing that even for them this
prema-sevā is extremely rare, for a maidservant like me
it will be next to impossible to attain. Still an
intense and unabating thirst for it leaves me delirious.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“What is the likelihood for this fallen and weak
maidservant to receive that fortunate service when it is
even difficult for premi devotees to attain? For a dāsī
the likes of myself, such an opportunity is extremely
unusual. Nonetheless, severe thirst for it robs me of my
composure.”

                              29
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017




“What sort of thirst is that?”



“An insatiable thirst,” she replies. The word ajarjarā
means ‘fresh and new.’ The Viśva-koṣa states that the
meaning of jarjara is ‘old.’ Guru means ‘great.’ The
essence is that this great thirst appears in ever-fresh
and new ways.




Verse 27



dhvasta-brahma-marāla-kūjita-bharair ūrjeśvarī-nūpura-

kvāṇair ūrjita-vaibhavas tava vibho vaṁśī-prasūtaḥ-kalaḥ

labdhaḥ śasta-samasta-nāda-nagarī-sāmrājya-lakṣmīṁ parām

ārādhyaḥ pramadāt kadā śravaṇayor dvandvena mandena

me



(Though aware of her position, she again prays with
great fervor.)



O all-powerful Kṛṣṇa, will my dull ears ever be able to
hear Your flute music mingling with the tinkle of Śrī
Rādhā’s ankle-bells, which alone defeat the warbling of
Brahmā’s swan? That combined sound is the sovereign
goddess of the city of sublime sounds. Śrī
Śyāmasundara’s flute song enriched by the melody of Śrī
Rādhā’s ankle-bells is the essence of all vibrations
that give pleasure to the ear.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O all-powerful Lord, when will I be able to worship the
sweet melodies issuing from the flute? When will I be
able to serve that song with my ears? What is special
about that music? It is enriched with the tinkling of
Ūrjeśvarī Śrī Rādhā’s ankle-bells. What does the
tinkling of Her ankle-bells do? It defeats the warbling
of Brahmā’s royal swan carrier. What is the combined
sound of the flute and the ankle-bells like? That sound
is glorious. It is the queen goddess reigning over the

                              30
Utkalika-vallari.txt                            5/5/2017

metropolis of sublime sound, having achieved sovereignty
over all melodies. When, oh when, will I be able to hear
the ringing of Śrī Rādhikā’s ankle-bells dancing to Your
flute song in the rāsa-maṇḍala?”




Verse 28



stambhaṁ prapañcayati yaḥ śikhi-piñcha-mauli-

veṇor api pravalayan svara-bhaṅgam uccaiḥ

nādaḥ kadā kṣaṇam avāpsyati te mahatyā

vṛndāvaneśvari sa me śravaṇātithitvam



O Vṛndāvaneśvari Śrī Rādhikā, the sound of Your vīṇā
overpowers and silences the flute song of He who is
crowned with a peacock feather. When will the music of
Your vīṇā reach my ears?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Vṛndāvaneśvari, when will Your most eminent Mahatī
vīṇā come within the range of my ears? What does its
sound do? It stops and silences even the flute-playing
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is crowned with a peacock plume. When
Śrī Kṛṣṇa hears that vīṇā, He is so captivated that He
starts playing His flute off-key, then the sound falters
and finally stops altogether. Will I ever be able to
hear Your vīṇā’s melody for just a moment?”




Verse 29



kasya sambhavati hā tad-ahar vā

yatra vāṁ prabhu-varau kala-gītiḥ

unnaman madhurimormi-samṛddhā

duṣkṛtaṁ śravaṇayor vidhunoti

(After this she is begging to hear Them sing a duet.)



                              31
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017


O supreme Masters, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, when will that
day come in my life when You sing such a melodious duet,
flooded with waves of sweetness, that it washes away all
inauspiciousness from my ears?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Your Excellencies, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, will such a
day come when I hear the two of You suddenly burst into
song, a soft and melodious duet that purges my ears of
all mundane sound vibration? When will that day be
mine?” The use of vā in the first line is as an ornament
of speech, an exclamation. Generally, it means ‘or,’ but
not in this case. One may ask what is special about that
mellow sound. The reply is that it is enriched with
towering waves of sweetness.




Verse 30



parimala-saraṇir vāṁ gaura-nīlāṅga-rājan-

mṛgamada-ghusṛṇānugrāhinī nāgareśau

sva-mahima-paramāṇu-prāvṛtāśeṣa-gandhā

kim iha mama bhavitrī ghrāṇa-bhṛṅgotsavāya



(Next she is praying to experience Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda’s bodily fragrance.)



O king of lovers Śrī Kṛṣṇa, O jewel of consorts Śrī
Rādhikā, Your fragrance is so glorious that just a whiff
humbles all other wonderful aromas. When will the
honeybee of my nose attain ecstasy inhaling the
luxuriant scent coming from the musk and kuṅkuma smeared
on Your dark and fair bodies?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O king of gallants, O beautiful temptress, when will
the fast-flowing stream of Your fragrance be a festival

                              32
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

for the honeybee of my nose?” According to the Viśva-
locana the word saraṇi (path) has two meanings: flow
(śreṇī) and trail (vartma). One might ask, “What is this
fragrance like?” The answer is, “The natural scent of
Their fair and dark bodies took pity on the aromas of
musk and kuṅkuma and allowed them to mingle with it,
thereby producing one wondrous consummate aroma.” One
might inquire further as to what the flow of that
fragrance is like. The answer is, “The stream of that
fragrance surges forth, just one drop of its fragrance
smothering the full spectrum

of all other smells.”



Verse 31



pradeśinīṁ mukha-kuhare vinikṣipañ

jano muhur vana-bhuvī phūt-karoty asau

prasīdataṁ kṣaṇam adhipau prasīdataṁ

dṛśoḥ puraḥ sphuratu taḍid-ghana-cchaviḥ



(The fortune of attaining intimate proximity to Their
Lorships appears highly unlikely, so instead Śrī Rūpa is
begging for Their direct darśana from afar.)



O my Master Śrī Kṛṣṇa, O my Mistress of Vṛndāvana Śrī
Rādhikā, sitting here in Vṛndāvana I cry out to You
again and again and weep, my forefinger at my mouth, “I
beseech You. If only for a moment be pleased with me and
allow my eyes to behold the sweetness of Your forms
which appear like a streak of lightning across a fresh
thundercloud.”




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



The forefinger – the finger next to the thumb – has two
names: pradeśinīṁ (pointer) and tarjinī (scolding). This
is substantiated in the Amara-koṣa (2.3.81). Putting her
forefinger at her mouth, this dāsī is sobbing
vehemently. The meaning of the other lines is clear.
“Your splendidly effulgent complexions resemble
lightning flashing against a fresh rain cloud.”




                              33
Utkalika-vallari.txt                             5/5/2017

Verse 32



vraja-madhura-jana-vrajāvataṁsau

kim api yuvām abhiyācate jano ‘yam

mama nayana-camatkṛtiṁ karotu

kṣaṇam apī pāda-nakhendu-kaumudī vām



(Now she is praying for darśana of all of Their toenails
simultaneously.)



O my Master Śrī Kṛṣṇa and my Mistress Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
You are the crowning glory of all the residents of
Vraja-maṇḍala, who are the embodiments of sweetness.
Therefore, I am praying to You both for a boon. May the
radiance of the brilliant moons of Your toenails fill my
eyes with wonder, even for just a moment.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



The meaning is clear.




Verse 33



atarkita-samīkṣaṇollasitayā mudāśliṣyator

nikuñja-bhavanāṅgane sphurita-gaura-nīlāṅgayoḥ

rucaḥ pracurayantu vāṁ puraṭa-yūthikā-mañjarī-

virāja-dali-ramyayor mama camatkṛtiṁ cakṣuṣoḥ



(Now she prays to see her Master and Mistress when They
have met by chance.)



O Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, when You suddenly catch sight
of each other in the garden in front of the nikuñja, You
swell with joy and embrace each other with lavish
affection. The meeting of Your golden and blue forms is
reminiscent of a black bumblebee sitting on a golden

                              34
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

jasmine bud, drinking its nectar. Let my eyes fill with
wonder as I behold Your two beautiful forms meeting.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“May the beauty of Your bodies fill my eyes with wonder.
Where will this happen? In front of the nikuñja. How do
the two of You behave there? You embrace each other most
affectionately, surprised and overjoyed to see each
other by chance. What do the two of You look like? Like
two dazzling figures, gold and blue.” Using a simile,
she describes the respective specialities of Their
forms: “Your bodies look very charming together, like a
black bumblebee sitting on a golden jasmine bud.”




Verse 34



sākṣāt-kṛtiṁ bata yayor na mahattamo ’pi

kartuṁ manasy api manāk prabhutām upaiti

icchann ayaṁ nayanayoḥ pathi tau bhavantau

jantur vijitya nijagāra bhiyaṁ hriyaṁ ca



(Lamenting over her lack of qualification she beseeches
Them.)



O Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, how astonishing it is that
exalted devotees who are accomplished in all kinds of
sādhana cannot catch even a momentary glimpse of You in
the course of their meditation. I, on the other hand,
even while plagued with a dull, evil mind filled with
unruly desires, long for You to appear on the pathway of
my eyes. Alas! How is it that I am not embarrassed? Have
I lost all sense of shame and dignity?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



The word bata indicates astonishment. By having the
direct darśana of the Supreme Controllers, Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, one experiences hlādini, the phenomenon of

                              35
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

true, pure ecstasy. “High-class saints who are
accomplished in all kinds of sādhana are not able to see
You in their minds even briefly. I, on the other hand,
burdened by gross body and senses and troubled by
abominable desires, hanker to see You directly with my
own eyes. Acknowledging my lack of qualification I
swallow my pride and unabashedly present my request to
You without fear or shame.”




Verse 35



athavā māṁ kiṁ nu dūṣaṇaṁ

bata vṛndāvana-cakravartinau

yuvayor guṇa-mādhurī navā

janum unmade yatīha kaṁ na vā



(Now she is revealing that it is the Divine Couple’s
charm that has compelled her to foolishly offer such an
outlandish prayer.)



Am I at fault in making such a request? O Master and
Mistress of Vṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rādhā, who
would not be driven mad by Your ever-fresh sweetness? By
drinking the honey liquor of the sweetness of Your
qualities, I have become so intoxicated that I have
dared to offer such a prayer.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“Who would not be maddened by the sweetness of Your
eternal freshness and Your other infatuating qualities,
such as delivering the fallen and purifying sinners? It
is only natural that the appeal of a beautiful object
will incite greed in even a hopeless beggar. Your
charming qualities are the cause of this fallen person’s
madness.”




Verse 36




                              36
Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017

ahaha samayaḥ so ’pi kṣemo ghaṭeta narasya kiṁ

brajanaṭavarau yatrodīptā krpā-sudhayojjvalā

kṛtapari-janaśreṇi-cetaś-cakora-camatkṛtir

vrajati yuvayoḥ sā vaktrendu-dvayī nayanādhvani



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, foremost of all the great dancers in Vraja,
O Śrī Rādhā, crown jewel of all the lady dancers, when
will that auspicious day come when Your gorgeous moon-
like faces tread the path of my vision – faces imbued
with nectarean mercy, faces which enamor the cakora-bird
hearts of the sakhīs?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



(This verse has not been included in the Stava-mālā
published by Chaukhambā of Vāraṇasī; thus there is no
commentary. The verse has been taken from other
publications.)




Verse 37



priya-jana-kṛta-pārṣṇi-grāha-caryonnatābhiḥ

su-gahana-ghaṭanābhir vakrimā-ḍambareṇa

praṇaya-kalaha-keli-kṣvelibhir vām adhīśau

kim iha racayitavyaḥ karṇayor vismayo me



O my refuge Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā, with Your
associates at Your heels, the two of You engage in an
animated quarrel, the meaning of which is difficult to
understand because Your talk is filled with repartees,
double meanings and trick questions. When, oh when, will
Your wildly amusing verbal love battle astound my ears?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O my Master and Mistress, will the wonder of Your

                              37
Utkalika-vallari.txt                            5/5/2017

humorous love-quarrels, which flows in waves one after
another, ever touch my ears?” The word kim is used when
asking a question. “What does that entertaining love-
quarrel entail? It is escalated by the interjections of
Their companions. But the same question arises again –
what is that love-quarrel like? It is very intense,
punctuated with lively and rowdy double-talk, quick
comebacks, telling gestures and confidential meanings.”




Verse 38



nibhṛtam apahṛtāyām etayā vaṁśikāyāṁ

diśi diśi dṛśam utkāṁ prerya sampṛcchamānaḥ

smita-śabala-mukhībhir vipralabdhaḥ sakhībhis

tvam agha-hara kadā me tuṣṭim akṣṇor vidhatse



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, O killer of Agha, when Śrīmatī Rādhikā
slyly pilfers Your flute, You will be searching
everywhere and asking, “Who has taken My flute? Who is
the thief?” One of Śrī Rādhikā’s sakhīs will point at
another sakhī and say, “She has taken it.” You will then
pick a fight with that innocent girl, who will laugh in
Your face and say, “O You crafty villain, today we have
outwitted You.” When will my eyes drink with delight the
moods reflected on Your face at that time?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O killer of Agha, O stealer of sins, when will You
satisfy my eyes?”



Kṛṣṇa asks, “How may I satisfy you?”



Śrī Rūpa replies, “I want to see You when You are alone
with Śrī Rādhā in the secret nikuñja and She steals Your
flute. You will then search for it in all directions and
ask, ‘Who has stolen My flute?’ Her girlfriends will
outsmart You by pointing to one sakhī, who is actually
innocent.”



One might ask, “ “What do those sakhīs look like?”

                              38
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017




“Their faces have become especially beautified by their
laughter, because at last the king of tricksters has
indeed been outdone. When will my eyes find full delight
seeing You in this situation?”




Verse 39



kṣatam adhara-dalasya svasya kṛtvā tvad-ālī-

kṛtam itī lalitāyāṁ devi kṛṣṇe bruvāṇe

smita-śabala-dṛgantā kiñcid uttambhita-bhrūr

mama mudam upadhāsyaty āsya-lakṣmīḥ kadā te



O Devī Rādhikā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, having bitten and cut His own
lips, will go to Lalitā and complain, “O Lalitā, look!
Your sakhī Śrī Rādhikā has bitten My lips.” Hearing Śrī
Kṛṣṇa speaking like this, with a smile and raised
eyebrows You will shoot Him a look of playful contempt
from the corners of Your eyes. When will You show me the
splendor of Your face in this moment and fill me with
bliss?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Devī Rādhikā, after Śrī Kṛṣṇa cuts His petal-like
lips with His own teeth, He says, ‘Lalitā, look how Your
friend Rādhā has bitten Me.’ When You hear Śrī Kṛṣṇa say
this, Your face will light up with a splendid
brilliance. When will You offer me the supreme pleasure
of seeing You like this?”



One might ask, “What does Her lustrous face look like?”
“It displays a slight smile, an astonishingly crooked
glance and knitted eyebrows expressing Her disdain. In
this way Śrī Rādhājī evinces Her anger towards that
outrageous fraud Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”




Verse 40


                              39
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017



katham idam api vāñchituṁ nikṛṣṭaḥ

sphuṭam ayam arhati jantur uttamārham

guru-laghu-gaṇanojjhitārta-nāthau

jayati-tarām athavā kṛpā-dyutir vām



(Now she again adopts a humble mood.)



O Lord and Lady of the afflicted, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-

Govinda, what chance does this lowly dāsī have to get
Your prema-sevā, Your loving service, which is sought
after by high-class devotees? I am completely unfit, but
Your supreme mercy does not take into account whether
one is qualified or not. Therefore, again I indulge in
begging You for this rare prema-sevā.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Maintainers of the distressed, is this fallen
maidservant qualified to desire the rare fortune of
serving You?”



One might ask, “What is that auspicious service like?”



“That prema-sevā is such that it is desired by exalted
uttama-bhāgavata devotees. If one receives Your loving
service, it is all due to Your radiant and supremely
glorious mercy.”



One might further inquire, “What are the glories of that
mercy?”



“That mercy does not consider whether one is high-class
or fallen. Although I am fallen, because Your grace is
such, this desire has arisen in me.”




Verse 41

                              40
Utkalika-vallari.txt                            5/5/2017




vṛtte daivād vraja-patī-suhṛn-nandinī-vipralambhe

samrambheṇollasita-lalitā-śaṅkayodbhrānta-netraḥ

tvaṁ śārībhiḥ samaya-paṭubhir drāg upālabhyamānaḥ

kāmaṁ dāmodara mama kadā modam akṣṇor vidhātā



(In this verse she is praying for the fruit of that
mercy.)



O Dāmodara, when by the will of Providence You are
separated from Śrī Vṛṣabhānu’s very dear daughter, Śrī
Rādhikā, the anxiety in Your eyes will reflect Your fear
of the angry Lalitājī coming and scolding You. Seizing
the opportunity, the she-parrots in the nikuñja will
rebuke You, “For no reason You have cheated Rāja-nandinī
Śrī Rādhikā.” Your face will appear so sweet at this
time. When will You delight my eyes with that sweetness?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Dāmodara, when will You fulfill my desire and give
pleasure to my eyes?”



Kṛṣṇa might ask, “How can I make Your eyes joyful?”



She replies, “When destiny has separated You from Śrī
Rādhikā, Śrī Vṛṣabhānu’s darling daughter, You will be
in fear of the fuming Lalitājī. At that time the she-
parrots, seeing the apprehension in Your eyes and
knowing what has happened, will taunt You, saying, ‘You
may be a superbly handsome prince with unparalleled
qualities, but You lack the beautiful quality of
intelligence; Śrī Rādhikā has completely given Her heart
and soul to You, but You have cheated on Her.’ I beg for
the pleasure of seeing the amusing and unique
expressions on Your lotus face when You hear their
mocking words.”



Actually, Śrī Rūpa is begging not for her own pleasure,
but for the sake of making arrangements for Kṛṣṇa’s
pleasure. She is telling Him, “If You allow me, I will
cleverly appease the offended sakhīs and turn them in
Your favor, which will be much to Your delight. With my

                              41
Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017

special skill I will placate Lalitājī and arrange for
You to meet with Śrī Rādhā.”



Kṛṣṇa’s sakhā Ujjvala is in fact Cupid, the god of love,
who nourishes Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda’s pastimes. It is
also by his divine intervention that They undergo
separation. (Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda’s sweet pastimes are
not affected by time, karma, the material modes, or the
will of Providence.) Without a doubt all of this happens
only by the desire of Ujjvala to expand Their pastimes.




Verse 42



rāsārambhe vilasati parityajya goṣṭhāmbujākṣī-

vṛndaṁ vṛndāvana-bhuvi rahaḥ keśavenopanīya

tvāṁ svādhīna-priyatama-pada-prāpaṇenārcitāṅgīṁ

dūre dṛṣṭvā hṛdi kim acirād arpayiṣyāmī darpam



O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, when the rāsa-līlā begins in Śrī
Vṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will leave all the other Vraja
beauties and take You to a secluded kuñja. Coming
completely under Your control He will be eager to
decorate You with many kinds of flowers. When will I
behold this scene from afar and my heart swell with
pride?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Śrīmatī Rādhā, will the day ever come when, seeing
You from the distance in the land of Vṛndāvana, my heart
will suddenly overflow with pride?”



One might ask, “Who is Śrī Rādhā? What is She like?”



Śrī Rūpa replies, “She is the one for whom Keśava left
behind all the other lotus-eyed girls of Vraja at the
beginning of the rāsa-līlā. Taking Her to a lonely place
He worshiped all Her limbs by decorating Her with
flowers.”



                              42
Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017


Again one might ask, “How did Keśava decorate Her?”



The reply is, “By dressing Her with flower ornaments
made with His own hands, He decorated Śrī Rādhā with the
position of svādhīna-bhartṛkā, the heroine who controls
her beloved. In truth, Keśava is always subservient to
Śrī Rādhā.”



Verse 43



ramyā śoṇa-dyutibhir alakair yāvakenorja-devyāḥ

sadyas tandrī mukulad-alasa-klānta-netrā vrajeśa

prātaś candrāvalī-parijanaiḥ sācī-dṛṣṭvā vivarṇair

āsya-śrīs te praṇayati kadā sammadaṁ me mudaṁ ca



O Vraja-rāja-kumāra, O Prince of Vraja, at dawn, with
eyes half-closed, fatigued from having been awake the
whole night, You come from Candrāvalī’s kuñja to Śrī
Rādhikā’s kuñja. When You place Your head on Her altā-
marked lotus feet to break Her māna, Your curly hair
takes on a charming ruddy luster. Candrāvalī’s friends,
the rival party (seeing Your lotus face beautified by
that red lac), go pale and look at You askance. When
will the beauty of Your face at this time tread the
pathway to my heart, exhilarating me with joy?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Vrajeśa, O Prince of Vraja, when will the beauty of
Your lotus face overwhelm my heart with pride and
happiness?” The Halāyudha-koṣa states that darpa, mada
and avalepa have the same meaning – pride. One might
ask, “What is the splendor of that face?” The reply is,
“When He bows down, touching the altā on the lotus feet
of Ūrjā-devī Śrī Rādhā, His face appears splendidly
delightful with His curly hair now tinged with red.”
Again one might query, “What is making His face so
beautiful?” “His sleepy, languid eyes half closed with
fatigue.” The Amara-koṣa says that sadyaḥ, sapadi and
tatkṣaṇa all mean ‘instantly.’ Again the same question
arises, “What is the beauty of that face like?” “The
beauty of that face is witnessed by Candrāvalī’s
friends, their faces pale and their eyes askew.”




                              43
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017



Verse 44



vyātyukṣī-rabhasotsave ’dhara-sudhā-pāna-glahe prastute

jitvā pātum athotsukena hariṇā kaṇṭhe dhṛtāyāḥ puraḥ

īṣac-choṇiṁa-mīlitākṣam anṛju-bhrū-valli-helonnataṁ

prekṣisye tava sa-smitaṁ sa-ruditaṁ tad devi vaktraṁ
kadā



O Devī Śrī Rādhikā! A wager is made for the nectar of
lips and a water-splashing contest ensues. Kṛṣṇa is
victorious, and, boldly grasping Your neck in front of
the sakhīs, He comes to claim His reward – the nectar of
Your lips. When will I see Your lotus face, haughtily
raised high, laughing and crying at the same time,
reflecting Your anger, with eyes red and Your vine-like
eyebrows knitted in contempt?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Devī, when will I have darśana of Your lotus face
contorted with scorn during the water-splashing
festival?” Vyātyukṣī refers to Them shooting water at
each other with a syringe. When an intransitive verb is
in the impersonal passive voice and in the feminine
form, as in this case, that verb is classified as
denoting mutual activity. According to Pāṇinī’s grammar
(3.3.43), “karma-vyatihāreṇa ca striyām: when a verb
that denotes a mutual activity is feminine in gender….”
This is why the feminine suffix ṇica has been attached
to the verbal root, thus accounting for the etymological
construction of the word vyātyukṣī.[i]1



In agreement with this rule, vyātyukṣī-rabhasotsava
means ‘a jubilant, passionate festival of spraying and
splashing water, known as Holī.’ One might ask, “What is
that festival about?” The answer is, “It is a contest in
which the winner is awarded the nectar of the loser’s
lips – a kiss, in other words.” One might further
inquire, “What is Your condition, Śrī Rādhā?” The reply
is, “In front of the sakhīs, Kṛṣṇa has wrapped His arms
around Your neck with great excitement to collect His
prize for winning the contest.” Again one might
question, “What is the meaning of that distorted
expression on Your face?” “You are displaying contempt
for Kṛṣṇa, Your face held high, a little red, Your eyes
narrowed and Your vine-like eyebrows knitted.”


                              44
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017



This verse describes Śrī Rādhārāṇī’s three moods:
kilakiñcita, kuṭṭamita and bibboka. Scholars describe
kilakiñcita in this way: when the hero and heroine are
meeting and she is feeling extreme joy, she experiences
a simultaneous mixture of pride, ambition, weeping,
smiling, envy, fear and anger. Kuṭṭamita is defined
thus: when the hero tenderly touches the heroine’s bosom
and kisses her, she reacts with anger, but internally
she relishes bliss. And bibboka: out of pride the
heroine acts haughtily towards her sweetheart.




Verse 45



ālībhiḥ samam abhyupetya śanakair gāndharvikāyāṁ mudā

goṣṭhādhīśa-kumāra hanta kusuma-śreṇīṁ harantyāṁ tava

prekṣiṣye purataḥ praviśya sahasā gūḍha-smitāsyaṁ balād

ācchindānam ihottarīyam urasas tvāṁ bhānumatyāḥ kadā



O Prince of Vraja, when Gāndharvikā Śrī Rādhikā,
surrounded by her sakhīs, secretly enters Your flower
garden and is happily picking flowers, You will
unexpectedly appear on the spot. Catching hold of the
veil covering the breast of Śrī Rādhikā’s friend
Bhānumatī, You will act very angry, but deep inside You
will be laughing. When will I see these moods on Your
lotus face?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Śrī Nanda-kumāra, Prince of the gopas, when
Gāndharvikā Śrī Rādhā, surrounded by Lalitā and other
sakhīs, stealthily trespasses into Your flower garden
and pilfers heaps of flowers, You suddenly appear from
nowhere. Confronting us You forcibly snatch the veil
from the breast of Bhānumatī, the friend of Gāndharvikā
Śrī Rādhā. When will I have the chance to see You do
this?” One might ask, “What does Your face appear like
at that time?” The reply is, “Your lotus face will be
masking a mischievous smile.” According to the Amara-
koṣa the word sahasā means ‘suddenly.’




                              45
Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017

Verse 46



udañcatī madhūtsave sahacarī-kulenākule

kadā tvam avalokyase vraja-purandarasyātmaja

smitojjvala-mad-īśvarī-cala-dṛg-añcala-preraṇān

nilīna-guṇa-mañjarī-vadanam atra cumban māyā



O Prince of Vraja, at the commencement of the spring
festival, Śrī Rādhā, surrounded by the sakhīs, beams a
gentle smile, and with a restless glance signals You to
approach Guṇa-mañjarī, who is sitting off alone. Going
over to her You kiss her on the lips. Oh, how I dearly
long for the sight of You while this is taking place.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Prince of Vraja, when will I see You at the beginning
of the spring festival and there are sakhīs and sakhīs
everywhere?” One might ask, “What is it that you want to
see Him do?” The reply is, “Signaled by the sidelong
glance of my Mistress Śrī Rādhā, whose face is lit by a
beaming smile, You will slyly plant a kiss on the lips
of Guṇa-mañjarī, who is sitting off to the side.”




Verse 47



kalinda-tanayā-taṭī-vana-vihārataḥ śrāntayoḥ

sphuran-madhura-mādhavī-sadana-sīmni viśrāmyatoḥ

vimucya racayiṣyate sva-kaca-vṛndam atrāmunā

janena yuvayoḥ kadā pada-saroja-sammārjanam



(After praying to witness this sort of delightful
pastime, Śrī Rūpa is now begging for service.)



O my Master Śrī Kṛṣṇa and my Mistress Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
when You are tired from roaming in the forest on
Yamunā’s bank and come to rest in a fragrant mādhavī
kuñja, when will I open my braided hair and use it to

                              46
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

brush the dust from Your lotus feet?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O my Lord and Lady, when will a maidservant the likes
of myself open my hair and use it to clean the dust off
Your lotus feet?” One might ask, “What are the two of
You doing?” The verse clearly provides the answer.




Verse 48



parimilad-upabarhaṁ pallava-śreṇibhir vāṁ

madana-samara-caryābhāra-paryāptam atra

mṛdubhir amala-puṣpaiḥ kalpayiṣyāmi talpaṁ

bhramara-yuji nikuñje hā kadā kuñja-rājau



O Rulers of the forest love-bowers, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Ramaṇa! Oh, will the day ever come when, in the sylvan
retreat beautified with humming bees, I will have the
chance to arrange for You a soft flower bed and a pillow
of tender new leaves that will withstand Cupid’s battle?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Rulers of the forest groves, when, in this nikuñja,
will I be able to prepare Your flower bed with clean
soft flowers?” One might ask, “What is the nikuñja
like?” The reply is, “It is alive with bees.” “How will
you make the bed?” “It will have a pillow of tender new
leaves.” Again one might question, “What are the bed and
pillow like?” The reply is, “They are capable of bearing
the strain of Cupid’s battle.”




Verse 49




                              47
Utkalika-vallari.txt                             5/5/2017

ali-dyutibhir āhṛtair mihira-nandinī-nirjharāt

puraḥ puraṭa-jharjharī-paribhṛtaiḥ payobhir mayā

nija-praṇayibhir janaiḥ saha vidhāsyate vāṁ kadā

vilāsa-śayana-sthayor iha padāmbuja-kṣālanam



O Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa, when will I have the chance to
serve You when You are relaxing on Your pastime-couch
and surrounded by Your sakhīs? I will bring a golden
pitcher of Yamunā water as black as a swarm of
bumblebees and wash Your lotus faces and feet.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“Will I ever have the opportunity to wash Your lotus
feet along with Your dear ones?” It is understood that
washing the lotus faces is also included here.[ii]2 One
might ask, “What are the two of You doing?” The answer
is, “You are resting on the pastime-bed.” One might
further inquire, “How will I wash You?” The reply is, “I
will wash You with Yamunā water, dark like bumblebees,
from a golden pot.”



In the Smṛti, kālindī kāla-salilā means ‘the River
Kālindī (the daughter of the Sun-god Kālinda) is black.’




Verse 50



līlā-talpe kalita-vapuṣor vyāvahāsīm analpāṁ

smitvā smitvā jaya-kalanayā kurvatoḥ kautukāya

madhye-kuñjaṁ kim iha yuvayoḥ kalpayiṣyāmy adhīśau

sandhyārambhe laghu laghu padāmbhoja-samvāhanāni



O my Master Śrī Kṛṣṇa and my Mistress Śrī Rādhā, as
evening falls You recline together on a pastime couch in
the middle of the nikuñja and launch a game of dice.
Gaily laughing and joking, each of You, intent on
winning, will be eager for victory. Will I ever be able
to gently massage Your lotus feet at that time?



                              48
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O my Master and Mistress Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa, You will
meet at dusk and commence a game of dice. In the middle
of the delight and excitement of the game, will I be
able to massage Your lotus feet?” One might query, “What
are the two of You doing?” The reply is, “Eager to
defeat the other, You are both laughing and joking.”



According to Pāṇinī’s rule, pāre madhye ṣaṣṭhyā vā: in
the nominative (sixth) case, the word madhya can mean
either ‘in the middle of’ or ‘within.’ Here, since the
word madhya is in the nominative (sixth) case and
therefore contains two meanings as cited above, when it
is compounded with the word kuñja, it becomes either (1)
madhya-kuñja, which means ‘that kuñja which is situated
in the middle-ground’ or ‘an area between two (other)
places;’ or (2) kuñja-madhye, which means ‘within the
kuñja.’ These are similar to the rules that apply to the
word vyātyukṣī (verse 44). Everything else in this verse
is clear.




Verse 51



pramada-madana-yuddhārambha-sambhāvukābhyāṁ

pramudita-hṛdayābhyāṁ hanta vṛndāvaneśau

kim aham iha yuvābhyāṁ pāna-līlonmukhābhyāṁ

caṣakam upahariṣye sādhu-mādhvīka-pūrṇam



O Prince and Princess of Vṛndāvana, You are expert
tacticians in the art of intoxicating amorous battle in
the nikuñja. When will I be fortunate enough to offer
You a chalice of honey-nectar at the beginning of Your
wanton play when both of You, rejoiced in heart, are
eager to sip the sweet flower elixir?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Vṛndāvaneśvara and Vṛndāvaneśvarī, when will I serve
You honey liquor when You are impatient to drink?” A

                              49
Utkalika-vallari.txt                             5/5/2017

question arises, “To whom will you give it?” The reply
is, “To that Couple who is expert in erotic enjoyment,
at the onset of Their fully intoxicating amorous
battle.” According to the Amara-koṣa (2.10.42) the words
caṣaka and pān-pātra are two names for a wine goblet.




Verse 52



kadāhaṁ seviṣye vratati-camarī-cāmara-marud-

vinodena krīḍā-kusuma-śayane nyasta-vapuṣau

daronmīlan-netrau śrama-jala-kaṇa-klidya-dalakau

bruvāṇāv anyonyaṁ vraja-nava-yuvānāv iha yuvām



O ever-fresh Prince and Princess of Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Śrī Rādhikā, lying on Your flowery love-couch with eyes
slightly open, the curls on Your foreheads wet with
drops of perspiration, You will be whispering intriguing
love-talk while sighing with fatigue. When will I fan
You with a long switch made from buds of the flowering
vines?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O youthful Couple of Vraja, when will I joyfully fan
You with a cāmara, a whisk made from long strands of
buds from the vines?” The meaning of the rest of the
verse is clear.




Verse 53



cyuta-śikhara-śikhaṇḍāṁ kiñcid utsraṁsamānāṁ

viluṭhad-amala-puṣpa-śreṇim unmucya cūḍām

danuja-damana devyāḥ śikṣayā te kadāhaṁ

kamala-kalita-koṭiṁ kalpayiṣyāmī veṇīm



O Danuja-damana[iii]3, destroyer of the demons, when, on

                              50
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

the order of Śrī Rādhājī, will I open Your topknot and
remove the peacock feather and flowers, and in its place
make a braid, the upper portion of which will be
interwoven with lotus flowers?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O killer of the demonic sons of Dakṣa’s daughter Danu!
On the order of Devī Śrī Rādhikā, when will I open Your
topknot and make a braid in its place?” The question is,
“How does that topknot look?” The reply is, “The peacock
feather, marked with a moon, is falling down from Your
topknot, and because it is a bit loose all the flowers
are also falling out.” “And how will you weave that
braid?” The reply is, “The top will be decorated with
lotuses.” The Viśva-koṣa states that the word koṭi has
four meanings: kinārā (edge), agrabhāga (front)[iv]4,
karoḍa (ten million) and bheda (difference).




Verse 54



kamala-mukhī vilāsair aṁsayoḥ sraṁsitānāṁ

tulita-śikhī-kalāpaṁ kuntalānāṁ kalāpam

tava kabaratayāvirbhāvya modāt kadāhaṁ

vikaca-vicakilānāṁ mālayālaṅkariṣye



O Kamala-mukhī Śrī Rādhikā, O lotus-faced girl, during
Your amorous enjoyment Your hair will fall down on Your
shoulders like a beautiful peacock’s tail. When will I
joyfully tidy up Your hair in a knot and decorate it
with a garland of fully bloomed jasmine flowers?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Kamala-mukhī Śrī Rādhikā, O lotus-faced girl, when
will I bind Your hair in a beautiful knot and decorate
it with blossoming jasmine flowers?” The question is,
“What is the condition of Her hair which you tie into a
bun?” The reply is, “It has scattered all over Her
shoulders during amorous play.” Another question might
arise, “What is this hair like?” The reply is,

                              51
Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017

“Rādhājī’s hair, smooth and glossy, looks like the
peacock feathers that Kṛṣṇa wears.” The Halāyudha-koṣa
describes various hairstyles: braid (veṇī), a braid
wound around the head (dhammilla), tresses (kuntala),
pony-tail (kabarī), etc. The same dictionary also
confirms vicakila as another name for mallikā, or
jasmine.




Verse 55



mithaḥ-spardhā-baddhe balavati valaty akṣa-kalahe

vrajeśa tvāṁ jitvā vraja-yuvati-dhammilla-maṇinā

dṛg-antena kṣiptāḥ paṇam iha kuraṅgaṁ tava kadā

grahīṣyāmo baddhvā kalayati vayaṁ tvat-priya-gaṇe



O Prince of Vraja, at the onset of the gambling match,
each of You will wager Your own deer. Upon defeating
You, the most illustrious of the Vraja damsels, Śrī
Rādhikā, will signal me to take possession of Your deer.
When, right in front of Madhumaṅgala and the other
sakhās, will I tie Your deer and bring it to my
Mistress, Śrī Rādhā?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Prince of Vraja, when, upon defeating You in the
gambling match, will the crown jewel of the Vraja
damsels, my Svāminī Śrī Rādhā, cue me with Her glance
and I will fetch Her the prize deer as Your beloved
Madhumaṅgala and other sakhās look on?”



“What kind of gambling match is this?”



The reply is, “A gambling match in which tension has
been mounting as Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa vie against each
other to win.”




Verse 56


                              52
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017



kiṁ bhaviṣyati śubhaḥ sa vāsaro

yatra devi nayanāñcalena mām

garvitaṁ vihasituṁ niyokṣyase

dyūta-saṁsadi vijitya mādhavam



O Devī Śrī Rādhikā, when will that auspicious day be
mine when You defeat Śrī Mādhava in the gambling arena
attended by Your friends and signal me with Your eyes to
mock that arrogant Śrī Mādhava?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Devī Śrī Rādhā, O Svāminī, will that blessed day ever
come when triumphing over Mādhava at gambling – that
Mādhava who is so proud of the strength of His arms –
You will signal me to mock Him?” One may ask, “How will
you make fun of Him?” Śrī Rūpa answers, “I will say to
Him, ‘Where has Your pride gone now? With physical
strength You have killed the demons and are so smug. But
a game of dice requires intelligence, not brute force.’
In this way I will ridicule Him.”




Verse 57



kiṁ janasya bhavitāsya tad-dinaṁ

yatra nātha muhur enam ādṛtaḥ

tvaṁ vrajeśvara-vayasya-nandinī-

māna-bhaṅga-vidhim arthayiṣyase



O my Master Śrī Kṛṣṇa, will the day ever be mine when
You approach me with great respect, begging me to
appease the anger of Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrī Rādhā and
break Her resolve not to see You?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya


                              53
Utkalika-vallari.txt                             5/5/2017



“O Master Śrī Kṛṣṇa, will such a day ever come when with
great honor You entreat this maidservant to break the
fierce māna of Vṛṣabhānu’s daughter, sulky Śrī Rādhā?
‘He sundarī, O beautiful girl, you are so friendly and
have many other good qualities. Now you are my only
refuge and well-wisher. Because you are always engaged
in Śrī Rādhā’s personal service, She is very much
attached to you, so She will surely listen to you.’ In
this way You will earnestly implore me.”




Verse 58



tvad-ādeśyaṁ śārī-kathitam aham ākarṇya mudito

vasāmi tvat-kuṇḍopari sakhi vilambas tava katham

itīdaṁ śrīdāma-svasari mama sandeśa-kusumaṁ

hareti tvaṁ dāmodara janam amuṁ notsyasi kadā



O Dāmodara, becoming anxious that Śrī Rādhikā is late,
You will relate to me a message for Her: “ ‘O Śrī Rādhā,
I was overjoyed to receive Your instruction from Your
female parrot and accordingly I am waiting for You at
the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. O Śrī Rādhā, why are You taking
so long to reach here?’ Deliver this flower-like message
to Śrīdāma’s sister, Śrī Rādhā.” Speaking to me thus,
You will dispatch me to Your beloved.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“ ‘Take the flower of my message to Śrīdāma’s sister,
Śrī Rādhā.’ O Dāmodara, with these words when will You
send this maidservant to Rādhājī?” What sort of message
is it? The verse conveys the answer clearly.




Verse 59



śaṭho ’yaṁ nāvekṣyaḥ punar iha mayā māna-dhanayā

viśantaṁ strī-veśaṁ subala-suhṛdaṁ vāraya girā


                              54
Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017

idaṁ te sākūtaṁ vacanam avadhāryocchalita-dhīś

chalāṭopair gopa-pravaram avarotsyāmī kim aham



O Śrī Rādhikā, in a sulky mood You will say, “I never
want to see the face of that philanderer again! Subala’s
friend Kṛṣṇa is on His way to My kuñja disguised as a
woman. Keep Him out.” Understanding Your intention, when
will I stop Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the best of the gopas, and
shrewdly and haughtily prevent Him from entering?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Svāminī Śrī Rādhikā, understanding Your intention
will I, with blossoming intelligence, be able to
boisterously outsmart and stop Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the crown
jewel of the gopas?” The question is, “What is Śrī Rādhā
saying?” The reply is, “In the verse śaṭho ’yaṁ. . . Śrī
Rādhā is saying, ‘Kṛṣṇa is a scoundrel – to our faces He
is affectionate and speaks flattering words, but behind
our backs He behaves otherwise. My only wealth is My
māna. He is not worthy of My even looking at Him. Just
see, to meet with Me, Subala’s friend is entering My
retreat dressed as a girl. Find some ploy to stop Him.
It seems that Śrī Kṛṣṇa has learned this art of dressing
up as a woman from Subala, whose habit it is to deceive
our elders thus.’



“After entering the kuñja Śrī Kṛṣṇa will hear Your dry
words and, feeling rejected, will give up His deceptive
behavior. Not seeing any other way, He will repeatedly
petition me. Apprehending Your intentions, I will tell
Him, ‘Previously, You also dressed as a woman, Mohinī,
to bewilder the demons, but there is no demon here. So
why have You come? Besides, Your mother is calling for
You to quickly go home. The clever gopīs who are seated
on either side of my Svāminī will also see right through
Your disguise and recognize You. You have no chance of
sneaking in. Sir, meditate on Your hypocritical nature
and return home.’ When will I proudly speak such cunning
words?”




Verse 60



agha-hara balīvardaḥ preyān navas tava yo vraje

vṛṣabha-vapuṣā daityenāsau balād abhiyujyate


                              55
Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017

itī kila mṛṣā gīrbhiś candrāvalī-nilaya-sthitaṁ

vana-bhuvi kadā neṣyāmī tvāṁ mukunda mad-īśvarīm



“O Aghanāśaka, O killer of Aghāsura, a bull-demon has
entered Vṛndāvana and is brutally attacking Your
favorite young bull. Come quickly and stop him!” O
Mukunda, when will I speak this falsehood and,
extracting You from Candrāvalī’s kuñja, escort You to my
Mistress Śrī Rādhikā?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Mukunda, when, with an outright lie, will I pull You
out from Candrāvalī’s haven and accompany You to my
Mistress Śrī Rādhikā in the forest?” The question is,
“What lie?” The answer is, “O Aghahara, Your new pet
bull is being violently attacked by a bull-demon.”
“Actually, I do not like to lie, but if You accept me,
then for Your happiness I will agree to modify the
truth.”




Verse 61



nigiratī jagad uccaiḥ sūci-bhedye tamisre

bhramara-ruci-nicolenāṅgam āvṛtya dīpram

parihṛta-maṇi-kāñcī-nūpurāyāḥ kadāhaṁ

tava navam abhisāraṁ kārayiṣyāmi devi



O Devī Śrī Rādhikā, when, after removing Your jeweled
belt and ankle-bells and covering Your radiant
lightning-like form with a mantle, dark as black bees,
will I take You for a new nocturnal rendezvous through
the dense darkness now enveloping the world?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“ ‘O Devī, when, the world cloaked in darkness, will I
cover Your body, effulgent like a bolt of lightning,

                              56
Utkalika-vallari.txt                            5/5/2017

with a wrap black as bees and take You for a new
abhisāra?’ The query arises, ‘What will I do before I
take You?’ The reply is, ‘I will remove Your belt and
ankle-bells for fear of their tinkling.’ ” The Amara-
koṣa (2.6.116) states that nicola and pracchadapaṭa both
mean ‘shawl.’




Verse 62



āsye devyāḥ katham api mudā nyastam āsyāt tvayeśa

kṣiptaṁ parṇe praṇaya-janitād devī vāmyāt tvayāgre

ākūtajñas tad ati-nibhṛtaṁ carvitaṁ kharvitāṅgas

tāmbūlīyaṁ rasayati janaḥ phulla-romā kadāyam



O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, possessor of my life, You will take the
tāmbūla from Your mouth and push it into Śrī Rādhikā’s.
O Devī Śrī Rādhikā, with loving anger You will rebuke
Him saying, “I will not accept anything from Your
mouth.” Expressing great disdain, You will spit the
chewed betel onto a leaf right in front of Kṛṣṇa.
Knowing Your intent, I will lean over and discreetly pop
that chewed betel into my mouth. As I feel intense
appreciation, my hairs rise up in ecstasy. When, oh
when, will this day come?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O my Owners, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa, when will I slyly
relish Your chewed pāna?” One might ask, “What is this
maidservant doing?” The reply is, “She is demurely
crouched by the side of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is
thinking, ‘This dāsī, a favored recipient of Our mercy,
should relish Our praṣāda pāna.’ Reading Her mistress’
mind, Śrī Rūpa guardedly takes that mahā-praṣāda betel,
and as she relishes it with deep appreciation, her hairs
bristle in elation.” One might further inquire, “What
has happened to this chewed pāna?” The reply is, “O
Vrajanātha, taking it from Your mouth You have succeeded
in affectionately pushing it into Śrī Rādhā’s mouth.
And, O Devī Śrī Rādhā, as You say to Kṛṣṇa, ‘I will not
take Your remnants,’ You display a contrary mood and
spit out that pāna onto a leaf.”




                              57
Utkalika-vallari.txt                            5/5/2017

Verse 63



parasparam apaśyatoḥ praṇaya-māninor vāṁ kadā

dhṛtotkalikayor api svam abhirakṣator āgraham

dvayoḥ smitam udañcaye nudasi kiṁ mukundāmunā

dṛg-anta-naṭanena mām uparamety alīkoktibhiḥ



O my Lord and my Lady, when You are both sulking in
anger, You are very anxious to meet, but each of You
obstinately maintains Your position, refusing to see
each other. “O Kṛṣṇa, why are You repeatedly signaling
me with Your eyes? Don’t do that, because māninī
svāminī, my sulky Mistress Śrī Rādhā, is not going to
entertain Your plea.” With this white lie, when will I
make You both laugh?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“ ‘O Master and Mistress, when will I make You both
laugh?’ One might ask how the two of You are feeling.
The reply is, ‘Both of You are sulking for no reason.
You are eager to see each other, but still You refuse to
look at each other because You are both clinging to Your
pride.’ Another question might arise, ‘How will you make
Us laugh?’ The answer is, ‘O Mukunda, why are You trying
to beckon me with Your dancing eyes? This māninī Śrī
Rādhā is not going to hear Your petition. Hence, give
rest to Your endeavors.’ In this way, when will I make
You both laugh with these deceptive words?



“Each of Them will interpret my speech differently. Śrī
Svāminī, relishing these words, will smile, thinking
that Śrī Hari has given up His māna. Otherwise why is
Her maidservant saying this? Concluding that Śrī Hari
has surrendered His māna first, She is smiling, knowing
that She is the victor. On the other hand, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
believes, ‘She has sent Her sakhī to Me. This is a clear
indication that Śrī Rādhā has given up Her māna before
Me.’ Śrī Svāmī will see Himself as victorious, and thus
His face will blossom with a smile.”




Verse 64




                              58
Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017

kadāpy avasaraḥ sa me kim u bhaviṣyati svāminau

jano ’yam anurāgataḥ pṛthuni yatra kuñjodare

tvayā saha tavālike vividha-varṇa-gandha-dravaiś

ciraṁ viracayiṣyati prakaṭa-patra-vallī-śriyam



O Prince and Princess, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rādhā, will
that fortunate moment ever be mine when I beautify You
by painting designs on Your foreheads with colorful and
fragrant pigments in the nikuñja?




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O Svāminī Śrī Rādhā, O Svāmin Śrī Mādhava, will I ever
get that opportunity?” According to the Viṣva-locana,
the word avasara means matta, prastāva and

varṣa – occasion. According to the Hema-koṣa, avasara
has two meanings: varṣa and kṣaṇa – moment. “O Svāminī,
O my Mistress, when will this maidservant use colorful
and fragrant dyes to paint artistic designs on Your
shining forehead and on Svāmī’s also?” Tvayā saha tava
means ‘both of Them.’ The meaning can also be taken in
two other ways: ‘O Svāminī, You with Your Master,’ or ‘O
Svāmī, You with Your Mistress.’ Vividha-varṇa means that
different pigments – yellow, blue, red and white – are
mixed with perfume and made into pastes.




Verse 65



idaṁ sevā-bhāgyaṁ bhavati sulabhaṁ yena yuvayoś

chaṭāpy asya premṇaḥ sphurati na hi suptāv api mama

padārthe ’smin yuṣmad-vrajam anunivāsena janitas

tathāpy āśā-bandhaḥ parivṛdha-varau māṁ draḍhayati



(“Though I am not worthy even to beg for such services,
still, as I have been given residence in Vraja, a hope
has arisen within me that I will attain that service.”
Thus, she prays:)



O my Lord and Lady, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rādhā, the wealth

                              59
Utkalika-vallari.txt                              5/5/2017

of prema that bestows the good fortune of readily
attaining Your sevā has not yet risen in my heart. Not
even in my dreams have I experienced it. Yet because I
am living permanently in this Vṛndāvana, where You
perform Your eternal līlās, my hope is strong and ever
increasing.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O best of Masters, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, the prema that
gives the good fortune of easily attaining Your sevā has
never even flashed in my dreams.” One might surmise, “In
that case you must be quite discouraged.” The reply is,
“That splendor of prema does not manifest even in my
dreams, but still, because I am living in Vraja, the
abode of Your pastimes, the hope of receiving the good
fortune of this sevā grows stronger.” In the Halāyudha-
koṣa the words ārya, parivṛdha, svāmī, prabhu, netā and
nāyaka are synonyms meaning ‘master.’




Verse 66



papadya bhavadīyatāṁ kalita-nirmala-premabhir

mahadbhir api kāmyate kim api yatra tārṇaṁ januḥ

kṛtātra ku-janer api vraja-vane sthitir me yayā

kṛpāṁ kṛpaṇa-gāminīṁ sadasi naumi tām eva vām



(“I have reached the conclusion that my residing in
Vraja has only been made possible by Your mercy, and
thus the fortune of serving You directly will be
possible by the same means – Your grace.” Expressing
these sentiments, Śrī Rūpa says:)



O possessors of my life, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rādhikā, I
continually offer obeisances to Your mercy, which,
because it is always directed to the most fallen, has
given me the good fortune of living in Śrī Vṛndāvana,
where the great premī devotees like Śrī Uddhava, in a
mood of servitorship, desire to take birth as a blade of
grass or a bush.




                              60
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



Great personalities like Śrī Uddhava, who are filled
with spotless love and who have already attained the
position of servants, also desire birth in Śrī Vṛndāvana
– even as grass or a creeper, bush or herb. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.47.61) Śrī Uddhava has said, “It is very
hard to renounce one’s family members and social
obligations, but in order to serve Śrī Govinda with
spontaneous and full-hearted commitment, all the gopīs
have indeed done this. Will I ever attain the dust of
their lotus feet? I am very eager for this, but that
dust, served by all the bushes, creepers and herbs in
Vṛndāvana, is very rare. Oh, how I wish that I could
take birth as one of those plants!”



“I bow down again and again to Your mercy, by whose
influence I, who am lowborn, have been brought to
Vṛndāvana.” The question is, “How does that mercy act?”
The answer is, “It flows towards the fallen.” According
to the Amara-koṣa (1.5.29) januḥ, jananam, janma, janiḥ,
utpatti and udbhavaḥ all share the same meaning – birth.




Verse 67



mādhavyā madhurāṅga kānana-pada-prāptādhirājya-śriyā

vṛndāraṇya-vikāsī-saurabha-tate tāpiñ ca-kalpa-druma

nottāpaṁ jagad eva yasya bhajate kīrtī-cchaṭā-cchāyayā

citrā tasya tavāṅghri-sannidhi-juṣāṁ kiṁ vā phalāptir
nṛṇām



(This verse and the next are spoken with the conviction,
or strength, one develops when one attains full
consciousness and feelings of intimacy by the influence
of bhakti.)



O tamāla tree, you are the desire tree of Vṛndāvana. The
presiding goddess of the forest kingdom, taking the form
of a mādhavī vine, has entwined herself around you, from
your base to your top, and thus your every branch and
twig has become most captivating. Your combined
fragrance permeates the whole of Vṛndāvana. The living
entities of this world who seek refuge in the shade of
your glories and greatness, are relieved of their
sufferings. Just by taking shelter of you one is certain
to obtain some wondrous fruit. Is there anything
surprising in this?

                              61
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O tamāla tree, as you are embraced by a mādhavī vine
from your roots to your crown, your trunk and branches
are looking most charming.” The question is, “What type
of mādhavī vine is this?” The reply is, “In the forest
kingdom she is the imperial hostess.”



“O tamāla, god of the forest, your fragrance, mingling
with that of the mādhavī vine, spreads throughout
Vṛndāvana. Your glories are so vast that their shadow
shelters the entire world, relieving all beings of their
afflictions. Is it any surprise that one who takes
shelter under your branches will attain wonderful
fruits? No, there is nothing unusual about this.”



When one object is praised by comparison with another,
such praise or extolment is called aprastuta-praśaṅsā,
which means ‘a figure of speech using an implied or
indirect expression.’ There are five classes of these
metaphoric figures of speech: (1) a general class of
something is used to illustrate a specific class; (2) an
implied quality is used to illustrate a stated generic
character; (3) an implied action is used to illustrate
the nature of a stated cause; (4) an implied cause is
used to illustrate a stated action; and (5) an implied
object is used to illustrate a stated object.



Here, in this verse, the fifth type of implied or
indirect expression (aprastuta-praśaṅsā), ‘an implied
object used to illustrate a stated object,’ is employed.
Also in this verse, a pun (śleṣa)[v]5, or play on words,
is employed in the case of chāyā, as it is understood to
mean ‘the shade of your glories.’ Because mādhavyā has
more than one meaning, chāyā is used as a form of
double-entendre.[vi]6




Verse 68



tval-līlā-madhu-kulyayollasitayā kṛṣṇāmbudasyāmṛtaiḥ

śrī-vṛndāvana-kalpa-valli paritaḥ saurabhya-visphārayā

mādhuryeṇa samastam eva pṛthunā brahmāṇḍam āpyāyitaṁ


                              62
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

nāścaryaṁ bhuvī labdha-pāda-rajasāṁ parvonnatir vīrudhām



O desire-vine of Śrī Vṛndāvana, when you blossom with
the nectar raining from the dark cloud, the fragrance
flowing from your honeyed pastimes permeates everywhere,
satisfying the whole atmosphere with sweetness. Hence,
the creepers serving the dust of your lotus feet are
especially glorious. What is surprising in this?



Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



“O desire-vine of Śrī Vṛndāvana, the profuse honey
flowing from your pastimes has thoroughly gratified the
entire universe with sweetness. Parva (limbs, or
creepers) has two meanings: granthi (winding) and utsava
(festival). These two are increasing and becoming more
glorious. Labdhā means the creepers attain the dust of
your lotus feet by taking shelter there. Hence it
implies that by attaining your foot-dust the vines’
relationship with you grows and their joy increases. Is
there anything surprising about this?”



“From where is the honey flowing?” The reply is, “From
kṛṣṇambuda, meaning the black clouds bursting with
ambrosial water.” In other words, the nectarean cloud,
Śrī Hari, overflows with the sweetness of His pastimes.
Here, in this verse also, the fifth type of implied, or
indirect, expression (aprastuta-praśaṅsā) is used.[vii]7



It is to be noted that according to some other com-
mentators, verse 67 uses the first type of metaphoric
speech under the cover of rūpaka alaṅkāra[viii]8 and the
present verse employs the same first type of metaphoric
speech under the cover of śleṣa, or double-entendre. Use
of a word having double meaning is the first type of
embellishment, or metaphor (atiśayokti)[ix]9. This
should be carefully deliberated upon.




Verse 69



paśupāla-vareṇya-nandanau

varam etaṁ muhur arthaye yuvām

bhavatu praṇayo bhave bhave

bhavator eva padāmbujeṣu me


                              63
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017



(Acknowledging that the fortune of service for which she
was praying is very rare, now Śrī Rūpa simply prays for
bhakti to Their lotus feet wherever she may take birth.)



O prince of Vraja and daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, I
am praying to You again and again that I may have love
for Your lotus feet life after life.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



This address, paśupāla-vareṇya-nandanau, the son and
daughter of the two best cowherders, refers to Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Bhave bhave means ‘birth after birth.’ The
other phrases are clear.




Verse 70



udgīrṇābhūd utkalikā-vallarir agre

vṛndāṭavyāṁ nitya-vilāsa-vratayor vām

vāṅ-mātreṇa vyāharato ’py ullalam etām

ākarṇyeśau kāmita-siddhiṁ kurutaṁ me



(Having recited this prayer she is now praying to attain
her desired object.)



O possessors of my life, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rādhā, You
are eternally absorbed in amorous enjoyment! This vine
of longings, this Utkalikā-vallarī, has sprouted up in
front of You here in Vṛndāvana. I tremble as I recite
it. After You hear my heartfelt request, be gracious to
this lowly person – answer my prayers and give me the
service for which I have been so deeply yearning.




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya




                              64
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017

“O God and Goddess, this Utkalikā-vallarī has mani-
fested before You.” According to the Dhanañjaya-koṣa the
words vratati, vallarī and latā have the same

meaning – creeper. “I am trembling simply from reciting
this Utkalikā-vallarī; I cannot imagine what would
happen if I deeply meditated on it. Therefore, the two
of You should bestow the desired perfection upon anyone
who reads this.” The question is, “By doing what?” The
reply is, “Ākarṇya, by hearing this prayer.” “What are
the two of You doing?” The reply is, “You are eternally
enjoying in Vṛndāvana.”




Verse 71



candrāśva-bhuvane śāke

pauṣe gokula-vāsinā

iyam utkalikā-pūrvā

vallarī nirmitā māyā



(Now Śrī Rūpa states the place and time of the birth, or
composition, of this prayer.)



In 1471 Śakābda (1549 A.D.) in the month of Pauṣa
(December-January) residing in Śrī Gokula (Vṛndāvana), I
have composed this unparalleled Utkalikā-vallarī.



Thus ends the translation of Utkalikā-vallarī, a part of



Stava-mālā,



written by Śrīmad Rūpa Gosvāmī




Stava-mālā-vibhūṣaṇa-bhāṣya



This eulogy was written in 1471 Śakābda (1549 A.D.) and
the commentary was written in 1686 Śakābda (1608 A.D.).



                              65
Utkalika-vallari.txt                            5/5/2017


This commentary on Utkalikā-vallarī, which contains
highly exalted moods and sweet poetry, was written by
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa. The moods of this poem are an
eternal wealth for the bhāvuka devotees, who are
proficient in the esoteric moods of love.



Thus ends the commentary on Utkalikā-vallarī.




* * *



[i] 1 Editor’s note: This is an explanation of why the
verb indicates that both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are
simultaneously shooting water at each other, and not
only Rādhā, which would be what is usually indicated by
a suffix in the feminine gender.




[ii] According to the Siddhānta-kaumudī in some
instances the description of one object automatically
implies the existence or completion of another.



[iii] Danuja-damana – destroyer of the demons who are
the sons of Dakṣa’s daughter Danu.



[iv] Editor’s note: Out of the four meanings agrabhāga,
or front, has been used here.



[v] Śleṣa – an equivocal phrase with double meaning.



[vi] Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as the tamāla tree, becomes much more
beautiful when He is embraced by Śrī Rādhā, the mādhavī
creeper. Rādhā’s prema nourishes Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness. The
fragrance of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda perfumes the whole of
Vṛndāvana. When one takes shelter of its

renowned shadow, all sufferings are allayed. By finding
refuge at its feet one gets the fruit of service. What
is so surprising about this? The divine rasika poet
Śrīpad Rūpa Gosvāmī is praying to Vṛndāvana’s desire-
tree – which is actually his most beloved adolescent
tamāla Śrī Govinda and mādhavī Śrī Rādhā – to mercifully
bestow his most desired goal.



                           66
Utkalika-vallari.txt                           5/5/2017


[vii] The glories of Śrī Rādhikā (the stated object) are
expressed through Vṛndāvana’s desire-fulfilling creepers
(the indirect object). The cloud, the Prince of Vraja
Śrī Śyāmasundara, is raining nectarean pastimes
overflowing with Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrī Rādhikā’s sweetness,
which fills the whole universe with satisfaction.
Alternatively, the maidservant who takes shelter of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s lotus feet surely attains the festival
of service to the Divine Couple.



[viii] rūpaka alaṅkāra – the identification, or
closeness, of the object of comparison to that with
which it is compared.



[ix] By using the words for the object of comparison,
the subject of comparison is automatically understood.




Table of Contents

Introduction

Verses

Verse 1

Verse 2

Verse 3

Verse 4

Verse 5

Verse 6

Verse 7

Verse 8

Verse 9

Verse 10

Verse 11

Verse 12

Verse 13

Verse 14

Verse 15

Verse 16


                           67
Utkalika-vallari.txt        5/5/2017

Verse 17

Verse 18

Verse 19

Verse 20

Verse 21

Verse 22

Verse 23

Verse 24

Verse 25

Verse 26

Verse 27

Verse 28

Verse 29

Verse 30

Verse 32

Verse 34

Verse 36

Verse 38

Verse 40

Verse 42

Verse 44

Verse 46

Verse 48

Verse 50

Verse 52

Verse 54

Verse 56

Verse 58

Verse 60

Verse 62

Verse 64

Verse 66


                       68
Utkalika-vallari.txt        5/5/2017




Table of Contents

Introduction

Verses

Verse 1

Verse 2

Verse 3

Verse 4

Verse 5

Verse 6

Verse 7

Verse 8

Verse 9

Verse 10

Verse 11

Verse 12

Verse 13

Verse 14

Verse 15

Verse 16

Verse 17

Verse 18

Verse 19

Verse 20

Verse 21

Verse 22

Verse 23

Verse 24

Verse 25

Verse 26

Verse 27


                       69
Utkalika-vallari.txt        5/5/2017

Verse 28

Verse 29

Verse 30

Verse 32

Verse 34

Verse 36

Verse 38

Verse 40

Verse 42

Verse 44

Verse 46

Verse 48

Verse 50

Verse 52

Verse 54

Verse 56

Verse 58

Verse 60

Verse 62

Verse 64

Verse 66




                       70
