Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ




Walking with a Saint



* * *




Morning Walks and Conversations

2007




Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




© 2014 Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights
Reserved.



To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/

Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

Digital Edition:



ePub: ISBN 978-1-63316-005-7

Kindle: ISBN 978-1-63316-025-5

Printed Edition:

ISBN 978-1-935428-61-9

First Edition: January 2013 (3,000 copies)

The photographers hold the copyright for their photos.
The photos in this book can only be used with their
permission.

Verse translations and quotes that are marked with an
asterisk (*) are by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja ©
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International. All other verse
translations and quotes are by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta

                           1
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

CONTRIBUTORS



There were many contributors to the completion of
Walking with a Saint: Morning Walks and Conversations
2007 in the form of transcribers, translators, editors,
designers, proofreaders, typists, and typesetters. Their
names are listed here: Śrīpāda B. V. Bhāgavata Mahārāja
(laghu), Śrīpāda B. V. Mādhava Mahārāja, Śrīpāda B. V.
Tīrtha Mahārāja, Ānitā dāsī, Bhadrā dāsī, Brajanāth
dāsa, Caitanya-candra dāsa, Dāmodara dāsa, Govinda-priyā
dāsī, Jāhnavā dāsī, Jānakī dāsī, Kṛṣṇa-kāminī dāsī,
Kumudinī dāsī, Lalita-kiśorī dāsī, Madana-mohinī dāsī,
Mañjarī dāsī, Rādhikā dāsī, Sītā dāsī, Sudevī dāsī,
Sulatā dāsī, Śyāmarāṇī dāsī, Trilokanātha dāsa,
Vaijayantī-mālā dāsī, Vāsantī dāsī, Vinoda-vāṇī dāsī,
and Viṣṇurāta dāsa.

Special thanks to Īśa dāsa (of purebhakti.tv) and
Madhuvrata dāsa for providing most of the sound-files.
Thanks to the many devotees who participated in the
walks and darśanas, and to those who helped with filling
in names when we couldn’t recognize voices.

Graphic and cover design by Anupama dāsa

Cover photo by Vāsantī dāsī

eBook encoding by Sanātana dāsa

Other photos by Ānitā dāsī, James Northey, Kṛṣṇamayī
dāsī, Sulatā dāsī, Vāsantī dāsī, Vṛndāvana dāsa and
Yajñeśa dāsa




Contents


Foreword

Editors’ Preface

Hilo, Hawaii

January 1 – darśana

Kona, Hawaii

January (undated) – morning walk excerpt

January 14 – darśana

January 19 – darśana

North Shore, Hawaii

January 2 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.17.27)


                              2
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

January (undated) – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse
3)

January (undated) – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse
4)

January (undated) – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse
5)

January (undated) śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 6)

January (undated) – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse
7)

January (undated) – śloka class(Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse
9)

January (undated) – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse
11)

January (undated) – śloka class (Teachings of Prahlāda
Mahārāja)

January (undated) – śloka class (Teachings of Prahlāda
Mahārāja)

January (undated) – śloka class Teachings of Prahlāda
Mahārāja)

January (undated) – śloka class (Teachings of Prahlāda
Mahārāja)

January (undated) śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.6.4
and 6.11.24)

January 27 – darśana

January 28 – darśana

January 30 – darśana (Appearance Day of Nityānanda
Prabhu)

January 31 – morning darśana

January 31 – evening darśana

February 2 – śloka class (Śrī Caitanya-Caritāmṛta,
Madhya-līlā 20.117)

Navadvīpa

March (undated) – darśana

Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

April 17 – darśana

April 19 – airport darśana

Los Angeles, California

May 18 – airport darśana

Houston, Texas

                             3
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017


May 23 – darśana

May 23 – radio interview

June 3 – copyright darśana

June 5 – darśana

June 8 – airport darśana

San Francisco, California

June 13 – darśana (after the walk)

June 14 – darśana (after the walk)

June 16 – morning walk

June 16 – darśana (after the walk)

June 17 – morning walk

June 17 – darśana (after the walk)

June 18 – morning walk

Badger, California

June 20 – morning walk

June 21 – morning walk

June 22 – morning walk

June 23 – morning walk

June 24 – morning walk

Frielendorf, Germany

July 9 – morning walk

July 10 – morning walk

July 11 – before the walk

July 11 – morning walk

July 11 – darśana (after the walk)

July 11 – darśana

July 12 – morning walk

July 13 – morning walk

New Delhi, India

September 30 – darśana

Jammu, India

October 3 – radio interview (hindi to english

                             4
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

translation)

Vṛndāvana, India

October 7 – Lithuanian darśana

October 29 – darśana

Govardhana, India

November 18 – darśana

November 23 – darśana

November (undated) – morning walk

Bangalore, India

December (undated) – darśana

About the Author

Booklist

Our Websites




Foreword


Walking With a Saint 2007 is the third published volume
in the series of conversations between Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja and his numerous
disciples and followers. These conversations were
recorded during his daily morning walks, which took
place throughout the several years of his widespread
world preaching tours, and some of the conversations in
many of his darśanas are also included here. Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja is a globally acclaimed
scholar and saint, and is also recognized as an eternal
associate of the Supreme Absolute Truth Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

The respected reader is cordially invited to join him
during these conversations, to truely benefit from the
deep wisdom and compassion that emanate from the heart
of this great living saint and that are articulated by
his potent words.

Western readers may be familiar with Śrīla A. C.
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, who is renowned as Śrīla
Prabhupāda and who is famous for having introduced and
spread the glorious teachings of pure theistic thought
in the Western world. In the same lineage and tradition,
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja has continued to
promulgate this message of Kṛṣṇa Consciousness across
the world. It is by the potency of such great stalwart
God-realized personalities that divine knowledge is
disseminated.

The ancient Vedic literatures have given humanity access

                           5
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

and a glimpse of the divine world or supramundane plane
since time immemorial. In essence, they emphasize the
enormous importance of the association and guidance of
saintly persons for the spiritual seeker’s ultimate
success, and in many instances establish the extreme
rarity of such association.

The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is regarded as the crest
jewel of timeless Vedic authority, illustrates this
point (6.14.3–5): “O Lord, there are as many living
beings in this material world as there are grains of
sand. Only a few of these are human beings, among whom
only a few direct their efforts in search of a higher
goal. Of those who are endeavoring for a higher goal,
only a few rare individuals seek liberation from this
world, and out of thousands of such people, hardly one
is actually able to achieve yogic perfection or
liberation (mukti). Amongst millions of perfected yogīs
and liberated souls, it is difficult to find a single
peaceful, great soul who is fully dedicated to the
service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.”

The great Vaiṣṇava saint Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says
of this verse, “Such pure devotees, who are free from
all contaminations of the heart and mind, are very rare
indeed. Even among millions of liberated souls, one can
hardly find a single pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore,
no association in this world is more rare than the
association of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees.” It is in the light of
this appreciation that we ask our patient readers to
take advantage of the pages of this third volume of
walking with a Saint.

Here in the foreword we include several quotes for your
interest, which illuminate the profound nature of the
association of such saints. In thinking about writing
this foreword, which is one of the first things you, our
respected readers, will see in this book, we considered
you would be most inspired by personally hearing about
the benefits of saintly association from saints of their
own caliber.

The first glorification of such association is an
excerpt from Śrī Guru-bhakti by Śrīla Saccidānanda
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura (taken from Rays of the Harmonist,
Memorial Edition Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā, No. 23, 2011): “The
living entity who is blinded by the delusion of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s potency of illusion and bound in the widespread
network of material existence wanders here and there.
Having been captivated by the hope for happiness, he
searches for happiness in knowledge, intelligence,
wealth, honor, etc., but by no means can he make himself
happy. In this way, the living entity passes many lives.

“As a result of accruing great spiritual merit over many
births, faith in bhajana is transmitted into the living
entity’s heart. His only chance of attaining true
happiness is in bhajana, devotion to Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the living
entities, called jīvas, are His eternal servants.
Śraddhā is the very strong and determined faith that by
performing bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, all sufferings are
dispelled and one becomes situated in one’s

                           6
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

constitutional position as a servant of Kṛṣṇa. With this
faith, the jīva soon takes the shelter of the lotus feet
of a bona fide guru and attains all types of perfection,
solely by the virtue of śrī guru’s grace.

“The boundlessly merciful Vaiṣṇavas are the supreme
friends of the fallen jīvas in this world. Knowing the
jīvas to be averse to Kṛṣṇa, the Vaiṣṇavas instruct them
on bhakti-tattva, the fundamental principles of pure
devotion. When faith develops in this, the jīva takes
shelter of the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava, who now
instructs him on bhajana. Then, when the disciple
exhibits suitable qualification, having developed
single-mindedness and expertise in bhajana, śrī guru
bestows his mercy upon him by granting the power to
behold the storehouse of transcendence, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Such
is the endless mercy of the Vaiṣṇava.”

The second excerpt is called Śrī Gaura-kiśora – The
Deity of Ideal Renunciation (taken from Rays of the
Harmonist, Memorial Edition Śrī Vyāsa-pūjā, No. 23,
2011). It was spoken by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura Prabhupāda, and compiled, translated (into
Hindi) and edited by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. It
glorifies the association of great saints in this way:
“My gurupādapadma is not a teacher of any of the
illusory subjects of this world, which are aimed only at
enjoyment; at the same time, he alone is the
indisputable genius in every subject in this world.
However, because I am deprived and fallen, because of my
own weaknesses, not all of my gurupādapadma’s teachings
have entered my heart.”1

He beautifully expresses the gratitude of a fortunate
recipient of such spiritual shelter and association
thus: “In order to speak all the teachings that, by my
gurupādapadma’s mercy, have somehow entered through the
pathways of my ears, may I possess millions upon
millions of tongues, millions upon millions of heads,
and millions upon millions of years to live. Then I will
sing about the unparalleled compassion and benevolence
of my gurupādapadma throughout the unlimited universes,
with millions and millions of tongues and millions and
millions of heads for millions and millions of years.
Only then will I have truly performed guru-pūjā… On that
day I will finally be liberated from singing about
fleeting illusory matters. On that day I will be
released from the captivity of all the mundane teachings
of this world.”

He continues, “How merciful was he that he used to say
to me, ‘Your scholarship, your purity, and your
aristocracy – give it all up and come to stay with me.
You will not have to go anywhere else. Whatever you need
– a cottage, a house, a mansion, a palace – whatever
scholarship and prestige you need, or whatever degree of
self control and renunciation you wish to attain, you
will get it all by being here. Just come to me. Do not
run here and there, impelled by desires like, ‘I must
have a nice home, I must find a good means to achieve
material success, and I must become vastly learned.’ Do
not aspire to achieve what ordinary people value so
much.’


                           7
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

“Compelled by compassion, my gurupādapadma has appeared
in this world to bestow upon me, by the collyrium of
knowledge, the divine realization that I am the servant
of Nanda-nandana [Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja].
Due to my ignorance, I had come to believe that enjoying
the objects of the senses was my duty and purpose in
life. Thus I had completely lost sight of my real duty.
But śrī gurupādapadma has appeared in this world to
dispel the darkness of my ignorance.”

By his personal deep humility, Śrīla Prabhupāda
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura continues to instruct
us on the glories of taking shelter in such saintly
association. He says, “Śrī gurupādapadma removes the
veil from my eyes and grants me true sight by divine
knowledge. He pulls away the veil that covers my eyes,
slightly parts my eyelids and instructs me, ‘Open your
eyes and look.’ For so long I thought I could see with
my eyes shut.

“So I am abandoning my pride and offering namaskāra
[obeisance] to him. This indeed is the ingredient of my
worship. The act of renouncing the arrogant conception
that I am the seer and enjoyer is called namaskāra. When
I was nurturing the misconception that I am the doer,
śrī gurupādapadma opened my eyes and dismissed my
notions of reality, which were improperly conceived.
Driven by some other knowledge, I was following the
blind. Gurupādapadma made me realize that I must not
follow the blind, that I must follow he who is possessed
of divine vision, and that to worship him was my duty.”

Last but not least is this third excerpt, which further
helps us understand the mercy that awaits us in the
association and shelter of great Vaiṣṇava saints. It was
spoken by Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja
in 1936, on the occasion of the appearance day of his
guru mahārāja, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
Prabhupāda:

“While others were yet in the womb of historical
oblivion, the sages of India had developed a different
kind of civilization, which enabled them to know
themselves. They had discovered that we are not at all
material entities, but that we are all spiritual,
permanent, and indestructible servants of the Absolute.
But because we have, against our better judgment, chosen
to completely identify ourselves with this present
material existence, our sufferings have multiplied
according to the inexorable law of birth and death, with
its consequent diseases and anxieties.

“These sufferings cannot be really mitigated by any
provision of material happiness, because matter and
spirit are completely different elements. It is as if
you were to take an aquatic animal out of water and put
it on the land, supplying all manner of happiness
possible on land. The deadly sufferings of the animal
are not capable of being relieved at all until it is
taken out of its foreign environment. Spirit and matter
are completely contradictory things. All of us are
spiritual entities. We cannot have perfect happiness,
which is our birthright, however much we may meddle with
the affairs of mundane things. Perfect happiness can be

                           8
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

ours only when we are restored to our natural state of
spiritual existence. This is the distinctive message of
our ancient Indian civilization, this is the message of
the Gītā, this is the message of the Vedas and the
Purāṇas, and this is the message of all the real
ācāryas, including our present ācāryadeva in the line of
Lord Caitanya.

“Gentlemen, although it is imperfectly that we have been
enabled by his grace to understand the sublime messages
of our ācāryadeva, oṁ viṣṇupāda paramahaṁsa
parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, we must admit that we have realized
definitely that the divine message from his holy lips is
the congenial thing for suffering humanity. All of us
should hear him patiently. If we listen to the
transcendental sound without unnecessary opposition, he
will surely have mercy upon us. The ācārya’s message is
to take us back to our original home, back to God. Let
me repeat, therefore, that we should hear him patiently,
follow him in the measure of our conviction, and bow
down at his lotus feet for releasing us from our present
causeless unwillingness for serving the Absolute and all
souls.”

About This Book

Walking With a Saint 2007 gives all its readers the
sublime association with a saint of the caliber of those
glorified above. It was in 2008 that Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja first requested that his morning walks
be published in yearly installments. Since then, Walking
With a Saint 2008 and then 2009 were manifest by his
mercy.

As described above, it is the duty of śrī guru to open
the eyes of his disciples, who had previously thought
that they could see the world with their eyes shut.
Similarly, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja corrected his
disciples when they were astray in their concepts of
life, their subsequent behavior, and their need for more
precision in philosophical understanding and
presentation. As the months rolled on with the first
publication, Walking With a Saint 2008, and more and
more walks and darśanas were being edited, several of
the editors began to consider removing the names of
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s spiritual daughters
and sons who were corrected or lovingly chastised by
him, worried that those followers would be embarrassed
by public exposure. The editors wanted to express their
concerns to him personally, and one of their
representatives had the good fortune to do that in
Delhi, India, in March of 2010. Here is the
transcription:


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, during some of your morning walks and
darśanas you lovingly chastise disciples; and sometimes,
out of your compassion, you tell about the faults of
certain disciples and others to the devotees present
with you. Some of the editors are thinking that these
statements should not be in the book. They are concerned

                           9
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

that on one hand we are supposed to quote our Gurudeva,
and on the other hand we are not supposed to criticize
others. If the readers see your chastisements or
apparent criticisms in the book, they might feel
comfortable to also criticize those same persons – or
anyone else. How do we reconcile this?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What I have told, I have told. There is no need for
adjustment; nothing to ask about that. By this
chastisement, he will correct himself. I gave him this
good instruction for him as well as for others.


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

So, should we write in our Foreword to the book that the
self-realized guru has a right to chastise, but others
do not?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes.2


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Suppose a disciple is doing something wrong and you
instruct him or chastise him for his betterment, and
after that he changes for the better. Then, although he
has already changed, one or two years later people may
read the morning walk book and think, “He is doing
wrong,” or “He has done wrong.” Do we need to keep in
the name of the devotee who is being corrected or
chastised?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. I have chastised disciples for those disciples’
well-being; but others should not chastise or find
fault. They have no power to do so.


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

When you say ‘no power,’ do you mean that they have no
power to change the person or make him Kṛṣṇa conscious,
so they have no authority to criticize or chastise?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.



The best thing about this book is that everyone who
reads it feels like they are right there with the saint
in the book, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, receiving
his loving compassion on his walks and darśanas. We pray

                           10
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

that our readers excuse any errors in our presentation.

Praying for the mercy of Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇavas,

The Editorial Team

Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta

Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Maharaja’s tirobhāva-tithi,

6 January 2013


Please note that, unless otherwise referenced, all the
bracketed statements within the text, as well as all the
footnotes, have been written by the editors and are
based on the explanations of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja.




* * *




1 The nature of pure love of God is such that one who
possesses it always feels himself bereft. Such
transcendental humility was displayed by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu when He exclaimed, “Na prema-gandho ‘sti
darāpi me harau – I haven’t the slightest tinge of love
of God” (Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 2.45). All of
our rūpānuga ācāryas have expressed similar sentiments.
For example, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja uttered
these words: “Personally, I have no hope for any direct
service for the coming crores of births of the sojourn
of my life, but I am confident that some day or other I
shall be delivered from this mire of delusion in which I
am at present so deeply sunk.”

Out of compassion for the fallen souls, to encourage
them on the gradually ascending path of bhakti, the
ācārya (in this instance, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura) may sometimes use himself as an
example of one who must yet labor for perfection when
instructing those who actually do have a long way to go
to reach such perfection. In this way he inspires hope
in others and nurtures an affectionate relationship with
them.



2 Several statements by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
were included in the Foreword of Walking With a Saint
2008 regarding the danger of a conditioned soul
chastising and criticizing others, and two such
statements are included here:


“To bring a person from the clutches of the Lord’s
deluding material potency, māyā, is very, very hard. If

                           11
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

lust or any other attachment is present in that person’s
heart it will go away very soon if he is chanting,
remembering, and listening to hari-kathā. Be very
careful. Don’t criticize devotees – or non-devotees.
First look at your own condition and try to purify
yourself. Is there any lust in you? Is there any deceit
in you? Be worried for that; don’t worry for others.
Guru and Kṛṣṇa are responsible for others. You cannot do
anything to help them, so you have no right to
criticize” (Hilo, Hawaii: February 7, 2005).


“If we think of others’ bad qualities, we will have to
absorb those qualities in ourselves” (India: September
4, 2005).




Editors’ Preface


Why We Edit The Way We Do

Whenever Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja would speak during morning walks or private
darśanas like those presented in this series of books,
he would shower us with wisdom and instructions. Tens of
thousands of his disciples and followers were so
fortunate as to receive this direct guidance. As we sat
before him, listening to the tone of his voice, watching
his facial expressions – his smiles, his frowns, the
expressions of his eyes – and noting his gestures, it
was easy, for the most part, to understand his words and
grasp his intent. However, when those same words are
transcribed onto paper, the meaning is sometimes lost.

It was a dilemma. He had instructed us to publish his
classes in English. He had repeatedly told us that his
teachings should be recorded, received, and understood.
He asked, time and again, that books be made of his
morning walks and darśanas. But English was not his
mother language, and direct transcriptions of his words
did not suitably represent him. Still, how could we
edit? Editing the words of a pure Vaiṣṇava seemed like a
transgression of proper etiquette.

We discussed our quandary with him, not once or twice,
but many, many times. Śrīla Mahārāja was not only very
much aware that his words had to be edited; it was his
idea, and he gave various persons this responsibility.
He clearly understood the importance of clear
communication – the power of the written word in
broadcasting the message of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He
repeatedly directed us to edit his words so as to
clearly represent his meaning to Western readers.

Since 1997, when we first began the editing of Śrīla
Mahārāja’s classes, we asked him thousands of questions
to clarify what he meant to say. This was done in person
and by email, and he always kindly replied. We also
asked thousands of questions to his personal servant,
who, having heard Śrīla Mahārāja explain the same points

                            12
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

many, many times in Hindi and Bengali, also kindly
answered our questions, and continues to do so to the
present day.

The following are examples of the type of editing we
have done:




Sometimes we have had to substitute words or phrases.
For example, Śrīla Mahārāja told us that when he could
not think of the English equivalent to a Hindi word, he
may say “anything” or “thing.” For example, paraphrasing
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he once said, “If
I’ve told, and you have understand anything rather
thing, not proper thing, so it is my fault that I could
not make you understand. So God and śuddha-bhaktas (pure
devotees) should forgive me.” He was actually wanting to
say, “If I’ve told something, and you have understood it
in a different way, not in the proper way, then it is my
fault that I could not make you understand. May God and
the śuddha-bhaktas forgive me.”

Sometimes we have had to add the intended meaning. He
once said that before Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Prabhupāda came to America he had no personality. He
actually meant that Śrīla Prabhupāda was not a well-
known personality. When he said that the gopīs passed
through the narrow galleries of Govardhana, he meant
that they passed through the narrow alleyways. Yet
another example is when he told us that when he had
said, “The gopīs knew by Pūrṇimā and Gargācārya that
Kṛṣṇa is God, yet they never saw Him as a God,” his real
meaning was, “The gopīs heard from Pūrṇimā and
Gargācārya that Kṛṣṇa is God, but they did not believe
this. They personally never saw Him as God.” He told us,
“ ‘knew’ means ‘heard from others.’ It was not their
view.” He expected us to add the intended meaning to the
transcript.

The following is an exact transcription of an original
sound file of a conversation that took place in
Australia. This was used in walking with a Saint 2009.
It is followed by the published version. This sound file
was particularly hard to decipher, as sometimes more
than one person was speaking at the same time.


Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Some devotees are asking, “Should we forget the temple
in Murwillambah and build something at the Garden-ashram
instead?”


Brajanāth dāsa:

Mathurānātha prabhu, he has a big piece of land. You
went by boat. Remember?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                           13
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


No, no. Murwillambah is better. This place is not good.


Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Okay.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Mathurānātha.


Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Yes.


Brajanāth dāsa:

For temple.


Mahāprabhu dāsa:

For temple.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

River crossing, on the top of hill.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

The place is okay, but for…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No plane case [??] [This sentence was not clear]. No big
hall can be done.


Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Yes.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Because in rainy season none can go…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And in Murwillumbah easily all can come.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yeah.


                              14
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Brajanāth dāsa:

For festivals.


Mahāprabhu dāsa:

For festivals.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yeah.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

So better there.


Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Okay.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Suppose put a festival there and rains start. All will
get stuck and not go.


Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Yes.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

From the viewpoint of living it is ok, but for festival,
Murwillumbah better.



The edited, printed version reads:


Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Some devotees are asking if we should build something at
the Garden-ashram instead of in Murwillambah.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Mathurānātha prabhu has a big piece of land that you
went by boat to see.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, no. Murwillambah is better. Mathurānātha’s Garden-
ashram is not a good location for a temple. Devotees
have to cross a river and climb a hill. And they can’t

                            15
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

build a big hall there. Murwillambah is easily
accessible to all, so it is a better location.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

As a residence, the Garden-ashram is okay, but
Murwillambah is better for festivals. In the rainy
season no one can access Garden-ashram.



These examples demonstrate some of the difficulties we
have faced in editing Śrīla Mahārāja’s speech. Such
extensive editing as we did in the above conversation is
not common; it is rare, but still, it is sometimes done.
During the manifest presence of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, this editing was done under his order and
direction. On many occasions he clearly let us know it
pleased him that his words would be presented in this
way. Now, we are still following the instructions he
gave us, in the hope that again he will be pleased.

In this regard, we take shelter of the wisdom of the
venerable Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, in a darśana given in March, 1978. (Only the
punctuation was edited by us.)


Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja:

Our gurudeva, he dictated in English some instructions
once, but little faulty from the standpoint of correct
English. Then our one professor Bhaal, disciple, he told
that [it is the] dictionary [that] should be corrected.
What Gurudeva says, it is alright.


Assembly:

[Laughter] Jaya.


Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja:

Do you follow? “Grammar and dictionary should be
corrected, but what guru says it is alright.” Then
another, little higher, position disciple, he told that
that is the lowest class disciples’ statement. The
higher class disciple will see that what guru wants from
him, what sort of service he wants; that correct English
should go to establish his position to the public. So
when it comes to the śiṣya (disciple), it will adjust.

Suppose your gurudeva, when you are going to take his
photo, in ordinary dress he comes before the photo
maker. But the śiṣya will, “No, no. You should stand in
this posture; with this dress you must take the photo.”
Do you follow?


Assembly:

Yes.

                            16
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja:

Very clear, very clear.


Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja:

So, in language also, gurudeva gives the main point, but
the language, if it is a little faulty, faulty to the
public, the śiṣya will come: “No, this should be couched
in good language.” That is not harmful. Do you follow?


Assembly:

Yes.


Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja:

So, in Sanskrit, what your Guru Mahārāja has told, “Namo
sārasvatā,” small these things, you say. I can’t follow
whether it is correct grammatically, but it will be your
duty, according to my opinion, to couch it well with the
language. And that will be the greatest service, service
of higher quality. And to say that “Dictionary should be
corrected and the grammer should be corrected, what my
guru has said.” But practically, that will be kaniṣṭha-
adhikārī service; the lower śiṣya, the lower status
service....To explain his prestige and position, you
will dress him in good dress.



In addition, we may omit certain portions of the sound
files for the following reasons:

A discussion is going on with Śrīla Mahārāja’s devotees
but with no audible participation on his part. He may
have been nodding “yes” or shaking his head “no,” but
because he was not speaking, we could not reference his
words. Somebody might have asked a question and somebody
else might have answered it, but if Śrīla Mahārāja did
not give his audible input, we did not include those
devotees’ conversations.

If somebody asked Śrīla Mahārāja a question and somebody
else rephrased that question to him, we may not include
this rephrasing.

Sometimes, after Śrīla Mahārāja said something, someone
else might repeat some part of that. Mostly, we did not
include this repetition.

If somebody asked Śrīla Mahārāja a question and there
was no audible answer, then we did not include that
person’s question.

When Śrīla Mahārāja engaged in friendly conversation
with someone, everyone within hearing and seeing range
could feel something of the transcendental love of God
emanating from his being. They were overwhelmed by his

                           17
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

friendliness, care, concern, and compassion, and they
received spiritual benefit from his mere presence. In
spite of the obvious transcendental value of these
darśanas to those present, if the conversations were not
instructive philosophically or practically, we may omit
them.



We readily admit our own imperfections in the matter of
hearing and editing the transcendental words of our
beloved Gurudeva, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. We
pray to our respected readers to forgive any errors made
in transcribing, editing, and in the overall
presentation, and invite you to communicate your
findings and corrections to us. We encourage you all to
visit the magnificent archive of sound and video
recordings of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja. (See www.purebhakti.tv for free downloading
and online hearing, or www.purebhakti.com/gvp for
submitting correction suggestions.)

Finally, we would be remiss if we did not take this
opportunity to give our profound thanks to Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s servant,
Śrīpāda Bhaktivedānta Mādhava Mahārāja, and Śrīla
Mahārāja’s secretary, Śrīpāda Brajanāth prabhu, for
their graciousness in facilitating, since the beginning,
all of our editorial questions.

Praying for the mercy of

Śrī Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇavas,

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī and the Editorial Team,

Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta

Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Maharaja’s tirobhāva-tithi,

6 January 2013




January 1, 2007


darśana

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I wish you all a happy New Year. The New Year we are now
celebrating is in accordance with Western calculation.
Most people celebrate it in relation to their physical
body and mind, because those in the Western world are
very concerned about their physical health and mental
well-being – not more than that. Very few persons in the
Western world know about the soul. They don’t even know
where they will go after death. They work at jobs, but
they don’t know of their goal after retirement, and they
become crazy.


                           18
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

We have to celebrate the New Year in such a way that our
devotion will increase day by day. We have to know that
we are not this gross or subtle body; we are not our
mind, ego, and intelligence. We are beyond all these
things. We are spirit souls, part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord. Let us leave whatever material
consideration was with us last year, and start anew this
year. Our devotion must increase.

The question may arise: “If my devotion must increase,
how will I maintain my life?” For maintaining your life,
you can continue what you are doing. Whether you want to
or not, you must perform some karma.

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna in the Bhagavad-gītā
(3.5):


na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api

jātu tiṣṭhaty akarma-kṛt

kāryate hy avaśaḥ karma

sarvaḥ prakṛti-jair guṇaiḥ


[No one can remain inactive, not even for a moment.
Everyone is impelled to act under the influence of such
qualities as attachment and hate, which are born of
one’s nature.]

No one can remain alive without performing some
activity. Whether you want to or not, you have to
breathe. Whether you are breathing or holding your
breath, this is also karma. If you are standing,
sitting, walking, or talking, all these are in the
category of karma. So, to maintain our lives, we are
forced to engage in some karma.

But this will not give you eternal happiness, or peace
and tran-quillity of mind. For happiness, you must
engage in some devotional service, and to cultivate
devotion successfully, you must first of all surrender
at the lotus feet of a bona fide guru. In good
association, under the guidance of gurudeva, you can
progress in devotional life. If you do this, your New
Year’s celebration will be successful.

In this world there are eight million four-hundred
thousand species of life, and among them four-hundred-
thousand are human beings. Most of the human population
does not know about God. They think they know God, but
who God is, what are His qualities, and what is His form
is not known to them at all. They only want to say
“God.” That is enough for them; they don’t know more
than that. In America, the government writes on its
dollar bill “In God we trust,” but they do not have any
conception of God.

So, who is God? G is for generator, He who creates this
world. O is for operator, He who nourishes and protects
us. And D is for destroyer. He who is the owner,
creator, and destroyer is Bhagavān, or God.

                             19
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


It is mentioned in the Vedic scripture [Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 1.3.28], “Ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ, kṛṣṇas tu
bhagavān svayam – all the incar-na-tions of Godhead are
either plenary expansions or parts of the plenary
expansions of the Supreme Godhead, but Kṛṣṇa is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself.” Therefore we
must serve Him, taking a vow from this very day, the New
Year’s Day. Whatever happened happened [Let bygones be
bygones]. We have to forget all these material things
and start anew our Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and then our
celebration of New Year’s Day will be successful.


nṛ-deham ādyaṁ sulabhaṁ sudurlabhaṁ

plavaṁ sukalpaṁ guru-karṇa-dhāram

mayānukūlena nabhasvateritaṁ

pumān bhavābdhiṁ na taret sa ātma-hā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.17)


[The human body, which can award all benefit in life, is
automatically obtained by the laws of nature, although
it is a very rare achievement. This human body can be
compared to a perfectly constructed boat, having the
spiritual master as the captain and the instructions of
the Personality of Godhead as favorable winds impelling
it on its course. Considering all these advantages, a
human being who does not utilize his human life to cross
the ocean of material existence must be considered the
killer of his own soul.*]

Nṛ-deha means ‘human body.’ We have received a human
body, which is very rare to achieve, and now it is easy
for us to do bhajana. However, we can see that other
living entities do not create weapons of mass
destruction and so many arrangements to maintain their
lifestyle. If anything happens, they quarrel with each
other with their claws and teeth, and at the next moment
they forget their quarrelling. But we humans take
revenge and become more ferocious than tigers, bears,
lions, and other wild animals.

How can we become calm, quiet and peaceful with each
other? It is possible only if we do bhajana. So, nṛ-
deham ādyaṁ sulabhaṁ sudurlabhaṁ, plavaṁ sukalpaṁ guru-
karṇa-dhāram. This human body is like a boat going from
one place to another, in one direction or another. A
captain is needed for the boat. Who is that captain? The
bona fide guru. Here in Hawaii we are situated by the
Pacific Ocean, and we see every day there are some boats
floating on it. These boats have sails, and when the
sails catch the wind, the boats move very fast. In the
same way, sādhu-saṅga (association with pure devotees of
Kṛṣṇa) is the favorable wind, for by sādhu-saṅga we can
advance very quickly in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In this way
our lives will be maintained very easily, and we can be
calm and quiet and in harmony with each other. Thus, our
celebration here will be successful.


                           20
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Generally, people understand the meaning of happiness in
terms of the body, mind, health, money, and good sons
and daughters. They consider that if they have these
things, they will be happy, but everyone becomes unhappy
in spite of having them. For a long time, since the
creation of this world, we have been coming and going,
taking birth and dying, but still we are not happy.

We have forgotten Kṛṣṇa. We are part and parcel of
Kṛṣṇa, and we have forgotten Him. That is why His
illusory māyā threw us into this world and covered our
constitutional form and qualities with two bodies – the
physical body and the subtle body.

We are trying so hard, here and there, to be happy, but
really everyone is full of grief. Only a truly qualified
guru can teach us by what process Kṛṣṇa’s service can be
achieved. Then, by practice and maturity of bhakti-
sādhana, we will surely become happy.

My blessing is that I am praying to Kṛṣṇa that He will
sprinkle His mercy upon you all, so that you will become
truly joyful in every way – by body, mind, and soul.

Are there any questions?

Haladhara dāsa:

What is the meaning of the name Rādhā, or Rādhārāṇī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Rādhā means ‘always serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa.’ Rādhā means ‘to
please Kṛṣṇa.’ Also, She is pleased by Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā
means ‘She runs towards Kṛṣṇa to serve Him.’ Rādhikā
means ‘Kṛṣṇa searches for Her and pleases Her.’

Kṛṣṇa means ‘all-attractive, with innumerable good
qualities.’ Rūpa-mādhurī: He is exquisitely beautiful.
Veṇu-mādhurī: His flute playing is very, very sweet.
Guṇa-mādhurī: He is full with particularly sweet
qualities. Līlā-mādhurī: His pastimes are enchanting. By
these qualities Kṛṣṇa attracts all beings in the world
and delivers them. All living beings, namely birds,
animals, and all other creatures, are attracted to Him,
and therefore He is called Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa is the ocean of rasa, or transcendental
relationships, and Rādhā is the power of Kṛṣṇa and the
embodiment of mahābhāva (the highest love for Him). By
Her sweet service to Him, Rādhā attracts and controls
Him. Although Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are not two bodies, only
one, it can also be said that Kṛṣṇa is the one Supreme
Person and Rādhā is the śakti, or power, within Him. For
līlā-vilāsa, or sweet pastimes, They have become two
bodies, but They remain one soul.




January (undated), 2007



                           21
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

morning walk excerpt

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla prabhu is saying that Satsvarūpa Mahārāja was very
attached to the vaidhī mood. Śrīla Prabhupāda was trying
to encourage him, “You should reciprocate with me from
your heart.” Śrīla is asking, “How can we develop the
mood of mamatā for our gurudeva, so that we have that
heart reciprocation with him?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What do you mean by mamatā?

Śrīla dāsa:

Uh… dāsya-bhāva (the mood of servitorship). Of course,
it is more than just service. There is a mood of mine-
ness (posses-siveness): “Gurudeva is mine, and I belong
to Gurudeva.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Who has more sense of mine-ness for Kṛṣṇa – Nanda Bābā,
Mother Yaśodā, the sakhās, or the gopīs?

Śrīla dāsa:

The gopīs.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Within all the rasas there is more mamatā in mādhurya-
rasa, and within mādhurya-rasa, Rādhikā has more mamatā
than the other gopīs. Mamatā means, “Whatever I have –
my mind, body, soul, wealth, reputation, and everything
else – I have given totally, solely, to Him. I have
given Him my whole energy.” For whom you give more
energy, mamatā will develop more to that person. If you
give your entire energy, then mamatā will be complete:


mānasa, deha, geha, jo kichu mora

arpilū tuwā pade, nanda-kiśora!

Mānasa Deha Geha (Verse 1)


[Mind, body, family, and whatever else is mine, I have
surrendered at Your lotus feet, O youthful Son of
Nanda!]


mārabi, rākhabi – jo icchā tohārā

nitya-dāsa prati tuwā adhikārā

Mānasa Deha Geha (Verse 3)


[Slay me or protect me as You wish, for You have full
ownership of Your eternal servitor.]

                              22
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


When this mood comes, it is understood that mamatā is
present. The gradation of this mood corresponds to the
gradation of mamatā.

You have some mamatā for me, but it is not full. You are
not giving your entire deha (body), geha (family), and
mānasa (mind) to me. If you will give yourself to me as
they do [indicating the other devotees present], then
you will have mamatā. When you have strong faith in me,
thinking, “He can help me in Kṛṣṇa consciousness,” then
it will come.




January 14, 2007


darśana

Kṛṣṇa-priyā dāsī (from Canada):

Govinda has a question regarding your hari-kathā last
night. He wants to know how to follow Śrīla Svāmī
Prabhupāda’s mood. Would that be in vaidhī-bhakti or
rāgānuga-bhakti?1

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

One must follow vaidhī-bhakti. But if one practices
vaidhī-bhakti in our line – reading Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and hearing classes on
all the subjects there, one will automatically come to
rāgānuga. If anyone practices bhakti as Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī explained it in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, he will
surely come to rāgānuga. All the principles explained by
Śrīla Rupa Gosvāmī are connected to rāgānuga. One should
begin from vaidhī-bhakti, and then he can easily develop
rāgānuga.

Madana-mohinī dāsī:

So, those who are just beginning to practice bhakti
should not try to practice rāgānuga? It will come
naturally?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Simply by hearing hari-kathā, they gradually begin
vaidhī-bhakti and then in due course become qualified
for rāgānuga.

Kṛṣṇa-priyā dāsī:

Are any of us qualified for rāgānuga-bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I think many will become qualified.

Do you want to go to Vaikuṇṭha to serve Lord Nārāyaṇa?


                           23
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Devotee:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do you want to go to Dvārakā to be a queen?

Devotee:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do you want to go to Mathurā?

Devotee:

No. I want to be a servant of Rādhā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is rāgānuga – the awakening of such greed. To those
who come to me, I give a powerful injection that never
goes in vain. This injection will gradually take them up
to rādhā-dāsyam (personal service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā).

But they must follow. It has been told in Bhagavad-
gītā(4.34):


tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ


[Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual
master. Inquire from him submissively and render service
unto him. The self-realized souls can impart knowledge
unto you because they have seen the truth.*]

Intellectually knowing the philosophy will not suffice.
If one knows all the scriptures, like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
the Purāṇas, the Vedas, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, and
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, but he cannot satisfy his gurudeva,
his erudition has no value. On the other hand, even if
one does not have much scriptural knowledge but he
always satisfies his gurudeva, it is certain that he
will become qualified.


vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ

śraddhānvito ‘nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ

bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ

hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.39)

                           24
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017



[A grave person who faithfully and continuously hears
the narrations of the transcendental pastimes that
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed with the young girls of
Vraja, and then describes those pastimes accordingly,
achieves supreme devotion for the lotus feet of
Bhagavān. He very quickly attains freedom from the
diseases of the heart, which are the transformations of
lust.]

The word anuśṛṇuyād in this verse means that the
disciple hears from gurudeva. Then, by serving and
pleasing him, that disciple will become qualified to
speak and preach. If a learned person is preaching but
is not pleasing gurudeva, he is not qualified. His
speaking will not produce any good result.

Jayaśrī dāsī

(from New York):

How do we continue to serve you when we leave here and
go back to our normal lives?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can remember the hari-kathā you have been hearing
this week. Try to understand it and incorporate it into
your life. Always meditate on that hari-kathā, and
execute the instructions I give while speaking.

Jayaśrī dāsī:

To always think what you would want us to do?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Jayaśrī, my niece, has received dīkṣā from you. And this
is Sarah, my other niece. She is meeting you for the
first time, and she has a question.

Sarah:

How do I sever worldly ties and become free to come to
the spiritual realm?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The holy name is even more powerful then the Supreme
Lord Himself. If you chant the holy name, Kṛṣṇa will
mercifully arrange everything for you. You will have the
time to engage more fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Please
chant the very powerful holy name of Kṛṣṇa.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Because she is so new, she still eats meat. Can you tell
her something that would encourage her to give that up?


                           25
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should know that within the word ‘meat’ there is ME-
EAT, meaning ‘those whom I eat will eat me.’

Sarah:

They will eat me?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Brajanāth dāsa:

If you eat an animal in this life, that animal will eat
you in the next life.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That may happen even in this life. The animals will
surely take revenge. So don’t take meat, wine, eggs, and
fish; all these are forbidden. Be careful to avoid
these, beginning from today.

Sumaṅgalā dāsī (from California):

Śrīla Gurudeva, here is my Vyāsa-pūjā offering. I am
giving it to you now, because on Vyāsa-pūjā day [4 days
later] there will be so many people coming to you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can always come. All can come. I am the father of
all of you. The father has affection for all his
children, so don’t be fearful.

Sumaṅgalā dāsī:

I have a question. Are the scriptures of other religions
also śabda-pramāṇa (transcendental evidence)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, but so-called followers do not actually understand
or follow their scriptures. The Bible has told us, “God
created man after His own image.” ‘After His own image’
means that He has a very beautiful transcendental form.
The so-called followers don’t agree with this. They say,
“Our God has no form.”

This is true for Muslims also. It is not written
anywhere in the Koran, the Muslim scripture, that,
“Those who do not follow Mohammad are the enemy and you
should kill them.” Still, some Muslim leaders want the
entire world to become Muslim and to chant “Allah, Huda”
by force. In the Koran it has been written that Allah
has a form, and according to that form He created man;
but the so-called followers don’t agree.

Sumaṅgalā dāsī:

Are those Vedic scriptures that are within the three
guṇas2 also śabda-pramāṇa, or only the scriptures in

                           26
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

sattva-guṇa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, they are śabda-pramāṇa. Especially, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is amala pramāṇa, the spotless evidence. If
you follow Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you will see that all
pramāṇas (Vedic evidences) are present there. The real
meaning of śabda-pramāṇa is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Gītā dāsī:

I need your help. I am too stressed with my pūjārī sevā
(service to the temple deities) in Los Angeles. Can I
train others and have them help me?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, they can help you. You can train those who are
favorable to the training.

Sudevī dāsī (from Canada):

I’m always so lusty and my brain is never working. I
need a powerful injection. Do you still have affection
for me even though I am acting so bad?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why do you say that?

Sudevī dāsī:

I am so dry in my heart.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Try to make your heart rasastha (full of rasa),
flavorful.

Sudevī dāsī:

But how?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

As others have done, and as I have done. Always be
happy, sinking in the ocean of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s love. Give
your entire energy to that, and be happy. If you do not
give your energy, your energy will automatically go to
sense gratification, and then you cannot be happy.

Sudevī dāsī:

But the pulling is so strong.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Be like us. Follow those devotees who are following me,
and be happy. In this way, control your mind and heart.




                             27
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


January 19, 2007


darśana

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is Glen. He is a famous art dealer. He has a big
gallery in Maui. Śyāmā dāsī showed him your art and he
became impressed. He wants to sell the original art and
giclees (state-of-the-art canvas prints) for high
prices, in order to bring the art into a new sphere of
recognition in the West.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Glen] My blessings to you.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Can you say something about the special value of your
spiritual art that other art doesn’t have?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If anyone sees pictures of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhikā and Their
associates, that person will receive sukṛti (spiritual
pious credits) and gradually become attracted to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. He will then attain the association of a
real sādhu, a bona fide spiritual master. He will thus
advance in spiritual life and become happy forever.

People everywhere are seeing these transcendental
pictures and inquiring, “Who is He? Very beautiful!” In
this way, just by seeing the pictures, they are reminded
of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. A very powerful sukṛti will
come to them, and their lives will become successful.
Moreover, if devotees see these pictures, they will take
Kṛṣṇa’s image in their eyes and keep it in their hearts.

How did he receive your paintings?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Your daughter Śyāmā dāsī met him and invited him here.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

By Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement, he picked your Vyāsa-pūjā day to
come and meet with us.

Glen:

My friend Jacob (Ramesh dāsa) here …

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You know him?

Glen:

We just met.


                           28
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

The number-one thing we might like to accomplish is to
broaden the interest of the art by bringing in
collectors from outside your devotees’ circles. Their
interest in the meaning of the paintings will develop
after they develop interest in the beauty. I think it is
a wonderful opportunity.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Good idea.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

He is impressed that the money we receive from the art
will not go to anyone’s personal interest, but to your
beautiful charity projects.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is my niece, Sarah. When she came to you during the
Vyāsa-pūjā ceremony yesterday, you said she should take
initiation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But she must first give up meat.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

I told her you would give her power to give this up. If
she is willing and has faith in you, then you will give
her strength.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Sarah:

I am afraid. Do you think you can make me ready?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. But be strong and determined that, “I will not take
these bogus things – cigarettes, meat, and all other
abominable things.”

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Jīva-pāvana prabhu is here, and we have a report to give
you on international book distribution – your book
distribution around the world. I have compiled a report
that shows the book distribution for the past three
years. Last year we distributed 50,000 books and this
year over 150,000 books – over three times more than
before. Also, in dollar amounts, we made under $40,000
last year, and this year $80,000.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                           29
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

$80,000.

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Yes, in book sales. I will share this report with the
book distributors around the world. The most widely
distributed books are Way of Love, Jaiva-dharma, the
School of Vraja CD book, and the songbook. Here is the
list with more details of the numbers of each title
sold. The list also shows the top distributors in the
world. England is number one.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Who sold the most?

Jīva-pāvana dāsa:

You gave an example that they should work as a team –
like a soccer team – one is the captain, one is the
helper, and so on. So the devotees in England are very
much working as a team.

The senior men are starting a temple in London. Āśrama
Mahārāja has a small group of new brahmacārīs. He and
the brahmacārīs collected £50,000 and paid their bills
for the books they distributed. They want to buy a
property.

The Gaṅgāmātās now have two houses – one for the
brahmacāriṇīs and one for guests. No one owes me money.
They are paying for the books, and that money goes into
the book fund.

So, I cannot say who is the number one, or main,
distributor in the UK, because they work as a team.

Viśvambhara dāsa:

The USA Festival team – a party consisting of myself,
Rāma-kānta prabhu, Vṛndāvana prabhu, my sister Rādhā,
and Gauravāṇī are one of the most successful teams in
America. Bhaktistore.com, which is an online distributor
run by your Gurukula in Badger, is also distributing
more books now.

My sister Rādhā also distributes books on the streets.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Wonderful. On the streets?

Viśvambhara dāsa:

My father and Advaita prabhu distribute a lot of books
in the Bay Area. There is also the Goloka distribution
party, and Āśrama Mahārāja, Dāmodara Mahārāja, and
Sajjana Mahārāja are the best sannyāsī-distributors.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Gurudeva is the best.

Jīva-pāvana dāsa:

                             30
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017


You are doing it. We are only the instruments.3

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Are some books being distributed here at this festival?

Viśvambhara dāsa:

At this festival in Hawaii, we sold over $5,000 worth of
books.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Here?

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Yes. Over 2,000 books were distributed at this festival.
Rāma-kānta prabhu and my sister Rādhā did everything.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, thank you.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Today is Madhukāra’s birthday.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can each take a flower [for throwing petals upon the
birthday devotee]. Maṅgalam bhavatu, kalyāṇam bhavatu –
May your birthday be auspicious. May you be happy in
this world and in the transcendental world, and may
vraja-bhakti enter your heart.




* * *




1 Vaidhī-bhakti is devotion prompted by the regulations
of the scriptures. When sādhana-bhakti is not inspired
by intense longing, but is instigated by the discipline
of scriptures, it is called vaidhī-bhakti.

Rāgānuga-bhakti is bhakti that follows in the wake of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates in Vraja, whose hearts
are permeated with rāga, which is an unquenchable loving
thirst for Kṛṣṇa that gives rise to spontaneous and
intense absorption.



2 Guṇa – lit. a rope; binding force; three qualities of
material nature which bind the living entity as ropes
do, due to him accepting different mentalities and
corresponding activities. These ropes are named sattva

                           31
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

(goodness), rajas (passion), and tamas (darkness). All
activities related to material nature are carried out by
the agency of these three guṇas.



3 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja´s
lecture in Badger, California, June 2, 2002:


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, you said in class that Brahmā thought he
had stolen the cows, but actually it was Yogamāyā who
had done it. We conditioned souls think, “I am doing
something,” but our activities are actually done by māyā
(Kṛṣṇa’s deluding material potency). So, suppose I
distribute a book and I think, “Oh, I’ve distributed a
book.” Who has really distributed the book?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Gurudeva has done it. How will you do it? You cannot do
anything. You cannot even make one blade of dry grass.
Guru gives energy to a disciple, but sometimes a
disciple becomes bewildered and thinks, “I am the doer.”
This wrong thinking influences that disciple to fall
down. All of you must be very careful.


Ramacandra dāsa:

Guru gives opportunity and capacity.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He gives both. He gives both the meal and the power to
digest it.




January 2, 2007


śloka class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.17.27

ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān

nāvamanyeta karhicit

na martya-buddhyāsūyeta

sarva-deva-mayo guruh


[One should understand fully well the ācārya to be as
good as Myself. He is My very svarūpa (My expansion). At
no time should one, out of envy, neglect or disrespect

                             32
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

the guru as an ordinary mortal, nor should he be
considered to have any faults, because śrī guru has the
potency of all the demigods.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should remember this śloka.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

One time in Birmingham, in 2004, you said that guru is
more than ācārya.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Can you explain this again?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In that connection the word ācārya refers to one who can
give upanayana (the ceremony of receiving the brāhmaṇa
thread). In India there are so many brāhmaṇas who are
only ācārya.1 They know the process of giving upanayana,
but they are not guru. They do not practice kṛṣṇa-
bhajana.

Guru is more than that, and if he personally gives
upanayana, that is still better; he is guru and also
ācārya. But one can be ācārya without being guru. Guru
gives transcendental knowledge, whereas one who is
ācārya without being guru only knows the process of
ceremony.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

In our line, though, the ācārya must also be guru?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Ācārya is included in guru.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Sometimes guru requests the ācārya to give upanayana.
Sometimes I do that as well. Sometimes I only give the
mantra, and I tell Mādhava Mahārāja or others to give
upanayana.

[To Acyutānanda dāsa] What is it that you are giving to
me? Two chapters2? They have sent only two chapters?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Maybe more, I will see.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                              33
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017


Yes, take a look; and after taking rest I will work on
them.




January (undated), 2007


śloka class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 3

yadīccher āvāsam vraja-bhuvi sa-rāgam prati-janur

yuva-dvandvaṁ tac cet paricaritum ārād abhilaṣeḥ

svarūpaṁ śrī-rūpaṁ sa-gaṇam iha tasyāgrajam api

sphuṭaṁ premṇā nityaṁ smara nama tadā tvaṁ śṛṇu manaḥ


[My dear mind, please hear me. If you are eager to gain
residence in Vraja on the platform of rāgātmikā-bhakti,
and if you desire to obtain the direct service of the
eternally youthful Divine Couple, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, then
birth after birth always distinctly remember and bow
down with great love to Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī,
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, and his elder brother Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī, and to all other associates of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, who are the recipients of His mercy.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

“O my dear mind, if you want to attain residence in
Vrajabhūmi with rāgātmikā-bhakti, and if you want to
worship the divine couple, then, my dear mind, always
remember and give obeisances to Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, his elder brother, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī…”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Crying bitterly, you should call out to Svarūpa
Dāmodara, Rūpa, and others. They will come and protect
you. What will they protect you from?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Lust, anger…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why are we crying? We are praying, “I cannot remove my
kāma (lust), krodha (anger), lobha (greed), mada
(pride), moha (illusion), and matsarya (envy) by myself.
So, please come and remove it.” Yadīccher āvāsam. If you
want to be in Vṛndāvana, and if you want to serve Rādhā

                           34
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

and Kṛṣṇa on the path of rāgānuga, then you must cry in
this way.

[To all the students present who recited and explained
the śloka] Very good; one śloka per day. You are doing
hard labor.

[To Vrndā-devī dāsī] And you are giving delicious food
to all.

Brajanāth dāsa:

She’s also doing hard labor.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, I know.

Brajanāth dāsa:

She wants to do more, but…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

She is silent, not saying anything, but doing hard
labor.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Gurujī, there are so many stavas and stutis (hymns and
prayers) and aṣṭakams (prayers consisting of eight
verses) in our paramparā. Of these, which are the most
powerful?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, there are so many to Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa, Mahāprabhu,
Vṛndā, Vṛndāvana…

Acyutānanda dāsa:

But…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

First to guru, then to Nityānanda Prabhu, then to the
all-merciful Caitanya Mahāprabhu, then to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Giri Govardhāna.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is later. After Rādhikā, then to Kṛṣṇa, then to
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together, then to Girirājajī, then to
Yamunā, Lalitā, and Viśākhā.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

But…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                             35
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017




śrī-gaurāṅga-guṇānuvarṇana-vidhau śraddhā-samṛddhy-
anvitau

pāpottāpa-nikṛntanau tanu-bhṛtāṁ govinda-gānāmṛtaiḥ

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaika-nipuṇau kaivalya-nistārakau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Sad-Gosvāmī-aṣṭakam (Verse 3)


[I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs,
namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who are
very much enriched in understanding of Lord Caitanya and
who are thus expert in narrating His transcendental
qualities. They can purify all conditioned souls from
the reactions to their sinful activities by pouring upon
them transcendental songs about Govinda. As such, they
are very expert in increasing the limits of the ocean of
transcendental bliss, and they are the saviors of the
living entities from the devouring mouth of impersonal
liberation.*]

And for Nityānanda Prabhu:


sarac-candra-bhrāntiṁ sphurad-amala-kāntiṁ gaja-gatiṁ

hari-premonmattaṁ dhṛta-parama-sattvaṁ smita-mukham

sadāghūrṇan-netraṁ kara-kalita-vetraṁ kali-bhidaṁ

bhaje nityānandaṁ bhajana-taru-kandaṁ niravadhi

Nityānandāṣṭakam (Verse 1)


[I perpetually worship Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, the root
of the kṛṣṇa-bhakti tree, whose bright face mocks the
full autumn moon, whose pure complexion glistens, whose
gait is like that of an intoxicated elephant, who is
always mad in kṛṣṇa-prema, who is the personifiction of
pure spiritual energy, whose face wears a gentle smile,
whose eyes are always rolling due to His absorption in
kṛṣṇa-prema, whose lotus hand is beutified with a staff,
and who, by the performance of nāma-saṅkīrtana, pierces
the influence of Kali-yuga.]

For Rādhikā, Śrī Rādhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa, which begins with:


munīndra-vṛnda-vandite tri-loka-śoka-hāriṇī

prasanna-vaktra-paṇkaje nikuṣja-bhū-vilāsini

vrajendra-bhānu-nandini vrajendra-sūnu-saṅgate


                             36
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam?


[O Śrīmatī Rādhikā! Śukadeva, Nārada, Uddhava, and all
the topmost munis are always offering prayers to Your
lotus feet. Remembering You and praying for Your service
miraculously removes all the miseries, sins, and
offenses of the three spheres. Your joyful face blooms
like a lotus and You delight in pastimes in the kuṣjas
of Vraja. You are the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja and
the dearly beloved of Vrajendra-nandana, with whom You
always perform vilāsa. When, oh when will You bestow
upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?]

And for Kṛṣṇa, Namāmi nanda-nandanam. Especially, there
are so many prayers for Rādhikā.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

But if there is not so much time and I want to learn
one…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can learn one at a time, and you will gradually
remember them all.




January (undated), 2007


śloka class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 4

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

From time to time, Kṛṣṇa comes to this world to
establish ātmā-dharma, or prema-dharma. He comes when
Brahmā and others pray to Him to take away the burden of
the Earth.

It is said that this human life is very rare; therefore
we must engage this life in śreya, activities which give
the most auspiciousness. What is the śloka? [To
Acyutānanda dāsa] Do you remember?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

I think so.


labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte

manuṣyam artha-dam anityam apīha dhīrah

tūrṇaṁ yateta na pated anu-mrtyu yāvan

nihsreyasaya viṣayah khalu sarvataḥ syāt

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.9.29)

                              37
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017



[This human birth is very rare, because it is only
attained after many lifetimes. Although temporary, it
can give the highest benefit [the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā]. After all, sense gratification is available in
all species [whereas spiritual perfection is possible
only for human beings]. Therefore, an intelligent person
should immediately, without wasting a single moment,
begin to endeavor [with one-pointed dedication] to
achieve the ultimate good fortune, before death comes.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You will have to very quickly learn all these ślokas, as
well as one, two, three, or four ślokas from Gauḍīya-
kaṇṭhahāra3.

Do you remember more verses of Manaḥ-śikṣā?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Which one?

Acyutānanda dāsa:




asad-vārtā-veśyā visṛja mati-sarvasva-haraṇīḥ

kathā mukti-vyāghryā na śṛṇu kila sarvātma-gilanīḥ

api tyaktvā lakṣmī-pati-ratim ito vyoma-nayanīm

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇau sva-rati-maṇi-dau tvaṁ bhaja manaḥ

Manaḥ-śikṣā (Verse 4)


[O my dear brother mind! Please abandon altogether the
prostitute of contemptible mundane talk, which plunders
the entire treasure of pure wisdom. You must
unequivocally give up hearing all talk of impersonal
liberation which, like a tigress, devours your very
soul. Furthermore, please abandon even the attachment to
Lakṣmīpati Śrī Nārāyaṇa, which leads to Vaikuṇṭha.
Rather, you should live in Vraja and worship Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who bestow upon devotees the precious jewel
of love for them.]

[Madhuvrata dāsa begins to recite the verse]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I want to hear a flow.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

No break.

                            38
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Asad-vārtā-veśyā visṛjam. The first line is saying that…

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Not visṛjam; visṛja.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Visṛja, useless talk is…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is sad-vārtā?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa-kathā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is asad-vārtā?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Asad-vārtā is like… uh…

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Mundane talks.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Mundane talks.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Asad-vārtā refers to any kathā (narration) other than
that which is related to Kṛṣṇa or His devotees. You can
continue.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Mati-sarvasva-haraṇīḥ. Such kathā steals your
intelligence.

Kathā mukti-vyāghryā na śṛṇu kila sarvātma-gilanīḥ means
that aspiring for mukti (liberation) and engaging in
talks involved with mukti eat up your soul like a tiger.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Like a tiger. Mukti eats your soul.


                            39
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

Brajanāth dāsa:

Tigress.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Tigress. It can…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It can eat and swallow you.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Api tyaktvā lakṣmī-pati-ratim ito vyoma-nayanīm. You
also have to give up any attachment for Laksmi-Nārāyaṇa,
because such talk leads you to Vaikuṇṭha. And, vraje
rādhā-kṛṣṇau sva-rati-maṇi-dau. O mind, please worship
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, for They will give you that rati (spiritual
attachment).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Can you give me the other pages [of Gurudeva’s yet-
unpublished Hindi manuscript] today?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Maybe in the afternoon.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Afternoon? You have not done any work on it.




January (undated), 2007


śloka class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 5

asac-ceṣṭā-kaṣṭa-prada-vikaṭa-pāśālibhir iha

prakāmaṁ kāmādi-prakaṭa-pathapāti-vyatikaraiḥ

gale baddhvā hanye ‘ham iti baka-bhid vartmapa-gaṇe

kuru tvaṁ phut-kārān avati sa yathā tvaṁ mana itaḥ


[Lust, anger, and so on are a band of dacoits who assail
one suddenly on the open road of material life. They
have bound my neck licentiously with the torturous,
dreadful ropes of wicked deeds and are thus killing me.
O mind, speaking in this way, you must grievously cry
out to the powerful and merciful devotees who are the
protectors of the path of devotion leading to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the killer of Bakāsura. Hearing your piteous cry, they
will surely protect you from such a condition.]


                              40
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[After hearing Madhuvrata dāsa speak the verse] Your
utterance should be more clear; more fluent. What is the
meaning?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

“Lust, anger, greed, madness, envy, and illusion are
like six dacoits who attack me on the open road of
material life. They bind my neck with the tortuous ropes
of wicked deeds and deviate me from the path of bhakti.
O mind, cry out piteously to the Vaiṣṇavas. They can
surely protect me from such a situation.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Tomorrow, try to chant the śloka more fluently. Very
good.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

This śloka is quite long, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But I am especially giving you this lesson, as it is
essential for you to follow all of this in your life.
Understand, and try to follow. There should be no kāma.
What is the meaning of kāma?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Lust.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And anger. Can you control anger? You will have to
control it. You can only have anger when someone
criticizes your gurudeva, any pure Vaiṣṇava, Mahāprabhu,
or Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, if anyone is abusing or
insulting you, then, oh, do not be angry.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Maṇimatī dīdī is writing to me and asking which maṇi, or
jewel, you want.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Because her name begins with ‘maṇi’ (meaning ‘jewel’),
therefore she is asking this question. The real maṇi is
prema-bhakti, but she is not able to give that. Anyone
can give worldly jewels, but the only real jewel, or
maṇi, is rādhā-kṛṣṇa-prema. Tell her, “Thank you.”

Brajanāth dāsa:

Vṛndā is learning some ślokas.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Slowly.


                           41
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

You can preach like Śyāmarāṇī, but you are so busy with
your other services to me. You are helping soooo much.




January (undated), 2007


śloka class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 6

are cetaḥ prodyat-kapaṭa-kuṭināṭī-bhara-khara

kṣaran-mūtre snātvā dahasi katham ātmānam api mām

sadā tvaṁ gāndharvā-giridhara-pada-prema-vilasat

sudhāmbhodhau snātvā svam api nitarāṁ māṁ ca sukhaya


[O wicked mind, although you adopt the path of sādhana,
you imagine yourself purified by bathing in the
trickling urine of the great donkey of full-blown deceit
and hypocrisy. By doing so, you are simultaneously
burning yourself and scorching me, a tiny jīva. Stop
this! Delight yourself and me by eternally bathing in
the nectarean ocean of pure love for the lotus feet of
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

“O mind, give up this donkey-urine, which is hypocrisy
and deceit, and always bathe in the ocean of the nectar
of Gāndharvikā-Giridhārī.”

Madhuvrata dāsa:

“O mind, although you adopt the path of sādhana, you
still imagine yourself purified by bathing in the
trickling donkey-urine of kuṭi-nāṭī, or deceit.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning of “donkey’s urine-passing”?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

This means ignorance.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning of kuṭi-nāṭī?


                           42
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Duplicity.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Ku means ‘bad.’ Ku refers to those who are not favorable
to bhakti. Such persons’ association is considered as
donkeys’ urine. “O mind, you are thinking, ‘By this
urine, kuṭi-nāṭī, I am very, very happy.’ It is actually
burning poison, so you must give it up.”

Then? Regarding Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

“O mind, please always bathe in the nectar ocean of love
for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

“Thus you will be happy, and you will always make me
happy.”

I am requesting you to remember this śloka so that you
will follow all the teachings therein. Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī’s instructions are very helpful for your
bhakti.

Tomorrow we will discuss more ślokas. How many are there
in Manaḥ-śikṣā?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Twelve.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

In addition, I request that you study Gauḍīya-
kaṇṭhahāra.




January (undated), 2007


śloka class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 7

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

In memorizing the Manaḥ-śikṣā ślokas, I try to learn the
English first. I want to know more ślokas. I know ślokas
from before I met you, like śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What you already know is sufficient – nothing more to
learn. You are…

                            43
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017


Vṛndā-devī dāsī: Too old.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They [the other ‘śloka students’ present] should learn.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

But I still learn something.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is only necessary for you to learn the important
ślokas, like ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma
vṛndāvanam4.

Brajanāth dāsa:

She knows daśa-mūla5.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ…

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam.6

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte.7 You can
learn ślokas like these.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

She knows daśa-mūla.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

All of it?

[To the others present] What is the śloka for today?

Acyutānanda dāsa:




pratiṣṭhāśā dhṛṣṭā śvapaca-ramaṇī me hṛdi naṭet

kathaṁ sādhu-premā spṛśati śucir etan nanu manaḥ

sadā tvaṁ sevasva prabhu-dayita-sāmantam atulaṁ

yathā tāṁ niṣkāśya tvaritam iha taṁ veśayati saḥ

Manaḥ-śikṣā (Verse 7)


[O mind, how can pure divine love appear in my heart as
long as the shameless dog-eating, outcaste woman of the
desire for prestige is audaciously dancing there?
Therefore always remember and serve the immeasurably

                              44
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

powerful commanders   of the army of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
beloved devotees of   the Lord. They will at once banish
this outcaste woman   and initiate the flow of immaculate
vraja-prema in your   heart.]

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Gurudeva, it’s stated in the purport that pratiṣṭhā, the
desire for name and fame, is the root of all anarthas
(thoughts and habits that are detrimental to bhakti).
Can you please explain something about this?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Even when other bad qualities disappear, pratiṣṭhā
remains because it is very deep in the heart. It will
leave completely only when one is liberated from this
world and has reached the stage of prema. Otherwise, it
lives in the heart and can awaken by one means or
another.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

There is still something remaining as long as one has
this body?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, as long as one has a body, something remains. It
may be sleeping, but it can awaken at any time.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Does pratiṣṭhā come when someone honors us, or is it
always present?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Pratiṣṭhā first came when the jīva became conditioned
and began receiving material bodies, but it becomes
gradually less, and less, and less as bhakti develops.
It is due to pratiṣṭhā that anger arises. If there is no
pratiṣṭhā, there will be no anger. Thus, pratiṣṭhā is
the root of all evil.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Can it be used in Kṛṣṇa’s service?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No. How can it possibly be used in Kṛṣṇa’s service?

Only someone like Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī can do so. He
offered pratiṣṭhā (respects) to others, even to those
who were far inferior to him. We have heard that Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Ṭhākura always
addressed others, including his disciples, with the word
‘āpni.’

Brajanāth dāsa:

The respectful form of ‘you.’


                             45
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He did this for all of his disciples, except for our
guru mahārāja and one other brahmacārī.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Paramānanda prabhu.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He addressed them with the word ‘tuhi’ (the intimate
form of ‘you’), but not any others.

Brajanātha dāsa:

Gurudeva, he used to offer others praṇāma (obeisances).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Other devotees therefore avoided doing praṇāma in front
of him [thinking that he would return the praṇāma to
them]. And he was the topmost paramahaṁsa (self-realized
soul).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He was not only paramahaṁsa; he was the crown jewel of
all paramahaṁsas.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

So, pratiṣṭhā can be used by giving it to others, but
never for oneself?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

As bhakti increases, the mood of humility gradually
manifests. For example, the quality of tṛṇād api
sunīcena, thinking oneself more humble than a blade of
grass, is perfect only in Rādhā, not in anyone else.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā prays, “Na prema-gandho ’sti darāpi me
harau – I do not have a drop, or even a scent, of prema.
If I really had any prema, why did I not die in
separation from Kṛṣṇa? A fish will die in a moment
without water, but still I am living. Oh, fie on Me! Fie
on Me!”




January (undated), 2007


śloka class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 9

madīśā-nāthatve vraja-vipina-candraṁ vraja-vane-

                            46
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017


śvarīṁ tāṁ-nāthatve tad-atula-sakhītve tu lalitām

viśākhāṁ śikṣālī-vitaraṇa-gurutve priya-saro-

girīndrau tat-prekṣā-lalita-rati-datve smara manaḥ




[O mind, always remember Vṛndānanacandra Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
the Lord of my Svāminī Śrī Rādhikā’s life,
Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā as my mistress, Śrī
Lalitā as the peerless friend of my Svāminī, Śrī Viśākhā
as the instructing spiritual master in the arrangements
of service rendered unto the Divine Couple, and Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Girirāja-Govardhana as those who grant
darśana of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and bestow ecstatic love for
Their lotus feet.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is our relation with Kṛṣṇa? What has been told in
this verse?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

We are maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We are maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. And what is our
relation to Kṛṣṇa? He is near and dear to Rādhikā. We do
not have a direct relation with Him. This is what
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is telling us here. Rādhikā is
our nātha, our Svāminī, or Mistress.

And Lalitā?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Lalitā is Her dearest friend.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And Viśākhā?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

She is Her śikṣā-guru. She gives instruction like Her
guru.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Viśākhā is not Her śikṣā-guru. She is our śikṣā-guru.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Ours.

What śikṣā does she give? She instructs us how to serve
Rādhikā in all ways, from the beginning of the day to
the end. She teaches how to only and always engage in
services to Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

                            47
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017


Madhuvrata dāsa:

As Rāya Rāmānanda, she also gives śikṣā to Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What śikṣā is she giving?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

It is in Rāya Rāmānanda saṁvāda.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What śikṣā is Viśākhā giving to Kṛṣṇa in the form of
Mahāprabhu?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

She is teaching Him how to relish the moods of
Rādhārāṇī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

She is teaching Him how to serve and please Rādhārāṇī.8
She is very dear to Rādhikā. She is together with
Rādhikā practically twenty-four hours a day, whereas
Kṛṣṇa is not. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa is performing pastimes
with the cows and cowherd boys, and sometimes with His
mother and father. He is sometimes separated from
Rādhikā, but Viśākhā is always with Her. Viśākhā is with
Rādhikā when She is sleeping, and when She is walking
with Kṛṣṇa; so she knows.

She can also sing so well. She is a master of all arts.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Tuṅgavidyā is also a good singer?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. She also knows about all kinds of medicines, and
also the languages of all the animals and birds.

Brajanāth dāsa:

And Citra knows how to paint?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.




January (undated), 2007


śloka class


                            48
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 11

[Acyutānanda dāsa and Madhuvrata dāsa recite and tell
the meaning of the following verse:]


samaṁ śrī-rūpeṇa smara-vivaśa-rādhā-giribhṛtor

vraje sākṣāt-sevā-labhana-vidhaye tad-gaṇa-yujoḥ

tad-ijyākhyā-dhyāna-śravaṇa-nati-paṣcāmṛtam idam

dhayan nītyā govardhanam anudinaṁ tvaṁ bhaja manaḥ


[O my dear mind, in order to obtain the direct service
of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Giridhārī, who are always entranced by
amorous desire, and the service of Their eternal
associates in Vraja, you should drink the paṣcāmṛta of
service to Them in accordance with the method prescribed
by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. This paṣcāmṛta is ambrosial nectar
comprised of the following five ingredients: worship of
Śrī Yugala (arcana), chanting the glories of Their
transcendental names, forms, qualities, and pastimes
(saṅkīrtana), meditating upon Them (dhyāna), hearing the
glories of Their names, forms, qualities, and pastimes
(śravaṇa), and offering praṇāmas unto Them. In addition
you should worship Śrī Govardhana daily in accordance
with the precepts of bhakti.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This verse is important. It describes sādhana, the
bhakti process.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

What topic will you speak on at the Hawaii festival?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have not decided yet. My decision will depend on the
audience.

After this, you should learn the verses in Gauḍīya-
kaṇṭhahāra9, subject by subject. Then, when I ask you to
speak something, especially the teachings of Prahlāda
Mahārāja, you will be able to quote such verses as
naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ10.

When Prahlāda’s father had first asked him, “What is the
best thing you have learned in school?” Prahlāda replied
with the verse beginning tat sādhu manye ‘sura-varya
dehināṁ11. Then, when Hiraṇyakaśipu demanded of him,
“Oh, your teacher has taught you this? He never told you
this. Why are you speaking in this way?” Prahlāda then
replied with this verse beginning naiṣāṁ matis tāvad.
You will also be required to know what Prahlāda was
teaching the boys. Then, when you speak on prahlāda-
caritra, the life-history and character of Prahlāda
Mahārāja, you will be able to quote these verses.




                            49
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



January (undated), 2007


śloka class




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.5.30

Teachings of Prahlāda Mahārāja


[The following few śloka classes are in relation to the
teachings of Prahlāda Mahārāja.]


matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā

mitho ‘bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām

adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ

punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām


[Persons who are addicted to household life due to
having uncontrolled senses, are entering into hellish
life wherein they repeatedly chew that which has already
been chewed. Their consciousness cannot turn towards the
service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa either by their own understanding,
by the instructions of others or by the combination of
both.]

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Matir na kṛṣṇa parataḥ svato vā...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Matir na kṛṣṇe.

[Madhuvrata dāsa continues to utter the verse with Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s assistance, and then
Acyutānanda dāsa utters the verse with his assistance.]

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Uh…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

O Father…

Acyutānanda dāsa:

O Father, materialistic people are only chewing that
which has been chewed.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                           50
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

What is the meaning?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Um…I don’t know.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What are they chewing?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

The meaning is that one’s father…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Fathers, forefathers, and others.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

They’ve gone to college, earned money, gotten married,
had children, gotten sick – and then their son does
exactly the same.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are not happy, they become old, and then they leave
their bodies without taking anything with them. All
materialists are like this.

More?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Because they can’t control their senses they enter the
hellish material existence, and no other materialistic
person can save them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Who can help them?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Guru; sad-guru (a self-realized guru).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Sad-guru; Vaiṣṇava.

You are chewing what your father, your grand-father and
grand-mother, their forefathers, and all other persons
like them have chewed. They marry, children come, and
one by one they all become old. They are not happy, and
one day they give up this body without being able to
take with them anything they have been collecting. You
are chewing the same thing they chewed.

They are foolish like dogs. If a dog finds a dry bone
and begins chewing it, blood flows from his own teeth as
he thinks, “This is very salty and very tasty.” Many
other dogs see him relishing the bone, ferociously
attack him, and relentlessly bite him until he gives up
the bone and with his tail between his legs runs to the

                           51
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

side. From there, that dog now watches and sees how the
next dog grabs the dry bone, begins to bite it, and is
also immediately attacked by all the other dogs.

Everyone in this world is foolish like this,12 and a
guru who is also foolish cannot help others to become
free. Prahlāda indicated to his demoniac father,
Hiraṇyakaśipu, “Gurus like Ṣaṇḍa and Amarka are of the
same category as you. How, then, can they help you?”
Hiraṇyakaśipu replied, “O foolish one, you are calling
my gurudeva and me foolish?”

Prahlāda replied by telling his father the next verse.




January (undated), 2007


śloka class




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.5.31

Teachings of Prahlāda Mahārāja


na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ

durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ

andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās

te ‘pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ


[Persons who are strongly entrapped by the consciousness
of enjoying material life, and who have therefore
accepted as their leader or guru a similar blind man
attached to external sense objects, cannot understand
that the goal of life is to give up this material life
and engage in the service of Lord Viṣṇu. As blind men
guided by another blind man miss the right path and fall
into a ditch, materially attached men led by another
materially attached man are bound by the ropes of
fruitive labor, which are made of very strong cords, and
they continue again and again in materialistic life,
suffering the threefold miseries.*]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Persons who want to enjoy this external material world,
and take as a guru someone who also wants to enjoy this
material world, cannot understand that the goal of their
life is to engage in service to Śrī Viṣṇu. Just as

                           52
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

someone blind follows another blind man, misses the
path, and falls into a ditch, in the same way, someone
who wants to enjoy this material world and accepts as
guru someone who also does so, is tied by the ropes of
this material existence.

Brajanāth dāsa:

He falls into a blind ditch.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning of uru-dāmni baddhāḥ?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Very strong material ropes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is that?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Material existence.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

“I will be happy;” “I will collect money;” “I will go to
the heavenly planets.” What are these convictions? They
are the illusory māyā.

What is the meaning of svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

They can never understand that the ultimate goal of life
is to go back to Godhead, to Viṣṇu. In the same way that
a blind person may follow another blind person, thus
missing the correct path and falling into a ditch…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning of ‘falling into a ditch’?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

It refers to birth and death.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Miseries; the endless pain of birth and death. Very
good.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Most people think they are having a very nice time in
the cycle of birth and death.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They don’t know what is bhakti, who is Viṣṇu, who is
Kṛṣṇa, who is the Supreme God. They know that there is
God, but they have no attachment for Kṛṣṇa and do

                              53
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

nothing for Him.




January (undated), 2007


śloka class




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.5.32, 7.6.1, 7.6.4, and 7.7.30–31

Teachings of Prahlāda Mahārāja


naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ

spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ

mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-’bhiṣekaṁ

niṣkiṣcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.32)


[Unless they smear upon their bodies the dust of the
lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava completely freed from material
contamination, persons very much inclined toward
materialistic life cannot be attached to the lotus feet
of the Lord, who is glorified for His uncommon
activities. Only by becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious and taking
shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord in this way can
one be freed from material contamination.*]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning of this śloka?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

“When one smears his body with the foot-dust of the
devotees of the Lord, who are free of material
contamination and from attachment to material objects,
only then can one come to the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

After that:


kaumāra ācaret prājṣo

dharmān bhāgavatān iha

durlabhaṁ mānuṣaṁ janma

tad apy adhruvam artha-dam


                             54
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.6.1)


[Prahlāda Mahārāja said: One who is sufficiently
intelligent should use the human form of body from the
very beginning of life – in other words, from the tender
age of childhood – to practice the activities of
devotional service, giving up all other engagements. The
human body is most rarely achieved, and although
temporary like other bodies, it is meaningful because in
human life one can perform devotional service. Even a
slight amount of sincere devotional service can give one
complete perfection.*]

tat-prayāso na kartavyo

yata āyur-vyayaḥ param

na tathā vindate kṣemaṁ

mukunda-caraṇāmbujam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.6.4)


[Endeavors merely for sense gratification or material
happiness through economic development are not to be
performed, for they result only in a loss of time and
energy, with no actual profit. If one’s endeavors are
directed toward Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one can surely
attain the spiritual platform of self-realization. There
is no such benefit from engaging oneself in economic
development.*]

And after that:


guru-śuśrūṣayā bhaktyā

sarva-labdhārpaṇena ca

saṅgena sādhu-bhaktānām

īśvarārādhanena ca


śraddhayā tat-kathāyāṁ ca

kīrtanair guṇa-karmaṇām

tat-pādāmburuha-dhyānāt

tal-liṅgekṣārhaṇādibhiḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.7.30–31)


[One must accept the bona fide spiritual master and
render service unto him with great devotion and faith.
Whatever one has in one’s possession should be offered
to the spiritual master, and in the association of
saintly persons and devotees one should worship the
Lord, hear the glories of the Lord with faith, glorify
the transcendental qualities and activities of the Lord,

                            55
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

always meditate on the Lord’s lotus feet, and worship
the Deity of the Lord strictly according to the
injunctions of the śāstra and guru.*]

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, Vṛndā is also learning a śloka.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What?

Vṛndā-devi dāsī:

I’m learning a few, but then I forget a few words.

[She recites a verse with Gurudeva’s assistance]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning?

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

“Our worshipful Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is the supreme object
of worship. The Vrajavāsīs, the gopīs, especially
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, better to say “Nanda-nandana,” “Yaśodā-nandana,”
“Rādhā-kānta,” and “Vrajendra-nandana.” Ārādhyo bhagavān
vrajeśa-tanayas. Our supreme worshipful object is the
son of Nanda Mahārāja. Nanda-tanu (the son of Nanda
Mahārāja) must be there in the explanation. If you only
say “Kṛṣṇa,” it may refer to Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa. It should
be explained like this: “The son of Nanda Bābā and
Yaśodā Maiyā, Vrajendra-nandana, is the supreme
worshipable object.”

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

I am not finished learning it, so I cannot say.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Then, after that?

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Okay. The brides of Vraja, the gopīs, especially Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The second phrase is tad-dhāma vṛndāvanam.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

As worshipful as Kṛṣṇa is, His dhāma, Vṛndāvana-dhāma,
is also worshipful. Then, the brides of Vraja, the
gopīs, and especially Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, express the
highest love of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Then, śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ
pramāṇam – the evidence is there in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

                           56
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Then, after that… I haven’t learned yet what comes next.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu who is telling this verse.
We should have respect and honor for His conclusion, not
for the opinion of others.

[To Acyutānanda dāsa] I want all the manuscript pages of
Catuḥ-ślokī Bhāgavatam. I will write the preface.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Okay.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

Something is with me now. Keep what is with you for the
time being, and later, when I need to work on more
pages, I will ask you for that.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

I gave you the corrections for Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi and
Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I will see them, and then I will write the preface for
Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā and Catuḥ-ślokī Bhāgavatam.




January (undated), 2007


śloka class




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.6.1

Teachings of Prahlāda Mahārāja


kaumāra ācaret prājṣo

dharmān bhāgavatān iha

durlabhaṁ mānuṣaṁ janma

tad apy adhruvam arthadam


[Śrī Prahlāda said: One who is sufficiently intelligent
should use the human form of body from the very
beginning of life – in other words, from the tender age
of childhood – to practice the activities of devotional

                            57
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

service and giving up all other engagements. The human
body is most rarely achieved, and although temporary
like other bodies, it is meaningful and beneficial
because in human life one can perform devotional
service. Even a slight amount of sincere devotional
service can give a person complete perfection.*]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Acyutānanda dāsa] Can you explain?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

“Human life is very rare. One who is intelligent should
perform devotional service to Lord Hari, because even a
small amount of devotional service gives one a great
amount of benefit.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And what about the next important verse? Can you explain
the verse beginning guru-śuśrūṣayā13?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

“One should approach the guru, worship him, offer all of
one’s material possessions unto him, stay in his
residence, in his association, and worship Lord Hari.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why from the age of five? Will we not do so in old age?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why not?

Acytānanda dāsa:

Because… uh…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We will all die. It may be that some die in the womb of
their mother, some will die after ten years, and some
after twenty years. There is no certainty when death
will come. So, it is better to begin devotional
activities from one’s young age.

Why should we not simply collect money to marry with a
very beautiful lady, and have many sons and daughters of
good character? Why not do all of this?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Because we have to leave all of these things when we
die.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                           58
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Should we not try to enjoy this world with our children,
wives, and all other friends and relatives?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why not?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Because it doesn’t make a person happy.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They do not give happiness. Rather, they are like
enemies. They take all of our attachment, which should
have been given to Kṛṣṇa. In the form of father, mother,
son, daughter, and especially wife or husband, they are
like dacoits.

Prahlāda Mahārāja is saying that if your age duration is
one hundred years, then fifty years goes in sleeping,
twenty to twenty-five years for learning to be expert in
making money, and from eighty to one hundred years old
we are too old to do anything. Then, the remaining ten
years goes to marrying, having daughters and sons, and
supporting them. So, when will you do bhajana? It is
better to perform bhajana from the beginning of your
life.

How to begin? First accept a guru and render service to
him with a sense of an intimate relationship
(viśrambheṇa), and then perform all your activities only
for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa.

[Madhuvrata dāsa, Brajanāth dāsa, and Vṛndā-devī dāsī
recite the verse.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, very good, very good! Vṛndā is better than
Brajanāth. [To Vṛndā-devī dāsī] He made mistakes, but
you made no mistakes.

[Vṛndā-devī then explains the verse.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good. [Taking the part of a materialist and
challenging Vṛndā-devī dāsī] We will practice bhakti-
yoga in old age. We should enjoy the world. Why should
we learn bhakti from the beginning? Why perform bhakti
from childhood?

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Because an old dog cannot learn new tricks.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

                           59
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017


Very good, thank you all.

You should remember the śloka of Vṛtāsura. Vṛtāsura was
Citraketu Mahārāja in his previous birth. He was a big
king with thousands upon thousands of wives but no
children, no son, and he was worried for this. Aṅgirā
Ṛṣi came and asked him, “Why are you so worried?” He
replied, “I have no child. Please give me one child.”
Aṅgirā Ṛṣi tried to make him understand that no one can
be happy by having a child. One can be happy only by
chanting and remembering and worshiping God. But
Citraketu said, “Anyway, please give me a son. Can you
give me one?” Angira Ṛṣi said “Yes.” He gave the king
some fruit and told him, “Give this to your queen.” A
very beautiful son soon came, who was beautiful like the
moon, and gradually that son became five years old.

Now the king was always with his queen and son. He was
ignoring all the other thousands of queens, and they
became worried. They thought, “He does not speak with
us, he does not give us oil, cloth, or anything, and the
reason is that son.” So, they poisoned that boy and he
died. When the king and queen saw what happened, they
wept and fainted. All were weeping, and those who gave
poison were also weeping to make a show.

At that time, Aṅgirā Ṛṣi arrived with Nārada Ṛṣi and
asked, “Why is everyone weeping?” Someone replied, “They
are weeping for their son.”

So they told the king, “Oh, he is there; he is
sleeping.”

The king replied, “No, he has gone.”

“Where has he gone? I see he is here lying down.”

“Oh, his soul is gone.”

“What harm is there if the soul is gone? Your son is
there – he whom you used to call son. If there is no
soul present now, then how is he your son? Have you seen
the soul?”

“No.”

“Then why are you weeping?”

Aṅgirā Ṛṣi and Nārada Ṛṣi then gave the king a mantra,
and by this he became free from all material attachments
and obtained spiritual realizations.

In the king’s next life he committed an offense at the
lotus feet of Śaṅkara (Lord Siva). Actually Śaṅkara was
his friend and he was only joking – it was not actually
an offence – but Pārvatī-devī (the wife of Śaṅkara)
could not realize this and thus cursed him to become a
demon. He thus became a demon, but he also remained a
pure devotee. He prayed while on the battlefield with
Indra, when Indra was going to kill him14:


ahaṁ hare tava pādaika-mūla

                              60
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


dāsānudāso bhavitāsmi bhūyaḥ

manaḥ smaretāsu-pater guṇāṁs te

gṛṇīta vāk karma karotu kāyaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.11.24)


[O Lord, please bestow such mercy upon me, that in my
next birth I may obtain the opportunity to exclusively
serve the servants who have taken shelter of Your lotus
feet. May my mind always remember Your all-auspicious
qualities, my speech always chant the glories of these
qualities, and my body always remain engaged in Your
service.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should remember the four consecutive ślokas,
beginning with this one.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, Nārada made the son come back to life?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, but the son said, “I cannot come back to you, I am
better where I am now. Who is my father? In a previous
life, my father may have been my son.15 I don’t want to
be here. Where I am now, I have chance to do bhajana.”

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Was the son actually Aṅgirā Ṛṣi himself?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Because he had no son to give to the king, he came
himself. He kept his body somewhere and his soul
manufactured a body and became that son.16

Bas. [That’s all for today.]




January (undated), 2007


śloka class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.6.4 and 6.11.24

tat-prayāso na kartavyo

yata āyur-vyayaḥ param

na tathā vindate kṣemaṁ

mukunda-caraṇāmbujam

                              61
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.6.4)


[Endeavors merely for sense gratification or material
happiness through economic development are not to be
performed, for they result only in a loss of time and
energy, with no actual profit. If one’s endeavors are
directed toward Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one can surely
attain the spiritual platform of self-realization. There
is no such benefit from engaging oneself in economic
development.*]

ahaṁ hare tava pādaika-mūla-

dāsānudāso bhavitāsmi bhūyaḥ

manaḥ smaretāsu-pater guṇāṁs te

gṛṇīta vāk karma karotu kāyaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.11.24)


[O Lord, please bestow such mercy upon me, that in my
next birth I may obtain the opportunity to exclusively
serve the servants who have taken shelter of Your lotus
feet. May my mind always remember Your all-auspicious
qualities, my speech always chant the glories of these
qualities, and my body always remain engaged in Your
service.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Who is praying?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Vṛtrāsura.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Who was Vṛtrāsura?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Vṛtrāsura was Citraketu Mahārāja in his previous life.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why did he become a demon?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

I don’t know.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I told this yesterday.   It was due to the curse of
Pārvatī. He was joking   with his friend Śaṅkara, but
Pārvatī took his words   very seriously. She took his
words as an offence to   Śaṅkara.

[Madhuvrata dāsa recites and explains the two verses.]

                              62
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why should we not do anything to maintain ourselves,
like making money and all related activities?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Because everything is coming from our previous
activities.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Without wanting it, suffering comes; and if happiness is
meant to be there, it will certainly also come. So we
need not try to do anything for our happiness. Rather,
we should engage only in mukunda-caraṇāmbujam (worship
of Krsna’s lotus feet). Try to do bhajana.

What does Mukunda mean here?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

One who gives liberation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. He gives liberation from all sufferings, and He
also gives prema.

[To Brajanāth dāsa] Can you utter the ślokas?

Brajanāth dāsa:

I have done only 50%.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What 50?

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

We learned the ślokas together, so he will speak.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Ahaṁ hare…[some difficulty]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Vṛndā-devī dāsī] Help him.

There are three things: body, tongue, and mind. If
whatever we do by body, think by mind, and tell by words
is engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then everything will
be okay.




January 27, 2007



                              63
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

darśana

Acyutānanda dāsa:

I have a question. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says we
should be humble:


tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka (Verse 3)


[Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass that has been trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless and offering respect to everyone according to
their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.]

How can we develop such qualities?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Kṛṣṇa has given independence to all jīvas – to some
degree, not fully – and with that independence the jīva
may or may not do what Kṛṣṇa wants him to do. If a man
wants to serve Kṛṣṇa, he is required to strictly follow
the instructions in this verse, thinking, “I should not
be angry. I must follow tṛṇād api sunīcena. This will
bring bhakti.” A person who wishes to advance in bhakti
is never allowed to quarrel with anyone for his own
gain.

Bharata and Śrī Rāmacandra quarrelled with each other,
but for what reason? Bharata told Śrī Rāma, “I will not
take the kingdom. You must take it.” Rāma replied, “No,
you should take it.” They were quarrelling only for the
purpose of giving, not for taking. On the other hand,
Duryodhana and the Pāṇḍavas were fighting for taking.

“I must attain love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. By following
the principles of tṛṇād api sunīcena (thinking oneself
more insignificant and lowly than the straw in the
street, etc.), I can attain Their service.” When one
develops this mood, he will strongly follow these
principles.

Read and follow Upadeśāmṛta. Amṛta means ‘nectar.’ Why
are these instructions (upadeśa) called nectar? It is
because following them gives kṛṣṇa-bhakti up to rādhā-
dāsyam (personal service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā). Rādhā-
dāsyam is the aim and object of our life and sādhana-
bhajana. If one truly desires this attainment, he will
follow Upadeśāmṛta. If we have everything in our life
except bhakti, we really have nothing; whereas if we
have only bhakti, our life is successful.


                           64
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

There are two additional principles to follow: strictly
reject what is not favorable for kṛṣṇa-bhakti and
strongly accept what is favorable. By such practice,
anarthas will gradually diminish and you will become a
pure bhakta.

If a person is giving medical help to all jīvas, is this
good or bad?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

It is good.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Is it favorable for bhakti, or not?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If you give medicine to a thief or murderer, thus making
him healthy, he will again murder others. And what will
happen to you?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Sin will come to me because I helped him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

Gradually give up all other engagements and attachments,
and become one-pointed to kṛṣṇa-bhajana and rādhā-
dāsyam. Maintain this determination: “I will not give a
particle of my energy to anything else.”


api tyaktvā lakṣmī-pati-ratim ito vyoma-nayanīṁ

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇau sva-rati-maṇi-dau tvaṁ bhaja manaḥ

Manaḥ-śikṣā (Verse 4)


[Furthermore, O mind, please abandon even the attach-
ment to Lakṣmīpati Śrī Nārāyaṇa, which leads to
Vaikuṇṭha. Rather, live in Vraja and worship Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who bestow upon devotees the precious jewel
of Their rati (spiritual attachment).]

Give up even the worship of Nārāyaṇa, Dvārakādīśa, and
Mathureśa, and give up the desire for vātsalya (service
in the mood of Kṛṣṇa’s parent) and sakhya (the service
of a friend). Keep only the Divine Couple Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa in your heart, with a desire for direct service to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Gurudeva, if someone is a doctor by profession and is

                            65
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

helping others to do sinful activities – if that is his
profession – then what can he do to be free from the
sinful reaction?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That person needs to somehow maintain himself. But we
are not doctors, engineers, or any other profession, so
how do we maintain ourselves? If one is a doctor by
skill yet totally engages in bhajana, his maintenance
will be automatically taken care of.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

If doctors give you their money, you will purify them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why should they not give their entire selves? Why give
only money? One day they will have to give up that
profession.

Money means energy.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

So, if they give their money, will they get purified?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. If one has money, he should donate it for Kṛṣṇa’s
service.

Without my desiring money, so much money comes to me. I
accept everyone’s money without any change in my
consciousness, and I engage their money in beautiful,
favorable works for Kṛṣṇa. For example, I use it for
dhāma-sevā and for creating places for hari-kathā. A
person will then come and hear hari-kathā and perform
kīrtana, and he will advance in bhakti.




January 28, 2007


darśana

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

All scriptures state that sādhu-saṅga – only sādhu-
saṅga, only sādhu-saṅga – will save us from the endless
pain of birth and death, and give kṛṣṇa-prema. Without
sādhu-saṅga, pure nāma will not come. By continual
hearing, our heart will be cleared, and then pure bhakti
will manifest in our hearts. Whether one is a doctor,
engineer, advocate, the president or prime minister of a
country, or anyone else – he will suffer. On the other
hand, anyone who is somehow maintaining his life and at
the same time chanting and remembering and weeping, that
person will very soon realize kṛṣṇa-prema.


                           66
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

Navadvīpa parikramā is coming again. About 10,000
devotees will be gathered there, and hari-kathā,
kīrtana, and dancing, will take place. Even if an
ignorant person goes to Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Navadvīpa-
dhāma, or Purī-dhāma – and especially to Vṛndāvana and
Navadvīpa – the dhāma, being very powerful, will shower
its profuse mercy upon him.

In our past births we committed many offenses, such as
nāma-aparādha, sevā-aparādha, and vaiṣṇava-aparādha, and
that is why we don’t experience prema while chanting.
When we go to Navadvīpa-dhāma, chanting and weeping, “O
Gaura, O Nityānanda Prabhu, O Dhāma Prabhu, I surrender
to you. Please be merciful to me,” the dhāma will shower
its compassion. In fact, although they are the same
tattva (truth), Navadvīpa-dhāma is even more merciful
than Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Perhaps you have been there many
times?

Govinda dāsī (of Hawaii):

Yes, many years ago. I’ve been there several times, and
I was there when Śrīla Prabhupāda was there. The last
time I saw Prabhupāda in this world was in Māyāpura.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In a village of Bengal, there was a lady who was a very,
very good devotee. She used to go to Navadvīpa-dhāma
every year. Her husband and sons told her, “Each year
you go to Navadvīpa-dhāma, so this year you need not go.
Why are you going? One time is enough.” She told her
husband, “We take prasādam, food, every day. Why do we
need to take it every day? One day will suffice.” Saying
this, she at once left for Navadvīpa.

If you cannot physically go to the dhāma, then be there
by mind. If you are here, send your mind to Navadvīpa
with us, and your mind will do parikramā.

Govinda dāsī:

I have no use for this mind. It gives me trouble day and
night, so please take it to Navadvīpa.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī: Will that give the same benefit?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not the same, but some benefit will be there.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Gurudeva, you have done this parikramā so many times.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have been doing parikramā since 1946. Once I was very
sick and could not go; I only missed once.

Brajanāth dāsa:

In total, you went fifty-nine times.


                            67
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

When the brahmacārīs would want to go back by bus, you
would pick up your daṇḍa [and show it to them in a
motion of chastisement].

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To a Bengali guest] What is your age now?

Hladinī-śakti dāsī:

He had a stroke, so he has problems speaking. He is
eighty-five. He is younger than you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To the guest] In this old age you must chant, “Hare
kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma hare
rāma rāma rāma hare hare,” while eating, sleeping, going
here and there, walking, or doing anything. You will
certainly become happy, and you will be saved from birth
and death. Only this holy name can save you.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

Gurudeva, when you did parikramā in the early years, did
you go by foot, with tents, from one place to the next?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. Two or three times we   went by foot in Vṛndāvana
with Guru Mahārāja, and in   Navadvīpa we went one time
with tents to each island.   We would live one day on one
island – one day here, and   one day there.

Once, in Campaka-haṭṭa, there was heavy rain; there was
water everywhere. It was Ekādāsī that day, and due to so
much rain no one could even take Ekādāsī prasādam. All
were crying, “What to do?” I was seeing to their needs,
and somehow we passed that night.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Did you give them bananas and coconuts?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We could not give them anything. They took prasādam on
the following day.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

Should we do like that Gurudeva – with tents?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Now there are 10,000 people. How can we do that? In the
early days, there were four or five-hundred of us. For
10,000 people, tents will not fit anywhere. And what
would happen if rain comes? Some rain will surely come.

Sāvitrī dāsī:

Guru Mahārāja, the devotees of ISKCON Bombay are
teaching a one-week course on how to preach to new

                             68
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

people. The course is called “The Search For Happiness.”
Rasānanda prabhu [now Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja] was
teaching this to us in Vṛndāvana, and I am studying it.
I would like to follow the way in which they teach the
course in ISKCON. It is a very simple way for people to
connect and understand. I am studying and making
outlines. I would like to maybe do this for our
devotees.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, you can teach others also.

Sāvitrī dāsī:

I would like to do this while traveling in different
parts of the world. After I finished law school, I was
teaching labor-law to many students in the university,
and I was also running businesses.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You are very qualified. You should boldly preach
everywhere.

Sāvitrī dāsī:

Gurudeva, Muslim people are so difficult to convince.
They don’t change their minds.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Somehow we must continue. So many devotees are joining
in China and Russia.

Hlādinī-śakti dāsī (of Hawaii):

Buddhists will be conquered by love for Kṛṣṇa. They have
no love in their hearts.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are against bhakti – more so than Māyāvādīs. They
are simply absorbed in false logic, and therefore their
numbers will increase as Kali-yuga advances.17 Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu came and spread Kṛṣṇa’s name, so
this nāma-saṅkīrtana will go everywhere.

Haladhara dāsa:

Is the Kṛṣṇa who appears as Vāsudeva in Mathurā the same
Kṛṣṇa who comes to Mathurā from Vṛndāvana and defeats
Kaṁsa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

The son of Devakī and Vasudeva killed Kaṁsa. By tattva,
both are the same. By mood, Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa
never comes to Mathurā.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:


                            69
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

He never goes out of Vṛndāvana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Mathureśa Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī and Vasudeva, killed
Kaṁsa. In fact, it was not He who killed Kaṁsa, but
Viṣṇu within His body who did it. Killing demons is the
duty of viṣṇu-tattva.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja: It’s stated in Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.13):


ataeva viṣṇu takhana kṛṣṇera śarīre

viṣṇu-dvāre kare kṛṣṇa asura-saṁhāre


[At that time, therefore, Lord Viṣṇu is present in the
body of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and Lord Kṛṣṇa kills the demons
through Him.*]

Viṣṇu living within Kṛṣṇa destroyed the demons.

Hlādinī-śakti dāsī:

Does this include the demons He killed in Vṛndāvana?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Haladara dāsa:

I have one question. Kṛṣṇa says, “If you think of Me at
the time of death, you will come to Me.” If one wants to
be the maidservant of Śrī Rādhikā, is it best to think
of Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhikā, or the bona fide guru?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

The three are non-different. Without guru, you cannot do
anything. Better to remember guru, through guru, Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa, and within remembrance of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa,
especially remember rādhā-dāsyam. Rādhe, Rādhe, Rādhe.

You should preach very boldly.




January 30, 2007


darśana

Appearance Day of Nityānanda Prabhu

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

During the rainy season in India, on guru-pūrṇimā

                           70
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

(vyāsa-pūrṇimā), devotees of all sampradāyas – Rāmānuja,
Madhvācārya, Viṣṇusvāmī, Nimbāditya, and even
Śaṅkarācārya – worship Śrīla Vyāsadeva.

In Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s pastimes, as that day was
approaching, Mahāprabhu asked Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu,
“Where will we perform Vyāsa-pūjā?”

Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita boldly said, “I have all the
paraphernalia for worship in my house, and I have the
book that contains all procedures for the observance of
Vyāsa-pūjā (Vyāsa-pūjā Paddhati). So, I request it be
performed at my home.”

Mahāprabhu then declared, “Tomorrow will be Vyāsa-pūjā;
everyone should come.” The next day all of Mahāprabhu’s
associates came. Everything was ready, but Mahāprabhu
was purposely somewhat late in entering the area of the
worship.

Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita told Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, “Mahāprabhu
is a little late, but we should begin. Please give the
garland to Śrīla Vyāsadeva and let us begin Vyāsa-pūjā.”
In an evasive way, Nityānanda Prabhu began to make the
sounds “hmm, hmm,” and said, “I’m going to do it, I’m
going to do it.”

When Mahāprabhu finally arrived, Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura
complained to Him, saying, “Your Śrīpāda (Nityānanda
Prabhu) is not performing Vyāsa-pūjā.”

Mahāprabhu then approached Nityānanda Prabhu and told
Him, “O Nityānanda Prabhu, do it now.” Now seeing
Mahāprabhu before Him, Nityānanda Prabhu took the
garland and all the paraphernalia for worship, and
offered them to Him – to show everyone that He is the
supreme guru. Mahāprabhu is the guru of Vyāsa and all
Vyāsas (all the Vyāsas that have appeared in the
creation thus far). Thus, Nityānanda Prabhu declared
that Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself.

While Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu was traveling with
Lakṣmīpati throughout many of the pilgrimage places of
India, after some time He came to Vṛndāvana. There, He
was searching and calling out, “Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is
Kṛṣṇa?”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

“Where is Kanhaiyā, where is Kanhaiyā?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He was caressing the cows and cowherd boys. He would run
here and there, weeping like a mad person and calling
out, “Oh, where is My Kṛṣṇa? Where is Kṛṣṇa?” Those who
heard and saw Him ran away, thinking, “Who is this
person? He is totally mad.” Actually He was totally mad.

Then, one day an aerial voice called to Him, “Nityānanda
Prabhu, Your brother is not here now. He is in
Navadvīpa. He has taken birth there and is now in His
youth.”


                            71
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

Nityānanda Prabhu at once left Vṛndāvana and went to the
border of Navadvīpa-dhāma, near the Ganges, where He hid
Himself in the house of Śrī Nandana Ācārya. He
considered, “If Mahāprabhu –

if Kṛṣṇa – is here, and He will search for Me, only then
will I know that He is really Nanda-nandana Kṛṣṇa;
otherwise not.”

At that time, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was at Śrīvāsa-
aṅgana, and He told the devotees, “A very great Vaiṣṇava
has come to Navadvīpa. Please go to Him and bring Him
here.” Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita and the other devotees searched
everywhere, but they could not find Him. Then Mahāprabhu
said, “Oh, I am coming. Let us find Him.”

When Mahāprabhu and His associates arrived at the house
of Nandana Ācārya and entered there, Nityānanda Prabhu
and Mahāprabhu saw each other. This was their first
meeting, and for some time they both simply stared at
each other. They embraced, and both fainted. Mahāprabhu
later told Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita to recite a verse, which he
uttered:


barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ

bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām

randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopa-vṛndair

vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada-ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.5)


[Śyāmasundara is entering the forest of Vṛndāvana
accompanied by His cowherd boyfriends. He wears a
peacock feather in His turban, a yellow karṇikāra flower
on His ears, a yellow-gold garment, and a victory
garland strung with five kinds of fragrant forest
flowers. Thus He displays His form as the greatest of
dancers. The nectar of His lips flows through the holes
of the flute [and thus the glorious vibrations of His
flute-song echo throughout the forest groves]. Singing
His glories, the cowherd boys follow from behind. In
this way, Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma [which is more charming
than Vaikuṇṭha], becomes delighted by the touch of His
lotus feet.]

Both the Lords then returned to external consciousness
and began to dance. Mahāprabhu told Nityānanda Prabhu,
“Oh, please come with Me,” and brought Him to Śrīvāsa-
aṅgana.

After that, Nityānanda Prabhu would sometimes reside at
Śrīvāsa-aṅganā with Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita and his family.
Sometimes He would be naked, at which time He would sit
on the lap of Mālinī-devī, the wife of Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita,
like a baby, and Mālinī-devī would give Him her breast-
milk.

Once, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu took off His dhoti and put
it on His head (as a turban), and in this way He went to

                              72
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śacīmātā’s house, calling, “Mother! Mother! I am very
hungry!” Then, totally absorbed in the mood of Śrī
Baladeva Prabhu, He searched for Kṛṣṇa, calling, “Where
is Kanhaiyā?” Mahāprabhu then gave Nityānanda Prabhu His
chaddar, personally wrapping it around Him, and Śacīmātā
gave Him prasādam.

Mālinī-devī had a bowl…

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

A silver bowl.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

A silver bowl that was full of ghee and was meant for
offering to the Deity. Once a big crow came and flew
away with the bowl, and Mālinī-devī began to weep.
Seeing this, Nityānanda Prabhu called to the crow, “Come
on, come on. Bring back that pot!” The crow at once came
back with the bowl.

Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu was present when Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu took sannyāsa. After taking sannyāsa,
Mahāprabhu wanted to go to Vṛndāvana, but Nityānanda
Prabhu brought Him by a trick to Advaita-bhavana (the
house of Śrī Advaita Ācārya) in Śāntipura. There, all
the residents of Nadia, including Śacīmātā, came and met
with Him.

Nityānanda Prabhu broke Mahāprabhu’s daṇḍa in Orissa, in
a place that later became known as Daṇḍa-bhāṅgā-nadī.

He sometimes used to mock quarrel with Śrī Advaita
Ācārya.

Nityānanda Prabhu kī jaya!

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Padmavātī-devī kī jaya! Hāḍāi Paṇḍita kī jaya! Viśvarūpa
Prabhu kī jaya! Śacī Maiya kī jaya! Gaura-Nityānanda
Prabhu kī jaya! Gaura Premānande! Hari hari bol!

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Thank you for coming to hear.

Brajanātha dāsa:

Gurudeva, did Śrī Viśvarūpa enter into Nityānanda Prabhu
when He left the world?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā it is written that when
Viśvarūpa disappeared, His power manifested in Īśvara-
purīpāda, and afterward, when Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu met
with Mahāprabhu, Viśvarūpa manifested in Nityānanda
Prabhu.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

I was discussing with Ratikalā in Bali. You had given a

                             73
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

couple of lectures on Nityānanda Prabhu there, and you
were testing the devotees to see if they knew whether
Nityānanda Prabhu can give gopī-prema. Ratikalā answered
correctly.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

During the manifest pastimes of Mahāprabhu, Nityānanda
Prabhu married the two sisters, Vasudhā and Jāhṇavā, who
were none other than Revatī and Vāruṇī, Śrī Baladeva
Prabhu’s wives during the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

When Nityānanda Prabhu married, many people became
confused and did not want to honor Him as before. But
Mahāprabhu always respected Him, and told Him to preach
in Bengal. In this regard Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura has
said, “If anyone, after hearing the glories of
Nityānanda Prabhu, criticizes Him, I will kick that
person on his head.”

Advaita Ācārya had six sons. Three of his sons,
Balarāma, Svarūpa, and Jagadīśa, used to respect
Mahāprabhu and Advaita Ācārya, but they were confused
about Nityānanda Prabhu and did not honor Him. Advaita
Ācārya therefore rejected these sons, and accepted only
Acyutānanda as his son.

Gaura Premānande




January 31, 2007


morning darśana

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

Gurudeva, what would you say is the most important
quality for being effective in preaching the message of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu? Is it humility, compassion,
knowledge, bhakti, realization?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:




bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari’ kara para-upakāra

Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Adi-līlā 9.41)


[One who has taken his birth as a human being in the
land of India (Bhārata-varṣa) should make his life
successful and work for the benefit of all other
people.*]

Preaching involves thinking, “All jīvas in this world
have forgotten Kṛṣṇa.” Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said,

                           74
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

and Śrī Kṛṣṇa has said in the Bhagavad-gītā, to first
hear from gurudeva, and then, after hearing, perform
kīrtana. Kīrtana means preaching, and in that there
should be humility:


tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka (Verse 3)


[Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass that has been trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless and offering respect to everyone according to
their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.]

We should not think, “I have become guru.” Rather,
“Following the order of our gurudeva, we are preaching.”

You must know the instructions given by your gurudeva –
knowing all tattvas (established philosophical truths)
such as kṛṣṇa-tattva, jīva-tattva, māyā-tattva, rādhā-
tattva, and the path out of māyā. How can a person
preach if he doesn’t know all tattvas? It is best to
read the first and second sections of Jaiva-dharma for
preaching, and the third section for following yourself;
not for preaching.




January 31, 2007


evening darśana

Brajanāth dāsa:

The first question is about brahma-vimohana-līlā. When
all the cowherd boys were in mystic slumber for one year
[and Krsna took their forms so that their mothers would
not miss them and worry], in that year Kṛṣṇa [in the
forms of those cowherd boys] married [was betrothed to]
all the gopīs. After the cowherd boys came out from
their mystic sleep, how did they understand that they
had been married? That must have been a surprise for
them. How do we reconcile that? Who explained to them
that they were married?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is all due to Yogamāyā. All of Kṛṣṇa’s desires are
fulfilled by Yogamāyā. The gopīs never thought, “Kṛṣṇa
is my husband,” and the friends considered, “This lady
is my wife.” Otherwise, how could there be parakīya-

                           75
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

bhāva (the mood of a paramour)? Do you understand?

Brajanāth dāsa:

In that year, when Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself as all the
cowherd boys, Gargamuni said, “All the gopas should now
marry with gopīs.” At that time the young gopas and
gopīs were promised to each other for marriage in the
future. All the gopīs thought, “I will marry this gopa
in the future.” When the gopas came out from their sleep
caused by Brahmā, did the gopas understand, or not
understand, by Yogamāyā’s influence that they were going
to marry this or that gopī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

By the power of Yogamāyā they considered, “She is my
wife.” Otherwise, there would be no parakīya-bhāva. [To
Amara dāsa] Do you know the meaning of parakīya?

Amara dāsa:

It’s when a married wife has love for another man.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

All the gopīs are Kṛṣṇa’s wives, in the sense that they
are all His power as expansions of Rādhikā. In this way,
by the influence of Yogaymāyā, a special thing was
manifest – upapati-bhāva, or paramour mood.

Amara dāsa:

The gopas were not attracted to their wives.

Brajanāth dāsa:

In the gopīs there are four divisions: svapakṣa (those
in Rādhikā’s party), vipakṣa (Rādhikā’s rival party),
taṭasthā (those who are neutral to Rādhikā’s party and
friendly with Her rival party), and suhṛt (those who are
friendly to Rādhikā’s party and neutral to Her rival
party). Is this division there in the sakhās also?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Their divisions are sakhā, priya-sakhā, priya-narma
sakhā, and prāṇa-sakhā [also known as suhṛda-sakhā].18
Their divisions are not like those of the gopīs. All are
svapakṣa to Kṛṣṇa.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Prabhu is saying that all the gopas are more attracted
to Kṛṣṇa than to their wives.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It has been told that they used to worship their wives,
because their wives fulfilled the desire of Kṛṣṇa. All
would honor that person who loved Kṛṣṇa. Also, the
mothers-in-law used to think, “My daughter-in-law serves
Kṛṣṇa.” At the same time, in order to increase the
eagerness of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs, they acted like they

                           76
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

were creating opposition.

Amara dāsa:

The gopas are more attracted to Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not like their wives. Their wives were more attracted,
and they served Kṛṣṇa more.

Amara dāsa:

But the gopas are not as attracted to their wives as
they are attracted to Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, that is right.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Prabhu is saying that the gopas may be na-puṁsā
(impotent).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, never. Only Abhimanyu, by the power of Yogamāyā, is
impotent. By birth he was not impotent, but after he was
married to the shadow of Rādhikā, then he became so.




February 2, 2007


śloka class

Śrī Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.117

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Madhuvrata dāsa] Do you remember something?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

A śloka?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not a śloka (the Sanskrit word for a Sanskrit verse); a
payara (Bengali verse).

Madhuvrata dāsa:




kṛṣṇa bhuli’ sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha


                            77
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 20.117)


[Forgetting Kṛṣṇa, the living entity has been attracted
by the external feature from time immemorial. Therefore
the illusory energy māyā gives him all kinds of misery
in his material existence.*]

“The conditioned soul, who is averse to Kṛṣṇa, has
become enamored by material energy since time
immemorial, and therefore māyā gives him unlimited
suffering in the form of three-fold miseries.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

How does māyā give suffering to the jīvas?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

I don’t know the śloka.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You will have to remember so many payaras.


kabhu svarge, kabhu martye, narake vā kabhu

kabhu deva, kabhu daitya, kabhu dāsa, prabhu

Prema-vivarta (6.6)


[Sometimes he goes to heaven. Then, he has to come down
to Earth again, or maybe he has to go to hell. Sometimes
he is born as a deva (demigod), sometimes as a demon,
sometimes as the master, and at other times as the
servant.*]


āmi siddha kṛṣṇa dāsa, ei kathā bhule

māyāra naphara haṣā cira-dina bule

Prema-vivarta (6.4)


[The jīva soul, having forgotten his constitutional
position as the eternal perfect and pure servant of
Kṛṣṇa, remains māyā’s slave while going from one body to
the next.*]

So many important truths are explained here. [To Vṛndā-
devī dāsī] Do you remember something?

[Vṛndā-devī dāsī: recites and explains the same verse.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And others?

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

I am trying to learn the next one, but I’ll mix them up

                           78
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

if I try to say more than one.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can tell Brajanāth prabhu to speak.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

He knows the verses.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do you know them?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa bhuliye…jīva…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Brajanāth buli [meaning ‘Brajanāth has forgotten’].


tāte kṛṣṇa bhaje, kare gurura sevana

māyā-jāla chuṭe, pāya kṛṣṇera caraṇa

Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.25)


[In the Kṛṣṇa conscious state, the living entity engages
in devotional service under the direction of the
spiritual master. In this way he gets out of the
clutches of māyā and takes shelter under the lotus feet
of Lord Kṛṣṇa.*]

Without this, māyā will not leave us. We should remember
this principle and try to be far away from māyā.

What is māyā?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

What is māyā? It is the external energy of the Lord.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the word-meaning of māyā?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Māyā means ‘not this.’ Mā-yā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And what does that mean?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

What appears to be real is actually illusory and
temporary.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                           79
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Mmm. [Pointing towards Vṛndāvana dāsa, who is standing
close by] Who is he?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Vṛndāvana dāsa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Whose building is this?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

It belongs to Vṛndāvana dāsa, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Who are you?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Madhuvrata dāsa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Madhuvrata?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

I don’t know who I am, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Whose coat is this?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

It is your coat.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

It is all māyā – the illusory māyā.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

‘I’ and ‘mine.’

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Mā means ‘not’ and yā means ‘this.’ What is not, we
think to be real. He thinks, “This is my wife.” This is
māyā. He is the eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

I have no realization of this, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. If you know everything about
bhakti-śāstras but you are not realizing or following,
then internally you are in māyā. Moreover, externally

                           80
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

you will later on accept māyā. For example, Prema-
prayojana knew so many things, so many things, but what
became of him? What will happen if a person is not
following and at the same time speaks hari-kathā to
others? This is the influence of the illusory māyā.
Then, where will you be as the hearer?

Thus, māyā is not so easy to give up. When we surrender
completely to guru and Kṛṣṇa, then we can give her up.
Those who have partly surrendered – who are surrendered
by words but not by activities, mind, and soul – are in
māyā. Though we are giving a chance to all, those who
follow will be saved and those who do not follow will
remain in this world of birth and death. We followed our
gurudeva with śaraṇāgati (the six limbs of surrender),
and that is why we are saved.

Thank you.

[To Acyutānanda dāsa] Can you give me some work
[regarding my Hindi manuscripts] today?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Yeah, maybe later.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Your dictation from yesterday.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You have made this ready?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Not yet. I have yet to do it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

All right, so do it. Have they sent something? 19

Acyutānanda dāsa:

I don’t think so.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

Gurudeva, you said that if we are not surrendering our
mind and soul to guru, then after some time we won’t be
able to maintain the facade of being a devotee?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, this is quite true. I can give guidance and tell
them what to do, but they will have to follow. I cannot
walk for them. They will have to walk. Hare kṛṣṇa hare
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma hare rāma rāma
rāma hare hare.




                            81
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

* * *




1 Ācārya is a homonym, which in this particular
connection refers to a brāhmaṇa who can perform fire
sacrifices and many varieties of ceremonies for giving
saṁskāras (impressions on the heart that come during
Vedic ceremonies). Ācārya also means ‘one who follows
rules and teaches others how to follow.’



2 The two chapters are for his publication work.



3 Gauḍīya-kaṇṭhahāra (literally: “A Necklace for the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas”) is a compilation of verses,
collected by Śrī Atīndriya dāsa Adhikārī, one of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s foremost disciples.
In its foreword, written by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura himself, the book is compared to a
necklace, holding eighteen gems of tattva, or conclusive
truths, such as guru-tattva (truths regarding śrī guru),
jīva-tattva (truths regarding the jīva, or living
entity), abhideya-tattva (truths regarding the process
how to obtain the ultimate goal of life), and prayojana-
tattva (truths regarding that ultimate goal). Pramāṇa-
tattva, or truths regarding what is to be accepted as
valid proof for all these truths, forms the pendant of
the necklace, and the blessings of śrī guru are its
central jewel.



4

ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma vṛṇdāvanaṁ

ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhūvargeṇā yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ pramāṇam amalaṁ premā pumartho mahān

śrī-caitanya-mahāprabhor matam idaṁ tatrādaro naḥ paraḥ


Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is our exclusive object of
worship and love. In the same way that He is worshipful,
so is His transcendental abode, Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. The
mood in which the young brides of Vraja [the gopīs,
headed by Śrīmatī Rādhikā] worship Him is the highest
and ultimate form of love of God. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
alone is the immaculate scriptural evidence of this.
Kṛṣṇa-prema is the supreme objective of life [beyond
mundane religiosity, economic development, sense
gratification and impersonal liberation]. This is the
conception of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu (gaura-vāṇī). We
hold this conclusion (siddhānta) in supreme regard [and
have no inclination or respect for any other conclusion
or cheating opinions].


                           82
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



5 Daśa-mūla – ‘ten roots’. In the Ayur-veda, the science
of herbal medicine, there are ten roots which, when
combined together, produce a tonic which sustains life
and counteracts disease. Similarly, there are ten
ontological principles. When these are properly
understood and realized, they destroy the disease of
material existence and give life to the soul. The first
of these principles is known as pramāṇa, the evidence
which establishes the existence of the fundamental
truths. The other nine principles are known as prameya,
the truths which are to be established.



6

ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28)


All avatāras (incarnations) such as Śrī Rāmacandra and
Nṛsiṁhadeva are the plenary portions, or expansions of
the plenary portions, of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. However, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Svayam Bhagavān, the
embodiment of six opulences and the original
fountainhead of everything.)



7

abdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte

mānuṣyam artha-dam anityam apīha dhīraḥ

tūrṇaṁ yateta na pated anu-mṛtyu yāvan

niḥśreyasāya viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.9.29)


This human birth is very rare, because it is only
attained after many lifetimes. Although temporary, it
can give the highest benefit [the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā]. After all, sense gratification is available in
all species [whereas spiritual perfection is possible
only for human beings]. Therefore, an intelligent person
should immediately, without wasting a single moment,
begin to endeavor [with one-pointed dedication] to
achieve the ultimate good fortune, before death comes.



8 Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja usually gives the   same
answer as Madhuvrata dāsa. We do not venture to
understand or explain his deep mood when he uttered   this
sentence. We can only say that Viśākhā-devī is born   on
the same day as Rādhikā and has the same qualities.   As

                              83
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

the daughter of Jaṭilā’s sister, she is also a relative
of Rādhikā. She knows how to please and serve Rādhikā,
and helps Kṛṣṇa to do so. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa
Himself. (Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja)



9 Gauḍīya-kaṇṭhahāra (literally: “A Necklace for the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas”) is a compilation of verses,
collected by Śrī Atīndriya dāsa Adhikārī, one of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s foremost disciples.
In its foreword, written by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura himself, the book is compared to a
necklace, holding eighteen gems of tattva, or conclusive
truths, such as guru-tattva (truths regarding śrī guru),
jīva-tattva (truths regarding the jīva, or living
entity), abhideya-tattva (truths regarding the process
how to obtain the ultimate goal of life), and prayojana-
tattva (truths regarding that ultimate goal). Pramāṇa-
tattva, or truths regarding what is to be accepted as
valid proof for all these truths, forms the pendant of
the necklace, and the blessings of śrī guru are its
central jewel.



10

naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ

spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ

mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-’bhiṣekaṁ

niṣkincanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.32)


Unless they smear upon their bodies the dust of the
lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava completely freed from material
contamination, persons very much inclined toward
materialistic life cannot be attached to the lotus feet
of the Lord, who is glorified for His uncommon
activities. Only by becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious and taking
shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord in this way can
one be freed from material contamination.*



11

tat sādhu manye ’sura-varya dehināṁ

sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt

hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.5)


[Prahlāda Mahārāja replied to his father:] “O best of

                             84
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

the asuras, King of the demons, any person who has
accepted the temporary body as real is certainly
embarrassed by anxiety because of having fallen into the
dark well of family life [or the bodily concept of life]
where there is no water [rasa] but only suffering. One
should give up this position and go to the forest to
take shelter of Śrī Hari.” *



12 “We are like this. Our fathers and forefathers have
tried to take the juice of material enjoyment from this
world, tasting only dry bone. If you ask your
grandfathers, who are eighty, ninety, or a hundred years
old, if they are happy with their life’s
accomplishments, they will all say, ‘No.’ When you ask,
‘Why not?’ they will reply, ‘I am now old. I can no
longer enjoy the taste of wonderful food because I
cannot digest anything I eat. I am going to die. I am
not happy.’ Ironically, their children consider, ‘Doing
what we have seen our fathers and grandfathers do, we
will now be very happy’ ” (Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja. Lecture in Badger, California, on May 10,
1998).



13

guru-śuśrūṣayā bhaktyā sarva-labdhārpaṇena ca

saṅgena sādhu-bhaktānām īśvarārādhanena ca

śraddhayā tat-kathāyāṁ ca kīrtanair guṇa-karmaṇām

tat-pādāmburuha-dhyānāt tal-liṅgekṣārhaṇādibhiḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.7.30–31)


One must accept the bona fide spiritual master and
render service unto him with great devotion and faith.
Whatever one has in one’s possession should be offered
to the spiritual master, and in the association of
saintly persons and devotees one should worship the
Lord, hear the glories of the Lord with faith, glorify
the transcendental qualities and activities of the Lord,
always meditate on the Lord’s lotus feet, and worship
the Deity of the Lord strictly according to the
injunctions of the śāstra and guru.*



14 Excerpt from a class on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja in
Mathurā, India, 1994:


Many of us think that Citraketu Mahārāja had committed
some offence and that is why he became a demon. This is
not so. Citraketu Mahārāja is a completely liberated
soul and is the disciple of Saṅkarṣaṇa. He performed his
pastime as Vṛtāsura to teach the world. The story goes
like this. Śaṅkara (Lord Śiva) was his friend and

                           85
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

godbrother. This librated mahā-puruṣa once came to
Kailāśa. At that time Śaṅkarajī was speaking hari-kathā.
The beautiful Pārvatī was sitting on his lap and Lord
Śiva had his arm around her neck. He was wearing a dor-
kaupīn of snakes. He also ornaments himself with snakes.

… Citraketu Mahārāja came, and seeing his friend
Śaṅkarajī like this, he laughed, “Why are you sitting
with Pārvatī on your lap while speaking hari-kathā? Why
are you doing this? Does anybody act like this? In front
of this assembly of so many ṛṣis and munis you are
making your wife look like a sense enjoyer. This is not
proper.” Saying this, Citraketu Mahārāja laughed.

Śaṅkarajī also smiled but Pārvatī was perturbed. Unable
to tolerate Citraketu’s words she cursed him, “You
should become a demon. Are you trying to be the guru of
Lord Śiva? Brahmā and so many other demigods accept his
authority and now you are giving him instructions? By
this you are insulting him.”

Śaṅkarajī did not feel affronted, but Pārvatī took
Citraketu Mahārāja’s words as an insult. As Citraketu
Mahārāja was his friend, Śivajī understood why he had
spoken in that way. To show that one should not insult a
Vaiṣṇava, Pārvatī cursed her husband’s friend. Citraketu
Mahārāja was highly qualified and powerful enough that
he could have counteracted her curse, if he had wanted.
But to keep the word of Lord Śiva’s dearmost beloved
Pārvatī-devī, he accepted her curse without any
complaint. Śaṅkarajī then said to her, “O Pārvatī, what
have you done? You don’t know that mahā-puruṣas like
Citraketu Mahārāja may stay in hell or in heaven, they
may become a demigod or a demon, they may accept any
kind of form! For them it does not make any difference,
because wherever they stay, they always perform
harināma-saṅkīrtana and bhakti for the lotus feet of Śrī
Hari. But by your giving this curse, now I can
understand what your mentality is.”




15 “By the mystic power of Nārada Muni, the living
entity reentered his dead body for a short time and
spoke in reply to Nārada Muni’s request. He said:
According to the results of my fruitive activities, I,
the living being, transmigrate from one body to another,
sometimes going to th e species of the demigods,
sometimes to the species of lower animals, sometimes
among the vegetables, and sometimes to the human
species. Therefore, in which birth were these my mother
and father? No one is actually my mother and father. How
can I accept these two people as my parents?” * (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 6.16.4).



16 Aṅgirā Ṛṣi is one of the seven Ṛṣis (great sages) and
he has all mystic powers; thus he can do anything he
desires, even keeping his body somewhere else and
adopting the body of the son of Queen and King
Citraketu. (Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja)

                           86
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017




17 Whatever is not genuine will increase as Kali-yuga
advances. Most Buddhists today follow Gautama Buddha,
who is not the incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. They have no proper
scriptural siddhānta, and therefore they depend on false
logic. (Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja)



18 The sakhās are the male friends, companions, and
attendants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The following is an excerpt
from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 29:


There are four types of sakhās in Vraja: (1) suhṛt, (2)
sakhā, (3) priya-sakhā, and (4) priya-narma-sakhā. The
suhṛt-sakhās are somewhat older than Kṛṣṇa, and they
have some vātsalya-bhāva (parental mood) mixed in their
moods towards Him. They carry weapons, and always
protect Kṛṣṇa from miscreants. They include Subhadra,
Maṇḍalībhadra, Bhadravardhana, Gobhaṭa, Yakṣa,
Indrabhaṭa, Bhadrāṅga, Vīrabhadra, Mahāguṇa, Vijaya and
Balabhadra. Maṇḍalībhadra and Balabhadra are the most
prominent among them.

The sakhās are somewhat younger than Kṛṣṇa, and their
mood of friendship is alloyed with a touch of dāsya-
bhāva (servitorship). They include Viśāla, Vṛṣabha,
Ojasvī, Devaprastha, Varūthapa, Maranda, Kusumāpīḍa,
Maṇibaddha and Karandhama. Devaprastha is the best of
these.

The priya-sakhās are friends of the same age as Kṛṣṇa
with unalloyed sakhya-bhāva (mood of friendship). These
include Śrīdāma, Sudāma, Dāma, Vasudāma, Kiṅkiṇī, Stoka-
Kṛṣṇa, Aṁśu, Bhadrasena, Vilāsī, Puṇḍarīka, Vitaṅka and
Kalaviṅka.

Kṛṣṇa’s priya-narma-sakhās are superior to the three
other groups of sakhās – namely the suhṛt-sakhās, the
sakhās, and the priya-sakhās – and they are expert at
performing extremely confidential activities. They
include Subala, Arjuna, Gandharva, Vasanta and Ujjvala,
who always speaks joking words.”




19 Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja mercifully engaged
many devotees in his publication work, and then he would
correct the texts they sent from India. Acyutānanda dāsa
and his other assistants managed his inflow of work,
keeping efficient communication with all devotees
involved, and printing hard copies of the manuscripts
for him to correct. Acyutānanda dāsa would enter all his
corrections into computer files and transcribe
dictations. On occasion, when not much work arrived, he
would spend some time reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or
Caitanya-caritāmṛta. On the rare occasions when no work
arrived, he would express his unhappiness by saying
things like, “I have no desire to stay in this world if

                           87
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

I cannot write.”




March (undated), 2007


darśana

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was dancing in Śrīvāsa-
aṅgana and performing His other navadvīpa-līlā, He
fulfilled His [Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s] three desires: śrī rādhāyāḥ
praṇaya-mahimā kīdṛśo vānayaivā 1. Is it that His going
to Purī and Godāvarī was for teaching the jīva souls how
to follow this path?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is not like that. He was playing sweet pastimes in
Navadvīpa, and He tasted all these moods [the
fulfillment of His desires] in Purī, in the Gambhīrā,
with Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda and Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara. In
Navadvīpa He enjoyed His bālya-līlā (baby and early
childhood pastimes) and then His paugaṇḍa-līlā (early
youth pastimes) of teaching. Afterwards He went to Gayā,
where He changed,2 and later He went to Jagannātha Purī.
He especially learned Rādhā’s mood when He went to
Godāvarī and accepted Rāya Rāmānanda, who is Viśākhā-
sakhī, as His śikṣā-guru. After that He again went to
Jagannātha Purī, and there He tasted these three moods.
[This is described in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā
13.26-39.]

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

If I understood you correctly, it was by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s complete līlā in Navadvīpa, Purī, and
Godāvarī that He became completely fulfilled.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But always remember that navadvīpa-līlā is aṣṭa-kālīya-
līlā, which is not true for Purī or Godāvarī. Navadvīpa-
līlā is prominent. In Godāvarī He manifested His form as
rasarāja-mahābhāva-svarūpa and told the highest kathā to
Rāya Rāmānanda; yet, Godāvarī is not Vṛndāvana.

Godāvarī is like Kurukṣetra, and Jagannātha Purī is like
Dvārakā. Only the pastimes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in
Navadvīpa appear in the category of aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.
This is likened to Kṛṣṇa’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā, in which
there is no killing of demons, no mathurā-līlā, and no
dvārakā-līlā; only His eternal vṛndāvana-līlās are
present there.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva told in his class that in Kṛṣṇa’s aṣṭa-kālīya-
līlā, Mathurā or Dvārakā have no place. In the same way,
in Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā, Puri and

                            88
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Godāvarī have no place.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Do you mean in nitya-dhāma (the spiritual world)?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In Śrīman-Mahāprabhor aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā-smaraṇa-maṅgala-
stotram and Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura has connected the sweet pastimes of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu with Kṛṣṇa’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.
First Mahāprabhu is meditated upon, and then Kṛṣṇa.3

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, in Navadvīpa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
mood is like that of Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī [Śrīmatī Rādhikā
enjoying aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā with Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana]?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

So my question is this: Śrīmatī Rādhikā is tasting
mādanākhya-mahābhāva in Vṛndāvana, at Prema-sarovara,
and Rādhā-kuṇḍa. So, is Mahāprabhu also tasting
mādanākhya-mahābhāva here in Navadvīpa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, but not externally. Inside.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Is He tasting them in Śrīvāsa-aṅgana, or all the time?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

In Navadvīpa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The devotee in his aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā meditation will see
Mahāprabhu always here in Navadvīpa-dhāma, in Māyāpura.
Mahāprabhu never leaves Navadvīpa, just as Kṛṣṇa never
leaves Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya padam ekaṁ na
gacchati. Mahāprabhu never goes for a moment out of
Navadvīpa.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

In which līlā is Mahāprabhu tasting mādanākhya-mahābhāva
in Navadvīpa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Mādanākhya-mahābhāva was in Mahāprabhu in Navadvīpa, but

                            89
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

it was not manifested. It manifested in Jagannātha Purī,
and especially in the Gambhīrā.

Śrīpāda Vaikhanas Mahārāja:

In the Gambhīrā, Mahāprabhu tasted the mood of Viyoginī-
Rādhikā. Does He experience mādanākhya-bhāva there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, mādanākhya-mahābhāva is there.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Mahāprabhu is the vipralambha-svarūpa, the embodiment of
separation mood. But He manifested the extreme symptoms
of separation mostly in Puri…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When Mahāprabhu returned to Navadvīpa from Gayā, He also
manifested so many symptoms that were just like those of
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā.4

Thank you for your questions.

Brajanāth dāsa:

One of the devotees is asking what is the qualification
for meditating on the aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Such qualification comes after ruci5, not before. It
comes especially in āsakti6. Otherwise, if one tries to
prematurely engage in such meditation, he will become
lusty.

Brajanāth dāsa:

But he is speaking about Mahāprabhu’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

In Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā, Mahāprabhu is
remembering Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes; that is the point.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Both are non-different.

Sītā dāsī (of England):

You said that Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā in Vṛndāvana is
Kṛṣṇa’s full hlādinī-śakti, but when She goes to
Uddhava-kyārī, She is in the mood of separation
(Viyoginī-Rādhā). Uddhava-kyārī is in Vṛndāvana, though.
So why is Rādhikā not full hlādinī-śakti there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Because She is displaying Her viyoginī (separation) mood
there.7

                              90
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


The pastimes of Nandagaon are divided into two parts.
Kṛṣṇa was living in Nanda-bhavana after He and His
family left Gokula. There He would go cowherding, and
the gopīs, who were experiencing separation from Him,
would go from Jāvaṭa and meet Him at Uddhava-kyārī (a
part of Nandagaon). At that time, all of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s moods as Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī would manifest.
Uddhava-kyārī, where Viśākhā-kuṇḍa and rāsa-līlā-sthalī
are situated, is one of the meeting places.

Later, when Kṛṣṇa left the gopīs and went to Mathurā,
Uddhava- kyārī became a place of separation moods, and
Rādhikā became Viyoginī-Rādhā there. In this way
Uddhava-kyārī is a place of both meeting and separation;
first meeting and then separation.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Is the worship of Gaura-Gadādhara for devotees at a
particular stage, or only for particular devotees like
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura?

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja and Śrīpāda Mādhava
Mahārāja discuss in Bengali and then Mādhava Mahārāja
translates in English]

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva says that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has
written that there is no difference between Gaura-
Gadādhara and Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, just as there is no
difference between Navadvīpa-dhāma and Vṛndāvana-dhāma.
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has even told that through
the kṛṣṇa-mantra one can serve Gaura-Gadādhara and
through the gaura-mantra one can serve the Divine
Couple.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Gaura-premānande. Chant mahā-mantra.

[Kīrtana]




* * *




1 “Desiring to understand the glory of Rādhārāṇī’s love,
the wonderful qualities in Him that She alone relishes
through Her love, and the happiness She feels when She
realizes the sweetness of His love, the Supreme Lord
Hari, richly endowed with Her emotions, appeared from
the womb of Śrīmatī Śacī-devī, as the moon appeared from
the ocean” * (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 1.6).




                            91
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

2 [Some atheistic Hindus told Chand Kazi:] “Nimāi
Paṇḍita was previously a very good boy, but since He has
returned from Gayā He conducts Himself differently. Now
He loudly sings all kinds of songs, claps, and plays
drums and hand cymbals, making a tumultuous sound that
deafens our ears. We do not know what He eats that makes
Him become mad, dancing, singing, sometimes laughing,
crying, falling down, jumping up, and rolling on the
ground. He has made all the people practically mad by
always performing congregational chanting. At night we
cannot get any sleep; we are always kept awake. Now He
has given up His own name Nimāi and introduced Himself
by the name Gaurahari. He has spoiled the Hindu
religious principles and introduced the irreligion of
non-believers. Now the lower classes are chanting the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra again and again. For this sinful
activity, the entire city of Navadvīpa will become
deserted” * (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 17.207–
212).



3 “Śrī Gaurāṅga, the Moon over Navadvīpa, is manifest in
His own abode during eight periods of each day and every
day. His pastimes should be remembered by meditative
devotees before they remember the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the Moon over Gokula. If someone lovingly reads or
recites the Lord’s eternal daily pastimes as they are
illuminated in the ten verses of this prayer, then the
Lord is immensely pleased with that person, by His own
merciful compassion. I thus meditate on the daily
pastimes of Śrī Gauracandra” (Śrīman-Mahāprabhor aṣṭa-
kālīya-līlā-smaraṇa-maṅgala-stotram: Auspicious prayers
for remembering the eight-fold daily pastimes of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Verse 10).



4 An excerpt from a morning walk in Alachua, Florida,
May 3, 2008:


Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I have a question. Yesterday, Brajanāth
prabhu mentioned in his speech that when Kṛṣṇa leaves
Vraja and goes to Mathurā, He becomes Mathureśa Kṛṣṇa,
and when He goes to Dvārakā He becomes Dvārakādhīśa
Kṛṣṇa. So, when Śrīmān Mahāprabhu leaves Navadvīpa and
goes to South India or other places, is it a similar
situation for Him?


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He is asking if Mahāprabhu would become ‘Nīlācala
Mahāprabhu’ or ‘Gambhīrā Mahāprabhu.’


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No. In the form of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Kṛṣṇa took
the beauty and intrinsic mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā so that
He would be able to taste the fulfillment of His three

                            92
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

desires. That is why He became Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari. One may say that He is comparable to
Dvārakādhīśa-Kṛṣṇa when He goes to Purī, but that is not
the fact. Rather, Mahāprabhu was relishing Kṛṣṇa of
Vṛndāvana.

Moreover, this question is not proper. There is
something wrong in the question itself. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa, but He is Kṛṣṇa who has taken the
beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and who is tasting the glory
of Her love. We should therefore think about
Mahāprabhu’s moods in relation to Rādhikā. He cannot be
addressed as ‘Purī Mahāprabhu’ or any similar name.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He is understood according to Rādhikā’s moods, not
Kṛṣṇa’s moods.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In the pastimes of Mahāprabhu, Kṛṣṇa is not Kṛṣṇa. He is
totally absorbed in Śrīmatī Rādhikā, thinking, “I am
Rādhikā.” There is no need to think about Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu in relation to the moods of Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā does not go out of Vṛndāvana for even
one moment; and Kṛṣṇa, in His original, complete
feature, also does not leave. Her original and complete
feature, always residing in Vṛndāvana, is Vṛṣabhānu-
nandinī Rādhā.

When Rādhikā is in Nandagaon and lamenting in separation
from Kṛṣṇa when He (His manifestation) went to Dvārakā,
She is Viyoginī-Rādhā. Therefore, when Mahāprabhu is in
Jagannātha Purī (which represents Dvārakā), He is in the
mood of Viyoginī-Rādhā. When Rādhikā meets Kṛṣṇa at
Kurukṣetra She is Saṁyogīnī-Rādhā, and when Mahāprabhu
is on the bank of Godāvarī with Rāmānanda Rāya, He is in
the mood of that Saṁyogīnī-Rādhā. In Navadvīpa, which is
hidden Vṛndāvana, Mahāprabhu is in the mood of
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhā.

Mahāprabhu actually never leaves Navadvīpa, which has
been told in śāstra to be the same as Vṛndāvana. The
twelve forests of Vṛndāvana are in Navadvīpa. Neither
Jagannātha Purī nor Godāvarī have been told to be the
same as Vṛndāvana.


Sugata dāsa:

What is the internal reason that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
did not stay long in Vṛndāvana?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When He was in Vṛndāvana, He would see Govardhana and
Yamunā and other stimulus for His thinking, “I am
Kṛṣṇa,” and “I performed so many sweet pastimes here.”
He did not want this mood to envelop Him. He did not

                            93
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

want His mood as Mahāprabhu to disappear. He therefore
quickly returned to Purī.




5 Ruci, or taste, is the sixth stage in the development
of the creeper of devotion, which develops after one has
acquired steadiness in bhajana. At this stage, with the
awakening of actual taste, one’s attraction to spiritual
matters, such as hearing, chanting and other devotional
practices, exceeds one’s attraction to any type of
material activity.



6 Āsakti is deep attachment for the Lord and His eternal
associates. Āsakti occurs when ones liking for bhajana
leads to a direct attachment for the person who is the
object of that bhajana. This is the seventh stage in the
development of the creeper of devotion, and it is
awakened upon the maturing of one’s taste for bhajana.



7 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
lecture on March 25, 2001, in Navadvīpa, India:


Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the highest shelter of prema, and She
Herself has three aspects. One aspect is the root, and
the other two are Her expansions. In Vṛndāvana,
especially in Govardhana, Nandagaon, Varṣāṇā, Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, and similar places, She is
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī. She is the root, and She includes Her
expansions as well. She never leaves Vṛndāvana. In
Nandagaon (Uddhava-kyārī) She is Viyoginī-Rādhā after
Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā. The astonishing madness of
separation She experienced as Viyoginī-Rādhā is recorded
in Bhramara-gīta.

As Saṁyogīnī-Rādhā, She spent three months in
Kurukṣetra, where She met with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Although this
is the aspect of Rādhikā who meets with Kṛṣṇa at
Kurukṣetra, Her desire cannot be fulfilled there; She
wants to go back to Vṛndāvana. It is the same Kṛṣṇa
there in Kurukṣetra, but in a different dress. There is
no flute in His hand and no peacock feather crown; He is
not Yaśodā-nandana, Nanda-nandana, Rādhā-kānta; He is
not addressed by those names. The mood there is very
different, because there are so many elephants, horses,
and a huge army, and Vasudeva and Devakī and all their
associates are present. There is no forest like
Vṛndāvana there, no Yamunā, no peacocks, and no deer.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā tells Śrī Kṛṣṇa, "My heart is not
satisfied. There is not even one drop of the ocean of
rasa of Vṛndāvana here in Kurukṣetra. I don’t want to be
here."

Kṛṣṇa tells Her, "You should meditate, and You will
realize that You are always with Me. If You meditate, My
lotus feet will appear in Your heart."

                           94
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017


She replies, "My heart and mind are the same, and my
mind is Vṛndāvana. So You should come to Vṛndāvana."
This is the meaning of Ratha-yātrā. Theratha-cart is the
chariot of Rādhikā’s mind, the chariot of Rādhikā’s
desire, taking Śrī Kṛṣṇa back to Vṛndāvana, back to
Vraja (represented by the Guṇḍicā temple). Saṁyogīnī
means that there is samyoga, a meeting between Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, but Rādhikā wants to go back to Vṛndāvana. She
wants to return to the forest of Vetasī trees; that is,
the forest of Kadamba trees, the forest which is
fragrant with beli, cāmeli, and juhī flowers. She wants
to take Kṛṣṇa there.

So, first Rādhikā is Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā. Second
She is Viyoginī-Rādhikā, who is always in a separation
mood and absorbed in citrajalpa, prajalpa, divyonmāda,
and other such bhāvas of separation. And in Kurukṣetra
She is Saṁyogīnī-Rādhā.

Saṁyogīnī-Rādhikā is meeting with Kṛṣṇa, but there is no
happiness because all the sweet stimuli of Vṛndāvana are
missing. Kurukṣetra is filled with many outside elements
that are contrary to vraja-prema. Therefore, Rādhikā
situates Kṛṣṇa on the chariot of Her mind and, along
with all the other gopīs, brings Śrī Kṛṣṇa back to
Vṛndāvana. This is the meaning of Ratha-yātrā, and these
are the moods Mahāprabhu relished in Jagannātha Purī.




April 17, 2007


darśana

Brajanāth dāsa:

He took harināma initiation from an ISKCON guru, and he
wants to take dīkṣā from you tomorrow.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is best   that he first hears my classes and examines
whether or   not I am a qualified guru. If I am not
qualified,   he should reject me as guru; and if I am
qualified,   then he may take initiation.

This examination period is required because a devotee
has to give his entire life to his guru. If the guru is
not qualified and thus falls down, the disciple becomes
hopeless. It is therefore a rule and regulation in our
guru-paramparā to test the guru first. The guru should
examine the disciple, and the disciple should also
examine the guru in order to insure that he is accepting
a guru who will never fall down.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Māyāpura-candra prabhu is from Bali. He is your
disciple. His wife does not accept his being a devotee,
but his children do. He wants to receive dīkṣā and

                             95
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

advance further in bhakti. What should he do?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He should take dīkṣā. He should not spoil his life for a
worldly wife and others, because they cannot help him to
attain the transcendental world. If his wife is not a
devotee and she tries to give some obstruction or
problem, then better he not stay with her. On the other
hand, even if she does not accept what he is doing, but
she does not create any problems for him, then he should
take dīkṣā and live with her. He will try to change her,
and if she comes to me, she may be changed.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Cāru-mukhī is a very good preacher. These are her two
friends, who want to take harināma from you tomorrow.
Barbara is a yoga teacher from Switzerland. She is also
a German translator. She hopes that when she understands
the philosophy better, she can help to translate your
books.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Barbara] It is important for you to know the meaning
of yoga. One plus one becomes two. Yoga means ‘plus.’
One is our self, the soul, and the other is the Supreme
Lord Kṛṣṇa. By the process of love and affection, both
of them can meet. The yoga of this world is only for
exercise of the body; it is not for awakening the soul.
It is best to learn how your soul will be happy, and how
you can very quickly develop attachment to Kṛṣṇa in love
and affection.

Barbara:

That is why I am here.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Lata] Where are you from?

Lata:

Malaysia.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Have you received initiation?

Lata:

Not yet.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why are you late? Don’t wait. Don’t waste your time. One
day you will have to become old and leave this body.
What you are collecting cannot go with you to your next
body – not even a farthing. Your relatives will weep,
but they cannot go with you. Better that you realize
yourself and Kṛṣṇa, and in that way be happy in this
world.

                           96
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śyāmarāṇī

dāsī:

Vrajanātha prabhu wants to translate your books into
Tagalog, the Filipino native language. He asks for your
blessings to do that.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, he can try. I want all of my books to be translated
into all languages of the world, and they should be
distributed.

Bala dāsa:

Yaśomatī-nandana prabhu from England is a good devotee.
He is going out to the streets every day, preaching and
distributing flyers for your program.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

Very good.

Mitravindā dāsī:

I received harināma and dīkṣā initiation from Śrīla
Tamāla Kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī, but now he has passed away. We
have learned from the scriptures that we should take
shelter of a pure devotee. I want to take śikṣā from
you. Should I give up my attachment to him?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Tamāl Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja was my friend. He used to honor me
as his śikṣā-guru. He used to come and hear hari-kathā
from me – Brahma-saṁhitā, Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, Rāga-
vartma-candrikā, and other books. But many ISKCON
leaders feared that if he would continue to come to me,
then, “ISKCON will be ruined and all will go to Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja.” He was bound by them not to come, but he was
my friend. So you can come and I will help you as a
śikṣā-guru. You can think of me as your śikṣā-guru.

Mitravindā dāsī:

The scriptures say that there are qualifications to be a
dīkṣā-guru. It seems that my guru is not of that
standard.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They cannot give bhakti as I give. I can help you much
more than any of the ISKCON leaders. That is why Tamāla
Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja used to come to me and learn. You can
also hear the dīkṣā-mantras from me. If you want to
honor him as dīkṣā-guru, I have no objection. Treat him
as your dīkṣā-guru and me as your śikṣā-guru. Sometimes
śikṣā-guru is higher than dīkṣā-guru. So, don’t have any
doubts.


                           97
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Brajanāth dāsa:

So she is not committing any offense to him?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, he will be glad.

Mitravindā dāsī:

This is my husband, Īśvara Purī prabhu.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

From what country?

Brajanāth dāsa:

From Philippines.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He has taken initiation from me?

Īśvara Purī dāsa:

Not yet. Tomorrow. I took harināma and dīkṣā from Śrīla
Tamāla Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I must help you. You will be very happy by hearing the
dīkṣā-mantras from me with a śikṣā relationship.

Brajanāth dāsa:

They were both managing the ISKCON temple in Cebu for
many years. This is where Tamopaha prabhu is from.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Next year I may come to the Philippines.

Vāsantī dāsī:

Here is a picture from your new disciple from Bacolod, a
small island in the Philippines. She is six years old
and you gave her the name Ramā (referring to both
Rādhārāṇī and Lakṣmī, the eternal consort of Mahā-
Viṣṇu). She drew this picture of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma for
you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Give her my blessings.

Vāsantī dāsī:

When we were at the airport parking lot in the
Philippines, just before our flight from Manilla to
Malaysia, we facilitated your phone initiation for four
of your new disciples. Here are the pictures of the four
devotees who were initiated. They are very nice young
men. We were running a little late, but when we arrived

                           98
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

in the airport terminal after the initiation we found
out that the plane was delayed by twenty minutes – so we
didn’t miss it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[Referring to Śyāmarāṇī dāsī] Always late.

Vāsantī dāsī:

We had a mobile phone to talk to you. [showing photos]
These are the initiates from Manila.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

By phone?

Vāsantī dāsī:

Yes. This is a photo of them shaving their heads the
night before.

This photo shows your phone initiation in Bacolod. This
one shows your new devotees in Cebu. And this photo was
taken in the ISKCON temple.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They allowed Śyāmarāṇī to speak?

Vāsantī dāsī:

They allowed her to speak one night, and at the end of
the evening they invited her for the following night.
But later they spoke to their temple manager who had not
been at the program. Then they said she couldn’t come
back to speak.

Sāvitrī dāsī:

After Malaysia I will go to preach in Hong Kong, then to
China, and then to the ladies’ āśrama in Los Angeles. I
would like to give some classes on how to preach to new
people and on Vedānta-sūtra.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Vedānta-sūtra?

Sāvitrī dāsī:

Yes, Rasānanda prabhu (now Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja)
was training us how to do this.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Who wrote Vedānta-sūtra?

Sāvitrī dāsī:

Vedavyāsa, an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                           99
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Why?

Sāvitrī dāsī:

He collected the essence of the Vedas and divided them
in four parts. He was not satisfied, though, so he put
all the Vedas in a sūtra form so that everyone could
memorize, and easily learn and understand, all the
Vedas.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Wonderful. Do you remember any sūtra from Vedānta-sūtra?

Sāvitrī dāsī:

Athāto brahma jijñāsā. [Meaning, “Now it is time to
inquire about the Absolute Truth.”]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

More?

Sāvitrī dāsī:

Yasya atho…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Ānanda-mayo ‘bhyāsāt. [Meaning “The Absolute is full
with transcendental pleasure.”]

More? Janmādy asya yataḥ. [Meaning, “From Him everything
emanates.”]

Sāvitrī dāsī:

Yes. That is the second sūtra.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good. You should try. Vedānta-sūtra is very, very
hard.

Brajanāth dāsa:

She is a lawyer.

Sāvitrī dāsī:

I want to be a lawyer of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Lalitā and Viśākhā are lawyers of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and
they are extremely competent. If you want to be like
them, that is very good.

I asked Giri Mahārāja, “How can a person judge who is
preaching well?” He could not reply, so I replied that
it is any person – sannyāsī, brahmacārī, brahmacāriṇī,
or householder – who inspires many people to be
devotees, and inspires them to take harināma and dīkṣā.


                          100
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Also, those who are distributing books and preaching in
such a way that others will be inspired of their own
accord to donate to my big projects, like book
publishing, our new temple in Navadvīpa, and preaching
centers here and there. The preacher needs to inspire
people in such a way that the people themselves come
forward to donate.

If a preacher cannot inspire anyone else to take
harināma and dīkṣā, his preaching is not good. I want
all of my disciples – whether they are brahmacārīs,
householders, ladies, or sannyāsīs – to very boldly
preach everywhere what I have taught them.

Śyāmarāṇī can speak better than any ISKCON leader. She
can defeat all their arguments and establish bhakti.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

That is why after she spoke one night at the ISKCON
temple in Cebu, they would not let her come back the
following night.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They fear.

Suppose one takes harināma and dīkṣā from a guru who
later falls down. Or, even if that guru does not fall
down, he cannot remove the doubts of his disciples and
he has no realized experience of Kṛṣṇa.How can he give
Kṛṣṇa from his heart into others’ hearts?

If a man is nourishing a cow that after a while no
longer gives milk, what should he do? He should get
another cow. He should get a cow that has milk. In the
same way, if a guru to whom we are attached cannot give
transcendental knowledge or realization, cannot remove
our doubts, and cannot give Kṛṣṇa from his heart to our
hearts, how can he be a bona fide guru? If he is a
Vaiṣṇava and you beg permission from him to go to a more
qualified guru, he will allow you to do so. If he is not
a true Vaiṣṇava, then he will not allow you. He will
say, “Don’t go. If you go, I will curse you.” Some
persons think, “My disciples are my property,” but the
bona fide guru does not think like this.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

ISKCON’s philosophy is now similar to the ṛtvik
philosophy 1. They are saying, “We do not have the
highest realization, but we are connecting you with
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja Prabhupāda. You will
get all things from him.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If the ṛtvik system is bona fide, then why did Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja take initiation from his
Gurudeva? And, why did his Gurudeva allow his many
sannyāsī disciples to initiate? Why did Śrīla Prabhupāda
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura accept a guru who,
being illiterate, could not even sign his name, and who
was blind? Moreover, that blind personality rejected him

                          101
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

two times, saying, “I don’t know anything. You should go
to another guru.” Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura replied, “If you do not initiate me, I will fast
until death.” At last Śrīla Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja initiated Prabhupāda, who would later say with
pride, “I am his only disciple.”

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Vrajanātha prabhu from Cebu is thinking of traveling to
the other islands in the Philippines, like Manila and
Bacolod, to preach. He has so much experience with
kīrtana and book distribution. Perhaps he can help the
younger devotees there. Do you like that idea?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, he should preach. He should read my books more than
he is doing at present. He should preach on all topics
according to what I have explained.

Īśvara Purī dāsa:

Gurudeva, our indoctrination from ISKCON was that the
disciple is the property of the guru. But you just
mentioned that the disciple is not the guru’s property.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The disciple is not his property. The guru tries to make
the disciple a very qualified guru like himself, so that
very soon the disciple can attain kṛṣṇa-prema and serve
Kṛṣṇa.

Brajanāth dāsa:

You often say that everyone is the property of Kṛṣṇa,
and guru brings one to Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. Not his property, but Kṛṣṇa’s property – Kṛṣṇa’s
servant, or maidservant. The bona fide guru thinks, “I
must help this person. He should become qualified and be
engaged in Kṛṣṇa’s direct service.” Moreover, there is a
service that is very mysterious, and that is rādhā-
dāsyam (personal service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā). To whom
Kṛṣṇa is pleased, He will engage as a maidservant of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Brajanāth dāsa:

You have also said that guru becomes very happy when any
of his disciples becomes more advanced by receiving
guidance from others.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. He will not be envious.

Vāsantī dāsī:

Gurudeva, does baby Kṛṣṇa wear a peacock feather? We see
in pictures that He wears a peacock feather, but in

                          102
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Veṇu-gīta it is stated that once, when the peacocks were
dancing for Kṛṣṇa, one of the peacocks offered Him his
peacock feather and Kṛṣṇa placed it on His own head, and
since then He began to wear it always.2

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He wears a peacock feather both when He is a baby and a
youth. In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta it has been clearly
written that He is actually always in kiśora age (a
teenage youth of about 14 years old). From kiśora, He
expands to be a baby or any other age. In His original
feature He never becomes older or younger than kiśora.

Barbara:

In your books you write that we should not only read
books, but realize them. What is the symptom of someone
who has realized what is in the book?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

An example of a realized soul is Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi. He is
easily able to say to a person, “May kṛṣṇa-prema come to
you,” and kṛṣṇa-prema will immediately manifest in that
person’s heart. That person will then dance, weep, and
sing in spiritual ecstasy. A kaniṣṭha-adhikārī will take
the aspiring devotee to a madhyama or uttama-adhikārī
guru.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gaurarāja is on the phone.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[on the phone] Hare Kṛṣṇa. Oh, my heartly blessings to
you, your wife, and your children. Perhaps you have
forgotten me. I remember you whenever I see the very
fine clothing of Ṭhākurajī, but I see that you have
forgotten me. Don’t forget me. Try to make some time to
meet with me. After this tour I will come back to
Malaysia, so you must surely meet with me.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Padma’s mother is on the phone. She is in the hospital.
She had a heart attack.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[on the phone] Hare Kṛṣṇa. My heartly blessings to you.
Always remember Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa will help you, and you will
be happy. Whatever suffering or happiness comes, always
remember Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you all.




April 19, 2007


                             103
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Airport darśana

Rāma-tulasī dāsa:

Is Ekādaśī-devī Śrīmatī Rādhikā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Ekādaśī is not Rādhikā, but she may be considered a
manifestation of Rādhikā. Kṛṣṇa has personally become
Ekādaśī. Since Ekādaśī and Kṛṣṇa are the same, and Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa are the same, it can be said that Ekādaśī is a
manifestation of Rādhikā.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the personification of hlādinī-
śakti (Kṛṣṇa’s supreme pleasure potency), is more than
Ekādaśī. In Goloka Vṛndāvana there is no observance of
Ekādaśī. Ekādaśī is only for those practicing sādhana
(devotional practices) in this material world.3 There,
in Goloka Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the supreme
power of Kṛṣṇa, so there are differences between Her and
Ekādaśī.

Rāma-tulasī dāsa:

There is a story that when Kṛṣṇa was sleeping in a cave,
the Mura demon came to kill Him. At that time, a śakti
(power) came out from Kṛṣṇa’s body in the form of a devī
(goddess) with many arms and killed that demon.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I think you are referring to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam’s
narration of the demon Kālayavana. When Kālayavana was
chasing Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa entered a cave where Mahārāja
Mucukunda was sleeping.

Mucukunda had previously gone to heaven to fight against
the demons on behalf of the demigods. After he had
helped the demigods win the battle, their commander-in-
chief, Kārtikeya, told him, “We want to give you a
benediction, so please ask for one.”

Mucukunda said, “I am very tired. I want to sleep, and I
want the benediction that anyone who awakens me will at
once be burned to ashes.” He received that benediction
by the blessing of Kārtikeya.

Kālayavana also had a benediction that he would not be
killed by anyone in the Yadu dynasty, and Kṛṣṇa knew
this fact. As He was being chased by Kālayavana, Kṛṣṇa
saw Mucukunda sleeping in the cave, so He hid Himself
there. Following Kṛṣṇa, Kālayavana entered the cave and,
thinking Mucukunda to be Kṛṣṇa, said to him, “Now You
are sleeping? Do not think I will let You go.” He kicked
Mucukunda, who awoke, looked towards him, and thus
burned him to ashes. No śakti came out from Kṛṣṇa’s
body.

Rama-tulasi dāsa:

There is a book about Ekādaśī that was written by Kṛṣṇa-
Balarāma Svāmī. In that book there is a description of a

                          104
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

manifestation of that devī. It states that when Kṛṣṇa
woke up, He saw her with multiple hands.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That book is not authentic. Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Svāmī does
not follow his own guru, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja. He thinks, “I was born as a brāhmaṇa and my
gurudeva was not; so I am greater than him.” He came to
me, but I refused to meet with him. I told him, “You
don’t have any faith in your gurudeva or guru-paramparā.
Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was not born in a brāhmaṇa
family, but he is equal to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Gopala Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Śrīla
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura was not a brāhmaṇa by birth, but
he was more qualified than any brāhmaṇa.” Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma
Svāmī’s thoughts are very bad. It is best not to read
his book.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

In that Ekadāsī book he collected many stories from
different Purāṇas for each Ekadāsī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

We also have a collection of such histories, but not in
English. Ours is in Bengali, but we can translate it
into English. That translation will be authoritative.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, this is your new daughter, Vrajarāṇī,
and this is her seven-month-old baby, Bhīṣma. When
Bhīṣma was 6 months old, he could not have a grain
ceremony (anna-prāśana) with you because his mother was
not in the same place as you. She wants to know if
Bhīṣma can at least have part of that ceremony with your
presence, wherein he indicates his future activities.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Bring him here.

[According to Vedic culture, it is customary to place in
front of a six-month-old child both coins and books in
order to get some indication of his future tendencies.
On one side there are coins (indicating future wealth)
and on the other side a scripture (indicating future
devotional scholarship), and sometimes a weapon
(indicating a future king or warrior). At this time the
child also receives his first grains.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No knife?

[Bhīṣma chose the ring, at which moment Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja immediately tapped him on the head with
the Śiva-tattva book (representing scripture).]


                          105
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

He will be a rich person.

Vrajarāṇī dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I have a question. Even though Bhīṣma
will become rich, will he also become a good devotee?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[Again tapping him on the head with the Śiva-tattva
book] Oh, yes. That is why I tapped him.

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja was then handed some
cake prasādam, and put a little piece into the baby’s
mouth to enact the baby’s grain ceremony.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Śyāmarāṇī dāsī] One thing: Regarding the information
I told you in confidence about the pictures in order
that you could paint them – you disclosed those ideas to
others. That is not good. Those truths should not be
disclosed.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Yes, I made a big mistake. I will not do that anymore.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I think you record all my words; but these particular
words should not be disclosed to others.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

I will be very careful from now on.

Gurudeva, this is the wife of your disciple Vijaya
prabhu. For her entire life up to now, she has been
worshiping Durgā-devī. Last night, we showed her your
translation and commentary of Brahma-saṁhitā, which
explains the relationship between Durgā and Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa. She read it. She wants to know how to cut her
relationship with Durgā, so that she can worship Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should know who Durgā-devī is. Durgā-devī is a
shadow of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Rādhikā is likened to the
soul, and Durgā-devī, Kālī, is likened to the body. If a
reality is not present, there can be no shadow of that
reality. Similarly, without Rādhikā, there would be no
existence of Kālī.

In order to give mere worldly benedictions, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā manifests as Durgā in this world. This world is
a durga, which means ‘fort;’ it is a jail.4 As protector
and destroyer of this world, Durgā-devī can give you
wealth, reputation, and other worldly benefits, but she

                            106
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

cannot give kṛṣṇa-prema, liberation, or anything
spiritual. Only Rādhikā and Her direct manifestations,
like Viśākhā and Lalitā, can do so.

Durgā-devī is not present in Goloka Vṛndāvana. She is
only manifest in this world, whereas there is a
manifestation of Śrīmatī Rādhikā named Yogamāyā, who is
in the spiritual domain and is somewhat like Her.
Whatever Durgā-devī gives you will be gone after your
death, so it is better for you to think of Rādhikā as
the reality and Her shadow as Durgā. It will be better
for you to take initiation, just as your husband has
taken, and thus worship Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Then, Durgā
will be very, very happy with you.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Sometimes disciples ask if they can still keep a deity
of Durgā in their house.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

They should be one-pointed. If they cannot give up
having Durgā on their altars, they can offer Durgā the
remnants of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s caraṇāmṛta (remnant
water from the bathing of the Deities). Otherwise, they
will be cheated.

Kṛṣṇa-priyā dāsī:

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says in Jaiva-dharma that we
should only take prasādam that has been offered to Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa. He says that the foodstuffs offered to the
demigods are not truly prasādam. What is the nature of
the foodstuffs we get when we go to the temples of the
demigods? What do we call that? Can we eat it?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We do not eat the remnants of Kālī, Durgā, Śaṅkara (Lord
Śiva), or their manifestations. If bhoga (unoffered
foodstuffs) is first offered to Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu, and
Their prasādam is then offered to the demigods, we can
accept that. For example, in Bhuvaneśvara, the bhoga is
first offered to Ananta Vāsudeva (a form of Kṛṣṇa), and
His prasādam is offered to Bhuvaneśvara Liṅga-rāja (Lord
Śiva). We can accept that prasādam. We offer obeisances
to Śaṅkara, and if a devotee gives the prasādam remnants
of Kṛṣṇa to Śaṅkara, we will accept that; otherwise
not.5 In any case, we will not accept ashes in imitation
of Śaṅkara,6 or other customs accepted by his followers.
If someone does not wear tilaka and kaṇṭhī-mālā (tulasī
neck-beads), then the messengers of Yamarāja, the god of
death, will consider, “This person is not a devotee of
Kṛṣṇa.” They will take that person to Yamarāja for
punishment. So, try to wear tilaka and kaṇṭhī-mālā.

Rāma-tulasī dāsa:

Regarding a devotee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and a non-devotee, what
happens to the soul after someone dies?


                          107
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If one is not a proper devotee, then according to his
activities he will have to go to heaven or hell.
According to his karma he may take birth anywhere, as a
dog, donkey, monkey, or any other species.

Rāma-tulasī dāsa:

Does this take place immediately, as soon as the soul
leaves the body? Or, does it take some time?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It depends on what the person has done.

Rāma-tulasī dāsa:

My wife passed away on January 5th of this year. Where
did she go?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

She was a devotee, and you and her children are
devotees. She was always chanting the holy name, so she
has taken birth in a rich devotee family. There she will
easily obtain a guru again, and she will continue her
bhajana.

Kṛṣṇa is more merciful than Nārāyaṇa, Viṣṇu, and other
incarnations. There is no one more merciful than Kṛṣṇa.
Even Lord Rāmacandra could not give as much honor to
ladies as Kṛṣṇa did. Kṛṣṇa gave Himself to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and the gopīs.

Sixteen thousand princesses, the very beautiful
daughters of kings, had been imprisoned in the jail of
Narakāsura, and they always remembered Kṛṣṇa there.
Kṛṣṇa came and killed Narakāsura, released the
princesses, and then told them, “You can now go wherever
you want – to your husbands, mothers, and fathers.” They
replied, “We cannot go anywhere. We want to be the
maidservants of Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā in Your palace.
We will sweep there, and perform all other menial
services.” Kṛṣṇa said, “No. I will accept you as My
queens, just as I have accepted Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā.”
He married all of them and took them to Dvārakā, and
there He gave each of them a palace.

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja was then called to go
to his gate for boarding his plane.]




* * *




1 A ṛtvik is a priest who performs a yajña (fire
sacrifice) for the fulfillment of worldly desires

                          108
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

(karma-kanda) on behalf of someone else. After the
departure of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, some of
his followers have propounded the idea that anyone can
still become the direct, initiated disciple of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja by taking initiation from
any of his disciples, who solely act as a ‘ṛtvik’
intermediate. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja strongly refuted this idea on many occasions.
In a lecture spoken in Russia on July 19, 2001, Śrīla
Mahārāja explained:


Those who think, “There is no need to accept a guru as a
mediator because we can chant the holy name, we can read
books, and we can do arcana and sādhana simply by the
ṛtvik system,” are not within the guru-paramparā. They
deceive others. They are actually cheaters; not bhaktas.
Nowhere in the śāstra is it written that a ṛtvik can
ever give bhakti. [There are nineteen places in
Prabhupāda’s books where the word ṛtvik is used, and in
all cases the word only refers to a priest officiating
or performing a fire sacrifice. Even when the word used
is ṛtvik-ācārya, it is still defined as a priest
performing a fire sacrifice for a secular gain.] This
can never be the case.

… These ṛtviks have no faith in Kṛṣṇa, no faith in
bhakti, and no faith in scriptures like the Vedas,
Upaniṣads, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and Caitanya-caritāmṛta.
They also have no faith in the guru-paramparā, and that
is why they cannot give bhakti.

This word ṛt has come from the word Ṛg-Veda. Those who
know all Vedas, including the Ṛg, Sāma, Yajur, and
Atharva Veda, all the Upaniṣads, and all the Purāṇas,
are actually ṛtvik. I think, however, that these modern
ṛtviks don’t even know the ABC’s of the Vedas. They say
that in this world there are no pure devotees, and
therefore there are no pure devotees to initiate anyone.
This idea is very, very wrong and it against the
principles of bhakti. The ṛtvik proponents saw that the
devotees in their society were quarreling amongst
themselves, and that there was no śuddha-bhakta there.
Then, mistaking that those who quarreled were in the
guru-paramparā, the ṛtviks became opposed to the actual
guru-paramparā.

Beware of this ṛtvik system. Without a self-realized
guru you cannot achieve bhakti in thousands of births.
This is an established truth. This is siddhānta. You
should therefore accept a sad-guru, serve him, and try
to follow his instructions. Then you can develop your
Krsna consciousness and all of your anarthas will
disappear. Otherwise, it will never be possible for pure
bhakti to come and touch your heart and senses.

… Real ṛtviks know all śāstras, and all of them have
gurus. A ṛtvik cannot be a ṛtvik without accepting a
real guru. All ṛtviks, like Vaśiṣṭha Ṛṣi, are very high-
class devotees. Viśvāmitra, Gautama, and even Vyāsadeva
are ṛtviks, but they have all accepted the guru-
paramparā. They all believe that there are always self-
realized gurus in the world. Nowadays, therefore, those
who call themselves ṛtviks are all cheaters, and we

                          109
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

should beware of them.



Later on that year, on December 12, 2001, Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja further
discussed this in a lecture given in Germany:


Many say that Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja was a
follower of the ṛtvik system, but this statement is
quite false. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja accepted
the guru-paramparā, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu, and the goal of life as shown by
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī,
the Gītā and the Bhāgavatam. Since Śrīla Svāmī Mahārāja
accepted these principles, how can anyone say he
accepted the ṛtvik system? Nowhere in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
Gītā, or any other scriptures is it stated that the
ṛtvik system has anything to do with the guru-paramparā
and bhakti. It has no connection with bhakti at all. The
ṛtvik system is only employed for the performance of a
fire sacrifice, for the fulfillment of worldly desires
(karma-kanda). It is totally irrelevant to our bhakti,
to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, to the Gītā, and to our guru-
paramparā. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī never mentioned anything
about the ṛtvik system in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu,
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, or in his other books. Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī has written so many books, but he has never
discussed the ṛtviks.




2 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
Bhakti-rasāyana, Chapter Two:


Kṛṣṇa saw Girirāja Govardhana resplendent with creepers,
blooming flowers, and ripe fruits. The breeze was
blowing very gently, seemingly unable to carry the full
weight of the flowers’ fragrance. Seeing this natural
splendor, the desire for enjoyment arose in Kṛṣṇa, and
He played the flute very softly. Hearing this deep
vibration, the peacocks went mad, dancing in rhythm with
their tail-feathers fully spread out. At that time, all
of the animals, birds, and insects of Vṛndāvana
congregated in the meadows of Govardhana to witness the
performance.

One of the peacocks thought, “Kṛṣṇa is playing such a
beautiful melody on His flute and dancing in such a way
that we are feeling great happiness, but I have nothing
to offer Him in return. I have no golden necklace around
my neck, or any valuable ornaments.

“I am simply an animal, but the feathers of my tail are
very valuable. There is nothing in this world which can
compare to their beauty, and upon seeing them everyone
becomes pleased. These seven-colored feathers are so
attractive, so is there any reason I shouldn’t offer Him
one feather?” He therefore left behind one of his
feathers.

                          110
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Seeing this, Kṛṣṇa thought, “That peacock is very
loving; he has fully appreciated My flute-playing and
has offered Me one of his valuable feathers. There is
nothing artificial in this offering.”

Lifting up the feather and placing it on His head, Kṛṣṇa
thought, “Just as the flute is dear to Me, this peacock
feather has now become dear to Me. While walking,
resting, dreaming, standing, or sitting, I will never
abandon it. Wherever I may go in Vraja, I will never
abandon the flute or this peacock feather.” This is the
origin of the peacock feather becoming Kṛṣṇa’s most
celebrated ornament.




3 One might argue that Nanda Mahārāja followed Ekādaśī,
and he is a resident of Goloka Vṛndāvana. Actually,
Nanda Mahārāja follows Ekādaśī only in prakaṭa-
Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana as it is manifested in this world,
which is sādhana-bhūmī, the world of devotional
practice. And he did so only for the purpose of teaching
others. (Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja)



4 “Durgā is the superintendent of police of this
universe. Durgā [a Sanskrit word] means ‘fort.’ Gā means
‘going,’ and dur means ‘difficulty.’ So, that realm
where you cannot go anywhere unless you accept so many
difficulties – that is called durgā, or fort. This
universe, this material world, is just like a durgā. You
cannot escape. Conditioned souls cannot escape. It is
very difficult. Daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā
duratyayā” * (Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja,
Bhagavad-gītā 7.14, purport).

“There are rules and regulations in this world’s
government, just as with an immigration department or
security department. These rules are simply reflections
of the original function of the supreme government. This
world is just like a prison house. You cannot escape so
easily.

“… The original superintendent is Durgā. Durgā is the
protector of this durgā, from where you cannot escape.
She is also a servant of Kṛṣṇa. This Durgā is fear
personified, but still she cannot disobey Kṛṣṇa’s order”
* (Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, Lecture of
October, 1974).



5 “Lord Viṣṇu should be offered everything, and His
prasāda should be distributed to all the demigods. This
practice is still followed in the temple of Jagannātha
at Purī. There are many temples of demigods around the
main temple of Jagannātha, and the prasāda which is
offered first to Jagannātha is distributed to all the
demigods. The deity of Bhagālin is worshiped with the
prasāda of Viṣṇu, and also, in the famous Lord Śiva

                          111
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

temple of Bhuvaneśvara, the prasāda of Lord Viṣṇu or
Lord Jagannātha is offered to the deity of Lord Śiva” *
(Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
4.7.55, purport).



6 Śaṅkara smears his body with ashes in order to show
the world the destination of bodies – at death their
bodies are burned and turn to ashes.




May 18, 2007


Airport darśana

Ānitā dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, today I’m going to visit my material
family.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Where?

Ānitā dāsī:

In Denver. Can you help me realize that you are my
father, and my mother, and my everything?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Go and meet with them, and again come to me.

Ānitā

dāsī:

I want to see you in Houston.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And then in Badger as well.

Ānitā dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, Śyāmarāṇī dīdī wanted me to ask you
this: If we have Gaura-Nitāi Deities and we are
performing maṅgala-ārati, is it okay to think of the
Deity of Nityānanda as Anaṅga Mañjarī and Mahāprabhu as
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Where there are Deities and you are doing Their arcana,
you should think of Them as Gaura-Nityānanda. Because
you are engaged in arcana-mārga, you should think first
about whatever Deity is present.

Ānitā dāsī:

                          112
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


But your gurudeva’s maṅgala-ārati song is for Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Mahāprabhu can be with Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, but Nityānanda
Prabhu cannot.

Ānitā dāsī:

So, it’s okay to sing this maṅgala-ārati song as worship
of Gaura-Nitāi?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We should meditate upon what has been told in the ārati-
kīrtana.

Ānitā dāsī:

Are you saying that there should be a separate ārati
song for Gaura-Nitāi?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Separate.

Ānitā dāsī:

If there are Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deities and Gaura-Nitāi Deities
on the same altar, but somewhat separated, which ārati
song would we sing in the morning?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

There should be one altar with a dividing structure of
any material. First sing to Gaura-Nitāi (Udilo aruṇa)
and then to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa (Maṅgala Śri Guru-Gaura). If you
only have time to sing one song, then you can sing
Maṅgala Śri Guru-Gaura and meditate on Nityānanda Prabhu
as akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva (the complete, undivided,
original guru).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Kṛṣṇa-mayī dāsī, who is a teacher in a public
school] You have trained your students very well.

Kṛṣṇa-mayī dāsī:

You have trained them very well.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are small, small children, yet they know Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Vṛndā dāsī:

They have two good teachers; you and Kṛṣṇa-mayī.

Kṛṣṇa-mayi dāsī:

They naturally love you so much, and they love to hear

                            113
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

about Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. It is so beautiful.

Ānitā dāsī:

I visited the school, Gurudeva. They know so many
stories of Gopāla – more than I do.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Are there any questions?

Mālinī dāsī:

How can I stay one-pointed in bhakti when I am at
school? What are the things I should do?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do some chanting and remembering, reading books, and
studying. Become qualified to preach my mission.

Śrī

Vṛndā dāsī:

I have a question, Gurudeva. When you are giving class,
as you sit on the vyāsāsana looking at all of us,
sometimes you look stern and sometimes you are smiling.
What are you doing with us through your eyes?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

By my eyes I am giving you kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Guru does this
in order to impregnate your heart with bhakti.

Śrī Vṛndā dāsī:

Sometimes when you are looking at us, it’s like, “Whoa!”
Sometimes I don’t know where to look. Should I keep
looking at you even though [making a gasping sound as if
overwhelmed]? Keep looking? Where else to look, right?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is why a living dīkṣā-guru, or śikṣā-guru, is
needed. Without guru, one cannot advance. Some gurus put
their hand on the disciples’ head and say, “May you go
to Goloka Vṛndāvana.” Nārada, for example, can do this.
A madhyama-adhikārī cannot do this. He can inspire by
his hari-kathā. Regarding a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, he will
take that devotee to a sad-guru (self-realized guru).

Ānitā dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, Mahāprabhu met with so many of His
associates outside of Navadvīpa. In nitya-līlā He is
always in Navadvīpa. How do we think that Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and other associates are with
Mahāprabhu in aprakaṭa-līlā [in Navadvīpa in Goloka
Vṛndāvana], if they were not living in Navadvīpa when He
was here in prakaṭa-līlā (His manifest pastimes in this
material world)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                           114
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017


They are certainly present there. You should see that
although Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana, Bhaṭṭa Raghunātha, Śrī Jīva,
Gopala-bhaṭṭa, dāsa Raghunātha, and Svarūpa Dāmodara and
Rāya Rāmānanda are not in Navadvīpa with Him outwardly
[they were with Him in other places], they are with Him
outwardly in aprakaṭa Goloka Śvetadvīpa (Navadvīpa in
Goloka).

Ṛṣabhadeva dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, in Los Angeles, Prema-prayojana prabhu
is preaching to the academic and yoga communities. Can
householder devotees also go to hear from him?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It depends on them. He is writing, or perhaps any of his
followers are writing, that he is the sole authority on
bhakti. I never say that I am the authority, and Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has not told this.

He is not the authority. Is it that he is the authority
because he was a sannyāsī and now he is a householder?
What can anybody learn from him if he has personally
deviated? I want to correct him and take him back to
sannyāsa. What I told in my class was only for him.
Everything I told about Purūravā and the prostitute was
only for him.

Śrī Vṛndā dāsī:

I thought it was for me.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Purūravā   lamented, “Oh, this
Urvaśī has cheated me. She has   taken my paramārtha
(transcendental) kṛṣṇa-bhakti.   I should leave her.” He
thus gave her up, came to this   world, and began to chant
and remember Kṛṣṇa.

Ṛṣabhadeva dāsa:

Is there benefit for beginners, like persons in the
academic or yoga communities, to hear from him? He is
also directing people to you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I call him only to attract him to come, and to give up
that lady and come to me. I am giving him a chance.

Sāvitrī dāsī:

Guru Mahārāja, yesterday an opportunity came for us to
put articles about bhakti-yoga in one of the biggest
magazines in L.A.; two yoga magazines and one big
website where so many people can read these bhakti-yoga
articles that contain your hari-kathā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

                           115
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrī Vṛndā dāsī:

Gurudeva, in the story of the king and Urvaśī, you say
that Urvaśī cheated the king. Isn’t it that he cheated
himself by his own desire?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is why he was saying, “I lost my heart and gave it
to Urvaśī. Her beauty and loving affairs attracted me,
and in this way she cheated me. I have deviated from
Kṛṣṇa.” Then he left her.

So, by chance one may have given up sannyāsa and become
entangled with a lady – or vice-versa any lady may be
entangled with a male person – and then they realize,
“What have I done?!” Repenting for this, they can again
come to the proper path.

Śrī Vṛndā dāsī:

Well, Gurudeva, you were a good surprise here in Los
Angeles. I was accepting that, “Oh, Gurudeva is not
coming to Los Angeles. I have to wait to go to see him
in Badger.” I wasn’t even dreaming that you were going
to come, but you’re a dream come true! And I wasn’t even
dreaming!

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I thought that I must come to L.A., even for one or two
days. So I changed my ticket.

Cāru-candrikā dāsī:

Gurudeva, my name is Caru-candrikā. I am working hard
with Govinda Mohiṇī to have an āśrama for the ladies
here in L.A. In that way we can preach, and have a space
for other ladies to come and be strong and preach your
mission. So please bless us…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If any lady desires, she can stay there in the temple –
we have some room with Śyāmalā.

Sāvitrī dāsī:

Guru Mahārāja, they already have an āśrama, in Venice.
They are running it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh. You are doing well? You are distributing books? How
many of you are there?

Caru-candrikā dāsī:

Two for now.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Two only? There should be more than three.

                          116
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017




May 23, 2007


darśana

Devotee:

Do you have any instructions for the devotees in
Washington?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Preach my mission, engage in book distribution, inspire
new devotees, and collect and inspire new people to
become devotees. You can preach from Jaiva-dharma or any
other book. Those who are qualified can preach in this
way.

Brajanāth dāsa:

[Reading an email] “We are vegetarian. Sometimes we are
working and we have to eat in restaurants. Is it okay to
take food from the restaurants that serve meat? Or,
should we avoid this all together?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To all the devotees present] What do you think?

Devotees:

Avoid.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, avoid. Very good. If devotees go anywhere outside,
they can bring something with them from home, as we do.
We buy and cook.

Ramā dāsī:

I heard from Vrajendra-nandana prabhu that Badger is
going to be a big society under your guidance. If we
want to focus our attention on Badger, then why should
we make a school in Alachua?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If you can prepare good teachers like Vrajendra-nandana
and others – there are five teachers in Badger – you can
make a good school in Alachua. Why not? Some-thing is
necessary.

Divya dāsī:

My daughter Rasika wants to become a teacher. She is
already in college. Perhaps she can be a teacher and
start a school in Alachua. Do you think that this is a
good idea?

                          117
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

Oh, I thought that she would become a brahmacāriṇī and
preach my mission.

Divya dāsī:

I tell her to do that.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Please help her so that she can preach.

Divya dāsī:

You can tell her. Tell her.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

My wish is that my girls become very expert in
preaching, as at the time of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja. At that time young ladies were preaching in so
many places. One of them was Śyāmarāṇī, also Vṛndāvana-
vilāsinī, and so many others. I want all of my lady
disciples to be like Śyāmarāṇī, preaching here and
there. This is bhakti. Do as our entire guru-paramparā
has done; then your life will be successful.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has told us, “Janma sārthaka
kari’ kara para-upakāra – One should make his own life
successful, and work for the benefit of all other
people.” At first you’ll need to know all tattvas:
viṣṇu-tattva, jīva-tattva, māyā-tattva, and all others.
Mahāprabhu has also said: “Guru haya tāra sarva-deśa –
Be qualified to be like a guru, and preach everywhere,
‘Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma
hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare.’ ” Don’t take eggs, fish,
meat, or wine, and avoid gambling and smoking. Remember
Kṛṣṇa and chant His name. Money can never save anyone.
Rather, it gives trouble. So do something to easily
maintain your life, and use the rest of the time to
preach.

Kṛṣṇa-vallabhā dāsī:

You are saying to become like guru before preaching. But
we may not become like guru in this life, so then no
preaching happens. How to reconcile this? Although we
are not qualified, we want to inspire others to come to
bhakti.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I want to make you all guru. Try to be guru. Not
initiating, but preaching is also within guru-tattva.
First, be of good character, very pure. With a strong
character, you can teach and all can hear; otherwise
not. “Avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam – We
should not hear hari-kathā from the mouths of those that
are not pure Vaiṣṇavas, who are not under the guidance
of guru, following and obeying him.”

                          118
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Aniruddha dāsa:

We do not have maṅgala-ārati in our Alachua saṅga, so I
go daily to the ISKCON temple for maṅgala-ārati. I
understand from Prabhupāda’s books that maṅgala-ārati is
very important. But I have heard from some of your
preachers that doing maṅgala-ārati and worshiping
Deities is for kaniṣṭhas. Is this true?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I attend. Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura attended and would personally ring the bell.
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī worshipped govardhana-śilā.
Those who say that maṅgala-ārati and Ṭhākurajī worship
are only for kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs are themselves kaniṣṭha-
adhikārīs.

Mukuṇḍa dāsa:

We all perform maṅgala-ārati at our homes. What
Aniruddha prabhu is trying to say is that we don’t have
a building yet, so we can’t come together and perform
maṅgala-ārati together. He wants that we have a place
where we can all come together.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You must arrange a place. First you can rent a house,
and then you can get a bigger center where Deities and
all temple paraphernalia can be situated. There you can
meet and perform ārati and all other functions.

Isa dāsa:

It is okay to go to ISKCON until we get our own place?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If it is favorable. If it is not favorable, if those in
the ISKCON temple criticize me or any pure Vaiṣṇava,
then it is better not to go.

Kṛṣṇa-vallabhā

dāsī:

ISKCON is a large temple with a lot of devotees. Only a
few people criticize.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When we will have our center, all should come there.

Gaṅgā-Nārāyaṇa dāsa:

When we have bhajanas in our saṅga, only a very small
amount of time is spent chanting the mahā-mantra. Your
devotees chant mahā-mantra only for a few minutes, at
the end.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                          119
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Whenever we meet together, hari-kathā should be
performed. You can chant mahā-mantra as much as you like
in your house. You can personally chant and sing mahā-
mantra anywhere. Regarding the saṅga meetings, some
mahā-mantra and pañca-tattva-mantra should be there at
the beginning and at the end, as we do.

Īśa dāsa:

Vṛndā dīdī says that when we have a center in Alachua,
you will come every year.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

First make it.




May 23, 2007


Radio Interview

Radio Host:

Just to introduce myself, I am beginning a radio program
here in Houston that is called “Yoga for Peace.” What we
do is educate people on the vastness of yoga and the
different paths that one can take in order to reach
peace. In this way, people don’t get too stuck in the
haṭha or āsana portion of yoga.1 They will be able to
understand that there are other avenues to expand and
reach peace. This is what the program is about. We have
interviewed Svāmīs and other great souls who have come
to town, and we play these interviews on the radio so
that people can learn.

I will start with an introduction and then I have a few
questions I would like to ask.

There are several paths in yoga, and at some point I
would like to discuss them all on “Yoga for Peace
Radio.” One of those paths is called bhakti, or the path
of devotion. We are fortunate to have His Divine Grace
Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja here to help us
better understand this yogic path of devotion. Mahārāja
is a great Vaiṣṇava saint who has circled the globe
twenty-five times with this simple message of love and
devotion that has attracted the hearts and souls of
millions. At the age of eighty-seven, he is the most
revered and eldest of Vaiṣṇava teachers to visit the
Western world. To date, he has written over fifty books,
which have been translated into several languages by his
followers. For over half a century, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja has demonstrated and exemplified the pure life
of utter dedication and loving service. Namaste, Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.

To start, I would like to congratulate you on your title
of “Cultural Ambassador of the City of Houston,” as
bestowed by our Mayor to you in the year 2004.


                          120
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, thank you.

Radio Host:

You’re quite welcome. So, to begin, I have a few
questions.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

How did she know?

Viṣṇu dāsa:

There was an article in the newspaper, and we sent some
information.

Radio Host:

And I read it on the internet.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

They have also given me American citizenship.

Radio Host:

Oh, wonderful! Then you’re welcome to come here any
time. The door is open.

Now, I have some basic questions for you. Why should
people practice yoga?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

We see that everywhere in this world – especially in
China, Taiwan, and Japan, as well as in other countries
– people do physical exercises to keep their bodies
strong and durable. It may be that for some time their
bodies can remain like that. They may be strong, with no
disease and with some longevity, but one day they must
become old, and where will their yoga go at that time?
They will no longer be able to do exercise. So, for the
time being we can exercise to protect our body from
disease and make it strong, but this is actually
exercise, not yoga.

Nowadays, yoga is very famous everywhere. The word yoga
has come from the Indian Sanskrit language, and it means
‘adding two things together.’ What two things? Most
people don’t know, but we know, because we practice real
yoga.

We are not this body. This body is only a bag of urine,
blood, stool, and other nasty things, and one day you
will have to give it up. But there is a soul in this
body; soul means ‘you and me.’ And there is also a
Supersoul, the Supreme Lord. We reside in the heart of
the body along with the Supersoul. By the practice of

                          121
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

bhakti-yoga, one will know, “I am spirit soul, part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord.” Then, by love and
affection, one joins together with Him. Do you
understand?

Radio Host:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If you want to build a wall, you lay brick after brick,
and there must also be some cement. Similarly, if we
want to have a connection with the Supreme Lord, there
must be prema, pure love and affection. By love and
affection we can be with Kṛṣṇa and serve Him. As a
result of such service, this body, which is a bag of
stool and urine, will be gone forever. We will thus
realize our very beautiful soul, which is everlasting,
with no birth, old age, and death. Then, with our
spiritual body, we will serve the beautiful Supreme
Lord. This is called yoga, and the effect of this yoga
is that we will no longer have to come to this world to
become old and die.

Radio Host:

Very good. So the reason to practice yoga...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But one thing: For the time being, we should try to keep
our body strong and well, and therefore we should also
accept these yoga exercises. At the same time, the
practice of bhakti-yoga is essential. Bhakti-yoga is
real yoga.

Radio Host:

In combination with the exercise?

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Haṭha-yoga is for maintaining the body, and bhakti is
for the soul, for spiritual advancement.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Haṭha-yoga is only for the physical body; we are not our
bodies.

Radio Host:

That leads me to the next question, which you may have
already answered in part. India has many bhakti-yoga
practitioners. Do you think that bhakti-yoga is a
practical path for the West?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not only for Western countries, but for the whole world.
Wherever there are living souls, bhakti-yoga is
practical.


                          122
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

I’ve traveled the world about twenty-four times. In each
and every country I go, I preach bhakti-yoga and show
people by my own example how to practice it. Thousands
upon thousands of persons are accepting the teachings of
bhakti, and they are now very happy – very happy.

Radio Host:

So, it is universal.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Millions of devotees follow me and practice practical
bhakti-yoga.

Radio Host:

Can Christians follow the bhakti path and still practice
their religion?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. Actually, Jesus Christ’s teaching is very good, and
it comes in the category of bhakti-yoga. But nowadays we
see that Christians are not following those teachings.
In the practice of bhakti-yoga, pure food is required.
We should not take meat, eggs, and wine, and we should
not engage in smoking. If we engage in these sinful
activities while trying to practice bhakti-yoga, that
will not be favorable; we will not be able to perform
bhakti-yoga.

But they do not follow this. If they would avoid meat,
eggs, smoking, and drinking wine – and at the same time
think of the Supreme Lord, who has a transcendental
form, who is very beautiful and merciful, and who is
seen by bhakti-yoga – then they can practice
successfully.

M-E-A-T means ‘me eat.’ You will be eaten by those whom
you are eating; so don’t eat meat. A child in the womb
is called an egg. If you eat eggs, you are doing so
against the will of the Supreme Lord. He has not created
these beings to be eaten. For your eating He has created
milk, sugar, ghee, so many fruits, vegetables, curd, and
unlimited other edibles.

Radio Host:

How do you feel about the poor treatment of cows in this
country in order to extract their milk? Do you feel that
such milk is still pure?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is a very wrong thing. It is cruelty. The Supreme
Lord will surely punish such cruel persons. They will
take birth as cows, and those cows will take birth as
humans and do the same thing to them. All activities
have a reaction – good or bad – so we should not do such
things.

Radio Host:


                          123
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

We should avoid the milk that is in the grocery stores?
Is that what you are saying?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is like meat. We should not take it.

Radio Host:

I very much agree. You have answered a lot of my
questions.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, there are also cows that are treated well and
fed an organic diet.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is good. I have seen this in Holland, millions of
cows, very big cows. We can take the milk of such cows.

Radio Host:

Unless a person can go and see how the cows are treated
in this country and many other places, it is difficult
to know. Their saying it is organic does not mean that
the cows are treated well. It just means they are fed
different food.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We have many cows in our āśrama (monastery). We give
proper care and food to them. First they give milk to
their calves, and only then do we take their milk.

Radio Host:

How can bhakti-yoga contribute to peace – personally and
globally?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Bhakti-yoga is the transcendental religion of all souls.
It is natural for the soul to serve Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the
Supreme Lord. God is love, and love is God. Kṛṣṇa is
love personified. If anyone serves Him, that person
becomes fully happy with pure love and affection. He is
never unhappy, because in the transcendental world there
are no diseases or old age, and no problem exists of any
kind. There is only happiness, and more happiness; that
person will be eternally happy.

Bhakti-yoga is very easy to follow. The devotee prays,
“O God, You are extremely merciful. Please be merciful
to me.” And he chants the Lord’s names.

The names of the Supreme Lord are very powerful. In a
moment the Lord can create millions of universes, and
again in a moment He can destroy them, and then re-
create them. He is causelessly merciful. He has all good
qualities. He has invested all His power, all His mercy,
and all His qualities in His names, and that is why His
names are so powerful. We chant and meditate upon His

                          124
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

names: “Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare /
hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare.” Whatever
language we speak, whether we live in Western or Eastern
countries, we can very easily chant and offer respectful
obeisances to Him. We can very easily become situated in
bhakti-yoga, and thus become liberated from this world
and be happy forever.

Radio Host:

Can one chant Jesus’s name and have the same effect as
chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Jesus is not God, the Supreme Lord. He is the son of
God. The Father has a form, because in the Bible, first
chapter, it is written that God created man after His
own image. If God has no image, how can He create the
human form, or human image? God has form and so many
qualities. All qualities reside in Him.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Other names can also be meditated upon?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What names do Christians have for God?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Jehovah, Yahweh.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The name Christ came when the young Jesus went to our
sacred places in India. In Vṛndāvana, where we come
from, he heard the name Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, and saw
His form. Then he went to South India, where the
residents pronounce Kṛṣṇa as “Krushna.” From Krushna
came Krista, and from Krista came Christ. Christ is the
same as Kṛṣṇa, and therefore you can chant the name
Christ, or Jehovah, or whatever name you wish.

Radio Host:

Allah?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Allah refers to brahma. Allah means ‘there is nothing
greater than that,’ and therefore He is Allah, or
brahma; He is the greatest. But one thing: we say that
God is Bhagavān (full with six opulences, namely wealth,
fame, knowledge, strength, beauty, and renunciation).
Brahma has no form or qualities. It is merely the
effulgence of the nails of the Lord. As the sunrays and
light have no form, so brahma and Allah are like the
effulgence of Bhagavān. Bhagavān has form and all
qualities, and He is very merciful. You can also chant
Allah or Huda, but you will not gain much from that.

Radio Host:

                          125
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


That is how peace can come globally – when everyone
realizes that it is all the same?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

By this we can always be peaceful; not quarreling and
not slaughtering animals. Animals are also souls, just
as we are. By this awareness we can be happy.

Radio Host:

That sounds good to me.

Another question: Do you believe that the bhakti
practice has contributed to your good health and
longevity?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That may be. I am always happy, traveling the entire
world, writing so many books, and preaching bhakti-yoga
everywhere. I have no worldly desires; I have given them
up forever. Actually, I have no home, but everywhere is
my home. I have no wife, but I have millions of
daughters and sons.

Radio Host:

Yes, a very loving family.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I don’t discriminate between Hindu, Christian, and
Buddhist. I know they are all souls within their bodies;
sons and daughters of God.

Radio Host:

One more question: How can one find his true teacher?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is very rare – very rare – to find such a teacher, or
guru. There are some symptoms by which such a guru is
recognized. He should know all the Vedic literature. He
should be so expert that he can remove the doubts of his
disciples. He should have realization of God, so that he
can give God from his heart to others’ hearts. Next, he
should be detached from worldly desires.

Such a guru is very rare. However, if you pray to God
with a clean and simple heart, “O God, You are merciful.
Please arrange that I can meet such a guru,” He will
somehow mercifully arrange that such a guru will come to
your door and tell you everything for your spiritual
success.

Radio Host:

So, the key is to be pure of heart in one’s desire. Very
good. Well, I don’t want to keep you very long. I’ve
kept you a long time already. I just want to go ahead
and ask if you have a final message to give to the

                             126
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

listeners of the radio program.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If any person wants to be happy, he must follow bhakti-
yoga. Without chanting the name of the Supreme Lord, one
can never be happy; never, never. To chant the name
properly one should give up eating meat and eggs,
drinking wine, smoking, and other bad habits. He should
not harm animals. He should not give any pain to
animals, or to any living entities. Thus, he can become
happy.

This is my final message. Also, I pray to the Lord that
all should be happy. Sarve sukhena bhavantu. All should
be without disease. I also pray that you will personally
be happy in your life, and that you will realize God.

Radio Host:

It seems you have taught your disciples very well,
because they can fill in your sentences for you [meaning
that they can provide English equivilents when Śrīla
Mahārāja says words in his native tongue, Hindi, and
appears not to know their English translation].

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are very expert. I am now eighty-seven years old.
They have taken care of me in such a way that I can
travel and write.

Radio Host:

Are you going to continue to travel?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yes, of course.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If I am a citizen in India, and here also, I will have
to come here.

Radio Host:

It has been a wonderful, wonderful pleasure meeting you.
Thank you so much. It has been a great honor to meet
you. I really appreciate this time that you’ve given me.
It’s been wonderful, and I hope this message can get out
to others. Namaste.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Many gurus come to the Western countries and say, “I am
God.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are totally foolish – idiot-number-one. If they are
God, why do they die? Why do they become old? Why do
they search after money? God can do anything by His
wish. Can they? They are cheating themselves and others.

                            127
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


God is: G – Generator of the whole world. O – Operator,
and D – Destroyer. That person is God. You are helpless.
Those who say “I am God” cannot do anything to help
themselves. They are bound to grow old and die. God has
no disease, no old age, no death – nothing like that at
all.




June 3, 2007


Copyright darśana

[Generally, all the darśanas of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja are clearly questions and answers and
teachings. Here in this “Copyright darśana,” the
teaching is more in the darśana as a whole than in the
particular words of Śrīla Mahārāja. His desires for the
protection of his copyrights is indicated here in this
darśana, but his detailed instructions in the matter can
be found in the endnotes.]

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, everybody is assigning to you any copy--
rights they may have.2,

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

Viśvambhara dāsa:

We are recording this session, so that everyone in the
world will see that you own your books.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good. I will give my rights to the committee –
Gaudiya Vedanta Publications (GVP).

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Can you show Gurudeva where to sign?

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Okay.

Victira, you can come.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Vicitri also?

Viśvambhara dāsa:

She is signing.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                            128
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Tīrtha Mahārāja also? What is he doing?

Viśvambhara dāsa:

He is helping with your translation of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, so he is assigning everything to you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Vṛndā also?

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Yes. At first, there are only nine. Tīrtha Mahārāja,
Śyāmarāṇī dīdī, Śānti dīdī, Prema-prayojana prabhu,
Acyutānanda...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Acyutānanda also? Very wonderful America.

Viśvambhara dāsa:

It is the Coypright Act of 1959. It is the same in
India.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The writer of the book is the authority, and he has the
copyright.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Those who have helped sign over their rights to him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Thank you, Śyāmarāṇī. You are serving me in so many
ways; so many ways.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

I haven’t started serving you yet.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You don’t need my signature?

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Yes, we will witness your signing.

Yamunā-prasāda dāsa:

The editors assist until there is a pre-press edition.
Gurudeva approves it all, including the cover and
pictures, and all that gets copyrighted.

Viśvambhara dāsa:

GVP doesn’t sign anything. Only the people who are
creating any aspect of the book need to sign. That is
copyrighted, and the final is published, reproduced, and

                          129
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

distributed.

We will make copies of these papers and send them to the
lawyers, and then we will give everyone a copy.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And Prema-prayojana.

Do Rādhā-kānta and Sundara-gopāla also need to sign?

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Rādhā-kānta, no. Sundara-gopāla yes. Whoever works on
assisting you with the books needs to sign.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Puṇḍarīka?

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Puṇḍarīka, yes, and Hari-priya and Prema-vilāsa prabhu.

Brajanāth dāsa:

For Hindi, too, Gurudeva. Oṁ Prakāśa prabhu too. Whoever
has worked on your Hindi and English publications need
to sign.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Indian and America law is the same?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes, for international copyrights.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, my books are now international.

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Universal, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You have all made them like that.

Viśvambhara dāsa:

You have inspired us. You have given us intelligence,
energy, and everything. Otherwise we are useless;
nothing




June 5, 2007


darśana

                          130
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Lokī, tomato, urad-dhal, and certain other foodstuffs
are to be strictly given up during puruṣottama-vrata3.
This system has been designed by scriptures. It is
important to take up renunciation and stop the desire to
enjoy. Sense gratification needs to be gradually given
up.

At present, your tongue hankers for various tastes:
“This is sweet, this is salty, this is beautiful,” etc.
Actually, it is your mind wanting all this, not your
ātmā (soul). Such hankering has no connection with your
ātmā, and for this reason it is good that you are
slowly, slowly, able to give up the desire for these
things.

In ancient times, our kings gave up all sense
gratification as soon as they reached fifty years of
age. They gave up all family life, and ate only
tasteless fruits, roots, and leaves of the forest.
Sometimes they would chew leaves, and sometimes they
would eat dry chickpeas. In this way they would give up
sense gratification and practice renunciation from
material things to the point that later they would even
give up these edibles and rely only on air. In fact,
they would finally give up even air and thus attain
Parabrahma, the Supreme Lord.

As long as you remain attached to material things, like
“I would like to eat some halvā or rabri,” and you
desire to enjoy material things, you will not be able to
perform śuddha-bhakti, or pure devotion. This is why our
scriptures tell us to give up all these things.

[To an Indian devotee, in Hindi] Are you following
puruṣottama-vrata? No? Why not? Do you fear giving up
tomatoes? You must definitely observe puruṣottama-vrata.
Meat, fish, onions, and garlic should not be taken at
all. If you eat these things, your consciousness
degrades to the mode of ignorance. Stay away from all
these things.

The Lord’s devotion is performed by chanting His holy
name. It has been told in scriptures that if you are not
chanting His names, you will be born as a donkey, pig,
sheep, and chicken in your next lives; and nobody will
be able to stop this on your behalf. You must chant
harināma.

[To a Western devotee] You should chant harināma – hare
kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa. You will then be liberated from this
miserable world and never come back. It is very easy.
You can chant in the day-time, night-time, even while
walking; and at the same time you should not take eggs,
meat, wine, and all such abominable things.

[To an Indian devotee, in Hindi] Now I will go to do
some writing (translation work). Be happy in bhakti. May
the Supreme Lord’s blessings be upon you.

Ānitā dāsī:


                          131
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

We are writing a report for a Houston newspaper and also
for the hari-kathā newsletter. [regarding the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam classes, given by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, in Houston. Following Vedic tradition, on the
first day of Śrīla Mahārāja’s hari-kathā, there was a
procession around the temple, wherein the leader of the
procession carried Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam on his head and
others, behind him, carried kalaśas (waterpots) on their
heads.] We need to know the significance of the kalaśas.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The Bhāgavatam is going in procession, and we are
following. The kalaśa contains water, mango leaves, a
swastika, and a coconut. These are all very auspicious
items, so we accept them for the auspiciousness of this
occasion. Ladies wear beautiful garments and carry the
kalaśas on their heads.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

The kalaśa is brought for any auspicious ritual
ceremony, to bring auspiciousness.

Ārati dāsī:

Then, after the ceremony, the water is sprinkled over
everyone and the coconut is distributed to everyone as
prasādam.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yes.




June 8, 2007


Airport darśana

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Gurudeva, when the devotees translated your kathā in
Houston about the rāsa dance, they quoted you as saying
that Kṛṣṇa showed that He was dancing with His own
shadow – and that nobody cares about one’s own shadow.
So, Kṛṣṇa was dancing with the gopīs, but He was not
attached to them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That was not the meaning. As an ordinary boy plays with
his shadow without attachment, in the same way Kṛṣṇa was
also playing with His shadow. The gopīs are like His
shadow. The words ‘Kṛṣṇa has no attachment’ mean that He
was not controlled by the gopīs lust; and the gopīs also
had no lust.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

So when you say ‘attachment,’ you mean ‘material lust’?

                            132
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, the mañjarīs are also present in the rāsa-
līlā. Are they participating, or are they serving?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is not a subject matter to be discussed at present.
Once you come to that stage after successfully
performing bhajana, you will understand all this by
yourself.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, in Vraja, the Pāṇḍavas are still performing
austerities to attain vraja-bhakti. Have they not
attained this yet?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is not so easy to attain vraja-bhakti. They will have
to perform austerities for millions of years.

Devotee:

Then how will I attain it?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There is a reason why you will be able to attain it. You
are performing one-pointed devotion under the guidance
of Vrajavāsīs, and you have been serving Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
from the beginning. The Pāṇḍavas initially served
Dvārakādhīśa Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is harder for them, and
it is easier for you, to attain it. It is easy for those
who have taken shelter of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Devotee:

You mentioned that in Bhāgavatam Kṛṣṇa is called Keśava,
meaning ‘He who combs Rādhārāṇī’s hair,’ and then you
also gave another meaning. Is there any difference
between the two meanings?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Ka refers to Brahmā, īśa refers to Śaṅkara, and va
refers to their worshipful Deity, Kṛṣṇa, or Keśava.

Devotee:

So, are They different?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are the same person.

Devotee:


                             133
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

What is the duty of the daughter to her father when her
father is all alone? I am asking this because after
marriage the daughter cannot do anything independently.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The daughter will do whatever is easily done. Daughters
are dear to the father, and sons are dear to the mother.
The daughter will have affection for the father and do
whatever is appropriate. At the time of marriage, the
father gives something to the groom so that the daughter
is maintained. At all times, the son will do whatever he
can do to maintain his parents.

Devotee:

Is the daughter obligated to do something?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Only if the father becomes unable to do anything for
himself, or is very poor,

Devotee:

Sometimes there are no sons in the family.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In India, when the father gives his daughter in
marriage, like a charity,4 he never accepts anything
from the daughter even if he is helpless.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He never even accepts water.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Because he has already given his daughter away, he
doesn’t even drink water at the house of the son-in-law
or at the house of the daughter’s in-laws.

Devotee:

Can he honor prāsadam at his daughter’s house?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In India [in traditional times], he would not do this.

Devotee:

I am asking whether the father should follow the same
customs here in the U.S.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Here in the U.S. it is not possible to follow the same
customs, because this place is bhoga-rājya, the kingdom
of sense enjoyment. It is like Svarga, the heavenly
planets. Here it is not easy to do sādhana, as there are
so many objects of sense gratification and twenty-four
hour-a-day-desires – “I want a car,” and so many things

                            134
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

like that.

Devotee:

And still there is no peace.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Everyone wants two of everything; two cars, and so on.

[To another devotee] You can sit on a chair.

[To another devotee] Don’t cry. Why are you crying? You
are building a maṭha, temple, here. I will come to your
maṭha. I will also stay with you and speak hari-kathā.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, please call us to come to Badger. Your
programs in Badger are always so nice, but we haven’t
been able to go there.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

We do not need to call you. You can come.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Haven’t the programs been good here? They are not good,
and that is why you want to go there?

Devotee:

No, the programs here have been very good. But no matter
how much we take your darśana, it is still not enough.

Devotee:

Mahārājajī, Akṣaya prabhu did a lot of service this time
for your programs.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Didn’t he go to his office for work?

Devotees:

No Mahārājajī, he was always busy here, doing some
service. He was always helping in the kitchen, and also
bringing so many things. In the evenings he cleaned
everything and then went home. Sometimes it was midnight
by the time he reached home.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Everyone did so much endeavor.

Rādhārāṇī dāsī:

This morning, Premamayī dīdī called and also offered her
daṇḍavat praṇāma (prostrated obeisances).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                            135
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

She will become a big doctor.

Rādhārāṇī dāsī:

By your mercy.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When she did her exams, she got 99%.

Rādhārāṇī dāsī:

She was quite sick at that time, but due to your mercy
she got such a high grade.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Śyāmarāṇī will be here for two to four days. Where will
she stay?

Devotee:

With Lakṣmī dīdī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Śyāmarāṇī dāsī] You will speak hari-kathā to them.

Houston is like a mini-India. The area where I was
staying with the devotees is just like a mini-India.

Bimalā dāsī:

Gurudeva, two years ago, a big hurricane was supposed to
pass through Houston. But it didn’t come. In my mind I
was always thinking that because of Gurudeva it didn’t
come.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It was due to Bhagavān.

Bimalā dāsī:

No, it was by your mercy.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To a guest] Why aren’t you taking harināma? What
lacking is there in you? Are you eating meat and fish?

Guest:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You must give this up, otherwise those animals will eat
you. Māṁsa, meat.5At present you are happily eating
meat. But when those animals eat you in the future, you
will be in distress. So quickly, today, give up eating
meat, fish, and so on. Don’t gamble, and don’t engage in
any immoral or cheating activities.


                            136
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

We need to go to the gate.




* * *




1 Haṭha-yoga, or āsana, is the third portion of the
process of aṣṭāṅga-yoga. It is the practice of adopting
different bodily postures, in order to render the body
supple so that a person may perform prolonged
meditation.



2 The following is a transcription of the copyright
darśana in Navadvīpa, March 13, 2009. In your reading,
it may sometimes seem that even though Śrīla Gurudeva
has already answered a particular question, it is again
asked in a couple of different ways. It may seem that
Mañju dīdī, Śrīla Gurudeva’s disciple-lawyer, didn’t
hear or understand Śrīla Gurudeva the first time, and
that is why she asked the same or similar question again
and again. After the darśana she explained the reason
for this. It is that the series of questions were in
deposition format, to see whether or not the answers
would be consistent. She did this with a desire to make
his statements more clear to us.

Prior to this meeting with Śrīla Gurudeva, Mañju dīdī
met with Brajanāth prabhu for nearly two hours,
discussing copyright, from the extremes of “all rights
reserved” to “all in the public domain” to the various
options in between (e.g., the various contracts offered
by Creative Commons). Mañju dīdī and Brajanāth prabhu
went over the questions so he could understand them
before going into meet with Śrīla Gurudeva. These
questions were printed out for Śrīla Gurudeva,
Brajanāth, and Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja to review during
the darśana:


Mañju dāsī:

Gurudeva, this will help me decide how strong a
copyright protection to put on your books – whether we
go one extreme or the other extreme, or somewhere in the
middle.


Brajanāth dāsa:

In copyrights, there are many [options]. You can say,
“No one can do,” or “Some can do,” or…


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja reads Question 1a]

                             137
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have no objection if anyone in the world produces my
books, as is, with my name, with or without permission;
it is ok. Anyone can do so. But, second [he read the
second question – number 1b] not; someone else’s name
cannot be there.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It must be your name, not another’s name.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not others’.


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja reads Question 2]


Brajanāth dāsa:

Suppose ISKCON BBT says, “We want to produce your books.
We will print two million books for distribution.” And
they earn some profit with that. Any objection?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should decide.


Brajanāth dāsa:

I think no objection, because your books will go, your
message will be known, and by that profit they will
distribute more books.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They can do that.


Brajanāth dāsa:

3a – If your books are there, and someone wants to make
changes and put your name on it…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No.


Mañju dāsī:

Even if there is one [original book] available and it is
good, proper, with your name on it, someone can’t…
[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja shook His head

                            138
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

indicating no.] You don’t want that…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I don’t want any change. All books should be as I have
written them.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Unless you give permission for any change…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why will I give permission?


Brajanāth dāsa:

Suppose they [those who made the original book] have
made mistake…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Then.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

That is another thing.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If there is any mistake, then they can make a
correction; otherwise not.


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja reads Question 3b]


Brajanāth dāsa:

Do you want us to take legal action if a book comes out
in your name that contains apasiddhānta (wrong
philosophy)?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.


Mañju dāsī:

You want us to take legal action?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

                            139
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



Brajanāth dāsa:

Anyone may say, “This is the book of my guru mahārāja,”
but so many apasiddhāntas are there. We can try to
reconcile by debate, but if needed, we may take legal
actions.

Number 4 – Do you want all the rights of the books while
you are manifest in this world? Or can the authors
retain rights?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What does this mean?


Brajanāth dāsa:

It means that if Prema-vilāsa prabhu has translated your
lectures and has said, “I am the translator. I
acknowledge that Gurudeva has the copyright, but I want
to publish this when I want.” Any problem with that?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What do you think?


Brajanāth dāsa:

I think there is no problem. If anyone wants to publish,
it is no problem.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

As long as it is in Śrīla Gurudeva’s name.


Mañju dāsī:

Can I ask a follow-up to number 4? Is it okay if an
original contributor wants to control any changes, so
that we would have to go to them and ask for permission;
like to Prema-vilāsa?


Brajanāth dāsa:

Or Navadvīpa prabhu.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What?


Brajanāth dāsa:

If Prema-vilāsa or Navadvīpa have made contributions to

                            140
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

some title, like Manaḥ-śikṣā or Bhakti-rasāyana, and we
want to make some changes because some mistake is there…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can change.


Brajanāth dāsa:

But if Navadvīpa prabhu says, ”You need to ask
permission…”


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why will they say that?


Brajanāth dāsa:

They have some right because they have done the
translation.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Then what should we do?


Brajanāth dāsa:

If we have good relations with them. Maybe Prema-vilāsa
prabhu would say, “I like my style, and it is written
well. If you want to change it, please consult with me.”
It is proper etiquette.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

So, you can do that.


Mañju dāsī:

That’s okay? If they want us to ask them every time we
want to reprint, that’s okay?


Brajanāth dāsa:

Officially they should give permission to reprint,
because they have translated the book. I think they will
have no objection for reprints. They may say in writing
that, “In the future you have the right to print, as
long as the original is kept.” We should ask them.


Mañju dāsī:

But do we have to go through the step of asking? Is that
okay?


                          141
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja indicates by nodding
that it would be okay.]


Brajanāth dāsa:

Certainly.


Mañju dāsī:

They could say no.


Brajanāth dāsa:

We can ask them, and then they can say [write], “Any
time in the future, you can reprint.”


Mañju dāsī:

I would like to try to get that [permission for any
reprints, if an assignment of all rights to Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja cannot be obtained. ]


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is better that they do it once. We don’t know what
will happen after Gurudeva departs. They may say, “We
want royalty. We did this…”


Mañju dāsī:

I will try [to get an assignment of all rights for all
time], but if I don’t get that, I want to know where to
draw the line.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Number 5 – In the future, are you willing for the
original contributors to put conditions on how the books
are published? Or, should the books be put in public
domain? This means that suppose you say, “In the future,
anyone can publish my books, no matter who it is. All my
followers can print my books, or any third party can do
so. I have no objection to this.” Someone may say, “I
have edited this book, or translated this book, and in
the future, I want the right to approve…”


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is not good.


Mañju dāsī:

If it is in the public domain or if anyone can publish,
it’s not an issue.

                            142
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


But what if there are derivatives or changes made;
should the original contributors be brought in and have
rights? What if they don’t like what the BTI or GVP are
doing? Should they have rights?


Brajanāth dāsa:

In the future, let’s say we want to change something;
the language has to be changed…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I think it is not proper. Why [should it be changed]?
Then it will be changed, changed, changed, so much
changed.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Better they write new books.


Mañju dāsī:

After you are not with us, should Tridaṇḍi Mahārāja, as
an original translator, have a right to say what the
changes are?


Brajanāth dāsa:

Let’s say he has translated Bhagavad-gītā in English,
and we all approve [and say that] it is proper. You have
approved. An editorial board has approved. In the
future, if anyone wants to make changes in the book,
should Tridaṇḍi Mahārāja have any authority to be
consulted?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is good.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Number 6a – Would you like your works to be carried
forward as you do for the ācāryas and elaborated on,
since their works are in the public domain with the one
exception being Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja? Like
now, you are giving some extra commentaries on the
commentaries of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura,
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīpāda, and Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī.
Can any learned ācārya in the future use your books and
write some commentary?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They can do so.


                          143
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Brajanāth dāsa:

Like you are using the edition of Bhakti Śrīrūpa
Siddhāntī Mahārāja.

Number 6b – In essence, do you want your words to be put
in the public domain? This means that anyone can publish
your books.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.


Mañju dāsī:

Anyone can publish your books, anyone can change your
books, or do anything with your words, if we put them in
the public domain. It is free for anyone to say, “I
could change it.”


Brajanāth dāsa:

She is telling that they can change your books, but we
will not allow. We have to hold on to that. Anyone can
publish if is unchanged.


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja nodded indicating
agreement with Brajanāth dāsa.]


Brajanāth dāsa:

Then, 6c – Would you like your words protected and
controlled like the BBT? Many disciples want to publish
the books of their guru mahārāja [Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja, Śrīla Prabhupāda], but BBT controls
that. Would you like us to do that?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No.


Brajanāth dāsa:

In the future, if there are mistakes in your books, do
you want corrections to be made?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.


Brajanāth dāsa:

What if the errors and corrections originated in the
Hindi? Should they be transferred into the English? Your

                          144
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Hindi edition is original. In the future [it may be seen
that] some slight mistakes may be there – grammar, a
typo, or some misunderstanding. If we change it in
Hindi, we should change it in English?


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja nodded indicating yes.]


Brajanāth dāsa:

What if the errors are simply typographical or
grammatical, and changing them would not change the
meaning?


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja nodded indicating it
was okay to fix them.]


Brajanāth dāsa or Mādhava Mahārāja:

No difficulty with that.


Mañju dāsī:

No problem.


Brajanāth dāsa:

[Reading question 7b] In the future, do you want an
editorial board to control corrections of your books?
Like maybe you say Bhakti Trust, GVP, or Śrīpāda Tīrtha
Mahārāja, or Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja, or any Vaiṣṇava
who has a deep understanding and who is qualified should
be consulted if any corrections need to be made.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In Hindi, I think no need of corrections. It is all
right.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Or, what about in English or any other language?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In English you can see.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Like Śrīpāda Tīrtha Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja,
Śyāmarāṇī; or you can name any who are…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                           145
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

In English they can do.


Brajanāth dāsa:

So an editorial board… Vaijayanti-mālā…


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja nodded indicating
agreement.]


Brajanāth dāsa:

[Reading question 7c] In the future do you want anyone
to control translations of your books?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What does this mean?


Brajanāth dāsa:

It means that if the books need to be translated into
other languages, some legal entity should give
permission for that, or not?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If anyone wants to translate into Russian language, he
can translate.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Suppose we say we have some Russian editorial board that
is approved by you or by our devotees. Then we will
recommend, “Please, if you do things proper, then you
can use our logo,” if we have any official logo that is
well-known around the world. Other than that, who wants
to translate and publish, we will have no objection.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can do what is good.


Brajanāth dāsa:

For example, if a devotee wants to make a book and put
their own name, we have no objection. If they puts your
name, we may have some objection.


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja nodded indicating
agreement with Brajanāth dāsa.]


Mañju dāsī:


                           146
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

So we want to control the translations? Yes?


Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes, correct?


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja nodded, indicating
yes.]


Mañju dāsī:

Do you have any suggestions as to how we can facilitate
future pure Vaiṣṇavas in using your words and building
on them and commenting on them? Any suggestions you
might have will be helpful for us.


Brajanāth dāsa:

If any Vaiṣṇava wants to publish Bhagavad-gītā and wants
to insert your commentary, any objection?


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

But Gurudeva’s name must be there. It must say that it
was taken from here.


Mañju dāsī:

Gurudeva’s name must be associated with the work. Is
that acceptable Gurudeva?


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja nodded indicating
agreement with Mañju.]


Brajanāth dāsa:

Only acknowledgement is required. We will inform them,
if we are around [still alive], to acknowledge that this
is coming from you.




Copyright darśana in Houston, May 29, 2009:




Mañju dāsī:

What we are doing, and Ānitā is helping me, is making
sure your wishes with respect to your books and
copyrights are respected. We want to record a summary
for our team.


                            147
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I told everything to Brajanāth.


Mañju dāsī:

Yes.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Brajanāth has not written what I told?


Mañju dāsī:

He wrote, but Ānitā is going to summarize your words for
our team, so our team can see. We have Kṛṣṇa-kāruṇya,
Jaya-gopāla, Vaijayanti-mālā…


Ānitā dāsī:

There are many international languages. They want to
know how they should manage translations.


Mañju dāsī:

So we will quickly summarize.


Brajanāth dāsa:

There are two or three questions.


Mañju dāsī:

Yes, Ānitā will ask them quickly, so we can get your
confirmation.


Ānitā dāsī:

So, you want GVP Inc. to manage English books; and Hindi
if they are asked to help; yes?


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja nods]


Ānitā dāsī:

Okay. And anyone can translate your books as long as
they give you permission also – to print and publish and
make changes to your books?


Brajanāth dāsa:

Whoever wants to translate your books, they can do so.

                          148
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

But rights should also be given to you, to publish the
same book.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. You have not already written all I told?


Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes, but they want to have a little recording, so that
those who have any doubts can see.


Ānitā dāsī:

For the future, if there is any question, everyone knows
your desire.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I will sign on the Will?


Brajanāth dāsa:

No, this is for book publishing.


Mañju dāsī:

This is for book publishing. I will draft a contract
that you will sign. This will all be in the contract.
This helps me to understand your wishes.


Ānitā dāsī:

Okay, so for different language books you can publish,
the translator can also publish, and GVP can publish;
okay?


[Śrīla Mahārāja nods]


Ānitā dāsī:

If there is a need to make changes, you said that there
should be an editorial board, and the editorial board
should consult the translators. If there is any dispute,
they can consult sādhu, guru, śāstra?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.


Ānitā dāsī:

You said in Navadvīpa that you want people to [be

                           149
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

allowed to] make commentaries for your books. So, it may
be that somebody may make some incorrect or opposite
(apa) siddhānta.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, they cannot.


Ānitā dāsī:

Okay.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Suppose a devotee wants to write some of their own
ideas; some may be good, some may be against siddhānta.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

An editorial board will judge after me. As long as I am
here, I am doing [judging], but after that.


Mañju dāsī:

The only thing we are worried about is that if some
ācārya in the future comes and conditions souls do not
recognize him.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What?


Brajanāth dāsa:

She is telling that in ISKCON they don’t see that you
are ācārya. They think your writing is not authentic –
not everybody thinks like that, but some do. So it may
happen in the future that someone is thinking, as Mañju
dīdī is using this example, that even though…


Ānitā dāsī:

If an ācārya comes in the future, but GVP, who are
conditioned souls, do not see “this is the ācārya,” and
they stop…


Brajanāth dāsa:

Sādhu, śāstra, and guru. That is the…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

…most important.


                          150
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Ānitā dāsī:

Okay, but the editorial board should decide who makes
commentaries?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, [they should decide] whether it is according to
śāstras, guru, Vaiṣṇavas.


Mañju dāsī:

So let’s confirm, because it’s a little different from
what we thought yesterday. So if someone comes along –
an ācārya – or let’s say I come along and I want to
write a commentary and I don’t know what I am talking
about. But someone else comes along, who is an ācārya
and does know what he is talking about, and he writes
something. We need to be able to have a mechanism to
stop me, but not him.

Or we allow me to do it, them to do it, and others will
write and say that I am stupid and I don’t know what I
am talking about, but that person does. It will be the
community of senior Vaiṣṇavas that will correct things,
but I won’t be prevented from making incorrect
statements and making my writing?


Brajanāth dāsa:

Do you understand? Regarding Bhagavad-gītā, so many
translations are there, but when you use Bhagavad-gītā
you will take Gita Press. You will take one particular
Bhagavad-gītā for reference that is authentic. Or when
you use any book, like Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I take the authentic Bengali, by Siddhāntī Mahārāja or
by others, not Gita Press.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Okay. So, for any book there may be other transla-tions,
but you don’t have so much value for them. It may happen
in the future that regarding the books you have
published, some may make commentaries on that. Some
[commentaries] may be authentic, and some may not be so
authentic.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What can you do?


Brajanāth dāsa:


                          151
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

Nothing.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Nothing to do. We cut the arguments of Śaṅkarācārya;
what can they do?


Ānitā dāsī:

Vaiṣṇavas correct. If there is any bad commentary, the
Vaiṣṇavas will correct.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And also what we tell, others can tell that it is not
correct.


Mañju dāsī:

It will be…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Nothing to do.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Because there are so many different approaches.


Mañju dāsī:

Yes, we would not necessarily know who was…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Regarding any disciple, he should not do it.


Mañju dāsī:

Okay.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

For others, you cannot check...


Mañju dāsī:

So…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

By writing or telling that, “Your arguments are [proven]

                          152
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

wrong by this argument.”


Mañju dāsī:

So, we’ll let anyone make commentaries, but we’ll also
monitor the commentaries and have others write responses
to those commentaries.


Brajanāth dāsa:

Anything which is incorrect, not according to the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava pure bhakti line, the teachings of Rūpa
Gosvāmī, we will give correction.


Mañju dāsī:

Okay, we will correct. So, we’ll allow and correct.


Brajanāth dāsa:

An editorial board.


Ānitā dāsī:

Anyone can publish a part of your book if they give you
credit?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, yes.


Ānitā dāsī:

Okay, and no changes also.


Brajanāth dāsa:

And acknowledgement.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They give acknowledgement that “it is taken from there.”


Ānitā dāsī:

And anyone can make an audio recording of part of your
book, and also a drama play?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, yes.



                             153
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Ānitā dāsī:

Okay.


Brajanāth dāsa:

But that should be favorable for bhakti and Gurudeva’s
reputation.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yes, yes.


Ānitā dāsī:

According to your teachings.

US law allows copyright for seventy-five years after the
life of the author. Do you want to make it less time?
After seventy-five years anybody can make any changes;
credit or no credit. Do you want to make it for less
time?


Brajanāth dāsa:

In America they have a law that anyone can file
copyright for any publications. That copyright will
expire after some time.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I am not copying copyright.


Brajanāth dāsa:

No [I didn’t mean that]. You say, “Whoever takes
something from my books should give acknowledgement.” In
America they have a seventy-five-year time limit. After
that, a publication becomes public domain.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, no problem. We have nothing to do with this.


Mañju dāsī:

Okay, do you want to make it less time, or seventy-five
years?


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Full time.




                            154
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



3 An excerpt from the article Śrī Puruṣottama Vrata in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī, published in Rays of the Harmonist,
No.9 (Winter 2001), written by Mādhava-priya dāsa:


The last fifteen days of śrī puruṣottama-vrata (vrata
means “vow”) were observed in Śrī Puruṣottama-dhāma, Śrī
Jagannātha Purī. During these days, more than six
hundred devotees assembled from different parts of India
and all over the world, despite worldwide terrorism
problems. They were blessed with the fortune to hear
profuse hari-kathā, and to perform parikramā of Śrī
Jagannātha Purī and neighboring areas under the guidance
of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

In his opening speech on the first day, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja said, “This year we are very fortunate
due to the observance of puruṣottama-vrata as part of
Cāturmāsya . We have got the fortune to partake in the
most auspicious activities, the nine limbs of bhakti, in
this most rare human life, under the guidance of exalted
Vaiṣṇavas in Śrī Jagannātha Purī Dhāma.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja then requested Śrīpāda
Bhaktivedānta Madhusūdana Mahārāja [formerly Kṛṣṇa-kṛpā
dāsa] to explain from the astrological point of view how
Puruṣottama month appears after every two years and
eight months. Mahārāja then explained that, according to
Sūrya Siddhānta, one solar month is thirty days whereas
one lunar month is twenty-nine and a half days. This
means that in one month there is a difference of half a
day between the lunar month and solar month, and in
twelve months, the difference is six days. Also,
according to the solar calendar, twelve solar months is
equal to 360 days. However, the earth completes its
rotation around the sun in 365 days and six hours; thus
there are five extra days. 6 + 5 days + 6 hours = 11
days + 6 hours extra in one solar year, 22 days + 12
hours extra in two solar years, and thirty days extra in
2 years 8 months 16 days and 4 hours of the solar
calendar. Thus there is an extra month, a gap between
the calculation by lunar month and solar month. In order
to bring both months into equilibrium, one month would
have to be subtracted in every two years, eight months,
sixteen days and four hours.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja explained that the name
“Puruṣottama” does not refer to Mahā-Viṣṇu or Vaikuṇṭha-
nātha Nārāyaṇa, or even to Kṛṣṇa of Dvārakā or Mathurā.
Puruṣottama, the name of the presiding Deity of this
month, refers to none other than Vrajendra-nandana
Śyāmasundara Himself, the worshipable Deity of the
Gauḍīyās; He is Golokapati Kṛṣṇa.

How did this extra month get the name Puruṣottama? Being
belittled by twelve other months, the presiding Deity of
this extra month approached Brahmājī, who took him to
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha Nārāyaṇa. Hearing the plight of the
extra month, Nārāyaṇa then took him to Golokapati Kṛṣṇa,
who bestowed all His qualities upon the extra month and
became its presiding Deity.


                          155
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has given a vivid description
of this month in his article The glories of Śrī
Puruṣottama Month, published in the previous issue of
Rays of the Harmonist [No.8, Summer 2001].



The following is an excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja’s lecture in Jagannātha Purī, India, August 4,
2004:


Puruṣottama month comes in the leap year – every thirty-
two months. Previously this month was known as mala-
māsa. Mala means unclean, contaminated, and suitable for
being rejected. This was considered the “rejectable”
month, because śāstra says about it: “You should not
perform any ritualistic activities, such as getting
married or receiving the sacred thread according to the
principles of varṇāśrama-dharma.” All of these
materially auspicious activities are stopped during this
month. No one is permitted to perform any of them, and
so this month was known as mala-māsa, the contaminated
month. The personification of this month approached Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and said to Him, “Oh my Lord, all in this world
despise and condemn me, because they cannot perform any
auspicious fruitive activities in my presence. I take
complete shelter of You and surrender to You. What
should I do?”

Kṛṣṇa explains in the Gītā:


sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (18.66)


Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender
unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions.
Do not fear.

“Give up all types of material religiosity and surrender
to Me unconditionally. I will take away all reactions to
your sinful activities; do not fear.” Kṛṣṇa replied to
Mala-māsa, “I will take away all your contamination,
because you are surrendered unto Me. I myself will
become the predominating Deity of this month. From now
on the people will not call you Mala-māsa. Instead they
will call you Puruṣottama-māsa. During this month they
will observe puruṣottama-vrata, the very auspicious
activities of devotional service, in Puruṣottama-
kṣetra.”

This month should be observed by following the rules and
regulations one follows during Kārtika month. Śrīmatī
Rādhikā is the predominating Deity in the month of
Kārtika, and Kṛṣṇa is the predominating Deity of

                           156
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Puruṣottama-māsa.

One should not perform any material pious activities
(śubha-karma) in this month. Instead of being derailed
into material activities, one should become one-pointed
and do one-pointed vows – for the happiness of Kṛṣṇa.
Only perform service to Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇavas, chant
harināma, and stay near Puruṣottama-deva. For those who
observe this vow, it is certain that all their desires
will be fulfilled. All so-called auspicious activities
of this world, such as performing duties within
varṇāśrama-dharma and getting married, will have no
value if one does not perform bhajana and if Kṛṣṇa is
not pleased. Therefore, all the devotees who have
assembled here to observe puruṣottama-vrata in
Puruṣottama-kṣetra, at the birthplace of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, are supremely
fortunate.




4 In the Vedic system this is called kanyā-dāna, or
giving one’s daughter in charity, meaning that the
father gives his daughter to a suitable young man for
her care and protection.



5 Māṁsa is the Hindi word for meat.


“You should hear the meaning of meat. The spelling of
‘meat’ in English is M-E-A-T. M-E, me. E-A-T, eat.
‘Those who eat meat will be eaten by those whom they
eat.’ If you are taking fish, meat, eggs, and cows,
those animals will become human beings and you will
become she-goats, cows, eggs, and so on, and they will
eat you. So, be careful” (Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja. Lecture in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, December
14, 2000).


“Now this question may be raised why are so many cows
being killed in the slaughterhouse. The answer is that
those who are killing cows, according to the decision of
karma-kāṇḍa, these killers of cows will in their next
life be cows, and the cows who are killed will become
men and kill the killers. The word flesh is called māṁsa
which means the animal in future will kill me and eat.
This is called karma bandhanam, bound up by the laws of
karma. If you kill some living being, he will kill you
in the next life. According to Manu-saṁhitā, the Vedic
law-book, a murderer is hanged and thereby released from
sinful activities, so that in the next life he may not
be killed. Life-for-life sentence is given to end the
result of sinful activities in this life instead of
waiting for the next life. Unfortunately, people at the
present moment do not know what is the next life, what
is this life, what is karma, how one becomes entangled,
and how one becomes free” (Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja. Letter to Alfred Ford, Los Angeles, July 16,
1974*).

                          157
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017




June 13, 2007




darśana

After the walk

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

One of my god-brothers has a sentimental relationship
with another god-brother and has, up to now, accepted
him as a śikṣā-guru. He is in saffron cloth. He is
worried that he will have to give up being a brahmacārī,
because his śikṣā-guru wants him to put on white cloth,
get married, and engage in business. He is now attracted
to your teachings and wants to do bhajana.

I heard that if the guru tells a disciple to get
married, that disciple can reject his order. Is this
true? Or, would the bona fide guru never give this
instruction?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why is that guru saying this? If he were bona fide, he
would not say this. He can be rejected.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

My god-brother is now rejecting his śikṣā-guru, and he
is accepting you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

A bona fide guru would not say, “Oh, you are a
brahmacārī; you should get married.” Has Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja said this? No. And I would
also never say this.1

The bona-fide guru laments for that former brahmacārī,
thinking, “I warned him, but still he insisted on being
married.” In our eyes, that brahmacārī has gone down. Do
you understand? If a person is engaged in Kṛṣṇa’s
service and hearing sweet pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, the life
history of Prahlāda Mahārāja, the glories of Hanumān,
the Pāṇḍavas, and Uddhava, and superior to them, the
gopīs – he should be able to give up material life
forever, as Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Gopala Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī have done. We follow them.

We inspire disciples to give up worldly life, but they
do the opposite. They take sannyāsa and then again
marry.

If you are actually preaching the mission of our guru-
paramparā, you will not deviate. If you are chanting,

                            158
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

but not preaching and not hearing hari-kathā from
superiors, you will certainly become weak.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

In Badger, in 2004, you said that if someone is
worshiping one hundred śālagrāma-śilās every day, but
has no taste for hearing hari-kathā, he will fall down
from his position in bhakti.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, he will sell or distribute his śālagrāmas.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

You said that this is like cutting a tree in pieces and
then giving water to the different parts. In that case
there will be no benefit to the tree.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Nothing.


yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena

tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ

prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇāṁ

tathaiva sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.31.14)


[As pouring water on the root of a tree energizes the
trunk, branches, twigs, and everything else, and as
supplying food to the stomach enlivens the senses and
limbs of the body, simply worshiping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead through devotional service
automatically satisfies the demigods, who are parts of
that Supreme Personality.*]

If you water the leaves and flowers of a tree, but not
the root, the leaves and flowers must die. On the other
hand, if you give water only to the root, all the leaves
and flowers will automatically be watered.

If you give water to both the roots and flowers, the
flowers will rot. If you give food to your mouth and
also to your eyes, what will happen? It is better to put
the food only in the mouth and not in any other part of
the body.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavat Mahārāja:

But Kṛṣṇa can eat with His eyes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This has been told for the jīvas of this world. It has
been said in the Vedic scriptures that Acyuta (a name of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, meaning ‘infallible’) is the root of the

                             159
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

entire world. If you simply please, worship, and serve
Him, the entire world is benefited.

[Speaking with Kṛṣṇa-devī from Italy, who has just
phoned] Hare Kṛṣṇa. Oh, my heartly blessings to you, and
to your daughter and sons. I was just asking your
husband about you. I think you are translating one of my
books now? Very good. You should preach and translate
books.

Your daughter is okay? What is she doing now?

Very good.

I want to come to Italy again, for another hari-kathā
festival there on the lake. It is very beautiful there.
I have just told your Prabhu (husband) to arrange this,
and we may come there in the summer-time. When Prabhu
returns, please discuss this with him and make a plan.

Giridhārī dāsa:

In the stage of aniṣṭhitā-bhakti (unsteady bhakti, the
stage of bhakti wherein the practitioner is still full
of anarthas that act as obstacles to his advancement),
is there some sequence of how the symptoms come and go,
or can they come and go at any time?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There must be some sequence.

Giridhārī dāsa:

They won’t come, for example, two at a time?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They may all be present at the same time. But gradually
one after another will be given up. The first symptom is
utsāha-mayī (false confidence) and then ghana-tarala
(sporadic endeavor). First he will learn something, and
in learning something he will have taste and sometimes
not. Then there is vyūdha-vikalpā (indecision), visaya-
saṅgarā (struggle with the senses), niymāksamā
(inability to uphold vows), and taraṅga-ranginī
(enjoying the facilities offered by bhakti). There is a
sequence.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, Śrautī Mahārāja remembers so much hari-kathā,
but when you ask him to give class, he becomes shy.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja] You should preach boldly.
When you give class, you can think that those in the
audience are like dry straws, knowing nothing.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

What if they think the same thing about me while I am
speaking?

                            160
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You must think that way about them. Then you can speak;
otherwise, you will be too shy.

I see that our preachers – like Vana Mahārāja, Nemi
Mahārāja, and Tīrtha Mahārāja – go alone to a specific
country, and so many devotees follow them and join their
party as they travel in that country.

It will be good if you do that too. Don’t be
discouraged. You know so much hari-kathā. You must do
this. Don’t be weak.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

But these preachers are traveling all over the world.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can also do that. You can travel all over France;
you can go to Nigeria and so many other places.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Śrautī Mahārāja thinks that you ordered him not to leave
Toulouse.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I suggested that he preach there only because he knows
French. The devotees there should be helped.

Brajanāth dāsa:

If he stays there, he loses his inspiration.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In that case he need not remain there.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

There are so many countries where people speak only
French. He is our only French sannyāsī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, yes.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

For example, the people speak French in Montreal, French
Guyana, Trinidad, and Mauritius.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He can preach there.




                            161
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

June 14, 2007




darśana

After the walk

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

The first time you came to the Western countries, you
said that while devotees chant japa, they can divide
their meditation into four parts – one part for
remembering Vraja Mandala parikramā (visiting the holy
places in Vṛndāvana where Kṛṣṇa performed His
transcendental pastimes)…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This instruction was for general persons. Those who have
just begun chanting can remember Vraja-maṇḍala
parikramā. They can perform parikramā of Govardhana and
Vṛndāvana in their minds, and they can offer flowers to
all the Deities there. Those who are more advanced will
meditate on Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes corresponding to His
different names:


tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

Upadeśāmṛta (Verse 8)


[While living in Vraja as a follower of the eternal
residents of Vraja, who possess inherent spontaneous
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one should utilize all his time by
sequentially engaging the tongue and the mind in
meticulous chanting and remembrance of Kṛṣṇa’s names,
form, qualities, and pastimes. This is the essence of
all instruction.]

While chanting the name of Kṛṣṇa, Dāmodara, Govinda, or
Gopīnatha, such devotees remember the sweet pastimes of
that name. When chanting the name of Govinda, what sweet
pastimes should we remember? We should remember His rāsa
dance with the gopīs. What is the meaning of Gopīnātha?
It means ‘He whose masters are the gopīs.’ The special
feature in the rāsa dance is that Kṛṣṇa is controlled by
the gopīs and is begging for their love. He tells them,
“I cannot repay you.” This is Gopīnātha.

It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.22):


na pāraye ’haṁ niravadya-saṁyujāṁ

sva-sādhu-kṛtyaṁ vibudhāyuṣāpi vaḥ

                          162
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


yā mābhajan durjara-geha-śṛṅkhalāḥ

saṁvṛścya tad vaḥ pratiyātu sādhunā


[My dear gopīs, our meeting is certainly free of all
material contamination. I must admit that even with the
lifetime of a demigod it would be impossible for Me to
repay My debt to you because you have cut off the
shackles of family life which are so difficult to break,
just to search for Me. Consequently I am unable to repay
you. Therefore, please be satisfied with your saintly
activities in this regard.]

Śrī Kṛṣṇa as Madana-mohana is very beautiful. He is the
son of Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā, and He is the Cupid of
Cupids. One can remember Him weeping as Mother Yaśodā
tries to bind Him. This is Madana-mohana.

Those who are more advanced can remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā (His pastimes throughout each twenty-
four-hour period), and those who are still more elevated
can remember something more. There is no single
instruction or meditation that applies to all. Devotees’
remembrance is in accordance with their gradation and
qualification in bhakti.

Sāvitrī dāsī:

[Introducing a young man] Guru Mahārāja, this gentleman
is from Belgium. I met him yesterday at the laundry shop
and spoke to him. He is doing yoga and meditation, and
he understood the philosophy as I shared it with him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To the young man] Can you meditate on my father?

Young man:

I don’t understand what you mean.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva is asking if you can meditate on his father.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do you know him?

Young man:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Then how can you meditate on the Supreme Lord? Have you
seen Him?

Young man:

No.


                            163
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In this iron-age of Kali-yuga (the age of quarrel and
hypocrisy), meditation begins by chanting the names of
the Supreme Lord.2 Śrī Kṛṣṇa will then give you a vision
of Himself, and then you will be able to meditate on
Him. In Kali-yuga there is no possibility of meditation
in the early stages of spiritual development. Meditation
begins at an advanced stage.

Do you know a blackish boy, playing on His flute with
His cows and friends in Vṛndāvana?

Young man:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Sāvitrī dāsī] Please explain all these truths to
him. Teach him how to meditate; how to chant and
remember Kṛṣṇa.

Without chanting, you cannot be happy at any time in
your life. Do you know who has created you? Who has
given you intelligence?

Young man:

Nature.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, not nature. Why has material nature not given the
same intelligence to animals as it has given you?
Intelligence comes from the Supreme Lord, who is very
merciful. You should chant His name; then you can
meditate, and gradually you will mature in your
spiritual life.

Gaura premānande hari haribol.




June 16, 2007




morning walk

Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍī Mahārāja:

You’ve created a wonderful mood.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

My Guru Mahārāja and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja
are telling me everything in my heart. What I speak is
not mine. Like a parrot, I am only repeating what they
have told me.


                             164
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

Devotee:

You are a transparent via medium [meaning, ‘They are
working through you’].

Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍī Mahārāja:

You are giving your heart to us.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You are all preaching – Padmanābha Mahārāja, Nemi
Mahārāja, Śrautī Mahārāja, Rādhā-kānta prabhu, Muni
Mahārāja, Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja, and others. I am very happy
that there are about thirty parties traveling around the
world.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Today, about twenty devotees from China will call you
for initiation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good preaching there.

Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura used
to say, “I don’t make disciples. I make gurus.” Whomever
he touched became guru.


brahmāṇḍa tārite śakti dhare jane jane

e veda purāṇe guṇa gāya jebāśune

Śrī Vaiṣṇava-vandanā (Verse 7)




What is the meaning?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Pure Vaiṣṇavas are so powerful by the grace of their
gurudeva that each of them can deliver an entire
universe. They are glorified in the Vedas and Purāṇas.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Dāmodara Mahārāja is also preaching very well.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

He spoke very well in Australia.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

The Mexican devotees are inviting you to come next year.
They want to do Ratha-yātrā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                             165
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

I will try. I want to go there, but now my age has
control over my travels.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

You have written in Mādhurya-kadambinī that Bhagavān has
given his kṛpa-śakti, the power of His mercy, to the
Vaiṣṇavas. I am very astonished to read this.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva is the embodiment of Bhagavān’s kṛpā-śakti.
When Bhagavān’s mercy becomes condensed and takes a
form, that form is śrī guru.

Devotee:

May I have your blessings to come for Vraja-maṇḍala
parikramā? I have never been there.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I am inviting all of you to come.

Brajanāth dāsa:

He has a question regarding the difference between Purī
and Navadvīpa. He says that some disciples of Gour
Govinda Mahārāja assert that Purī is non-different from
Vṛndāvana, and it is the highest of the Lord’s pastime
places.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Never, never. This is not told in any scripture.

Gokula dāsa:

Guru Mahārāja (Śrīla Gour Govinda Mahārāja) never said
this.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We should know the difference between Navadvīpa, Purī,
and Godāvarī. Externally, there were generally not such
discussions in navadvīpa-līlā as there were in Purī,
where Mahāprabhu bitterly wept in separation from Kṛṣṇa.
Moreover in Godāvarī, in Mahāprabhu’s conversations with
Rāya Rāmānanda, the philosophical discussions were the
most elevated. Mahāprabhu and Rāya Rāmānanda discussed
gopī-bhāva, rasa-tattva, kṛṣṇa-tattva, rādhā-tattva, and
prema-tattva.

But it was in Navadvīpa that Kṛṣṇa took birth as
Mahāprabhu, Śacīnandana Gaurahari. Kṛṣṇa’s mother,
father, and friends all took birth in Navadvīpa-maṇḍala,
or nearby.

What did Mahāprabhu do there? He did as Kṛṣṇa did in
Vṛndāvana. In Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa performed His aṣṭa-
kālīya-līlā, His pastimes performed during the eight
divisions of each day. In His aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā He does
not go to Mathurā, nor does He perform His Dvārakā
pastimes, nor does He even take birth.

                             166
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


During Kṛṣṇa’s pre-dawn pastimes (niśānta-līlā), Lalitā
and Viśākhā and other gopīs perform kīrtana while
anticipating the awakening of Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa. Śuka
and śārī, male and female parrots, speak many sweet
words to awaken Them. Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa then awaken,
They meet with the other gopīs, and soon after that They
are obliged to separate.

A little later in the morning there are other pastimes,
like the meeting between Śyāmalā and Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
Śyāmalā wants to hear from Rādhikā’s lotus mouth how She
and Kṛṣṇa enjoyed Their previous night’s pastimes.

At about 9:00am, Kṛṣṇa takes prasādam and goes
cowherding. At midday He meets with the gopīs at Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, and after that, the sweet pastimes of Kṛṣṇa at
Sūrya-kuṇḍa take place.

Later, in the evening, when Kṛṣṇa returns to Vṛndāvana
from cowherding, all of the gopīs, who had been
anxiously waiting to see Him, exchange glances with Him.
Kṛṣṇa then goes home to take prasādam, and after that He
performs His midnight līlā. Where is Mathurā in this
aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā? Where is Dvārakā? It is not present at
all.

That same Kṛṣṇa, overwhelmed by the mood of Rādhikā,
takes birth in Navadvīpa as Śacīnandana Gaurahari. There
He plays with His friends, like Gadādhara Paṇḍita,
Jagadānanda Paṇḍita, Murāri Gupta, Advaita Ācārya, and
so many others, and such pastimes are His aṣṭa-kālīya-
līlā.

There are no pastimes of Jagannātha Purī in Navadvīpa –
which is non-different from Vṛndāvana – because
Jagannātha, Baladeva and Subhadrā are only in Dvārakā.
When Kṛṣṇa is with Subhadrā and Baladeva in Dvārakā, He
is devoid of His flute and peacock feather. He forgets
that “I am the son of Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā.” Instead He
thinks, “I am the son of Vasudeva and Devakī.” That
Kṛṣṇa cannot enter the eightfold daily pastimes of
Vṛndāvana.

Also, although the conversation between Rāmānanda Rāya
and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu (Rāya-rāmānanda-saṁvāda)
that takes place in Godāvarī includes the highest of
topics, and although Rasarāja-mahābhāva3 manifests
there, still, that place is not equal to Vṛndāvana, or
even Dvārakā.

Actually, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā cannot take one
step out of Vṛndāvana. That Rādhikā who never leaves
Vṛndāvana is Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā, and that Kṛṣṇa
is Yaśodā-nandana and Nanda-nandana. Since They are
always in Vṛndāvana, who went to Dvārakā? It was Kṛṣṇa’s
expansion, Vāsudeva-kṛṣṇa who went. The Rādhikā who is
in a separation mood in Nandagaon, weeping with the
other gopīs for Kṛṣṇa who has gone to Mathurā and
Dvārakā, is called Viyoginī Rādhikā. Viyoginī means that
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are separated, whereas They are not
separated in Vraja.

When Kṛṣṇa goes to Kurukṣetra, He meets with Rādhikā and

                          167
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

the gopīs, at which time the gopīs want to bring Him
back to Vraja. There, Rādhikā is called Saṁyogīnī.
Saṁyogīnī refers to Their meeting for a moment, for only
a few days, and They are not fully meeting. [When
Mahāprabhu is singing to Lord Jagannātha at the Ratha-
yātrā festival in Purī, He is in the mood of Rādhikā
meeting Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra.]

The aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu only
takes place in Navadvīpa. Navadvīpa is Vṛndāvana,
Jagannātha Purī is like Dvārakā, and Godāvarī is like
Kurukṣetra.4

Devotee:

Wasn’t there rāsa-līlā in Śrīvāsa-aṅgana?

Brajanāth dāsa:

There is kīrtana-rasa in Śrīvāsa-aṅgana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It was not rāsa   [with a long ‘a,’ which refers to
Kṛṣṇa’s dancing   with the gopīs]. Kṛṣṇa performed the
rāsa dance with   the gopīs. Can Mahāprabhu perform such
rāsa dance with   His friends?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He performs saṅkīrtana-rasa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is saṅkīrtana-rasa [with a short ‘a,’ meaning
‘mellows’], not rāsa [with a long ‘a,’ meaning ‘Kṛṣṇa’s
dance with the gopīs’].

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, some people say that the pūjārīs
(priests) in Jagannātha Purī sometimes dress Lord
Jagannātha like Śyāmasundara. They put a pītāmbara
(yellow shawl) on Him and give Him a flute.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When has He taken His flute there?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Sometimes they decorate Him like that.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Sometimes indicates ‘momentary.’5

Giridhārī dāsa:

Lord Jagannātha listens to Gīta-govinda by the poet
Jayadeva Gosvāmī, and to the songs of the poet
Caṇḍīdāsa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                             168
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Not to Caṇḍīdāsa; only to Gīta-govinda. This is because
Jayadeva Gosvāmī lived for some time in Purī.

Gokula dāsa:

But Gurudeva, when my Guru Mahārāja or any Vaiṣṇava goes
to Jagannātha Purī, they always see Vṛndāvana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Who?

Gokula dāsa:

You.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Only Caitanya Mahāprabhu sees Vṛndāvana in Purī.

Gokula dāsa:

Wasn’t Śrīla Gour Govinda Mahārāja always seeing
Vṛndāvana there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When Mahāprabhu used to go to the shore of the ocean, to
the garden of Lord Jagannātha, or to the temple of Ṭoṭā-
gopīnātha, He used to see Govardhana and Yamunā. Can you
truly see this? We cannot.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gokula is saying that his Guru Mahārāja, Śrīla Gour
Govinda Mahārāja, used to see Vṛndāvana when he was in
Jagannātha Purī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good. You can also see Vṛndāvana in this forest-
garden here in San Francisco. Yamunā is also here; you
can see it – if you have got the eyes to do so.

It is stated in Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Kalyāṇa-
kalpataru, “Yathāya vaiṣṇava-gaṇa, sei sthāna vṛndāvana
– Wherever there are devotees, that place is actually
Vṛndāvana.” This is a special thing.

Gokula dāsa:

Yes. Vaiṣṇavas say, “I am always seeing Vṛndāvana.” They
are always in the mood of Vraja. So when some persons
hear that, they conclude that Purī is Vṛndāvana.

Brajanāth dāsa:

We also say something like this. When we are in Badger,
New Vraja, we say, “This is like Vṛndāvana.”

Gokula dāsa:

Oh, so those persons have misunderstood, and that is why

                          169
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

they came to the conclusion that Purī is Vṛndāvana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If someone is seeing Vṛndāvana in Purī, and someone else
is in Vṛndāvana, in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, are both places equal?

Gokula dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Has your Gurudeva said this?

Gokula dāsa:

No. He said that it is like Vṛndāvana.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

When Mahāprabhu went to Jagannātha Purī and saw Lord
Jagannātha, He saw only Jagannātha, and He saw Him as
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, not as Jagannātha. When
He would sometimes see Lord Baladeva and Subhadrā as
well, He would say, “Oh, why have I come to Kurukṣetra?”
At that time He would greatly lament.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Why did Mahāprabhu travel from Purī to Vṛndāvana? If
Jagannātha Purī and Vṛndāvana are the same, He could
have stayed in Jagannātha Purī. But He went to
Vṛndāvana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, why did He personally go from Purī to Vṛndāvana?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, when we are on Navadvīpa parikramā, you say
things like, “We are in Govardhana,” or, “Here is Rādhā-
kuṇḍa.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Is Rādhā-kuṇḍa in Purī? Are the twelve forests of
Vṛndāvana, and Nandagaon, in Purī? They are in
Navadvīpa.

Giridhārī dāsa:

Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta describes that nitya Jagannātha Purī
is located below Vṛndāvana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. Oriyan devotees favor Purī, accepting it as
Vṛndāvana. Yathāya vaiṣṇava-gaṇa, sei stāna vṛndāvana.
It was in this way that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to
see the Deity Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha and say, “Here is
Gopīnātha, so Caṭaka Parvata is Govardhana.”


                             170
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Gokula dāsa:

When we were with you in Purī in 2001, we were showing
you a book of my guru mahārāja. We were trying to prove
to you that he said that Purī is Vṛndāvana. But then,
when you looked at the book you pointed out to us,
“Look, he says that Purī is like Vṛndāvana.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

On the other hand, Navadvīpa is not like Vṛndāvana; it
is Vṛndāvana. That is the difference.

Devotee:

What does the Gambhīrā represent?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is like Nandagaon. After Kṛṣṇa’s departure to
Mathurā, Śrīmatī Rādhikā wept and lamented in Nandagaon,
in Uddhava-kyārī, “Oh, where? Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is
Kṛṣṇa?” Viśākhā-kuṇḍa is also there in Nandagaon, and
Bhramara-gīta was spoken there. The topmost separation
mood is experienced there.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

The Gambhīrā is not Nandagaon, but when Mahāprabhu was
in the Gambhīrā, He was in the mood of Rādhikā in
Nandagaon.




June 16, 2007




darśana

After the walk

Hare Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Gurudeva, I’ve brought my father, Raṅga Purī. He’s from
Bolivia.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Raṅga Purī is currently the Ambassador of Bolivia in
Washington D.C.

Hare Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

He has been working for a long time on a Spanish
translation of Ramāyāna. He would like your blessings to
publish it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

                            171
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


It is very good that he has completed it. I will be
happy if you publish it. Which edition have you
translated? Vālmīki’s version?

Raṅga Purī dāsa:

We have translated Vālmīki Ramāyāna, but we are also
including some insights from Rāma-carita-mānasa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If you are doing a translation, then only one book
should be translated. Don’t mix two different books.
Vālmīki’s Ramāyāna, written in Sanskrit, is the
authentic Ramāyāna [written millions of years ago].
Tulasī dāsa’s Rāma-carita-mānasa is in Hindi [written by
him a few hundred years ago]. It was taken from
Vālmīki’s Ramāyāna, as well as from the versions and
commentaries of others, and it is very easy to
understand.

You are an Ambassador? Very good. That is a high post. I
am not able to touch such a high post.

From whom have you taken initiation?

Raṅga Purī dāsa:

From Śrīla Bhakti Pramoda Purī Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

Hare Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I want your blessings, because many
devotees from Bolivia want to go to India for Kārtika.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They should come.

Hare Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

But it is very expensive for them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Bolivia is not a poor country.

Hare Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

It is very poor, and very corrupt. The people there earn
$60 for one month’s work. I am coming for Kārtika. But I
want to bring more people, so I want your blessings to
go there to help them collect their fare.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, two or three days ago you were speaking
about our remembering of pastimes while doing japa. You
said that general devotees can remember the pastime-

                          172
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

places of our Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā. You said that
those who are more advanced can remember the particular
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa that are in accord with His particular
names, those on the next level of advancement can
remember aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā, and those who are still more
advanced can meditate on something still higher.

How can devotees recognize their own qualification? How
will they know what to remember? What are the
indications?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There is a barometer:


kṣāntir avyartha-kālatvaṁ viraktir māna-śūnyatā

āśā-bandhaḥ samutkaṇṭhā nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ

āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne prītis tad-vasati-sthale

ity ādayo ‘nubhāvāḥ syur jāta-bhāvāṅkure jane

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.25–26)


[(1) kṣāntiḥ – forgiveness, forbearance or tolerance,
(2) avyartha-kālatva – not wasting time, (3) viraktiḥ –
detachment from worldly enjoyment, (4) māna-śūnyatā –
absence of pride, (5) āśā-bandha – steadfast hope [that
Kṛṣṇa will bestow His mercy], (6) samutkaṇṭhā – intense
eagerness [to obtain one’s goal], (7) nāma-gāne sadā
ruciḥ – a taste for always chanting the holy names, (8)
tad-guṇa-ākhyāne āsakti – attachment to hari-kathā, (9)
tad-vasati-sthale prītiḥ – affection for the
transcendental pastime places of the Lord. These nine
ecstatic moods, or anubhāvas, develop within a person in
whom the symptoms of bhāva have begun to sprout.]

When the seed of bhāva-bhakti (the initial stage of
perfection in devotion) sprouts in one’s heart, one will
be able to meditate upon aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā; not before
that. As long as devotees maintain any kind of worldly
attachment or desire, and as long as they maintain the
conception that they are this material body, they are
not qualified to meditate upon aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.

Thank you all.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

I would like to speak with you for three or four
minutes; sometime when it is convenient.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Alone?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

With just a few devotees.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                            173
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017


You can come anytime.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Do you have some problem with your eye, Śrīla Gurudeva?
I saw something in it yesterday, and now it is watery.
Any difficulty?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have difficulty with my ears. I cannot hear ninety-
five percent of what is being said. I think that God is
very merciful. He has arranged for me not to hear
anything unnecessary. I am happy about that. I am not
unhappy.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

We are not happy, though, because we cannot speak to you
so easily.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

When others talk among them-selves in my presence, I am
not hearing them. I am only chanting. When I travel by
car, the devotees in the car are always talking; but I
don’t know what they are saying. I am simply chanting
Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Tulasikā dāsī:

Your Russian daughters, Lalitā-kiśorī, Annapūrṇā, and
Devakī, are sending you their humble daṇḍavat praṇāma
(prostrated obeisances) and asking for your blessings.
Indulekhā is also asking for blessings to be strong. She
is having some problems with her family.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Tell them that I am giving them my blessings.




June 17, 2007




morning walk

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, do you remember Śrīla prabhu?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh!

Śrīla dāsa:

                          174
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017


I am trying to hide, actually.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He is not fully obeying me. I told him that he is very
qualified; he is a learned person. I thought that he
would take sannyāsa and preach everywhere, at which time
everyone would follow him. He also does not want to
marry, so everything is favorable for him. I don’t know
what he is afraid of, or why he hesitates. There is some
lack in him.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He is the vartma-pradarśaka guru6 of Brajanāth prabhu.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Of so many.

Śrīla dāsa:

I want to make a confession. First of all, your laser-
like instructions to me, your kind responses to my
inquiries, your hari-kathā, and your association are the
most valuable and precious moments of my life. I want to
express that to you, and to thank you. I am feeling
shame, embarrassment, and pain because of my inability
to follow your instruction.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Try to obey Vaiṣṇavas. You cannot be happy doing what
you think is best for you. It is best to follow what
Vaiṣṇavas tell you regarding the aim and object of life,
and to follow the behavior and philosophical conceptions
of your Gurudeva. If you want to be a gṛhastha, you can
marry. But if not, then preach very strongly,
everywhere, as we are preaching,

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

He could give up his house.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. He can sell it and remit the money to the bank.

Brajanāth dāsa:

But Gurudeva, he has collected so many things.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I know that. But what is the use?

Śrīla dāsa:

They are a burden.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Preaching is part of the bhakti-yoga practice. He should

                             175
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

preach, and donate his house to me.

Brajanāth dāsa:

But he has only debts, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Did you come yesterday?

Śrīla dāsa:

I come every day.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

On the first day as well?

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

He sits in the last row.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Last row. He does not come in front of me because he
knows I will tell him to leave his home and preach; so
he fears.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam tells us that if one is hearing hari-
kathā from a bona fide guru and Vaiṣṇava, all types of
tattva-jñāna very soon manifest in his heart. He will
realize all spiritual truths and at once become detached
from worldly entanglement. If Śrīla is hearing
continuously without experiencing the fruit of
realization and detachment, then there is some defect in
his hearing and associating. He will do well to
consider, “I am wasting my life. If I don’t take
advantage of the opportunity offered by this human life,
I will again have to transmigrate throughout the cycle
of endless material life and death.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.9.29) states:


labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte

mānuṣyam artha-dam anityam apīha dhīraḥ

tūrṇaṁ yateta na pated anu-mṛtyu yāvan

niḥśreyasāya viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt


[This human birth is very rare, because it is only
attained after many lifetimes. Although temporary, it
can give the highest benefit [the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā]. After all, sense gratification is available in
all species [whereas spiritual perfection is possible
only for human beings]. Therefore, an intelligent person
should immediately, without wasting a single moment,
begin to endeavor [with one-pointed dedication] to
achieve the ultimate good fortune, before death comes.]

[To Śrīla dāsa] You know this verse, perhaps?

                            176
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla dāsa:

I think of that verse every day, but I do not follow it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can pray to Kṛṣṇa that He may kindly give you the
strength to follow.

Did you hear the class yesterday?

Devotee:

Yes, Mahārāja. I was drowning in an ocean of nectar.
Thank you very much.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yesterday in the class, Gurudeva was describing that
Nārada came to Kaṁsa, advised him, and then went away
singing, “Śrīmān Nārāyaṇa Nārāyaṇa, Nārāyaṇa.” Everyone
in the class was so pleased to hear Gurudeva singing
this mantra.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When Nārada Ṛṣi goes to Vaikuṇṭha-loka, he sings,
“Nārāyaṇa, Nārāyaṇa,” and when he goes to Goloka
Vṛndāvana, he sings, “Rādhikā-Ramaṇa.” Nārada muni
bājāya vīṇā rādhikā-ramaṇa nāme. Kṛṣṇa personally gave
him his vīṇā 7, and that vīṇā is svara-brahma (charged
with transcendental sound). Do you know the meaning of
svara-brahma?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It has the same meaning as śabda-brahma (spiritual
sound).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He received svara-brahma from the gopīs, and Śaṅkara
(Lord Śiva) did as well. Innumerable tunes come from the
gopīs’ ankle bells, and later Śaṅkara learned those
tunes from them.

Yesterday I explained about Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhā,
Viyoginī Rādhā, and Saṁyogīnī Rādhā.8 From where did I
receive this knowledge? Is it documented anywhere? Is
there any evidence of this reality?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Where?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is described in the Sanat-kumāra-saṁhitā.


                            177
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written about
this in his commentary, wherein he quoted that saṁhitā.
Whatever we tell must be authentic.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Mahāprabhu told Sanātana Gosvāmī, “Sarvatra pramāṇa dibe
purāṇa-vacana – Whatever we quote must be certified by
scripture” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā
24.343).

Someone said that after killing Śaṅkhacūḍa, Kṛṣṇa gave
the Syamantaka jewel to Baladeva, and Baladeva gave it
directly to Rādhikā.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

He didn’t give it to Rādhikā. He gave it to Dhaniṣṭhā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He gave it to Dhaniṣṭhā, Dhaniṣṭhā gave it to Lalitā,
and Lalitā gave it Rādhikā. Why?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Balarāma cannot come before Rādhikā. He is the elder
brother of Kṛṣṇa. He would never come before Her.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It would be rasābhāsa (an unpalatable mixing of rasas).
In Indian Vedic culture, this would not happen, but
nowadays Vedic culture is not followed. Where there is
an influence of Western culture, Indian boys and girls
sit together, and eat and joke together, whereas in
Indian villages even today, Vedic culture is adhered to.
A lady does not speak or come before her vaśura. Do you
know the meaning of the word vaśura?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Elder brother?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Vaśura. Sura means devatā (demigod). The elder brother
is regarded like a devatā. Do you know the meaning of
svaśura? There is no word for it in English, but in
general it means ‘father-in-law.’ The father-in-law is
also considered like a demigod.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

She does not come before him either?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

A woman will not come in front of her husband’s father.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:


                            178
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

She wears a veil.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

I know it is the etiquette, but I do not know the reason
behind it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If the śvaśura or vaśura sees her, he may be attracted
by her beauty and lust may come from that attraction.

All these traditions are very highly acclaimed in India.
I have seen that a father never places his young son on
his lap. The father’s brother, uncle, and father do it,
as he lives in a joint family. The father does not show
so much affection externally, but he supports and
nourishes his son.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Why is that? Why would he do that?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is the tradition in a big family. When a family is
small, with only the father and mother and no other
elders, the father may place his son on his lap. The
danger is that if he outwardly shows affection and
places his son on his lap, the son may become very
naughty. He may not follow the orders of his father.

Any questions?

Śivānanda Sena dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I give so much affection to my son. He’s
here.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In that case, because you are so attached, you will have
to take birth as his son in your next life. You will
become his son.

Śivānanda Sena dāsa:

He is actually your son. I am only the caretaker. He
knows this well.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Don’t be attached to anyone, whether that person is your
wife, your children, or anyone else. Do your duty, but
with the understanding that your family members are all
Kṛṣṇa’s servants and maidservants.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Jīva dāsa [now Viṣṇu Mahārāja] is asking whether or not

                             179
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Kṛṣṇa sits on His father Nanda Bābā’s lap.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have not seen in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or any other
scripture that Nanda Bābā places Kṛṣṇa on his lap. When
Mother Yaśodā bound Him and the yamala-arjuna trees fell
down, and when Kṛṣṇa was bitterly weeping, only then did
Nanda Bābā come and place Kṛṣṇa on his lap. In that
special case he even carried Him on his shoulders.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

On another occasion you told us that fathers have great
affection for their daughters, and mothers have great
affection for their sons. But the instance of Lord
Rāmacandra’s father, Dāsaratha Mahārāja, was different.
He had so much love for Rāma that he never wanted to be
separated from Him. It is shown in the Ramāyāna that
Kauśalya and Kaikeyī had deep affection for Lord Rāma,
but Daśaratha Mahārāja had so much love for Him that he
even gave up his life in separation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It may be that there are some special cases.

Do you know the meaning of apadharma?

Acyutānandana dāsa:

It means ‘exception.’

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In bhakti we should not have any worldly desire. Still,
Draupadī called out, “O Kṛṣṇa, I have given myself to
You. Everything is in Your hands.” She closed her eyes,
let her veil fall from her mouth, and cried out, “O
Govinda rakho sarana, ab to jīvana hari – I have given
my whole life to You. You can save me or not save me, as
You desire. I am no longer worried.”

This is anyābhilāṣitā9. By nature one may have no
personal desire or need. Apadharma (extraordinary
circumstances, such as when one’s life is in danger) is
applied when a thief or a tiger comes. At that time what
would you do?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

I will call out, “Alas, Bhagavān.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

“Save me!” This is not against dharma.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

You are the śikṣā-guru of many disciples. Do you love
them more than your own disciples? You do not take your
own disciples onto your lap, but you do so for others.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                             180
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


In truth, I have so much affection for the disciples of
my śikṣā-guru, parama-pūjyapāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja, because he requested me to take care of
them. The śikṣā-disciple and his śikṣā-guru have a
special relationship. They can open their hearts to each
other, whereas a disciple cannot always openly reveal
his heart to his dīkṣā-gurudeva.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

But you have also said that you have such a deep
relationship with your gurudeva that you open your heart
and reveal everything.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Sometimes this is very hard; but you can reveal
everything to your śikṣā-guru, because he is both your
guru and your friend. Regarding your dīkṣā-gurudeva, he
is not like a friend; he is your controller.

Giridhārī dāsa:

Śrīla Guru Mahārāja, when Parama-gurudeva first came to
Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvati Ṭhākura, was
Prabhupāda a brahmacārī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, at first. But by the time of their second meeting,
one year later, Prabhupāda had taken sannyāsa.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Devotees in different countries around the world want
preaching centers. They can establish temples, but they
need managers. They want brahmacārīs and qualified
devotees to come and help them preach and manage
programs for you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If that is so, then our sannyāsīs should bring more and
more brahmacārīs by their preaching. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja and his disciples used to create many
brahmacārīs.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Śrīla prabhu can manage a center. He is qualified.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I cannot believe him.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

In Mauritius, a devotee is building a big temple with a
nice Ṭhākurajī, and he wants brahmacārīs to be there.
Also, in Durban and Johannesburg. In South America, Sao
Paulo needs devotees, and so does Venezuela and Costa
Rica.


                            181
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

By preaching, it may be that brahmacārīs will come. The
devotees in Houston are creating a very big center, and
many brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs will be there. All the
Indians there are helping so much.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

At the time of Śrīla A. C. Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Prabhupāda, everyone managed – gṛhasthas, new devotees,
brahmacārīs. Anyone who was available somehow managed.
There is no problem if the desire is there.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Even gṛhasthas did so. We will have to follow this
principle.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

It’s very hard to make brahmacārīs. Everybody wants to
do business.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

A gṛhastha or a vānaprastha can manage very easily. Some
brahmacārīs also manage. In India we see that our
brahmacārīs are managing.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Are you married now?

Rohini-nandana dāsa:

Not yet.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What do you want? Like them, you can also come forward.
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was married, and he left
everything. I was also married, and I left everything.
When Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja was married, his
wife kicked him out, because he was doing nothing
worthwhile from her point of view.

Ladies:

[having waited for his return, are now singing] Happy
Fathers’ Day to you. Happy Fathers’ Day to you. Happy
Fathers’ Day dear Gurudeva, Happy Fathers’ Day to you.




June 17, 2007




darśana


                             182
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

After the walk

[During his Bhakti-yoga festival in San Francisco, Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja stayed at the Marriott
Residence Inn, which is about a forty-five minute drive
from the festival site at the Asian Cultural Center.
Every morning he walked from 5:30 to 6:30 am., and upon
his return, his lady disciples would be waiting for him.
All the devotees would then enter his room and, before
his taking breakfast, he would sit for about twenty
minutes and grant them his darśana. As he was returning
from his walk on June 17th, Fathers’ Day, about fifteen
of his daughters were waiting for him with flowers and
gifts in honor of the special holiday.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Is today Father’s Day for females only, or also for
males?

Devotees:

For males also.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Then why are the males not giving me any gifts?

I have more affection for my daughters. None of the men
told me it is Father’s Day.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, you said on the morning walk that even
though the father has so much affection for his son, he
may not show it directly. He may not take the son on his
lap. We know you love your sons best; therefore you are
not showing it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have more affection for my daughters.

My blessings to you all today is that pure bhakti will
come in your hearts. The greed to serve in rāgānuga-
bhakti will come. My blessings are that you will attain
your highest goal.

What is your highest goal?

Caru-candrikā dāsī:

Mañjarī-bhāva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Rādhā-dāsyam(personal service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā).

In the West, after the sons’ marriage, the fathers and
sons separate from each other. The sons do no service at
all for their fathers. But in India, even when their
mothers and fathers are very old, the children serve.
Nowadays, a ‘wind’ has come from the Western countries
to India, and old persons are suffering. They are not

                             183
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

allowed to live with their families. In villages,
though, they are still taken care of by their children.
I want you all to follow varṇāśrama-dharma, of which
this is an example.

Gokula dāsa:

If we are in family life, we should take care of our
mother and father?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, and have good relations with your brothers. Lord
Rāma wanted to give His kingdom to Bharata, and Bharata
wanted to give the kingdom to Rāma. They were quarreling
about this point. Nowadays, it is the opposite; we
quarrel for our own ownership. We should be like Rāma
and Bharata.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu told us to be like trees. A tree
gives its leaves, fruits, branches, flowers, juice,
fruits, shade, and wood to others. We should try to live
not for ourselves, but for others. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja left everything in his old age and
traveled the entire world to benefit others. I also only
travel to help and bring the highest benefit to all, and
to follow our guru-paramparā.

[Mahāprabhu dāsa from Australia tells Śrīla Mahārāja
that his thirteen-year-old daughter, Tulasī dāsī, was
there to see him.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

She came to hear hari-kathā?

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Yes. She took initiation from you a few years ago, and
now she wants second initiation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Tulasī dāsī] How many rounds do you chant?

Tulasī dāsī:

I am building up.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

How many rounds are you chanting?

Tulasī dāsī:

Two rounds.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good, but no dīkṣā now.

When you realize the glories of the holy name – that the
holy name can save you from the pain of endless birth
and death – then you will chant more. Money and worldly

                          184
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

things cannot make you happy. These holy names will give
you kṛṣṇa-prema, and you will be able to serve Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa forever. When you realize this, then you will
chant more. Then, when I come to Australia, you can
receive the dīkṣā-mantras.

[Later]

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

In this morning’s darśana you said we should follow
varṇāśrama-dharma. You said we should serve our mother
and father and brothers.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not only on Father’s Day, but every day.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

What if we have a non-devotee mother, father, and
brother?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Those who are gṛhastha (house-holders) should do so, and
those who are renounced, having given up the world,
should serve their holy master.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

A householder should serve even their non-devotee mother
and father?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, they should serve their mother, father, and
brothers – whether their parents are devotees or non-
devotees – otherwise they will have to go to hell.
Everyone who is not a pure devotee has debts to others
in this world. When my father used to come to Mathurā, I
would take his foot-dust on my head.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

His father was a devotee.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Even though I am a sannyāsī and he was a gṛhastha, I did
so. He was my first guru. He taught me Mahābhārata,
Ramāyāna, and other scriptures.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Devotees serve their parents to inspire them to become
devotees. The parents receive good impressions by
remembering how their devotee children always give
respect to them, and bring them prasādam, and the good
news about what is best for their eternal welfare.




                            185
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


June 18, 2007




morning walk

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Why are you smiling?

Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍī Mahārāja:

Because it is so wonderful to be with you, Śrīla
Gurudeva.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

You are telling us all of the beautiful things that our
Guru Mahārāja [Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja]
wanted to tell us. We were like babies when he was
physically present, so we could not fully understand him
at that time.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Are you understanding him now?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

A little, something, and I think he is happy about that.
He wanted to tell us then, but we wouldn’t have been
able to understand.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Was my explanation interesting?

Devotee:

That is an understatement.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What did I clarify regarding Nanda Bābā and Kṛṣṇa? Did
Nanda Bābā go back to Vṛndāvana from Mathurā with, or
without, Kṛṣṇa? You don’t know? I explained it during my
class.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

There are two prakoṣṭhas (sections within the pastimes).
In one prakoṣṭha, Nanda Bābā goes back to Vṛndāvana
without Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, with only Kṛṣṇa’s golden
ornaments and some clothes, crying and crying. In
another prakoṣṭha, he is happy to go back there with
Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But this is hidden. This siddhānta, as explained by
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, is very exalted.


                             186
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Does Baladeva Prabhu know, or not?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, He knows. In one prakoṣṭha both Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva
go back to Vṛndāvana with Nanda Bābā.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

When Baladeva came back from Dvārakā to Vṛndāvana, He
was seeing only the prakoṣṭha in which the Vrajavāsīs
were feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. He didn’t see the
other prakoṣṭha.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In Vraja, absorbed in thinking of Kṛṣṇa, He Himself
became black like Kṛṣṇa. His Deity is black in Daujī and
in Madhuvana, because He is always feeling the
Vrajavāsīs’ separation mood for Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, Baladeva’s mood in rāsa-līlā is not
completely āśraya-jātīya-tattva (the mood of Kṛṣṇa’s
servant), is it? He is viṣṇu-tattva, so He is viṣaya,
the Supreme Lord and enjoyer.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There are two kinds of rāsa. During the Holi rāsa, Kṛṣṇa
and Baladeva sang with many melodies of beautifully
ascending (āroha) and descending (avaroha) notes, and
all of the gopīs were present there. In fact, at the
time of Holi all the gopas and gopīs were able to
assemble together.

When Baladeva went to Rāma-ghāṭa from Dvārakā, He per-
formed rāsa with His own gopīs.10

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

What is Baladeva’s mood?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

He performed rāsa to satisfy the gopīs, because they
were greatly lamenting and suffering in separation from
Kṛṣṇa. Baladeva wanted to relieve their separation mood,
and therefore He danced and sang with them. His dancing
was not like the dancing of Kṛṣṇa with the gopīs,
wherein Kṛṣṇa held hands with them and engaged in
amorous sports.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

But like Kṛṣṇa, Baladeva is also viṣṇu-tattva. What
would be the fault in His dancing with the gopīs as
Kṛṣṇa did?


                             187
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Nṛsiṁhadeva is viṣṇu-tattva, but He cannot do as Kṛṣṇa
did. Even Rāmacandra, who is superior to Lord
Nṛsiṁhadeva, cannot perform such pastimes.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Only Kṛṣṇa can do rāsa.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

When Baladeva danced with His own gopīs at Rāma-ghāṭa,
were Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs also present and watching?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Actually, the idea of Baladeva dancing with His own
gopīs has been told for ignorant persons.

In Heaven, the damsel Urvaśī goes to so many men, and
there is no fault either on her part or on the part of
the men. There is no fault, because their heavenly
bodies are not like ours.

If there is no fault in Heaven, then what to speak of
the transcendental world, where Rādhā, the gopīs, and
Baladeva Prabhu have fully transcendental bodies. There
is no impurity or im-pro-priety in the transcendental
world. It has been told only for ignorant persons that
Baladeva Prabhu was with His own gopīs. He was actually
with Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs, but there was no fault in this.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Who is giving this explanation, Śrīla Gurudeva? I could
not find in the commentary of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura that Baladeva is dancing with His
gopīs as well as Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Have you read it?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

No, I have not read it. I was looking in Sārārtha-
darśinī (Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s
commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Tenth Canto), but I
could not find it there.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I am explaining this to you from my vision, and from the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam commentary of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has also explained this [in his
commentary on Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavata].

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

So Baladeva Prabhu does not have viṣaya-bhāva (the mood
of the supreme transcendental enjoyer)?


                             188
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, not at all.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Then how is He viṣṇu-tattva?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Other than Kṛṣṇa, no one can perform rāsa (as Kṛṣṇa
does); not Baladeva or anyone else. Baladeva danced with
the gopīs in order to please and pacify them. There is
no trace of indecorum in Baladeva Prabhu dancing with
them. He did not touch the bodies of the gopīs as Kṛṣṇa
did. Kṛṣṇa expanded into innumerable forms as He danced
and sang with all the gopīs. He embraced them, whereas
Baladeva had no intimate contact.

[To Indupati dāsa] Are you hearing hari-kathā?

Indupati dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I am trying to hear, but my heart is
like a stone. There is not much going in.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have come to melt all hearts.

[To another devotee] Do you remember what I, and others,
have been speaking? Will you remember all these topics
in the future?

Devotee:

By your blessings, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Are you understanding the topics we discussed?

Devotee:

Something, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Something is better than nothing.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, it is said that Rādhārāṇī is
the storehouse of Kṛṣṇa’s qualities.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is your question?

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

I do not understand this.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                             189
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017


Rādhikā is āśraya (the complete reservoir of love for
Kṛṣṇa), not viṣaya (Kṛṣṇa, the object of love). All
qualities reside in that āśraya. Without Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa
is nirviśeṣa, devoid of qualities; without Rādhikā, His
qualities cannot manifest. With Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa is dhīra-
lalita (the transcendental hero, who is subjugated by
His beloveds) and nava-kiśora-naṭavara (the eternally
youthful dancer), and He has all the other qualities of
the transcendental reservoir of all pleasure. Without
Her, He is nirviśeṣa-brahma, zero.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

If Rādhikā is there, then Kṛṣṇa is a hero; otherwise He
is zero.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Without Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa’s qualities do   not manifest; that
is why the statement is made that She   is the reservoir
of all His qualities. There can be no   rāsa without
Rādhikā. Kṛṣṇa performs rāsa-līlā for   Her pleasure.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

In yesterday’s class we were explaining that when Kṛṣṇa
entered Kaṁsa’s arena, all the people saw Him
differently. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam states that some ignorant
persons saw His virāṭ, or universal form.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Virāṭ aviduṣām. [The meaning is that the ignorant
persons (aviduṣām) present in Kaṁsa’s arena saw Kṛṣṇa as
virāṭ, meaning ‘a very great personality.’ Only in
connection with ‘virāṭ-rūpa’ does ‘virāṭ’ refer to
Kṛṣṇa’s universal form.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In that connection, virāṭ does not refer to viśva-rūpa,
or Kṛṣṇa’s universal form. They saw Him as virāṭ.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

What is the difference between virāṭ and viśva-rūpa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Virāṭ means ‘very great personality.’ Those ignorant
persons were not eligible to see viśva-rūpa. Even Arjuna
saw the universal form only by the power and mercy of
Kṛṣṇa. How, then, can ignorant persons see that form?
That would be an absurd consideration. Somehow they
thought, “Oh, virāṭ.” They saw that Kṛṣṇa was a great
personality.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

After Kṛṣṇa killed the elephant Kuvalayāpīḍa, everyone
thought, “Oh, He is not ordinary.” They thought Him to
be a great person.


                             190
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, on the parikramā path in Vṛndāvana,
there is a mandira (temple) with a golden Baladeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When Baladeva was with Kṛṣṇa in Vraja, He was golden.
However, when Kṛṣṇa was in Dvārakā and Baladeva was in
Vraja, then He became black. ‘Golden color’ in this
connection means ‘like Baladeva’s own color.’ He was not
black; He was fair complexioned.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

That golden Daujī was Baladeva Himself in His own
svarūpa (natural form)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, you are giving tridaṇḍi-sannyāsa [tri
means ‘three’]. But our daṇḍa (staff, carried by
sannyāsīs) contains four sticks, plus this small one.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There are four sticks, but still it is called tridaṇḍa;
no harm. Within the three, four are present.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

But we have five, because of the small stick that is
tied at the top.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That small stick on the daṇḍa is the jīva. Nārāyaṇa is
the entire daṇḍa, and the small stick is the jīva, who
combines with the entire daṇḍa by service (performed by
the three: body, mind, and words). Do you understand?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

So the fourth daṇḍa is Nārāyaṇa?

Devotees:

No. The whole daṇḍa is Nārāyaṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

One whole daṇḍa is called Nārāyaṇa. The jīvas are
serving Nārāyaṇa there.11

Although it is called ‘three (tri-daṇḍa),’ one more is
there, and a similar example is in the word Veda-trayī
(literally meaning ‘three Vedas’). Veda-trayī actually
refers to all the four Vedas.

The Eleventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes how

                            191
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

this creation was engineered, and there it explains that
there are twenty-eight elements. What are these
elements?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

There are five gross elements, five subtle elements,
five working senses, and five knowledge-acquiring
senses.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is twenty. Then there are mind, intelligence, ego,
citta (consciousness), prakṛti (nature), puruṣa (the
Enjoyer, the Lord who glances over the material nature),
atma (the living being), and Paramātma (the Supersoul).
This makes twenty-eight.

Some persons say that there are twenty elements, some
say there are sixteen, others say there are seven, and
some say there are six. Arjuna asked Kṛṣṇa, “Why do
different spiritual authorities seem to contradict each
other?” Kṛṣṇa replied, “All that the ṛṣis (great sages)
have said is true. When they say that there are six, all
twenty-eight reside in these six, and when they say
sixteen, twenty-eight are present in those sixteen.”

If someone says, “Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is coming to
Badger,” does that mean that I am coming alone? No. You
are all accompanying me. I cannot go alone.

Devotee:

Śrīla Gurudeva, what type of classes will you give in
Badger?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why have you kept your hair? If you shave today, then
you can come to Badger.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He is asking what you will speak about when you come to
Badger?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I will speak on whatever I think is best.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

I am not going to worry about preaching to the
scientists anymore.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, don’t be worried.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Whatever scientific knowledge I already have, I can use
that in my general preaching.


                            192
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, that is enough. If an appropriate occasion arises,
you can speak about science and scientists – not like
those preachers who are almost always speaking,
“Scientists, scientists, scientists,” and neglect the
topics we discuss in our classes. Others cannot speak on
the topics we discuss, and even most of our Gauḍīya
Maṭha devotees do not discuss them.




* * *




1 ‘Brahmacārī’, the Homonym – by Śyāmarāṇī dāsī, based
on Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja’s books,
conversations, and lectures:


From the beginning of the International Society for
Kṛṣṇa Consciousness in the West in the 1960s and 1970s,
there was no real brahmacārī āśrama in the strict sense
of the term. Śrīla Prabhupāda [Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja] had to gradually bring a very fallen material
society to the point where the people in general could
follow varṇāśrama-dharma. He performed the miraculous
feat of single-handedly introducing varṇāśrama-dharma in
the West.

He gave saffron cloth to a man or boy from that person’s
very first day in the temple. He wanted to encourage and
strengthen the newcomers in Vedic living, and he wanted
to give society at large some semblance of a practical
conception of varṇāśrama (wherein young boys from all
walks of life would live for some years in the āśrama of
the guru, be trained in brahmacārī life, and then when
they became of marriageable age, decide whether they
would remain brahmacārī or become householders).

Most of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s male and female followers had
previously been living together outside of marriage, or
had had many lovers in immorality. He wanted to bring
them to a civilized life of marriage, and to help them
to become Kṛṣṇa conscious in their married āśrama, and
therefore he introduced the system of initial brahmacārī
training.

The standard of the brahmacārī in ISKCON was different
from the traditional Gauḍīya Maṭha standards, wherein
one wears white cloth until one desires to become a
committed or permanent resident of the maṭha (temple).
Only after some years is he given saffron cloth, when
the spiritual master sees that he understands the real
meaning of bhakti and detachment from the world is
manifesting in his heart. Receiving saffron cloth, he
takes a vow never to marry, and to remain celibate.

This is the standard of brahmacārī that Śrīla Nārāyaṇa

                          193
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Gosvāmī Mahārāja is referring to, and Śrīla Prabhupāda
would also never approve of such a brahmacārī marrying.”




2

prāyeṇālpāyuṣaḥ sabhya

kalāv asmin yuge janāḥ

mandāḥ sumanda-matayo

manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.1.10)


O learned one, in this iron age of Kali men have but
short lives. They are quarrelsome, lazy, misguided,
unlucky and, above all, always disturbed.*


kaler doṣa-nidhe rājann

asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ

kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya

mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.3.51)


My dear King, this age of Kali is a veritable ocean of
faults. Still, it has one most exalted attribute: one
who simply performs kīrtana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names, form,
qualities, and pastimes, especially by chanting the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, can certainly become liberated from
material bondage and receive entrance to the highest
destination – the transcendental realm of Vraja.


kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇuṁ

tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ

dvāpare paricaryāyāṁ

kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.3.52)


Whatever result was obtained in Satya-yuga by meditating
on Viṣṇu, in Tretā-yuga by performing sacrifices, and in
Dvāpara-yuga by serving the Lord’s lotus feet can be
obtained in Kali-yuga simply by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mahā-mantra.*




                             194
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

3 An excerpt from Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja’s lecture in Holland, June 29, 2002:


After speaking in this way, Caitanya Mahāprabhu revealed
Himself as Rasarāja Mahābhāva, and seeing this form,
Rāya Rāmānanda fainted and began to roll on the earth.
What was so special about this form? Rāmānanda Rāya had
personally seen both Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa in Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes, (because he is Viśākhā Sakhī in those
pastimes), but now, in this form, he saw that each and
every limb of Rādhikā was covered by each limb of Kṛṣṇa,
and the body of Kṛṣṇa was covered with the golden
complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. And still, even though He
was covered by that golden complexion, some black luster
from His body was showing through. Rāya Rāmānanda had
never before seen this form. This means that Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is Rādhikā covered by all the limbs of Kṛṣṇa,
who is covered by the complexion of Rādhikā. Kṛṣṇa’s
beauty is nīlamaṇi-kānti, which means it has the beauty
and luster of a sapphire pearl. This beautiful luster
was covered with a golden luster, and the combined
beauty of the two is rasarāja-mahābhāva.

Kṛṣṇa is Rasarāja and Rādhikā is Mahābhāva. Here,
Rasarāja and Mahābhāva are combined, and Rāya Rāmānanda
fainted when he saw that form.




4 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
book, The Origin of Ratha-yātrā:


You should know that there are no Vṛndāvana forests in
Jagannātha Purī. Therefore, Jagannātha Purī can never be
equal to Navadvīpa. A very high class of separation is
tasted by Mahāprabhu in the Gambhīrā, but at the same
time Navadvīpa is Vṛndāvana and Purī is not. Purī is
like Dvārakā. In Dvārakā, Kṛṣṇa laments for the gopīs.
He cannot wear His peacock feather or carry His sweet
vaṁśī, and He cannot declare, ‘My father and mother are
Nanda and Yaśodā. These are not My real queens. The
gopīs are My most beloved.’

Do you know the meaning of the word Navadvīpa? Nava
refers to nitya-nava-navāyamāna, and it means always
ever-fresh. Nava also means nine. Navadvīpa consists of
nine islands, and they denote the nine processes of
bhakti.

The Vedas, Upaniṣads, and so many other Vaiṣṇava
literatures have referred to this Navadvīpa in the
following way:


śriyaḥ kāntāḥ kāntaḥ parama-puruṣaḥ kalpa-taravo

drumā bhūmiś cintāmaṇi-gaṇa-mayi toyam amṛtam

kathā gānaṁ nāṭyaṁ gamanam api vaṁśī priya-sakhī


                          195
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

cid-ānandaṁ jyotiḥ param api tad āsvādyam api ca



sa yatra kṣīrābdhiḥ sravati surabhībhyaśca su-mahān

nimeṣārddhākhyo vā vrajati na hi yatrāpi samāyāḥ

bhaje śvetadvīpaṁ tam aham iha golokam iti yaṁ

vidantas te santaḥ kṣiti-virala-cārāḥ katipaye

Brahma-saṁhitā (5.56)




I worship that supreme abode of Śvetadvīpa, where the
beloved heroines are a host of transcendental goddesses
of fortune, and the Supreme Personality Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
only lover; where all the trees are spiritual desire-
trees, and the earth is made of transcendental wish-
fulfilling cintāmaṇi jewels; where the water is nectar,
natural speaking is a melodious song, and walking to and
fro is an artful dance; where the flute is the dearmost
friend; where light is full of knowledge and bliss, and
the supreme spiritual substance that comprises all
things is relishable; where a vast transcendental ocean
of milk is always flowing from millions upon millions of
surabhī cows; and where time is not subject to passing
away, even for half the blink of an eye, because it is
not divided into past and future, but remains in the
undivided eternal present. That divine abode, which is
practically unknown in this world, is known by the name
of Goloka to only a few, rare sādhus.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has quoted this verse, and Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has also quoted this, along with
many such verses. Navadvīpa is Śvetadvīpa. In
transcendental Goloka Vṛndāvana there are two parts:
Vṛndāvana and Śvetadvīpa. Vṛndāvana and Navadvīpa are
complementary. Without Navadvīpa, Vṛndāvana is
incomplete, and without Vṛndāvana, Navadvīpa is
incomplete. Together they are complete, just as when
separation and meeting mix together, the resulting
situation creates a sense of completeness. Where there
is no separation mood, that saṁyoga (meeting) is
incomplete.

The twelve vanas (forests) and upavanas (gardens, parks,
and small forests) of Vṛndāvana are in Navadvīpa, within
the nine islands: Madhuvana, Tālavana, Kumudavana,
Bahulāvana, Kāmyavana, Khadiravana, Bhadravana,
Bhāṇḍīravana, Bilvavana, Mahāvana, Vṛndāvana, and
Lauhavana. All of these forests, in some way, are in
Navadvīpa.

Don’t think that Jagannātha Purī is superior to
Navadvīpa. Don’t think that Godāvarī, where Mahāprabhu
revealed His mahābhāva-rasarāja mood, is superior to
Navadvīpa. Navadvīpa is far superior to both these
places. On one hand, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu revealed
His transcendental form of rasarāja-mahābhāva at

                          196
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Godāvarī, and that most high class of hari-kathā, Rāya-
rāmānanda-saṁvāda, took place there. Also, Caitanya
Mahāprabhu showed His extreme moods of separation in
Gambhīrā. He jumped in the ocean, and He relished
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s moods of separation with Svarūpa
Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda there. These may be said,
therefore, to be the deepest hari-kathās, but there are
so many reasons why they are not.

Jagannātha Purī is certainly a very elevated pastime
place, especially regarding the gambhīrā-līlā of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, but still it is like Dvārakā. There
is no forest or sub-forest of Vṛndāvana there. Gokula,
Bhāṇḍīravana, Nandagaon, and Varṣāṇā are present there.
They are not present on Godāvarī-taṭa, neither are they
in Kurukṣetra or Jagannātha Purī. Therefore, Navadvīpa
must be superior to these places.

Because so many places are there in Navadvīpa in a
hidden way, Navadvīpa is known as gupta Vṛndāvana. One
of the nine islands of Navadvīpa is Godrumadvīpa, which
is described by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his Jaiva-
dharma. Godrumadvīpa is Nandagaon, near to Varṣāṇā. The
birthplace of Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Māyāpura is Mathurā
and Gokula combined. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa, with
the internal mood and complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.
Kṛṣṇa took birth in Vṛndāvana; partly in Mathurā, but
fully in Gokula, and both places are combined in
Māyāpura Yogapīṭha.

Then, crossing Gaṅgā to Koladvīpa, where our Devānanda
Gauḍīya Maṭha is situated, we find Girirāja-Govardhana.
There, all the kuñjas and caves where Kṛṣṇa played with
the sakhās and sakhīs are situated. Nearby there is
Rasaulī, or rāsa-sthalī, where Candra-sarovara is
located at the foot of Girirāja-Govardhana. Nearby is
Ṛtudvīpa, where Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are
situated, and that is Kokilavana. Our Devānanda Gauḍīya
Maṭha was constructed by our gurudeva on the West bank
of the Gaṅgā, the bank where Yamunā flows. Māyāpura is
on the East bank of Gaṅgā, and Lord Brahmā performed
thousands and thousands of austerities on that Gaṅgā
bank.

In Navadvīpa there is Pañca-veṇī, the meeting place of
the Gaṅgā, Yamunā, Sarasvatī, Godāvarī, Narmadā, Sindhu,
and Mānasī-gaṅgā. Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are there,
and this is all very wonderful. In Māmagāchi
(Modadrumadvīpa), Bahulāvana is present, and in the
north of Māyāpura is Bhadravana. Jahnudvīpa is
Bhāṇḍīravana, and Sīmantadvīpa is Mathurā. These truths
have been explained by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his
Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya. Vṛndāvana is in Navadvīpa,
not in Jagannātha Purī or Godāvarī.

There is one very important point to note, and I am
explaining it for those who are senior Vaiṣṇavas. They
will be able to understand. Junior devotees should note
it down, and they should also try to understand. Please
consider these things very deeply. With regards to
Navadvīpa being Vṛndāvana, there are two aṣṭa-kālīya-
līlās. One is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā
and one is Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.
Mahāprabhu’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā takes place in Navadvīpa,

                          197
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

and it is that aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā upon which devotees
meditate. They do not meditate on such līlās in
Jagannātha Purī.

In their gaura-gāyatrī mantra, the brāhmaṇas chant
viśvambharāya dhīmahi and gaurāya. Why do they utter
gaurāya? Who is Gaura? Gaura, or Gaurāṅga, is Kṛṣṇa,
with the intrinsic mood and beauty or golden color of
Rādhikā. He is actually Kṛṣṇa, but now He is fully
absorbed in the mood of Rādhikā. He feels as though He
has become Rādhikā, and there are three features of
Rādhikā. One is Vrṣabhānu-jā or Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Rādhikā, one is Viyoginī Rādhikā, and one is Saṁyogīnī
Rādhikā.

Like Kṛṣṇa, Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā never goes out of
Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa and Rohiṇī-nandana Rāma are always in
Vṛndāvana. If They are going towards Mathurā, They will
turn back to Vṛndāvana at the borderline. Rohiṇī-nandana
Rāma cannot go out of Vṛndāvana, because He always
remains with Kṛṣṇa. Only Their manifestations, Vasudeva-
nandana Kṛṣṇa and Vasudeva-nandana Baladeva, will go to
Mathurā and Dvārakā. The pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Mathurā
and Dvārakā are transcendental and everlasting, as are
the pastimes of Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana.
Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa plays eternally in Mathurā, and in
Vṛndāvana, Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa is eternally playing.

Rādhikā has three moods or three features. Kṛṣṇa will
not change when He goes to Mathurā, but He will not use
His flute and peacock-feather. He will change His father
and mother, but not His form. Only His mood will be
changed, and mood is the prominent factor of
determination. If He takes His flute and peacock-
feather, and He tells everyone, ‘I am the son of Nanda
and Yaśodā,’ then He is Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa. On the
other hand, if He has no peacock-feather and flute, and
He tells everyone, ‘I am the son of Vasudeva and
Devakī,’ then He is present by His prakāśa
(manifestation). His manifestation is not fully He
Himself, the Supreme.

In the same way, Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā is always
with Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. In Nandagaon, where Rādhikā
felt so much separation and spoke Bhramara-gīta, She is
Viyoginī Rādhikā. Actually, She is never in viyoga, in
the sense that She is never separated from Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained this truth in his
Lalitā-mādhava and also in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. That is why
Kavi Karṇapūra has not discussed the līlā of Mathurā and
Dvārakā. He completes his Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū just
after rāsa-līlā. Our ācāryas cannot tolerate the idea
that Rādhikā should be separated from Kṛṣṇa. In Her
original and complete feature She is called Vṛṣabhānu-
nandinī. She is eternally with Nanda-nandana Kṛṣṇa, and
the Rādhikā who feels separation in Nandagaon is Her
manifestation, Viyoginī Rādhikā. She is the same
Rādhikā, but She is feeling viyoga, or separation. Then,
in Kurukṣetra, She is Saṁyogīnī Rādhikā. She goes there
for a moment, for one or two days and, keeping Kṛṣṇa on
the chariot of Her mind, She brings Him back to
Vṛndāvana. Saṁyoga means ‘always meeting.’


                          198
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

In the mantra ‘gaurāya svāhā’ or ‘tan no gauraḥ
pracodayāt’, the name Viśvambhara is uttered.
Viśvambhara never lived in the cave (Gambhīrā) in
Jagannātha Purī, for He is Śacī-nandana Gaurahari in
Navadvīpa. From there He gives so much knowledge, so
much love and affection, and a very high-class prema to
the jīvas. He even gave prema to Jagāi and Mādhāi.
Viśvambharāya dhīmahi. We meditate on Him in Navadvīpa.

In Gambhīrā, Mahāprabhu played a role of great opulence.
At that time, in the night, only Rāya Rāmānanda and
Svarūpa Dāmodara, Viśākhā and Lalitā, were able to
witness His pastimes. Although Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī was
always hearing and knowing all of Mahāprabhu’s pastimes,
even he could not go there to witness these. In
Godāvarī, Mahāprabhu manifested His form as rasarāja-
mahābhāva. This is opulence. At that time even Rāmānanda
Rāya began to pray like Devakī or Arjuna, ‘O, You are
that same Supreme Personality of Godhead.’ This is
opulence.

In Navadvīpa there is no opulence. In Navadvīpa,
Śacīnandana played as Kṛṣṇa played with the girls in
Vṛndāvana. While bathing in the Gaṅgā He would say to
the little girls, ‘Will you marry Me? I want to marry
you; if you will not marry Me then you will not be
happy. Give your offerings of sandeśa and bananas to
Me.’ This comes in the category of the aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā
of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and it is therefore far superior
to any līlā in Jagannātha Purī. In Navadvīpa there is
svārasikī upāsanā, meditational worship of the continual
flow of unlimited līlās taking place throughout each
twenty-four hour day; whereas in Purī there is
mantramayī upāsanā, meditational worship of a specific
līlā, as in this case Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s separation
feelings for Kṛṣṇa.

In Navadvīpa Mahāprabhu performed His mādhurya-līlā,
whereas in Jagannātha Purī all the līlā is full of
aiśvarya. In Navadvīpa anyone could quarrel with
Śacīnandana, as school friends. Gadādhara Paṇḍita and
Jagadānanda Paṇḍita always used to quarrel with Him like
little children, and Śacī Mā also used to chastise her
son. In Jagannātha Purī, however, even the King,
although wanting to place his head at Mahāprabhu’s lotus
feet, was not allowed to come to Him. Rāya Rāmānanda and
all others always prayed to Mahāprabhu. He was not
considered their friend, but rather He was considered so
much greater than them. In this way, the līlā in
Navadvīpa is sweeter than the līlā of Jagannātha Purī,
and there are so many deep truths hidden therein.

If you take bath in Navadvīpa, at Jagannātha Ghāṭa,
Bārakoṇa, you will come out at Keśī Ghāṭa, Vṛndāvana,
where rāsa-līlā is going on. However, if you take bath
in the ocean at Jagannātha Purī at Svarga-dvāra, you
will not come out in Vṛndāvana. Only if you are in the
Gambhīrā can you know something of the glory of
Vṛndāvana, and you will have a very thick greed to go
there. Navadvīpa is therefore more glorious than
Jagannātha Purī, and it is even more glorious than
Godāvarī, where Mahāprabhu met with Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda.

Although Caitanya Mahāprabhu engaged in so many pastimes

                          199
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

in Navadvīpa, still He took sannyāsa – because of His
compassion. He wanted to sprinkle His mercy. He did not
only come to taste rasa. In Navadvīpa He was tasting and
giving something, but in order to give more, He took the
renounced life of a sannyāsī. He left Śacī Mā and
Viṣṇupriyā, which was a very pathetic scene. Kṛṣṇa left
the gopīs in Vṛndāvana, He came to Mathurā, and after
that He came to Dvārakā. Mahāprabhu also left Viṣṇupriyā
devī as Rāmacandra left His Sītā forever, and this was
all very pathetic.

After taking sannyāsa, Mahāprabhu went to Purī, after
that He was admitted in the school of Rāya Rāmānanda and
then Svarūpa Dāmodara, and then He preached His mission
of rāga-mārga, rāgānuga-bhakti.




Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu at Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha in Purī – The
following is a discussion with Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja at the Ṭoṭā Gopīnātha Mandira in Jagannātha
Purī, September, 1993:




Whenever Mahāprabhu went to Jagannātha Mandira and saw
Subhadrā and Baladeva, He did not experience very much
pleasure. Rather, in front of Baladeva and His sister
Subhadrā, He felt very shy and thought, ‘I have come to
Kurukṣetra.’ He was in the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā at
Kurukṣetra where, in great separation, She tried to
bring Kṛṣṇa (Jagannātha) to Vṛndāvana. In the mood of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Mahāprabhu did not like to see Kṛṣṇa at
Kurukṣetra because all His associates, along with all
His Queens of Dvārakā, were present, and there were so
many horses and elephants. There was no chance for
Rādhikā to be with Kṛṣṇa in private, and this is why
Mahāprabhu always felt unbearable separation in Purī.
His residence in Gambhīrā was therefore like Rādhikā
being in Vṛndāvana and feeling separation for Kṛṣṇa in
Dvārakā.

The mood of separation was always present in Mahāprabhu
in Purī. When Rādhikā went to Kurukṣetra, She could not
take rest with Kṛṣṇa. Rather, She was given a separate
accommodation in a tent, and Kṛṣṇa lived with the
Yādavas and His Queens. When He went to His own
accommodation, She felt great separation.

In Purī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu sometimes saw the sea
as Yamunā and jumped in it, but there He wept still more
because Kṛṣṇa would disappear. Sometimes He became like
a tortoise, His limbs drawn into His body, and sometimes
the joints of His arms and legs would become separated
by eight inches and remained connected only by skin. At
that time, He sometimes appeared like a ghost, and when
the devotees saw Him in that condition, they would all
become fearful and begin to weep for Him. All this was
due to His separation from Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, to get some
relief, He would come to take darśana of the Ṭoṭā-

                          200
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

gopīnātha Deity.

Seeing Gopīnātha, He thought, ‘Oh, I have come to
Vṛndāvana. My prāṇanātha, the Lord of my life, is here.’
In this way His tears of separation would subside. On
one side of Gopīnātha we see Śrīmatī Rādhikā, on the
other side Lalitā, and both are black like Kṛṣṇa. When
Mahāprabhu used to see Gopīnātha, being in the mood of
Rādhikā, He (She) became one in mood with Kṛṣṇa and
became black. Rādhā becomes black by seeing Her
prāṇanātha and becoming absorbed in Him. She sometimes
takes Kṛṣṇa’s flute and plays it, and in this way also,
She becomes black. In the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa
becomes Mahāprabhu, and Lalitā becomes Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara. This is the mood of Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha with
Rādhikā and Lalitā. You can see that Gopīnātha is
sitting. Although you do not see any other vigraha
sitting, He sits.

Some say that when Śrīla Gadādhara Paṇḍita became old,
he could no longer offer garlands to Gopīnātha, and
therefore Gopīnātha sat down. But this is not actually
the reason. When Caitanya Mahāprabhu disappeared at the
age of forty-eight, Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita was only one
year younger. He left this world a year after Mahāprabhu
disappeared, and thus there was no chance for him to
become old. The actual history is that when Mahāprabhu
disappeared, following the order of Mahāprabhu, Śrī
Gadādhara Paṇḍita did not leave the worship of
Gopīnātha. Always feeling separation, he quickly became
lean and thin and could not even stand up to give Him a
garland. Seeing Gadādhara Paṇḍita in such a state,
Gopīnātha sat down for him, and Gadādhara Paṇḍita
continued to offer the garlands along with his tears.

There was a bhakta of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu named Māmu
Ṭhākura who used to render various services to Him. Soon
after Mahāprabhu disappeared, Śrīla Gadādhara Paṇḍita
also disappeared, and at that time his disciple Māmu
Ṭhākura was appointed by the government of Purī to serve
Gopīnātha. He was old – about 84 years – and he could
not properly offer garlands to Gopīnātha. Some say that
perhaps because Māmu Ṭhākura could not give garlands to
Gopīnātha in his old age, Gopīnātha sat down for him.
Actually, however, Gopīnātha sat for Śrīmatī Rādhikā
(Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita). It is a common thing for
Śrīmatī Rādhikā that Kṛṣṇa stands up and sits down for
Her.




5 Here it means that once a year, during Śrī Janmāṣṭamī
(Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s appearance day), the pūjārīs dress Lord
Jagannātha as Śrī Śyāmasundara. (Śrīpāda Mādhava
Mahāāja)



6 The vartma-pradarśaka guru is the person who
introduces one to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or who introduces
one to the pure devotee.


                          201
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



7 A vīṇā is a large Indian string instrument, similar to
the lute.



8 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
lecture in Navadvīpa, India, March 25, 2001:


Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the highest shelter of prema, but She
Herself has three aspects. One aspect is the root, and
the other two are Her expansions. In Vṛndāvana,
especially in Govardhana, Nandagaon, Varṣāṇā, Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, and similar places, She is
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī. She is the root, and She includes Her
expansions as well. She never leaves Vṛndāvana. In
Nandagaon (Uddhava Kyārī) She is Viyoginī Rādhā after
Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā. The astonishing madness of
separation She experienced as Viyoginī Rādhā is recorded
in Bhramara-gīta.

As Saṁyogīnī Rādhā She spent three months in Kurukṣetra,
where She met with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Although this is the
aspect of Rādhikā who meets with Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra,
Her desire cannot be fulfilled there; She wants to go
back to Vṛndāvana. It is the same Kṛṣṇa there in
Kurukṣetra, but in a different dress. There no flute in
His hand and no peacock feather crown. He is not Yaśodā-
nandana, Nanda-nandana, Rādhā-kānta; He is not addressed
by those names. The mood there is very different,
because there are so many elephants, horses, and a huge
army, and Vasudeva and Devakī and all their associates
are present. There is no forest like Vṛndāvana there, no
Yamunā, no peacocks and no deer.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā tells Śrī Kṛṣṇa, ‘My heart is not
satisfied. There is not even one drop of the ocean of
rasa of Vṛndāvana here in Kurukṣetra. I don’t want to be
here.’

Kṛṣṇa told Her, ‘You should meditate, and You will
realize that You are always with Me. If You will
meditate, My lotus feet will appear in Your heart.’

She replied, ‘My heart and mind are the same, and My
mind is Vṛndāvana. So You should come to Vṛndāvana.’
This is the meaning of Ratha-yātrā. The ratha (cart) is
the chariot of Rādhikā’s mind, the chariot of Rādhikā’s
desire, taking Lord Kṛṣṇa back to Vṛndāvana, back to
Vraja (represented by the Guṇḍicā temple). Saṁyogīnī
means that there is samyoga, a meeting between Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, but Rādhikā wants to go back to Vṛndāvana. She
wants to return to the forest of vetasī trees; that is,
the forest of kadamba trees, the forest which is
fragrant with belī, cāmeli, and jūhī flowers. She wants
to take Kṛṣṇa there.

Therefore, first Rādhikā is Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā.
Second She is Viyoginī Rādhikā, who is always in a
separation mood and absorbed in citrajalpa, prajalpa,
divyonmada, and other such bhāvas of separation. And in
Kurukṣetra She is Saṁyogīnī Rādhikā. She is meeting with

                          202
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Kṛṣṇa, but there is no happiness because all the sweet
stimuli of Vṛndāvana are missing. Kurukṣetra is filled
with many outside elements that are contrary to vraja-
prema. Therefore, Rādhikā situates Kṛṣṇa on the chariot
of Her mind and, along with all the other gopīs, brings
Śrī Kṛṣṇa back to Vṛndāvana. This is the meaning of
Ratha-yātrā, and these are the moods Mahāprabhu relished
in Jagannātha Purī.




9 Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja is
referring to the first word of the following verse by
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, describing pure bhakti:


anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11)


Uttama-bhakti is the cultivation of activities that are
meant exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; in
other words, the uninterrupted flow of service to Him,
performed through all endeavors of the body, mind, and
speech, and through the expression of various bhāvas
(spiritual sentiments). It is not covered by jñāna
(knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation) and karma
(reward-seeking activity), yoga, or austerities; and it
is completely free from all desires other than the
aspiration to bring happiness to Kṛṣṇa.

In his lecture on the nature of pure bhakti, spoken in
Jagannātha Purī, October 9, 2001, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja elaborated on the meaning of anyābhilāsitā in
the following way:




Anyābhilāsitā-śūnyaṁ. First of all, the general idea
means there is no selfishness. The devotee does not
serve Kṛṣṇa to get anything in return. He is not doing
anusilanam (uninterrupted devotional service) for his
own happiness or with any expectations. But here it is
not stated anyābhilāsa-śūnyaṁ, completely devoid of all
other desires. The verse is saying anyābhilāsitā-śūnyaṁ.
The suffix sitā indicates that one should be devoid of
all desires except for the service of Kṛṣṇa in one’s
svabhāva, one’s natural position. If one is sitting down
chanting and everything is peaceful, then in his nature
he has no desire other than to serve Kṛṣṇa. If a
calamity or crisis or great danger will come, if someone
comes to kill or beat that person, then at that time his
regular nature, his svabhāva, becomes transformed, and

                          203
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

at that time he may call out, ‘O Kṛṣṇa, save me.’ In
this situation the devotee appears to be asking Kṛṣṇa
for something for himself, but this mood is not in him.
It is not in his svabhāva in ordinary circumstances.
Therefore, by the word anyābhilāsitā, this suffix sitā
has made a concession to include this devotee in the
definition of uttama-bhakti.




10 The following is an explanation given by Prema-
prayojana dāsa on Śrī Baladeva Pūrṇimā, August 12, 2003,
at Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana Gauḍīya Maṭha in Vṛndāvana. When
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja heard this explanation,
he expressed his appreciation of how well the subtle
tattvas (established philosophical truths) were so
clearly explained. He said that he wanted this told
everywhere, so that all the devotees could know these
truths:




So, why has Baladeva Prabhu performed this rāsa-līlā?
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has explained
the identity of the gopīs with whom Baladeva Prabhu was
dancing. This is a point of great controversy. I will
try to explain the vicāra, the deliberations on the
subject, one after another, and in the end present the
viśeṣa-vicāra, the special conclusion, of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura mentioned that
at the time of śaṅkhacūḍa-vadha (the pastime of Kṛṣṇa
killing the demon Śaṅkhacūḍa), holi-līlā was going on at
Govardhana. During that pastime some gopīs were standing
very far away and were looking at Baladeva Prabhu. Kṛṣṇa
Himself glanced at Baladeva Prabhu to indicate to Him
that those gopīs had some special attachment for
Baladeva. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
commented that Baladeva Prabhu performed rāsa-līlā with
those gopīs who were looking at Him.

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has given
another explanation. When Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana for
Mathurā, there were many gopīs in Vraja who were not old
enough to meet with Kṛṣṇa in rāsa-līlā. Later, when
Baladeva Prabhu returned to Vṛndāvana, He did rāsa-līlā
with them, fulfilling their desire now that they were
old enough to take part in such a līlā.

These explanations have been given for loka-saṅgraha,
for the general people who are in ignorance of rasa-
tattva. They cannot understand what is rāsa-līlā and how
Baladeva Prabhu can also perform rāsa-līlā with Kṛṣṇa’s
gopīs.

Why does Baladeva Prabhu perform rāsa-līlā with Kṛṣṇa’s
gopīs? This is His service. Ordinarily in this world,
when the prākṛta-nāyaka and nāyikā (the mundane hero and
heroine) meet together, they do so for their own

                          204
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

happiness and their own pleasure. But who is Baladeva
Prabhu? He is Kṛṣṇa Himself. He is abhinna-prakāśa, non-
different from Kṛṣṇa, but with sevaka-abhimāna, the
identification that He is Kṛṣṇa’s servant. He is
composed entirely of this sevaka-abhimāna, and therefore
everything that He does is for the service of Kṛṣṇa.
Thus, if Baladeva Prabhu has performed rāsa-līlā with
Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs, the idea should never enter into the mind
that Baladeva Prabhu has any bhoga-vṛtti, enjoying
tendency. He has done this for the sake of Kṛṣṇa’s
service, in order to pacify the gopīs’ mood of
separation for Kṛṣṇa.

…When Baladeva saw that He was completely unable to
appease the gopīs’ sorrow, He Himself became overwhelmed
in separation. He began to weep bitter tears and called
out, ‘O Kṛṣṇa! O Kṛṣṇa! Why did You leave Vṛndāvana?’
Then, when Baladeva Prabhu was completely absorbed in
separation from Kṛṣṇa, His complexion turned blackish.
This is why here in Vraja-maṇḍala there are famous
Deities of Baladeva Prabhu in Dauji, Mahāvana, and
Madhuvana that are black: to remind us of this very
pastime.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī had explained that Baladeva
manifested millions of forms upon seeing the very high
separation mood of the gopīs. In each form He took one
gopī to a kuñja, and then He cried out for Kṛṣṇa, “O
Kṛṣṇa, please come to Vṛndāvana.” Then, immediately,
Kṛṣṇa manifested millions of forms, took the hand of
each gopī, and entered each kuñja, where He fulfilled
their hearts’ desires to serve Him. In this way Baladeva
Prabhu draws Śrī Kṛṣṇa to Vṛndāvana, and He is therefore
known as Saṅkarṣaṇa.




11 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
lecture in Hawaii, May 23, 2000:


The vaiṣṇava-sannyāsa daṇḍa represents the control of
three things: our body, our words, and our mind. In this
tridaṇḍa, as Nārāyaṇa-svarūpa, there are actually four
large sticks – the four together representing Nārāyaṇa –
and one small stick on the top, which represents the
jīva. We must give our heart, and our body, mind, and
words, to Kṛṣṇa. By these three we serve Him.

There is also another meaning: Kṛṣṇa, His power,
Rādhikā, and service to Them. These are also three, and
there is yet another set of three: Bhakti (devotion),
bhakta (the devotee), and Bhagavān (the Lord).




June 20, 2007


morning walk

                          205
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Are there any questions?

Jñāna-śakti dāsa:

I have a question about the husbands of the gopīs in
Vraja. Are they somewhat in a mood of aiśvarya towards
Kṛṣṇa (the consideration of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s opulence and
majesty)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, not at all. They are always in a mādhurya mood (the
consideration of Kṛṣṇa as one of the cowherd folk).
There is an abundance of aiśvarya in Vṛndāvana, but it
is always covered by mādhurya, or sweetness, that is, a
sense of a sweet, human-like relationship with Kṛṣṇa.

Sometimes, when there is a need, on very rare occasions,
opulence comes to serve Kṛṣṇa there. For example,
Kṛṣṇa’s lifting of Govardhana Hill was a pastime of
great opulence and majesty, but all the gopas were
thinking that they were helping Him to lift it. When
Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā heard and saw Kṛṣṇa lifting
Govardhana, they never considered that He was personally
lifting it. Rather, they were of the conviction that “We
have worshiped Nārāyaṇa, and by His mercy He is lifting
this hill through Kṛṣṇa.”

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

The gopas, the cowherd boys who Kṛṣṇa plays with in the
fields, are they also married? Does Kṛṣṇa play with
their wives? Or, is He playing with other gopas’ wives?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He is playing with His own wives.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

His own potencies.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

He is playing with His most beloved gopīs.

By the influence of Yogamāyā, the gopīs seem to have
husbands. This was arranged by Yogamāyā so that the
gopīs can enjoy parakīya-bhāva (the mood of a paramour)
with Kṛṣṇa, as there is not as much rasa, or mellow
taste, in svakīya-bhāva (the mood of Kṛṣṇa’s wife, or
queen).

Giridhārī dāsa

(from Los Angeles): Life is short in Kali-yuga. At this
time, the only strong quality remaining in this world is
honesty. So, I think that brahmacārī life is the best
life.

                            206
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not honesty; only kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

What he is trying to say is that he wants to take
saffron cloth from you. He is asking that you give him
brahmacarya.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good. I will be happy if you live in our temples,
like Los Angeles, Houston, and San Francisco. Bring me
some saffron cloth. I will make you a brahmacārī at this
festival, but then you must be very bold in your
preaching.

[To all the devotees present] Does anyone else here
desire to become a brahmacārī? Does anyone else want
saffron cloth? Do any of you, even if you are now a
householder, want to enter the sannyāsa āśrama? I want
to make many brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs, and I want to
make Los Angeles a strong preaching center.

[To Jayaṛṣi dāsa] You should be in charge of a preaching
center. You are very qualified.

[To all the devotees present] Are there any other
questions?

Baladeva dāsa:

We understand from scripture that śrī guru is present
everywhere. It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.2),
taṁ sarva-bhūta-hṛdayaṁ munim ānato ‘smi [I offer my
respectful obeisances unto that great sage Śukadeva
Gosvāmī, who can enter the hearts of all].

So, what is the difference between my asking in an
internal prayer to gurudeva to remove all obstacles to
my bhakti – like lust, anger, greed illusion, madness,
and bewilderment – and asking him directly, face to
face, to remove them?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If the guru is on the level of Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī,
there is no need of asking face to face. Guru is a
manifestation of Kṛṣṇa, and therefore he is powerful
enough that his response will inspire your heart. If the
guru is not of Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī’s caliber and is a
madhyama-adhikārī (an intermediate devotee), then Kṛṣṇa
will fulfill the disciple’s desire on behalf of that
guru.

Brajanāth dāsa:

What if the disciple prays to the qualified guru, and he
also wants to ask in person?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                            207
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

That is also good, but if he is far away and cannot ask
in person and he earnestly prays within his heart, the
reply will come.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, it is said that the guru gives the
conception of sambandha-jñāna (one’s eternal
relationship with Kṛṣṇa) when he gives dīkṣā-mantras to
the disciple. If the guru is only on the madhyama
(intermediate) platform and the understanding of his own
and his disciple’s svarūpa, or eternal form, is not
complete, then what conception can he give?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

First understand that at the time of dīkṣā, all kinds of
anarthas are eradicated and one’s relationship with
Kṛṣṇa is realized. Nowadays, dīkṣā is not actual
(vidvad-rūḍhī) dīkṣā.1 Rather, in the ordinary dīkṣā of
present days, gurudeva is giving only some qualification
to the disciple to begin his dīkṣā process. Later, when
the disciple’s relationship is realized, then his dīkṣā
is real, or actual.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Rādhā-kānta prabhu’s question is this: If a madhyama-
adhikārī has no realization of his own relation with
Kṛṣṇa, then how can he give this?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He can give something, even though he does not have that
realization. Then, in this life, or in future lives, the
disciple will find a perfect guru; and by surrendering
to that perfect guru he will be able to realize his
relationship with Kṛṣṇa.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

So ultimately we have to take śikṣā from an uttama-
bhāgavata (topmost devotee)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You cannot realize who is an uttama Vaiṣṇava in your
present stage. When you become a madhyama-uttama
Vaiṣṇava (the highest level of madhyama, just prior to
the uttama Vaiṣṇava stage), then you will be able to
realize.

Gokula dāsa (from Australia):

Can’t an uttama-adhikārī2 make you realize?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, he can. He knows a disciple’s level of
qualification, and he gives his mercy accordingly. A
father places weight upon his son’s head according to
his son’s capacity; not more than that. Guru does this
as well.


                            208
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Padmanābha dāsa:

How can one progress from anuṣṭhānikī dīkṣā (official,
ordinary dīkṣā) to vidvad-rūḍhī (actual) dīkṣā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Listen to hari-kathā and perform guru-sevā. Both are
essential:


tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (4.34)


[Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual
master. Inquire from him submissively and render service
unto him. The self-realized souls can impart knowledge
unto you because they have seen the truth.*]

You will have to serve guru, follow his orders, and hear
his hari-kathā. The knowledge given by him will
gradually manifest in your heart and you will become
qualified for vidvad-rūḍhī.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, in his letters, our guru mahārāja (Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja) did not usually say that
he was giving dīkṣā. He said that he was giving second
initiation. What kind of dīkṣā was he giving, or not
giving?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Did he give the guru-mantra and all the other mantras?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is dīkṣā. He called it ‘second initiation’ as an
English translation.3 Harināma is given first. If dīkṣā
and harināma are given at the same time, at the same
ceremony, then harināma is given first and just after
that dīkṣā is given.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

You were saying that nowadays one’s dīkṣā is not vidvad-
rūḍhī. It is merely giving some adhikāra, or
qualification, for later advancement. Is the bona fide
guru simply giving some adhikāra, or is he giving full
dīkṣā?


                           209
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The guru gives an opportunity for the disciples to begin
their dīkṣā process. We see in Jaiva-dharma that when
Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha took dīkṣā, they at once
realized and saw Gauracandra (Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu),
but nowadays the dīkṣā initiations are not of that
caliber.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Is it that the madhyama-guru gives instructions, thereby
giving their disciples sukṛti (spiritual merits), and
then, when the disciple follows these instructions he
will get the association of the topmost devotees?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

A disciple should always think, “My gurudeva is an
uttama-adhikārī and an associate of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Otherwise he cannot advance.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He should think like that. In the Bhagavad-gītā there is
a śloka which states that if anyone is worshiping the
demigods, the fruit of that worship is given by Kṛṣṇa,
because the demigods have no power to give that fruit.
Suppose you worship grass or straw, thinking, “I am
worshiping Kṛṣṇa.” That straw is not Kṛṣṇa, but if you
consider, “Kṛṣṇa is here, I am worshiping Him,” He will
know this and sprinkle His mercy upon you at once.

[To Śrīpāda Bhāgavat Mahārāja] You can take two or three
brahmacārīs with you.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavat Mahārāja:

We have already arranged for Madhukāra, Prāṇa-govinda,
and Abhirāma to come with me.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good; and the others should remain in Los Angeles
under the guidance of Avadhūta Mahārāja. I want Los
Angeles to be the most prominent center in America.

Here in Badger, I want to give classes on the
conversations between the Nava-yogendras (the nine
highly elevated and renounced sons of King Ṛṣabhadeva)
and Nimi Mahārāja. I want to speak about their nine
answers to the king’s nine questions. All our speakers
should know this subject matter and be ready to be
called upon.

Nṛhari dāsa:

Do you want only sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs in the
preaching center in Los Angeles, or do you want
gṛhasthas, house-holders, there as well?


                             210
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Gṛhasthas may also be there –those gṛhasthas who can
give their whole time for bhajana and service. Generally
gṛhasthas cannot give full-time service, and that is why
I did not mention them before. It does not matter
whether one is gṛhastha or in the renounced order – all
the devotees will work together – but husband and wife
should not live together in the maṭha (temple).

Gokula dāsa:

Why are you saying that we should give prominence to
preaching in Los Angeles?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is a prominent place. From the beginning, when I
first went there, I told the devotees that Los Angeles
is a big city with a large population. We can therefore
preach all over the world from there. There are many
opportunities and resources to preach everywhere from
there.

Hṛdaya-govinda dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, You have been instructing us for many
years about book distribution and bringing devotees to
you. I see that, especially in the Bay Area of San
Francisco, so many people are hungry for your books.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I request you to stand up in class and speak about this.
I will support you.

Hṛdaya-govinda dāsa:

I have a   question. When our Śrīla Prabhupāda was
present,   he said that if a disciple prays to him, that
disciple   will become empowered to distribute more books.
How does   this work?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He inspired them.

Devotees should distribute books, and they should also
realize the nectar contained within the books. If they
do not read the books, their book distribution will be
only karma (fruitive action for personal gain).

Devotee:

Do you give harināma and dīkṣā at the same time?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If I think that one is qualified for both, then I do so.
If one can chant more than sixteen rounds daily and has
some knowledge and strong belief, then I give both at
the same time.

Prāṇa-govinda dāsa (from Alachua):

                            211
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Sixth Canto, Chapter 1, Verse
1 [purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja], it is
said that at the end of one hundred years of Brahmā’s
life, all the residents of his planet will go back home,
back to Godhead. Praviśanti paraṁ padam.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, this is not at all true. He did not say this. They
will enter the body of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu along with
Brahmā.

Prāṇa-govinda dāsa:

So what is paraṁ padam? Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja put a verse in the end of his purport, saying
praviśanti paraṁ padam.4

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

With regard to those who are not liberated, how can they
go to the spiritual world?5 Only if one is liberated by
completing his course of bhakti can he be admitted
there. Regarding those who still have anarthas and are
still committing sins, how can they go?

They will sleep within the divine body of Kāraṇodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu, and at that time their physical bodies will no
longer be with them. At the time of death their souls
(covered by a type of subtle body), along with Brahmā,
will enter into the body of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu will then merge into Kāraṇodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu. They will all be there, and after creation they
will all take birth again according to their previous
karmas.

There is no pralaya, meaning devastation or
annihilation, on Brahmaloka at the end of Brahmā’s day.
At that time the topmost heavenly planets remain, and
all the other heavenly and lower planets are
annihilated. At the time of mahā-pralaya, however, which
is the end of Brahmā’s life, all the planets below the
Virajā River 6 will be abolished.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Will Brahmā be liberated at that time?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If Brahmā is qualified, he will be liberated – otherwise
not.7 Regarding the other residents of his planet, they
will also sleep within the transcendental body of
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu.

Prāṇa-govinda dāsa:

I heard from someone that our Śrīla Prabhupāda said on a
morning walk that all jīvas first took birth in this
material world as Brahmā. I never heard this from him
personally.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

                            212
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017


Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja have both said that the first birth of the jīva
in this world was as Brahmā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have not heard this in my entire life of eighty-seven
years. I am very well acquainted with both Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja and Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka
Śrīdhara Mahārāja. I know that they did not say this.

Śrīpāda Niṣkiñcana Mahārāja

(at that time Brajendra-nandana dāsa): Gurudeva, you
once said in Costa Rica, in a conversation with Śrīpāda
Paramadvaiti Mahārāja, that even if one is a madhyama
devotee, if he has no connection with an uttama devotee
he cannot deliver his disciple.

My question is that in order to give dīkṣā, must a
madhyama-guru have a connection with an uttama devotee
who is present in this world. Is that a fact?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, this is quite wrong. He can give dīkṣā. We should
try to follow the direction of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
and our Gosvāmīs.

[To Mahībhartā dāsa and the drama team] I want to see a
drama about the life and character of Prahlāda Mahārāja,
and in addition you can perform whatever other drama you
like.

Tamāla Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, when I see my son, how shall I behave
with him?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can have affection for him and you can do your duty;
there is no harm in that. But do not be attached to him.
Simply do your duty.




June 21, 2007


morning walk

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yesterday (evening) we explained two questions.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Yes, the questions that were answered by Kavi and Havi.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                          213
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017


What was the first question?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

The first question was, “What is the ultimate good, the
ultimate benefit?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Śrautī Mahārāja] Can you answer?

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

“What is”… Mmm…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It takes you so much time to answer?

Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍi Mahārāja:

“What is the process to achieve…?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

That was not the real question.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

“What is the easiest way for someone to become free from
the cycle of birth and death?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The question was: “What is bhāgavata-dharma?”

By engaging in the process of bhāgavata-dharma, all
problems will very easily disappear, the pain of endless
births will cease, and kṛṣṇa-prema will manifest.

This was the question. What was the answer?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

One must associate with sādhus. By the association of a
sādhu and the holy name…

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:




ye vai bhagavatā proktā

upāyā hy ātma-labdhaye

añjaḥ puṁsām aviduṣāṁ

viddhi bhāgavatān hi tān

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.34)

                             214
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



[Even ignorant living entities can very easily come to
know the Supreme Lord if they adopt those means
prescribed by the Supreme Lord Himself. The process
recommended by the Lord is known as bhāgavata-dharma, or
devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.*]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is the same teaching given by Kṛṣṇa Himself,
regarding how He can be easily attained; how we can very
easily attain His love and affection. By śravaṇam
(hearing about Him), kīrtanam (chanting His names and
glories), and smaraṇam (remembering Him), all the pain
born from all problems will easily disappear.

After this, Kavi explained: You have forgotten Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. So, first go to guru, accept him, and serve him.
In this way you will be able to serve Kṛṣṇa.


bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo ‘smṛtiḥ

tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ

bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.37)


[Fear arises when a living entity misidentifies himself
with the material body because of absorption in the
external, illusory energy of the Lord. When the living
entity thus turns away from the Supreme Lord, he also
forgets his own constitutional position as a servant of
the Lord. This bewildering, fearful condition is
affected by the potency for illusion, called māyā.
Therefore, an intelligent person should engage
unflinchingly in the unalloyed devotional service of the
Lord, under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master
whom he should accept as his worshipful deity and as his
very life and soul.*]

Kavi also explained:


yān āsthāya naro rājan

na pramādyeta karhicit

dhāvan nimīlya vā netre

na skhalen na pated iha

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.35)


[O King, one who accepts this process of devotional
service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead will never
blunder on his path in this world. Even while running

                          215
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

with eyes closed, he will never trip or fall.*]

If one follows this path, even if he runs with his eyes
closed, he will not fall down. What is the meaning of
this verse?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

For those who are on this path, which has been given by
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, practicing śravaṇam, kīrtanam, and smaraṇam
under the guidance and shelter of sad-guru (a self-
realized guru), it does not matter how difficult that
path is. Still…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments that
running with one’s eyes closed means that even if
someone is not conversant with all the śāstras, but he
performs nava-vidhā-bhakti, the nine-fold processes of
bhakti, he will be assured of success. Am I
understanding this correctly?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No. [To Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja] What is the
meaning?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

This path of bhāgavata-dharma is directly given by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. All the difficulties and pitfalls that are in the
paths of karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, and aṣṭāṅga-yoga8 have
no effect on the devotee, because bhāgavata-dharma is
the nature of the soul. The soul’s natural position is
to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, if the soul submits to
the process of pure bhakti, he is protected. In fact,
even if he is not perfect in following, he will still be
supported.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍī Mahārāja] Can you tell something
more about this?

Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍī Mahārāja:

You have to have courage and faith to keep on moving.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Dhīra-kṛṣṇa dāsa] Can you explain this?

Dhīra-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

It has already been emphasized that we should serve
gurudeva as our own ātmā (soul). In that type of…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                             216
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

You cannot explain it. Better to listen to my
explanation.

Speaking the words of Kavi, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī says
that if one who is on this path closes his eyes and runs
very quickly, he cannot fall down or be derailed. What
is the meaning? Vaidhī-bhakti is a slow development. The
devotee practicing vaidhī-bhakti carefully opens his
eyes, but his progress is very slow.

On the other hand, those who follow rāgānuga-bhakti are
‘closing their eyes.’ This means that even though they
may neglect some limbs of bhakti, like dvārakā-dhyāna
(meditation on Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Dvārakā), or arcana,
they are successful.

They always weep:


evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā

jātānurāgo druta-citta uccaiḥ

hasaty atho roditi rauti gāyaty

unmāda-van nṛtyati loka-bāhyaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.40)


[In the heart of one who adopts such a transcendental
vow, attachment for chanting the name of his most dear
Lord arises and melts his heart. Now he rises above the
condition of the general mass of people, and he is
beyond caring for their opinions and views. In a natural
way – not out of pretence – he acts as if mad. Sometimes
he bursts out laughing and sometimes he sheds floods of
tears. Sometimes, in a loud voice, he calls out to
Bhagavān and sometimes, with a sweet voice, he sings
Bhagavān’s glories. At other times, when he perceives
his beloved standing before his eyes, he even starts
dancing in order to please Him.]

The devotional activities described in this verse are
not about vaidhī-bhakti. The devotee described here is
always weeping and laughing, devoid of any shame. This
is the meaning.

When one follows rāgānuga-bhakti, there is no harm if he
neglects the few limbs of vaidhī-bhakti which are not
favorable for the cultivation of rāgānuga.9 By the
process of rāgānuga-bhakti alone, even if he neglects
other processes, he will attain all success. This is the
hidden meaning of ‘running with one’s eyes closed.’

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Can we say, then, that the entire first answer of Kavi
refers to rāgānuga-bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He begins his reply from vaidhī-bhakti, which includes
the verse beginning bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ, and then

                          217
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

he reaches rāgānuga-bhakti.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

In regard to what you were saying about the devotee on
this path being able to reach perfection while running
with his eyes closed, does this support the statement
that bhakti is not dependent on anything? Is that the
understanding?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I explained the meaning that in vaidhī-bhakti you follow
certain rules and regulations, with very slow progress.
You must go very carefully, with open eyes, respecting
all and following all regulations of the bhakti line.
Then, after a long time – or even after many births –
rāgānuga-bhakti will manifest. ‘Closing one’s eyes and
running very fast’ refers to the true rāgānuga sādhaka’s
neglect of some of the limbs of bhakti. There will be no
chance of falling down for him; he will continue to
perfection.10

Here, in this verse [Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.40], there
is no mention of the limbs of bhakti. Actually, the
devotee described in this particular verse is a mahā-
mahā-bhāgavata [playing the role of a rāgānuga-bhakta].
He is doing nothing here, nothing, except calling out,
“Ha (alas) Kṛṣṇa! Ha Kṛṣṇa!” Sometimes laughing,
sometimes weeping, seeing Kṛṣṇa in his heart, and
sometimes becoming silent (mauni). He will not fall
down, even if he neglects any limb of bhakti, and he
will rapidly increase in his love.

Abhirāma dāsa:

Śrīla Guru Mahārāja, is it favorable for bhakti to
follow kārtika-vrata11 in Badger?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Surely. You can follow it anywhere. And we must also
follow cāturmāsya-vrata12; not only in Badger, but
everywhere in the world.

Padmanābha dāsa:

Gurudeva, does ‘closing his eyes and running’ mean that
the sādhaka is not following at least the basic
principles of…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You have not understood, and therefore you cannot ask a
proper question. Try to understand what I have just
explained.

Padmanābha dāsa:

I understood a little bit, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You cannot understand. You will have to become like them

                          218
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

(the sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs present), being without
wife and without possessions; always hearing and
thinking about bhakti subjects, and serving them. Then
you will be able to easily understand.

Indupati dāsa:

We see many devotees who go to Vṛndāvana and absorb
themselves in chanting. They ignore many limbs of bhakti
and simply chant in Vṛndāvana, but after some time they
leave the process entirely.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Such persons are not following rāgānuga. Rāgānuga-bhakti
is very rare, very rare. Whether in Vṛndāvana or
anywhere else, such ordinary devotees are prone to
commit offenses.

What I explained is for rāgānuga-bhaktas like Raya
Rāmānanda. He was taking care of young and very
beautiful naked ladies without being at all affected.
Can you do so?

Indupati dāsa:

No, Śrīla Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

One who tries to do so without having Śrīla Rāya
Rāmānanda’s qualification, thus neglecting the
regulative principles, is simply lusty. Only persons
like Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī can
do such things. They are qualified, and the attainment
of their qualification is our life’s aim and object.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Some devotees say, “Śrīla Gurudeva, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, is preaching rāgānuga-bhakti. We
should therefore only hear rasa-kathā, and in that way
we can enter into rāgānuga-bhakti.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What am I explaining here? Rāgānuga-bhakti? Or what?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

You are explaining vaidhī-bhakti also.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I am discussing mostly vaidhī-bhakti. I am not
discussing anything at all about rāsa-līlā. They are
speaking falsely.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

It is sometimes said that this path of bhakti is like a
sharp razor’s edge. Is this only in relation to nava-
vidhā-bhakti, the nine-fold process of vaidhī-bhakti?


                            219
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is this world that is like the sharp edge of a razor
(kṣurasya dhārā), not bhakti. Bhakti is very soft. You
do not understand? This world, which is made of
ignorance, is kṣurasya dhārā; there are problems
everywhere. Give up this ignorance and come to bhakti.
This is the meaning of the verse you refer to.

What was the second question of Nemi Mahārāja to the
nine sages?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

“What are the qualities of the different grades of
devotees who practice bhāgavata-dharma?” The grades of
devotees are uttama-bhagavata, madhyama, and kaniṣṭha.

Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍī Mahārāja:

“And what are their activities? How do they speak? What
do they do?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is their behavior?


śrī-rājovāca

atha bhāgavataṁ brūta

yad-dharmo yādṛśo nṛṇām

yathācarati yad brūte

yair liṅgair bhagavat-priyaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.44)


[Mahārāja Nimi said: Now please tell me in greater
detail about the devotees of the Supreme Lord. What are
the natural symptoms by which I can distinguish between
the most advanced devotees, those on the middle level,
and those who are neophytes? What are the typical
religious activities of a Vaiṣṇava, and how does he
speak? Specifically, please describe those symptoms and
characteristics by which Vaiṣṇavas become dear to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.*]

What was Śrī Havi’s first answer to this question?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

The first answer is about the uttama- bhāgavata (the
most advanced, first-class devotee). “Bhagavata bhavam
atmana – The uttama-bhāgavata sees his own mood of love
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa in all living entities. He sees his own
bhāva (mood of devotion) in all other persons.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is an example of how he thinks?

                             220
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

He thinks, “Everyone is engaged in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s service.
Everyone has the mood, or bhāva, that I have.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the mood of Prahlāda Mahārāja?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

He sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere, in everyone, and in
everything, and they are totally surrendered to Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He sees all living entities and every aspect of creation
in Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is an example of an uttama-bhāgavata.

And who is the madhyama?

Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍi Mahārāja:

He distinguishes between…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

[To Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja] You?

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

A madhyama-adhikārī has four different relationships. He
sees the Supreme Lord and worships Him in his heart. He
sees the devotees and engages in the six exchanges of
love with them. He preaches to the innocent and
ignorant, but he avoids, or neglects, the envious.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You are not explaining this clearly. Who will explain
it?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:




īsvare tad-adhīneṣu

bāliśeṣu dviṣatsu ca

prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā

yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.46)


[A madhyama-bhāgavata is one who has love for Īśvara and
His pure devotees, friendship towards His bhaktas, shows
mercy towards those who are innocent [in regard to

                             221
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

bhakti], and neglects those who are inimical to Īśvara
or His bhaktas.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What do you mean by maitrī?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

For the madhyama-adhikārī there are three different
kinds of friendship with devotees. In his friendship
with very advanced devotees, he offers everything – his
heart and soul and all he possesses. He maintains
friendship with devotees on the same level of bhakti as
himself, and friendship with instruction for less-
experienced devotees. These are the three different
kinds of maitrī.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

And prema?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Prema is defined in this verse:


anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11)


[Uttama-bhakti is the cultivation of activities that are
meant exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; in
other words, the uninterrupted flow of service to Him,
performed through all endeavors of the body, mind, and
speech, and through the expression of various bhāvas
(spiritual sentiments). It is not covered by jñāna
(knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation) and karma
(reward-seeking activity), yoga, or austerities; and it
is completely free from all desires other than the
aspiration to bring happiness to Kṛṣṇa.]

This is prema towards Īśvara, the Supreme Lord.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And then?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Bāliśeṣu means that the devotee preaches to those who
are outside the devotee saṅga, and who do not yet
understand devotional service. Kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs are
also bāliśeṣu, and they also need association.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                            222
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

What are the symptoms of a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:




arcāyām eva haraye

pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate

na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu

sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.47)


[A person who endeavors whole heartedly in the
ritualistic worship of the Deity form of Śrī Hari
according to worldly faith yet does not worship the
devotees of Śrī Hari whose bodies are also temples of
Śrī Hari, nor offer respect to other living entities, is
known as a materialistic, or kaniṣṭha, devotee.]

The kaniṣṭha-adhikārī has śraddhā, or faith, in
worshiping the Deity form of the Lord. He may also have
śraddhā in guru and may give him proper respect. But he
does not know how to recognize devotees, nor does he
know on what level different devotees are situated. He
does not know how to deal with people in general, and he
becomes easily influenced by them. His śraddhā is komala
(very soft and pliable); it can be shaken at any time.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Okay.

Aniruddha dāsa:

Can a kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇava preach properly?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What will he preach? He barely knows anything about
siddhānta. He should serve madhyama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇavas
and regularly hear from them. Then he will be able to
preach properly.

Devotee:

Śrīla Gurudeva, didn’t Śrīla Svāmī Mahārāja Prabhupāda
use only kaniṣṭhas to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness all
over the world?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He used to tell them that preaching means distribution
of books, reading, and associating with more elevated
Vaiṣṇavas. How can a kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇava preach properly
if he only knows arcana and worship of his gurudeva?
What can he preach if he doesn’t factually understand
the other limbs of bhakti, if he cannot differentiate
between the uttama, madhyama, and kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, and

                             223
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

if he does not properly understand bhakti-siddhānta?

Devotee:

Even though we were kaniṣṭha, we always said we were
madhyama because we preached.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is because Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja
wanted to somehow engage all those who came to him. He
wanted them to develop a taste for bhakti. He considered
that by doing the services he gave them, they would
advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This was his motive.

[To Subala Sakhā dāsa] Have you taken many photos in
Vṛndāvana?

Subala Sakhā

dāsa:

In Vṛndāvana? Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When will our Vraja-maṇḍala Parikramā (large size) book
be published?

Subala Sakhā dāsa:

It will come out soon. A devotee from Holland is working
on the graphics and layout…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And what are you doing?

Subala Sakhā dāsa:

I am selecting the photos, and then sending them to him
so that he can work on them and put them…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I wanted this book to be published, but Niścintya could
not do it and you could not do it.

Subala Sakhā dāsa:

It will get done, Gurudeva. I give a hundred per cent
guarantee that it will get done.




June 22, 2007


morning walk

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:


                          224
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva, in San Francisco you said that we should
follow varṇāśrama-dharma, the system of four castes and
spiritual orders of life. To what extent, or in what
sense, do you want us to follow it?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Follow it as your gurudeva, parama-pūjyapāda Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, told you to follow.

If one is a brahmacārī, he follows the principles of
brahmacarya; if one is a gṛhastha, he is an exemplary
gṛhastha like Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita and other pure devotees.
Those in the vānaprastha-āśrama follow the principles of
varṇāśrama in their āśrama, and sannyāsīs follow the
principles of those in the renounced order. This is
varṇa and āśrama dharma, the religious system of social,
or occupational, and spiritual orders of life. You are
not paramahaṁsas (self-realized souls), and that is why
you have been told to follow. You must follow
varṇāśrama.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Varṇas also? We should all work according to our
propensity?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Varṇa and āśrama; both. Because we follow daiva-
varṇāśrama (division of society by qualification, not by
birth, and executed for the pleasure of the Lord),
everyone should accept that which is favorable for
bhakti, not other things.

For example, we do not accept smārta-kriyā, activities
performed according to smārta (regulative but not
devotional) scriptures. The funeral ceremony for one’s
father and mother should not be performed according to
smārta regulations. If there is a fire sacrifice or a
marriage, it should be done solely according to Vaiṣṇava
scriptures and regulations.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

What is the ladies’ position in varṇāśrama-dharma? You
have always emphasized that ladies and gentlemen are
equal in bhakti.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Sītā devī, Arundhatī, Anasūyā, Gārgī, Maitrī, Draupadī,
Kuntī, and other Vaiṣṇavīs have been given so much
respect in our śāstra and Vedic culture – on the same
level as ṛṣis and maharṣis (the best of the great sages
and saints).

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Śrīla Prabhupāda has said that ladies are very good and
men are very good, but together they are not very good.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                            225
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

If a man and woman are gṛhastha, it is okay for them to
associate with each other. If they are not gṛhastha,
their association will be the cause of their fall-down;
this is māyā. Kāmadeva, Cupid, has defeated even
Viśvāmitra, Brahmā, and Śaṅkara (Lord Śiva).13 The only
personalities he could not defeat were Nara-nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi
and Nārada.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

In ISKCON there was a problem because, supposedly,
according to the ISKCON members’ understanding of
varṇāśrama-dharma, ladies are less intelligent and in a
lower position.14

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, no. Never think like this.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He is saying that in ISKCON they used to think like
this, and they proclaimed that their conception was
according to the principles of varṇāśrama.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

That conception created a big problem.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, certainly. They don’t give respect to ladies, but I
give respect, and I want everyone to do so. We give
respect according to an individual’s qualification.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Can ladies take management positions in this society?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, so much. In India, Indira Gandhi became the Prime
Minister.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

So ladies do not just make babies?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They can make so many babies. Indira Gandhi had two very
beautiful sons, and one of her sons became the Prime
Minister. Her daughter-in-law, Sonya Gandhi, also has
one son and one daughter, and her son may also become
Prime Minister. In America, Clinton’s wife may become
the President.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

I am a family man, Śrīla Gurudeva. I have a family, and
I see that the girls are always more intelligent than
the boys.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                            226
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Yes, sometimes they are.

Aniruddha dāsa:

While you were giving class yesterday, my god-brother
Harer-nāmānanda prabhu (Spanish) prayed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “I
want to have a close relationship with Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja.” Then, when you were leaving the
temple, you approached him and asked, “Who are you?”

He was amazed and startled, thinking, “How did he know?”
He is taking that as a sign of the beginning of his
establishing a closer relationship with you. He is a
very serious disciple of Prabhupāda. He wants to have a
closer relationship and serve you, but he wants to know
how.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Harer-nāmānanda dāsa] Hear from me for four more
days, and our relation will strengthen automatically.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He wants to know how he can serve you more.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He can serve in any way he thinks best.

Śivānanda dāsa:

One or two years ago, in Venice, I was on a morning walk
with Śrīla Gurudeva, Brajanāth prabhu, and Śrīpāda
Mādhava Mahārāja. I was a little bit upset with some of
the activities of ISKCON, and I asked Śrīla Gurudeva,
“Are these people offenders or asuras (demons)?” Śrīla
Gurudeva said, “They are my children.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja] Can you explain the
meaning of māyā as I described in my class yesterday?
What is māyā?

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

It is hard for me to speak without prior preparation.

Devotee:

Māyā is the desire to be a second Kṛṣṇa, and that
misunder-standing creates all the problems of this
world.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

You should know that there are two kinds of māyā.
Ultimately, māyā is yogamāyā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s internal
desire-potency, whose function is in Goloka Vṛndāvana
and in Kṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlā, His pastimes as manifest in

                            227
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

this material world. Yogamāyām upāśritaḥ. In His rāsa-
līlā Kṛṣṇa employed His yogamāyā, His potency that makes
the impossible possible, and that yogamāyā potency made
all arrangements for Him and the gopīs. Without
yogamāyā, rāsa-līlā would not have been able to take
place.

There is no function of yogamāyā in this world. Here in
this world, māyā refers only to worldly māyā, by which
creation, sustenance, and destruction of the cosmos take
place. This māyā is a shadow of the real māyā, or
yogamāyā.

Māyā is also the thinking that, “I am this body, these
relatives are mine, this wealth is mine, this land is
mine, and all my possessions are mine.” We think, “Oh,
wealth will save me; my relatives will help me.” This
conception is māyā.

Māyā is able to defeat everyone in this world. In Kali-
yuga, this present age of quarrel and hypocrisy, she
especially attacks sannyāsīs; so be very careful.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

How does māyā attack the sannyāsīs, Śrīla Gurudeva, and
how can we be safe?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

She sees that the sannyāsī is the best person to be
attacked.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

So how can they be saved?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They can be saved only by surrender to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Guru,
and Vaiṣṇavas. If sannyāsīs think, “There is no one to
control me,” they will surely land in the lap of māyā.
Those sannyāsīs who always remember Kṛṣṇa, Guru, and
Vaiṣṇavas will be protected.

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, for so long you have been asking me
which devotees are the top book distributors. Now we
have determined the top three book distributors by how
many books they have distributed, but we are wondering
if that is actually the best way to measure. Is there a
way to measure by quality?

The only way to practically measure right now is through
quantity. But there is some doubt in several devotees’
minds in this regard; they have expressed some
dissatisfaction with this method. So, we are wondering
if there is another way to measure for next year.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Some devotees are saying that ISKCON leaders used to
encourage the number one, two, and three distributors,

                            228
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

who, by so many tricks, ‘by hook or by crook’
distributed books and then left devotional service. Many
of the topmost distributors left Kṛṣṇa consciousness and
are now completely in māyā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

So, be careful.

Still, we should give some reward to the best
distributors.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

How can they judge who is the top?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

By how many books they are distributing; only by this
way.

Viśvambhara dāsa:

Another question is this: We are inspired to give the
top distributor a big recognition – a ticket to Kārtika
– but some devotees think that that is too much.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They should decide. A committee will decide.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, yesterday you mentioned that the
difference between your brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs and
those of our Śrīla Prabhupāda is that you are training
your brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs in such a way that they
will not fall down in the future. You have trained all
the brahmacārīs who have been with you for many years,
telling them very strictly that they must never give up
their brahmacarya, their saffron cloth.

One thing to note is that during the time of our
Prabhupāda, he encouraged brahmacarya, but he did not
enforce it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

Yes, he did not enforce brahmacarya, because it was the
beginning of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness mission in the
West.15

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Yes. He did not enforce it. If they wanted to marry,
there was no problem.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

In fact, in the beginning he personally arranged the
marriages, because he saw that they were not capable of
remaining brahmacārīs.

                            229
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He was very, very intelligent. Somehow he arrested them
all. He trained them to make money also. In this way,
even if they would give up life in the maṭha (temple),
they would be able to easily maintain their lives.

Gokula dāsa (from Australia):

Śrīla Gurudeva, I have a question. Since the beginning
you have encouraged us to form a society in this saṅga,
and now the leaders are doing this. Yesterday there was
a big meeting.

But some devotees have a doubt regarding the
establishment of a society, and I also have a doubt.
Those who assume management positions tend to be very
strong, pushy, and forceful, especially in Western
societies. How can we best avoid a body of controlling
leaders? Many are asking this question.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We do not control here. I do not want to control anyone
by force. I have love and affection for everyone, and I
control everyone by that love and affection.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gokula is saying that if there are managers in the
society, then by their natures they will want to control
everyone.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, no. Why would that happen? I always remind the
leaders to think that they are servants of the maṭha. I
make them maṭha commanders to serve all. I tell them not
to think, “I am the controller; I am the head.” I tell
them, “Don’t think, ‘I am the monarch.’ ” They should
consult with all others before doing anything.

Gokula dāsa:

I see that several institutions, like ISKCON and even
Śrīla Gour Govinda Mahārāja’s institution in
Bhubanesvara, are being managed with a mentality of
control. Only one institution was not like that, and
that was the Gauḍīya Vedanta Samiti lead by you and
Śrīla Trivikrama Mahārāja and Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, when we first came to Kārtika, we saw how
everything was managed by you. We saw how there were no
management meetings; nothing of the sort.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There was no meeting at all at that time, and still
there is no meeting. Everything transpires as if
automatically.


                            230
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Brajanāth dāsa:

On the contrary, we (Western devotees) have to sit down
from time to time and have meetings. We have to say to
everyone at the meeting, “You have this job and you have
that job, and if you don’t do your job, then everything
will fail.” But there are no meetings in your saṅga.
Everything happens automatically.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No meetings at all.

Devotee:

Śrīla Gurudeva, when there are properties and money
involved, there is always greed. How can we avoid that,
and how can we avoid the way we suffered in ISKCON? When
Śrīla Prabhupāda was here, nothing like this happened;
but after his departure so many leaders began fighting
over properties and temples, and kicking out devotees.
Ambition and greed tend to come to societies, desiring
to destroy them. How can we avoid this?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The members of the ‘controlling committee’ must be very
selfless, surrendered to Guru, Vaiṣṇavas, and Kṛṣṇa, and
also detached from worldly wealth and desires. I want to
make members like this. Māyā may come, but we are trying
by this method.

Purandara dāsa:

In the absence of good association, leaders may adopt
their old bad habits of trying to be controllers. How
can that be avoided?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Some corruption dwelled in Satya-yuga, more so in
Dvāpara, more in Tretā, and still more so in Kali-
yuga.16 We are trying, but still it may come, and
therefore it is essential that we are careful in that
regard. We find that sometimes, if a father has two
sons, the sons quarrel and one shoots the other instead
of loving him. This is the world; this is why we should
chant and remember Kṛṣṇa, and be surrendered to Kṛṣṇa
and guru. This is why. Without this, any scheme will
fail.

Gokula dāsa:

It always seems that some persons are there to persecute
others, and sometimes I’m thinking that this is Kṛṣṇa’s
arrangement to teach us to be more tolerant.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, this is not Kṛṣṇa’s arrange-ment. He never likes
things like this. He is very merciful and kind.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:


                            231
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

This is the arrangement of Kali (the personification of
this age of quarrel and hypocrisy).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Those who are selfish are simply cheaters.

[To Aniruddha dāsa] Don’t criticize ISKCON, as you have
done. The ISKCON devotees are also my children. Don’t
speak about them with such anger. Be calm and quiet, and
perform bhajana. Don’t see anyone’s faults. See your own
faults. Do you understand?

Aniruddha dāsa:

But if we keep a humble attitude…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Try to follow these principles of humility and respect
for all. These are not my words. Rather, śāstra is
telling this and Kṛṣṇa is telling this. Whoever
criticizes others will see that he has absorbed all the
bad qualities he is criticizing. He will see that those
bad qualities have entered his own being.




June 23, 2007


morning walk

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Ask about what you want to hear.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, in other Kali-yugas, when Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu does not come, do the yuga-avatāras (the
incarnations for the various Kali-yugas) also come in a
golden complexion? Who are they?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Kalki comes, and if needed, other incarnations come.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

But Kalki does not teach nāma-saṅkīrtana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Never. He only kills demons.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Who teaches the yuga-dharma (the religious practice
prescribed for a particular age) in other Kali-yugas?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                             232
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu does not come, Viṣṇu
teaches it.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

Do those who are killed by Kalki get liberation?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Certainly. This is because Kalki is viṣṇu-tattva (a
manifestation of Viṣṇu, or Kṛṣṇa Himself), not
śaktyāveśa (a living entity empowered by the Lord for a
specific mission).

Prāṇa-govinda dāsa:

The demon Kālanemi was killed by Viṣṇu in his past life.
Why did he have to come again, to be killed by Kṛṣṇa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Kṛṣṇa is independent. He may come in any form, and He
can do as He likes. It has therefore been written, “One
may be able to count the particles of sand in the
universe, or the stars in the sky, but no one can count
the transcendental qualities of Kṛṣṇa.”


[In time, learned philosophers or scientists might be
able to count all the atoms of the earth, the particles
of snow, or perhaps even the shining molecules radiating
from the sun, the stars and other luminaries. But among
these learned men, who could possibly count the
unlimited transcendental qualities possessed by You, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who have descended onto
the surface of the Earth for the benefit of all living
entities?*]

Lord Brahmā’s prayer

in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.7


jānanta eva jānantu

kiṁ bahūktyā na me prabho

manaso vapuṣo vāco

vaibhavaṁ tava go-caraḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.38)


[Lord Brahmā declared: “There are people who say, ‘I
know everything about Kṛṣṇa.’ Let them think that way.
As far as I am concerned, I do not wish to speak very
much about this matter. O my Lord, let me say this much:
As far as Your opulences are concerned, they are all
beyond the reach of my mind, body, and words.” *]

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:


                            233
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva, what part of the Eleventh Canto would
you like to cover next in your classes here?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I will briefly discuss the entire Eleventh Canto. I will
especially discuss the instructions of Kṛṣṇa in Uddhava-
saṁvāda (The conversion between Kṛṣṇa and Uddhava). But
I will discuss only the most important parts, like the
chapter describing the twenty-four gurus. Kṛṣṇa gave
many instructions about varṇa and āśrama dharma for
gṛhasthas and renunciants, and other elevated subjects
as well.

Kamala-kānta dāsa (from Germany):

When will your translations of the Tenth, Eleventh, and
Twelfth Cantos of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam be completed?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

It will take some time, but work is going on. First we
will complete the Tenth Canto, and then gradually the
others. Whatever Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja has
left for me as his remnants, I must do that.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Will you give your own commentaries on those Cantos?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I will give the commentary of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura, but in some places I will add my
mood.

Abhirāma dāsa:

In your class last night, you said that in Kali-yuga we
are not held responsible for the bad thoughts of the
mind. Yet, in one of your purports on Manaḥ-śikṣā, you
explain that due to offenses committed by the mind it
will take many lifetimes to attain perfection. How do we
reconcile this? Are we responsible for offenses
committed by the mind?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is he asking?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

You said in your class that if someone in Kali-yuga is
thinking of committing a sin, there is no reaction.
Conversely, if one thinks of doing something good, one
gets benefit from that thought. However, you state in
the Manaḥ-śikṣā that if one commits offenses in the
mind, he cannot attain kṛṣṇa-prema for many lifetimes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Manaḥ-śikṣā has warned us to be careful. In all other

                          234
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Purāṇas it has been told that if you think bad thoughts,
you will not be accountable for those thoughts, but this
is referring to sinful thoughts, not to offensive
thoughts. Regarding sins, if you think about hurting or
killing someone, you will not have to suffer the fruit
of having performed that activity.

If one commits offenses in the mind, he may manifest
that action externally, and that is another reason that
śāstra has warned against it. It is said that one should
not imitate Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā, not even by mind.


naitat samācarej jātu

manasāpi hy anīśvaraḥ

vinaśyaty ācaran mauḍhyād

yathārudro ‘bdhi-jaṁ viṣam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.30)


[One should never imitate the behavior of great persons.
If out of foolishness an ordinary person imitates such
behavior (i.e. Kṛṣṇa’s dancing with the gopīs), even
mentally, he is doomed; just as one who imitates Rudra
by swallowing an ocean of poison.]

Although mental sins do not affect us, we should not
perform sins even in our mind. If we dwell on such acts,
we may end up engaging in them externally.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Are you saying, then, that we will not get a reaction
for mental sin, but we will get some reaction for mental
aparādha?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. Aparādha is different; it is very dangerous.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

One of the six types of offenses to a Vaiṣṇava is not
being happy to see him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

That is an offense committed in the mind, and another
offense is being angry upon seeing a Vaiṣṇava.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Devotee:


                             235
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

Doubt is also a mental state.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Doubt is also bad.


ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca

saṁśayātmā vinaśyati

nāyaṁ loko ‘sti na paro

na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (4.40)


[But ignorant and faithless persons who doubt the
revealed scriptures do not attain God consciousness;
they fall down. For the doubting soul there is happiness
neither in this world nor in the next.*]

Aniruddha dāsa:

Gurudeva, when the soul achieves the four perfections in
the Vaikuṇṭha planets, namely sālokya, sāmīpya, sārūpya,
and sārṣṭi (living on the same planet as the Lord,
becoming His associate, having a similar form as His,
and possessing similar opulences), is there a
possibility of receiving a female form? Or, does one
only receive a male form there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja] What is the answer?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

I can only guess, Śrīla Gurudeva, because I have never
heard this answer. I would say that it is possible for
them to get either a male or female form.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is not that it is possible. It is for sure.

Aniruddha dāsa:

If that is the case, do the males and females in
Vaikuṇṭha get married and reproduce? A devotee told me
that there is transcendental family-life in Vaikuṇṭha.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

These are not good questions, and there is no need to
think about this. We should discuss what is real, what
we see in śāstra.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

This is described in the Third Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, when Lord Brahmā has a vision of Vaikuṇṭha.
It is described that the residents of Vaikuṇṭha, male

                            236
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

and female, ride together on bejewelled airplanes. They
sit side by side and are both very beautiful, but there
is no mundane lust.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There is no marriage in Goloka Vṛndāvana; Kṛṣṇa and the
gopīs are not married. There is no marriage even in
Dvārakā-puri in Goloka. Everyone is eternal there, so
when will they get married? If there is birth, then
gradually there will be childhood and then youth, at
which time marriage will take place. But there is no
birth or death in Goloka.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, in bhauma-līlā (Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
performed in this material world), the sādhaka jīva who
reaches perfection has the opportunity to take birth
from the womb of a vraja-gopī. You are saying that this
is not the case in nitya-dhāma (Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
performed in the spiritual world)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is correct. There is no birth or death there; the
original age is teen-age.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Yesterday some of us were discussing Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta, and a question came up regarding whether
or not there is evidence in śāstra that the jīva has
fallen from Goloka or Vaikuṇṭha. One devotee said he had
asked a scholar in ISKCON, Kuśakrata dāsa, who has now
passed away and who has translated many of the Gosvāmī’s
books. Kuśakratha replied that there is evidence in
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. He said that when Gopa Kumāra
arrived in Goloka, Kṛṣṇa received him, saying, “O my
friend, you were lost for so long. Where were you?”
Kuśakratha cited this as the evidence that the jīva left
Kṛṣṇa’s līlā and is now returning.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, no. The author of Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī, has personally written an explanation
to that exchange between Kṛṣṇa and Gopa Kumāra. They
should read Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s explanation, not
only his translation. Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
and all other such scriptures are evidence of the fact
that the jīva does not fall from Vaikuṇṭha or Goloka.17
Kṛṣṇa comes to this world from Goloka. His associates
also come from Goloka or Vaikuṇṭha, and therefore, when
they manifest in this world, their birth here is only a
play. Any associate of the Lord may come from there and
play in that way. It is they who have come from
Vaikuṇṭha and again have ‘gone back.’ This does not
apply to conditioned souls; it is only for liberated
persons.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Seeing Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā may say to Lalitā, “Who is

                            237
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

this boy? I have never seen Him before.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This does not mean that Rādhikā never met Kṛṣṇa before,
or that Kṛṣṇa was not previously present before Her.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Śrīla Prabhupāda told his disciples not to try to learn
Sanskrit, because if people get a little bit of
knowledge in it, they will make mistakes. He said that
translation of Sanskrit is not a matter only of
intellectual knowledge, but a matter of revelation from
the mind of the sādhus.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

His instruction was for ignorant persons, especially for
those in Western countries. They would have to do a lot
to learn Sanskrit. In India, however, devotees learn
Sanskrit from the beginning of their lives. Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was a scholar from birth,
and he is mahā-mahā-mahopadhyāya, the topmost learned
ācārya. For such devotees it is not bad to learn
Sanskrit. They can do so.

Prāṇa-govinda dāsa:

I was talking with Hṛdayānanda Mahārāja of the GBC a
couple of weeks ago. I asked him why he stated that
Tulasī-devī fell down from the spiritual world, since
she is an expansion of svarūpa-śakti, which can never be
under māyā. It would be considered Māyāvada philosophy
to say that she fell.

Hṛdayānanda Mahārāja replied, “What are you talking
about? Śrīla Prabhupāda said I can go outside and find
references from different scriptures to use for my own
writings. So I did.”

Then I asked him, “Is there any reference of Śrīla
Prabhupāda or any other ācārya that will support what
you just said?” He said, “I found it in Brahma-vaivarta
Purāṇa, and that is enough for me.” Then I replied,
“Isn’t māyā-śakti a shadow potency of svarūpa-śakti?“ He
replied, “I have never heard that word, svarūpa-śakti.”
This is why he wrote in the GBC book about the jīvas
falling from Vaikuṇṭha – based on that.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Never, never. The jīvas have never fallen from Goloka
Vṛndāvana.

Prāṇa-govinda dāsa:

But he said he translated that pastime from the original
Sanskrit.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Never, never, never [meaning that the understanding was
inaccurate].

                          238
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Nṛhari dāsa:

Gurudeva, to confirm what you were saying, it was for
the purpose of pastimes that Jalandara and Tulasī came
from the spiritual world?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. What is the harm in their coming here? They came
here to play. After all, Jalandhara is a manifestation
of Kṛṣṇa.

Jāhnavā-jīvana dāsa:

Śrīla Gour Govinda Mahārāja said that when someone in
Kali-yuga takes initiation, that person becomes situated
in Satya-yuga (by consciousness).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What he has told is okay, but we will have to think
further about this. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja
was a qualified guru who gave some persons sannyāsa.
Later on those sannyāsīs married and left their
devotional lives, discarding their tulasī-mālā, or neck-
beads. In that case, how are those sannyāsīs situated in
Satya-yuga?

Gokula dāsa:

I think my Guru Mahārāja’s quote about Satya-yuga is
originally from Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī – that if we take
dīkṣā in Mahāprabhu’s line, we are exempt from any
reaction to our bad thoughts. We are effectively in
Satya-yuga.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We can reconcile this. Dīkṣā is of two kinds: vidvad-
rūḍhī (with realization) and avidvad-rūḍhī (formality).
If the dīkṣā initiation is not vidvad-rūḍhī, it is not
dīkṣā in the true sense. Having received real dīkṣā, the
devotee realizes his relationship with Kṛṣṇa, at which
time all of his offenses and anarthas disappear.

In Kali-yuga, such real dīkṣā is very rare. We therefore
see that even though one has participated in the
official dīkṣā ceremony and has received the dīkṣā
mantras, if he is not realized and all of his offenses
have not gone, then his dīkṣā is not true (vidvad-
rūḍhī). Rather, such a person has merely entered the
school of dīkṣā, and he may still engage in nonsense
activities or mentalities. However, those who have
received vidvad-rūḍhī dīkṣā will never fall, and nothing
unfavorable to bhakti will even enter their minds. They
quickly progress.

Gokula dāsa:

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja was giving class yesterday,
about caitanya-līlā. He said that between Caitanya-
bhāgavata and Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Caitanya-caritāmṛta
is more sweet. Caitanya-bhāgavata contains more awe and

                          239
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

reverence.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, you are telling the opposite of reality. Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has written, “Śrī Vṛndāvana
dāsa Ṭhākura is Vyāsadeva. He has written Śrī Caitanya-
bhāgavata, the sweet pastimes of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and I am taking some remnant to write
Caitanya-caritāmṛta.” Caitanya-bhāgavata does not
include much philosophy (siddhānta). Relatively
speaking, Śrīla Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura has not given
importance to siddhānta, whereas Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī has emphasized it.

Gokula dāsa:

So, in the Navadvīpa pastimes described in Śrī Caitanya-
bhāgavata, there is more sweetness?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, because there is only līlā. As discussed in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, there is more siddhānta in
Mahāprabhu’s Purī pastimes, and still more siddhānta in
His pastimes on the bank of the Godāvarī.

Giridhārī dāsa:

Caitanya-bhāgavata describes how Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
went to Gayā and offered piṇḍa18 for His father, and
then came back to Navadvīpa. After that, in total, how
many years did He perform saṅkīrtana in Navadvīpa before
taking sannyāsa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is not written in śāstra, but you may know that He
performed navadvīpa-līlā until the age of twenty-four.
After His birth He could only perform His baby and
childhood pastimes (bālya-līlā), and then He performed
His pre-youth (paugaṇḍa-līlā) pastimes. After that He
went to Gayā, and when He returned, in the gap, before
taking sannyāsa, He performed saṅkīrtana.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Śrīla Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura did not mention
Mahāprabhu’s exact age when performing these activities.

Giridhārī dāsa:

Some people said that He performed saṅkīrtana for eleven
months, and others are saying it was for three years.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the use of thinking about this? Is there any
use? Why are you bothering your mind with this?

Devotee:

It is common practice that devotees take the ashes of
other devotees’ dead bodies to the Ganges or to

                            240
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Vṛndāvana. What is the connection between the soul and
the ashes? What is the soul’s benefit if the ashes of
his rejected body are thrown into the Ganges? Will this
do any good to the soul?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He benefits. It is mentioned in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that
Indra thought, “Sagara Mahārāja is performing
austerities for the purpose of taking my throne and
heavenly kingdom, so I must destroy him.” Indra thus
stole his horse that was meant for offering at an
aśvamedha-yajña (horse sacrifice19) and hid it in Kapila
Muni’s āśrama. The sons of Sagara Mahārāja searched
everywhere for that horse and finally found it there.
They accused Kapila Muni, and in return they were cursed
by him to burn to ashes. Then, after thousands of years,
their descendents sprinkled some water of the Ganges
upon their ashes and they were liberated. Ganges is the
foot-bathing water of Lord Vāmanadeva. One can get so
much benefit from her touch, even after thousands of
years.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Also, previously, the souls of the dead persons who are
not liberated identified with their bodies. Therefore,
even though their bodies become ashes when cremated,
those persons are somehow connected with their bodies
that are now in the form of ashes. This is another
reason that there is so much benefit.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

In order to progress from pravṛtti-mārga (the path of
materialism) to nivṛtti-mārga (the path of freedom from
materialism), one should follow Vedic and Tantric rules
and regulations. Can you please say something about
vaiṣṇava-tantra?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Vaiṣṇava-tantra refers to scriptures like Nārada-
pañcarātra, Gautamīya-tantra, and Parāśara-tantra. The
sages Nārada, Gautama, Parāśara, etc. have written these
scriptures, just as Śrīla Vyāsadeva wrote Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. These scriptures explain the regulations for
devotional activities like taking dīkṣā and performing
arcana of the Deities. ‘Vedic’ refers to scriptures like
the Upaniṣads, which gives training in good habits that
free one from the materialistic way of life; and
tāntrika especially refers to training in the rules and
regulations of activities like dīkṣā and arcana. Our
Gosvāmīs have said to follow both.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

The Rādhā-Kṛpā-Kaṭākṣa-Stava-Rāja is from a tantra.
These are prayers to Śrīmatī Rādhikā from Lord Śiva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I doubt that it was Śaṅkara who originally prayed this
stotra (hymn, or prayer), which is coming from ancient

                            241
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

times. I think that Nārada may have uttered it. [At
other times Śrīla Mahārāja said that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
is the author.]

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

What is the definition of tantra?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Tantra means jñāna, or knowl-edge. There are five kinds
of knowledge, and that is called pañcarātra. Rātra also
means ‘knowledge’ and pañca means ‘five.’20 Nārada
taught the five kinds of knowledge in his Nārada-
pañcarātra.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

The paths of pravṛtti-mārga and nivṛtti-mārga are both
described in the Vedas. Some devotees are thinking, “I
cannot come to nivṛtti-mārga unless I first follow
pravṛtti-mārga. I must first try to satisfy my material
desires.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Persons who think this way are foolish and ignorant.
They have already tasted all of these things in their
past hundreds of thousands of lives in different
species; not only in this human species.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

They have already tried to enjoy?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

Yes, so there is no need to pursue it relentlessly.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Prabhupāda Sarasvati Ṭhākura had so many disciples who
took the renounced order from him. According to the
Vedas, one should progress through the āśramas of
brahmacarya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, and sannyāsa. But
Prabhupāda’s disciples did not go through all those
stages. They took sannyāsa from him when they were still
in the brahmacārī-āśrama. Is this proper or not?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

One can take sannyāsa from the brahmacārī-āśrama. There
is no need of first becoming a gṛhastha or a
vānaprastha.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

There is another question that comes in many devotees’
minds. They think, “I am from a Western country, with so
many bad saṁskāras (impressions on the heart) from my
life prior to coming to Vaiṣṇava life. I must act
according to those saṁskāras. I have so many material

                            242
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

desires. Therefore, if I try to take brahmcarya or
sannyāsa now, this will be artificial and I will fall
down because I have not fulfilled my desires.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is also not a good idea to nurture.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Jagāi and Mādhāi had so many bad impressions on their
hearts. Do these devotees have more bad impressions than
Jagāi and Mādhāi? If Jagāi and Mādhāi were able to
benefit so much by their surrender and by Mahāprabhu’s
grace, why not the Westerners?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Miracles are performed by sādhu-saṅga. Those persons
only want to enjoy. They do not know that we are eternal
servants of Kṛṣṇa and that there is no happiness here in
the material world. They are ignorant, and therefore
their opinion has no value.




June 24, 2007


morning walk

Balarāma dāsa:

Can I ask you a question, Gurudeva? Tomorrow is nirjala
Ekādaśī (to be observed by full fasting, even from
water). If there were any defects in our following
Ekādaśīs during the year, how can we properly observe
this nirjala Ekādaśī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We should try to follow all Ekādaśīs. If there was a
defect in your observance of any previous Ekādaśīs,
simply continue practicing. By chanting nāma, everything
will be okay.

Balarāma dāsa:

Should one clean one’s teeth on nirjala Ekādaśī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why not? Should you not take bath?

Balarāma dāsa:

Bath is not drunk.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But somehow the water is entering your body.


                            243
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Of course, you must bathe, but do not take caraṇāmṛta on
that day; simply offer praṇāma to the caraṇāmṛta.

Balarāma dāsa:

What about ācamana?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Just touch the water to your lips.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

When you do ācamana, the water is supposed to go to your
heart. It says in the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa that the proper
way to do ācamana is like this (demonstrates) – like a
chicken.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have not seen this in any scripture.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

It also says that when you take ācamana, it has to come
into the body and purify the heart.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can take ācamana in that way on other days, but not
on Ekādaśī.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Actually, if we have somehow or other not observed other
Ekādaśīs, will observing nirjala Ekādaśī compensate?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have just answered this. You can compensate only by
harināma – not by properly following nirjala Ekādaśī.
You will have to follow every Ekādaśī. Only for Bhīma
was a concession given, only for him.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

We always understood that if someone does not observe
the other Ekādaśīs throughout the year, if he very
strictly follows Pāṇḍava nirjala Ekādaśī, then he won’t
get a bad reaction for not following all of the other
Ekādaśīs. Is this not true?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is not true at all.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

No, but we always thought this. Everyone thought this.

Nṛhari dāsa:

It is also stated in Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Svāmī’s book – the
book you told us not to read.

                            244
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are all wrong. ISKCON [the disciples of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, but not Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja personally] has discovered
this.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

They are doing this because of Bhīma.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are not Bhīma.

From ancient times up to the time of the six Gosvāmīs,
like Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, devotees used to
observe all Ekādaśīs as nirjala Ekādaśī, without taking
even water. Ambarīṣa Mahārāja observed each Ekādaśī for
three days: on the first day he controlled his eating;
on the second day he avoided eating and drinking
(nirjala); and on the third day he ate only once.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

The Pāṇḍavas used to regularly observe nirjala Ekādaśī,
but Bhīma once told Kṛṣṇa, “It is not possible for me to
do nirjala every time. Kṛṣṇa replied, “On other Ekādaśīs
you can take fruits and roots, but you must follow
nirjala on this one day.” Bhisma was thus permitted to
observe nirjala on this day alone, but he had to observe
all the other Ekādaśīs. This day is therefore called
Pāṇḍava nirjala Ekādaśī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In India, every Ekādaśī is generally observed without
food or water. Pūjyapāda Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja saw that the Western devotees were somewhat
weak, so he introduced a concession for them. He said
that they could take aṇukalpa (eating a little, just to
maintain one’s life) three times in the day. However,
instead of following aṇukalpa, they took ‘bṛhat-kalpa,’
eating and drinking as much as they could take. Do you
understand? This is not good.

Brajanāth dāsa:

They say that if they do not eat sufficiently, they
would not have any strength or power.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Bogus; that was the argument of Mohinī21.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, Śrīla Prabhupāda said that Kṛṣṇa will fulfill
a devotee’s desire for preaching only as much as that
devotee desires. How can we increase our desire for
preaching?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                            245
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


You can do so by following our paramparā. Śrī Nārada,
Śrīla Vyāsadeva, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the six
Gosvāmīs, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and all of
Mahāprabhu’s followers have personally performed
bhajana:


yāre dekha, tāre kaha ‘kṛṣṇa’-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra’ ei deśa

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 7.128)


[Instruct everyone to follow the orders of Lord Śrī
Kṛṣṇa as they are given in the Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. In this way become a spiritual master and
try to liberate everyone in this land.*]

This means that you must first become qualified, and
then you can teach and preach. If you are not personally
following, and you are not realizing anything, then what
can you preach?

By first knowing all siddhānta, all philosophical
conclusions, your preaching will be successful. We
should think, “Preaching is also a bhajana, so we must
preach.”

Preaching means to help others. In Bhagavad-gītā, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna, “Do not explain these truths to those
who are selfish, or to bad persons. Explain these truths
only to those who have a little faith.”22 In the
Bhāgavatam, Kṛṣṇa told Uddhava [in Uddhava-saṁvāda],
“What I am telling to you, do not tell it to those who
do not have strong faith.”23 Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has
also written this in his Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛta, and Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī has written this in his Ṣaṭ-sandarbha:
Those who have no śraddhā, or faith, should not read my
book.

We can read and hear if we have faith. If we think that
we will have enormous transcendental gain from such
reading or hearing, this means we have śraddhā.

Prana-govinda dāsa:

It is seen that Dhṛtarāṣṭra does not have very much
śraddhā, but Sañjaya still tells him what is happening
on the battlefield of Kurukṣetra.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Śrī Kṛṣṇa allowed that, and at last Vidura inspired
Dhṛtarāṣṭra to go to the forest, giving up every-thing.
Vidura took him to Haridvāra, where his body burned to
ashes.

Sañjaya had told Dhṛtarāṣṭra that, through himself,
Vyāsadeva allowed Dhṛtarāṣṭra to ‘see’ the events taking
place on the battle-field. This is because Vyāsadeva
considered, “Dhṛtarāṣṭra is a blind person. One day his
eyes should open. He should see that all of his sons –

                          246
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

whom he loved so much and had shown partiality in the
tension between the Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas – have died.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Dhṛtarāṣṭra wanted to see the Mahābhārata battle, and
therefore Vyāsadeva was going to give him the
transcendental vision to see it. But then Dhṛtarāṣṭra
said, “I will not be able to recognize anyone in the
battle, because I have never seen them. It is better
that Sañjaya be able to see what is happening, and he
can then narrate everything to me.” And Vyāsadeva did
just that.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Yaśodānanda dāsa] It is for this that I am
attracting you.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

I feel very attracted, Śrīla Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Somehow you are very lucky; your ‘everything’ is engaged
in Kṛṣṇa’s service.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, you mentioned to Giri Mahārāja on the
morning walk that preachers have five symptoms.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I told him, “Why have you shaved your face? No other
brahmacārī or sannyāsī has done this.” He said that he
shaved for preaching. Then I said, “We have not shaven,
but who is preaching more – you or us?” He admitted,
“You and all other sannyāsīs are preaching more than I
am.” Then I said, “If you shave in the future, I will
reject you.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Then you told him some symptoms of a preacher. You said
that the number of disciples will increase, and money
will come [meaning ‘the results of people’s energy will
be offered in Kṛṣṇa’s service’].

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If one is preaching, but those to whom he is preaching
are not inspired to take shelter of guru and initiation,
then his preaching is like zero.

Also, money will follow him. Vaiṣṇavas do not want
money, but still it will come. The success of one’s
preaching depends on how much he inspires others to take
harināma and thus make their lives successful. That
person is doing a high class of preaching.

I asked him, “What have you done? Nothing.”


                            247
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

I told him, “You preach, but no one is coming to take
harināma, so what is your preaching? How much money have
you given to me?”

He said, “Nothing.”

“So why are you preaching, and why have you shaved?”

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Some devotees think that there is no need for them to
preach yet, because they are not yet advanced. They
think, “First we will read and chant. Then, when we
become advanced, then we will preach.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They should enjoy the world, and then return to the
world. They should take birth after birth, and they
should suffer the pain of life and death.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

I see that you don’t accept their idea.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, how can we help fulfill Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s mission to make Kṛṣṇa
consciousness the worldwide religion?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We are doing this. Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura did this, and after him, Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja preached everywhere. Then,
what-ever Śrīla Svāmī Mahārāja left for me as his
remnants, I am taking and continuing his mission.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, one of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disciples,
Jayapatākā Svāmī, claims to have about 60,000 disciples.
Do we consider this to be a symptom of successful
preaching?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He himself does not chant, and he is not established in
bhakti. What to speak of him? In India there is a person
named Asaram Bapu, and he gives dīkṣā by phone to
thousands of people at a time. He has more disciples
than Jayapatākā Svāmī. Do you know Kṛpālu Mahārāja? He
is now is jail. He has millions of disciples.

Aniruddha dāsa:

Our Śrīla Prabhupāda wanted a planetarium to be
constructed in Māyāpura, and now the GBC has pledged to
construct it at the cost of about sixty million dollars.
They are doing this mostly in order to gather all of the
Prabhupāda disciples together, because they are seeing
that many devotees are fleeing ISKCON and coming to you.
Do you think we should support this project?

                          248
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why are you thinking about them? What is the use? Don’t
think about them.

Aniruddha dāsa:

But you said that successful preaching means ‘followers
and money.’

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

So follow me. Follow Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja
and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Why follow them, and why always
think about them? If you think about them, their bad
qualities may come to you.

What is the teaching in the story we told about the
female pigeon and male pigeon?

Devotee:

The human form of life is our chance to take up Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. It is not possible in any other form of
life; only in the human form. So…for the short
flickering time, so…I forgot.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I want to hear the story of the he pigeon and she
pigeon. I want Mahibharata prabhu to explain it. What is
the teaching behind this story?

Mahibharata dāsa:

The teaching behind this story is that one should not
become attached to one’s wife and family – and not to
even take a wife and family. Simply follow śrī gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The male pigeon was very attached to his wife, and he
considered that he could not survive without her.
Children also came, and then he became still more
attached. Death was waiting for him, but he could not
see it.

What became of them? Due to their ‘love’ for each other,
both were killed by the hunter. So, if you are attached
to ladies, your bhakti will be spoiled. You will be
worse than dead. Death is not bad. Worse than death, you
will undergo spiritual death, meaning diversion from
bhakti. Always think about this.

If you are telling this story and not realizing it, and
instead marrying again and again and maintaining a sense
of strong relations with children and wives, then your
bhakti comes to nothing.

Devotee:

[inaudible]


                          249
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

He is saying that although sannyāsa, or renunciation, is
encouraged, in practical life we see that householders
are more steady. They remain in household life and...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Your realization is zero. We follow the realization of
high-class bhaktas. Because you are a conditioned soul,
what you tell may be wrong.

Nirguṇa dāsa:

Last night I read that the self-realized souls find it
quite hilarious that the conditioned souls want to
marry, because in actuality we are all female.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I also say this. They are not realizing that they are
both female.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

We see many cases of god-brothers, older devotees, who
have been married once or twice, are now reaching the
age of fifty or fifty-five. They say that they must
again have a partner.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Be careful.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

They say that they want to have a companion. They don’t
want to have the sex life or children, but they want a
companion.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are speaking lies. They have so much lust and other
contaminations. Why do they not want guru companions or
high-class Vaiṣṇava companions?

Gokula dāsa:

Gurudeva, I am dying.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why?

Gokula dāsa:

It is natural that I am attached to my wife, because I
am a conditioned soul. I cannot stop this.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You may remain with your wife, no harm. But don’t be
attached. Moreover, regarding those who are not married,
they should be careful.

                          250
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017


Gokula dāsa:

But this attachment is natural because I am conditioned.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is not natural. We have seen that Mahārāja Janaka,
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, and others like them remain with their
entire families, but they are not attached. They support
their families out of a sense of duty, and they don’t
consider, “We cannot survive without our wives.”

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Many of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disciples have been following
you for some years, and they feel so much help and
inspiration from your association. We want everyone to
have a chance to hear what they are feeling, so we want
to record them speaking about their spiritual life – how
they have been helped by you in their relationship with
our Śrīla Prabhupāda as well as with you. Is this good?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is good.

Dhīra-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Was there any formal dīkṣā initiation in Satya-yuga?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why not? Brahmā took initiation from Kṛṣṇa, and Nārada
took initiation from Brahmā.

Dhīra-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

That was bhagavati-dīkṣā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Somehow they gave dīkṣā, as Vyāsadeva took dīkṣā from
Nārada. First of all, you must know the meaning of
dīkṣā.

Dhīra-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Divyaṁ jñānaṁ yato dadyāt.24

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

Does dīkṣā refer only to that mantra? What do you
understand by the word dīkṣā?

Dhīra-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

They will learn their relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Did they realize their relationship with Kṛṣṇa?

                            251
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Dhīra-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is dīkṣā. If they don’t realize their relationship
via the mantras, they have not actually received dīkṣā.
It is about vidvad-rūḍhī and avidvad-rūḍhī. Do you
under-stand?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes. Real dīkṣā occurs when we have taken complete
shelter of sādhu-saṅga and sad-guru, and when we receive
nourish-ment from them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The devotee has realization; this is dīkṣā. Dīkṣā is not
completed by only giving the mantra. Brahmā received
kāma-gāyatrī initiation by hearing the sound of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s flute.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, does it mean, then, that unless we have
realization of our svarūpa, our siddha-deha, we have not
completed the dīkṣā process?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We should know all tattvas, established truths, and be
situated in those tattvas. We should know our
relationship with Kṛṣṇa and our duty towards Him; we
should be established in that. This is real dīkṣā.

By avidvad-rūḍhī dīkṣā you are only entering in the
course of dīkṣā. If a young boy is admitted in a school,
he is a student, and a PhD is also a student, but there
is so much difference between the two. Similarly,
avidvad-rūḍhī dīkṣā is also dīkṣā, but it is the
entrance, and the other is real dīkṣā.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I have a question regarding rāgānuga-
bhakti. Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.15) says
rāga-mārga bhakti loke karite pracāraṇa, meaning that
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to preach rāga-mārga
bhakti. You have also said many times that Mahāprabhu
did not come to preach vaidhī-bhakti. Vaidhī-bhakti has
already been preached by other ācāryas in other ages.
Mahāprabhu has come to give rāga-mārga bhakti, and all
of our ācāryas in the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī are
trying to give it.

When a guru is teaching vaidhī-bhakti to the beginner
student, as Rūpa Gosvāmī taught it, is there a
difference between that vaidhī-bhakti which that
rūpānuga-ācārya is preaching and the vaidhī-bhakti which
was previously followed and preached?


                          252
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

The vaidhī-bhakti preached by Rāmānujācārya, Nimbāditya,
and Madhvācārya is different from the vaidhī-bhakti
preached by Mahāprabhu and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. If one
follows the principles of vaidhī-bhakti as taught by Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that devotee is in the beginning
stage of rāgānuga-bhakti. If one hears from Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta – Sanātana-śikṣā, Rūpa-śikṣā, and
Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda – his vaidhī-bhakti will turn
into rāgānuga-bhakti.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

You have told us that actual rāgānuga-sādhana-bhakti can
only be done in the stage of at least āsakti25.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When you have a real desire for perfection– real, not
artificial – then to follow bhakti means that āsakti has
come.

Giridhari dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, is the harināma-guru considered to be
the mantra-guru?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He is guru. Also, if that guru is qualified but he has
passed away from this world and his disciple took only
harināma from him, then the disciple will take dīkṣā
from a guru who is equal to that harināma-guru. The
dīkṣā-guru should be equal to the bona fide harināma-
guru, and in the same line.




* * *




1 An excerpt from Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja’s book Pinnacle of Devotion, from the section
called “The Glories of Sādhu-saṅga”:


There are two kinds of disciples, and therefore there
are two kinds of dīkṣā initiation – anuṣṭhānikī and
vidvad-rūḍhī. Anuṣṭhānikī refers to the external
formality of a fire yajña (fire sacrifice) and the
giving of dīkṣā (gāyatrī) mantras. If one thinks, ‘I
have sacrificed so much, my head is shaven, and I have
received my mantras; I am therefore initiated,’ this is
external. Of course, formal initiation is essential, but
it is not complete without vidvad-rūḍhī.


                          253
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Vidvad-rūḍhī refers to an internal initiation wherein
the disciple completely gives his heart at his guru’s
lotus feet, knowing that his guru will make him
qualified to serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Gurudeva
gives all kinds of divya-jñāna, transcendental
knowledge, about kṛṣṇa-tattva, guru-tattva, vaiṣṇava-
tattva, and prema-tattva.




2 Uttama-adhikārī, uttama-vaiṣṇava, and uttama-bhāgavata
are different terms for the topmost devotee.



3

“So, we are trying to follow Sanātana Gosvāmī by dīkṣā-
vidhānena, by initiating persons from anywhere. It does
not matter what is a person’s background” (Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. Lecture in Vṛndāvana,
India, October 27, 1972).


“So, this morning we are having an initiation ceremony
for some devotees. The initiation means beginning. The
Sanskrit name is dīkṣā” (Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja. Initiation lecture in Hyderabad, India, August
22, 1976).


“After association, the next stage is regulated life for
following the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. This is
called initiation… This is called dīkṣā” (Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. Initiation ceremony
lecture in Montreal, Canada, July 29, 1968).



4 As Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja said that Brahmā
and his associates attain the spiritual world only if
they are perfect in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja also wrote that in the
reference referred to in the text:


Bhagavad-gītā 8.16




From the highest planet in the material world down to
the lowest, all are places of misery wherein repeated
birth and death take place. But one who attains to My
abode, O son of Kunti, never takes birth again.*


Purport



(by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja)

                          254
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017



All kinds of yogīs – karma, jñāna, haṭha, etc. –
eventually have to attain devotional perfection in
bhakti-yoga, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, before they can go
to Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental abode and never return. Those
who attain the highest material planets, the planets of
the demigods, are again subjected to repeated birth and
death. As persons on Earth are elevated to higher
planets, people on higher planets such as Brahmaloka,
Candraloka, and Indraloka fall down to earth. The
practice of sacrifice called pañcāgni-vidyā, recommended
in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad, enables one to achieve
Brahmaloka, but if on Brahmaloka one does not cultivate
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then he must return to Earth. Those
who progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness on the higher
planets are gradually elevated to higher and higher
planets and at the time of universal devastation are
transferred to the eternal spiritual kingdom. Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣana, in his commentary on Bhagavad-gītā, quotes
this verse:


brahmaṇā saha te sarve

samprāpte pratisañcare

parasyānte kṛtātmānaḥ

praviśanti paraṁ padam


When there is devastation of this material   universe,
Brahmā and his devotees who are constantly   engaged in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness are all transferred to   the spiritual
universe and to specific spiritual planets   according to
their desires.




5

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.32.12–15




When the interaction of the three modes of material
nature begins, Brahmā, who is the creator of this cosmic
manifestation and who is full of Vedic knowledge, and
the great sages, who are the authors of the spiritual
path and the yoga system, come back under the influence
of the time factor. They are liberated by their non-
fruitive activities and they attain the first
incarnation of the puruṣa (Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu), but at
the time of creation they come back in exactly the same
forms and positions as they had previously.*

Purport




                          255
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

(by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja)


Sometimes Brahmā thinks that he is independent of the
Supreme Lord, and the worshiper also thinks that Brahmā
is independent. For this reason, after the destruction
of this material world, when there is again creation by
the interaction of the material modes of nature, Brahmā
comes back. Although Brahmā reaches the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as the first puruṣa incarnation,
Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is full with transcendental qualities,
he cannot stay in the spiritual world.




6 Virajā – literally, ‘free from the influence of rajo-
guṇa, the material mode of passion.’ The Virajā,
sometimes referred to as the River Virajā, is the
boundary between the material and spiritual worlds.



7 In the following excerpt, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja again confirms Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja’s statement that Brahmā and his associates go
to the spiritual world only if they are perfect in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. We again and again see that it is
supremely beneficial for us to understand the teachings
of Śrīla Prabhupāda under the guidance of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja:



Purport to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.1.1



(by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja)



Bhakti-yoga itself is so powerful that even an impious
man with no assets in karma-yoga or an illiterate with
no assets in jñāna-yoga can undoubtedly be elevated to
the spiritual world if he simply adheres to bhakti-yoga.
Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (8.7) that by the process of
bhakti-yoga one undoubtedly goes back to Godhead, back
home to the spiritual world. Yogis, however, instead of
going directly to the spiritual world, sometimes want to
see other planetary systems, and therefore they ascend
to the planetary system where Lord Brahmā lives, as
indicated here by the word brāhmaṇa. At the time of
dissolution, Lord Brahmā, along with all the inhabitants
of Brahmaloka, goes directly to the spiritual world.
This is confirmed in the Vedas as follows:


brahmaṇā saha te sarve

samprāpte pratisañcare

parasyānte kṛtātmānaḥ

                          256
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


praviśanti paraṁ padam


Because of their exalted position, those who are on
Brahmaloka at the time of dissolution go directly back
home, back to Godhead, along with Lord Brahmā.




8 Karma-yoga is the path to God realization through
dedication of the fruits of one’s work to God.

Jñāna-yoga is the process of spiritual elevation based
on philosophical introspection and cultivation of
knowledge.

Aṣṭāṅga-yoga is the yoga system, consisting of eight
parts: yama (control of the senses), niyama (control of
the mind), āsana (bodily postures), prāṇāyma (breath
control), pratyāhāra (withdrawal of the mind from
sensory perception), dhāraṇā (steadying the mind),
dhyāna (meditation), and samādhi (deep and unbroken
absorption on the Lord in the heart).



9 Excerpts from The Hidden Path of Devotion, Chapter 3:


Which limbs are practiced in rāgānuga-bhakti? Which are
essential and which are disregarded? To answer this,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has described five
categories of devotional practices for a person with
genuine greed:

Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī: absorption in one’s siddha-bhāva –
the mood of a manjarī.

Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-sambandhī: those practices related to
one’s cherished mood. Such practices surely deliver the
desired goal.

Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-anukūla: those practices which are
favourable to one’s cherished mood.

Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-aviruddha: those practices which are
neutral, neither favorable nor opposed to one’s desired
mood.

Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-viruddha: those practices which are
detrimental to the attainment of one's desired mood.




… First is abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī, and then bhāva-sambandhī.
The practices of bhāva-sambandhī are superior to those
of nimitta-kāraṇa, which are bhāva-anukūla. The bhāva-
sambandhī practices are the mūla-kāraṇa, the main cause,
in the development of abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī. Ekādaśī,
Janmāṣṭamī etc. are secondary.

                          257
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


The injunction that Ekādaśī is secondary is for a person
who gives stress to Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī, and Rāma-
navamī, but who is not hearing harikathā, chanting, and
remembering Kṛṣṇa.

What is the harm in neglecting Ekādaśī? For one who has
greed and is so engaged in bhāva-mayī or bhāva-sambandhī
that he is unaware of his external surroundings, there
is no harm. Vaṁśīdāsa Bābājī Mahārāja is an example of
this. He was observing Ekādaśī for three or four days,
on Aṣṭamī (the eighth lunar day) and Navamī (the ninth
lunar day). Then, on Ekādaśī, the eleventh lunar day, he
was completely unaware of the day due to being absorbed
in internal consciousness. Similarly, Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī would be internally absorbed in remembering
his services in the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa for many
days, and Ekādaśī would pass by at that time. Because
these two mahā-bhāgavatas (topmost selfrealized
devotees) were performing rāgānuga-bhajana, there was no
harm in their missing Ekādaśī. However, if one misses
Ekādaśī when one is externally conscious, this would be
very harmful for his bhakti.

… First I explained abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī, which may be in
a ripe or unripe stage. In the stage of sādhana it is
the absorption in one’s internal identity as a gopī
while still having a material body, and in the siddha
stage one actually becomes a gopī. In both cases, it is
abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī. Next is bhāva-sambandhī upādāna-
kāraṇa. These are activities that must be performed,
like hearing and remembering. These practices must not
be neglected for any reason. Regarding nimitta-kāraṇa
practices, if we cannot follow them under certain
circumstances, it is not harmful. Therefore, they are
considered secondary.

Observing the vow of Kārtika may fall in the category of
either upādāna-kāraṇa or nimitta-kāraṇa. When it is
followed simply in accordance with the rules of
renunciation such as avoiding certain foods and
activities, then it is in the category of nimitta-
kāraṇa. When it is followed in accordance with the
principles of hearing and chanting the names and glories
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then it is in the
category of upādāna-kāraṇa and is bhāva-sambandhī. If
austerities are observed during the month of Kārtika,
that is good, but śravaṇam and kīrtanam during Kārtika
must not be neglected.


… Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Applying gopī-candana-tilaka and nāma-mudrā (stamping
the names of Kṛṣṇa on one’s body), which are nimitta-
kāraṇa, are in the category of bhāva-anukūla, which is
the third of the five limbs of rāgānuga-bhakti. First is
bhāva-mayī, second is bhāva-sambandhī, and third is
bhāva-anukūla. Anukūla means ‘favorable.’ Practices in
the category of bhāva-anukūla begin with worship of
Tulasī-devī by offering her obeisances, watering her,
and doing parikramā (circumambulating her). These
practices are favorable, and should therefore be
performed. Other practices include the worship of cows,

                          258
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Dhātrī (Myrobalan) trees, Aśvattha (Banyan) trees, and
offering respect to brāhmaṇas.

Do you understand? These are among the sixty-four
varieties of bhakti listed in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu and
are somewhat favorable and beneficial. We follow the
instructions of Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his Śrī
Manaḥ-śikṣā: “Sujane bhūsura-gaṇe – honoring even
brāhmaṇas who are not single-pointed in worship of
Kṛṣṇa, and who may be engaged in demigod worship.” At
the same time, if a rāgānuga Vaiṣṇava has no time for
these practices there is no harm, because they are
nimitta-kāraṇa. So, all of these are bhāva-anukūla; they
are favorable. Do you understand?


Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja:

Favorable, but not essential.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, not essential.

Next is bhāva-aviruddha – not unfavorable and not
favorable.

… Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has said that for
the rāgānuga-bhakta, although śravaṇam, kīrtanam, and
smaraṇam are superior, the management needed for
arranging the kīrtana is not less important.


… Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja:

Does management come in the category of bhāva-aviruddha?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

To understand, let us take this example. You are
preaching, managing, and holding meetings; you are going
here and there in order to promote nāma-saṅkīrtana.
There is no alternative – you must perform these duties.
At the same time, it is essential to internally maintain
a certain mood while engaging in these activities. When
that mood is present, there is no harm in executing
these activities, as they are favorable for rāgānuga-
bhakti.

The fifth category for rāgānuga-sādhakas is bhāva-
viruddha. The activities to be rejected are:
Ahaṅgrahopāsanā (considering oneself to be non-different
from the object of worship); kara-nyāsa (assigning the
syllables of the mantra to the fingers); mudrās (various
procedures of intertwining the fingers during worship);
and dvārakā- and mahiṣī-dhyāna (meditation on Kṛṣṇa’s
Dvārakā pastimes and worship of His queens). The
previously mentioned practices, those in the category of
bhāva-aviruddha, may be helpful, but these are directly
harmful and should be rejected.

… One should respect all the limbs of bhakti, beginning

                           259
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

with śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇu-smaraṇaṁ, but among all the
limbs, smaraṇam, meditation on Kṛṣṇa, is the goal.
Āsakti (attachment) is of two kinds: āsakti for the
limbs of sādhana (devotional practices leading to the
goal), and āsakti for Kṛṣṇa and His associates. Both are
good, but in later development, āsakti in śravaṇam,
kīrtanam, and all such practices of sādhana-bhakti will
transform into āsakti for remembering Kṛṣṇa and His
associates. In this way, āsakti begins as bhāva-anukūla
(activities that are favorable for rāgānuga-bhakti) and
later on becomes bhāva-mayī (complete absorption in
one’s cherished mood).




10 In this morning walk, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahāraja
is speaking about a truly advanced rāgānuga sādhaka The
following are excerpts from a lecture given in Germany
dated July 8 2007, in which he warns his audience for
imitation of this advanced stage, and giving up the
regulative principles of bhakti in the name of following
rāgānuga-bhakti:




Nowadays, especially in European countries and in
Russia, devotees think they are very ‘rasika’. They want
rasa (the taste of spiritual mellows). They want to go
up to the top of the tree of prema at once. They only
want mādanākhya-bhāva (the highest ecstatic devotional
love, situated only in Śrīmatī Rādhikā). They do not
want to follow vaidhī-bhakti. They don’t like vaidhī-
bhakti.

This idea is very dangerous, so be very careful about
this. Those who have these ideas are nonsense sahajiyā-
vaiṣṇavas.

… When one has no rāga (attachment to Kṛṣṇa and
absorption in His service), one may read from the
scriptures that he should engage in bhakti to Kṛṣṇa, and
if he does not do this, he must go to hell. If one thus
engages his mind in bhakti by this fear, his activity is
called vaidhī-bhakti.

What is rāga? What is the meaning of rāga? Rāga refers
to the love for Kṛṣṇa that is present in the residents
of Goloka Vṛndāvana – in Subala and Śrīdāmā, in Nanda
Bābā and Yaśodā-maiyā, and especially in Lalitā,
Viśākhā, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Rāga means ‘spontaneous
attachment to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.’ It is the love by which the
Vrajavāsīs serve Kṛṣṇa and control Him. This is rāga,
and the person who has this rāga is called rāgātmikā.

One may develop greed to follow these rāgātmikā
associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa by hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
from a bona fide guru or Vaiṣṇava, and then desiring to
serve Kṛṣṇa like Subala, Śrīdāmā, and Madhumaṅgala, or
like Mother Yaśodā.


                          260
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

… We should know all these truths.


śāstroktayā prabalayā tat-tan-maryādayānvitā

vaidhī bhaktir iyaṁ kaiścin maryādā-mārga ucyate

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.269)


[Devotional service governed by the rules and
regulations of the scriptures is also called maryāda-
mārga, or the reverential path of devotion, the path of
serving the Lord in opulence, by different scholars
(such as Vallabhācārya).]

Śrīla Vallabhācārya has explained about devotional
etiquette and regulations (maryāda). Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
gives us this instruction: śravaṇam (hearing), kīrtanam
(chanting), smaraṇam (remembering), pāda-sevanam
(serving the lotus feet), arcanam (worshiping), vandanam
(praying), dāsyam (becoming a servant), sakhyam
(becoming a friend), ātma-nivedanam (surrendering
everything), constitute the nine limbs of vaidhī-bhakti.

There are also five limbs of bhakti that are most
important: sādhu-saṅga (association with devotees),
bhāgavata-śravaṇa (hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam), mathurā-
vāsa (living in Mathurā), nāma-kīrtana (chanting the
holy name), and śrī-mūrtira śraddhāya sevana (worshiping
the deity with faith and veneration).

If we follow these without offense, we will attain
prema-bhakti (pure transcendental love of Śrī Kṛṣṇa)
very soon.

… Simply telling others, “I have greed,” will not do. If
one says, “I don’t want to do any vaidhī-bhakti. There
is no need to follow vaidhī-bhakti,” this is against
śāstra.


śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir utpātāyaiva kalpate

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.101)


[Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the
authorized Vedic literatures like the Upaniṣads,
Purāṇas, Nārada-pañcarātra, etc., is simply an
unnecessary disturbance in society.]

Those who don’t follow the rules and regulations of
bhakti are completely independent and whimsical. They
don’t want to follow. They don’t want to accept any
inconveniences or suffering in the execution of vaidhī-
bhakti. They want to jump at once to the top of the tree
of bhakti. They want only rādhā-dāsyam and mañjarī-bhāva
(direct, personal service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā in the
secluded grove).

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has stated (from the Śrutis and Smṛti

                          261
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

śāstras) that there are sixty-four limbs of bhakti, and
the first ten limbs are especially important. First
comes guru-padāśraya. One must first accept harināma
initiation, and then dīkṣā-mantra initiation. One must
learn how to do bhakti, and learn what is bhakti, what
is not bhakti, what is sakāma-bhakti (the performance of
bhakti for the purpose of satisfying material desires),
niṣkāma-bhakti (the performance of bhakti without
desires for material results), nirguṇa-bhakti (devotion
that is unaffected by the qualities of material nature),
uttama-bhakti (pure devotional service), āropa-siddha-
bhakti (activities which are not pure bhakti, but are
designated as bhakti due to their being offered to the
Supreme Lord), saṅga-siddha-bhakti (endeavors that are
associated with, or favorable to the development of
bhakti but are not of themselves purely composed of
bhakti), svarūpa-siddha-bhakti (endeavors that are
purely constituted of devotional service).

Aspiring devotees should know all these truths;
otherwise they will perform bhakti which is actually not
bhakti. Those who don’t want to follow these principles
are stupid and nonsense. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja used these words; I am simply repeating his
words. So be very careful.

… Always be careful in this regard. The people who deny
the importance of observing the principles of vaidhī-
bhakti do not want to follow, but you must first follow
vaidhī-bhakti. If you read Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta under
the guidance of a rasika Vaiṣṇava, your vaidhī-bhakti
will automatically turn into rāgānuga-bhakti. This is
the process.




11 Kārtika-vrata is a one month vow (usually in October–
November) to follow certain regulations, restrict the
intake of certain foodstuffs, visit the pastimes places
of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, not criticizing others, etc.



12 Cāturmāsya-vrata is a four-month vow (usually from
July–August till October–November) that also includes
restricting the intake of certain foodstuffs.



13 Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja explained elsewhere
that these great personalities were not actually
defeated by Cupid; rather, they played that pastime in
order to teach us conditioned souls how careful we must
be in this regard.



14 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
lecture in Kijkduin, Holland, on July 12, 2005:


Some people think that śūdras and women are very low.

                          262
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

This is actually a wrong idea – a very wrong idea. You
should know you are neither male nor female. The soul is
transcendental, a servant of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but we have
now accepted a female or male form. It is not that the
intelligence is low in ladies and high in men.

It is also not true that black people are necessarily
śūdras. Who are śūdras? Those who eat cow-flesh and
drink alcohol, and those who cheat others. Śūdras are
those engaged in diplomacy, duplicity, hypocrisy, and
envy – whether they are black or white. I will speak
something more on this topic, with reference to Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.

We are all spirit souls. The soul is not white or black.
All souls are very beautiful. Regarding the
transcendental form of the soul, there is no question of
who is less intelligent or more intelligent. If ladies
are so low-class and so low in intelligence, how could
the gopīs have defeated even Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa? Why does
our guru-paramparā, beginning from Brahmā and Nārada,
worship the gopīs? Why did Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu – Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Himself – adopt Śrīmatī Rādhā’s mood? Śrīmatī
Rādhikā always defeats Kṛṣṇa in beauty, in intelligence,
and in all other ways. If ladies are less, why do we
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas want to be gopīs? We want to serve
Lord Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā in a female form, not a
male form. So how is it possible that this female form
is lower? Don’t think like this.

Śrīla Vyāsadeva appeared in a family of śūdras, and Śrī
Nārada Ṛṣi was also born in a śūdra-family. However,
whoever calls them śūdras will go to hell. Śrīla
Haridāsa Ṭhākura was born in a Muslim family. He
appeared in a family in which cows were slaughtered and
their flesh eaten, but he is not a Muslim.

Rāmānanda Rāya said about himself, ‘I am śūdra.’ This is
tṛṇād api sunīcena – humility. Mahāprabhu said about
Himself, ‘I am a Māyāvādī sannyāsī.’ Was He a Māyāvādī
sannyāsī? Of course not. One may say that He Himself
said so, but He said so only out of tṛṇād api sunīcena.




15 “For preaching we give young boys sannyāsa, but
actually it is being experienced that they are not fit
for sannyāsa. There is no harm, however, if one thinks
that he is unfit for sannyāsa; if he is very much
agitated sexually, he should go to the āśrama where sex
is allowed, namely the gṛhastha-āśrama” (Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. Purport to Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 8.2.30).



16 A yuga is one age within a cycle of four ages, which
rotate like calendar months in the life of a universe.
They are named Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, and Kali. Each age
has consecutively less good qualities, longevity,
auspiciousness, etc.


                          263
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



17 For more information on this subject, one can
download Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s book, Journey
of the Soul, from www.purebhakti.com.



18 Śrāddha is a ceremony in honor of and for the benefit
of deceased relatives, in which the forefathers are
offered piṇḍa. Generally, piṇḍa is an offering of small
balls of rice cooked in milk with black sesame, ghee,
and honey. The offering is made to the deceased and his
forefathers, in order for the deceased to attain a body
suitable for enjoyment in Pitṛloka.



19 Aśvamedha-yajña is a horse-sacrifice of antiquity in
which vast wealth is spent. Formerly the brāhmaṇas were
so highly qualified by purity and in the skill of
chanting mantras that the life of the animal would be
rejuvenated. By performing one hundred such sacrifices
one could attain the post of Indra. This sacrifice is
forbidden in the age of Kali as there are no qualified
brāhmaṇas to perform it properly.



20 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
lecture in Singapore, on February 13, 2001:


There are five kinds of knowledge: pratyakṣa, parokṣa,
aparokṣa, adhokṣaja, and aprākṛta. The knowledge of
everything we see and realize by our direct experience
is called pratyakṣa; this is false knowledge.

Next is parokṣa. We don’t see Svarga, the heavenly
planets, but we believe in them. We hear that if a man
is a thief, a dacoit, a debauchee, and so on, he will
have to go to hell. On the other hand, if he is pious,
he will go to the heavenly planets and there he will be
very happy. This knowledge is called parokṣa.

Next is aparokṣa, as taught by Śaṅkarācārya. This is the
knowledge of impersonal Brahman, the idea that God is
impersonal and that we are all non-different from God in
all respects.

Adhokṣaja is the knowledge of Vaikuṇṭha, the awareness
that there is a place beyond time, where there is only
the eternal present. In Vaikuṇṭha there is no birth and
death, no suffering and sorrows. In that abode there is
so much opulence, and everyone there prays to Nārāyaṇa.

There is something higher than this, however, the most
superior truth, which is called aprākṛta. Aprākṛta is
knowledge of that realm where vraja-līlā is performed.
There, Kṛṣṇa is sometimes like a baby. There He is
controlled by His father and mother, His beloved gopīs,
and His friends. No one can ever imagine such very, very
sweet pastimes. We must try to know this aprākṛta. This
is the aim and object of our life – service to this

                          264
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Kṛṣṇa. This is aprākṛta-jñāna.




21 Mohinī was the enchanting and alluring female
creation of Brahmā who tested King Citrāṅga, a
determined follower of Ekādaśī.



22 “This confidential knowledge may never be explained
to those who are not austere, or devoted, or engaged in
devotional service, nor to one who is envious of Me”
(Bhagavad-gītā 18.67).



23 “You should not share this instruction with anyone
who is hypocritical, atheistic or dishonest, or with
anyone who will not listen faithfully, who is not a
devotee, or who is simply not humble” * (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 11.29.30).



24 This is the first line of the definition śloka of
dīkṣā. This verse was quoted by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (2.9), and later expanded upon by
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in Bhakti-sandarbha (283):


divyaṁ jñānaṁ yato dadyāt

kuryāt pāpasya saṅkṣayam

tasmāt dīkṣeti sā proktā

deśikais tattva-kovidaiḥ


That spiritual undertaking which awakens divya-jñāna
(transcendental knowledge) and destroys all sinful
reactions at the root is called dīkṣā by authorities
learned in the Absolute Truth.



25 Āsakti is deep attachment for the Lord and His
eternal associates. Āsakti occurs when ones liking for
bhajana leads to a direct attachment for the person who
is the object of that bhajana. This is the seventh stage
in the development of the creeper of devotion, and it is
awakened upon the maturing of one’s taste for bhajana.




July 9, 2007


morning walk

                            265
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Are there any questions?

Prakasātma dāsa:

Yesterday you were talking about Śuka, the parrot of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. When he was born as Śukadeva Gosvāmī
from the womb of Śrīla Vyāsadeva’s wife, he was already
situated in Brahman realization. He didn’t see the
difference between male and female, or even between
humans and trees. Then he heard Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for
the third time. Why is this?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Śukadeva heard Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for the first time from
Śaṅkara (Lord Śiva).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, no, no. Since Śukadeva is the parrot of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, he already knows everything – more so than
Śaṅkara and others.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Since that is the case, then when he was in the womb,
why did he have only Brahman realization (realization of
all-pervading spirit beyond matter)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

A mother knows everything about her house and family.
Still, when she hears from her son, “Oh, my maternal
uncle’s house is like this. He has good horses,” she
becomes happy. Similarly, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who in
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is the parrot of Śrīmatī Rādhikā named
Śuka, knows more than Śaṅkara. He went to Kailāsa only
to relish the sweet pastimes again.

Brajanāth dāsa:

But when he was in his mother’s womb, before hearing
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from Vyāsadeva, he only had brahma-
jñāna (Brahman realization, or knowledge of the
impersonal Absolute Truth).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

No, no, no. Because he is a partici-pant in Rādhā’s
pastimes, he knows everything and has full realiza-tion
of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Why would he taste only brahma-
jñāna?

We can compare Śuka’s pastimes with those of Sītā and
Rāma, or Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa. Sītā is the personification
of Śrī Rāma’s power, hlādinī-śakti, and thus non-
different from Rāma. So, one might ask what was the

                           266
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

necessity of her marrying Him? The answer is that she
married Him in order to enact her beautiful human-like
pastimes with Him.

Similarly, Śukadeva Gosvāmī was playing a role, for
show. It was a show. He wanted to demonstrate to the
world that Kṛṣṇa’s sweet pastimes are so powerful and
attractive that even a brahma-jñānī (one who is beyond
material considerations and is situated in
transcendence) is attracted by them:


ātmārāmāś ca munayo

nirgranthā apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim

ittham-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.7.10)


[Those who are satisfied within and who are most
fortunate can become attracted by the qualities of Śrī
Bhagavān if they receive the causeless mercy of Śrī
Bhagavān and His devotees. They can then become absorbed
in relishing the sweetness of bhakti-rasa by engaging in
causeless devotion (ahaitukī bhakti) to Him.]

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, yesterday you were stressing the
necessity of vaidhī-bhakti. You were saying that many
persons are not following vaidhī-bhakti, yet they want
to achieve rāgānuga-bhakti.

What about those persons who are chanting and following
all the principles of vaidhī-bhakti, but always want to
hear rasa-kathā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

To have this greed is good; very, very good. It is an
elevated aspiration:


kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ

krīyatāṁ yadi kuto ’pi labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.70)


[If consciousness which is infused with the mood of the
gopīs’ love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is available anywhere, then
buy it at once, without delay. The only price to get it
is laulyam, an intense longing to obtain vraja-bhāva.
Without this divine greed, such love cannot be obtained
even by performing pious activities (karma-miśra-bhakti

                             267
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

or vaidhī-bhakti) for millions of births.]

I was saying yesterday that genuine greed is good; it is
very exalted. But the consideration is whether
transcendental greed has really awakened. If one truly
has that greed, he is at once qualified with the stage
of ruci (true taste for chanting, hearing, and
remembering). Real transcendental greed begins to
manifest from the stage of ruci, not from the stage of
śraddhā (initial faith). This is the qualification.

Let us suppose one does not possess this qualification,
yet he is telling others, “I have so much greed for
rāgānuga-bhakti and rāgātmikā-bhakti.” Suppose that
person is speaking only on this subject to his various
audiences. Then, later we see that he is entangled with
a lady and has left his devotional practices. In that
instance, where is his ruci?

So, we should be careful. If we have actually attained
such greed (laulyam), we do not disclose this by
announcing, “I have greed.” We nourish this mood
internally, while externally following vaidhī-bhakti.
Internally, a person with real greed would be like Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Suppose a person admits, “I don’t have greed. But I want
greed, so I want to hear only rasa-kathā. This is the
process for getting greed.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is essential that such a person also hears Bhagavad-
gītā, Uddhava-saṁvāda (the conversation between Kṛṣṇa
and Uddhava in the Eleventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam),
and similar subjects. By this, one will gain strength
for rāgānuga-bhakti.

It has been written in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā
2.117):


siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa

ihā ha-ite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa


[A sincere student should not neglect the discussions of
philosophical conclusions (siddhānta), considering them
controversial, for such discussions strengthen the mind.
Thus, one’s mind becomes attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.]

Are you happy with our classes?

Harer-nāmānanda dāsa:

Yes, very happy. I want to learn more from you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You are very fortunate. Thank you for your effort in
organizing this good festival.

                          268
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Harer-nāmānanda dāsa:

It is happening by your mercy.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Rāghava Paṇḍita, you should take more interest and come
nearer to me.

Rāghava Paṇḍita dāsa:

By your mercy. Absolutely.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda has explained the symptoms of
greed [in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.294]: “Kṛṣṇaṁ
smaran janaṁ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam – One
remembers Kṛṣṇa, and especially His intimate
associates.” The second symptom is: “Sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa
siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi – One follows those exalted
devotees who live in Vraja.” And third is:
“śravaṇotkīrtanādīni vaidha-bhakty-uditāni tu yāny
aṅgāni ca tāny atra vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ – One maintains
all the limbs of vaidhī-bhakti.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I discussed this yesterday, and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura has given the same instruction in Jaiva-dharma.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

You said yesterday that Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura wrote about this in his Rāga-vartma-candrikā.
There he says that a person established in rāgānuga-
bhakti follows the principals of vaidhī-bhakti. If he
neglects such principles, he simple creates disturbance
(utpātāyaiva kalpate).

Dhīra-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

The followers of the Rāmānuja sampradāya, or Śrī
sampradāya, attain Vaikuṇṭha without lobha-mayi-bhakti
(bhakti enriched with pure greed to attain the
transcendental service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā Kṛṣṇa). They do
this on the strength of vaidhī-bhakti alone.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. By following such principles they attain pure
aiśvarya-mayi-bhakti (bhakti imbued with full sense of
the Lords godly opulence – worship in awe and
reverence). They can go to Vaikuṇṭha.

Dhīra-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Serving in aiśvarya-mayi-bhakti, that devotee can
transcend the stage of ruci and come to āsakti (deep
attachment), bhāva (the initial stage of perfection in
devotion), and prema (the highest stage of love for
Kṛṣṇa). Isn’t this a fact?


                             269
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, they can achieve prema; but that prema will be
aiśvarya-mayi-prema.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

This means they do not go beyond Vaikuṇṭha.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Are they called rāgātmikā-vaikuṇṭha-bhaktas? Can we call
them rāgātmikā-bhaktas?1

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Who?

Śrīla Padmanābha Mahārāja:

The Vaikuṇṭha associates of Lord Nārāyaṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. They are situated in rāga, although it may be that
they possess only śānta-rāga (attachment in the mood of
passive adoration) or dāsya-rāga (attachment in the mood
of servitorship). Those who reside in the Vaikuṇṭha
planets are situated in dāsya-rasa, and this is
especially true in rāma-līlā.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

So, regarding the sādhaka who wants to attain Vaikuṇṭha
and is worshiping Lord Rāma or Lord Nārāyaṇa, can he be
called a rāgānuga-bhakta (one who is devotedly following
in the footsteps of rāgātmikā devotees of the Lord’s
spiritual abode)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If one serves Nārāyaṇa like Jaya and Vijaya, or like
Nārada, Viśvaksena, Garuḍa, or Lakṣmī, he is known as a
rāgātmikā-bhakta with aiśvarya-bhava.

Dhīra-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

We heard that the term rāgātmikā is used only in
reference to the Vrajavāsīs..

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No. Rather, the associates in Vraja are rāgātmikā-
bhaktas to the extreme point. Hanumān has some rāga, as
do the Pāṇḍavas, but the rāga of all the devotees
outside Vraja is aiśvarya-mayi, full with a conception
of the Lord’s opulence.

Bhūdhara dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, you say that whatever little realization
someone like us may have, we should never share it with
anyone. You said that would be compared with camphor
which evaporates when exposed to the air. I think you

                             270
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

indicated that someone who expresses supposedly high
realizations is actually aspiring for prestige and
followers. Is that correct?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If one is actually experiencing spiritual realizations,
his nature will be that he will hide it as a millionaire
hides his wealth. Do you understand? A millionaire will
consider, “Others should not know, otherwise they might
somehow take it away.” Similarly, a person with actual
realization considers, “I should hide my realization,
otherwise it will evaporate like camphor burning by an
open doorway.”

Is there a book table here at the festival?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Where? At the main gate?

Brajanāth dāsa:

They have a big book table outside the gate.

Devotee:

I feel very grateful to your sannyāsa disciples. They
are taking care of me like a little brother. I want to
ask you, Śrīla Gurudeva, how can I serve you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

By chanting, remembering, following the principles of
your gurudeva and mine, and by following Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī. Also, you can distribute my books. You can
serve me in this way.

Devotee:

Thank you very much.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This instruction is for everyone.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 3.15)
says, vidhi-bhaktye vraja-bhāva pāite nāhi śakti2. One
cannot attain Kṛṣṇa by vaidhī-bhakti. So, we don’t need
to perform vaidhī-bhakti. We are doing rāgānuga.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, no. If you are correct, then why has Śrīla Kṛṣṇa
dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī written about the sixty-four limbs
of bhakti? He is following Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Rāgānuga-bhakti is the best form of bhakti in this

                             271
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

world, but it is followed and experienced inwardly. One
who actually possesses greed does not disclose it.

Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja:




vidhi-mārga-rata-jane svādhīnatā ratna-dāne

rāga-mārge karān praveśa

rāga-vaśavartī haiyā pārakīya bhāvāśraye

labhe jīva kṛṣṇa-premāveśa

Kalyāṇa-kalpataru

by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura


[To the person fixed in the regulative principles, the
holy name gives the jewel of independence, placing him
on the path of spontaneous devotion (rāgānuga-bhakti).
That person, overcome by spontaneous attachment to the
Lord, takes shelter of the parakīya mood and goes on to
become absorbed in love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

The meaning of this śloka is that in Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s sampradāya the practices of vaidhī-bhakti
take one to rāgānuga.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Does that vaidhī-bhakti have a special name?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No.

It is not rāgānuga at first. It begins from vaidhī-
bhakti. If one in the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī follows
vaidhī-bhakti, that vaidhī-bhakti is really the
beginning of rāgānuga.

Will a rāgānuga-bhakta follow Ekādaśī, or not?

Devotees:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Is this vaidhī-bhakti or rāgānuga-bhakti?

Devotees:

Vaidhī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                             272
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017


Will that rāgānuga-bhakta cele-brate Janmāṣṭamī (Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s appearance day), or not? And what about Nṛsiṁha-
caturdaśī? Is Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī (the appearance day of
Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva) vaidhī-bhakti or rāgānuga-bhakti?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is one hundred percent vaidhī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Still, everyone should observe these holy days,
otherwise they will be corrupted.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[Speaking to a brahmacārī] My brahmacārī, do you want to
go down? [Meaning, do you want to leave your brahmacārī-
āśrama?]

Devotee:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I will slap you. Sannyāsīs should not fall down, and
brahmacārīs should prepare to become sannyāsīs in the
future. One who gives up either the sannyāsa or
brahmacārī āśrama has no bhakti. Be careful. What you
want depends on you. I cannot control you.




July 10, 2007


morning walk

Devotee:

I am looking for a guru. What are the qualities of a
good guru – a bona fide guru?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He knows all śāstra – Vedas, Upaniṣads, and all other
Vedic scriptures – and thus he can remove the devotees’
doubts. He has realization of the Supreme Lord, and
therefore he is able to transfer Kṛṣṇa from his own
heart to the heart of his disciple. He is also quite
detached from worldly things, but we cannot see this
symptom.

We can understand if a person is able to remove all
kinds of doubts by his responses to our inquiries.
However, if one can remove doubts but does not
personally follow the rules and regulations of bhakti,
that person cannot be a bona fide guru.

Where is the reporter?

                            273
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Brajanāth dāsa:

I spoke with him last night. He will be here at 5:30. He
said he will meet you this morning at 5:30 or 6:00
o’clock.

Gauracandra dāsa:

Gurudeva, may I ask a question? Kṛṣṇa has created the
material world so that He can enjoy pastimes of
delivering the suffering fallen jīvas. He cannot enjoy
this pastime in the spiritual world because in the
spiritual world no one is suffering. Only in the
material world does Kṛṣṇa have the opportunity to
exhibit compassion.

I, a jīva, am suffering in this material world. Does
this mean that Kṛṣṇa doesn’t love me so much? Does it
mean that He loves His pastimes of deliverance more than
He actually loves me? Does He place the jīvas here to
suffer just so that He can manifest His pastimes of
compassion?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Kṛṣṇa can accomplish so many things by one activity. He
has come from Goloka Vṛndāvana to relish the love and
affection of the Vrajavāsīs, especially the gopīs, and
more especially Rādhikā. Those who hear all of Kṛṣṇa’s
sweet pastimes with the Vrajavāsīs will be liberated and
develop kṛṣṇa-prema.

Kṛṣṇa has also come to establish religious principles:


yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham



paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge

Bhagavad-gītā (4.7–8)


[O descendant of Bharata, whenever there is a decline of
religion and an increase in irreligion, at that time I
manifest My eternally perfect form in this mundane
world. To protect My unalloyed devotees, to annihilate
the wicked, and to firmly establish religion, I appear
in every age.]


                           274
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Gauracandra dāsa:

I am wondering how much Kṛṣṇa loves me, compared to how
much He loves His pastimes. It seems that I have to
suffer so that He can be compassionate.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You cannot realize Kṛṣṇa’s love at your present stage,
but when you have attained the bhakti of Uddhava you
will realize that He has so much love and affection for
you. He is causelessly merciful. He comes here for so
many reasons – about twelve reasons – as I explained
yesterday. He comes here to help persons like you.

Do you still have the doubt? Has it not yet been
removed?

Gauracandra dāsa:

I know I’m stupid, Gurudeva. I’ve got so much to
realize.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We cannot imagine Kṛṣṇa’s love. It is beyond the limit
of our mundane knowledge. He is samadarśī, which means
that He is equal to all. He comes to this world, but He
is not attached to it. One of His names is Ananta, which
indicates that He is unlimited.

If you love Him, you will realize, “He loves me.” If you
do not love Him, you will think, “He is neglecting me.”
Kaṁsa thought, “Kṛṣṇa is my enemy. He is coming to kill
me.” But Kṛṣṇa did not kill him. Rather, Kṛṣṇa liberated
him from all worldly considerations, in order that he
would no longer commit offences to devotees. Kṛṣṇa is
very kind.

Devotee:

I suppose this refers to the verse:


ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (4.11)


[In whatever way My devotees surrender unto Me, I reward
them accordingly. Everyone follows My path in all
respects, O son of Pṛthā.*]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śacīnandana dāsa:

                             275
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Can I ask a question? A bhakta once came to Śrīla Gaura
Kiśora dāsa Bābājī along with his new wife. Śrīla Gaura
Kiśora dāsa Bābājī told him, “Every day you should do
pūjā to your wife.”3 Is this appropriate for us? And if
it is, then how should it be done?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[With affectionate and playful sarcasm, encouraging his
students to avoid running after sense gratification in
the form of enjoying the opposite sex] You can daily
wash her feet, and then take her foot-bathing water on
your head. You can pray like this, “Oh devī, be kind to
me.” And if she beats you, you should say, “O devī, I am
now satisfied.”

Madhusūdana dāsa:

Gurudeva, there are two things necessary to advance in
bhakti; sādhana, devotional practice, and guru-kṛpā, the
mercy of guru. If I have these, do I require any
separate effort to develop rāgānuga-bhakti? Or, does it
appear spontaneously?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When your guru manifests his mercy upon you, he will
pray to Kṛṣṇa for you. Kṛṣṇa knows every-thing, so He
will be very kind. His heart will melt, and He will have
mercy upon you so that you will attain success.

Madhusūdana dāsa:

I don’t have to make any special effort to develop
rāgānuga?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Both are needed; sādhana must be performed.

When Yaśodā was trying to bind Kṛṣṇa, she vowed, “I will
bind Him, otherwise I will not eat anything. I will
fast.” Perspiring, she thought, “What is this?! Why am I
not binding Him?? O Nārāyaṇa, Nārāyaṇa! [not knowing
that her son is the original Nārāyaṇa] I must bind my
son!” Seeing her great determination, Kṛṣṇa at once
allowed Himself to be bound, merely by the rope that
tied her hair.


sva-mātuḥ svinna-gātrāyā

visrasta-kabara-srajaḥ

dṛṣṭvā pariśramaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ

kṛpayāsīt sva-bandhane

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.18)


[Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw that His mother’s body had become
drenched with perspiration. The garlands woven into her

                           276
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

braid had fallen out, and she had become utterly
exhausted. Seeing His mother’s fatigue, little Śrī Kṛṣṇa
compassionately allowed Himself to be bound.]

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

[Affectionately referring to Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja] So we should just meditate, “Nārāyaṇa,
Nārāyaṇa, Nārāyaṇa”?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[Referring to the original Nārāyaṇa, Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa] Without Nārāyaṇa, our destination cannot be
reached.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, if we remember ślokas from Śrī Vilāpa-
kusumāñjali while we chant harināma, is this like remem-
bering Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, or is it like remembering aṣṭa-
kālīya-līlā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can think as you like. Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
has given aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā in Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, but in
brief. It is all right to think in this way.

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

Gurudeva, every day we chant in the song Śrī-guru-
caraṇa-padma, “Janme janme prabhu sei – Śrī guru is my
lord, birth after birth.” Is it that we are only
starting to serve gurudeva in this life and that it will
now go on forever, or have we already started in past
lives?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Some have performed bhakti in previous lives, and some
are newcomers. Regarding those who are now advanced,
they have performed devotional activities in past lives.
Regarding those who don’t know much about bhakti but are
beginning to develop śraddhā by hearing from bona fide
Vaiṣṇavas, they are new. It may also be true that some
persons have accrued sukṛti (spiritual merits) in
previous lives from having previously accepted a guru
and are now joining again, but they may not be very
sincere, whereas a new devotee may advance more quickly
if he is sincere.

Kamala-kānta dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, one of your preachers once said that
bhakti cannot be checked by any material cause. What
does it really mean?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What do you mean by ‘material cause’?

Kamala-kānta dāsa:


                          277
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

Well, entanglement in the material world.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If someone is helping his gurudeva by giving a great
deal of money, and if his gurudeva really spends this
money on book publication, temples, and service to guru
and all other Vaiṣṇavas, then, although that money is
material and some sin may have been committed by the
donor, it will help in that donor’s development of
bhakti. Do you understand?

A flower and water are material, but when offered to
Ṭhākurajī they become transcendental.

Prakāśātmā

dāsa:

Yesterday you were speaking in your class about Ananta
Vāsudeva4. I am wondering, when the mahā-puruṣa (self-
realized ācārya) leaves this world, is it usual that his
mission goes into chaos?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not necessarily. If one is like Ananta Vāsudeva, for him
there will be chaos. After our gurudeva departed from
this world, even after over forty years, we have
remained fixed in his devotion. On the other hand,
anyone who is engaged in nonsense activities and
offenses must suffer in chaos. By serving one’s gurudeva
with viśrambheṇa guru-sevā (intimacy) one very quickly
develops kṛṣṇa-prema, but if one commits offenses he
goes to Rasātala (the lowest hellish planetary system).

There is a śloka in śāstra which states that if the root
of the lotus is situated in the water, it blossoms under
the sun. If there is no water, however, that same lotus
will wilt and dry up.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:




nārāyaṇo ‘pi vikṛtiṁ yāti guroḥ pracyutasya durbuddheḥ

kamalaṁ jalād apetaṁ śoṣayati ravir na poṣayati

Jaladākhyāna Saṁhitā


[When a lotus flower is situated in water, the rays of
the sun cause it to blossom. The same sun, however, will
wither a lotus which is not situated in water. In this
example the disciple is compared to the lotus, śrī guru
to water, and the Supreme Lord to the sun.]

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

So we have to pray to the guru that he will always be…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                            278
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Guru is the root of bhakti. Guru, Vaiṣṇava, and sādhu
are the roots. A sādhu is able to describe to us the
glory of gurudeva, because he himself is guru.

Devotee:

I have a question. We know that śrī guru’s position in
kṛṣṇa-līlā is as a mañjarī. What is his position in
caitanya-līlā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What do you mean by ‘mañjarī’?

Devotee:

I don’t know.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It was for all of you that I spoke about rāgānuga and
related topics in my class. Don’t try to jump to the
top. Begin from the bottom, not from mañjarī-bhāva,
otherwise you’ll be…

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He is not asking what is guru’s mañjarī form in Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What does he want to know?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He wants to know what is the form of guru in Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s pastimes?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is better that you desire to know how your anarthas
will disappear, and how your sambandha-jñāna
(relationship) with Kṛṣṇa will strengthen. Don’t go
beyond that. You are new, so where have you heard about
mañjarī-bhāva? Perhaps someone has told you that you are
a mañjarī? It is best not to think about this at your
stage.

Śrīpāda

Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, Śrīla Gour Govinda Mahārāja used to say
that śraddhā (implicit faith that by performing bhakti
all other subsidiary activities are automatically
accomplished) and sukṛti (spiritual credits accrued by
performance of bhakti in previous lives) are
interrelated; they are linked. We hear that according to
previous sukṛti we get sādhu-saṅga. Still, all of us
Westerners took birth in the families of cow-eaters. Is
that why it is seen that the śraddhā of most Westerners
remains komala (weak)

                             279
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


for a very long time?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It may be; it may be.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

We had accumulated sukṛti, but still we took birth in
the families of mlecchas.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

So, how much sukṛti was there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We think that Western persons live in bhoga-bhūmi.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

The place of enjoying material life.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

Not sādhana-bhūmi (the place of sādhana-bhakti). But
now, by the grace of mahā-puruṣas, self-realized souls,
they are coming in the devotional line.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

But their sukṛti is meager?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It may be that their sukṛti is okay. Otherwise, how is
it that they are now becoming advanced? Padmanābha
Mahārāja and all others here were cow-eaters, but just
see the transformation. See how they have become
advanced.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

His question is this: If we had the sukṛti to get the
saṅga of a very beautiful sādhu, then why did we take
birth in the family of cow-eaters? It seems strange that
both would be there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But now you do not take cow-meat; do you?

One more point. Even if you would have eaten cow-meat
through-out your life, but in the end of your life, by
the mercy of Kṛṣṇa or guru and Vaiṣṇavas, you chant only
a few holy names, all your sins would go away.


                            280
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Have you read about the pastime of Ajāmila? He not only
ate meat, but he engaged in numerous abominable sinful
activities. Still, all his sins disappeared by chanting
nāmābhāsa, a semblance of the pure holy name of Lord
Nārāyaṇa. So, there is nothing to fear or worry.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Can it also be possible that someone was a devotee in
his previous life, but then committed some heavy
vaiṣṇava-aparādha and was cursed to take birth in some
bhoga-bhūmi or in a family of cow-eaters? Is that also
possible?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It may be; it may be. If one commits guru-aparādha, he
must get some sinful result.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Jīva-pāvana dāsa] When will you take sannyāsa? Or,
will you remain married throughout your life?

Jīva-pāvana dāsa:

I am waiting for your order.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Your son is already a sannyāsī, but you are still now
where you were before.

Jīva-pāvana dāsa:

I have a three year plan, but you can make it three
weeks if you like.

Devotee:

I would like to ask about vraja-prema. What are the
rasas included in vraja-prema?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There are twelve rasas in Vraja, but the main ones are
three: sakhya (friendship), vātsalya (parenthood), and
mādhurya (amorous love). Śānta (passive adora-tion) is
present there, but it is covered. It does not manifest.




July 11, 2007


Before the walk

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

You are initiated?

Devotee:

                            281
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017


Yes, I am initiated.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Then why are you smoking?

Devotee:

I am trying to give it up.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Give it up.

Devotee:

I will do it.

[Then, performing a short marriage ceremony:]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You must first promise that after your marriage ceremony
you shall remain together for the rest of your lives;
that you will not divorce each other.

[To the groom] Repeat after me. I promise that
throughout my life…

Devotee:

I promise that throughout my life…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I will not divorce her.

Devotee:

I will not divorce her; I promise.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You must respect each other. [To the groom] You should
respect her.




July 11, 2007


morning walk

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

On a few occasions Mother Yaśodā chastises Kṛṣṇa in this
way: “You are a thief. You are a friend of the monkeys.”
But the gopīs very often rebuke Him in stronger ways:
“You have killed a lady (Pūtanā), and You have killed a
cow (Ariṣṭāsura). Don’t touch us. Go away at once. Jahi,
jahi – Go, go.”

                             282
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


What kind of bhakti is this? Is it bhakti to rebuke and
call Kṛṣṇa ‘cheater’ and ‘head of all liars’? How is it
bhakti?

Śiśupāla also rebuked Kṛṣṇa, saying, “There is no
certainty as to the identity of Your father and mother.
You are a liar and a cheater.” Śiśupāla uttered words
similar to that of the gopīs, but he received a
different result. Kṛṣṇa cut off his head. Why was this?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

The gopīs have unparalleled prema for Kṛṣṇa, and their
whole intention is that Kṛṣṇa should be happy. They
understand that Kṛṣṇa is very pleased by the loving mood
coming from their hearts.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The gopīs consider that Kṛṣṇa will be happy by their
abusing and insulting Him.

Can you explain?

Prema-prayojana dāsa:

In his definition of uttamā-bhakti (the highest form of
bhakti), Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda uttered the words
ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam. The word ānukūlyena means
‘devoid of an antagonistic mood towards Kṛṣṇa.’ Śiśupāla
was antagonistic towards Him, whereas the gopīs love
Him. In fact, the gopīs become angry only because of
their very intimate relationship with Him. Kṛṣṇa
personally confirmed this when He said, “When My
beloveds rebuke Me, I experience such great pleasure
that I forget all the glorification of the Vedas, as
well as that of the stutis (hymns) of Brahmā and other
demigods.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

In the Ādi Purāṇa, Arjuna asked Kṛṣṇa, “O Kṛṣṇa, I have
heard that You become so happy when the vraja-gopīs
rebuke You in many ways. On the other hand, when Brahmā
stole Your cows and then glorified You by ardent
prayers, You hardly paid any attention to him. What is
the cause of this?” Kṛṣṇa replied, “Arjuna, because you
are My dear friend, I will now tell you something very
confidential. In the hearts of the gopīs of Vraja
resides a beautiful paramour mood. Thus, even their
harsh words please Me immensely. Although great poets
glorify Me with ornamental language, they cannot please
Me; whereas the gopīs overwhelm Me with pleasure.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They both explained this very well. Kṛṣṇa is not very
interested to hear His glories sung from the mouths of
Brahmā, and He never looks towards him. For the gopīs,
on the other hand, He holds His two ears like cups in
order to hear their words.

Do you have any questions?

                             283
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Your speaking is so inspired here; even more so than in
Badger. It seems that you are speaking with more energy
and enthusiasm. Is it because of the number of devotees
here?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It seems that I am telling more? I spoke strongly about
the true symptoms of rāgānuga-bhakti for those who have
some misconception. It was for them that I spoke such
words.

Transcendental greed is very sacred and exalted. It must
therefore be kept concealed within the heart, as burning
camphor is kept in a closed room so that its fragrance
will not evaporate but instead become more and more
condensed. If you have any realizations, it is best to
conceal them. Do you understand the word yara-mata?

Devotee:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It applies to one who knows, “My mother goes to other
men,” but he does not tell others.

Paramānanda dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I heard that if we don’t share our
realization, we will lose it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Some things are meant to be concealed in the heart and
others are meant to be shared. Some subject matters may
be told to worldly persons, whereas mysterious things
are for telling only to elevated persons. It is not that
one rule applies to all circumstances. It is not that
one may tell everything everywhere.

All of you, be ready to speak in this evening’s class
about Bakāsura, Aghāsura, and brahma-vimohana-līlā.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, what you have just mentioned about the
gopīs’ mood toward Kṛṣṇa is very difficult to
understand. On one hand the gopīs have so much love for
Kṛṣṇa, and on the other side they become angry with Him
and rebuke Him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It seems that they are angry, but actually they are not.
They act in that way simply to please Kṛṣṇa. They do
this so that others will think they are angry.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:


                             284
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

Gurudeva, Śrīla Trivikrama Mahārāja said that Kṛṣṇa
never abuses the gopīs.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, never. Kṛṣṇa considers that He cannot dare to abuse
them, otherwise they will all leave His company at once.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

In a commentary you gave on kāntā-prema (the love of the
gopīs for Kṛṣṇa) in Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda, you said
that due to the gopīs’ surrender to Kṛṣṇa, they know
that by insulting Him He will always remain with them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The one thing I neglected to say is that Kṛṣṇa is very
surrendered to the gopīs.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

Is it because they surrendered that He also surrendered
fully to them?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Kṛṣṇa has surrendered, but not fully. He can’t.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Suppose somebody is not realized, and yet he is speaking
about high topics (regarding the amorous pastimes of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa). In order to explain bhāva and
prema, he is reading and speaking these pastimes to
others. He is not going so deeply into the details, not
making the pastimes look naked, but he is doing
something near to that. Is this okay, or not okay?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

To whom is that person speaking? If it is to young
ladies, then it is bogus. Men should not speak to ladies
alone.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

What if it is spoken to a mixed audience?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

If males are also there, and if one is glorifying Śrī
Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in a covered way, that
may be okay; there is no harm in that. A teacher may
speak only with persons who have the qualifications to
hear such topics.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

In certain circumstances there are some qualified
hearers. In other words, sometimes our groups are mixed.
What should a teacher do in such cases?

                           285
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

A teacher or guru must be careful not to speak to an
unqualified audience; otherwise both the guru and hearer
will go down.


naitat samācarej jātu manasāpi hy anīśvaraḥ

vinaśyaty ācaran mauḍhyād yathā ‘rudro ‘bdhi-jaṁ viṣam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.30)


[One should never imitate the behavior of great persons.
If out of foolishness an ordinary person imitates such
behavior (i.e. Kṛṣṇa’s dancing with the gopīs), even
mentally, he is doomed; just as one who imitates Rudra
by swallowing an ocean of poison.]

[To Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja] What is the meaning?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

This is the verse told by Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī to
Mahārāja Parīkṣit at the end of his rāsa-līlā narration.
He says there that no one should dare to imitate – even
mentally, or even to imagine – that they can perform
rāsa-līlā as Kṛṣṇa does. This is because they are not
Īśvara, God, or god-like controllers like Lord Śiva.
Lord Śiva can drink an entire ocean of poison and not
become affected by it, but the ordinary conditioned soul
will immediately die if he tries to imitate him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If one has some realization due to hearing from gurudeva
with faith, he can tell something to those who are
qualified to hear. Otherwise, he should not repeat
anything.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

If someone was once a sannyāsī, but after he left
sannyāsa he is still touching on high things, is that
okay, or not okay?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We cannot put a lock on anyone’s mouth.

It is written in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:


vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ

śraddhānvito ‘nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ

bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ

hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.39)

                           286
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



[A grave person who faithfully and continuously hears
the narrations of the transcendental pastimes that
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed with the young girls of
Vraja, and then describes those pastimes accordingly,
achieves supreme devotion for the lotus feet of
Bhagavān. He very quickly attains freedom from the
diseases of the heart, which are the transformations of
lust.]

If one hears with full faith from a realized person, and
after that he describes those topics with faith, then,
very soon, transcendental kāma (amorous love) for Kṛṣṇa
will manifest in his heart. What kind of kāma? He will
determine, “I must serve Kṛṣṇa as the gopīs (mañjarīs)
serve.” This mood, called kāmānuga-bhakti (the gopīs’
transcendental paramour love for Kṛṣṇa) will manifest in
the heart. At that time, all worldly lust, the disease
of the heart, will disappear forever. If one hears, or
has heard, the topics of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with the
gopīs, and if lust from one’s heart is thus gone, how is
it possible for that person to marry again? Do you
understand? If that person marries again, what does this
mean?

Has Śaunaka Ṛṣi or any of the eighty-eight thousand ṛṣis
married again?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The fruit of such faithful hearing is bhakti. The
measurement of one’s advancement in bhakti is the extent
to which one is detached from wealth, reputation, wife,
and all other varieties of sense gratification.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Will the śraddhā (faith) mentioned in that verse be on
the level of niṣṭhā (steadiness), or ruci (taste for
devotion), or just śraddhā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Full śraddhā.

Gokula-candra dāsa:

If one considers that his worshipful Deity is Lord Rāma
in Ayodhyā, then he might think that “Hare Rāma” means
Sītā and Rāma. So how does it refer to…?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We should understand that the worshipful Deity of the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is one. In “Hare Kṛṣṇa” the name Kṛṣṇa
is there, and Kṛṣṇa is non-different from His name. In
that case, “Hare Rāma” cannot be Sītā and Rāma. A person
must know who his worshipful Deity is. In this mantra,
Rāma refers to Rādhā-ramaṇa, meaning Kṛṣṇa, the beloved

                           287
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

of Rādhā, who enjoys pastimes with Her.

Gokula-candra dāsa:

And how does the mahā-mantra refer to śrī guru?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can consider that gurudeva has given you the mahā-
mantra – Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. We are there-fore always
indebted to him. This indebtedness is not a worldly
exchange; it is transcendental.

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

Gurudeva, regarding that verse you just quoted:
Vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ. You said that
we should hear and repeat. My question is, how can we
repeat such a high subject?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not everyone is qualified to repeat these topics. When
one’s hearing is complete, and by that perfect hearing
one achieves all spiritual qualities and all negative
qualities disappear from his heart, then he is qualified
to speak.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

I have a question in this regard. Suppose a devotee is
hearing with strong faith, serving for some time, and
repeating what he has heard. But then, possibly because
he has committed some offense, he falls from his
position. Is it possible that at one time he could have
had this kind of śraddhā and then lost it?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, it may be. Until the stage of bhāva-bhakti 5 a
person may do something wrong. He may criticize guru,
Vaiṣṇavas, or Kṛṣṇa, and then he may fall down.




July 11, 2007


darśana

After the walk

Vicitrī dāsī:

Last night you spoke this śloka:


nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād

bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-’bhirāmāt

ka uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt

                             288
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


pumān virajyeta vinā paśughnāt

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.1.4)


[Glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
performed in the paramparā system; that is, it is
conveyed from spiritual master to disciple. Such
glorification is relished by those who are no longer
interested in the false, temporary glorification of this
cosmic manifestation. Descriptions of the Lord are the
right medicine for the conditioned soul undergoing
repeated birth and death. Therefore, who will cease
hearing such glorification of the Lord except a butcher
or one who is killing his own self? *]

You were saying that hearing hari-kathā from the lips of
a pure Vaiṣṇava is the infallible medicine to remove our
anarthas and give us bhakti. Then you told the story of
Ananta Vāsudeva [a disciple of Śrīla Prabhupāda
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura]. You explained that
he had been hearing hari-kathā from the lips of a pure
Vaiṣṇava – he was following the formula – but that he
fell down. So, what went wrong? Why didn’t it work?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I explained that he began to criticize Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

His own guru.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He claimed that Śrīla Prabhupāda does not understand
madhura-rasa (Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s amorous love). He
left Śrīla Prabhupāda and went to a sahajiyā bābājī. He
gave away Śrīla Prabhupāda’s books to vendors [and
disposed of them and destroyed them by various means].
It was because of this very great offense that a desire
to marry came in his heart. He thus took poison and
descended to Rasātala (one of the hells). So, you must
all be careful.

Paramānanda dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, Mahārāja Parīkṣit said to the bull of
religion, dharma, that the person who identifies the
performer of a sinful act gets the same destination as
the person who perpetrated the act.6 What does this
mean?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It means that another person is not responsible for
one’s sufferings. Although it was Kali who beat the legs
of the bull, the bull did not tell Mahārāja Parīkṣit,
“Kali had done this to me.” As an elevated devotee, he
said, “I don’t know who has done this to me. It has been
caused by my previous karma. He who controls the entire
world – who ordains creation, maintenance, and
destruction – has done this.”7

                             289
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Paramānanda dāsa:

Would the saintly King Parīkṣit feel some discomfort by
punishing criminals? Is he unhappy to give this
punishment?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Kali-yuga (the age of quarrel and hypocrisy) is a very
high-class yuga (age). In Kali-yuga, if any pious or
spiritual activities are performed by the mind alone,
the fruits of those activities will be enjoyed by the
performer. On the other hand, if one performs some sin –
not by body, but by mind – that mental act will not
produce a sinful reaction. [In previous ages, one would
have to taste the fruits of a sinful act simply by
thinking about doing some sin.] In Kali-yuga you can
receive all perfection by harināma, chanting, and even
nāma-ābhāsa produces good results.




July 11, 2007


darśana

[There were a few hundred devotees at this darśana. They
lined up in front of Śrīla Mahārāja’s vyāsāsana and, one
after another, spoke a few words to him and perhaps
asked a question. Here is an excerpt:]

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, this is Indumatī from Lithuania. She is an
artist and has spoken with Śyāmarāṇī dīdī. Śyāmarāṇī
dīdī likes her.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

[Translating] She wants to know if you have some
particular project for her to work on. She is thinking
of making a coloring book for children.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Indumatī dāsī] Good. You can be with Śyāmarāṇī, and
your artwork will improve. She will help you, and then
your pictures can come in our publications.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

After this festival we are going to other cities in
Germany. In case you give any phone initiations where we
will be, can you bless these beads? [Śrīla Mahārāja
touches all the sets of beads in a bag.]


                          290
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

You said last night that watching a video of you is not
as beneficial as seeing you in person. So, what is the
actual benefit of seeing a video of you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, something will still come. By watching the video,
one will get knowledge, and gradually that person’s
śraddhā (faith in bhakti) will increase.

Śacīnandana dāsa:

Is it like a book, Gurudeva?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Like a book.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

She has a question, but her English is not very good.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can ask for her. Where is she from?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

She is from Brazil, but she is living with the
Gaṅgāmātās in England. Most young girls want to get
married. One side of her is like this, but another side
of her wants to be a brahmacāriṇī and continue living
with the Gaṅgāmātās. She wants to know what you want her
to do.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If you want to marry, don’t suppress it; you can marry.
But if in your heart you really want to be a
brahmacāriṇī, then do that – be like the Gaṅgāmātās.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

What do you think she is qualified for?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It depends on her own will. It depends whether or not
her will is pakka (first class). If not, she should
marry, but it is better to be like the Gaṅgāmātās. If
she cannot do that, then she can marry.

Ānitā dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, my friend Kelly wants to give this [a
gift] to you. She is here for two or three days.

Vāsantī dāsī:

Gurudeva, you are so merciful to bring me on tour with
you. This is the rest of the money for my ticket.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                          291
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

You are always giving, always giving.

Gītā dāsī (from Amsterdam):

Śrīla Gurudeva, before I took initiation I was able to
chant with quantity and quality. But now I am having a
problem with both quality and quantity. I am wondering
if I had sādhu-saṅga in a previous life and that is why
I was able to chant well in the beginning. What would be
the reason I can’t chant now? Have I committed an
offense? If so, how can I find the personalities who I
committed offenses towards, to apologize?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You are lacking in pure sādhu-saṅga. If you were in
sādhu-saṅga, especially like Śyāmarāṇī is in sādhu-
saṅga, you would again be inspired. Become inspired, and
then chant and remember.

Tāruṇī dāsī (from Stuttgart):

I want to ask if it is better to start training for
management, or is it better do more and more bhakti?
Would it be better to go to the Gaṅgāmātās, or to India?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What kind of management?

Tāruṇī dāsī:

For seven months I would get trained in acquiring skills
for organization and management.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If it is favorable for bhakti, you can do that.

Tāruṇī dāsī:

Yes, but is it more important to first get absorbed in
bhakti-yoga? I’m twenty-nine years old.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Bhakti is required. Best to do what is most favorable
for bhakti. If you are always chanting and remembering
in sādhu-saṅga, that is good. Management alone will not
do.

Tāruṇī dāsī:

I know, but my dilemma is this: Should I get the
training of Kṛṣṇa consciousness at the Gaṅgāmātās, or go
to India, and after that get this material training?
That’s my dilemma.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The Gaṅgāmātās are trained. They can train you.

Tāruṇī dāsī:


                           292
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

After that, should I go to the material world and learn
management?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should train those who don’t know anything about
bhakti.

Tāruṇī dāsī:

Ok, thank you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To another devotee] Remain in sādhu-saṅga and read
about the character of Vaiṣṇavas like Prahlāda Mahārāja
and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.

Sucitrā dāsī:

Gurudeva, is it possible for me to stay in India?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If you can manage with no money problem, then you can do
so.

Sucitrā dāsī:

Can I live by only distributing your books?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, yes. You can do that.

Devotee:

I am here for the first time. If it is to your liking, I
can help distribute your books and also translate them
in the Finnish language.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, you can do that. Very good.

Devotee:

I have Deities, but I always feel unqualified to worship
Them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If Ṭhākurajī is with you, you must worship Them.

Anupamā dāsī:

This is Hemāṅgī and her daughter Anurādhā. They do a lot
of service in Munich. Hemāṅgī is sewing all of
Ṭhākurajī’s outfits.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good, very good.


                            293
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

Devotee:

How can I serve you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can chant harināma, learn siddhānta, and develop in
bhakti. You can distribute my books.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, which article from the Rays of the Harmonist
would you like to be translated first into Russian?
There are so many. Which should we begin with?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Whichever one you think is better to translate.

Devotee:

Which ācārya should we start with?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

You can start with any article by Śrīla Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Whatever you think is best. You can also translate Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s articles.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He is a disciple of Śrīla Bhakti Svarūpa Dāmodara
Mahārāja.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, Śrīla Bhakti Svarūpa Dāmodara Mahārāja was my
friend.

Do you have love for your family members?

Devotee:

Yes, for some of them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

Oh, you should give that love to Kṛṣṇa. Whatever you
have, give it to Kṛṣṇa.




July 12, 2007


morning walk


                            294
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

Devotee:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I have been smoking marijuana.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

He wants to ask for forgiveness.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Always remember that intoxicants cannot give you
happiness. Death is coming very soon; you don’t know
exactly when it will come. If you neglect the rules and
regulations, you will have to go to hell. You cannot
imagine what hell is like.

Devotee:

Attachment to this world is very bad for those who want
to practice sādhana-bhakti. I am so attached to my
family. What are the consequences?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Try to give your attachment to Kṛṣṇa, and in that way
you will become happy forever. Other attachments will
lead you to hell.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

His family members are also devotees.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is okay, but don’t be attached. See only that they
are children of Kṛṣṇa. You have been given the duty as a
family member only to see that your family becomes
devotees.

Vṛndāvana dāsa (from Denmark):

Śrīla Gurudeva, the other day you asked me for my
pranāmī. You explained that pranāma (offering of
obeisances) does not mean only to offer folded palms and
sāṣṭāṅga-danḍavat (bowing down on the ground), but to
offer one’s heart and soul to gurudeva. In that context,
what exactly does pranāmī mean?

Brajanāth dāsa:

The day before yesterday he gave you pranāmī (a
donation) from someone else, and then you asked him,
“Where is your pranāmī?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You have become a vāntāśī. Do you know the meaning of
vāntāśī? It means that you have again eaten what you
have already vomited. This is very bad. You left your
wife and took saffron cloth (representing the life of
brahmacarya), and then you rejected your saffron cloth
and returned to her. Don’t change like this.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

                            295
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


But you said to me…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I never told you to take saffron cloth, and never told
you to give it up. Try to be strong.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

I had never asked your permission to renounce and take
saffron. Therefore I did not feel blessed. So, without
feeling blessed…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I do not want to hear any argu-ments. Be strong.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

By your mercy Gurudeva.

Paramānanda dāsa (from Ireland):

Śrīla Gurudeva, when we are selling books, we sometimes
meet people from the Muslim faith. When we tell them
that our nāmācārya Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura was born in a
Mohammedan family, they sometimes ask if in his
childhood he ate meat.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He never took meat in his entire life – since birth.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Although he was born in a Muslim family, his family
members were like Hindus. He was brought up like a
Hindu.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He was an incarnation of the combination of Brahmā and
Prahlāda. You should know that he would never take meat.

Paramānanda dāsa:

And the Chand Kazi?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

At first he was eating meat. Then, by the association of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he gave up all his sinful
activities.

Śrīpāda Bhaktivedānta Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja is preaching
every-where in China in his sannyāsa dress?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Not when he crosses the border.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:


                            296
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

It is not possible at that time.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Only at the border?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Not only at the border. The Buddhist religion is
accepted by the government because it is China’s
official religion. But other religions are illegal;
completely illegal.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But the government says that it is all right for an
Indian to wear saffron cloth in China.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

The Svāmī Nārāyaṇa groups went there. The government
allowed Indians to attend their function because it is
their own religion, but Westerners were not allowed.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

If they see Indians wearing this dress, they don’t have
any suspicions, but if they see Westerners wearing this
dress, they become very suspicious. They watch, and
expel them from the country.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja changes his cloth?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Yes, he must change his cloth when in public, but for
preaching in a house he always wears his sannyāsa dress.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The devotees in China are preaching very well. Hundreds
of devotees have been initiated there.

Devotee:

In Hong Kong there is no problem to wear saffron cloth.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Previously, during the communist time in Russia, our
guru mahārāja, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda,
gave sanction for the devotees to wear ordinary clothing
for preaching. He was very pleased by this.

Gurudeva, which chapters will you speak about tonight?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

We will come to Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with Kāliya, and then
with Ariṣṭāsura, and perhaps Pralambāsura.

                            297
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Govardhana?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Govardhana.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Rasānanda prabhu [now Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja] told me
yesterday that he wants to try to speak about
Govardhana. He has a very good kathā for Govardhana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

All right. The pastimes of Govardhana include Kṛṣṇa’s
punishing the demigod Indra and holding up Govardhana on
His finger.

I want to finish those subjects very quickly so that I
can come to Veṇu-gīta, Rāsa-līlā, and then Gopī-gīta. I
also want to speak something about Bhramara-gīta.

Yaśasvinī dāsī:

If someone performs nirjala8 Ekādaśī but takes your
personal prasādam remnants, does that break the Ekādaśī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Yaśasvinī dāsī:

So which is better – to do nirjala and take Gurudeva’s
remnants, or do nirjala and not take it?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

You can keep Gurudeva’s remnants for honoring on the day
after nirjala. [In that way nirjala is protected and the
devotee is also honoring Gurudeva’s prasādam.]

Devotee:

I have committed some offenses.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Don’t commit offenses. If you increase your chanting,
offenses will disappear.




July 13, 2007


morning walk

Malati dāsī (from France):

                             298
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017


Gurudeva, Tāruṇī is leaving this morning to go back to
Canada.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Tāruṇī dāsī] Oh, my blessings are with you.

Paramānanda dāsa:

Gurudeva, this is Dwayne and Ian from Northern Ireland.
They came to see you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Have they heard our classes?

Paramānanda dāsa:

Yes, they heard last night.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To the guests] Be happy by chanting and remembering the
Lord.

There is no need to make worldly plans for the future.
There is no need to think, “We don’t know what will
happen after Mahārāja leaves this world. We should make
a separate arrangement for our future so that we can be
peaceful.”

Don’t think like this. Think only about how to attain
kṛṣṇa-prema; how to attain sajātīya snigdha āśaya, the
association of pure devotees who are affectionate to you
and who are oceans of the transcendental mood for which
you aspire. Best to mold your life only around this, and
thus make your life successful. Don’t worry, thinking,
“Oh, what will be our future after Mahārāja leaves this
world? We should do something separate for our welfare.”
What you propose, God will dispose. So, no need to
worry.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, some devotees are asking that at the
time of dīkṣā initiation you say that we should take
Kṛṣṇa as our priyatama, our most beloved. But, since
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is already Kṛṣṇa’s beloved, how can we
take Him as our beloved?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is the meaning of gopī-jana-vallabha: Kṛṣṇa is the
beloved of all the gopīs. You can think of this in the
way that Rūpa Mañjarī or Rūpa Gosvāmī thinks. You can
follow Rupa Gosvāmī in his sādhaka form, as well as in
his form as the gopī, Rūpa Mañjarī.

Gauracandra dāsa (from England):

Gurudeva, if I chant my japa in front of the Deities in
the temple, should I meditate more on Kṛṣṇa, or on
Rādhārāṇī?

                          299
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Both. They are the Divine Couple.

Rāma dāsa (from Germany):

Śrīla Gurudeva, I would like to show you a picture from
my magazine. I made an announcement in it for your
Bhakti-Yoga Festival.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

For this festival?

Rāma dāsa:

Yes, it was for this festival, and it brought some
people. I wrote an article, and in the article I made a
small presentation about the meaning of bhakti-yoga.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good, very good. How many people read the magazine?

Rāma dāsa:

It has a print-run of 5,000. It comes out four times a
year. It has more than 5,000 readers because two, or
three, or four people are reading each copy.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrī Gurupādapadma
[Śrīla Bhakti Prajñana Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja], and
Śrīla Sarasvati Ṭhākura also published magazines.

Rāma dāsa:

I regularly do one article with some pictures and infor-
mation about you. [Showing a photo in the magazine] I
think this is a very nice picture of you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, regarding what you just said about not
making future plans – plans for after you leave…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Make plans only for sādhu-saṅga. You can plan how to be
successful by sādhu-saṅga, and how to attain kṛṣṇa-
prema. Your whole attention must be on that. Don’t
think, “When Mahārāja is no longer in this world, what
to do? I don’t know what will happen. I don’t know what
will happen to the saṅga. So, from right now, I should
try to create something separate in order that I can be
very happy and peaceful.” Don’t think like that. Rather,
place your whole attention on Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I was
telling only this.

                            300
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

I have a personal question in that regard. I am
developing a project for Vaiṣṇava studies that is
separate from the group in Birmingham, but I am also
still working with the group. I am not thinking about
the future in the way you just described, because my
mind is not on possession of property. I actually don’t
care about that.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I think this project should be for everyone. Everyone
with projects should think, “This is not my own
property. Rather, it is a bhakti project.”

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

This is a bhakti project, but it is also specific.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And at the same time everyone should think, “This is my
maṭha.” You can consider your project in this way.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Mahārāja desires to train devotees who want to become
dedicated brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

In Mathurā, in Vṛndāvana, and everywhere else we are
teaching everyone, “Oh, you stand up [and speak], and
you stand up. We do this together, with hundreds and
thousands of devotees. Why can’t you do it this way?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

I want to do it in a different way, but if you want me
to do in this way, I will do it. I have no problem.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do what is favorable for you. I expressed my desires,
but everyone is independent to do as they like. Even
Kṛṣṇa cannot take away your independence.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

I will do as you desire; no problem.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

This instruction is not only for you. It is for all. Our
whole attention should be on how we can achieve kṛṣṇa-
prema.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

                           301
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


: Gurudeva, sometimes we preach to Christian people,
after which they become attracted to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, come to your lotus feet, and take
initiation. Still, they sometimes think that Jesus, or
Īśa, is God, and not the son of God. What would you
recommend for the development of their Kṛṣṇa
consciousness?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can tell them, “Kṛṣṇa and Christ are the same. We
are pure Christians – more so than those who falsely
proclaim themselves as Christians. We don’t eat cows,
beef, or any other animal food. The Supreme Lord,
Christ, has not created the animals for us to eat. We
devotees follow all the principles of the Bible. You
should also follow, and become pure.”

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

They think that Jesus, Īśa, is the Supreme Lord. They
think that he is viṣṇu-tattva. How shall we explain that
he is the son of God?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Christ is Kṛṣṇa. Christ, Christos, Krusta, Kṛṣṇa.9

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

So, Jesus is the son of Kṛṣṇa.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes, Jesus is the son of Christ.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Jesus never proclaimed, “I am God.”

Ananta-kṛṣṇa dāsa (from Lithuania):

May I ask a question? I serve in the Russian Orthodox
Church in Lithuania. I have a relationship with my
priest, and I have a very good feeling when I serve him.
May I serve him after taking initiation from you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If he is against God, Kṛṣṇa, then don’t serve there.

Ananta-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

No, he is not against Kṛṣṇa. When I asked his permission
to come here, he said, “Go. I bless you.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If he is favorable, you can do some service there.

[To Padmanābha Mahārāja] Do you remember the śloka
beginning duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ?


                            302
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:




duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ

sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ

vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ

sthita-dhīr munir ucyate

Bhagavad-gītā (2.56)


[One who is not disturbed by the three types of miseries
– given by one’s own body or mind, given by others, and
given by the demigods or nature – who remains free from
hankering in the presence of plentiful opportunities for
sensual happiness, and who is free from attachment,
fear, and anger, is called a sage of steady mind.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ – In any situation, a devotee
should not be affected by distress or suffering (dukha).
Sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ – He should not desire happiness.
He should not be attached to happy situations.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This refers to worldly happiness, not transcendental
happiness.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Worldly happiness.

Vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ – The devotee is detached from
every-thing in this world. Bhaya – He is free from all
kinds of fear. You were just saying that we shouldn’t
worry about what will happen in the future. Krodha – He
is free from anger, and frustration. Sthita-dhīr munir
ucyate – Kṛṣṇa is describing the qualities and nature of
someone who is perfectly situated in transcendental
consciousness, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja] Please recite the verse
beginning tat te ‘nukampam.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:




tat te ‘nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo


                           303
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam

hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te

jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.8)


[A person is entitled to the treasure of serving the
lotus feet of Godhead, who redeems us of our worldly
bondage, if he lives with his heart, speech and body
submitted to Him and if, through his good vision, he
truly sees the mercy of Godhead in the sufferings he
brought about by his own deeds. There is no other way of
being delivered from this world. Whatever Godhead does
is for our good. We can be redeemed if we behold His
mercy in every event and in every activity. But if we
notice any defect in His work, or realise any cruelty
therein, it is sure to result in evilness and
difficulty.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the meaning?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

If some suffering comes to a devotee, that devotee
thinks it is a result of his previous activities; Kṛṣṇa
is now giving a very, very little token punishment for
those activities.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Kṛṣṇa gives us suffering so that we will become detached
from this world. That is His mercy.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Hṛd-vāg – He offers obeisances with his heart, with his
words, and with his body. Jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-
bhāk – For one who lives in this way, the lotus feet of
Kṛṣṇa are his rightful inheritance. This cannot be taken
away from him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If someone is abusing you, why should you not become
angry?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

I can think that this is the result of my previous
karma. It is not that that person is doing something to
me. Kṛṣṇa is doing something to me, and this person is
simply the instrument or the carrier. I can’t oppose
what is happening. If I try to oppose it, it will come
to me from somewhere else, or from some other person.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, always think like that.


                          304
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

If someone is tearing a piece of paper, should you
become angry?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Tearing my paper? I don’t understand.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

You are like the paper.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

If someone is tearing an insignificant piece of paper,
will you be angry, or not?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Will you be angry?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

There is no need to be angry.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The tearing of the paper is a useless thing. Similarly,
we may see many things in this world which we may
consider to be the cause of our anger, but they are all
like dreams. After a dream is over, we say, “Oh, nothing
happened.” So, we need not be angry. By considering
things in this way, we will be able to do bhajana
successfully.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

In Badger last year, you were speaking from the Eleventh
Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. You were telling us about
the Avantī brāhmaṇa. You explained how people used to
come and urinate on his head, spit at him, and pass
stool in his kamaṇḍalu (waterpot).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

The Avantī brāhmaṇa was not dis-turbed by this, because
he understood, “These circumstances have come from my
own previous activities, so I must tolerate them.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Try to follow this understanding, then you will be happy
and able to do bhajana of Kṛṣṇa. Be niṣkāma, free from
material desires. Desire only love and affection for
Kṛṣṇa, nothing else; then you will not be disturbed.
Don’t disturb anyone, and don’t be disturbed by anyone.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, regarding this same verse, duḥkheṣv
anudvigna-manāḥ, sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ, when we discuss

                            305
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

this topic, many devotees say it is easier for them to
be surrendered when misery or suffering comes, but what
about when happiness comes? They say that when happiness
comes, they become too much attached to it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

After all, it is worldly happiness. There is no use of
worldly happiness. Only kṛṣṇa-bhakti is of value. Our
only happiness should be in the opportunity for
svajātīya snigdha-asaya sādhu-saṅga (the association of
those Vaiṣṇava sādhus who are situated in the goal we
want to attain and who are affectionate to us).

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, practically speaking, in my practical
situation…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do whatever is favorable. Don’t waste time.

Sat-prema dāsa:

Gurudeva, how is it that Śrīyā Śuka (Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
parrot) merged in Brahman (the impersonal light
emanating from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s divine form, or the
impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth) after being
with Rādhārāṇī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

He is saying that when Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī was in the
womb of his mother, he was in Brahman realization, or
impersonal realization. He is asking how it is possible
that the parrot of Śrīmatī Rādhikā can be reduced to the
stage of impersonal realization.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He did this to show that even a brahmavādī, a brahma-
realized soul, can become a bhakta. He did this only as
an outward show.

Paramānanda dāsa:

Gurudeva, when the body of the conditioned soul is burnt
to ashes (cremated) after death, how important is it
that his ashes go into the Yamunā and Ganges Rivers, and
what is the destination of that soul whose ashes get
that opportunity?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Suppose a devotee is living in a foreign country and
cannot bring the ashes to the Yamunā or Ganges. How
important is it to do this?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                           306
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


If one is unable to place those ashes in the Ganges, he
will not do so; but if one has the opportunity to do so,
it is very good. They will begin or develop in their
spiritual path, they will engage in sādhana-bhajana, and
then they will go to Vaikuṇṭha.

Devotee:

In the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam we see so many
chapters describing the ecstatic pastimes of Kṛṣṇa. We
see in the Ninth Canto that there is chapter after
chapter of descriptions of dynasties and names of
various kings. Should we see some differences, or no
differences, between the different cantos? Should we see
that all of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is transcendental? Should
we consider all the parts of Bhāgavatam to be equally
transcendental?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are not equal. Up until the Ninth Canto, the
instructions regarding the various histories are given
to inspire us for renunciation – detachment from worldly
things. We learn detachment from the histories of
Purūravā and Purañjana and other kings, and then we
become qualified to read the Tenth Canto.

The material world’s creation, maintenance, and
destruction as described in the Second and Third Canto
of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam have been told only for this
purpose – to inspire us for renunciation. Then, in the
Eleventh Canto we learn from the many histories and
instructions regarding the process to attain kṛṣṇa-
prema. We are advised to follow all the instructions
imparted therein.

Yogesh dāsa:

This morning I was having a hard time waking up to come
on your walk, but I suddenly remembered Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s words: “A moment’s association with a pure
devotee is worth so much.” I wanted to understand this
statement, so I ran here to find out the answer.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, you are fortunate.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

You will be going to his house in Mauritius, so he will
have your association there.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He is from Mauritius?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

He is Yogesh prabhu, a disciple of our Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


                           307
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

I want to go to Mauritius. Can you help me?

Brajanāth dāsa:

You requested the devotees in Mauritius to make a
festival like this there.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I want a festival like this. I also want to meet with
the Prime Minister of Mauritius, to thank him that
Indian culture is still being maintained in his country.

[To all the devotees] Also, remember this: I explained
in my class about Saubhari Ṛṣi. He cursed Garuḍa, and
what became of him?

Devotee:

He fell down.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He deviated. He developed lust in his heart and then
approached King Māndhātā to marry his daughters. We must
be always alert regarding offences to Vaiṣṇavas.




* * *




1

“The original inhabitants of Vṛndāvana are attached to
Kṛṣṇa spontaneously in devotional service. Nothing can
compare to such spontaneous devotional service, which is
called rāgātmikā bhakti. When a devotee follows in the
footsteps of the devotees of Vṛndāvana, his devotional
service is called rāgānuga bhakti ” * (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.149).


“When one becomes attached to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead according to one’s natural inclination to love
Him and is fully absorbed in thoughts of the Lord, that
state is called transcendental attachment, and
devotional service according to that attachment is
called rāgātmikā, or spontaneous devotional service” *
(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.272).



2 “But simply by following such regulative principles
one cannot attain the loving sentiments of the devotees
in Vrajabhūmi.” *




                          308
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

3 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
book, Prabandhāvalī, Chapter Five:


Feeling that he had attained nothing by staying with
Bābājī Mahārāja, a young man left him. Then, after about
two weeks he returned to Bābājī Mahārāja with a
beautiful young lady from a wealthy family, whom he had
married. He offered praṇāma to Bābājī Mahārāja and said,
‘Bābājī Mahārāja, I have entered the saṁsāra, the
material world. Bhaktivinoda Thākura has written in his
Gītāvalī: “kṛṣṇera saṁsāra kara chāḍi’ anācāra – we
should give up our offences and perform bhajana as
family men.” Therefore I have collected a kṛṣṇa-dāsī.
Please be merciful to her, and to me also, so we can
engage in bhajana and have a successful material life as
well.’

Bābājī Mahārāja replied, ‘You have done well! I am so
pleased! You have collected one kṛṣṇa-dāsī? Then you
should do one thing: you should offer pūjā to this
kṛṣṇa-dāsī. Every day you should cook an offering for
her, and offer her praṇāma and some flowers, saying,
“You are a kṛṣṇa-dāsī, and very dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” But
beware. Don’t try to enjoy her, otherwise everything
will be destroyed for you and you will descend into
hell!’

Hearing this, the boy was astonished and was rendered
speechless. Frightened, he called his “kṛṣṇa-dāsī” and
quickly left.

Was deceiving Bābājī Mahārāja an easy thing? It was not
possible to deceive him.”




4 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
evening class in Frielendorf, Germany, July 9, 2007:


I will tell you a story about Śrīla Prabhupāda
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Ṭhākura. He had two
disciples, named Ananta Vāsudeva and Sundarānanda, who
were both very brilliant and had sharp memories. They
both served him, and at that time they were controlled
by his influence.

After Śrīla Prabhupāda left this world, they became
‘guideless,’ and no one could control them. Ananta
Vāsudeva became the President of the Gauḍīya Maṭhas all
over India and also took sannyāsa. However, after some
time he and Sundarānanda began to think, ‘Our gurudeva,
Śrīla Prabhupāda, was not qualified to give siddha-deha
(one’s perfect spiritual form) and mañjarī-bhāva. He has
not indicated that he will give that to us. It is better
to have another guru, and retake dīkṣā from him.’

Criticizing Śrīla Prabhupāda in so many ways, they both
went to a bābājī of Navadvīpa, took shelter of him, and
received [so-called] siddha-bhāva from him. They threw
the books of Śrīla Prabhupāda, such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

                          309
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, in the Ganges River, and
did other very nonsense things with those books. What
became of them as a result of criticizing their gurudeva
and disobeying him? Lust came in their hearts and they
could not check it.

Ananta Vāsudeva gave up his sannyāsa-āśrama and married
a lady, and then he went to Vṛndāvana to engage in
bhajana. He was hosted at the Rādhā-ramaṇa Gosvāmī
temple, where the Rādhā-ramaṇa Gosvāmī eventually took
all the property and gold that he had collected from his
disciples. The Gosvāmī also took away all the books that
he had printed and expelled him from his house.

Ananta Vāsudeva eventually became so depressed that he
took poison and died, and his disciples took him in the
night and gave him [so-called] samādhi. And what became
of Sundarānanda? At last he became totally mad, at which
time he began smearing his own stool all over his body.

We should be very careful about guru-aparādha.



An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s book,
Prabandhāvalī, Chapter Six:


When Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda
entered his unmanifest pastimes, the Gauḍīya Maṭha
became divided over who would be the next ācārya. Ananta
Vāsudeva was nominated, but in time it was seen that he
was not qualified. Many devotees asked my guru mahārāja
what to do, and he told them that if a guru is fallen he
should be given up, and a bona fide guru accepted
instead. If a disciple does not realize that his guru is
unqualified at the time of dīkṣā but finds out later, he
should reject that person and accept a real guru. If
one’s dīkṣā-guru is unable to give pure bhakti, then one
should humbly ask his permission to take shelter of a
qualified śikṣā-guru. However, if the disciple is
refused permission, then he must conclude that this so-
called guru is selfish and worldly-minded, and should
therefore be rejected.




An excerpt from an interview with Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja in Murwillumbah, Australia, January 15, 2000:


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

After Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvati Ṭhākura, there was
a person named Ananta Vāsudeva. He was very qualified,
but he became charmed by a lady devotee and left his
sannyāsa. He married, after which many devotees became
against him and said, “Now you should enter family life?
This behavior is like that of a dog who eats something,
vomits it, and again eats hiw own vomit.” At that time
he was very powerful. He had money and so many
disciples, and he began to torture his god-brothers, the

                          310
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

disciples of Śrīla Bhaktisiddānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who
opposed him.


Satyarūpa dāsī:

What was the cause of the friction?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It came about because he was attracted to his own lady-
disciple and married her. His god-brothers told him that
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures it is written
that such behavior is not a good thing for Vaiṣṇavism.
They said, “You should go with her, and you should
vacate your position as ācārya.” Everyone turned against
him. He was at that time very wealthy and had a great
deal of power, but his god-brothers left him and
established their own maṭhas (temples) here and there.

So there are many sections, and everyone besides him is
in the paramparā. All are like one. Sometimes they meet
together and have discussions. They also meet here and
there wherever there is an utsava (festival). Their
preaching centers are in different places, but they are
of the same opinion.


Satyarūpa dāsī:

Was the falling of Ananta Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement
so that the Gauḍīya Maṭha will grow more?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, that is right. We can reconcile it in this way.
Otherwise we could not have preached all over the
world.”




5 The stage of bhāva-bhakti is the initial stage of
perfection in devotion. It is compared to the first ray
of the prema-sun appearing in the heart of the bhakti-
sādhaka that marks the end of the stage of sādhana.



6 “The king said: O you who are in the form of a bull,
you know the truth of religion. You are speaking
according to the principle that the destination intended
for the perpetrator of irreligious acts is also intended
for one who identifies the perpetrator. You are no other
than the personality of religion” * (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
1.17.22)



7 “O greatest among human beings, it is very difficult
to ascertain the particular miscreant who has caused our

                          311
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

sufferings, because we are bewildered by all the
different opinions of theoretical philosophers. Some of
the philosophers, who deny all sorts of duality, declare
that one’s own self is responsible for his personal
happiness and distress. Others say that superhuman
powers are responsible, while yet others say that
activity is responsible, and the gross materialists
maintain that nature is the ultimate cause. There are
also some thinkers who believe that no one can ascertain
the cause of distress by argumentation, nor know it by
imagination, nor express it by words. O sage amongst
kings, judge for yourself by thinking over all this with
your own intelligence” * (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.17.18–
20).`



8 Nirjala: nir means ‘no,’ and jalā means ‘water;’ to
observe a full fast, even from water.



9 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
booklet, The Way of Love, which is based on his lecture,
spoken at the famous Custard Factory in Birmingham,
England, June 14, 2003 :


“Jesus also taught this philosophy. He went to India
when he was about sixteen years old, and he visited many
places of pilgrimage, like Vṛndāvana, Ayodhyā, South
India, and Jagannātha Purī. In Purī he saw the deities
of Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā, and he heard Lord
Jagannātha (meaning “Lord of the Universe”) addressed as
Kṛṣṇa. In this part of India, the name Kṛṣṇa is
pronounced Kroosna. Because of different languages,
Greek and Hebrew, this name became Kroosta, then Krista,
and now it is pronounced Christ. Kṛṣṇa, Kroosna, Krista,
and now Christ – they are the same.”




September 30, 2007


darśana

[This art and publishing darśana took place at Śrī
Rāmaṇa Vihārī Gauḍīya Mātha in Janakpuri, New Delhi:]

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Some devotees say that when new people read the story of
King Hariścandra in the booklet Secrets of the
Undiscovered Self, they think that his guru, Viśvāmitra
Muni, was cruel to him for taking away his kingdom,
separating him from his queen, and temporarily killing
his son.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have clarified this. By Viśvāmitra’s grace,

                          312
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

Hariścandra went to Vaikuṇṭha and Hariścandra’s son
became a great king; so how can Viśvāmitra be considered
cruel? Out of pity he entered Hariścandra’s dream, gave
him darśana, and took away all his material possessions
and conceptions.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Mañjarī is helping Rādhā-mohana prabhu and Īśvara Purī
prabhu with the drawings of the ācāryas for your
Bhagavat-arka-marīci-mālā. Mādhava-priya prabhu said
that you want drawings.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It’s going to be published in Hindi.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Yes.

We have no artistic or photographic references for
Bhāgavata Ācārya and Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.
What should they look like?

Mañjarī dāsī:

What should they be doing in the picture?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Bhāgavata Ācārya should look about fifty years of age. I
want to see the praṇāma mantra offered to him by
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and then I can see what he should
be doing.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

We’ll ask Mādhava-priyā prabhu to send you the
manuscript.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If the book is here with Rāmacandra, I will see it here.

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja asks Rāmacandra prabhu
if he has the original Bengali book that was used as the
basis of his translation.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura should look like a
tridaṇḍi-sannyāsī ācārya. He is sitting and doing
bhajana with daṇḍa and japa beads.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Three years ago, we showed you photographs of the wall
paintings (bas reliefs) in your Govardhana maṭha. Even
though the photographs weren’t good quality, you were
satisfied enough to order us to make a large size book
of all the art we [the art team] did for you, and to
give one copy of that book to the President of India.


                          313
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

In order to carry out that order, we arranged for
professional photographs to be taken of the bas reliefs,
with dramatic lighting. And after that, Rādhā-mohana and
Īśvara Purī prabhus did some photo editing. Now the
photos are complete, and we want to show them to you for
your approval.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are the artworks you have all done?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Yes, only two bas reliefs are not finished; everything
else is finished.

[Showing a photo] We all did this together. This scene
takes place after Kṛṣṇa’s water sports with Rādhikā and
the gopīs in Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Rādhikā and the gopīs are now
decorating Kṛṣṇa after bathing.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Okay. Okay. Very good.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is Pulastya Ṛṣi carrying Govardhana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why have you given him a stick?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

I don’t know. We put the stick in the original sketch
and showed that to you.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

Someone told me he was flying. Was he walking, or
flying, as he carried Govardhana?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He was walking. Better to take out the stick.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Okay, we will take out the stick.

This is Dāna-nivartana-kuṇḍa, where the gopīs forcibly
dressed Kṛṣṇa as a gopī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

Oh, let me see it again. [Looking again] Madhumaṅgala
should be somewhere in the picture.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

He is here. He is very upset because Kṛṣṇa was defeated

                          314
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

by Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Where?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

[Pointing at a part of the photo] Do you see these two
boys? They are sitting and lamenting that Kṛṣṇa was made
a laughing stock by Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, no. His śikhā should be tied to a tree. [The gopīs
had grabbed him and tied his śikhā to a tree.]

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

The bas relief is already on the wall, so how can we
change it?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

No problem. You can change it on the computer.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is Sanātana Gosvāmī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why is Kṛṣṇa holding this lotus flower? Why is His hand
like this? He should be like this. [Śrīla Mahārāja
pointed with his own fingers, showing how Kṛṣṇa should
be shown pointing.] He is pointing to the śilā and
telling Sanātana Gosvāmī, “I am giving you this śilā.
Please take it and circumambulate it.”

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is Pulastya Ṛṣi cursing Govardhana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Where is Govardhana?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Here is his face, and here is his eye [to symbolically
indicate that Govardhana is a person].

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It does not look like Govardhana. Only big, big trees
are seen in your photo. It should look like a mountain,
just as in the previous picture of Pulastya.

Pulastya had been carrying Govardhana on his fingers,
and then put him down. Now he is saying, “O Govardhana,
you will not come any further with me? Then I will curse
you.”

If I cannot understand that this is Govardhana, who will

                            315
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

under-stand? Don’t show eyes. Small plants should be
there.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is nauka-vilāsa, the boat pastime.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

I want to see that nauka-vilāsa again. Śrīmatī Rādhikā…

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

She is embracing Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But why is She looking very afraid?

Mañjarī dāsī:

She is afraid of falling out of the boat. Her veil is
flying.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It will do.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Should we change it?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva is saying that it is okay.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is Kṛṣṇa surrendering to Rādhā after the pastime of
Dāna-nivartana-kuṇḍa.1 She is now blessing Him, saying,
“Kalyāṇa bhavatu – May Your life be auspicious.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This animal should look more like a deer. It should be
more golden, with spots.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Okay, we’ll change it.

Now, here are the photos of some Dasa Avatāra bas
reliefs. This is Kūrma (Kṛṣṇa’s tortoise incarnation).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

And this is Nṛsiṁhadeva.


                            316
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, Nṛsiṁhadeva.

He looks like a person with a moustache, not like
Nṛsiṁhadeva. Also, there is no need of a mukuṭa
(helmet). A lion cannot wear a mukuṭa.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Okay, we can change it on the computer, but we cannot
change the wall painting.

Here is Matsya (Kṛṣṇa’s fish incarnation).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Here is Baladeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[Showing how Baladeva Prabhu should look by puffing out
his own chest, looking mighty and smiling proudly.] He
should look more carefree.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Okay, we will try to change it in the computer.

Here, the mañjarīs are dressing Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa after
jala-keli-līlā (water sports in Rādhā-kuṇḍa).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Okay.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is Buddha.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is Hanumān blessing Govardhana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why is everything looking green? There should be more
stone color, and peacocks should be here, dancing.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

We thought that although nowadays there are many stones,
thousands or millions of years ago there were not so
many stones. We thought there would be more grass and
trees at that time.


                          317
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No. Stones were there, but not broken as they are
nowadays. So, there must be more stone color. Some
dancing peacocks and nīla-gaya (large blackish-blue
animals that look half-deer – half-cow) and deer should
be shown.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is Hanumān carrying Govardhana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good. Oh, let me see Hanumān again.

[After seeing the picture again] He would not have given
up his club; [posing as Hanumān] with one hand he is
holding up Govardhana, and with the other he is holding
a club – like this.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

So, one hand should be down, holding a club?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Or, one hand can be holding the club over his shoulder.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Okay.

This is the Annakūṭa ceremony: Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva and
the residents of Vraja worshiping Govardhana Hill.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is also okay.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

When you were previously looking at the bas relief on
the wall, you said to make Baladeva whiter. So, Rādhā-
mohana prabhu made Him more white in the computer.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[Pointing to Kṛṣṇa’s form on the top of Govardhana] He
is Govardhana taking prasādam?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Harideva.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Yes. And, here is the other Kṛṣṇa, who is worshiping
Himself in His feature as Harideva.

This is the pastime at Kusuma-sarovara. It is when Kṛṣṇa
is sitting on the branch, but getting ready to jump off.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                            318
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017


There should be more branches. From where will the
flowers hang if there are not more branches? From the
trunk? It should all look natural. Kṛṣṇa is hiding in a
grove of a kuñja. He is not sitting out in the open.
Kṛṣṇa’s branch should be here, behind very green leaves
and flowers. Kṛṣṇa should be sitting on a higher branch,
not on that branch.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

And pushing down the other branch with His feet.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There needs to be some change.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This one shows Kṛṣṇa jumping down and catching Rādhikā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. There should be more flowers.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Okay; more branches and flowers.

This is Rādhikā leaving the rāsa-līlā in vāsantī-rāsa
(the rāsa-dance that takes place in springtime). She is
upset. Seeing that Rādhikā has left, Kṛṣṇa is also
leaving. The other gopīs are surprised, thinking “Where
did Kṛṣṇa go?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why is Rādhikā so big?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Because She is way in front.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

She should be practically the same size as the other
gopīs. Her face is too long here. It should be more
round.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Okay, we will make it more round.

[Next the artists showed Śrīla Mahārāja the paintings of
Kalki, Holi, and the jala-keli-līlā (water-sports), all
of which he said were very good.]

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

This is Kṛṣṇa lifting Govardhana. This gopī   is saying,
“Govardhana, if you fall down, I will curse   you to
become ashes.” Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā   are in
anxiety for the well-being of their son. As   Kṛṣṇa is
holding up the mountain, He and Rādhikā are   stealthily

                            319
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

casting sidelong glances at each other.

In Kṛṣṇa’s ecstasy, His cloth is falling from His
shoulder, His flute is falling from His hand, and He is
about to faint. You told us that Madhumaṅgala is
pinching Him and saying, “Your pītāmbara (yellow
chaddar) and flute are falling. This is not the time for
that.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Here is Vāmanadeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is this in His hand?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

A conch shell.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

A conch shell does not look like that. This looks like a
fish.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Okay, we will change it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I previously told you to collect all of your works, from
the beginning.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

From my beginning with you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, from the beginning with Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja up until now, including all these bas reliefs.
All these paintings should come in one book.

Śyāmarāṇī

dāsī:

Okay.

We have recently made a contract with the BBT. In a
couple of days, the BBT trustee will be bringing me a CD
of all the high-resolution scans of my BBT art – the
work I did for our Prabhupāda.

After that, the devotees in your publishing groups will
be able to use them. For example, here are two paintings
that I did for the BBT, and now Rādhā-mohana and Īśvara
Purī prabhus have used them for the covers of your books

                            320
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

for mass distribution – Nectar of Govinda-līlā and Going
Beyond Vaikuṇṭha.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Okay. Very good.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

One other thing. Radha-mohana prabhu and Īśvara Purī
prabhu are making a presentation of all the art, as a
CD, so that devotees can show various slide shows when
they are preaching to people.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Okay.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva used to do slide shows before [when he was
traveling and preaching with his guru maharaja, Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja].

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Viśvambhara prabhu asked us to make a new cover for your
English Jaiva-dharma.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And for the Hindi edition?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Hindi, too, if you like.

In this way, people in the street will like to purchase
it. What would you like on the cover? Presently it is a
black cover with a small picture of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura. Would you like a bigger picture to make it more
attractive?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That photo is very good.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

It is good, but very small.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can make it bigger.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Śrīpāda Vaikhānasa Mahārāja told me that when he was
going to print Jaiva-dharma in Bangalore, you told him
to put Gaura-Nitāi on the cover.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I don’t remember that. Why would I have said that? It is

                             321
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

better that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is there, as it
is his book. Why Gaura-Nityānanda?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

[Looking at the photo of himself on the cover of the art
CD] Who is he? He has very long hands. What is he doing?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

You are giving instructions on how to finish the
painting of Prema-sampuṭa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Make it beautiful. My photo cannot be like this. Is this
my photo, or have you made it in the computor?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

It is your photo. [Possibly the camera lens had
distorted the proportions.] We will change it to make it
more natural.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, make it better.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Also, regarding the Sevā-kuñja painting, you told me to
fix Rādhikā’s eye. At that time I also changed Her hair
to make it more curly. This is how it is now. Which one
do you like better?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This [with the curly hair] looks better.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

I have one more question.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Your questions will not stop.




* * *




1 An excerpt from Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala Parikramā, Part 2:


At the place called Dāna-ghāṭī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His gopa
friends would become tax collectors and demand milk,

                            322
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

yogurt, and butter from the gopīs. When the gopīs
refused to give any tax, Kṛṣṇa would forcibly plunder
and relish their milk products.

The gopīs, being tired of these daily encounters,
decided one day to retaliate strongly. They decided that
on a chosen day they would all hide in the caves and
dense kuñjas on the hill on both sides of the narrow
pathway. A few gopīs would then cross Sāṅkarī Khor
carrying pots of milk, yogurt, and butter on their
heads. The plan was that the moment Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās
would stop them and try to plunder their load, the gopīs
would call out to their friends hiding nearby, who would
at once descend from their hideouts. Then, under the
leadership of Lalitā, they would teach Kṛṣṇa and His
sakhās a good lesson.

And so it happened that the next day thousands and
thousands of gopīs divided into groups and hid
themselves in the dense kuñjas and large caves around
Sāṅkarī Khor. Then, as usual, a few gopīs placed pots of
milk and yogurt on their heads and made their way
towards Sāṅkarī Khor. Kṛṣṇa, Madhumaṅgala, and the other
sakhās obstructed their path and forcibly began to
plunder their milk and yogurt. At once, these gopīs
signalled the gopīs who were hiding, and a wonderful
līlā took place. Five to ten gopīs forcefully caught
hold of Kṛṣṇa. Another five to ten caught hold of
Madhumaṅgala, and further groups captured Subala,
Arjuna, Lavaṅga, and the other sakhās. They slapped
their cheeks till they were swollen. They then tied
their śikhās to the branches of the trees and asked
them, ‘What pleasure is there in plundering our yogurt?
Will you ever do it again?’ Madhumaṅgala folded his
hands and prayed at the feet of Lalitā. ‘Please spare
me. I was very hungry. I am a simple brāhmaṇa boy who
fell under the influence of that fickle Kṛṣṇa. I shall
never behave like this again.’ The gopīs thus taught the
sakhās a lesson.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Viśākhā, and some other gopīs had
captured Kṛṣṇa. They slapped His cheeks a few times and
then forcibly dressed Him like a woman with a blouse and
lahaṅgā (skirt). They even put sindūra (vermilion) in
the parting of His hair, bangles on His arms, anklets on
His feet, and so on. They covered half His face with a
veil, placed a pot of yogurt on His head, and began to
make fun of Him by demanding tax on the yogurt. From the
top of the hill, Lalitā Sakhī aimed a stone at the pot
of yogurt on Kṛṣṇa’s head, breaking it and drenching His
whole body. All the sakhīs began to laugh and clap, and
Śyāma felt very ashamed. ‘Will You dare to demand tax on
our yogurt ever again?’ they asked. ‘Hold your ears and
vow, “From today, I will never try to tax the gopīs’
yogurt.” ’ They forced Kṛṣṇa to repeat this.

Dāna Nivartana Kuṇḍa is the place where the gopīs
reclaimed their dāna from Kṛṣṇa.




October 3, 2007

                          323
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



Radio interview

Hindi To English Translation

Announcer:

Listeners, today we are introducing you to the world-
renowned preacher of kṛṣṇa-bhakti and kṛṣṇa-nāma, Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. For the past
sixty years, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has been a leader
of kṛṣṇa-bhakti-yoga. He has been serving humankind,
teaching how to make human life happy and successful. He
is touring the globe for the twenty-fifth time, and has
recently arrived in Jammu. We are now meeting this
divine personality, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārājajī.

Mahārājajī, we welcome you to our studio. For the past
sixty years you have been preaching and propagating
kṛṣṇa-bhakti, and on this subject you are the guide for
millions of people. How are you feeling about this?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have been preaching Vedic philosophy and culture for
over sixty years in India, and also for the past fifteen
years throughout many Western and Eastern countries
around the world. Millions of people are accepting this
and finding happiness and auspiciousness in their lives.
Knowing this, I am also feeling very happy.

Announcer:

What dharmic, or religious, message are you giving to
the world?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Our message is that human birth is very rare. By His
great mercy, the Supreme Lord has given us this human
body. Only in this life can we know, by the help of
sādhus and saints, that we are a minute part of that
Supreme Lord. Due to our forgetfulness of Him, at this
time and for millions of births, from the beginning of
creation, we are roaming in the cycle of birth and
death. We are looking for happiness and peace, but we
are not able to attain happiness and peace due to
distress of old age, death, and other types of misery
that we find in this world.

It is only in this human birth that we can realize these
things. We can know and understand that it is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who has created this
universe and that we have a relationship with Him. With
this relationship we should perform bhajana at His lotus
feet, come out from this cycle of birth and death, enter
His association, and attain His service.

Announcer:

What is the effect of the Vedic philosophy-based kṛṣṇa-
bhakti that you are preaching in different countries?


                          324
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Due to the Vedic knowledge that I am preaching all over
the world, millions of people all over the world have
given up eating cow and other meat, eggs, garlic, and
onion, and are taking up a righteous way of living.
According to the Vedic rules, they are wearing neck
beads, keeping śikhā, wearing sacred thread, and
performing devotional service to the Lord. They are
considering themselves very happy and fortunate, and
they are saying that they are indebted to me life after
life for saving them from the miseries of this world.

Announcer:

What is your message for the people of Jammu and
Kashmir?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

My special message for the people of Jammu and Kashmir
is that there is only one God, or Supreme Being. Whether
you call Him Allah, Khuda, Paramātmā, Bhagavān, or God,
or any other name, He is the creator of this world.
Because we have forgotten Him, we have fallen into this
cycle of birth and death.

No one is Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist, or Christian from
birth. Due to our lifestyle, the society and country in
which we are born, and our learned characteristics, we
classify ourselves as Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist, or
Christian, and because of this, we are trying to gain
each other’s wealth and belongings. We are thinking that
we are Hindu or Muslim. We are thinking, for example,
that only by coming in the Muslim religion can one be
benefited. With this idea we are even eager to kill
other human beings.

My message is that by birth we are not Hindu, Muslim, or
Christian. We are the children of the same God, who has
given us birth so that we can worship Him according to
our own way of devotion and attain His lotus feet. He
will only be attained by love. That is why we should
offer our love to our worshipful Deity, be compassionate
to other living souls, avoid any fighting, and maintain
peace. This is my message.

Announcer:

What is the importance of Indian Vedic dharma in today’s
time?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Indian Vedic dharma is important at all times – those
times that have passed and those times that are yet to
come. Also at the present time, it is very important in
complying with this Vedic dharma. In the world today,
rich countries like America have also become fed up with
wealth. Wealth is not getting them any happiness or
peace. The highest rates of suicides are in these
countries. In Russia and China also, suicide rates are

                          325
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

very high. No one is happy.

If people of these countries accept Vedic culture, as
they are now taking up as a result of preaching, they
can live a happy life. They will have loving
relationships with each other and will not waste their
valuable time in fighting.

There is a prominent mantra in our Vedic culture:


īśāvāsyam idam sarvaṁ

yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat

tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā

mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam

Śrī Īśopaniṣad (Verse 1)


[The Supreme Lord is the controller and proprietor of
all that is, of every animate and inanimate entity
through-out creation. One should accept for himself what
the Lord has given him as his share, and never try to
take another’s portion.]

There is only one Supeme Godhead. He is present in all
living entities and is also in all moving and non-moving
entities. Surrender everything unto Him. Do not be
greedy for anyone’s wealth, belongings, land, or wife.
This is the main reason for war and fighting. Our
Gandhijī also understood this, and preached it
everywhere.

Announcer:

Mahārājajī thank you very much for coming to our studio.




October 7, 2007


Lithuanian darśana

[Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja introduces many devotees, one
after another, and tells Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
about their various devotional qualities and
contributions to his mission. Each devotee offers his or
her obeisances:]

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, here are the devotees from Lithuania.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

My blessings to you all. Chant and remember Kṛṣṇa; read
and distribute my books.


                           326
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

[Translating for a Lithuanian devotee] When did Kṛṣṇa
first get His peacock feather?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is not that Kṛṣṇa only wore the peacock from His
childhood years. He has been wearing it since His birth,
and He has been wearing it in Goloka Vṛndāvana
eternally.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

He was born with a peacock feather?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He wore it even before His birth.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, this is Lalitā-priyā, Ratikalā, and Jayantī.
They are helping very much. They want to go to the
Gaṅgāmātās and to Kārtika, and then perhaps organize a
center next year.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

My blessings to you.

Devotee:

What service can we do with the qualities we possess?
What is the best thing we can do to make you happy?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Be with the Gaṅgāmātās. Do as they are doing. Preach and
distribute books, and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa.




October 29, 2007


darśana

Śrīpāda Bhāgavat Mahārāja:

We want to take all headaches from you. We don’t want
you to have any headaches.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But I think that I have no headache. I am very happy to
preach all over the world, and all sincere persons are
coming by love and affection. I want that you will all
continue in this way after me. Do everything like me,
with love and affection – not by controlling.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavat Mahārāja:

                             327
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


‘After me’ will be after a long time.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very soon I will tell my preachers who are preaching in
different areas that I will not go to those areas to
initiate. They should give harināma and also dīkṣā, and
thus continue the mission. After my departure, and also
while I am still in this world, I will allow all to
preach and make disciples in their areas.

But do not be like ISKCON leaders. They quarrel with
Vaiṣṇavas and don’t honor them; especially they don’t
honor senior Vaiṣṇavas. I want everyone to give respect
to seniors, whether those seniors are gṛhasthas or
sannyāsīs. I request the sannyāsīs not to think, “The
gṛhasthas are controlling us. They should not come.”

Problems always come, and they will continue to come in
the future. At the time of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda there were so many
problems, and my gurudeva even had to go to jail. But
pure Vaiṣṇavas always keep their feet on the head of
problems, and I do that as well. Problems come, but I
keep my feet on the head of problems.

In ISKCON, almost all sannyāsīs have gone down and left
sannyāsa. Then, new ones are coming and making their
pockets heavy as well. Still, to this day, I have no
bank account nor do I keep even one paisa. Brajanāth and
Rādhā-kānta and Yaśodānanda have accounts, but I do not.
I have something in pocket, but not in my pocket.
Everything is in the pockets of Mādhava Mahārāja and
Brajanāth, and Brajanāth keeps all the accounts.

I have not done anything for myself; I have not kept
even one paisa or shilling. Be selfless like me,
following in the footsteps of what I have done for the
mission – preaching, establishing preaching centers, and
helping others.

I also want a ladies’ āśrama for ladies who are orphaned
(who have left their home and family); either here in
Gopīnātha Bhavan or outside. Also, I want a school in
Vṛndāvana for the children of devotees.

[Later]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why are you worried?

Kiśorī-mohana dāsa:

I am worried because two days ago, after the meeting,
you said very clearly, “I will stop traveling. My
disciples, the preachers, will be traveling everywhere,
and they will be giving harināma and dīkṣā.” And then
you said, “They will make their own disciples.” My worry
is that everything I have heard from you for the last
eleven years about the qualities of guru, guru-tattva,
who can give dīkṣā, and what is the definition of dīkṣā
– it seems like it was all smashed to pieces at that

                          328
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

moment.

I want to understand from you how someone can give dīkṣā
who does not have realization of his own relationship
with Kṛṣṇa and who cannot see the svarūpa (form) of the
soul. I don’t understand.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should not be worried about that. [Indicating some
Western sannyāsīs in the room] Those sannyāsīs who are
preaching my mission everywhere are madhyama-adhikārī. I
think they will not deviate; I have that faith. Only a
few went, like Prema-prayojana, but I have no doubt
about these sannyāsīs. The Indian sannyāsīs, like Vana
Mahārāja, Tīrtha Mahārāja, and Mādhava Mahārāja, are
qualified, and they are also madhyama-adhikārī.

For my gurudeva, I am giving initiation, dīkṣā, and even
sannyāsa. So, I want that, in my lifetime, those who are
qualified should do the same. Thus our paramparā will
continue. I would like that.

If they are madhyama-adhikārī, they can give initiation
even if they have no realization. I have been giving
initiation for the past forty years, since our guru
mahārāja ordered me to do so. We should obey our holy
master, our spiritual master. But I also want them to be
qualified.

I have not told this for the gṛhastha-bhaktas. I have
said this for these sannyāsīs – that after some time, in
my lifetime, I am allowing them to initiate. After some
time I will stop traveling, and if I have energy at that
time I will write books as I am doing now. And at some
time, if my health is okay, I may go one time to
America, or one time somewhere in the East.

You should all preach my mission.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, but you will also continue to accept
disciples.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, one thing more. The sannyāsīs are going to all the
places, but if any devotee wants that, “I will take
dīkṣā and harināma from Mahārāja.…”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

From Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They will come to me, and I will initiate them.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Direct or by phone; in some way he will give.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                            329
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017


But those who are satisfied by them should take
initiation from them.

Kiśorī-mohana dāsa:

But how do we continue to preach guru-tattva – pure
guru-tattva?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They will preach as I preach guru-tattva.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva is saying, “If they want, they can take
initiation from me.” Gurudeva is happy to give them
initiation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. I will give. But if they are satisfied by the
sannyāsīs, oh, no harm.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, Kiśorī-mohana’s concern is that our
siddhānta, and what we have heard from you, is that the
bhakti-latā-bīja (the seed of devotion) and one’s
relationship with Kṛṣṇa can only come from a Vaiṣṇava
who is on the high-level uttama stage. What will the
disciple be receiving if he receives dīkṣā from a lower
Vaiṣṇava – a madhyama or.…?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

By the order of Gurudeva, the disciple acts like a
postman. The postman gives money, money orders, and
everything else, but that money is not his. Similarly,
that ‘money’ is Gurudeva’s, and thus he is distributing
to all.

They can take what I am saying in this sense. They
should not think, “I am guru.”

Śrīpāda Bhāgavat Mahārāja:

Last year in Vaṁśī-vaṭa, you told me that only the
vraja-rasika-uttama-adhikārī (the self realized guru who
is an associate of Kṛṣṇa in Goloka Vṛndāvana) can give
the bhakti-latā-bīja.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is true. It is true.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavat Mahārāja:

Then I asked you, “Can one who is coming up from
kaniṣṭha to madhyama give that bīja?” You said, “No.”
But are you saying now that if you give the order to
that madhyama, then...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

                             330
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017


Mahārāja:

He should give initiation like a peon (postman).

Śrīpāda Bhāgavat Mahārāja:

It will come by that order?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If he follows the order sincerely, then Kṛṣṇa
realization may come.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, you are saying it is true – you just said it
is true – that only the uttama-mahā-bhāgavata can give
the bīja. Is that true, or not true?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is true.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

So the madhyama cannot give it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If the madhyama is sincere, he can inspire them for
that. He will tell all these things to him, and inspire
them for that kṛṣṇa-sevā-vāsanā to come. [Kṛṣṇa-sevā-
vāsanā is the desire to serve Kṛṣṇa purely, the seed of
which is the symptom of the bhakti-latā-bīja.]

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

But in some lifetime that disciple will have to receive
initiation directly from the uttama-bhakta? Otherwise,
it is not possible to actually receive it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Don’t have any doubt or worry. They should follow what
I’m telling them. They should not think, “I am guru.”

[To Śyāmarāṇī dāsī] What do you want to tell?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

When we go to preach, we tell people, “Surrender to śrī
guru.” Suppose the disciple thinks, “Yes, my guru,
Padmanābha Mahārāja, is śrī guru, that very guru who is
talked about in śāstra.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

When I am not alive, what will happen?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Won’t there be another one coming like you?


                             331
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt          5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If I leave this planet, what will happen? Will everyone
stop giving and taking initiation? What will they do?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

I am just speaking by siddhānta.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, no. I want to ask you: When I leave this planet,
what will they do? Will they initiate, or not?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Whatever you desire, of course. But isn’t there another
uttama-adhikārī always present on the planet who one
should search for?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I think that whether I will tell them to do so or not,
they must initiate.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

“They will anyway,” you are saying?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I know. So, why not beginning from my lifetime?

In his last days Śrīla Srīdhara Mahārāja stopped giving
initiation, and when anyone came to him he told them,
“Go to Govinda Mahārāja.” But during my lifetime, if
someone really only wants to take initiation from me, I
will initiate him.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

It was just a question about our preaching.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They may tell the candidates for initiation, “Your main
guru is Mahārāja [Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja].”
They may say this during my lifetime. They are free to
initiate, or to send the candidates to me; no harm.

[Stretching out the word ‘worried’] Don’t be w o r r r i
e e e e d.




November 18, 2007


darśana

[During the Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā festival, Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja held regular informal group

                          332
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

darśanas so he could meet with all the international
pilgrims and answer their questions. The devotees of
Russia, China, India, and Brazil were so great in number
that separate meetings were held in the temple room for
each of those nationalities on different days. The
following is a transcription of the darśana arranged for
the devotees from all the remaining nations.]

Lalita-kiśorī dāsī:

Can I come on your summer tour?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, as long as you don’t go for the purpose of having a
relationship with a boy. Don’t go on the tour for the
purpose of choosing a boyfriend; otherwise it is better
not to go. Do you understand?

There is a very big disease here. So many naughty boys
and girls are disobeying me, and I want to correct them.
This is not the place for those who are looking for
someone to marry or to enjoy sense gratification. They
should go out of the temple and return to their
countries. They can enjoy there.

So, you can come on my tour if you are strict and intend
to make progress in your Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Devotee:

What is the qualification for meditating on Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s daily pastimes?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Those who have totally removed their lust and all kinds
of anarthas (thoughts and habits that are unfavorable
for bhakti), whose hearts are now totally pure and who
have become humble, they can do so:


tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka (Verse 3)


[Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass that has been trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless and offering respect to everyone according to
their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.]

They are qualified to meditate on Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
daily pastimes. So many devotees take the association of
the bābājīs of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and in Vṛndāvana, and in this
way they go to ruination. First try to remove all of

                           333
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt         5/8/2017

your anarthas. Follow the system told by Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in Śrī Bhajana-rahasya.

Sāvitrī dāsī:

[Introducing a new devotee] She is from Turkey. She
wants to get initiated. She is saying, “When I go back
to Turkey, if I tell people that I visited the same
places that Allah (God) visited, what will people think?
They will think I am crazy.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can tell them all the things you have heard – that
you went to the places of Allah. Please learn all the
conclusive philosophical truths that I have been
explaining, and then you can tell your people, “I am a
soul and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supersoul. That Supersoul was
in India, in Vṛndāvana, and I have heard so many of His
sweet pastimes. Always chant and remember, ‘Hare kṛṣṇa
hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma hare rāma
rāma rāma hare hare.’ ”

Mohinī dāsī:

I have heard that you were previously doing bhajana here
in Govardhana. Can you tell something about how you were
living here, how much you were chanting, how you were
alone, what you were eating, what you were doing, and
when you were waking up?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I lived here before 1968 for two months. Daily, while
weeping, alone, I would do parikramā and read Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and Caitanya-caritāmṛta.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

In other words, not for showing off to anyone else.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I was chanting more than sixty-four rounds a day.

Mohinī dāsī:

What time would you wake up?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I would wake up at 3:00 am.

Mohinī dāsī:

Then what? How would you begin your day?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

First I would chant harināma, then I would chant my
āhnika (gāyatrī mantras), then do parikramā while
chanting – fourteen miles daily. When I returned I would
beg mādhukarī (very small amounts of prasādam) at the
Vrajavāsīs’ houses. After returning from there, I would

                            334
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

read Caitanya-caritāmṛta, while weeping and experiencing
so many transcendental moods. My sentiments cannot be
told.

Bhadrā dāsī:

Previously I’ve heard it said that when we are preparing
an offering for Kṛṣṇa, we should never taste it.
Nowadays I am hearing that it is okay to taste the
offering before it is offered, as long as it is not
tasted in an enjoying mood, but only for Kṛṣṇa’s
pleasure.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Suppose you are preparing something, and without tasting
it yourself you give it to your Deity; and suppose it
was like poison. Or, instead of using sugar, you used
salt – how will it taste? A rāgānuga-bhakta who wants to
give delicious foods to Kṛṣṇa may taste it first.
Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd friend Madhumaṅgala would taste a
preparation first, and would think, “This is very
sweet.” Then he would give his remnants to Kṛṣṇa. Those
who are qualified for this can do so.

Kṛṣṇacandra dāsa:

When you were in the Philippines, you gave me one of
your socks, and all the paraphernalia you used there is
also still with us.

We are a third-world country and you came there only two
times. What is the best attitude for us brahmacārīs to
develop our love for our gurudeva?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Read my books, and also Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, and always engage your mind in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. Go on doing this, always thinking,
“Gurudeva is with me in my heart.”

Devotee:

Who is the guru of Jesus?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Prema-prayojana dāsa] Who is the guru of Jesus?

Prema-prayojana dāsa:

John the Baptist gave him initiation, which is called
baptism in Christianity.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Jesus was a servant of God. He was an exalted Vaiṣṇava,
but not an uttama-vaiṣṇava in the mood of Vraja.

Veṇu-gopāla dāsa:

The other day you mentioned about the chastise-ment of
Choṭa Haridāsa. You said that he committed a minor

                            335
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

offense but received a serious chastisement. I am
wondering how it is possible to follow pure strictness
in our own lives.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:




yadi cāha praṇaya rākhite gaurāṅgera sane

choṭa haridāsera kathā thāke yena mane

Prema-vivarta (Chapter 7)


[If you want to associate with Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you
must always remember the incident of Choṭa Haridāsa and
how he was rejected by the Lord.]

Whether you are a brahmacārī or a sannyāsī, if you are
not following the order of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you
will be ruined. We see so many historical examples of
this; so be careful.

Choṭa Haridāsa was not lusty. On the request of
Mahāprabhu’s associate, Śrī Bhagavān Ācārya, Choṭa
Haridāsa went to the house of a very old lady named
Mādhavī Māhiti to obtain some fine white rice for
offering to the Deity. Mādhavī Māhiti was eighty-four
years old, and she is considered to be one of the
eternal associates of the Lord.

But there was also a young lady present in Mādhavī
Māhiti devī’s house. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu knew this,
and when He later heard about Choṭa Haridāsa’s going
there, He at once stopped Choṭa Haridāsa from coming to
see Him. He was teaching us that if one is in the
renounced order of life and he sees a young lady, his
mind and body may become transformed with lusty
feelings. Mahāprabhu wanted to teach us that those in
the renounced order should follow the ideal etiquette
and be careful about association with the opposite sex.
We are obliged to always remember this.

Your mind is very weak. Don’t listen to your mind. At
any time it may cheat you. Māyā cheated Brahmā, Śaṅkara,
Indra, and Nārada.1 She is very powerful, and she can
only be defeated by Kṛṣṇa. So, be careful if you want to
attain love for Kṛṣṇa.

Devotee:

Is it possible that there is a difference between the
disciple’s external relationship with his gurudeva and
his internal relationship?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Externally you can
consider, “Guru is my father, my mother, my brother, my
guardian, my protector, and my well-wisher,” so try to
obey all of his instructions.

Internally, you can know that he is an associate of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa:

                            336
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017



sākṣād dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ

uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ

kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

Śrī Gurvaṣṭakam (Verse 7)


[All the scriptures proclaim śrī gurudeva is sākṣāt
hari, the direct potency of Śrī Hari, and is thus
considered by saintly authorities to be His non-
different representative. Because śrī gurudeva is so
dear to the Lord, being His con-fi--den--tial servitor
(acintya-bhedābheda-prakāśa-vigraha, the inconceivable
different and non-different worshipful mani-festation of
the Lord), I offer prayers unto his lotus feet.]

Know also that gurudeva is serving Kṛṣṇa (Kṛṣṇa Himself)
and Kṛṣṇā (Śrīmatī Rādhikā), so he (gurudeva) must also
have a teenage gopī form. You can think, “I want to be
her maidservant.”

Devotee:

Why is sannyāsa only given to men?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Women can take sannyāsa, no harm. If a woman is
qualified, she can take sannyāsa. However, if any lusty
person forcibly attacks her, how will she be able to
protect herself? In a rare case, a lady can take
sannyāsa, just as Śyāmarāṇī is a sannyāsī although not
with daṇḍa (the sannyāsa staff) and all the other
paraphernalia of a sannyāsī.




November 23, 2007


darśana

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

I have a doubt. What is the purpose of the art book you
want me to publish?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Mahārāja:

All will see what you have done under my guidance and
what you did before.

I have seen one big photo book.


                            337
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017

Brajanāth dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa Art Book.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

The Form of Beauty by Sharma?

Do you want the pictures I did for Śrīla Prabhupāda in
the same book?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, past and present.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

What is the purpose of having the past ones?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They will know what a good painter you are.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

To show I am a good painter doesn’t inspire me to do it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Then let it be.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva wants to show what a good painter you are.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If you don’t want to do it, then don’t do it.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

I want to do what you want.

Brajanāth dāsa:

This is what Gurudeva wants.




November (undated), 2007


morning walk

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

[Having heard from Śrīla Mahārāja that without Śrīmatī
Rādhikā Kṛṣṇa would be zero, or nirviśeṣa-brahma (an
impersonal God without qualities), and having determined
from his understanding of Jaiva-dharma that even without
Her, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Person with independent
desire, Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja asks:] Jaiva-dharma states

                            338
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

that Kṛṣṇa is not impersonal brahma. He is puruṣa (the
Supreme Personality of Godhead); He has desire. You said
we will have to reconcile. I would like to know how we
reconcile these two.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have said that without Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa is nirviśeṣa-
brahma. What has been written in Jaiva-dharma?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

It is stated there that He is not nirviśeṣa-brahma.
Because He is puruṣa, He has His own desire.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Desire is also a power, and that desire-power is called
icchā-śakti. Rādhika is present (as the personi-fi-
cation of that icchā-śakti). Without Rādhika, there is
no existence of Kṛṣṇa. He is nirviśeṣa-brahma.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

She is always present as Kṛṣṇa’s śakti, His icchā-śakti.
She is sometimes perceived externally, as mūrta-rūpa,
meaning in Her personal feature, and sometimes as
amūrta-rūpa, meaning internally, as a potency.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It seems that Kṛṣṇa is walking, but His ‘walking-power’
is Rādhikā.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Kṛṣṇa’s smiling, speaking, seeing, and everything else
is a power. Without power, how can He do these things?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Rādhikā is Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa-śakti. Without Rādhikā’s
śakti, Kṛṣṇa has no existence.2




* * *




1 Excerpts from Journey of the Soul, Part 1, Chapter 5:


The verses of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, and other Vedic scriptures are full of
profound purports and require careful explanation. For
example, it is sometimes thought that the great sage
Nārada Muni, although a liberated soul, occasionally
falls into māyā. In reality, his apparent fall-downs are
his pastimes of role-playing, performed for the purpose

                            339
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

of serving the Lord in His various incarnations. All of
his pastimes are performed to please the Lord, and also
to teach lessons to all of us.

In the following pastime, Nārada Muni conquered Kāmadeva
(Cupid) and then proudly thought, ‘Oh, even my own guru,
Śaṅkara (Lord Śiva), ran after māyā. When Kṛṣṇa assumed
His female form as the goddess Mohinī-mūrti, Śiva became
enraptured and ran after her, oblivious to her real
identity.’ Śrī Nārada Muni gloated, ‘On the other hand,
when Kāmadeva came to me, he could not attract me at
all.’

Nārada approached Lord Śiva and boasted, ‘I have
conquered Kāmadeva.’ Lord Śiva laughed and said, ‘Don’t
tell Lord Brahmā and Lord Nārāyaṇa.’ Not listening, he
then went to Lord Brahmā, bragging in the same way. Lord
Brahmā thought, ‘A thorn of false ego has entered him.
It must be removed.’ Brahmā replied, ‘Very good, but
don’t tell Lord Nārāyaṇa.’ Not listening, Nārada finally
approached Lord Nārāyaṇa.

Listening to Nārada’s self-praise, Lord Nārāyaṇa
considered, ‘False ego, like a disease, has now infected
his heart. His disease is like piles, and he will not be
cured without an operation. I must remove this
condition; I must operate.’ Hiding His real feelings, He
replied to Nārada, ‘You are My best devotee. I am very
proud of you.’

While Nārada was returning to this universe after his
visit with the Lord, he saw a magnificent kingdom in
which there lived a king and his beautiful daughter.
Delighted, Śrī Nārada thought, ‘I have never before seen
such stunning beauty!’ Approaching the king, he said, ‘I
know astrology. I want to see the hand of your daughter
so that I can tell you her future.’ He then read on the
princess’s palm that the man she marries would possess
all the qualities of greatness, in full. Wondering, ‘How
can I marry this girl?’ he left and began to meditate on
his worshipful Lord Nārāyaṇa.

Nārāyaṇa at once appeared in his meditation and
inquired, ‘What benediction do you wish?’ Nārada prayed,
‘Please help me. I want to marry the king’s daughter.
Please give me a face as beautiful as Yours.’ Lord
Nārāyaṇa replied, ‘All auspiciousness to you. All
blessings unto you. I will do what is best for you.’

Now, convinced and satisfied that Lord Nārāyaṇa had
fulfilled his desire, Nārada returned to the king’s
palace. It so happened that the king was then in the
midst of performing his daughter’s svayaṁvara, the
ceremony in which a princess chooses her husband. The
king’s daughter was holding a garland, preparing to
place it on the neck of the man who would most attract
her, whom she would choose to marry.

Nārada followed the princess as she perused the various
contestants, showing his face in hope that she would
offer him the garland. However, whenever he came into
her view, she looked at him in disgust and walked on.
Still, trying to attract her attention, he continued to
pursue her.

                          340
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


The associates of Lord Śiva were present on that
occasion and, seeing Nārada’s repeated attempts, told
him, ‘Oh, you are so beautiful!’ Nārada believed that he
was being praised, but he was actually being ridiculed.

In the meantime, Lord Nārāyaṇa arrived at the palace on
His bird carrier, Garuḍa, and as soon as the princess
saw Him, she adorned His neck with her garland. Then,
without a moment’s delay, Lord Nārāyaṇa placed her on
His lap and they quickly flew away on Garuḍa.

Nārada deliberated, ‘What a wicked person! I have served
Him selflessly throughout my life. Only one time did I
request from Him a favor – I wished to marry this girl
and I asked Him for a countenance as attractive as His
own. I will now see what type of face He has given me!’
Then, looking in a mirror, he saw that he had the face
of a baboon.

Angry and upset, Nārada immediately flew to Vaikuṇṭha,
where he saw that very princess on Lakṣmī-devī’s seat.
‘You have cheated me!’ He rebuked, ‘I curse You that You
will weep just as I am weeping over this lady. Your wife
will be taken away from You, and to retrieve her You
will have to take the help of monkeys!’

At the next moment Lord Nārāyaṇa removed the illusion
created by His yogamāyā potency, and Nārada saw that the
girl who had enchanted him was actually Lakṣmī-devī
herself.

‘I performed this operation only to remove your false
ego and pride,’ Lord Nārāyaṇa explained kindly. Nārada
at once fell to the Lord’s lotus feet and apologized
profusely.

This transcendental pastime became the cause of Lord Śrī
Rāmacandra’s appearance. It manifested to teach
conditioned souls what to do and what not to do. We
should not think that Nārada was previously in Goloka
Vṛndāvana or Vaikuṇṭha and was later covered by māyā. By
the wish of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, devotees can do anything to
fulfill His desires.”




The following is an excerpt from Journey of the Soul,
Part 3, Chapter 2:


These are examples. Brahmā became attracted with his
daughter. Lord Śiva became attracted with the beauty of
Mohinī-mūrti, even in the presence of his wife. So this
sex life can be controlled only by becoming Kṛṣṇa
conscious (Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. Room
conversation in Bombay, January 7, 1977).



The above passage may seem to imply that even Lord
Brahmā and Lord Śiva, who are both pure devotees, can

                          341
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

become bewildered by māyā. However, the pastimes of
Brahmā and Śiva wherein they appear to be attracted by
māyā are only meant to instruct conditioned souls.

Brahmā and Śiva occupy the highest posts in the universe
– as the creator and the destroyer respectively – and
conditioned souls sometimes desire such high posts. In
the following conversation, Śrīla Prabhupāda cautions
his audience about desiring any exalted position in this
world, for all material situations are fraught with the
miseries offered by māyā. Śrīla Prabhupāda encourages
his audience to desire only pure devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa.


Devotee:

It says here that a pure devotee like Haridāsa Ṭhākura
would not fall victim to Māyādevī’s temptations, but
even Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, might fall victim. I always
thought that they were pure devotees of the Lord.


Prabhupāda:

No. They are pure devotees, but they are guṇāvatāra
(presiding deities of the modes of nature). Just like
Lord Brahmā is the supreme personality within this
material universe. He’s the father of all living
entities. So they are pure devotees. Of course, if we
very scrutinizingly study, Haridāsa Ṭhākura is, in
devotional service, in a greater position than Brahmā,
although he is considered the incarnation of Brahmā –
Brahmā Haridāsa.




So we should not be disturbed when we see Lord Brahmā
and Lord Śiva are captivated in that way. We should take
this instruction, that is, “Lord Brahmā or Lord Śiva
become victim of māyā sometimes, what to speak of us?
Therefore we shall be very, very careful. There is
chance of fall-down even in the status of Brahmā and
Śiva, what to speak of ordinary persons. Therefore we
should be very strongly inclined to Kṛṣṇa consciousness
like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Then we shall be able very easily
to overcome the allurement of māyā.” That is to be
understood. Not that “Brahmā showed weakness. He is weak
or he is less.” No. That is for our instruction (Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. Lecture on Bhagavad-gītā,
2.62–72, spoken in Los Angeles, California, December 16,
1968).



These quotes show that Brahmā and Śiva, as pure devotees
of Kṛṣṇa, assist the Lord in giving His instructions to
the souls of this universe.


The sages like Marīci were not in the wrong in sub-
mitting their protests against the acts of their great
father [Brahmā]. They knew very well that even though
their father committed a mistake, there must have been

                          342
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

some great purpose behind the show; otherwise such a
great personality could not have committed such a
mistake. It might be that Brahmā wanted to warn his
subordinates about human frailties in their dealings
with women. (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.12.29)


The illusory material energy is represented by Durgā-
devī, who is the wife of Girīśa, or Lord Śiva. Durgā-
devī could not captivate Lord Śiva’s mind, but now that
Lord Śiva wanted to see Lord Viṣṇu’s feminine form, Lord
Viṣṇu, by His mystic power, would assume a form that
would captivate even Lord Śiva. Therefore Lord Viṣṇu was
grave and at the same time was smiling. (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 8.12.14)


The Supreme Personality of Godhead knew that because
Lord Śiva is not an ordinary person, he cannot be
bewildered even by the most beautiful woman. Cupid
himself tried to invoke Lord Śiva’s lusty desires in the
presence of Pārvatī, but Lord Śiva was never agitated.
Rather, the blazing fire from Lord Śiva’s eyes turned
Cupid to ashes. Therefore, Lord Viṣṇu had to think twice
about what kind of beautiful form would bewilder even
Lord Śiva. (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 8.12.15)



Brahmā and Śiva are not ordinary souls and are not
subjected to temptation. They remain free from the lure
of māyā; rather they are under the influence of yogamāyā
– so what to speak of the residents of the spiritual
abodes of the Lord. In fact, Brahmā and Śiva worship the
residents of the Lord’s abodes, especially the residents
of Vṛndāvana.



2 An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 14:


Bābājī:

Now see how the śakti of para-tattva (the Supreme
Personality of Godhead) is never absent in Him. Para-
tattva is always self-illuminated and self-manifesting.
The Vedic mantras describe the three types of śakti of
that self-manifested tattva as follows:

That Paramātmā is omniscient and the creator of the
world. He is self-born (ātmā-yoni), the controller of
kāla (time), the knower of all, the Īśvara of pradhāna
(māyā), and the Īśvara of all kṣetrajñas (jīvas). He is
full of all transcendental qualities and beyond all
material qualities, yet He is their master. He binds the
jīvas in saṁsāra, places them in their positions, and
liberates them from it. (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.16)

This mantra describes the three states of parā-śakti .
The word pradhāna denotes māyā-śakti; the word kṣetrajña
denotes the jīva-śakti; and the cit-śakti has been
alluded to by the word kṣetrajña-pati. The Māyāvādīs
explain that brahma is the condition of para-tattva

                          343
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

without śakti and that Īśvara is of this state with all
śakti, but this doctrine is simply imaginary. In
reality, Bhagavān always possesses all śakti. Śakti is
present in all of His aspects. He is eternally situated
in His svarūpa, and although He has all śakti in that
svarūpa, He Himself remains the Supreme Person, full of
His own independent will.


Vrajanātha:

If He is fully associated with śakti, He only works with
the assistance of śakti. Then where is His independent
nature and desire?


Bābājī:

Śakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ – according to this statement
in Vedānta, śakti (potency) and the śaktimān puruṣa (the
Supreme Person who possesses all śakti) are non-
different. Work shows the influence of śakti; that is,
all work is accomplished only by the means of śakti.
However, the desire to do work is an indication of
śaktimān. The mundane material world is the work of
māyā-śakti, all the jīvas are the work of jīva-śakti,
and the cid-jagat (spiritual world) is the work of cit-
śakti. Bhagavān inspires the cit-śakti, jīva-śakti, and
māyā-śakti to be engaged in their respective activities,
but He Himself is still nirvikāra (unattached and
unaffected).


Vrajanātha:

How can He remain nirvikāra when He works according to
His independent desire? Indeed, to be possessed of
independent desire (sva-icchāmaya) means that He
experiences vikāra (transformation).


Bābājī:

Nirvikāra means to be free from any material
transformations (māyika-vikāra). Māyā is the shadow of
svarūpa-śakti. The work of māyā is reality, but it is
not an eternal reality. Thus the defect of māyā is not
present in the para-tattva. The vikāra that is present
in Śrī Hari in the form of His desire and pastimes is
nothing but the highest manifestation of prema. Such
wonderful manifestations of transcendental
variegatedness are present in advaya-jñāna Bhagavān. In
spite of creating the material world by His desire
through His māyā-śakti, this cit nature remains in
eternal, unbroken existence. Māyā has no connection with
the astonishing, variegated līlā of Bhagavān in the
spiritual world.




December (undated), 2007


                           344
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017


darśana

Bakula dāsī:

When I am chanting harināma, I fall asleep many times,
quite regularly.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good. You can sleep, and after sleeping you can
again chant. It is essential for this body to take rest.
Only when you become like Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs
will you not become sleepy.

Umā-śaṅkara dāsa:

Gurudeva, when we chant, why can we not always think of
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? The mind flickers to so many things.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is because you have so many anarthas (unwanted
mentalities and activities). When these anarthas
disappear, you will become steady in devotional
practices.

Umā-śaṅkara dāsa:

How can we get rid of those anarthas?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Always stay in the association of high-class Vaiṣṇavas,
and serve them.

Umā-śaṅkara dāsa:

But for gṛhasthas, will this association…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

As a gṛhastha, you can have more chances to serve them.

Umā-śaṅkara dāsa:

Can you be more specific regarding how to serve in the
gṛhastha-āśrama?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should know what your gurudeva and Vaiṣṇavas really
desire, and try to fulfill their desires.

Umā-śaṅkara dāsa:

What do I have to do, Gurudeva?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should know what a true exalted devotee wants, and
try to fulfill that. Do you know what I want?

Umā-śaṅkara dāsa:

                          345
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017


You want to preach the mission of Mahāprabhu.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I want you to know the desire of your gurudeva, and try
to fulfill it – just as Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī knew what Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted, and thus wrote so many
books.

Umā-śaṅkara dāsa:

What is your desire for me? How can I serve you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If you associate with me, then you can know what I want.

Umā-śaṅkara dāsa:

How should I associate with you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I want that you give up all of your anarthas and become
a pure devotee. I want you to be like Rūpa Gosvāmī, Jīva
Gosvāmī, and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.

Umā-śaṅkara dāsa:

That can happen only by your blessings.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

My blessings are always for every-one, everywhere. You
will have to practice devotional activities.

Umā-śaṅkara dāsa:

To practice and receive your blessings, you should again
bless me.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If you try, Kṛṣṇa will see this and think, “He is trying
hard.” His mercy will then come to you:


sva-mātuḥ svinna-gātrāyā

visrasta-kabara-srajaḥ

dṛṣṭvā pariśramaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ

kṛpayāsīt sva-bandhane

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.18)


[Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw that His mother’s body had become
drenched with perspiration. The garlands woven into her
braid had fallen out, and she had become utterly
exhausted. Seeing His mother’s fatigue, little Śrī Kṛṣṇa
compassionately allowed Himself to be bound.]

                           346
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt        5/8/2017


Mother Yaśodā determined, “I must bind Kṛṣṇa,” and she
‘practiced,’ or labored, to do this. Then, as soon as
Kṛṣṇa saw her sweating and very restless to bind Him, He
was at once bound by His own mercy.

When Nārāyaṇa saw Dhruva not eating or breathing,
standing on one foot like a statue, He considered, “My
devotee is performing such difficult austerities.” At
that time He came within Dhruva’s vision.

Prahlāda’s father tried to kill him by various means,
but Prahlāda did not pray to Kṛṣṇa to save him. Still,
Kṛṣṇa, who always looks after His bhaktas, came at once
and killed Prahlāda’s father.

Cāru-candrikā dāsī:

Gurudeva…?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Ladies should be like Draupadī, and more so, like the
gopīs. The gopīs left their husbands, mothers, fathers,
children, and everyone else. One-pointed, they went to
Kṛṣṇa, and when they arrived at the place where He was
calling them, He wanted to test them. He told them, “You
should return to your homes – to your fathers and
husbands.” They replied, “You are our father; You are
our husband. How can we return when You have stolen our
hearts? Without our hearts, how can we return? First
return our hearts, and then we will go to our husbands.”
Ladies should be like those gopīs.

Cāru-candrikā dāsī:

You are always telling us not to criticize or hear
criticism. If we are not sure if someone is criticizing,
what should we do? Especially, what should we do if we
think we are hearing criticism from a senior?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There are so many śāstras, like Bhagavad-gītā and
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, where you can receive Kṛṣṇa’s
instructions. Thus, when you hear anything, you can
judge, “Is it right, or not?” If it is not possible to
judge yourself, then go to your gurudeva and ask, “I do
not understand. What should I do?”

Cāru-candrikā dāsī:

Should we perhaps glorify those who are being
criticized?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If you are sincere, Kṛṣṇa will speak as a śikṣā-guru in
your heart. He will inspire you with proper
understanding. For those who are not so sincere, He will
not do so.

Cāru-candrikā dāsī:


                          347
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

I am not so sincere.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Try to become sincere.

[To Umā-śaṅkara dāsa] If you give your heart and senses
to Kṛṣṇa, then gradually, at the time of meditating,
Kṛṣṇa will come to you.

Śrīpāda Daṇḍī Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, this is Śrīdhara.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Are you a vegetarian?

Śrīdhara:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Be vegetarian. The word ‘meat’ means ‘me-eat,’ meaning
that those whom you are eating will take revenge and eat
you. Don’t eat these things. If you become vegetarian,
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy will come to you.

Narahari dāsa:

When we chant our gāyatrī-mantra in the evening, we are
supposed to face North. When Thākurajī is in the room,
should we face North or Thākurajī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Try to adjust. It is best to keep Thākura in such a
position that you can worship facing East.

German Devotee:

In the morning and mid-day.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If this is not possible, then still face the Deities.




About Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


On the sacred and auspicious day of Maunī Amāvasyā,
1921, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
took his divine birth in a devout Vaiṣṇava family in
Tivārīpura, in the state of Bihar, India.

In February, 1946, he met his gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and his life of
complete and exemplary dedication to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism,
or the path of kṛṣṇa-bhakti in the line of Śrī Caitanya

                          348
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Mahāprabhu, began to manifest.

He accompanied his gurudeva on his extensive preaching
tours throughout India, actively assisting him in
propagating the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu for
the eternal benefit of the living entities in this
world. This included regularly hosting the thousands of
pilgrims attending the yearly circumambulation of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, the appear-ance place of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the appearance
place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

His gurudeva had instructed him to translate the
writings of prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas into Hindi, a
task he assiduously assumed throughout his entire life
and which resulted in the publication of nearly fifty
Hindi sacred texts. Later, most of these invaluable
masterpieces were translated into English and other
major languages of the world.

For many years, he traveled throughout India to spread
the message of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, and it was for this
end, also, that in 1996, he journeyed abroad. During the
next fourteen years, he circled the globe more than
thirty times. Whether he was in India or abroad, his
preaching always bore the distinctive characteristic of
boldly unmasking any misconception obscuring the
specific purposes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s advent,
in strict adherence to the desire of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda and in
perfect congruence with the conceptions of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s foremost follower.
Thus, in present times, in upholding the glorious tenets
of the Gauḍīya sampradāya, he performed the function of
a true ācārya.

At the age of ninety years, on December 29, 2010, he
concluded his pastimes in this world at Cakratīrtha, in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma. The following day, in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, Śrī Gaurasundara’s fully empowered
emissary, the very embodiment of His unique compassion,
was given samādhi. He will never cease to reside in his
divine instructions and in the hearts of those who are
devoted to him.




English titles published by

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


Arcana-dīpikā • Beyond Nīrvāṇa • Bhagavad-gītā •
Bhajana-rahasya • Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindu-bindu • Bhakti-
rasāyana • Bhakti-tattva-viveka • Brahma-saṁhitā •
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Vol. 2.1) • Butter Thief • Caitanya
Mahāprabhu – The Original Form of Godhead • Camatkāra-
candrikā – A Moonbeam of Complete Astonishment •
Controlled by Love • Dāmodarāṣṭakam • Discerning the
True Sentiments of the Soul • Distinctive Contribution
of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī • Essence of All Advice • Essence of
Bhagavad-gītā • Eternal Function of the Soul • Fearless

                          349
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

Prince • Five Essential Essays • Gauḍīya Gītī-Guccha •
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism versus Sahajiyāism • Gaura-vāṇī
Pracāriṇe • Gift of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu • Gīta-
govinda • Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha • Gopī-gīta • Guru-
devatātmā • Happiness in a Fool’s Paradise • Harināma
Mahā-mantra • Harmony • Hidden Path of Devotion •
Impressions of Bhakti • Jaiva-dharma • Journey of the
Soul • Kṛṣṇa – the Lord of Sweetness • Letters From
America • Maharṣi Durvāsā and Śrī Durvāsā-āśrama •
Manaḥ-śikṣa • My Śikṣā-guru and Priya-bandhu •
Navadvīpa-dhāma Māhātmya • Navadvīpa-dhāma Parikramā •
Nectar of Govinda-līlā • Śrī Jagannātha Ratha-yātrā •
Our Eternal Nature • Our Gurus: One in Siddhanta, One at
Heart • Pinnacle of Devotion • Prabandhāvalī • Prema-
sampuṭa • Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā • Rāga-vartma-
candrikā • Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda • Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ
• Secrets of the Undiscovered Self • Secret Truths of
the Bhāgavatam • Shower of Love • Śikṣāṣṭaka • Śiva-
tattva • Ślokāmṛtam • Ślokāmṛtam-bindu • Soul of Book
Distribution • Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
– His Life and Teachings • Their Lasting Relation • To
Be Controlled by Love • True Conception of Guru-tattva •
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa • Upadeśāmṛta • Utkalikā-vallarī
• Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā • Veṇu-gīta • Śrī Vraja-
maṇḍala Parikramā • Walking with a Saint (2007, 2008,
2009, 2010) • Way of Love • Rays of the Harmonist
(periodical)




Gaudiya Vedanta Publications (GVP)


publishes, preserves and distributes the books of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. For more
information on the contents of these books, please
visit:




www.purebhakti.com

for news, updates, and free downloads of books, lectures
and bhajanas.




www.purebhakti.tv

to watch and hear classes online, or get links and
scheduled updates for live webcasts




www.harikatha.com


                          350
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

to receive, by email, the lectures and videos of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja on his
world tours




If you are interested to know more about the books,
lectures, audio recordings, videos, teachings, and the
international society of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, please contact us at

connectwithussoon@gmail.com




or find a center in your area on

www.purebhakti.com/contact-us




YOUR COMMENTS AND FEEDBACK



We humbly invite our readers to submit any errors they
may find in this publication at

www.purebhakti.com/gvp




YOUR SUPPORT



If you would like to support GVP’s publication,
preservation and distribution of Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s books, you
can:




sponsor the endowment fund of a printed book will assure
that when a book is first printed, there will always be
funding to keep that book in print. For more
information, please visit

www.mygvp.com




                             351
Walking-With-a-Saint-2007-_1Ed-2013_.txt       5/8/2017

sponsor books for the GVP Book Distribution Program.
This program is a federally approved 501 c3 non-profit
religious organization that places Śrīla Gurudeva’s
books in stores, libraries, prisons, hospitals, and many
other locations. It makes the books available to all
people at no cost or low cost. For more information,
please visit

www.gvpbookdistribution.com




                          352
