Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ




Walking with a Saint



* * *




Morning Walks and Conversations

2009




Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




© 2014 Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights
Reserved.



To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/

Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

Digital Edition:



ePub: ISBN 978-1-63316-007-1

Kindle: ISBN 978-1-63316-027-9

Printed Edition:

ISBN 978-1-935428-46-6

First Edition: October 2011 (5,000 copies)

The photographers hold the copyright for their photos.
The photos in this book can only be used with their
permission.

Verse translations and quotes from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta are by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja © Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International.


                           1
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Verse translations and quotes from Bhagavad-gītā that
are marked with an asterisk (*) are by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja © Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
International. All other verse translations and quotes
from Bhagavad-gītā are by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

CONTRIBUTORS



There were many contributors to the completion of
Walking with a Saint – Morning Walks and Conversations
2009 in the form of transcribers, translators, editors,
designers, proofreaders, typists, and typesetters. Their
names are listed here: Śrīpāda B. V. Tīrtha Mahārāja,
Śrīpāda B. V. Mādhava Mahārāja, Acyutānanda dāsa,
Anaṅga-mohinī dāsī, Ānitā dāsī, Anupama dāsa, Brajanāth
dāsa, Dāmodara dāsa, Devānanda dāsa, Govinda-priya dāsī,
dāsī, Jāhnavā dāsī, Jānakī dāsī, Jaya-govinda dāsa,
Jayaśrī dāsī, Kṛṣṇa-kāminī dāsī, Kṛṣṇa-kāntā dāsa,
Lalit-kiśorī dāsī, Madana-mohinī dāsī, Rāma-kāntā dāsa,
Śānti dāsī, Sudevī dāsī, Sulatā dāsī, Śyāmarāṇī dāsī,
Tri-lokanāth dāsa Vaijayantī-mālā dāsī, Vasanti dāsī,
Viṣṇurāta dāsa, and Yasodānandana dāsa.

Special thanks to Īśa dāsa (of purebhakti.tv) and
Madhuvrata dāsa for providing most of the sound-files.
Thanks to the many devotees who participated in the
walks and darśanas, and to those who helped with filling
in names when we couldn’t recognize voices.

Graphic and cover design by Anupama dāsa

Cover photo by Vāsantī dāsī

eBook encoding by Sanātana dāsa

Anaṅga-mohinī dāsī, Dhruva dāsa, Govinda-priyā dāsī,
Kundalatā dāsī, Mādhavī dāsī, Madhuvrata dāsa, Subala-
sakhā dāsa, Vasanti dāsī and Vṛndāvana dāsa




Contents


Foreword

Cebu, Philippines

January 1 – śloka class (Śrī Caitanya-candrāmṛta 125)

January 2 – śloka class (Śrī Caitanya-candrāmṛta 54)

January 4 – śloka class (Śrī Padyāvalī 74)

January 5 – śloka class (Mukunda-mālā-stotra 33)

January 6 – śloka class (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.2)

January 9 – darśana

                              2
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017


January 11 – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-Śikṣā, Verse 5)

January 12 – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 6)

January 14 – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 8)

January 16 – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 9)

January 16 – art darśana

January 17 – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 10)

January 19 – śloka class (Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 11)

January 19 – darśana

Johor Bahru, Malaysia

January 25 – morning walk

January 25 – darśana (after the walk)

January 26 – morning walk (Śrīla Gurudeva’s appearance
day)

January 27 – morning walk

January 28 – morning walk

Guangzhou, China

March 31 – arrival darśana



April 1 – art darśana

April 2 – darśana

April 2 – airport darśana

North Shore, Hawaii

April 10 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.24)

April 12 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.25)

April 13 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.26)

April 14 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.27)

April 22 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.47.61)

April 23 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.47.62)

April 25 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.82.39)

April 28 – śloka class (Śrī Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, Madhya-
līlā 13.122)

May 2 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.4, 6)

May 3 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.7)

                             3
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt   5/8/2017


Hilo, Hawaii

May 7 – morning walk

May 8 – morning walk

Las Vegas, Nevada

May 15 – darśana

May 16 – darśana

May 17 – darśana

Houston, Texas

May 20 – morning walk

May 21 – morning walk

May 23 – morning walk

May 23 – darśana (after the walk)

May 25 – morning walk

May 25 – darśana

May 26 – morning walk

May 26 – darśana (after the walk)

May 27 – morning walk

May 28 – morning walk

May 29 – morning walk

May 30 – morning walk

May 31 – morning walk

Brighton, England

June 3 – darśana

June 4 – morning darśana

June 4 – evening darśana

Venice, Italy

June 6 – morning walk (excerpt)

June 7 – morning walk

June 8 – morning walk

June 9 – morning walk

June 12 – morning walk

Padua, Italy

                           4
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


June 17 – śloka class (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.3.25–26)

June 18 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.39)

June 23 – śloka class (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.3.18)

June 26 – śloka class (Bhagavad-Gītā 2.27)

Paris, France

June 29 – morning walk

June 30 – morning walk

Vṛndāvana, India

August 3 – Gopīnātha Bhavana (ladies āśrama darśana)

Govardhana, India

March 2 – morning walk

March (undated) – morning walk

August 7 – morning walk

August 9 – morning walk

August 10 – morning walk

August 10 – darśana

August 11 – morning walk

October 22 – darśana

November 1 – darśana for Russian devotees

Bangalore, India

September 10 – darśana

September 11 – darśana

New Delhi, India

November 14 – darśana2

Appendix

About the Author

Book List

Our Websites




Foreword



                           5
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

The great saint with whom you now have the fortune to
walk, the personification of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s divine
mercy, is renowned throughout the world as Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. His followers
honor him with the shorter title of Śrīla Gurudeva, the
honorific appellation given to all saintly, self-
realized spiritual masters.

The meaning of ‘Śrīla Gurudeva’ is very significant. The
Sanskrit word Śrīla means ‘one who brings us Śrī, the
embodiment of the Lord’s personal opulences;’ gu means
‘darkness;’ ru means ‘light;’ and deva means ‘godlike.’
Śrīla Gurudeva is he who takes us from a world that is a
dungeon of darkness and ignorance, and carries us to a
world of effulgent transcendental knowledge and
spiritual opulence. Since Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja accomplishes this beautifully,
we will hereafter refer to this supremely exalted saint
as Śrīla Gurudeva.

The following true story from the ancient Vedic
literatures was told by Śrīla Gurudeva in Badger,
California, on May 19, 2004, during one of his world
preaching tours. He narrated this history in order to
emphasize the value of associating with saintly persons:


Once, the sages Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha were
quarrelling. Viśvāmitra told Vasiṣṭha, “You should
address me as brahmarṣi, because I have become an
exalted, realized brāhmaṇa.” Vasiṣṭha said, “I will
address you as rājarṣi, a saintly warrior, because you
have come from a royal family.” He refused to praise
Viśvāmitra as a brahmarṣi, because he considered that
Viśvāmitra would become proud, which would not be
beneficial for him.

Viśvāmitra then boasted that his performance of
austerities was a great thing – greater than any other
achievement. Vasiṣṭha disagreed. He insisted that sādhu-
saṅga, the association of saintly devotees of the Lord,
was the greatest achievement.

They both approached Ananta Śeṣa, the serpent
incarnation of the Lord on whose innumerable hoods
millions of universes rest, and presented their case to
him. Viśvāmitra asked him, “Please, you decide if it is
Vasiṣṭha, or I, who is telling the truth. Am I greater
than Vasiṣṭha or is Vasiṣṭha greater than me?”

Lord Ananta replied, “This topic is very deep and grave,
but at present I am carrying the burden of all the
universes upon my hoods. O Viśvāmitra, I am extremely
tired. I want to rest one of my hoods. Please arrange
that when I remove my hood, the universe will not even
slightly move or fall from its position, and then I will
answer you.” Viśvāmitra responded, “Oh, that is a very
insignificant task.” To this end Viśvāmitra offered Lord
Ananta the fruit of the entirety of his performances of
yoga and austerities, but still he could not carry the
burden of Ananta for even a moment. When Ananta began to
remove his hood, there were severe earthquakes,
hurricanes, and other natural disasters.


                           6
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Ananta then turned to Vasiṣṭha and asked, “Can you take
my burden?” Vasiṣṭha replied, “I am offering you the
result of only half a moment of my association with
saintly persons. If I have ever had any elevated
Vaiṣṇava association, may the universe remain calm.”

Again Ananta went to remove his hood from beneath the
universe, this time successfully. The universe remained
calmly in its place, hovering in space without moving.
Ananta said, “Viśvāmitra, by this I have given my
answer, which is for you to ascertain. Vasiṣṭha offered
me the result of taking sādhu-saṅga for a mere half a
moment, and that in itself fully freed me of the burden.
You were unable to arrange that for me.”

So, taking sādhu-saṅga for even a fraction of a second
can change your entire life and make you happy forever.
Sādhu-saṅga is also called mahat-saṅga. Mahat means
‘great,’ so mahat-saṅga means ‘association with great
saints.’ Mahat-saṅga gives the highest of all kinds of
benedictions, including material religiosity, economic
development, sense gratification and, at the end, the
attempt to become one with the Supreme. In fact, sādhu-
saṅga dances on the head of all these achievements.



In the same discourse, Śrīla Gurudeva shared with his
audience another history, as follows:


There was once a murderer named Vālmīki, who hunted and
killed many brāhmaṇas, ṛṣis, and mahārṣis (elevated
saints). By Vālmīki’s good fortune, one day he met Śrī
Nārada Ṛṣi, who was a transcendental touchstone. In
other words, simply by Nārada’s touch, that murderer
became a realized sage like Nārada himself.

Nārada Ṛṣi had told him, “Chant the holy names of God:
Rāma, Rāma, Rāma,” but because of his sinful life he
could not do so. Nārada then asked him, “Can you chant:
marā, marā, marā?” Marā means ‘death.’ Vālmīki replied,
“Oh, yes,” and he began, “Marā, marā, marāma, rāma,
rāma…” The word marā gradually turned into the word
‘Rāma,’ indicating Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s incarnation, Lord Rāma.

Vālmīki did not need to study in gurukula to attain the
fortune of becoming an empowered devotee of Lord Rāma;
nothing was required for him. By Śrī Nārada’s
association, he unknowingly began chanting the name of
Rāma, and later he knowingly chanted “Rāma, Rāma, Rāma”
and became self-realized.

If Nārada approaches a murderer and tells him, “May you
immediately have realization of Śrī Rāma and His abode
and pastimes,” that very thing transpires. If the great
saint Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī comes and blesses a person by
placing his hand on his head, that person also becomes
self-realized. When the Lord’s associate, Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara, placed his hands on the head of Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
became like Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara. The glory of that
self-realized Śrī Gurudeva is unlimited. We cannot
glorify him adequately.

                           7
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017




A few days later, on May 22, Śrīla Gurudeva told his
listeners:


It is to be understood that those who have attended the
hari-kathā discourses of a great saintly person have
already achieved the results of taking bath in the
Ganges and at all the world’s holy places. They have
performed all kinds of austerities and given all
varieties of pious donations. In fact, the fruits of all
these pious acts can never be compared with a particle
of saintly association. Mahat-saṅgama-māhātmyam evaitat
paramādbhutam (Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta 2.7.14). This means
that the glory of mahat-saṅga, the association of great
saints, is supremely astounding. The effects of mahat-
saṅga are beyond logic – logic cannot reach it – as
there is nothing that cannot be accomplished by it. We
cannot imagine the results of even one moment with such
a saint.

In the Third Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Devahūti states
that if someone unknowingly engages in an activity or
exchange with a self-realized soul, takes prasādam with
him, or talks with him – even about worldly things –
what will happen? That person’s life will change
imperceptibly; what to speak of one who performs these
activities knowingly. The glory of this opportunity
cannot be expressed.

There is a river here in Badger. If you have any doubts
about this, then go to that river and throw all your
doubts in there forever.



In Australia, on February 1, 2000, Śrīla Gurudeva spoke
the following to his eager audience:


Your coming here will not go in vain; it will never go
in vain. There is no harm if you are overwhelmed by
lust, if you have many worldly desires, or if you are
besieged by impurities –

as long as you have strong belief in the association of
pure devotees. Sādhu-saṅga sādhu-saṅga sarva sastre
kaya, lava mātra sādhu saṅga sarva siddhi haya. Sarva
siddhi means ‘all perfection.’ If you want the opulence
of this world, you can have it. If you want to attain
the heavenly planets, you can have that. If you want
Vaikuṇṭha, or if you want love and affection for
Rāmacandra like that of Hanumān, very good; you can have
that. If you want to be like the prominent queens of
Dvārakā like Satyabhāmā and others, you can have that
very quickly. Moreover, if you want to be a Vrajavāsī,
if you want the Vrajavāsīs’ love and affection for
Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa will say to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, “O,
please let them have that love right away.” If Śrīmatī
Rādhikā desires anything, Her desire is quickly
fulfilled.


                           8
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017



We would now like to share with you some excerpts from
the foreword of the Morning Walks book that was
published last year by Śrīla Gurudeva’s mercy – Walking
with a Saint 2008. We would love our respected readers
to experience the wonder of being on morning walks with
Śrīla Gurudeva, which can take place to a great extent
simply by reading this book. To express what happens to
those who are with him, we cannot think of more
appropriate words than those found in that foreword:


After rising as early as 3 A.M., uttering mantras and
prayers and chanting the various names and glories of
Kṛṣṇa, it is a part of Śrīla Gurudeva’s morning practice
to take a brisk walk for up to one hour. This is a time
when those seeking his association can walk with him,
and also hear from him, for sometimes he stops and
spontaneously shares his realizations.

Although he is a sublime and elevated being, his
relationships and interactions with people are intimate
and sweet. Hundreds of thousands of people take his
association, and yet he is always able to tailor his
communication for the person who comes before him, even
if that person has never met him before. To one inquirer
he might express himself with irony, to another with
gravity, to another playfully, to another sternly, to
another sympathetically, to another speaking subtle
philosophical intricacies, and to another with
deliberate simplicity. Sometimes what he says is
applicable for the moment, and sometimes for eternity.
Sometimes his replies apply to a specific individual and
sometimes to the entire audience, and in all cases his
words enlighten all.

Most of the time he replies personally, and on occasion
he calls on a sannyāsī (renunciate) or other senior
disciples to reply. Sometimes he expresses appreciation
for his disciples’ replies, and sometimes he corrects
them.1 There is a saying in India that a mother teaches
her daughter-in-law by teaching her daughter. In other
words, the mother will most readily give corrective
instruction to her own daughter, but that instruction
will apply equally to the less accessible daughter-in-
law. Similarly, on his morning walks, Śrīla Gurudeva
trains his disciples/preachers to speak and understand
with great precision and clarity the established truths
of Vedic philosophy; and by this he also wants to
inspire all the people of the world, all of whom he
regards as his spiritual children. He wants to inspire
them with the understanding that correct philosophical
thought elevates one on the path to perfection, whereas
incorrect comprehension can derail one from the path and
keep one chained to the darkness of material and
spiritual confusion.

One cannot help but be struck by Śrīla Gurudeva’s
warmth, ease, compassion and gravitas, and one is struck
by even a slight sense of his unconditional, ever-fresh
love and affection for all. We learn from spiritual
masters that whenever a saint speaks, atoms of prema
(transcendental love of God) emanate from his glance and

                           9
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

from every pore of his divine body, and these atoms fall
upon all those who are fortunate enough to be in his
presence. Powerful saints come to this world with the
sole purpose of alleviating the suffering of all souls
by giving them the eternal solution. Everyone starts
somewhere, and Śrīla Gurudeva accepts all with an
inconceivable open heart.

He impregnates seeds of pure loving devotion into the
hearts of all those who sit or stand before him; and, by
his watering of those seeds, those hearts automatically
blossom into fragrant flowers which he offers into the
lotus-like hands of the Supreme Lord. In fact, even if
Śrīla Gurudeva is not speaking about transcendental
subject matters, his listeners are injected by his
divine presence with the spiritual strength to overcome
obstacles imposed by this world of birth and death.

Śrīla Gurudeva is an intimate friend and spiritual
successor of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, known
throughout the world as Śrīla Prabhupāda, the renowned
preacher and founder-ācārya of the International Society
for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. As such, he accepted Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s order to spiritually nurture Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s disciples and followers and to continue his
mission. Having been given by Śrīla Prabhupāda the key
that opens the locks on the vast treasure-chest of Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s divine books, Śrīla Gurudeva explains,
clarifies, and sheds light on Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
teachings during his own walks, darśanas, lectures, and
books. Thus, within Walking with a Saint, Śrīla Gurudeva
fulfills one of his most cherished services in this
world.

His native language is Hindi. Because English is not his
mother tongue, the editors have slightly edited his
words under his guidance, for clarity of meaning and for
flow of the English language. The language of Walking
with a Saint is very straight forward and easy to
understand. At the same time, Śrīla Gurudeva uses many
Sanskrit terms, and we have retained them in the text in
order to preserve the precision of meaning. For the
benefit of the readers, these terms are always explained
in English, either in the text itself or in the
footnotes. If you find the explanation in the text or
footnote insufficient, you are invited to turn to the
glossary at the back of the book. Following the
tradition of our spiritual preceptors, we use standard
diacritical markings to indicate the pronunciation of
the Sanskrit words. Pronounce ā like a in father, ī like
ea in neat, ū like oo in root, ṛ like ri in rip, ṁ and ṅ
like ng in hung, ś and ṣ like sh in shy, and c like ch
in chap.

We wish we could put videos of these morning walks and
darśanas on the pages of this book, so that you would be
able to see Śrīla Gurudeva’s sweet smiles and laughter,
and hear his voice full of unending care and compassion
for all souls. You may download these videos, if you
wish, at www.purebhakti.tv.



On December 29, 2010, as Walking with a Saint, 2009 was

                           10
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

entering its layout and proofreading stages, Śrīla
Gurudeva disappeared from the vision of this mortal
world and entered the eternal pastimes of the Divine
Couple Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Still, he is forever present with us. As a manifestation
of the mercy of the Supreme Lord and thus being in one
sense non-different from Him, Śrīla Gurudeva is
everywhere. He can easily hear our prayers and fulfil
our hearts’ deepest desires. We quote him in his Walking
With a Saint, 2008 (Houston, May 30): “Vāṇī
(instructions) and vapu (physical presence) are the
same. However if you follow śrī guru’s instructions you
will be attracted to Kṛṣṇa very easily. So try to follow
his words. ‘Association’ means to follow him, not to be
physically with him. It does not matter whether or not
you are physically with him. If you follow his
instructions, there will be an effect.”

We’ll end here. We pray that you forgive us for any
mistakes in presenting Śrīla Gurudeva’s love-filled
exchanges.

Your aspiring servants,

The Editors

Kārtika, October 2011

* Please note that, unless otherwise referenced, all the
bracketed statements within the text, as well as all the
footnotes, have been written by the editors and are
based on the explanations of Śrīla Gurudeva.




* * *




1 Please see Appendix.




[From mid-November 2008 to mid-January 2009, Śrīla
Gurudeva resided in Cebu, Philippines, on a writing
retreat. After returning from his morning walk at 6.45
am, he would have a short meeting with his personal
party of devotees, teaching them ślokas (Sanskrit
verses) from various Vedic scriptures, and giving them
‘homework assignments’ to memorize those ślokas and
their English translations for the next morning. On the
next day he would listen as they ‘recited their
lessons,’ asking them questions or commenting in order
to help them clarify their understanding.]




                           11
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017



January 1, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrī Caitanya-candrāmṛta 125

by Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī

[The ‘students’ each recite this śloka and its
translation.]


kālaḥ kalir balina indriya-vairi-vargāḥ

śrī-bhakti-mārga iha kaṇṭaka-koṭi-ruddhaḥ

hā hā kva yāmi vikalaḥ kim ahaṁ karomi

caitanyacandra yadi nādya kṛpāṁ karoṣi


[Now it is the age of Kali. My enemies, the senses, are
very strong. The beautiful path of bhakti is spiked with
countless thorns (like karma, jñāna, and unrestricted
sense enjoyment). My spirit is weak. My senses are
powerful and agitated. Oh, what shall I do? Where shall
I go? O Lord Caitanya-candra, if you do not grant me
Your mercy, what shall I do to save myself?]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This will be your śloka for tomorrow:


saṁsāra-duḥkha-jaladhau patitasya kāma-

krodhādi-nakra-makaraiḥ kavalī-kṛtasya

durvāsanā-nigaḍitasya nirāśrayasya

caitanya-candra mama dehi padāvalambam

(Śrī Caitanya-candrāmṛta 54)




[To Acyutānanda dāsa] Today you will complete your work
[typing Śrīla Gurudeva’s hand-written corrections to a
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam manuscript]? Oh, and you can also
check to see whether or not Rādhā-priyā has sent her
work.1 Also, please tell Rāmacandra prabhu to make
arrangements.2

And ask Jīva-priya [now Śrīpāda Viṣṇu Mahārāja] how his
preaching is going on. Ask him how successful his
collection in Bengal has been up to now. How many
coconuts and how many mounds of rice has he collected?

I will write a letter to Rādhā-kānta and Viśvambhara

                              12
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

after taking rest. You can take the dictation.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Okay.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Rādhā-kānta has written to ask if I am personally
writing my own letters. My signature will be there in my
reply.




January 2, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrī Caitanya-candrāmṛta 54

[Madhuvrata dāsa, Acyutānanda dāsa, and Brajanāth dāsa
recite their assigned verse.]


saṁsāra-duḥkha-jaladhau patitasya kāma-

krodhādi-nakra-makaraiḥ kavalī-kṛtasya

durvāsanā-nigaḍitasya nirāśrayasya

caitanya-candra mama dehi padāvalambam


[O Caitanya-candra, I have fallen into an ocean of
misery where I have been made a mouthful for the
crocodiles and sharks of lust, anger, and so forth.
Kindly give this destitute person, chained to wicked
desires, the shelter of Your lotus feet.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

“O Caitanya Mahāprabhu, I have fallen into the vast
ocean of material existence, and this ocean is full of
sharks and crocodiles.” This means that the ocean of
material existence is filled with lust…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What do the crocodiles represent?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Lust, anger, greed, pride, illusion, and envy.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And lust for ladies.

                             13
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Madhuvrata dāsa:

And lust for ladies; yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is the meaning of nakra, or ‘crocodiles;’ and what
do makara, or ‘sharks,’ represent in this śloka?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

I don’t know the difference.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They refer to the desire for name and fame; and so many
worldly problems.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

“By my wicked material desires I am chained to this
world. So, my only refuge is the lotus feet of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you feel this mood of prayer from your heart?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

No. Well, a tiny bit.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You should realize the mood of these ślokas. I am giving
you these ślokas so that you will truly realize them and
thus enter the realm of bhakti.

If you see a beautiful lady, are your eyes and heart
attracted to her, or not? Do you understand?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Though you reject the idea, still your heart goes there.
It is extremely difficult even for munis, those who are
undisturbed in the midst of all adversities. It is
essential to understand this clearly, and with tears in
your eyes pray through all these ślokas.

Do you have any anger? This is one of the crocodiles.
You must realize all these truths.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

How do we realize, Gurudeva?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By praying:

                            14
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017



he kṛṣṇa! karuṇā-sindho!

dīna-bandho! jagat-pate!

gopeśa! gopikā-kānta!

rādhā-kānta! namo ‘stu te


[I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is an ocean of
mercy, the friend of the distressed and the source of
creation. He is the master of the gopas and the lover of
the gopīs headed by Śrīmatī Rādhikā.]

You know this prayer. What is the meaning?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

“O Kṛṣṇa, You are an ocean of mercy.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How do you know this?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Because He sends His most dear devotees to this world to
help the fallen jīvas.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

More?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

More?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When Pūtanā came to kill Kṛṣṇa, what did He do?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

He gave her a motherly position [as a nurse in Goloka].

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He has sent so many   ṛṣis and munis to train you. He is
so merciful that He   manifests as caitya-guru (the
Supersoul, who acts   as guru in the heart). He has sent
guru. Śrī guru came   to you; this is the mercy of Kṛṣṇa.

Although Kṛṣṇa always lives in Goloka Vṛndāvana, He
descended with His associates and performed sweet
pastimes in order to invite the conditioned souls to
witness them; and even those who simply hear those
pastimes will be liberated. In this way, Kṛṣṇa is
karuṇā-sindhu, an ocean of mercy.

And what is the meaning of dīna-bandhu?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

                             15
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


It means that He is the friend of the most fallen.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In what way?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

As you have just described.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When Sudāmā Vipra went to see Kṛṣṇa, he was extremely
poor. What did Kṛṣṇa do? He gave Sudāmā great wealth and
opulence.

Do you know the history of the elephant Gajendra and the
crocodile?3 When Gajendra called to Kṛṣṇa’s incarnation,
Lord Viṣṇu, the Lord came to the seashore where Gajendra
and the crocodile were engaged in battle. Lord Viṣṇu
killed the crocodile and gave him liberation. Moreover,
He gave Gajendra pure bhakti and sent him to Vaikuṇṭha.
This is another example of Kṛṣṇa’s being dīna-bandhu,
and there are so many other examples.

In what way is He jagat-pate?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

He is the controller of the whole world.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In what way?

Brajanāth dāsa:

He manifests as His various incarnations: Mahā-Viṣṇu,
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, the guṇa-
avatāras, śaktyāveśa-avatāras, and manvantara-avatāras.
In so many ways He is managing this entire universe for
the benefit of the living entities.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He empowered Brahmā to create, and Brahmā created the
universe. He empowered Śaṅkara (Lord Śiva) to destroy.
He manifested as Viṣṇu, and as Viṣṇu He supports and
nourishes the world. He also manifested as the Supersoul
in the heart of all living entities, and in that form He
councils us to be careful. In this way He is jagat-pate.

In what way is He gopeśa?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Gopeśa has two meanings. He is the controller of the
gopīs, and He is controlled by the gopīs.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gopeśa is a combination of two words: gopa (cowherd boy)
plus īśvara (controller or Lord).

                              16
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

He nourishes the cowherd boys by giving them the relish
of His prema.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

On so many occasions He saved the gopas from the demons.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Gopikā-kānta means that He is controlled by the gopīs.
Rādhā-kānta means that He is controlled by the love and
affection of the gopīs, and especially by the love of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Try to remember the mood of each śloka I give you, as
well as the meaning of every word of each śloka. You
will then realize the truths therein, and after that any
prayer or śloka that comes to you will come with
realization.

This is enough for today.




January 4, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrī Padyāvalī 74

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is today’s śloka?

[Madhuvrata dāsa and Acyutānanda dāsa each recite the
śloka.]


nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir nāpi vaiśyo na śūdro

nāhaṁ varṇī na ca gṛha-patir no vana-stho yatir vā

kintu prodyan nikhila-paramānanda-pūrṇāmṛtābdher

gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ


[I am not a brāhmaṇa (priest or Vedic scholar), kṣatriya
(warrior or administrator), vaiśya (agriculturalist or
businessman), or śūdra (worker), nor am I a brahmacārī
(celibate student), gṛhastha (householder), vānaprastha
(renounced householder), or sannyāsī (full renunciate).
Being transcendental to this gross and subtle body, I am
the servant of the servant of the servant of the lotus
feet of the beloved of the gopīs, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the
ultimate shelter of everyone, full of transcendental
bliss, and an ocean of unlimited nectar.]


                            17
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

The meaning is that my identity is not that of a
brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, or śūdra; nor am I a
brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, or sannyāsī. My
identity is that I am an eternal servant…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are you American?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You are from England?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Yes, from England. Acyutānanda is from America.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

I am American.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This verse explains that you are not from England or
America. You do not have any worldly identity. What are
you?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

I am a servant of the servant of the servant of the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The servant of gopī-bhartu, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is controlled
by the gopīs. Why do you say that you are the servant of
Kṛṣṇa? You are American. I see that you are fair, or
reddish, in complexion.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

This is false ego.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why is it false ego?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Kintu prodyan nikhila-paramānanda-pūrṇāmṛtābdher. Kṛṣṇa,
who is always served by the gopīs, is the most
attractive, self-effulgent personality, and He is the
supreme object of our service.


                           18
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why didn’t you answer by saying that false ego is due to
dehātma-buddhi, the illusory attachment for personal
bodily coverings and everything connected with the body?
In reality we are ātmā, pure spirit soul, but due to our
bodily identification we have a false conception of
ourselves. Why has this come about? It is due to kṛṣṇa
bhuli, forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa.

Madhuvrata dāsa:




kṛṣṇa bhuli’ sei jīva anādi-bahir mukha

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.117)


[Forgetting Kṛṣṇa, the living entity has been attracted
by the external feature from time immemorial. Therefore
the illusory energy [māyā] gives him all kinds of misery
in his material existence.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why has ignorance entangled us? Because we have
forgotten Kṛṣṇa. In what way have we forgotten Him? The
answer is that we are infinitesimal jīvas; we are not
Paramātmā, the Supersoul. Being infinitesimal, it is
possible to forget Him.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is the author of this śloka (nāhaṁ vipro…)?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

To whom? He has spoken this verse for the benefit of
all, but specifically He told it to Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara
and Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda. He used to relish this verse
with them in various ways, weeping continuously.

Will you remember this until the end of your life?

Brajanāth dāsa:

By your mercy, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t forget.

Who is telling you this?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja and Acyutānanda dāsa:


                           19
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

You have told us.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

So, don’t forget this – for your entire life.

What is the next śloka?


saṁsāra-sindhu-taraṇe hṛdayaṁ yadi syāt

saṁkīrttanāmṛta-rase ramate manaś cet

premāmbudhau viharaṇe yadi citta-vṛttir

māyāpurākhya-nagare vasatiṁ kurusva

(Śrī Navadvīpāśatakam, Verse 87,

by Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī)


[If you cherish the desire in your heart to cross the
ocean of material existence, if you have the desire to
taste the sweet nectar of the holy name, if you have an
intense eagerness to play in the ocean of prema, you
must certainly reside in the city of Śrī Māyāpura.]

We will discuss this śloka tomorrow. You must read Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, from beginning to end; and after
this, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from top to bottom. We are
engaged in devotional services throughout the day, but
within this time we must somehow take some time – in the
night or the day – to study.

In a single day, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī sometimes slept approximately three hours, and
sometimes they did not sleep at all. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu did not sleep at all in the day or night. It
is essential that we also curtail our sleeping.

In my young age, and then after I took sannyāsa up until
the old age of seventy-five, I never slept in the
daytime. In the daytime I used to go to the garden of
our maṭha4, or to a park, even in the heat, and I would
read all the scriptures. I request that you also do
this.

A gṛhastha works very hard, performing many activities
throughout the day, and it is to our advantage to do ten
times more than that in kṛṣṇa-bhajana. Kṛṣṇa-bhajana is
our life and soul. After this life is finished, we do
not know what birth we will take.


kṛṣṇa tvadīya-pada-paṅkaja-pañjarāntam

adyaiva me viśatu mānasa-rāja-haṁsaḥ

prāṇa-prayāṇa-samaye kapha-vāta-pittaiḥ

kaṇṭhāvarodhana-vidhau bhajanaṁ kutas te

(Mukunda-mālā-stotra 33,

                           20
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


by King Kulaśekhara)


[O Kṛṣṇa, my request is that the swan of my mind be
confined in the cage of Your lotus feet and dwell there
in the ocean of rasa. At the time of death the throat
will be choked up with mucus, air and bile. Under such
conditions, how will it be possible to remember Your
name?]

[To Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja] Can you explain this
śloka?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

A devotee is praying to Kṛṣṇa: “Kṛṣṇa tvadīya-pada-
paṅkaja-pañjarāntam, adyaiva me viśatu mānasa-rāja-
haṁsaḥ – O Kṛṣṇa, my desire is that my mind becomes like
a swan. As a swan eats lotus roots in Māna-sarovara, I
want my swan-like mind to enter the network of the lotus
flowers of Your feet and take the honey from there.”

Kṛṣṇa may ask the devotee, “Why are you so worried about
being able to do that now? Your life span is long; wait
a little.” In that case the devotee will tell Him, “No,
I want to do this right now.” Kṛṣṇa may ask, “Why not
wait for your old age to come?” The devotee will then
reply, “At that time I will be in great pain, my throat
will be filled with mucus, and my voice will be choked;
so how will I remember You? I want my mind to be focused
on Your lotus feet right now, and in that way I will be
able to remember You when my last breath comes.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you understand? Always remember this. Otherwise, if
we wait for death to remember Kṛṣṇa, then, when our
throat is choked up with mucus, bile, and air, we will
not be able to remember. “Adaiva me viśatu – may I enter
such remembrance right now.” We should think seriously
about all these things.

Thank you.




January 5, 2009


Śloka Class

Mukunda-mālā-stotra 33

[The students recite their homework śloka:]


kṛṣṇa tvadīya-pada-paṅkaja-pañjarāntam

adyaiva me viśatu mānasa-rāja-haṁsaḥ

prāṇa-prayāṇa-samaye kapha-vāta-pittaiḥ

                            21
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


kaṇṭhāvarodhana-vidhau smaraṇaṁ kutas te


[O Kṛṣṇa, my request is that the swan of my mind be
confined in the cage of Your lotus feet and dwell there
in the ocean of rasa. At the time of death the throat
will be choked up with mucus, air and bile. Under such
conditions, how will it be possible to remember Your
name?]

Madhuvrata dāsa:

“May my mind be spontaneously absorbed in You, Kṛṣṇa,
just as the rāja-haṁsaḥ, the swan…”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of kṛṣṇa tvadīya-pada-paṅkaja-
pañjarāntam adyaiva me viśatu?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

It means “may my mind be spontaneously absorbed in
Kṛṣṇa…”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

To whom is Mahārāja Kulaśekhara speaking?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Please control my mind.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

To whom?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then say, “Kṛṣṇa,” “My dear Kṛṣṇa.”

Madhuvrata dāsa:

“O Kṛṣṇa, may my mind…”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

“My dear Kṛṣṇa.”

Madhuvrata dāsa:

“My dear Kṛṣṇa, may my mind be spontaneously absorbed in
You, just as the rāja-haṁsaḥ goes inside the lotus
flower stems. At the time of death, the kapha, vāta, and
pita will come to my throat and choke me. How will I
remember You at that time?

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                           22
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Do you know the English for kapha, vāta, and pittaiḥ?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

It means ‘mucous, air, and bile.’

Acyutānanda dāsa:

“O my dear Kṛṣṇa, please control my mind so that it can
only think of Your lotus feet; because at the time of
death…”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of adyaiva?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

It means ‘now.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It means ‘just today, not tomorrow.’

Acyutānanda dāsa:

At the time of death, all the mucous, bile, and air will
obstruct my throat. So, how will I be able to remember
You at that time?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Tamopahā dāsa] What is the meaning of your śloka?

[Tamopahā dāsa recites the śloka of the previous day,
beginning with samsara-sindhu-tarane.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Try to utter the śloka without moving your head.

What is the meaning?

Tamopahā dāsa:

If one is interested in crossing the ocean of saṁsāra
(material existence), if one is interested in hearing
the nectar of saṅkīrtana, if one wants to taste the
ocean of love, then one must take shelter of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why don’t you say, “One must be surrendered to Kṛṣṇa?”

Tamopahā dāsa:

Because Mahāprabhu is more merciful than Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes. Kṛṣṇa has no time. He is always engaged in rasa
with His mother, and He is busy cow-herding with His
friends. He has come in the form of Mahāprabhu only to

                           23
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

hear our prayers and to deliver us. Caitanya Mahāprabhu
is most merciful. He traveled throughout India to help
devotees and non-devotees alike. He made so many
Vaiṣṇavas – hundreds of thousands.

Kṛṣṇa didn’t travel in that way. Rather, He went to
fight in the Mahābhārata War, and also to fight with
Śālva, Jarāsandha, and other demons. He traveled to
fight, whereas Mahāprabhu didn’t go anywhere to fight.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

What is the meaning of mānasa-rāja-haṁsaḥ?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The mind, mānasa, is like a royal swan. The author of
this śloka challenges his mind, “Why are you engaged in
taking bad things?” If water and milk are mixed in a
reservoir of water, the swan can separate the two and
drink the milk. “Now you are engaged in drinking all
varieties of worldly tastes; you are always absorbed
with this. Now, give this up and take milk.” That milk
is śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

When you told us this śloka before, you explained this
meaning: “The swan in Mānasa-sarovara eats only lotus
stems, not snails or other things. Similarly, my swan-
like mind should eat only nectarean things from Your
lotus feet; nothing else.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We can learn from Mahāprabhu and His associates, who
never engaged in politics. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī, and Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara always
thought about how to please Mahāprabhu; nothing else.

All disciples should be like this; thinking, how to
please their guru. Myself, Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja, Śrīla
Trivikrama Mahārāja and others were always like this. We
were not selfish, not engaged in politics, and we did
not hear kathā about anyone but Kṛṣṇa and His pure
devotees. In this way we served our Gurudeva, and this
is why he became pleased with us. Thinking how to please
guru later transfers into thinking how to please Kṛṣṇa.

This is the śloka for tomorrow:


kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya-

bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya

prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.2)

Madhuvrata dāsa:


                             24
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You are not remembering it, so you can try it again
tomorrow along with the meaning.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

I have learned it so many times, but after I learn it I
forget it again.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t forget it. Once you memorize it, it is best to
revise your memory from time to time. You can do so by
re-reading it in books and by practicing it in your
mind.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

When I learn a new verse, I forget the old one. I need
more memory.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Gaura premānande, hari haribol.




January 6, 2009


Śloka Class

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.2

[Śrīla Gurudeva requests his students to chant this
śloka:]


kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya-

bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya

prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā


[When transcendental devotional service, by which love
for Kṛṣṇa is attained, is executed by the senses, it is
called sādhana-bhakti, or the regulative discharge of
devotional service. Such devotion eternally exists
within the heart of every living entity. The awakening
of this eternal devotion is the potentiality of
devotional service in practice.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?


                             25
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Tamopahā dāsa:

I didn’t study yesterday, but it’s about…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You have not studied.

[To Madhuvrata dāsa] So, you explain.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

This verse is the definition of sādhana-bhakti. Sādhana-
bhakti is the engagement of the mind and senses in the
limbs of bhakti – śravaṇam (hearing), kīrtanam
(chanting), smaraṇam viṣṇu (remembering Kṛṣṇa), pāda-
sevanam (serving His lotus feet), arcanam (Deity
worship), vandanam (offering prayers), dāsyam (becoming
a servant), sakhyam (becoming a friend), and ātma-
nivedanam (surrendering everything) – with the aim of
attaining bhāva-bhakti.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why must sādhana-bhakti be performed? What is the aim
and object?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

It is to purify the heart so that bhāva-bhakti can
manifest.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Without this aim, our practice it is not real sādhana.
It is essential to know the definition of uttama-bhakti
(pure devotion), because sādhana-bhakti has some
relation with it. In its pure sense, uttama-bhakti is
performed at the stage of prema, mahābhāva, sneha, and
so on. When one performs devotional practices in such a
way that uttama-bhakti will manifest in one’s heart, it
is called sādhana-bhakti. When one’s aim and object is:
“I will achieve bhāva-bhakti,” then one’s practice is
sādhana; otherwise not.

What is the meaning of the last two lines?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Nitya-sidhasya means that bhāva-bhakti is eternally
present in the heart.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By sādhana you cannot make a new thing. Rather, you will
realize what is already present in the heart. That mood
will manifest.

Madhuvrata dāsa:




nityā-siddha kṛṣṇa-prema ‘sādhya’ kabhu naya

                           26
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017


śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.107)


[Pure love for Kṛṣṇa is eternally established in the
hearts of the living entities. It is not something to be
gained from another source. When the heart is purified
by hearing and chanting, this love naturally awakens.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Acyutānanda dāsa] What is the meaning?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Sādhana-bhakti is performed only to attain bhāva-bhakti.
Then only is it called sādhana-bhakti. Bhakti is that
which is described by…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You will have to tell the same thing I just told.
Uttama-bhakti, prema-bhakti, is anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ. To
attain that mood by the engagement of the senses is
called sādhana.

We don’t know our soul, so we engage our senses. The
result of śravaṇam, kīrtanam, smaraṇam, pāda-sevanam,
arcanam, vandanam, dāsyam, sakhyam, and ātma-nivedanam
is the attainment of uttama-bhakti.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

The nitya-siddha bhāva, the transcendental mood which is
already in the heart, will manifest.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is bhāva-bhakti?

[Śrīla Gurudeva requests the students to chant the
definition verse, and each recites it, one after the
other.]


śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā

prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya bhāk

rucibhiś citta-māsṛṇya-

kṛd asau bhāva ucyate

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.3.1)


[When devotional service is executed on the
transcendental platform of pure goodness, it is like a
sun-ray of love for Kṛṣṇa. At such a time, devotional
service causes the heart to be softened by various
tastes, and one is then situated in bhāva, or
transcendental emotion.]

                            27
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Tamopahā dāsa] Do you remember this verse? This is
the homework for tomorrow. Please memorize the verse and
its meaning.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Gurudeva, I have a question. If the jīva soul has no
relation with this body, then how by engaging the body
can we purify the soul?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Whether or not you know it, we already have a
relationship with Kṛṣṇa. The soul is present inside the
body, and the Supersoul is also present. We have
forgotten this. We know about it, and we hear about it,
but we have no realization. At present we have a certain
conception of ourselves. I now call myself my mind, my
nose, my ears, and my mouth. If we can engage all our
senses in Kṛṣṇa’s service, as we presently conceive of
ourselves, this is sādhana.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Do the material mind and senses become spiritual?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, we will have to give them up here. Only our soul is
spiritual, and only our soul reaches the spiritual
world. But the soul has everything: a nose, eyes, ears,
a very beautiful form, and all qualities. In fact, there
is ultimately no need of the material senses, mind, and
body – gross or subtle. Do you understand?

Once upon a time, when the battle of Mahābhārata was
finished and Duryodhana and his one-hundred brothers had
been killed, Arjuna and Bhīma began to argue.

Arjuna exclaimed, “I have killed all those mahārathīs
(powerful warriors).”

Bhīma announced, “I am the cause of winning this battle.
I killed all the brothers of Duryodhana, Duryodhana
himself, and so many others. If I had not participated
in the battle, we could not have won.”

Arjuna said, “Without me, this battle would not have
been won by us.”

Bhīma had a son named Ghaṭotkaca, whose son was
Barbarika. Before the battle of Mahābhārata, Barbarika
had approached Kṛṣṇa and said, “Why are You collecting
so many soldiers? I will destroy the entire army for
You.”

When Kṛṣṇa asked how he would do that, Barbarika took a
piece of grass and, reciting a mantra over it, threw it
into the air. At that moment everyone’s chest was struck
with a red mark. All the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas, and even
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, had that red mark on their chest. Kṛṣṇa was

                           28
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

very amazed to see this, and at once took His Sudarśana
cakra and cut off Barbarika’s head.

Barbarika’s head spoke, asking, “Why have you killed me
like this?”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “You have the greatest power of any
warrior here. If you participate in the battle,
everything will be finished too quickly.”

Barbarika replied, “Still, I want to see the battle. I
want to see who is prominent. Please keep my head on the
top of any mountain so that I can see.”

Now that the battle was finished and Bhīma and Arjuna
were arguing, Kṛṣṇa called for Barbarika – that head.
Barbarika’s head was brought and Kṛṣṇa asked,
“Barbarika, please tell us who was the greatest
fighter.”

Barbarika replied, “I saw    that no one was a prominent
fighter. I saw that Kṛṣṇa    alone did everything. He
killed Duryodhana, Karṇa,    Duśāsana, Bhīṣma Pitāmaha, and
others. No one else could    have done it.”

Bhīma and Arjuna became silent.

What is the meaning?

Tamopahā dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa is the doer.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We think that we are expert, but really we are not.
Kṛṣṇa wants to take some service from us for our
benefit; He doesn’t need our service. Therefore, we
should avoid any kind of pride and false ego that “I am
the hero.” So many heroes came and went.

Always be very polite, as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
states:


tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

(Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam, Verse 3)


[Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass which has been trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless, and offering respect to all others according
to their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.]

If false ego comes and you at once remember this verse,

                              29
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

that false ego will subside.

First, do you know all the verses of Upadeśāmṛta from
beginning to end? Second, do you know Manaḥ-śikṣā from
top to bottom? And third, do you know Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s Śikṣāṣṭakam? It is important to memorize
these three books. I may call on you at any time for
this.

Tamopahā dāsa:

This is the instruction of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura to his disciples.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I also say this.

Tamopahā dāsa:

Now you are giving that to us.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When I first came to the maṭha, the first thing I
memorized was the verses of these three: Upadeśāmṛta,
Manaḥ-śikṣā, and Śikṣāṣṭakam – and also their meanings.
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written Śrī Upadeśāmṛta
Bhāṣyam, which I have translated into Hindi. He has
given all the deep purports therein.

Brajanāth dāsa:

That book is now in English, as well as Manaḥ-śikṣā.




January 9, 2009


Darśana

Śrīla Gurudeva:

A certain type of devotee does not marry. Rather, he
approaches a qualified guru and begins one-pointed
bhajana. Who has performed bhakti in this way?

Mādhava dāsa:

You have done this, and your Gurudeva has done this.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I am referring to ancient times.

Mādhava dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna to do that.

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                           30
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

That is okay; but more specifically, Śrīla Śukadeva
Gosvāmī left his father and mother and went to do
bhajana. Nārada Gosvāmī’s mother was dying, yet he left
her and went to the forest to perform bhajana. The sons
of Brahmā, namely Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanātana, and Sanat
Kumāra all left home for bhajana. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu renounced His married life and His old
mother.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s father and mother forced
him to get married – to a young lady who was beautiful
enough to have won the Miss Universe contest. He was the
only son of his father and uncle.

Brajanāth dāsa:

He was the only heir to his father’s and uncle’s wealth.
They were very wealthy.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yet he ran away from home.

[To Mādhava dāsa, the son of Tamopahā dāsa] I am not
telling you to give up your father and mother, because
they are devotees. You can serve them, as Śrīla
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, in his previous āśrama,
served his father, Tapana Miśra.




January 11, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrī Manaḥ-Śikṣā, Verse 5

[The six attending śloka students recite the verse.]


asac-ceṣṭā-kaṣṭa-prada-vikaṭa-pāśālibhir iha

prakāmaṁ kāmādi-prakaṭa-pathapāti-vyatikaraiḥ

gale baddhvā hanye ’ham iti bakabhid vartmapa-gaṇe

kuru tvaṁ phutkārān avati sa yathā tvaṁ mana itaḥ


[Lust, anger, and so on are a band of dacoits who assail
me suddenly on the open road of material life. They
willfully bind my neck with their dreadful ropes of
wicked deeds and are thus slaying me. O mind, cry out
loudly to the powerful and merciful Vaiṣṇavas who are
the protectors of the path of bhakti leading to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the killer of Bakāsura. Hearing your piteous cry,
they will surely protect you from such aggressors.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Madhuvrata dāsa] You should utter the śloka more…

                             31
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Madhuvrata dāsa:

Fluidly?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

[To Tamopahā dāsa] What is the meaning?

Tamopahā dāsa:

Impermanent, unclean things are like a rope around my
neck.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What are these?

Tamopahā dāsa:

Lust, greed…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Kāma, meaning ‘lust;’ lobha, meaning ‘greed to take
something from others.’

Tamopahā dāsa:

Lust, anger, greed, and so forth.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

To collect more money than needed, and to enjoy that
money in sense gratification.

Tamopahā dāsa:

These are like thieves on the road ahead of me. They are
strangling me with a noose; they are like highway
robbers waiting to hang me. I call upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
enemy of Bakāsura, to come and help me. And I also call
upon the Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What does gaṇe mean?

Tamopahā dāsa:

The associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

Tamopahā dāsa:

I call upon them to help me conquer these enemies.
Please mind, follow them.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

                           32
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Lust, anger, greed, envy, pride, and so forth are like
dacoits on the open road of material life that suddenly
attack me. They bind my neck with a rope and force me to
perform sinful activities. Oh mind, pray and cry out
piteously to the Vaiṣṇavas of our paramparā. They can
all save me from this position.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who are they?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

They are the eternal associates; guru-paramparā and
gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They are Mahāprabhu’s associates, like Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and others.

Your explanation was very good; very vivid.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

When you taught us this śloka in Mathurā, you explained
why Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī uttered the name baka-
bhid. Baka-bhid means ‘He who killed Bakāsura.’ Kṛṣṇa
also killed Aghāsura and Pūtanā, so why did Raghunātha
dāsa take the example of Bakāsura? The crane (baka)
represents hypocrisy and duplicity. He stands in the
water on one leg, with his eyes half-closed as if in
meditation. But then, when he sees any fish, he grabs
it. In the same way, we think that greed, lust, and all
other impure thoughts and moods have subsided and are
under our control, but as soon as they get the chance,
they manifest and harass us. We are like the crane.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Lust, anger, and greed to take another’s property or
collect more money than needed may attack us at any
time; and at that time we cannot check these urges. We
can only pray to Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, our entire guru-paramparā, and especially to
gurudeva. We can pray, “O Gurudeva, save me, save me. I
am dying.”

There was once a boy. In the beginning of his boyhood he
was sent by his father to school, and he began studying
with his teachers. Then, some time later, his father
called him and he returned home. The boy, Prahlāda, was
decorated by his mother, and then he came and sat on the
lap of his father. His father began to caress his head,
and said, “Oh, good boy, my son, can you tell me what
you have studied in your school, and what you especially
like?” Prahlāda replied as follows:


tat sādhu manye ’sura-varya dehināṁ

sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt

                            33
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.5.5)


[O best of the asuras, king of the demons, as far as I
have learned from my spiritual master, any person who
has accepted a temporary body and temporary household
life is certainly embarrassed by anxiety because of
having fallen in a dark well where there is no water but
only suffering. One should give up this position and go
to the forest [vana]. More clearly, one should go to
Vṛndāvana, where only Kṛṣṇa consciousness is prevalent,
and should thus take shelter of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.]

He replied, “O Father, O best of the demons, I have
learned in my school that the house in which we are
living is a blind-well.” How so? The following example
has been given.

Once there was a king, and he went hunting. By chance he
became separated from his soldiers, at which time a
tiger began chasing after him and he became frantic to
save his life. There was a tall tree, which he could not
climb, but then he saw a blind-well and a small tree. He
held onto two branches of that tree and lowered himself
into the well. As soon as he somewhat descended into the
well, he saw some black serpents at the bottom, hissing
with a desire to immediately bite him.

The king thought, “My God, there are so many cobras. But
just outside the well a tiger is roaring loudly.” Now he
was in a dilemma regarding what to do. Hanging from the
two branches of that tree, he noticed that two rats came
out of the blind well, one black and one white, which
started to bite the branches on which he was hanging.

And he noticed more. A beehive rested on the branches,
and from the beehive some honey dropped in front of him.
Seeing the honey, he could not control himself. He
forgot that death waited downward, death waited upward
in the form of the tiger, and death waited also in the
form of the rats cutting the branches he held. Licking
the honey, he thought, “How sweet this honey is; how
sweet.”

What is the symbolism regarding the black and white rats
cutting the branches? What is the tree? The tree may be
compared to our lifetime, and the rats symbolize day and
night. Days and nights cut down our lifetime: day and
night, one week, a fortnight, a month, a year; cutting
our lifetime. What does the tiger represent? He is the
symbol of death. What are the snakes? They are symbols
of the problems in this world. What is the honey which
is dropping down in front of the king? It is the
happiness of this material world. This is our situation.

What is your age?

Campakalatā dāsī:

                            34
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Forty-seven.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This means that forty-seven years of your lifetime have
already been cut down. Do you know how much longer you
will live in this world?

Campakalatā dāsī:

I don’t know.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Today, tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, or after one
hundred years, you will die. The tiger represents death,
and the snake represents the innumerable problems of
this world. Have you any problems? Are your daughters
married? Do you worry about this?

Campakalatā dāsī:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

One day you will become old. Perhaps you will not be
able to walk at that time, and you will be attacked by
many diseases. These are cobras. And what is the honey?
Suppose a man and woman coming home from outside [where
they were besieged by problems] now see their children.
Those children jump onto their laps and say, “What have
you brought for me?” By this exchange, the parents
forget all their problems.

Prahlāda’s father became very angry by hearing
Prahlāda’s words. He retorted, “What bogus thing have
you learned?? To go to the forest and do bhajana of
Kṛṣṇa???”

Again Prahlāda was sent to school, where his teachers
taught him dharma (material religiosity), artha
(economic development), kāma (sense gratification),
politics, hypocrisy, and other spiritually useless
things. Again he went to his father, and his father
asked, “What have you learned in your school?” He
replied śravaṇam, kīrtanam, vīṣṇu smaraṇam, pāda-
sevanam, arcanam, vandanam, dāsyam, sakhyam, ātma-
nivedanam. What is the meaning?

[Brajanāth dāsa explains the words of Prahlāda and his
father’s unsuccessful attempts to kill him.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Now explain what Prahlāda told his classmates about
living for one hundred years?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Prahlāda told his classmates, “If our life is one-
hundred years, half of the time we waste in sleeping,
and another twenty years we waste in studying and going

                           35
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

to school to learn some profession to become expert at
making money. Then what happens? We get married, and
then old age comes, at which time we cannot walk or
remember anything. And in the middle, whatever time is
left, what are we doing? We are working very hard for a
little sense gratification.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Prahlāda said, “If you are giving all your energy to
your marriage and to maintaining your family, when will
you do bhajana? So, begin from today; otherwise your
life will be useless.”

All the boys wanted to follow Prahlāda Mahārāja. They
asked him, “What should we do?” Prahlāda replied,
“Perform kīrtana. Chant, “Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma Hare
Hare.”

[Śrīla Gurudeva sings together with his devotees for
awhile.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then Prahlāda’s father came.

[Brajanāth dāsa describes Hiraṇyakaśipu’s challenges,
Prahlāda’s replies, and Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Hiraṇyakaśipu could not die in the day or night, inside
or outside the house, by any weapon, by any man, any
demons, or any demigods.

Brajanāth dāsa:

The day was finished; it was evening, dusk, Nṛsiṁhadeva
caught Hiraṇyakaśipu in the doorway, which was not
inside or outside, put him on His lap, which was not on
the land, in the sea, or in the air, pulled out his
intestines with His nails, which were not weapons, and
put those intestines around his neck like a garland.
This indicates that no matter how many arrangements for
protection we make in this world, we must die.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

At that time Nṛsiṁhadeva was very, very angry. Fire
emanated from His mane, and He was so furious that He
could have destroyed the entire world. Brahmā requested
Prahlāda to pacify Him, so Prahlāda approached Him
without fear and sat on His lap.

Tears came from Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s eyes and He became
calm and quiet. He said, “O Prahlāda, I came late
despite the fact that your father was harassing you so
greatly. Please take a boon. What do you want?” Prahlāda
replied, “I am not a businessman. I do not serve You to
receive a boon from You.”

This is why I told you that you are wasting your time.
Please come here in the mornings and sit. Come daily; I

                           36
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

will tell you some stories.




January 12, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 6


are cetaḥ prodyat-kapaṭa-kuṭināṭī-bhara-khara

kṣaran-mūtre snātvā dahasi katham ātmānam api mām

sadā tvaṁ gāndharvā-giridhara-pada-prema-vilasat

sudhāmbhodhau snātvā svam api nitarāṁ māṁ ca sukhaya


[O wicked mind, although you adopt the path of sādhana,
you imagine yourself purified by bathing in the
trickling urine of the great donkey of full-blown deceit
and hypocrisy. By doing so, you are simultaneously
burning yourself and scorching me, a tiny jīva. Stop
this! Delight yourself and me by eternally bathing in
the nectarean ocean of pure love for the lotus feet of
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, the Divine Couple.]

Śrīla Gurudeva: What is the meaning?



Madhuvrata dāsa:

The practicing sādhaka may be able to give up lust,
anger, greed, and envy, as told in the previous verse,
but he may not be able to give up deceit, kapaṭa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is kapaṭa?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Duplicity and dishonesty. Oh my dear mind, why do you
constantly bathe in the burning urine of the donkey of
deceit? By doing this you are burning yourself and also
burning me, the jīva. Rather, bathe in the nectarean
ocean of prema for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

“Do not burn yourself, and do not burn me. Rather, make
yourself happy and make me happy as well.” In the place
where donkeys pass urine, the grass dries up.

Do you have any risk of being burned by the donkey?

Madhuvrata dāsa:


                              37
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You have no risk. Why?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva is protecting us.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I am keeping you all with me. I am giving you
instructions that will protect you from going towards
that donkey. You do not understand right now, but this
is the real fact. We are indebted to guru. My Gurudeva
kept me with him for so many years, and thus he helped
me in such a way that I can preach all over the world.
Don’t deviate.

Brajanāth dāsa:

By this we understand that without sādhu-saṅga, we are
in complete darkness. We are unable to progress without
sādhu-saṅga.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When you become a perfect sādhu, you will be able to
help others – not now.




January 14, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 8

yathā duṣṭatvaṁ me davayati śaṭhasyāpi kṛpayā

yathā mahyaṁ premāmṛtam api dadāty ujjvalam asau

yathā śrī gāndharvā-bhajana-vidhaye prerayati māṁ

tathā goṣṭhe kākvā giridharam iha tvaṁ bhaja manaḥ


[Therefore, O mind, with utter humility and grief-
stricken words, just worship Śrī Giridhārī Kṛṣṇa in
Vraja in such a way that He will become pleased with me.
By His causeless mercy He will remove my wickedness,
bestow the nectar of His supremely radiant prema, and
confer upon me the inspiration to worship Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

                             38
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


O mind,   please worship Giridhārī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja, so that
He will   remove the wickedness from my mind and bestow
upon me   unnatojjvala-rasa-prema. Please inspire me to
perform   bhajana of Śrī Gāndharvā, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. O
mind, I   am worshiping you. Please do this.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of dadāti ujjvala-rasām?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Dadāti means ‘to give.’

Tamopahā dāsa:

It means, “Please give me ujjvala-prema.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is that?

Tamopahā dāsa:

The dāsya (service) of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Ujjvala means ‘brilliantly shining.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is that?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

It refers to the service of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

In parakīya-bhāva (paramour love).

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Parakīya-bhāva, unnata-ujjvala-rasa – rādhā-dāsyam.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, the parakīya mood; this is the meaning. Ujjvala-
rasa does not refer to all mādhurya-rasa [i.e. the
mādhurya-rasa of Kṛṣṇa’s queens]. It refers only to
parakīya-mādhurya-rasa, rādhā-dāsyam, especially under
the guidance of Rūpa Mañjarī.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is more worshipful for us
than even Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. In this one śloka he has
given us sambandha (our relationship with Kṛṣṇa),
abhidheya (the process of dealing in that relationship),
and prayojana (the goal, kṛṣṇa-prema). Gāndhārvikā-
Giridhārī refers to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Gāndhārvikā is
Rādhā and Giridhārī is Kṛṣṇa. Worship of Rādhā-Giridhārī
is sambandha, abhidheya is rendering Them service, and
the prayojana is unnatojjvala-rasām sva-bhakti, or

                             39
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

rādhā-dāsyam.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is very, very kind. He has
directly told us everything we need to know regarding
attainment of our goal. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has kept
something hidden, but Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has
directly given the formula.

Brajanāth dāsa:

What is the ‘wickedness’ here?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Wickedness refers to hypocrisy and other things which
have not yet been removed, like the desire for name and
fame. This desire is extremely difficult to remove.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Gurudeva, it is mentioned in Manaḥ-śikṣā, in the purport
to this verse, that hlādinī-śakti5 comes into the heart
by the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas. Where is this mentioned
in the Sanskrit śloka?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Hlādinī sar-prema mahābhāva.


mahābhāva-svarūpā śrī-rādhā-ṭhākurāṇī

sarva-guṇa-khani kṛṣṇa-kāntā-śiromaṇi

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 4.69)


[Śrī Rādhā Ṭhākurāṇī is the embodiment of mahābhāva. She
is the repository of all good qualities and the crest
jewel among all the lovely consorts of Lord Kṛṣṇa.]

Mahābhāva indicates Rādhikā. She will come by the mercy
of Vaiṣṇavas like Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī,
Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, and Rāya Rāmānanda.

[To Vṛndā-devī dāsī] What is your question?

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

In this śloka Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is praying
to Giridhārī, Kṛṣṇa, but he also worships the giridhārī-
śīla that was given to him by Mahāprabhu. We understand
that Giridhārī is also hari-dāsa varya (the greatest
servant of Kṛṣṇa). Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is praying to
Giridhārī for that mood to serve. In what way is he
seeing Giridhārī in this śloka?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Giridhārī and Girirāja are not the same.6 Girirāja is
Girirāja Govardhana, and Giridhārī is Kṛṣṇa who holds
Girirāja.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                            40
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


Giridhārī as Kṛṣṇa Himself, and Gāndhārvikā is Rādhā. He
sees Giridhārī as that Kṛṣṇa who is with Rādhā.

Why is Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī calling out only to
Giridhārī? Giridhārī is causelessly merciful. He saved
the Vrajavāsīs by holding up Girirāja Govardhana for
seven days without moving. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is
saying, “Since He is merciful, He will surely bestow
upon me unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam.”

[To Tamopahā prabhu’s son, Mādhava dāsa] Are you under-
standing something? What is the aim and object of your
life?

Mādhava dāsa:

My aim and object is to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is ujjvala-rasa?

Mādhava dāsa:

Um… Paramour…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Paramour refers to a lady who is married but loves
another man. The paramour mood is not a bad thing in
relation to Kṛṣṇa, but for others it is very bad.

[To Tamopahā dāsa] You are remarried?

Tamopahā dāsa:

Yes, Campakalatā is my second wife.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why did she leave her husband and marry again?

Tamopahā dāsa:

She was never married before. It was me; I was married
before.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You were parakīya.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Should we worship girirāja-śīla as Giridhārī?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, in the form of Mahāprabhu, gave Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī a girirāja-śīla (Kṛṣṇa) and
guñjā-mālā (a necklace made of guñjā berries,
representing Rādhikā). If you become perfect, siddha,
will you still worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, or will you worship
Giridhārī and guñjā-mālā? Will you give up Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa

                           41
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

and worship Giridhārī and guñjā-mālā?

Brajanāth dāsa:

No. Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The ultimate goal of this śīla (Deity in the form of a
stone) and guñjā-mālā worship is to enter that service.

We were here for six weeks.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Seven weeks.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

On the 20th we will start from Cebu.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes. Then we will be with Dr. Param in Penang.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Where will we go first?

Brajanāth dāsa:

We will go to Singapore, where we will stay with Guptajī
for one or two days for rest. Then we will go to
Malaysia, to Johor Bahru, just over the border from
Singapore.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By car?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes, it is about forty-five minutes away.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How many days will we be there?

Brajanāth dāsa:

About five or six days.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And after that?

Brajanāth dāsa:

To Dr. Param’s house.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By car?


                              42
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

Brajanāth dāsa:

We will go by flight, and they will drive with the
luggage.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And after that?

Brajanāth dāsa:

We will go back to Singapore.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Again Singapore? We are going there three times now.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes. We will go back to Singapore. You will give one
program there in the Gīta Mandira.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I spoke there last year on Gīta?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes. Then, from there we will go to Calcutta.




January 16, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 9

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the śloka?

[All the students present recite the śloka, one after
another:]


madīśā-nāthatve vraja-vipina-candraṁ vraja-vane-

śvarīṁ tāṁ-nāthatve tad-atula-sakhītve tu lalitām

viśākhāṁ śikṣālī-vitaraṇa-gurutve priya-saro-

girīndrau tat-prekṣā-lalita-rati-datve smara manaḥ


[O mind, always remember Vṛndāvana-candra Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
the prāṇanātha (Lord of the life-breath) of my Svāminī
Śrī Rādhikā, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā as my
mistress, Śrī Lalitā as the peerless friend of my
Svāminī, Śrī Viśākhā as the śikṣā-guru in the
arrangements of Śrī Yugala sevā, and Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and

                           43
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Girirāja Govardhana as those who grant darśana of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and bestow sublime rati for Their lotus
feet.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

As the essence of all instruction is Verse Eight of Śrī
Upadeśāmṛta, beginning tan nāma-rūpa caritādi-
sukīrtanānu, this śloka is the essence of the entire
Manaḥ-śikṣā.

[To Brajanāth dāsa] After this class I will go to take
breakfast, and then rest. Then, at 8 o’clock, because I
have completed all my work, you can give me more pages
to work on. And please tell Kṛṣṇa-kṛpā to send another
file at once.7

Brajanāth dāsa:

I told him yesterday.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When will he send it? He should send it at once.

Brajanāth dāsa:

I requested him to send it ‘at once.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

(To Tamopahā dāsa) What is the meaning?

Tamopahā dāsa:

My dear mind, always remember that the Lord of
Vṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Vṛndāvana-candra, and His Īśvari,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, are the Lords of Vṛndāvana, and Lalitā
is Her…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Speak clearly. This is important.

[Tamopahā dāsa explains the verse.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Your explanation is still not clear.

[To Madhuvrata dāsa] Can you explain?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

O my dear mind, always remember Vṛndāvana-candra Śrī
Kṛṣṇa as the prāṇanātha, the dear-most beloved, of my
Svāminī, Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, yes. This is the meaning.

Madhuvrata dāsa:


                           44
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

Always remember Śrīmatī Rādhikā as my Mistress, or
Svāminī.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Svāminījī [jī denotes affection and respect].

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Svāminījī. Always remember Śrīmatī Lalitā-devī as the
dear-most sakhī of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Always remember
Viśākhā-devī as Their śikṣā-guru in matters of conjugal
rasa. Always remember Girirāja Govardhana and Śrī Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, as they will bestow upon us this sublime rati.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

[To Campakalatā dāsī] Have you understood something? Who
is your mistress?

Campakalatā dāsī:

Rādhikā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is Lalitā?

Campakalatā dāsī:

I don’t know.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is Viśākhā?

Campakalatā dāsī:

Śikṣā-guru.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who can bestow mercy so that we can become servants of
Rādhikā?

Campakalatā dāsī:

Govardhana.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Govardhana and Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

There was a king named Uttānapāda, who was the ruler of
the entire universe. He had two wives: the first named
Sunīti, meaning that she was full with all good
qualities and especially she was a worshiper of Kṛṣṇa;
and the second named Suruci, meaning that she was
absorbed in sense gratification and attached to worldly
things like kingdom, wealth, and material knowledge.
Sunīti had a son named Dhruva, meaning that he was fixed
and determined; and Suruci had a son named Uttama.

                              45
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Once, King Uttānapāda was sitting on his throne, and
Uttama, the younger son, was sitting on his lap. Dhruva
was playing nearby with some boys and, seeing his
brother on the lap of his father, he told his father, “I
too want to sit on your lap.”

In the meantime, Suruci came and declared, “Dhruva, you
cannot sit on your father’s lap. If you want to sit on
his lap, you will have to perform austerities and then
take your next birth from my womb.” The king wanted to
take Dhruva on his lap; however, bewildered by Suruci’s
beauty, he feared displeasing her.

Dhruva began to weep. Along with his friends he went to
his mother, who asked him, “Why are you weeping?”
Dhruva’s friends told her, “He wanted to sit on his
father’s lap, but Suruci warned him, ‘You can sit on his
lap only after you take birth from my womb.’ ”

Dhruva’s mother replied, “You are weeping about this?
This is a very small thing. If you desire, you can
control the entire universe. Go to the forest and engage
in austerities to please the Supreme Lord, and He will
give you the benediction to become king.” Thus, Dhruva
left his father’s house during the night and went to the
forest.

[To Brajanāth dāsa] What more?

Brajanāth dāsa:

When he got to the forest, Dhruva began to search for
God, and Nārada Ṛṣi appeared to him.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Kṛṣṇa inspired Nārada to go and help him.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Great saintly persons always look for ways to benefit
those who have forgotten their relationship with God.
Nārada Ṛṣi was thus inspired by Kṛṣṇa to go to Dhruva...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And help him.

Brajanāth dāsa:

And help him. Nārada met with Dhruva and said, “My boy,
what are you doing here? You are so small. What are you
looking for in the forest? Better to go home.”

Dhruva replied, “No, dear sir, I am searching for God.”

Nārada replied, “What do you want from God?”

Dhruva said, “I want a kingdom greater than that of my
great-grandfather.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                           46
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Nārada said, “Better to return home, because the forest
is full of lions and tigers who will eat you.” He was
testing Dhruva.

Brajanāth dāsa:

He was testing to see if Dhruva was serious. “Better to
go home. Come back when you are strong and have no fear
of any dangerous situations.”

Dhruva replied, “No, I want that kingdom now. Please
instruct me so that I will have darśana of the Lord, so
that He will give me His benediction.”

Nārada Ṛṣi agreed, “All right. I will give you a special
mantra by chant by which God will manifest and bestow
His special benediction upon you.” He gave Dhruva the
mantra, after which Dhruva continually meditated on it.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This mantra was of Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa: Oṁ namo bhagavate
vāsudevāya.

Brajanāth dāsa:

He always chanted this mantra, for Nārada had instructed
him that after three months of chanting he would obtain
darśana of God.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Six months.

Brajanāth dāsa:

He was so determined that he gave up eating and
drinking.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He took bath in Yamunā and went to the forest called
Madhuvana, where he sat under the shade of a tree in a
high place and began to chant that mantra.

He first gave up eating. What was he eating now?

Brajanāth dāsa:

In the second month Dhruva Mahārāja ate only every six
days, and for his eatables he took dry grass and leaves.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In the third month?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Only drinking.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Drinking what?


                           47
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Brajanāth dāsa:

Only water [every nine days].

Śrīla Gurudeva:

During the forth month, he took only one breath of air
every twelve days, and after some time he also left
breathing and entered samādhi, trance. Then, after six
months his complete stoppage of breathing chocked up the
universal breathing. The demigods prayed to the Lord for
help, and Kṛṣṇa appeared before him as His expansion,
Lord Viṣṇu. Lord Viṣṇu first entered Dhruva’s heart,
with cakra (disc), padma (lotus flower), conch, and
club, after which He appeared directly in front of
Dhruva.

Then?

Brajanāth dāsa:

He was so overwhelmed…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No. When He came in front of Dhruva, Dhruva’s samādhi
broke, and he wondered, “Where is Bhagavān?” He thus
opened his eyes and saw Viṣṇu before him, but he was not
able to offer prayers.

Out of His compassion, Viṣṇu touched His conch-shell to
Dhruva’s forehead, and thus Dhruva was able to pray.
Viṣṇu then told him, “You will be the king, not only of
your father’s kingdom, but of the entire universe. When
your time in this body is over, you will not die.
Keeping your feet on the head of death, you will go to
Dhruvaloka and serve Me there.”

After Viṣṇu disappeared, Dhruva Mahārāja began to
lament: “What wrong I have done! I was searching for
broken glass, and I received cintāmaṇi, a desire-stone.
If one wants gold, that cintāmaṇi will manifest gold. If
one wants a kingdom, he will get a kingdom. Why did I
want this broken glass? Oh, I am cheated. I am cheated.”

In the meantime, while Dhruva was still away from the
palace, Nārada came and told the king, “Your son is
returning.” King Uttānapāda then became free from the
fear of Suruci and, with his elephants, horses, and
entire army, he came out of the city to greet and
embrace his son. He brought Dhruva to his palace and
gave him his entire kingdom.

If anyone is determined to have darśana of Kṛṣṇa, he
must be very fixed. Kṛṣṇa then sends His associate, who
teaches that aspiring devotee how to attain His darśana,
and that associate gives him a mantra and teaches him
how to practice it.

[To Campakalatā dāsī] How did you become my disciple, my
daughter? Because Kṛṣṇa inspired me to come and help
your family, I came to your house; this is the special
mercy of Kṛṣṇa. For those who are determined to give up
sense enjoyment and want to serve Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa becomes

                           48
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

very merciful. He sends one of His devotees by telling
him, “Go and help them.” For this reason He sometimes
comes Himself, and sometimes He sends His associate –
the ācārya or guru. Thus, we can proceed in bhakti and
become happy forever.

Tamopahā dāsa:

Dhruvaloka became the Polestar, the star that all other
planets circumambulate.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Dhruvaloka will never be destroyed?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

All the planets, including the Sun and the Moon as well
as all the hundreds and thousands of stars, revolve
around the Polestar, the planet of Mahārāja Dhruva, in
their respective orbits; some higher and some lower.
There, in Dhruvaloka, resides an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa
named Hari, who is surrounded by great opulence. Dhruva
was not sent to Goloka Vṛndāvana. For that, there must
be special mercy.

[To Tamopahā dāsa] Will you take your wife and sons?

Tamopahā dāsa:

She wants to go to heaven and be with Jesus. I want to
go to Goloka.




January 16, 2009


Art Darśana

Śrīla Gurudeva:

(To Śyāmārāṇī dāsī) I would like you to make some
pictures that illustrate these ślokas:


barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ

bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām

randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopā-vṛndair

vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada-ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.21.5)


[(The gopīs began to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa within their minds.)
Accompanied by His cowherd friends, He entered the
charming forest of Vṛndāvana. His head was decorated
with a peacock feather. He wore yellow karṇikāra flowers
over His ears, a golden yellow garment on His body, and

                              49
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

a beautiful, fragrant vaijayantī garland around His
neck. Śrī Kṛṣṇa exhibited His supremely captivating
appearance, just like the best of dancers performing
upon a stage. He filled up the holes of His flute with
the nectar of His lips. The cowherd boys followed behind
Him singing His glories, which purify the entire world.
In this way, the forest of Vṛndāvana manifested even
greater splendor than Vaikuṇṭha, due to being beautified
by the marks of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.]

In this śloka, the assembly of gopas are surrounding
Kṛṣṇa and calling out, “Kṛṣṇa kī jaya ho! Kṛṣṇa kī jaya
ho! – All glories to You! May You be all-victorious!”


barhāpīḍābhirāmaṁ mṛga-mada-tilakaṁ kuṇḍalākrānta-gaṇḍaṁ

kañjākṣaṁ kambu-kaṇṭhaṁ smita-subhaga-mukhaṁ svādhare
nyasta-veṇum

śyāmaṁ śāntaṁ tri-bhaṅgaṁ ravi-kara-vasanaṁ bhūṣitaṁ
vaijayantyā

vande vṛndāvana-sthaṁ yuvati-śata-vṛṭaṁ brahma gopāla-
veśam

(Śrī Stava-kalpa-druma)


[I worship that Parabrahma – whose crown is decorated
with a peacock feather, whose large forehead is marked
with tilaka of musk and saffron candana, whose fish-
shaped earrings create a reflection upon His charming
cheeks which themselves pulverize the pride of sapphire,
whose eyes resemble fully-blossomed lotus flowers, whose
neck tapers like a conch-shell, whose lotus face is
graced with a gentle smile, who holds a flute to His
bimba fruit-like lips, whose bodily complexion is like
that of a fresh monsoon cloud, who is supremely
peaceful, who stands in a delightful threefold-bending
posture, whose yellow cloth is resplendent like the rays
of the sun, who is adorned with a vaijayantī flower
garland, who is surrounded on all sides by thousands of
gopīs, and who resides in Śrī Dhāma Vṛndāvana dressed as
a cowherd boy.]

kasturī-tilakaṁ lalāṭa-paṭale vakṣaḥ-sthale kaustubhaṁ

nāsāgre vara-mauktikaṁ kara-tale veṇuḥ kare kaṅkaṇam

sarvāṅge hari-candanaṁ sulalitaṁ kaṇṭhe ca muktāvalī

gopā-strī-pariveṣṭito vijayate gopāla-cūḍāmaṇiḥ

(Śrī Gopāla-sahasra-nāma 28)


[His forehead is decorated with musk tilaka, upon His
chest rests the Kaustubha jewel, an exquisite pearl
adorns the tip of His nose, His lotus hand holds the
flute, bracelets adorn His wrists, His entire form is
anointed with candana, a necklace of pearls graces His
charming neck, and He is surrounded by cowherd maidens.
All glories unto He who is the crest jewel of cowherd

                           50
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

boys!]

I would love to see these ślokas illustrated.

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Shall I illustrate Kṛṣṇa alone? Or, surrounded by the
gopīs?

Under your direction I’ve already painted the Veṇu-gīta
verse: barhāpāḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ.8

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Try and do it again; differently this time.

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

This time, do you want to see the gopīs present in the
forest, or just the cowherd boys?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The gopīs were far away in their houses. Only Kṛṣṇa and
the sakhās were in the forest.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Baladeva Prabhu should not be carrying a plough.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There are so many ślokas of mādhurya-rasa that you can
paint.

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Would you like different paintings for each individual
śloka, or the same one painting that illustrates all the
ślokas together?

Śrīla Gurudeva:




phullendīvara-kāntim indu-vadanaṁ barhāvataṁsa-priyaṁ

śrī-vatsāṇkam udāra-kaustubha-dharaṁ pītāmbaraṁ sundaram

gopīnāṁ nayanotpalārcita-tanuṁ go-gopā-saṅghāvṛtaṁ

govindaṁ kala-veṇu-vādana-paraṁ divyāṅga-bhūṣaṁ bhaje

(Padyāvali 46)


[I worship Govinda, whose complexion is the color of a
blossoming blue lotus flower, whose face is like the
moon, who is fond of wearing a peacock feather in His
crown, whose chest bears the mark of Śrīvatsa and is
adorned with the Kaustubha gem, who is attired in
beautiful yellow garments, whose handsome form the gopīs
worship with sidelong glances, whose companions are

                            51
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

multitudes of cows and gopas, who plays sweet melodies
on the flute, and whose body is decorated with
glittering ornaments.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Try to be a gopī. Then, as a gopī, paint.

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Should I wait?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why wait?

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Do you want a different painting for each of the ślokas
that you just mentioned?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We will be able to use them anywhere.

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Okay; general paintings.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

General.

Śyāmārāṇī

dāsī:

Are you ordering me to personally paint these paintings?
Or, can anyone in the art department paint them?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can take help from others, as you like; but mainly
you.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Under your supervision.

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Do you want my hand on it, or just my supervision?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[If you don’t paint,] then where will you keep your
hand?




January 17, 2009


                           52
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017


Śloka Class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 10

[Madhuvrata dāsa, Acyutānanda dāsa, and Tamopahā dāsa
individually recite the following verse.]


ratiṁ gaurī-līle api tapati saundarya-kiraṇaiḥ

śacī-lakṣmī-satyāḥ paribhavati saubhāgya-valanaiḥ

vaśī-kāraiś candrāvalī-mukha-navīna-vraja-satīḥ

kṣipaty ārād yā tāṁ hari-dayita-rādhāṁ bhaja manaḥ


[O mind, give up attachment for all others and just
worship the most beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
who inflames Rati, Gaurī, and Līlā by the effulgent rays
of Her beauty; who vanquishes Śrī Śacī, Śrī Lakṣmī, and
Śrī Satyabhāmā by the profusion of Her good fortune; and
who dispels the pride of the chaste young girls of
Vraja, headed by Śrī Candrāvalī, by Her ability to bring
Śrī Kṛṣṇa under Her control. This Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the
most beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of this śloka?

Tamopahā dāsa:

“Rati, Gaurī, and Līlā are all diminished in glory by
the splendor of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is Rati?

Tamopahā dāsa:

Rati is the wife of Cupid.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And Gaurī?

Tamopahā dāsa:

Gaurī is the wife of Lord Śiva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And Līlā?

Tamopahā dāsa:

Līlā is the wife of Śrī Nārāyaṇa?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

                             53
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Tamopahā dāsa:

The glory of all of them – Śacī, the wife of Lord Indra;
Lakṣmī, the wife of Lord Nārāyaṇa; and even Satyabhāmā,
one of the queens of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā – is
diminished by the effulgence of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Moreover, even the chaste maidens of Vraja headed by
Candrāvalī are not of the caliber of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s favorite.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who by Her beauty defeats Rati, the
consort of Kāmadeva, Gaurī, the consort of Lord Śiva,
and Līlā, the consort of Nārāyaṇa; and who by Her
fortune defeats Śacī, the consort of Indradeva, Lakṣmī,
the consort of Nārāyaṇa, and…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why have you mentioned Nārāyaṇa’s wife only two times?
Nārāyaṇa has three wives.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Śrī, Bhū, and Līlā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has therefore mentioned
His three wives.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

She also defeats Satyabhāmā by Her fortune; and She
conquers all the gopīs who are headed by Candrāvalī.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has written the word
navīna, meaning ‘young;’ the young gopīs.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

O mind, always worship this Hari-dayita Śrī Rādhā, the
most beloved of Śrī Hari.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Acyutānanda’s pronunciation and explanation were very
good.

What is the essence of this śloka? The purport is this:
“O mind, be one-pointed towards the worship of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:


                            54
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

In bhava-ullāsa-rati (mañjarī-bhāva).

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If Rādhikā were not present, Candrāvalī and others may
be prominent; but wherever there is Śrīmatī Rādhikā, She
takes precedence. She is the most beloved of Kṛṣṇa. He
can even give up Satyabhāmā, Rukmiṇī, and other queens.
He can give up Candrāvalī and other gopīs, but not
Rādhikā. She is always with Kṛṣṇa; They are each other’s
most beloved.

In Satya-yuga (the golden age), when the longevity of a
person was 100,000 years, there was a king named
Bharata. Bharata Mahārāja realized that this world is a
dark well. He realized that no one can be happy here,
and that without practicing bhakti to Kṛṣṇa no one can
be liberated and attain Kṛṣṇa’s pure loving service.

When Bharata Mahārāja was 50,000 years old, he renounced
the world. He gave up his wife, children, big kingdom,
wealth, reputation, and all his possessions to go to the
forest and perform bhajana.

What was his mentality when he left? If a man has so
much pressure to pass stool and there is no chance to go
to the latrine, then, when he finally passes somewhere
he feels great relief. Bharata felt this relief when he
left his wife, children, and kingdom.

He went to the forest, to a very beautiful place near a
river, where he practiced bhakti-yoga. One day, while he
was in meditation, a pregnant deer came nearby to graze
on some grass, and in the meantime a lion wanted to
attack the deer. Bharata heard the lion’s roar, his
samādhi trance was broken, and he saw that out of fear
of the lion the pregnant deer was jumping across the
river. As the deer jumped she gave birth to a baby deer,
which had fallen from her womb and was now drowning in
the river – sometimes surfacing and sometimes submerged
under the water. In the meantime, with a pathetic glance
that mother deer looked back and forth from Bharata
Mahārāja to her baby, as if asking Bharata, “Can you
please save my child?” Then she died.

Having come out of his trance, Bharata Mahārāja took the
baby deer in his arms and then returned to his āśrama.
The deer gradually grew, and now Bharata Mahārāja’s
entire sense of mine-ness was transferred to this deer.
He began thinking, “I am the father, mother, and friend
of this deer. If I am not with her, who will take care
of her? She will die.”

Gradually, the deer became bigger and bigger. Whenever
Bharata was in trance and chanting his mantra, the deer
would caress him with her head and jump into his lap;
and Bharata Mahārāja could no longer concentrate on his
mantras. In this way his thoughts became consumed by the
deer, and he found himself doing ‘deer bhajana.’

One day a big group of deer came nearby, and the young
deer considered, “They are my family!” She mixed with
them and then went away. Bharata began searching,
thinking, “Where is that deer? Perhaps a lion or tiger

                           55
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

has killed her?!”

Where was Kṛṣṇa? Bharata Mahārāja had stopped his
meditation on Kṛṣṇa and was no longer chanting His holy
names. Rather, he was always thinking, “Deer, deer,
deer.” In the meantime, at the time of Bharata’s death
his thoughts were still absorbed in “Deer, deer, deer.”

What became of Bharata Mahārāja? He became a deer in his
next life. If at the time of death one thinks of his
wife, daughter, son, wealth, dogs, etc., he will become
like that object of meditation.

What happened after this?

Brajanāth dāsa:

In his next life, Bharata Mahārāja took birth as a deer.
We have heard how by becoming attached to any object and
always remembering that object, we become devoid of our
inclination to worship God, Kṛṣṇa.

By the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, in his next life as a deer,
Bharata Mahārāja remembered that in his previous life he
had become side-tracked. Instead of perfecting his
bhajana, he had become attracted to a deer. He had lost
the opportunity to remember Kṛṣṇa at the time of death
and thus become liberated and engaged in the service of
Kṛṣṇa. He now thought, “This time I should not become
entangled in any activity that will cause me to take
birth again and again in this cycle of birth and death.”
He went to the same āśrama of ṛṣis and stayed nearby,
always remembering how he had lost…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In the form of a deer he was hearing their hari-kathā
and taking bath in the Ganges.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes, he was very fortunate.

Eventually the time of death came again, and in his next
life Bharata Mahārāja became the very great saintly
personality, Jaḍa Bharata. He took birth in a very pious
family, so from birth he was engaged in many auspicious
activities.

He was thinking, “I should not be entangled in this
world anymore. If I obey the advice of my father and
brothers, then again I may be entangled in so much
karma. If I meditate upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa and behave as if I
am deaf and dumb, as though I do not understand
anything, then my good fortune will be that this is my
last life and I will attain perfection.”

Thinking in this way, he did the opposite of everything
his father tried to teach him. His father considered,
“My son cannot follow proper advice.” He asked his other
sons, “Always look after your brother.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                              56
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

And then the father died.

Brajanāth dāsa:

After some time the father died, and Jaḍa Bharata’s
brothers thought, “Our brother is dumb, and he doesn’t
understand anything. We should just keep him near the
fields to protect us from dangerous animals and birds,
like a guard.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What were they giving him to eat?

Brajanāth dāsa:

They used to give him only leftovers, but Jaḍa Bharata
never complained. He ate whatever was given to him and
he was quite healthy.

While he was protecting the field, a band of worshipers
of the demigoddess Kali approached him. They had been
looking for an opportunity to offer some sacrifice to
their worshipful deity. They had captured a man to offer
to Kali but he had run away. When they saw Jaḍa Bharata,
they thought he was very fit to be offered to her.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They thought, “He has all the symptoms of a very good
offering.”

Brajanāth dāsa:

So they caught him, and he did not protest. That was his
nature: “Whatever God has arranged, I will accept, but I
will not become attached.” Thus, he let them take him to
offer to Kali. According to the system of offering human
sacrifices, the dacoits put his head on a stone and were
ready to cut off his head. However, just as they were
about to cut his head, Kali burst out of her statue.
Carrying big swords, she and her associates cut off all
the dacoits’ heads; they were all slaughtered. Only Jaḍa
Bharata was protected, because he was Kṛṣṇa’s devotee.
Kali could not tolerate the thought of his being killed.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Kali said to him, “Prabhu, why are you hiding yourself?”

Brajanāth dāsa:

Kali said to him, “Why are you hiding your glories? You
are a great devotee. You must help others and enlighten
them.” Jaḍa Bharata was then thinking about how to
continue, and as he was…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

(To Tamopahā dāsa) What happened after that?

Tamopahā dāsa:

After that he was taken by King Rahūgaṇa’s soldiers and

                            57
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

forced to carry the king’s palanquin.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Where was the king going?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

King Rahūgaṇa was on his way to Kapila’s āśrama to learn
philosophy.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why was he going to Kapila’s āśrama?

Tamopahā dāsa:

He was going to learn brahma-jñāna (knowledge of
impersonal spirit beyond matter).

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Tattva-jñāna (knowledge of all established spiritual
truths).

Tamopahā dāsa:

He was carrying the palanquin with the other carriers,
but sometimes he saw ants and didn’t want to step on
them. He would therefore stop and walk around them, at
which time the palanquin would almost fall over. The
other carriers warned him not to do that, but he did it
again, and the king and his ministers became angry.

King Rahūgaṇa called out to him, “Don’t you know that I
am the king? Why are you doing this? You can be punished
very severely.” After some discussion, Jaḍa Bharata
explained to him some very important verses:


rahūgaṇaitat tapasā na yāti

na cejyayā nirvapaṇād gṛhād vā

na cchandasā naiva jalāgni-sūryair

vinā mahat-pāda-rajo-’bhiṣekam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 5.12.12)


[My dear King Rahūgaṇa, unless one has the opportunity
to smear his entire body with the dust of the lotus feet
of great devotees, one cannot realize the Absolute
Truth. One cannot realize the Absolute Truth simply by
observing celibacy (brahmacarya), strictly following the
rules and regulations of householder life, leaving home
as a vānaprastha, accepting sannyāsa, or undergoing
severe penances in winter by keeping oneself submerged
in water or surrounding oneself in summer by fire and
the scorching heat of the sun. There are many other
processes to understand the Absolute Truth, but the
Absolute Truth is only revealed to one who has attained
the mercy of a great devotee.]

                              58
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Without smearing the dust of a pure devotee on one’s
body, there is no hope. Not by tapasya, penances, nor by
becoming a sannyāsī; nor by chanting ślokas of the Vedas
can one achieve the Supreme. There is a penance wherein
one sits in a cold river in the winter, and another
wherein one sits under the sun with fires all around him
in the summer. There are many yogīs who do this in the
Himālayas, but they do not achieve any perfection. The
only thing that will give a person perfection is getting
one particle of the dust of a pure devotee on one’s
head. This is the path to perfection.

Jaḍa Bharata told this to the king, who was struck with
wonder. Although Jaḍa Bharata with his matted locks was
looking like a dumb, retarded man, he was speaking the
highest philosophy. The king understood his glories.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The king asked him, “Who are you?”

[To Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja] And what did he reply?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

The king asked Jaḍa Bharata, “Are you Kapiladeva? Are
you any of the Nava-yogendras? I am on my way to learn
all of this philosophy. Who are you?” He jumped from his
palanquin and asked these questions.

Jaḍa Bharata replied, “Have you heard of Bharata
Mahārāja in your dynasty? I am referring to the king
whose land Bhārata-varṣa is named after.”

The king said, “Yes.”

Then Bharata said, “I am that same person.” He then
began to tell the history of how he gave up his kingdom,
wife, and children.

It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:


yo dustyajān dāra-sutān

suhṛd rājyaṁ hṛdi-spṛśaḥ

jahau yuvaiva malavad

uttamaśloka-lālasaḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 5.14.43)


[While in the prime of life, the great Mahārāja Bharata
gave up everything because he was fond of serving the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Uttamaśloka. He gave up
his beautiful wife, nice children, great friends, and an
enormous empire. Although these things are very
difficult to give up, Mahārāja Bharata was so exalted
that he gave them up just as one gives up stool after
evacuating. Such was his greatness.]


                              59
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Bharata Mahārāja then told King Rahūgaṇa the history of
his becoming entangled with a deer, and how he came to
this position. King Rahūgaṇa became very happy, and
greatly honored him. The king thus became successful by
hearing all of Bharata Mahārāja’s instructions.

The main thing is that if someone wants to advance in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness and make his life successful, he
must follow three principles:


bhakta-pada-dhūli āra bhakta-pada-jala

bhakta-bhukta-avaśeṣa, tina mahā-bala

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 16.60)


[The dust of the feet of a devotee, the water that has
washed the feet of a devotee, and the remnants of food
left by a devotee are three very powerful substances.]

Bhakti-pada-dhūli refers to the foot-dust of devotees.
One may think, “He is a human being, like myself. His
foot-dust and my foot-dust are the same, because our
feet walk in the same places. I know better than him.
Why should I respect him so much?”

Here is an analogy. If there is one drop of poison on
your food, even if your eyes cannot detect the poison,
it will act and you will die. In the similar way, if a
liberated soul has stepped somewhere on the land and you
go to that same place, even without knowledge of its
significance, this will benefit your soul.

Bhakta-pada-jala refers to the foot-bathing water of
devotees. Even Bhagavān wants such foot-bathing water.

Once, Kṛṣṇa became very sick and no one could cure Him.
Nārada Ṛṣi came to Him and asked, “Prabhu, how can You
be cured?” Kṛṣṇa told him, “I will be cured if I get the
foot-dust of My devotees to place on My head.”

Nārada Ṛṣi then went to the heavenly planets, Vaikuṇṭha,
and many other places; but no one would give him their
foot-dust for Kṛṣṇa. They were afraid they would go to
hell for giving their foot-dust for God’s head and body.

Nārada Ṛṣi then went to Vraja, where the gopīs said, “We
are prepared to give Him foot-dust.” Nārada asked, “Are
you not afraid that if you give Kṛṣṇa your foot-dust,
you will go to the hellish planets?” The gopīs replied;
“We don’t care for hellish planets. Kṛṣṇa must be cured.
We can reside in hell life after life, birth after
birth; we have no problem with that. But Kṛṣṇa must be
cured.” Then they gave Nārada Ṛṣi their foot-dust.

Nārada Ṛṣi brought this dust to Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā, and
Kṛṣṇa smeared His whole body with that dust.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Be brief.


                           60
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Kṛṣṇa put the leftover foot-dust in a pond, and this
became the tilaka that we use now – gopī-candana.

The third powerful substance is bhakta-bhukta-avaśeṣa,
which refers to the remnants of the pure devotee. Such
remnants are of two types: the hari-kathā coming from
their lotus lips, and their prasādam remnants. By that
prasādam, one can conquer māyā.

If someone wants to be free from anarthas and māyā, he
will have to serve these three things. He will then
advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and his life will be
successful. This is the essence of the teachings of
Bharata Mahārāja. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There are two important points in this connection.
First, if you want to do bhajana and you have therefore
left your wife, children, and everything else, then
don’t again become attached to any person or object. Be
attached only to Kṛṣṇa’s name, beauty, and everything in
relation to Kṛṣṇa.

Second, even if you are gṛhasthas, householders, do not
be attached to your house, office, etc. You can be there
physically, supporting your children and wife, and
others – as your duty. This is your duty, but it is
essential to give up thinking, “I am the owner of all
this.” Don’t be attached. Somehow support your life with
whatever you have, and do bhajana. If you are attached
to anyone, at the time of death you will again become
hogs, pigs, dogs, cats, etc. If you have a cat, don’t be
attached to it. Otherwise you will have to become a cat.




January 19, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Verse 11

[All the students recite and explain this verse, one
after another:]


samam śrī-rūpeṇa smara-vivaśa-rādhā-giribhṛtor

vraje sākṣāt-seva-labhana-vidhaye tad-gaṇa-yujoḥ

tad-ijyākhyā-dhyāna-śravaṇa-nati-pañcāmṛtam idaṁ

dhayan nityā govardhanam anudinaṁ tvaṁ bhaja manaḥ


[O my dear mind, in order to obtain the direct service
of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Giridhārī, who are always entranced by
amorous desire, and the service of Their eternal

                            61
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

associates in Vraja, one should drink the pañcāmṛta of
service to Them in accordance with the method prescribed
by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. This pañcāmṛta is ambrosial nectar
comprised of the following five ingredients: worship of
Śrī Yugala (arcana); chanting the glories of Their
transcendental names, forms, qualities, and pastimes
(saṅkīrtana); meditating upon Them (dhyāna); hearing the
glories of Their names, forms, qualities, and pastimes
(śravaṇa); and offering praṇāma unto Them. In addition,
one should worship Śrī Govardhana daily in accordance
with the precepts of bhakti.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Is our time finished here?

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

One more day.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then, day after tomorrow we leave.

[To Tamopahā dāsa] Are you also going to America after
my departure?

Tamopahā dāsa:

Soon.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Gurudeva, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu explained the five
prominent limbs of bhakti, and in this verse Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī is also mentioning five limbs. Are they the same
five?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They are not directly the same, but their purport is the
same. For example, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
has written, ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas, and Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī has written, tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-
sukīrtanānu smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā. Ultimately, the
purport is the same.


ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma vṛṇdāvanaṁ

ramyā kācid-upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavatam pramāṇam-amalaṁ premā pumartho mahān

śrī-caitanya mahāprabhor matam idaṁ tatrādaro naḥ paraḥ

(Caitanya-manjusa, by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura)


[The Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the
King of Vrajadhāma, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja, is the ultimate
worshipful Lord of all lords. His residential abode,
Vṛndāvana, is as much worshipful as the Lord Himself.

                             62
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

The way of His worship that was conceived by the circle
of the damsels of Vraja-dhāma is unsurpassable by any
other devotee. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the unalloyed
evidence for this. This is the sum-total opinion or
cultural philosophy of Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We
bow down our heads before Mahāprabhu’s opinion and shall
not accept any other cultural movement whatsoever.]

tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

(Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Verse 8)


[While living in Vraja as a follower of the eternal
residents of Vraja, who possess inherent spontaneous
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one should utilize all his time by
sequentially engaging the tongue and the mind in
meticulous chanting and remembrance of Kṛṣṇa’s names,
form, qualities, and pastimes. This is the essence of
all instruction.]

When Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana and came to Mathurā, His
father Vasudeva Mahārāja sent Him to gurukula. Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva thus studied with Sāndīpani Muni, a very
exalted teacher.

There, Kṛṣṇa had a friend named Sudāmā Vipra. Although
Sudāmā was a poor brāhmaṇa and Kṛṣṇa was the Supreme
Lord, they had a very intimate friendship. Kṛṣṇa later
came to Dvārakā, became king, and married Rukmiṇī,
Satyabhāmā, and His other queens, and Sudāmā was also
living somewhere in Dvārakā.

Sudāmā maintained himself and his wife Gargī by begging,
and therefore they sometimes had food to eat and
sometimes they fasted. Thus, due to poverty, although
Sudāmā and Gargī were both in the prime of youth, they
looked aged. Gargī was young, but she looked like an old
lady with dried-up breasts.

One day Gargī told her husband, “Oh, sometimes you beg
and sometimes you don’t. You are always engaged in
meditating on Kṛṣṇa. Whatever you bring from begging, I
cook and give it to you, but you eat only half and give
me the other half. I cannot tolerate your fasting.

“I remember that you had a friend in Dvārakā who has
become king there. He likes brāhmaṇas, and in fact one
of His names is Brahmaṇya-deva, Lord of the brāhmaṇas.
You must go and ask for His help.”

Sudāmā replied, “I can go, but I cannot ask Him for
wealth or anything else.”

His wife said, “If you go, He will automatically give
you whatever you need. Please go.”

Sudāmā thought, “I do not want to go to the Supreme Lord

                             63
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Kṛṣṇa for wealth, but if I go I will have the
opportunity to receive His darśana. We had a very bosom
friendship, so I should go.” He told his wife, “Please
bring me something to give to my friend Kṛṣṇa as a
present.”

Sudāmā’s wife Gargī had nothing at home, so she went to
a nearby house and asked for whatever the neighbor would
give. She was given some flat rice and, as she had no
new clean cloth, she wrapped the rice in an old cloth.

Sudāmā took the bundle and then set off for Dvārakā.
During the journey he was remembering Kṛṣṇa, thinking,
“Will He recognize me, or not? A long time has passed.
How will I meet Him? His palaces are enormous; He has a
palace for each of his 16,108 queens, so how will I find
Him?”

Kṛṣṇa had instructed the palace guards, “If a brāhmaṇa
comes to see Me, he should have no problem in getting
direct access to Me.” The guard now told Sudāmā that
Kṛṣṇa was in the palace of Rukmiṇī, and when Sudāmā
enquired from passersby, someone showed him the way.

When Kṛṣṇa saw Sudāmā reaching the gate of His palace,
He thought, “Oh, My friend Sudāmā is coming!” He had
been sitting on the bed of Rukmiṇī, but although Rukmiṇī
and so many others were there serving Him, He gave up
what he was doing and ran to the door to embrace Sudāmā.
He took Sudāmā into the palace and gave him a seat – His
own seat – and He then sat down next to Sudāmā.

He told His queens, “Please bring water in a golden pot
to wash the feet of this brāhmaṇa.” They brought the
water and Kṛṣṇa began to personally wash Sudāmā’s feet,
after which He personally massaged his feet.

The queens wondered, “Who is this brāhmaṇa? What is so
special about him that Kṛṣṇa is giving him His own seat
and washing his feet?”

Kṛṣṇa then drank Sudāmā’s caraṇāmṛta (foot-bathing
water), and also gave it to His queens.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

The queens were surprised.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The queens cooked very delicious and opulent food for
Sudāmā, who took the prasādam and afterwards rested on a
bed while Kṛṣṇa massaged his feet.

Sudāmā was thinking, “Does He recognize me or not? I am
a very poor person. There are cracks on my feet and I am
wearing old, worn and torn clothing. So, perhaps He does
not recognize me.”

Kṛṣṇa then said, “How is your wife? Has she given you
any gift for Me?” Out of fear and shame Sudāmā
hesitated. He hid the cloth full of broken rice chips
under his armpit thinking, “How can I give this thing to
the Supreme Lord?”

                             64
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Kṛṣṇa knew his thoughts. He forcibly took the cloth bag,
opened it, and ate one handful of the rice. Just as He
was about to take the second handful, Rukmiṇī caught His
hand and said, “By taking this one handful, You have
reciprocated by giving the wealth of the entire
universe. Now only we queens remain Yours. Do You want
to give us to this brāhmaṇa as well? That’s enough.
Don’t, don’t.”

Kṛṣṇa told Sudāmā, “Do you remember when we were in
gurukula? Guru-mātā (the wife of our guru) told us to
bring some dry wood from the forest for cooking and for
performing a fire-sacrifice. It was evening time, and
the sky was covered with clouds. On our way back from
collecting the dry wood, rains began to pour heavily and
everywhere was flooded. We could not discern where the
water was deep or shallow.

“This went on for the whole night as we kept the bundle
of wood on our heads, standing in one place to keep the
wood dry. In the morning our Gurudeva came searching for
us, calling out, ‘Where is Kṛṣṇa? Sudāmā, where are
you?’

“We called back, ‘We are here.’

“ ‘What are you doing?’ Gurudeva asked.

“ ‘Our guru-mātā sent us to get dry wood yesterday
evening, but due to the heavy rains throughout the
night, we could not find the way home. So we stayed
here.’

“Gurudeva then blessed us by saying, ‘May what I have
taught you, and what I have not taught you – all veda-
śāstra, all the arts, and everything else for which you
have come here – come in your heart.’

“Do you remember this?”

Sudāmā now realized, “Oh, He does recognize me.”

In this way Kṛṣṇa and Sudāmā talked for the entire
night, and in the morning Sudāmā said, “Prabhu, my
friend, now I want to return to my house.”

Kṛṣṇa replied, “Very good, very good.” He walked with
Sudāmā for some distance, not giving him anything, and
then He returned to His palace as Sudāmā proceeded to
his house.

On his way home Sudāmā thought, “Kṛṣṇa is very merciful.
I came to Him for wealth, but He did not give me any.
Perhaps He thought, ‘If I give him wealth he will forget
Me. He will be always engaged in sense gratification.’
How merciful Kṛṣṇa is!” He began to weep, meditating on
the mercy of Kṛṣṇa as he gradually reached his village.

He wondered, “Where is my house? In place of my house
there are so many palaces. Oh, where is my very lean
cow? Instead of my one cow, I now see 16,108 kāmadhenu
(wish-fulfilling) cows, horses, and elephants.”


                           65
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Then he saw a very beautiful lady surrounded by her
beautiful singing girlfriends. Holding an ārati tray she
was coming towards him, as he moved away thinking, “Who
is she? Why is she coming towards me?” She laughed, and
then forcibly grabbed him and performed his ārati. Then,
when she touched him, he saw that he was also very
beautiful and opulent.

She told him, “I am your wife. See how Kṛṣṇa has given
us so much wealth and opulence.”

If a devotee becomes like Sudāmā, Kṛṣṇa will give him
everything; whereas He may not give wealth to ordinary,
aspiring devotees. Rather, He may take all of their
wealth and make them street beggars.




January 19, 2009


Darśana

[Just before Śrīla Gurudeva’s initiation ceremony, he
was visited by Dādā Dharma-vedānanda, a yoga master,
therapist, and founder of the Ananda Marga Wellness
Center.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the aim and object of your society?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

Self-realization and service to others.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How? Can ladies and gentlemen dance together and live
together?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

No, no. I am celibate. I am a sannyāsī. We are very
strict in our discipline. I fast four times a month, and
we have a strict sattvika diet.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the name of that sādhu who died?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

You are talking about Rajaneesh.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We have a strong repulsion towards Rajaneesh. I thought
you are from that group.

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:


                           66
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Rajaneesh and Ananda Marga are very different.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then, very good. Do you accept God?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

Of course.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you accept that Kṛṣṇa and Rāma are God?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

You are speaking about Deities. We respect all Deities.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

But who is your Deity? Who is your iṣṭadeva (worshipful
Deity)?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

There are two factors. One factor is parama-puruṣa, the
supreme consciousness.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is He?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

Secondly, we also have the concept of guru.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Guru is God?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

No, guru is not God.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is guru?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

Guru is a means to realize God.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is the Supreme Lord? Does He have a form?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

The Supreme Being is infinite.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Does He have a form?


                           67
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

He is with form and without form. The infinite has no
limitations.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If He has a form, then He must have a name and
qualities.

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

Yes. Everything and everyone is a manifestation of God.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We are also God?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

Everything is a manifestation of God.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Explain clearly. You are God, but now you have been
covered by māyā? Is this right?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

This is a concept.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Is this your concept, or not?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

I am an expression of God. I am an expression of the
infinite, just as the different colors of the rainbow
are the expression of the white light.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you are God, the Supreme Lord, and now you have been
covered by māyā, why were you covered by māyā? Who
covered you?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

I can only guess.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you follow any bhakti-śāstras such as the Vedas,
Upaniṣads, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, or the
Koran or Bible?

Dādā

Dharma-vedānanda:

In every scripture there is something good.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                           68
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


What do you follow?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

I don’t follow any particular scripture. In Ananda-
mārga, we quote the Vedas, Tantras, and Upaniṣads.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you know Śaṅkarācārya?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What has he taught?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

When he was about to die, he said that bhakti-yoga is
the quickest way.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

But what was the main subject of his writing? What did
he write before that?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

He confused people.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I think you should follow the Vedas. The essence of the
Vedas is Vedānta-sutra, and the explanation of Vedānta
is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. If you want to be happy in your
life, try to give up all other conceptions; accept the
teachings of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. If you do this, you will
realize that ‘I am happy,’ and you will make others
happy also. Otherwise, in my conception, what you are
telling will not suffice.

What is the proof for your concept of the Absolute
Truth?

Dādā

Dharma-vedānanda:

There is an infinite Being.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That is okay, but can He be finite or not?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

All the colors and forms that we see are finite. Right?

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                              69
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

God is infinite; and He is also finite, meaning that He
has a form: Do you know this verse: pūrṇasya pūrṇam
ādāya?

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

Please elaborate.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This the first verse from Śrī Īśopaniṣad:


oṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ

pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate

pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya

pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate


[The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete, and
because He is completely perfect, all emanations from
Him, such as this phenomenal world, are perfectly
equipped as complete wholes. Whatever is produced of the
Complete Whole is also complete in itself. Because He is
the Complete Whole, even though so many complete units
emanate from Him, He remains the complete balance.]

Kṛṣṇa is infinite, pūrṇam, and at the same time He lays
on the lap of Mother Yaśodā as a small baby. The entire
universe is within Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is within the
universe. This is the conception of the Vedas. Kṛṣṇa is
infinite, even when He is on the lap of Mother Yaśodā.
We cannot conceive of this truth with our intelligence,
but the Vedas, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and Bhagavad-gītā
teach us with perfect evidence, and we accept their
teachings.

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

Everything that we see is finite. Is that right?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This body is finite, but the person who is speaking [the
jīva] is beyond the finite body. The Soul of all souls,
brahma [the Supreme Absolute Truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa], is also
within the body. Without brahma there is no existence.

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

That is good. Now, is the finite a part of the infinite?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Our soul is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. Our
body is material.

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

The body is finite, and the finite is part of the
infinite. Outside of the infinite, there cannot be

                             70
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

anything.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The body is not part of brahma, or the Supreme Lord. It
is part of the deluding material māyā. Kṛṣṇa has many
potencies, of which māyā is one. In this way, the
material body is a manifestation of māyā; not of Kṛṣṇa
and His cit-śakti (spiritual potency).

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Thank you for coming.

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

We say that God has form, and no form. He is a person,
and impersonal. We say that the personal form is
supreme. He is the source of His impersonal aspect. On
the other hand, Ananda Marga says that the impersonal
aspect is supreme.

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

No, we don’t say that. The personal is the inspiration.
Personally, I am not interested to merge into the
impersonal. My interest is to go on serving and loving
as much as I can. Kṛṣṇa – if we want to call it Kṛṣṇa,
that is fine with me – Kṛṣṇa is the expression of love.
I want to merge in that.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

God is love, in the sense that Kṛṣṇa Himself is love. He
is more than love.

Dādā

Dharma-vedānanda:

Yes; that from which everything comes.

Thank you so much. I enjoyed meeting you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Thank you. I was in confusion, thinking that you are
from ‘Bhagavān’ Rajaneesh. So, you are okay. I am happy
that you don’t want to merge into the Supreme Lord, and
that you want to have love and affection and serve Him.

Dādā Dharma-vedānanda:

You know, not only do I respect what you are doing, but
I love what you are doing. It is very beautiful.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Thank you.


                           71
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017




* * *




1 Rādhā-priyā dāsī and Sunita dāsī would type the hand-
written manuscripts containing Śrīpāda Tīrtha Mahārāja’s
translations, after which the manuscripts would go to
Sañjaya dāsa (for editing), and then to Śrīla Gurudeva
and his party. Śrīla Gurudeva would then do his own
editing.



2 Rāmacandra dāsa would assist in coordinating the
various ways of transferring written manuscripts and
computer files among the devotees serving Śrīla Gurudeva
in the Hindi publishing. For example, at this time Śrīla
Gurudeva also wanted him to get the print-out of
Haṁsadūta to the Sanskrit scholar Mr. Ganeshi Lal Sharma
in Delhi.



3 The following is an excerpt from the Summary of
Chapter Two of the Eighth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (by
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja):


In the midst of the Ocean of Milk, there is a very high
and beautiful mountain that has an altitude of eighty
thousand miles. This mountain is known as Trikūṭa. In a
valley of Trikūṭa there is a nice garden named Ṛtumat,
which was constructed by Varuṇa, and in that area there
is a very nice lake.

Once, the chief of the elephants, along with his female
elephants, went to enjoy bathing in that lake, and in so
doing they disturbed the inhabitants of the water.
Because of this, the chief crocodile in that water, who
was very powerful, immediately attacked the elephant’s
leg.

Thus there ensued a great fight between the elephant and
the crocodile. This fight continued for one thousand
years. Neither the elephant nor the crocodile died, but
since they were in the water, the elephant gradually
became weak whereas the power of the crocodile
increased. Thus, the crocodile became more and more
encouraged. Then the elephant, being helpless and seeing
that there was no other way for his protection, sought
shelter at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.




4 Maṭha – a monastery; a temple of the Lord with an

                           72
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

attached āśrama for brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs.



5 Hlādinī-śakti is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s internal pleasure-giving
potency, Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



6 It was a girirāja-śīla that Mahāprabhu gave to
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, not a giridhārī-śīla, and it is
Girirāja who is hari-dāsa varya, not Giridhārī.



7 Several devotees had been sending computer files for
the Hindi translation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Tenth Canto.



8 As shown on the cover of Śrīla Gurudeva’s book Veṇu-
gīta.




January 25, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are there any questions?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Yes, I have a question. I’ve been thinking about this
question. The nitya-siddha gopīs are expansions of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, or svarūpa-śakti. Are the mañjarīs also
expansions of Śrīmatī Rādhikā? Are they also expansions
of svarūpa-śakti?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Not all.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Regarding the ācāryas who come in our sampradāya from
Mahāprabhu, are they svarūpa-śakti expansions of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

All those who have come in our paramparā, like Śrīla
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura and all others.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                              73
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


The associates of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa such as Rūpa Mañjarī, and
the associates of Mahāprabhu such as Rūpa Gosvāmī…

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Are they all direct expansions?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes they are associates of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā; Her expansions. In Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
līlā they are expansions of Nityānanda.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are there any other questions?

Mārkeṇḍeya Ṛṣi dāsa:

One of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja’s disciples in
Jagannātha Puri is asking about a devotee who recently
left his body. This disciple was asking: On what basis
can we say that one soul goes to the spiritual world,
while for another soul we just pray that he can get a
future birth in a position where he can continue his
devotional service?

He was asking you this question because he had read some
of your statements. After the departure of certain
devotees, you request us to pray to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
for their souls, and you mention that you hope those
souls will get a better birth in their future life.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If a bhakta is chanting but still has anarthas and has
not reached the level of prema, how can he go to the
spiritual world?

Mārkeṇḍeya Ṛṣi dāsa:

Sometimes devotees leave their bodies in Vṛndāvana.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That is not sufficient. Rather, such devotees will take
birth in the dynasty of bhaktas.


prāpya puṇya-kṛtāṁ lokān

uṣitvā śāśvatīḥ samāḥ

śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe

yoga-bhraṣṭo ’bhijāyate

(Bhagavad-gītā 6.41)


[A person who deviates from the path of yoga after
practising for only a short time attains the planets of
the pious and, after enjoying there for many years, he

                              74
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

takes birth in a righteous and wealthy family.]

He may take birth in Vṛndāvana, Navadvīpa-dhāma, or
Puri-dhāma, and gradually he will develop in his bhakti.
Without prema, how can one go to the spiritual world?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

In his Kṛṣṇa Book, my Śrīla Prabhupāda says that if they
have reached the last stage of bhāva, they will go to
Bhauma-Vṛndāvana in another universe, where Kṛṣṇa is
performing His pastimes.1

Śrīla Gurudeva:

First they will go to mahāprabhu-līlā, then to rādhā-
kṛṣṇa-līlā.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Yes. He said they first have to reach this stage in
order to achieve that.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

But sometimes, especially in ISKCON, devotees have the
conception that by the mercy of Prabhupāda, simply by
chanting sixteen rounds throughout their life and by
following the regulative principles and distributing
books, then, at the end of their lives, Prabhupāda or
Lord Caitanya will come and take them to the spiritual
world by special mercy.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They will develop, but they will not immediately reach
perfection.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

But in this regard, when you were discussing mahat-saṅga
(the association of great saints), you explained that
there is a śloka which tells how Gopa-kumāra gave his
disciple that blessing.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If the guru is like Kṛṣṇa, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, or
Nārada Muni, he may give such blessings. And still,
although Nārada Ṛṣi gave mercy to so many, he never sent
anyone directly to Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Only if a guru comes directly from Rādhikā and is
ordered by Her to come for that very purpose can the
disciple go at once to his ultimate destination.
Otherwise, it is not so easy.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

And Jana Śarmā, the disciple of Gopa-kumāra, had
performed so much bhajana.

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                              75
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Jana Śarmā’s guru is an associate of Rādhikā, and
Rādhikā gave a special order that Jana Śarmā be taken
immediately to Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

One more question in this regard: In your Guru
Mahārāja’s biography you have written the story of
Anaṅga-mohana Brahmācārī. There you mentioned that
although he did not do any particular special sādhana,
everyone saw that because of his guru-niṣṭhā and guru-
sevā...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He did not go to Goloka Vṛndāvana. How would it have
been possible for him to go directly to siddha-aprakaṭa
Vṛndāvana, Goloka Vṛndāvana? He went to prakaṭa
Vṛndāvana (Vṛndāvana as it is manifest in this world).

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

When he passed from this world he was saying, “Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa are calling me to Vṛndāvana. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are
calling me to Vṛndāvana.” And he was calling his Guru
Mahārāja, “Oh Bābā, Bābā (Father, Father).” The doctors
were surprised, because he was saying these things while
he had no pulse or any signs of life.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Oh, so this didn’t mean that he was going to nitya-
dhāma. The place he went to was within some universe
where Kṛṣṇa is performing His līlā?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Still, that’s good enough.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

That is exactly what Śrīla Prabhupāda says in Kṛṣṇa
Book, Twenty-eighth Chapter, sixth paragraph.

In the past you have said that when we leave this body,
if we have done some good bhajana, then we get a chance
to take birth with Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura and become his disciple, then Śrīla Narottama
dāsa Ṭhākura’s disciple in a birth after that, and so
on. Does that mean we leave this universe?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then, after that, one will go to Mahāprabhu’s pastimes.
Only, then, by the arrangement of Yogamāyā, will he go
to the planet in some universe where Kṛṣṇa is performing
His pastimes in this material world.

This has been written in Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s commentary. I speak from authority. I don’t

                              76
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

invent my own infor-mation. Everything I have written is
from our ācāryas.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

You have opened up the treasure-chest of śāstra with
your key.




January 25, 2009


Darśana

After the Walk

Vasanti dāsī:

[Showing a video on a computer] Gurudeva, this is a
little movie of the Chinese New Year parade and Śubha-
yātrā of Lord Jagannātha that was held yesterday by your
devotees.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is this?

Vasanti dāsī:

Chinese dragons.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Is that Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja’s chariot?

Caru-candrikā dāsī:

Yes, and the Ratha-yātrā cart is just behind it.
Gurudeva, practically everyone came out of their houses
with so many offerings for Jagannātha.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Many packages of prasādam, books, and flyers were
distributed.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. Dragons; and this is a lion? Were the people
looking at the dragon, or the lions, or were they
watching Lord Jagannātha?

Devotees:

Jagannātha.

Caru-candrikā dāsī:

Gurudeva, I have a question about Dhruva Mahārāja. After
he had darśana of Lord Nārāyaṇa [Viṣṇu], he heard that
his brother, Uttama, was killed by a yakṣa [a ghostly

                              77
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

follower of the demigod Kuvera, the treasurer of the
demigods]. He wanted to take revenge, so he engaged in a
great battle with the yakṣas. Svāyambhuva Manu finally
told him to stop because of all the killing. Why, after
having darśana of Lord Nārāyaṇa and becoming a pure
devotee, did he become so entangled?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They had killed his brother, Uttama.

Caru-candrikā dāsī:

But why would he want to take revenge? At that time he
was a pure devotee.

Śrīla Gurudeva: At that time he was present in this
world. Prahlāda Mahārāja also fought, and even Bhagavān
Rāmacandra fought. If the Lord fights, why would His
associates not also fight? We fight against those who do
not believe in God, and there is no harm in this.

Kuñja-kalikā dāsī:

Gurudeva, I have heard many times that we should become
sincere devotees, but I do not understand what it really
means to be a sincere devotee.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It means being sincere to God, Kṛṣṇa; not wanting
anything worldly. A sincere devotee wants only to
improve his bhakti and achieve prema. Otherwise, if one
wants worldly things, even mukti (liberation), he is not
really sincere. A sincere devotee wants only to serve
gurudeva; nothing else. Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva showed the
example of this. They went to Their guru’s āśrama, and
there They rendered service to Their Gurudeva without
ever asking anything in return.

Citra dāsī:

At the time of death I may not remember Kṛṣṇa; but if I
remember you, is it okay?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Okay.

[Throwing flowers and giving blessings for a devotee’s
birthday] Maṅgalam bhavatu, kalyāṇam bhavatu. All
aupiciousness to you. May you be happy in this world and
in the transcendental world. May you attain kṛṣṇa-bhakti
and go to Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Devotees:

Haribol!

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To all] Maṅgalam bhavatu.

Where is Jānakī?

                             78
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017


Brajanāth dāsa:

She is here.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Can you complete Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta very soon?

Jānakī dāsī:

I will try.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I want Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta to be printed very soon – in
a month.

Vicitri dāsī:

Gurudeva, we will print Volume Two first, because that
is almost ready, and we will print Volume One
afterwards. It won’t take long to get Volume Two ready.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is okay to publish Volume Two first. Any part can
come first; no problem.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This book must be completed as soon as possible – first,
second, and third volumes – so that we can print in one
or two months. This has been in progress for five years.




January 26, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva’s Appearance Day

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja] Please explain the
meaning of anyābhilāṣitā.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Now [laughing]?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why “Heh, heh, heh”?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

When I was explaining anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ last evening
during your class, I did not explain the details of what
are favorable and unfavorable actions.

                              79
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

Can you explain the details now? I would especially like
you to explain the meaning of the phrase anyābhilāṣitā-
śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam.


anyābhilāṣitā śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.11)


[The cultivation of activities that are meant
exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or in other
words the uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
performed through all endeavors of the body, mind, and
speech, and through the expression of various spiritual
sentiments (bhāvas), which is not covered by jñāna
(knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation), and karma
(reward-seeking activity), and which is devoid of all
desires other than the aspiration to bring happiness to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is called uttamā-bhakti, pure devotional
service.]

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Okay. So, as you were saying to me last night, there is
favorable karma and unfavorable karma.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of anyābhilāṣitā?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Anyābhilāṣitā means that one should accept what is
favorable for bhakti and reject what is unfavorable.
Śūnya means...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I know that you cannot explain it. Try to read Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu.

[To Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa]You explain.

Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa

(from Australia): I am not qualified, Gurudeva. I cannot
explain it.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can explain so much about magic. Why not these
topics? I want you to be a good preacher.

Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

                              80
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Thank you, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You are very bold, but you should know how to explain
bhakti. What is bhakti?

Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Bhakti is eternal spiritual bliss and devotion to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is bhakti.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is not the definition. You should learn the
meaning.

What is the idea of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu regarding
our supreme object of worship? Do you know the verse
beginning ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma
vṛndāvanam?


ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma vṛṇdāvanaṁ

ramyā kācid-upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavatam pramāṇam-amalaṁ premā pumartho mahān

śrī-caitanya mahāprabhor matam idaṁ tatrādaro naḥ paraḥ

(Caitanya-manjusa, by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura)


[The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the son of Nanda
Mahārāja, is to be worshiped along with His transcenden-
tal abode, Vṛndāvana. The most pleasing form of worship
for the Lord is that which was performed by the gopīs of
Vṛndāvaṇa. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the spotless evidence of
this, and pure love of God is the ultimate goal of life
for all men. These statements, for which we have the
highest regard, are the opinion of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.]

Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I know that in your old age you cannot memorize the
ślokas, but you should know the meaning of this śloka
and preach bhakti.

[To Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja] Do you understand?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Yes. Anya-abhilāṣa. Abhilāṣa means ‘desire.’ We should
not have any desires for unfavorable karma, jñāna, etc.
Śūnya means ‘we should be devoid of these unfavorable
desires.’

                              81
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, this is not the meaning.

[To Giri Mahārāja] What is the meaning?

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnya means ‘devoid of all desires other
than the desire to serve Kṛṣṇa favorably.’ It means
‘devoid of all material desires.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It does not matter whether the karma or jñāna is
‘favorable’ or ‘unfavorable.’ We must give it all up. We
must give up the desire for taking birth in the heavenly
planets and for mokṣa (impersonal liberation), and for
all things other than the service of Kṛṣṇa.

But why has the word anyābhilāṣitā been stated? Why not
simply the word anyābhilāṣa?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Because tā indicates special circum-stances, as in the
case of Draupadī. When Draupadī found herself in a
situation where she had no other shelter, she called out
to Kṛṣṇa. She did not do this for some material desire
for protection, because Draupadī was completely
surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. This was a special circumstance.2

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

A life-threatening circumstance.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Yes, life-threatening. So she called out to Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

Yesterday we heard the story of Nārada Muni and Dhruva
Mahārāja. Viṣṇu manifested Himself to Dhruva Mahārāja,
who was a sakāma-bhakta (one who performs bhakti in
order to achieve some material benefit). Regarding
Nārada Muni, Viṣṇu only appeared to him for a moment –
and then disappeared – because Nārada had some
attachment to sattva-guṇa (the material mode of
goodness). Nārada had a desire to meditate in the
forest, which was a desire in the mode of goodness, and
for this reason Viṣṇu didn’t show Himself to Nārada for
more than a moment. Yet, he showed Himself to Dhruva
Mahārāja, who had a much stronger material desire.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja] What is the answer?


                              82
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

You once explained that for those devotees who want
śuddhā-bhakti, pure, unalloyed bhakti, Kṛṣṇa personally
takes over their karma. He gives them more prārabdha-
karma3 to get them to the point where they can attain
śuddhā-bhakti because their intentions are originally
for śuddhā-bhakti. I think Nārada Muni falls in that
category?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, that is not the answer.

[To Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja] Can you explain?

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

I don’t know, Gurudeva. I’ll be honest.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Dhruva was a sakāma-bhakta (a devotee who performs his
devotional activities with material motives); and from
the beginning, Nārada was a niṣkāma-bhakta (a devotee
who performs his devotional activities with no material
motives). We should know that gold is more valuable than
iron, and that the value of cintāmaṇi (a wish-fulfilling
gem) is so many more times higher than the value of
gold. Similarly, niṣkāma-bhakti is very high. Dhruva
Mahārāja performed bhakti only for a worldly kingdom,
whereas Nārada did not have such desires.

Nārada had been performing austerities, but precious
things cannot be acquired by the practice of general
austerities. Therefore, it was in order to greatly
increase Nārada’s eagerness that Bhagavān told him, “You
will not see me again in this lifetime.” He did this
because He wanted to make Nārada more advanced in
devotional service. He wanted him to be a rasika-bhakta.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Once you explained that even when Nārada Ṛṣi’s mother
expired, he did not concern himself with performing
ritualistic ceremonies for her. Rather he immediately
went to the forest to do bhajana. On the other hand,
even when Dhruva was seated in the transcendental
airplane that was just about to take him to Vaikuṇṭha,
he remembered his mother, Sunīti. He thought, “How shall
I go alone to Vaikuṇṭha, leaving behind my poor mother?
I will not go without her.”

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

Sakāma-bhakta Dhruva Mahārāja is a typical example of a
karma-miśra-bhakta (a devotee whose bhakti is mixed with
the desire for fruitive reward). Who is a typical
example of a jñāna-miśra-bhakta (a devotees whose bhakti
is mixed with the desire to merge into impersonal
brahma)?

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                              83
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

The four Kumāras, and also Śukadeva Gosvāmī in his first
stage.

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

What about Lord Śiva?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, he is so high – far superior to other devotees. He
is the guru of all Vaiṣṇavas. He is even Nārada’s guru.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

“Vaiṣṇavānāṁ yathā śambhuḥ – he is the greatest
Vaiṣṇava.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He is not under any rules and regulations, or anyone’s
control.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

In one form, Śivajī is Gopeśvara. He is beyond all these
categories.

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

And Lord Brahmā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Brahmā is a dāsya-bhakta; adhikārika-dāsa.

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

Is he a karma-miśra or jñāna-miśra-bhakta?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Adhikārika-dāsa means that he was given the order and
adhikāra (qualification) to create the world. He can
create only by the power of Kṛṣṇa, and he does so.
Because he creates by the order of Kṛṣṇa, he is called
adhikārika-dāsa.

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

Brahmā is always a pure devotee?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He is a śuddhā-bhakta, but not a rasika bhakta. He may
become a rasika bhakta in the future.

Moreover, there are so many Brahmās. Our Brahmā
requested Kṛṣṇa that he become the foot-dust of the
residents of Vṛndāvana; this is not an ordinary prayer.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Brahmājī became a mountain in Varsānā (Brahma-parvata)
by performing worship of Rādhā.

                            84
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes. Śaṅkara manifests in Nandagaon as the mountain
Nandīśvara Hill, and Brahmā as Brahma-parvata in
Varsānā.

Brahmā is our ādi-guru (the first guru in our Brahma-
Madhva-Gauḍīya sampradāya), not Śaṅkara. In this way, we
follow Brahmā, not Śaṅkara.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Śaṅkara is followed by Viṣṇusvāmī of the Rudra
sampradāya.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Padmanābha Mahārāja] The color of your cloth is too
dark. Better to reduce it somewhat.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

I made a mistake. I used too much dye.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
Prabhupāda wrote that even if guru makes a mistake, he
is always right.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

I don’t know. That’s why I’m asking.

And the conditioned soul, even if he is right, he is
always wrong.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If guru is wrong, he is not guru. On the other hand, if
Nārada or any bona fide ācārya in our guru-paramparā act
as though they don’t know something, they are guru.

Nārada Ṛṣi approached the demon Kaṁsa and asked him,
“What are you doing? Why have you excused Devakī and
Vasudeva? I know that the demigods had a meeting and
discussed various ways to kill you. Those demigods have
now appeared as Devakī and Vasudeva and their associates
for that purpose.”

After Kaṁsa heard this from Nārada, he killed the sons
of Devakī and Vasudeva, and also began to harass Devakī
and Vasudeva themselves. What is the significance of
this? Although Vasudeva and Devakī are the father and
mother of Kṛṣṇa, Nārada told Kaṁsa to harass them. Why?

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

He did it so that Kaṁsa would commit more offenses and

                             85
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

Kṛṣṇa would therefore appear sooner.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

What Nārada did seems to be wrong, but it is not.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura also said that
even if guru makes a mistake when reciting a verse, he
is right; and the conditioned soul, even if he recites
the verse correctly, he is wrong.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Our Guru Mahārāja hardly ever quoted ślokas; he mostly
used logical arguments. Moreover, when he did refer to a
śloka, he uttered only two or three words, not the
complete śloka. Sometimes guru’s pronunciation may be
incorrect, but guru is correct. In this way we can apply
what you said, but not where other matters are
concerned. Guru can never do wrong.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, you told us that when you met our Śrīla
Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja in his final
days, he told you, “I have made a mistake, because I
preached against my godbrothers.” Then you told him,
“No, no. You have not done any wrong. We understand why
you did what you did. It was to encourage your
disciples, for preaching.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, yes, yes. He knew the reality. What he did was to
encourage his disciples, for preaching. What he did
seemed to be wrong, but it was not. Whatever a real guru
says, that is okay. He says certain things due to
special circumstances.

Mārkeṇḍeya Ṛṣi dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, today is your birthday. For your
birthday, I am presenting you with some videos of your
world-wide preaching.

Today I’m begging you to give me a little mercy so that
I can develop the object of life that you are
distributing.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

My speaking should come in the form of books.

[To Padmanābha Mahārāja] Do you understand?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha

Mahārāja: Yes.

                             86
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

What I am telling in my morning walks and darśanas
should come in the form of books.4

I have already told this to Padmanābha Mahārāja.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

It should be made into books. Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This should be done very soon.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, this devotee is from Nandana’s apartment
building in Kuala Lumpur.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, thank you. Please attend our classes. And may you
very soon become a pure bhakta.

Very soon you will become old and have to give up this
body, and not a farthing of what you have collected will
go with you to the next body. Without bhakti, you cannot
be happy in your life; so take up this process very
soon. Chant the holy name, and be happy forever.

Devotee:

Thank you, Gurudeva. I’m trying very hard. I’m trying.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t delay.

[Devotees who have not been on the walk, but who have
been waiting at the door of Śrīla Gurudeva’s residence,
now sing “happy birthday.” They also present him with
gifts.]

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

It is also Jānakī dīdī’s birthday today.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[Throwing flower petals on Jānakī dāsī’s head] Maṅgalam
bhavatu kalyāṇaṁ bhavatu, sukhī bhavatu laukika
paralaukika. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti bhavatu. Rādhā-dāsyam bhavatu.
All auspiciousness to you. May you be happy in this
world and the transcendental world. May you attain
kṛṣṇa-bhakti, and especially the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

[Devotees sing, “Govinda dāmodara mādhaveti.” Then,

                            87
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

together with Śrīla Gurudeva, they sing, “Rādhe rādhe
rādhe, jaya jaya jaya śrī rādhe.”]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[calling out loudly] Jaya jaya Śrī…

Devotees:

[calling out loudly] Rādhe!

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[calling out loudly] Jaya jaya Śrī…

Devotees:

[calling out loudly] Rādhe!

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[calling out loudly] Jaya jaya Śrī Rādhe!

Devotees: [

calling out loudly] Rādhe!

Śrīla Gurudeva:

My darling daughters and sons, I’ll meet you soon.




January 27, 2009


Morning Walk

Prakāśātmā

dāsa:

Why do we never mention all the ācāryas between Śrīla
Vyāsadeva and Śrīla Madhvācārya?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Madhvācārya was a direct disciple of Vyāsadeva.

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

But Madhvācārya appeared in the thirteenth century and
Vyasa appeared 5,000 years ago.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Madhvācārya went to Badarikāśrama and meditated on
Vyāsadeva. Vyāsadeva then appeared to him directly and
gave him mantras. Vyāsadeva also instructed him to
reveal the contents and inner meanings of his books.

We all give thanks to Vijaya and his company, because he

                              88
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

has arranged everything for this festival and it is
going on well. He is personally serving me, and he is
also helping everyone else. So, our festival is
successful.

Brajanāth dāsa:

They want to hold another festival next year, and bring
more devotees. Nandanandana prabhu of Hong Kong said he
will bring two hundred more devotees.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This year’s attendance was poor. In America there were
five hundred devotees, and we had such numbers in other
places, like Australia, as well.

Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Gurudeva, the anniversary of your appearance on the
planet yesterday was wonderful.

I have a dilemma. As you know, in 2004, when Prema-
prayojana prabhu brought me to you in Sydney, I was in a
sad state after twenty-five years of being in another
saṅga, with Siddha-svarūpa dāsa. I was his doctor for
twenty-five years, and he treated me kindly because of
that.

But I felt like I was in kindergarten: no hari-kathā, no
encourage-ment to learn ślokas or their meanings, no
gāyatrī-mantra; nothing. I had enough after twenty-five
years, so I prayed, and Kṛṣṇa pulled me out of that
saṅga. Then, for many years I was in limbo, in no-man’s
land, ‘no-Kṛṣṇa land.’

By Kṛṣṇa’s mercy and by your mercy, you accepted me. In
Sydney, I declared my ignorance and my neophyte status
and lack of qualification to you, but you embraced me
and said I must be initiated without delay.

I’m so grateful. I’ve come from there to post-graduate
university, even though I have a hard time absorbing.

Previously I did not know what hari-kathā was. But now
my problem is that yesterday you said you want me to be
a great preacher, yet I have trouble absorbing your high
knowledge.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I will inspire everything in your heart.

Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

I knew you would. It comes with your mercy.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can speak very well. I will inspire you.

Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Thank you.

                           89
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

What has Siddha-svarūpa given you?

Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Nothing, but I gave him my medical expertise; I treated
him.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That life is bogus. They don’t do bhajana.

Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

No bhajana, no hari-kathā, no gāyatrī, no ślokas, no
meanings of ślokas.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And here you see that these devotees have become good
devotees and scholars of Gauḍīya philosophy.

Tamal-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Yes. And sometimes I cry tears, because I don’t know
anything after my twenty-five years in the former saṅga.
But now I hope I can…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You will be a very good devotee.

Tamal Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Thank you, Gurudeva.

Devotee:

Our Gurudeva is gone now, and he has left someone as
ācārya. I do not know what to do. I am confused. I am
not able to balance my relationship with this ācārya.
What is my duty?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can go and preach the instructions of your Gurudeva.
The present ācārya is stubborn; he is not able to build
nice relationships. If there is no understanding between
you and him, then preach separately. My Gurudeva, Śrīla
Śrīdhara Mahārāja, and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja all left their Gurudeva’s maṭhas. They
established their own temples, and then they continued
preaching their Gurudeva’s instructions. You can do the
same.

Devotee:

They were all very senior and I am conditioned. I cannot
compare myself with them.

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                           90
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

If you dedicate yourself, your Gurudeva will personally
give you strength.

Devotee:

Okay.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

At least you are educated. I was not educated, but by
serving my Gurudeva, he made me as I am now. There are
so many educational certifications, like PhD, but I do
not have any of those. However, because of my sincere
service to my Gurudeva, he gave me inspiration and my
preaching became successful. Now, so many devotees
worldwide are listening to my hari-kathā.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

I have one question.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why are you late?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

Because I am a fool.

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Deity is Madana-mohana, the
presiding Deity of sambandha-jñāna (the establishment of
one’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa). Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
Deity is Govinda-deva, the presiding Deity of abhidheya
(the devotional activities performed in that
relationship). Śrīla Madhu Paṇḍita’s Deity is Gopīnātha,
the presiding Deity of prayojana (the goal of life,
kṛṣṇa-prema).

My question is this: Is it correct to say that because
Gopīnātha is the prayojana Deity, He is somehow superior
to Govindajī because Govindajī is the Deity of only
abhidheya? In other words, is it correct to say that one
gets more from one Deity than from another?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There is no need for these types of statements. It is
crucial to speak only the correct siddhānta
(philosophical conclusions). Have I ever said this?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

No. You have never said this.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Follow me, follow Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and follow our
ācāryas.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yesterday, Vicitri dīdī was telling…

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

                              91
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


When Vicitri dīdī was speaking in your class last night,
she said that you are giving Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī, and
this is higher than Rādhā-Śyāmasundara with Lalitā and
Viśākhā, who my Guru Mahārāja established [in ISKCON’s
Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandira in Vṛndāvana].

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t think like this. Don’t compare. This is wrong. We
should not compare one Ṭhākura (Deity) with another.
They are all the same Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; only Their names are different.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:

That is what I wanted to understand.

[Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja showed Śrīla Gurudeva a picture
of a cloudy-looking person who vaguely resembled an
angel with upraised arms, who was standing in the sky
above a mountain situated in an area of China that was
known for its mysticism. This picture had been given to
the Chinese devotees by Giri Mahārāja, and it had been
circulating in China at the time of his touring there.
Some Chinese devotees had strong faith that this was a
proof that Mahāprabhu manifested His presence in China
and gave special mercy there.]

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, is this picture bona fide?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It was done by computer.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why are you showing me this?

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

Because the Chinese devotees have faith in it.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Just worship the real Gauracandra. There is no need for
this photo. Worship only what is real.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is mentioned in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta that because
of Mahāprabhu’s attraction to the love of His
associates, He always appeared in four places. He
appeared in the household temple of Mother Śacī, in the
places where Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu danced, in the house
of Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita during congrega-tional chanting, and
in the house of Rāghava Paṇḍita.

There were not more than four. Why would Mahāprabhu
appear on the top of a mountain?

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

                              92
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


I wanted everyone to hear this.

Padmanābha dāsa:

When Baladeva Prabhu performed the rāsa dance [while
Kṛṣṇa was in Dvārakā], did Rādhārāṇī participate? Some
people in Vṛndāvana were saying that She did.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why say such a useless thing? I didn’t say this. Did I
say this?

Padmanābha dāsa:

No. Gokula-pati prabhu said it in a lecture.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is a bogus idea. Where does such an idea come from?
How is it possible for Śrīmatī Rādhikā to be in the same
place that Baladeva Prabhu is present?5

Any questions?

Ātmārāma dāsa:

The devotees in Bali wanted to come to see you, but they
couldn’t. They are feeling separation from you. They
could not come because the government has increased the
tax for leaving the country from one hundred to three
hundred dollars. For the Balinese devotees the average
wage is about one hundred dollars per month.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Extend my heartly blessings to them.

[To Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja] Late Mahārāja has come.
How are you?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

I don’t know. You will have to tell me how I am,
Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Not good.

We should always remember this verse:


tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā māna-dena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

(Śikṣāṣṭakam, Verse 3)


                           93
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


[Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass that has been trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless and offering respect to all others according
to their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.]

This verse is not only for one person. It is for
everyone, especially for all sannyāsīs. Sannyāsīs should
give proper respect to others because Kṛṣṇa resides in
everyone’s heart.


uttama hañā vaiṣṇava habe nirabhimāna

jīve sammāna dibe jāni’ ‘kṛṣṇa’-adhiṣṭhāna

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 20.25)


[Although a Vaiṣṇava is the most exalted person, he is
prideless. He gives all respect to everyone, knowing
everyone to be the resting place of Kṛṣṇa.]

Be tṛṇād api sunīcena, taror api sahiṣṇunā. Give honor
and don’t desire it. Is that okay?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Yes, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you follow this principle in your life?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

I am trying to follow.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There is something wrong; I have received some
complaints. We should give respect to disciples, what to
speak of god-brothers; not only to sannyāsīs. We should
be humble with everyone; then we are sannyāsīs,
otherwise not. Suppose certain sannyāsīs think, “I am a
guru and he is a disciple,” or, “I am a sannyāsī and my
godbrother is a gṛhastha and therefore inferior.” Such
persons are not really sannyāsīs, and it will be very
hard for them to achieve bhakti.

One more thing: Don’t criticize anyone. Only if you can
change someone can you correct him. For example,
Nalakūvera and Maṇigrīva were doing wrong, so Nārada
came to them and cursed them, out of pity. He did not
pay specific attention to what they were doing. He
considered only this: “Oh, their lives have gone in
vain. How shall I reform them?” He had the power to do
what was necessary, and that is why he pointed out their
fault. Thus, his curse turned out to be a benediction.

So try to follow these principles; all sannyāsīs must
follow them. I have heard some complaint, but I will not

                           94
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

tell you from whom. I want all my sannyāsīs to be ideal
by giving respect to others.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I want to ask about your order for the
temple in Murwillambah.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

First, the loan should be paid off.

Brajanāth dāsa:

They have done that.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The full amount?

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Almost. There is 8,000 Australian dollars remaining to
be paid. The devotees in Murwillambah have been managing
a restaurant for one year, and all the money from the
restaurant is paying off the loan.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

After it is paid off, you can begin the construction of
the temple and kīrtana hall. The temple [the Deities’
altar room] can be small, no harm in that, but the
kīrtana hall must be large in order to accommodate all
the devotees and guests.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Some devotees are asking if we should build something at
the Garden-ashram instead of in Murwillambah.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Mathurānātha prabhu has a big piece of land. You once
went by boat to see it.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, no. Murwillambah is better. Mathurānātha’s Garden-
ashram is not a good location for a temple. Devotees
have to cross a river and climb a hill. And they can’t
build a big hall there. Murwillambah is easily
accessible to all, so it is a better location.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

As a residence, the Garden-ashram is okay, but
Murwillambah is better for festivals. In the rainy
season no one can access Garden-ashram.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Gurudeva, I am feeling very unqualified. I feel like a
bucket full of holes. You are pouring in the mercy, and
the mercy is running away.

                            95
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

This way of thinking is very good. Kṛṣṇa will help you.




January 28, 2009


Morning Walk

Padmanābha dāsa:

When gurudeva tells a disciple to do something and that
disciple’s material intelligence is not able to
comprehend gurudeva’s desire, there is resistance from
inside to follow gurudeva’s order. Will that amount to
guru-aparādha?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Such a person is actually not a disciple. If he does not
understand the wish of gurudeva, how can he be a
disciple? He should know gurudeva’s wish. If the
disciple is sincere and free from worldly desires, then,
by serving gurudeva he will be able to understand.
Sometimes gurudeva wants to instruct the disciple, but
he knows that the disciple would not be able to follow
him. So he thinks, “Somehow I should bring him to this
line of devotion.”

If a disciple cannot understand or follow, that is his
fault. If he is not following, it means his bhajana has
not begun.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

Gurudeva, sometimes, when reading your books, there is
some stirring in the heart; some emotion may come. For
instance, when reading about Kṛṣṇa meeting the gopīs at
Kurukṣetra, some emotion appears in my heart. But how is
it possible for a very low-class person like me to have
this emotion? Am I just a sahajiyā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is okay. Even if that emotion comes only for a
moment, it is very good. You are fortunate. Try to
maintain such emotions for longer periods of time.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

I’m confused, because every day I look at ladies; and
then I’m reading your books and sometimes feeling some
emotion. How is this possible?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is your luck. These books are for this purpose.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

                           96
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


But should I confirm with senior devotees some-times,
that this is correct? Otherwise, I’m worried there may
be some...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

My books will remove all your doubts. And if at any time
you cannot find the solutions in my books, you can ask
any of my disciples.

Even after my departure from this world, you can ask me
any question and I will inspire you in your heart. Don’t
think of gurudeva as a mortal being. He will inspire
you. I feel this way; I ask my Gurudeva questions. I ask
questions to Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, and they answer me.

Mahāprabhu dāsa:

A few of my friends, who are disciples of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja sometimes tell me, “Today
Śrīla Prabhupāda told me this; yesterday, he told me
this.” They have conversations with him every day. So
what is the difference between…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If one is a   high-class devotee, he can directly speak
with him in   this way. Otherwise, if one is not so pure,
he will not   speak with them directly. Rather,
inspiration   will come.




* * *




1 Excerpt from Kṛṣṇa, The Supreme Personality of Godhead
(Chapter 28), by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja:


The mature devotees, who have completely executed Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, are immediately transferred to the
universe where Kṛṣṇa is appearing. In that universe the
devotees get their first opportunity to associate with
Kṛṣṇa personally and directly.




2 The term anyābhilāṣa means ‘a desire for other
objects.’ To this word the Sanskrit suffix in has first
been added. This suffix indicates the natural or
acquired way of living or acting. When used in
conjunction with the word anyābhilāṣa, it means ‘the
innate tendency to act under extraneous desires.’ To
this the suffix tā is added, which indicates the quality

                             97
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

or state of being of anything. This means that in his
natural condition a sādhaka should have no desires other
than for bhakti. But if on the appearance of some
unexpected calamity (in an unnatural condition) a
sādhaka prays, “O Bhagavān, I am Your devotee. Please
protect me from this calamity,” then in spite of this
desire, no damage is done to his bhakti” (Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Verse 1, Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-
vṛtti).



3 Prārabdha-karma is the result of previous activities
which have already begun to bear fruit in the form of
happiness or distress.



4 [Excerpt from a morning walk conversation in Odessa,
Russia, on September 22, 2008:]


Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is my desire that all of our discussions during these
morning walks should be noted in the form of a book.

[To Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja] Have you done anything
in this regard? If not, then you are not able to repay
me.

[To all devotees present] I am telling you all; these
morning walks must be published as a book, so that in
the future everyone will be able to know all these
truths. This is my idea.




5 Baladeva Prabhu’s rāsa dance was performed with
Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs. Our ācāryas comment that they were
Baladeva Prabhu’s gopīs so as not to disturb the minds
of unqualified persons. Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her sakhīs
are not present when Baladeva Prabhu dances with the
gopīs.




March 31, 2009


Arrival Darśana

[Yamunā dāsī, the Chinese translator, is introducing the
hundreds of devotees as they approach Śrīla Gurudeva’s
lotus feet to offer praṇāma and give him their heartfelt
offerings, one after another. Here is an excerpt of the
darśana:]

Yamunā dāsī:


                           98
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Lavaṅga-latā dāsī was crying to meet you. She could not
get a visa to come to India. She had a dream that you
brought her there.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Tell her that I came here for her.

Tell them all that I am very happy to come to very nice
China.

[Yamunā dāsī translates Śrīla Gurudeva’s words into
Chinese, after which there was a loud and long
applause.]

Yamunā dāsī:

They are also very happy.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There are so many Chinese devotees who cannot come to
India. I came here for them.

Yamunā dāsī:

Haripriyā dāsa wants to take first and second initiation
from you. He has waited so long. He has been a
vegetarian for twenty-three years.

Haripriyā dāsa:

[weeping]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Haripriyā dāsa] I have been waiting for you.




April 1, 2009


Art Darśana

Vasanti dāsī:

This is Śyāmarāṇī dīdī’s sketch. She wanted me to show
it to you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

Vasanti dāsī:

[Showing photos that will be used as references] She
wanted to show you that the gate to the kuñja (secluded
forest grove) is made of flowers. And there will be
trees on this side.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                            99
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Okay.

Vasanti dāsī:

She is asking if it is okay that Rādhārāṇī is looking at
Kṛṣṇa, but not out at us.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[Pointing at certain parts of the sketch and tapping the
sketch, which was situated on the small desk on his bed]
Okay.

Vasanti dāsī:

She said this dancer will be smaller.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[Pointing and tapping] These gopīs are somewhat far
away, so they are looking small. These gopīs are nearer,
so they are looking bigger.

This gopī is more beautiful than Rādhārāṇī. Rādhārāṇī
should be more beautiful then her.

Vasanti dāsī:

When you gave the order for this and other paintings,
you gave four verses that were to be illustrated; like
phullendīvara-kāntim indu-vadanaṁ and kasturī-tilakaṁ
lalāṭa-paṭale vakṣaḥ-sthale kaustubhaṁ.1

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, like this:


phullendīvara-kāntim indu-vadanaṁ barhāvataṁsa-priyaṁ

śrī-vatsāṇkam udāra-kaustubha-dharaṁ pītāmbaraṁ sundaram

gopīnāṁ nayanotpalārcita-tanuṁ go-gopa-saṅghāvṛtaṁ

govindaṁ kala-veṇu-vādana-paraṁ divyāṅga-bhūṣaṁ bhaje


[I worship Govinda, whose complexion is the color of a
blossoming blue lotus flower, whose face is like the
moon, who is fond of wearing a peacock feather in His
crown, whose chest bears the mark of Śrīvatsa and is
adorned with the Kaustubha gem, who is attired in
beautiful yellow garments, whose handsome form the gopīs
worship with sidelong glances, whose companions are
multitudes of cows and gopas, who plays sweet melodies
on the flute, and whose body is decorated with
glittering

ornaments.]

Vasanti dāsī:

You said that the pictures should be general, so that

                          100
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

they can be used in your various books and for other
preaching purposes. Is this painting general enough?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is okay, okay, okay.

Vasanti dāsī:

Śyāmarāṇī dīdī said that you usually tell her exactly
what to paint – the exact pastime and all the details –
and then she knows that the painting is your heart. For
this picture, you didn’t tell her specifically what
pastime it should be. You just gave the verses and
indicated that she should decide on the specific
pastime. So, she wants to know if this picture is really
your heart; if it is really what you want.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is good. She can make it like this, and one or two
other paintings like this. I have told all my moods to
her, and it is according to my moods that she has
painted this. But some changes are needed.

Vasanti dāsī:

This picture is from your lecture on the third verse of
Vilāpa-kusumāñjali. [Pointing] Here is Rati Mañjarī
tying the mekhalā (waist-belt) on Rādhārāṇī’s waist in a
way that none of the other gopīs would see. You said
that you want this painting to be used in many places in
your books, so it should be general.

This is a general scene of the gopīs dancing and Kṛṣṇa
watching; The only part of the painting that will be
specific is Rati Mañjarī stealthily putting on the
waist-belt. Most of the viewers of the painting will not
understand this secret part. They will only see the
general scene. Is it okay? 2

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I think that her idea is best. She should keep it as she
likes. It is okay in the way she has done it.

Vasanti dāsī:

She is also asking about a swing painting.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why did she not come here?

Vasanti dāsī:

She could not get a visa yet.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Where is she?

Vasanti dāsī:


                             101
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Hong Kong.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You received a visa?

Vasanti dāsī:

I came two months ago to visit my mother here, and she
got me a multiple entry visa, so my visa was no problem.
They said Śyāmarāṇī dīdī’s passport picture looked
religious.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Ours looks religious, so why could they not give it to
her?

Brajanāth dāsa:

You are from India so you are like a monk, so not a
problem.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I am like a monk.

Vasanti dāsī:

Not like, you are a monk.

We will find out today at 3 pm if she got a visa or not.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Today I am here and tomorrow I will leave. Are you
following me everywhere?

Vasanti dāsī:

After China, we will go to Japan.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How many days in Japan?

Vasanti dāsī:

One week, but if she doesn’t get a visa, then three
weeks.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

After Japan?

Vasanti dāsī:

Canada.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then you will meet me in Houston.

Vasanti dāsī:

                            102
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017


Yes, and before Houston we are going to Mexico.

These are beads for Japan, for you to bless them.

[Śrīla Gurudeva puts his hand in the bag of beads to
bless them.]




April 2, 2009


Darśana

[Just before leaving for the airport, at 5am Śrīla
Gurudeva went to the hotel where the two-hundred Chinese
devotees were staying, and were now surrounding him in
the reception room.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

My blessings to you all. I am inviting you all to come
to Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā for Kārtika month, if you
have no money problem. I hope that we will meet again
very soon.

[Uttama dāsa translated each sentence separately into
Chinese, and after each Chinese translation, there was
loud applause.]




April 2, 2009


Airport Darśana

Vasanti dāsī:

[Introducing two travelers] This is Aisha and Ahmid.
They were walking by and became attracted to you; but
they don’t know why. They wanted to meet you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you know English?

Aisha and Ahmid:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you know that one day you will become old?

Aisha and Ahmid:

Yes.


                          103
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Can any scientist or doctor help you so that you won’t
become old?

Ahmid:

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

After some time you will have to give up your body. How
much money can you take with you? Can you take a single
farthing?

Ahmid:

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Nothing. So why are you struggling so much and doing
labor like donkeys?

First of all, you should know that you are not this
body, and that in this body there is a soul and
Supersoul. God has given this human form only to realize
that we are not this body, but the soul, and God Himself
is the Supersoul. If you do not realize this truth while
you are in this human body, you will have to come back
in your next births as fish, dogs, bears, and so many
other animals.

Those who you are now eating will eat you in your future
lives. Meat means ‘ME-EAT’. Those whom you are now
eating will eat you in the future. If you eat fish, then
they will become humans and eat you in your next births.
So, don’t eat meat. Chant God’s names and be happy
forever.

Aisha and Ahmid:

Thank you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is my mission. It is to understand these principles
and develop devotion to God that so many devotees
throughout the world, hundreds of thousands, especially
in America, China, Russia, Europe, and other countries
are following me.

Aisha and Ahmid:

Thank you very much.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Where are you going now?

Ahmid:

Beijing.


                           104
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you live in China?

Ahmid:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

For a job?

Ahmid:

We are doing business.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Which country are you from?

Ahmid:

I am from Niger and she is from Mozambique. We got
married just one month ago.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Brajanāth dāsa] Is our luggage checked in yet?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Everything is done

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then?

Brajanāth dāsa:

We can go now.




* * *




1 For the full verses and their meanings, please see the
Art Darśana in Cebu, Philippines, on January 16, 2009.



2 The following is an excerpt from Śrīla Gurudeva’s
darśana in Vṛndāvana in 1991:


Śrīmatī Rādhikā ordered all the sakhīs to please Śrī
Kṛṣṇa by dancing and joking with Him. Then, to the
accompaniment of various types of musical instruments
such as khol, mṛdaṅga, dampa (a type of drum), and so

                          105
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

on, they began to dance along with Her. The gopīs had
very thin waists, and while they danced it seemed as if
their waists would break in two. They danced very
swiftly and beautifully, and performed kīrtana at the
same time. In appreciation, Kṛṣṇa responded by calling
out, “Sādhu! Well done! Excellent!”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā became somewhat tired. When She sat
down, She noticed, “Oh, My mekhalā (waist belt) is not
here?” In Her haste She had left it in Vilāsa-kuñja.
This mekhalā is very dear to Kṛṣṇa, who always wants to
play with it and tighten it on Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s waist.
Now She feared, ‘If all the other sakhīs come to know
that I have forgotten My mekhalā there, they will surely
tease Me about it.’ Silently, therefore, by Her eyes,
She discreetly indicated to Śrī Tulasī Mañjarī, “I have
forgotten that beloved mekhalā in the kuñja. Without
letting the others know, go there quietly and bring it
to Me.”

Rūpa Mañjarī, who is ever watchful of every movement of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, was silent and did not speak about this
to anyone, but she also knew the fact that the mekhalā
was missing.

Tulasī Mañjarī told the other mañjarīs, “I’m going to
bring some flowers. I’ll come back very soon.” Saying
this, she took a basket and went to the kuñja. When she
returned, all the sakhīs were dancing, singing, or
otherwise engaged. She very skillfully sat near Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and, without anyone seeing, bound the mekhalā
around Her waist. Śrīmatī Rādhikā was very pleased and
said, “Oh, you did it so well that not even Kṛṣṇa,
Lalitā, and Viśākhā were aware that My mekhalā was
missing. If they had noticed, they certainly would have
teased Me to no end, and I would have been so
embarrassed. You have protected My honor.” She again
joined the other gopīs and began to dance for Kṛṣṇa.”




April 10, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.24

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is today’s śloka?

Acyutānanda dāsa:



ahaṁ hare tava pādaika-mūla-

dāsānudāso bhavitāsmi bhūyaḥ

manaḥ smaretāsu-pater guṇāṁs te


                            106
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

gṛṇīta vāk karma karotu kāyaḥ


[O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, will I
become a servant of Your eternal servants, who find
shelter only at Your lotus feet? O Lord of my life, may
my mind always think of Your transcendental attributes,
my words always glorify those attributes, and my body
always engage in the loving service of Your Lordship.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Brajanāth dāsa Do you remember the verse? What is
the meaning?

Brajanāth dāsa:

O Lord, may I again become the servant of the servant of
Your servant, who is exclusively…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

May I again? What do you mean by ‘again’?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Bhuyah means ‘again.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It does not mean ‘again.’ Vṛtrāsura thinks that he has
not yet served. He wants to serve for the first time.

Brajanāth dāsa:

It says ‘again’ in the translation.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It means ‘again and again.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Vṛndā-devī dāsī] Can you recite this verse? You will
have to preach; not to just sit in one place.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Last night I learned about the verse, but I didn’t
understand it fully. I know a little bit, but I have to
look at my paper.

O Lord, will I again and again be able to become the
servant of the servant of those who are exclusively
dedicated to Your lotus feet? May I again and again
become their servant, so that my mind can always be
engaged in thinking of You, my words always be engaged
in glorifying Your activities, and my body be fully
engaged in Your loving devotional service.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Madhuvrata dāsa] Now recite the śloka in a tune.


                            107
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Madhuvrata dāsa:

When? Now? [He sings the verse]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[Leads all in singing the verse]

For tomorrow, all of you can learn this śloka:


na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ

na sārva-bhaumaṁ na rasādhipatyam

na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā

samañjasa tvā virahayya kāṅkṣe

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.25)


[O my Lord, source of all opportunities, I do not desire
to enjoy in Dhruvaloka, the heavenly planets, or the
planet where Lord Brahmā resides, nor do I want to be
the supreme ruler of all the earthly planets or the
lower planetary systems. I do not desire to be master of
the powers of mystic yoga, nor do I want liberation if I
have to give up Your lotus feet.]

I am not teaching you these prayers merely for
memorization and remembrance. My intention is that the
moods of the prayers will enter your hearts. So, please
chant these prayers daily.




April 12, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.25

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is today’s śloka?

[Acyutānanda dāsa and Madhuvrata dāsa each recite
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.25, as spoken by Vṛtrāsura]

Acyutānanda dāsa:

O Lord Hari, O Kṛṣṇa, I have no desire to attain Svarga,
nor do I want to go to Brahma-loka. I do not want to
rule over the entire Earth, nor over Rasātala. I do not
want the aṣṭa-yoga-siddhis (eight yogic perfections),
nor do I want mokṣa (liberation). If I have to give You
up, I do not want any of these.

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                            108
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

Why did you say mokṣa? What is the reference?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

apunar-bhavaṁ vā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of apunar-bhavaṁ vā?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

It means ‘to not have to take birth again’.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Madhuvrata dāsa] Can you explain?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Vṛtrāsura is addressing Kṛṣṇa in this way: “O source of
all possibilities.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa can give liberation and
yoga siddhis, mystic perfections. He can give
everything. Still, Vṛtrāsura is saying, “I do not want
sovereignty over planets such as Dhruvaloka, or even a
position like that of Lord Brahmā. I do not desire yoga
siddhis or even liberation from material existence, if
it means that I am not in Your association.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of virahayya kāṅkṣe?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

It means ‘if I am separated from You.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What does he want?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

He is not saying.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He wants to be always serving. This is the meaning. In
the previous verse he addressed Kṛṣṇa as asu-pate, which
means ‘Prāṇanātha, O Lord of my life.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Vṛndāvana dāsa] Do you understand the mood of this
verse?

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What do you want from Śrī Kṛṣṇa? If He comes and tells
you, “You may ask any boon,” what will you say?

                          109
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Vṛndāvana dāsa:

What will I ask? I will ask to be able to render direct
service to Him.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you want to attain heaven?

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

Whatever He wants, that I will do.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, that is not the way to respond. You can reply in
this way: “If You want to give me salvation, liberation,
heavenly power, yoga siddhis, or Rasātala as attained by
Bali Mahārāja, I will not accept any of these things. I
only want to be with You and serve You. I want never to
be separated from You.”


ajata-paksa iva mataram khagah

stanyam yatha vatsatarah ksudh-artah

priyam priyeva vyusitam visanna

mano ’ravindaksa didrksate tvam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.26.)


[O lotus-eyed Lord, as baby birds that have not yet
developed their wings always look towards their mother
to return and feed them, as small calves tied with ropes
await anxiously the time of milking when they will be
allowed to drink the milk of their mothers, or as a
morose wife whose husband is away from home always longs
for him to return so that she can satisfy him in all
respects, I always yearn for the opportunity to render
direct service unto You.]

Madhuvrata dāsa:

I spoke with Dāmodara Mahārāja yesterday.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How is he?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

He is in Turkey. His preaching is going very well.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Already three new people have come to join us. He is

                          110
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

doing nagara-saṅkīrtana1 and book-distribution in
Istanbul, and he is very happy.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Dāmodara Mahārāja says this is the best place he has
ever gone to. He quoted Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s
statements in Jaiva-dharma about Muslim-dharma and how
it is related to vaiṣṇava-dharma. He says that in Turkey
all are open-minded. At least ten people at a time
surround the devotees when they are distributing books,
and ask questions and want the books. On nagara-
saṅkīrtana all the people are saying, “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Kṛṣṇa.”

He said, “We distributed books and invitations, and now
people are calling us on the telephone and saying, ‘We
want to come to your program.’ ” And he also said they
are becoming vegetarian. He said this is the best place
he has ever been in the Western world for book-
distribution and preaching. He is encouraging all
devotees to come there and help distribute books, and in
this way make Kṛṣṇa consciousness successful there.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Muslim countries, like Pakistan, Malaysia, Iran, and
others, are very, very strict. Iran is not as strict as
Pakistan. Malaysia is good, but not like Turkey. Another
reason I like Turkey is that the Muslims there are truly
liberal.




April 13, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.26

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We will have to direct our attention towards our
mission: writing books, and preaching here and there.
You may try to solve problems, but everything depends on
Kṛṣṇa.

What is the śloka for today?

[The students individually recite the śloka:]


ajāta-pakṣā iva mātaraṁ khagāḥ

stanyaṁ yathā vatsatarāḥ kṣudh-ārtāḥ

priyaṁ priyeva vyuṣitaṁ viṣaṇṇā

mano ’ravindākṣa didṛkṣate tvām



                            111
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

[O lotus-eyed Lord, as baby birds that have not yet
developed their wings always look for their mother to
return and feed them; as small calves tied with ropes
await anxiously the time of milking, when they will be
allowed to drink the milk of their mothers; or as a
morose wife whose husband is away from home always longs
for him to return so that she can satisfy him in all
respects - I always yearn for the opportunity to render
direct service unto You.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Brajanāth dāsa:

In this śloka there are three sections. The first one
states: O my Lord, I want to develop eagerness to be
with You and serve You, just like baby birds are very
eagerly awaiting their mother to come and bring them
food. Gurudeva, you have explained that because the
mother brings food there is some relation, but the food
is different from the mother. The second example, the
baby calf, is better than the first. The calf is eagerly
waiting for the mother, who comes and directly gives her
own milk. This stage is a little better than that of the
baby bird.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There is some selfishness in the first example, because
the baby bird only wants to satisfy its hunger.
Therefore, Vṛtrāsura rejected this.

Brajanāth dāsa:

There is also some selfishness in the second example,
the example of the baby calf, as it wants to satisfy its
stomach by its mother’s milk; but at least the milk is
coming directly from the mother.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And third?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Thirdly, a beloved who is very morose because her lover
is far away in a distant place is eagerly waiting and
thinking, “When he returns, I will satisfy him in all
regards.” This is the best example, because the beloved
is thinking, “I will satisfy my lover.” Similarly,
Vṛtrāsura is praying, “I want to have that eagerness, my
Lord, to be engaged in Your service only to please You,
as the gopīs do.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja] Can you explain the
special significance of this śloka?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

In the first line, ajāta-pakṣā iva mātaraṁ khagāḥ, the

                            112
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

baby birds are doing only smaraṇa (remembrance) of their
mother; no śravaṇa or kīrtana (hearing or chanting).

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Only smaraṇa. They engaged only their minds.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

They are always thinking about their mother and
wondering when she will come to feed them; moreover the
food she brings is not from within her own body. These
baby birds also have some fear of big birds, like
eagles, and that is another reason they are hankering
for their mother. They want her to remove their fears.

The second line of the śloka explains that the time has
come for milking, but the mother cow has not yet
returned from grazing. Her calves remember her and begin
crying for her. Thus, in this example, both kīrtana and
smaraṇa are present. When the milkman comes to untie
these calves, they so hurriedly want to go to their
mother that it is hard for him to untie them.

Both these lines reveal some self-interest. The baby
birds and calves are not hankering for their mothers’
happiness; they are thinking about their own. Vṛtrāsura
did not want to be like them, so he rejected this idea.

The third line of the śloka, priyaṁ priyeva vyuṣitaṁ
viṣaṇṇā, describes how a lover is waiting for her
beloved, thinking, “When my beloved comes, I will
satisfy him in each and every respect.” Those near to
her are thinking, “She is such a nice person. She does
this and that, and she is always remembering her
beloved. Even if he is only an hour, or half an hour,
late, her eagerness increases.” Her mind is engaged in
śravaṇa, kīrtana, and smaraṇa; all three are there, as
she always wants to satisfy her beloved by her thoughts,
words, and actions. This is the first hint of gopī-bhāva
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and therefore this is a very
important śloka.

Here in this line, the Sanskrit words priyaṁ priyeva do
not actually mean ‘husband and wife.’ Rather, they mean
‘lover and beloved.’ Priya always satisfies her priyaṁ;
she does not hanker for her own interest.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

She has no selfishness.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

She has no self-interest. She is engaged in śravaṇa,
kīrtana, and smaraṇa with no selfishness.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Vṛtrāsura wants to serve by his mind, words, and body,
as stated in the śloka we discussed today.

You can also remember some verses from Brahma-sutra, or
Vedānta-sūtra, along with their meanings; and also the

                            113
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

first three ślokas of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto One,
Chapter One. Do you remember these? Then, there are the
ślokas from Chapter Two, beginning sa vai puṁsāṁ paro
dharmo, and dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ, viṣvaksena-
kathāsu yaḥ, and also vedanti tat tattva-vidhas tattvam.
Do you know the meaning of advaya-jñāna tattva (the one-
without-a-second Absolute Truth)? Then, after that,
there is the śloka beginning sṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ,
puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ.

There are so many ślokas to remember. You can also
remember Veṇu-gīta, Gopī-gīta, and Bhramara-gītā, as
well as the expressions of the princesses of Mathurā in
the arena of Kaṁsa regarding the gopīs’ love and
affection for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. You can also learn and remember
the prayers of Śrī Uddhava which he uttered after
meeting with the gopīs in Vṛndāvana. Try to memorize all
these ślokas.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

For tomorrow??

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

No, no. Gradually.

Gurudeva, Vṛndāvana prabhu says that he cannot remember
all the ślokas, but he can remember their meanings.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, remembering the meaning is okay.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

The devotees were very happy yesterday, because all the
speakers spoke so nicely.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It was a very good class.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Vṛndāvana also, Gurudeva...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He also. All.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

And you, of course, were the best.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

You didn’t ask Vṛndā to speak.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

No need.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                            114
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


I have told her to preach.




April 14, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.11.27

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of this verse?


mamottamaśloka-janeṣu sakhyaṁ

saṁsāra-cakre bhramataḥ sva-karmabhiḥh

tvan-māyayātmātmaja-dāra-geheṣv

āsakta-cittasya na nātha bhūyāt


[O my Lord, my master, I am wandering throughout this
material world as a result of my fruitive activities.
Therefore I seek friendship only in the association of
Your pious and enlightened devotees. My attachment to my
body, wife, children, and home is continuing by the
spell of Your external energy, but I wish to be attached
to them no longer. Let my mind, my consciousness, and
everything I have, be attached only to You.]

Madhuvrata dāsa:

O my Lord, O Uttamā-śloka, I am wandering in this
material world as a result of my fruitive activities.
Now I desire only the association of your pure devotees.
By Your illusory potency my attachment to my wife,
children, and house still continues, but I desire this
to finish. Now I want only that my body, mind, and
consciousness be attached to You.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

O Lord, I am wandering in this saṁsāra (material
existence) because of my karma. May I have friendship
only with your devotees; may I not have any other
attachment.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

From where have you brought the word ‘devotees’?

Acyutānanda dāsa:


                             115
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

From uttamā-śloka janeṣu.

May I not have any attachment to my sons, my wife, and
my house. O Lord, may there not be any more attachment
for these things.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What did the unmarried princesses of Mathurā say when
they saw Kaṁsa sitting on his throne? What did they say
when they saw that by Kaṁsa’s order Cāṇūra and Mūṣṭika
wanted to crush Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva – without anyone
doing anything about it, or even warning Them?

These young ladies were considering, “We must not remain
in this assembly, for by staying here we are attracting
offense personified. Why is no one here objecting to
these young boys fighting with those huge, mountain-like
wrestlers? It is true that we are seeing Kṛṣṇa, but
unfortunately it is just as the wrestlers are trying to
crush Him in this unfair match. How fortunate are the
gopīs, on the other hand, who always see Him in the
idyllic setting of Vṛndāvana.”


puṇyā bata vraja-bhuvo yad ayaṁ nṛ-liṅga-

gūḍhaḥ purāṇa-puruṣo vana-citra-mālyaḥ

gāḥ pālayan saha-balaḥ kvaṇayaṁś ca veṇuṁ

vikrīdayāñcati giritra-ramārcitāṅghriḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.44.13)


[How pious are the tracks of land in Vraja, for there
the primeval Personality of Godhead, disguising Himself
with human traits, wanders about, enacting His many
pastimes. Adorned with wonderfully variegated forest
garlands, He, whose feet are worshiped by lord Śiva and
goddess Ramā, vibrates His flute as He tends the cows in
the company of Balarāma.]

You should learn other ślokas as well, from Veṇu-gīta,
Gopī-gīta, and Bhramara-gīta.

Especially, there are three very good ślokas which were
uttered when Kṛṣṇa went to Kurukṣetra and met with the
gopīs there:


gopyaś ca kṛṣṇam upalabhya cirād abhīṣṭaṁ

yat-prekṣaṇe dṛśiṣu pakṣma-kṛtaṁ śapanti

dṛgbhir hṛdī-kṛtam alaṁ parirabhya sarvās

tad-bhāvam āpur api nitya-yujāṁ durāpam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.82.39)


[While gazing at their beloved Kṛṣṇa, the young gopīs

                            116
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

used to condemn the creator of their eyelids [which
would momentarily block their vision of Him]. Now,
seeing Kṛṣṇa again after such a long separation, with
their eyes they took Him into their hearts, and there
they embraced Him to their full satisfaction. In this
way they became totally absorbed in ecstatic meditation
on Him, although those who constantly practice mystic
yoga find such absorption difficult to achieve.]

mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām

amṛtatvāya kalpate

diṣṭyā yad āsīn mat-sneho

bhavatīnāṁ mad-āpanaḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.82.44)


[Rendering devotional service to Me qualifies any living
being for eternal life. But by your good fortune you
have developed a special loving attitude toward Me by
which you have obtained Me.]

āhuś ca te nalina-nābha padāravindaṁ

yogeśvarair hṛdi vicintyam agādha-bodhaiḥ

saṁsāra-kūpa-patitottaraṇāvalambaṁ

gehaṁ juṣām api manasy udiyāt sadā naḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.82.48)


[The gopīs spoke thus: Dear Lord whose navel is just
like a lotus flower, Your lotus feet are the only
shelter for those who have fallen into the deep well of
material existence. Your feet are worshiped and
meditated upon by great mystic yogīs and highly learned
philosophers. We wish that these lotus feet may also be
awakened within our hearts, although we are only
ordinary persons engaged in household affairs.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Bās [That’s all for today].

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It’s time for wheatgrass juice.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

How do you remember all these ślokas? You know so many
ślokas.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is only by the mercy of my Gurudeva.




                            117
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017



April 22, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.47.61

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is today’s śloka?

[Each student recites the verse, one by one]


āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām


[The gopīs of Vṛndāvana have given up the association of
their husbands, sons, and other family members, who are
very difficult to give up, and they have forsaken the
path of chastity to serve the lotus feet of Mukunda,
Kṛṣṇa, which one should search for by Vedic knowledge.
Oh, let me be fortunate enough to be one of the bushes,
creepers, or herbs in Vṛndāvana, because the gopīs
trample them and bless them with the dust of their lotus
feet.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

The gopīs’ fortune has no limit; their great fortune is
endless. If I can just become a creeper, grass or herb,
so that I can serve the dust of their lotus feet, this
will be my great fortune.The gopīs have given up all
objects of attachment that are very difficult to give
up, like their fathers, husbands, and sons, and they
have also given up the paths of dharma (moral religious
principles), and maryādā (social etiquette). They have
thus attained Kṛṣṇa, who is glorified by all of the
śrutis (Vedic scriptures). If I can place myself under
their lotus feet, I will consider my life successful.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of śrutibhir vimṛgyām?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

What the Śrutis are trying to obtain.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The śrutis are searching for that padavīm (the lotus

                             118
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

feet) of the gopīs, but they still have not attained it.

[Brajanāth dāsa explains the verse.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Giving up their chastity, shame, husbands, and all other
relations, the gopīs have taken shelter at the lotus
feet of Kṛṣṇa. Is that what you told?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes, they have completely taken shelter.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

So are they like Arjuna – only taking shelter?

Brajanāth dāsa:

They know only Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By their constant loving services, they have controlled
Kṛṣṇa. This should be stated; not that they have ‘taken
shelter.’ So many bhaktas have taken shelter, but this
is not the gopīs’ speciality. By their upapati-bhava
(parakīya mood) they serve Kṛṣṇa so exclusively that He
is controlled by them. That is what the Śrutis are
searching, but have still not found.

[To Vṛndā-devī dāsī] You.

[Vṛndā-devī dāsī explains the verse]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

[To Vṛndāvana dāsa] What is the purport? Why is Uddhava
praying like this? What wonderful things did he see?

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

He is realizing the level of prema possessed by the
gopīs.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How did he realize this?

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

He realized this because although their character is
spotless, they gave up their chastity and religious
principles.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No. He heard Brahmāra-gīta from the mouth of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and in this way he understood something of the
nature of madanākhya-mahābhāva. He thought, “I cannot
achieve this. I can desire it, and all the munis (sages)

                            119
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

desire it, but we can never attain it.” Astonished, he
then prayed through this verse.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Uddhavajī heard Brahmāra-gīta at Uddhava-kyārī, but he
is uttering this prayer at Kusuma-sarovara.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He prayed in Uddhava-kyārī, and then he became grass
near Śyāma-kuti [near Kusuma-sarovara].

Brajanāth dāsa:

But when he was by Uddhava-kuṇḍa [near Rādhā-kuṇḍa] with
all the Dvārakā queens…2

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Govardhana is near to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and Kusuma-sarovara
is also near there; so he thought, “I want to be grass
at Kusuma-sarovara.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

When you first taught us this śloka, you said, “Why is
Uddhava praying to become grass, an herb or a bush? The
answer is that if he were to become a big tree, that
tree might not receive the dust of the gopīs’ feet, as
the dust would not go so high. However if he takes birth
as grass, or as an herb, or a bush, he would be able to
easily bathe in their foot-dust.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Tomorrow’s verse:


yā vai śriyārcitam ajādibhir āpta-kāmair

yogeśvarair api yad ātmani rāsa-goṣṭhyām

kṛṣṇasya tad bhagavataḥ caraṇāravindaṁ

nyastaṁ staneṣu vijahuḥ parirabhya tāpam

(Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.47.62)


[The goddess of fortune herself, along with Lord Brahmā
and all the other demigods, who are masters of yogic
perfection, can worship the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa only
within their minds. However, during the rāsa-dance Lord
Kṛṣṇa placed His feet upon these gopīs’ breasts, and by
embracing those feet the gopīs gave up all distress.]

What is the symptom of a guru-sevaka, a true servant of
guru?

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

He has no ambition in life but to serve śrī gurudeva.


                            120
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Brajanāth dāsa:

He follows the order of gurudeva, and he does not
associate with anyone who does not follow gurudeva’s
order.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is the main consideration. He maintains friendship
with only those who are serving śrī gurudeva; he
maintains a bosom friendship with them. With regard to
those who disobey or have no service mood, he remains
very far.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Once you told us that during the solar eclipse at
Kurukṣetra, the queens of Dvārakā asked Draupadī, “We
are 16,108 queens, yet we cannot control Kṛṣṇa; whereas
you control your five husbands, and also Kṛṣṇa. Do you
know any black magic?” Draupadī said, “No, I don’t know
any black magic. I love only those who love the
Pāṇḍavas, and I never speak with those who are inimical
to the Pāṇḍavas. This is how I control them.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

“If someone loves the Pāṇḍavas, I love him. Otherwise, I
have no relation with him.”

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, if a person has no relationship with śrī
guru, we should not have any relationship with him?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You may relate with anyone in a general way, but do not
have a bosom friendship with those who don’t obey
gurudeva – who have other ambitions and who don’t want
to serve. By their contaminated association their
qualities will come to you, and then you will also
become disobedient to your gurudeva.

Lakṣmī-devī dāsī:

May I ask a question about the śloka? Why would the
gopīs not want to give their foot-dust? Are they just
shy, or do they think that Uddhava is more exalted than
them?”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is not written anywhere that Uddhava wanted to
approach the gopīs and personally take their foot-dust.
He always thought, “I am unqualified to directly take
the dust of their feet.” He prayed for their foot-dust
from afar, not in person.

Brajanāth dāsa:

You have said that when Uddhavajī saw the height of the
gopīs’ love, his cap fell off.


                            121
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, I gave that analogy. When someone goes to Mount
Everest with a cap on his head, his cap falls off when
he lifts his head to look up at the top.


satāṁ prasaṅgam mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj josanad asvapvarga vartmani

sraddha ratir bhakti anukramisyati

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.25)


[In the exalted association of pure devotees, the
recitation and discussions of My glorious pastimes
become a rejuvenating nectar to both the heart and the
ears. By such cultivation one quickly becomes liberated
from the ignorance of material bondage. He then
progressively attains sraddha (sadhana-bhakti), rati
(bhava-bhakti), and bhakti (prema-bhakti) unto Me.]

In the association of sadhus (satam), those who serve
Śrī Kṛṣṇa purely, very powerful hari-kathā is always
discussed. Those who sink in the stream of that hari-
kathā will attain sādhana-bhakti, then bhāva-bhakti, and
then prema-bhakti. There is no other way.


‘sādhu-saṅga’, ‘sādhu-saṅga’ – sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.54)


[The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that through
even a moment’s association with a sādhu, a pure
devotee, one can attain complete spiritual perfection.]

There was a low-class boy named Ekalavya, who wanted to
learn archery from Droṇācārya; at that time Droṇācārya
was the best archer in the world. Droṇācārya refused to
teach him, because he knew that Ekalavya was against
Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. Despite Droṇācārya’s refusal to teach
him, Ekalavya made a statue of Droṇācārya and began to
learn archery by offering that statue praṇāma.

One day, Droṇācārya, along with the five Pāṇḍavas and a
dog, went to the forest where Ekalavya was living. When
the dog heard the sounds of archery and the voice of
Ekalavya, it began to bark. At once the dog’s mouth
became full of arrows, although there was no scratch or
injury.

Seeing this, the Pāṇḍavas thought, “Who shot those
arrows?” They went searching, and finally they saw
Ekalavya.

Droṇācārya asked Ekalavya, “From where have you learned

                          122
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

archery?”

Ekalavya replied, “I have learned it from you,
Gurudeva.”

Droṇācārya asked. “Now that you have become very expert,
have you given me any dakṣiṇa?”

“No, Master.”

“You must give me dakṣiṇa.”

“What do you want?”

“I want the thumb of your right hand.”

Ekalavya at once cut off his right thumb and gave it to
Droṇācārya.

ISKCON leaders name their disciples Ekalavya, but we
never do this. Why? Droṇācārya knew that Ekalavya was
disobedient. He thought, “If I tell him, ‘Don’t be
inimical to Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna,’ he will not obey me.”
Ekalavya wanted to learn archery only to kill Kṛṣṇa and
Arjuna.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Many persons think that Ekalavya is glorious because he
gave up his thumb. They think that he followed the order
of his Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Droṇācārya refused him, saying, “I will not teach you
archery, and don’t try to practice it.” But he did it
nevertheless. In the end he tried to fight with Kṛṣṇa,
and Kṛṣṇa killed him with His cakra.




April 23, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.47.62

[The śloka students recite the verse, one by one:]


yā vai śriyārcitam ajādibhir āpta-kāmair

yogeśvarair api yad ātmani rāsa-goṣṭhyām

kṛṣṇasya tad bhagavataḥ caraṇāravindaṁ

nyastaṁ staneṣu vijahuḥ parirabhya tāpam


[The goddess of fortune herself, along with Lord Brahmā
and all the other demigods, who are masters of yogic

                             123
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

perfection, can worship the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa only
within their minds. But during the rāsa dance Lord Kṛṣṇa
placed His feet upon these gopīs’ breasts, and by
embracing those feet the gopīs gave up all the distress
caused by their feelings of separation.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Brajanāth dāsa] Not fluent.

Brajanāth dāsa:

I could only say two lines fluently.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Brajanāth dāsa:

I can only say and understand the general meaning. It
says that the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī, and even
Brahmā…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And all the demigods.

Brajanāth dāsa:

And even those demigods who have attained mystic powers,
can only worship the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa by their
minds. But these gopīs embraced the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa
during the rāsa festival, and they placed them upon
their breasts so that all of their distress was gone.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Distress?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Hrd-roga kāma-tāpa, meaning ‘the warmness of…’

Acyutānanda dāsa:

The heat of lust.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Acyutānanda dāsa] You explain.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet are worshiped by Śrī Lakṣmī-devī,
Lord Brahmā, those who are āptakāma (self-satisfied),
and the yogīs; but only within their minds.

The gopīs hearts are burning in the heat of separation
from Kṛṣṇa; so during the rāsa dance, by keeping His

                          124
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

lotus feet on their breasts, the gopīs became completely
relieved from the heat of separation from Him.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

[To Vṛndāvana dāsa] What is the purport?

[Vṛndāvana dāsa explains the verse.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the specialty of the gopīs?

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

There is almost no limit to their prema.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the specialty of the gopīs in this śloka?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yesterday you said that the gopīs can control Kṛṣṇa. So
by their desire to please Kṛṣṇa, they are even able…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Brahmā and Lakṣmī cannot even attain the lotus feet of
Kṛṣṇa in their meditation. The gopīs are so fortunate
that those very feet, which do not come in the
meditation of Lord Brahmā and Lakṣmī-devī, rest on their
breasts and remove their burning separation.

This is tomorrow’s verse:


vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ

pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ

punāti bhuvana-trayam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.47.63)


[I repeatedly offer my respects to the dust from the
feet of the women of Nanda Mahārāja’s cowherd village.
When these gopīs loudly chant the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the vibration purifies the three worlds.]

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, in this śloka, is it that the gopīs are
taking Kṛṣṇa’s feet, or is He personally placing His
feet on their breasts?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They take His lotus feet. He is somewhat shy, and

                            125
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

therefore hesitates.




April 25, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.82.39

[The śloka students each recite the verse:]


gopyaś ca kṛṣṇam upalabhya cirād abhīṣṭaṁ

yat-prekṣaṇe dṛśiṣu pakṣma-kṛtaṁ śapanti

dṛgbhir hṛdī-kṛtam alaṁ parirabhya sarvās

tad-bhāvam āpur api nitya-yujāṁ durāpam


[While gazing at their beloved Kṛṣṇa, the young gopīs
used to condemn the creator of their eyelids [which
would momentarily block their vision of Him]. Now,
seeing Kṛṣṇa again after such a long separation, with
their eyes they took Him into their hearts, and there
they embraced Him to their full satisfaction. In this
way they became totally absorbed in ecstatic meditation
on Him, although those who constantly practice mystic
yoga find such absorption difficult to achieve.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

[Each student explains the verse.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of cirat?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

It means that ‘after a long time’ the gopīs again had
darśana of their beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

‘After a long time’ means after fifty, or maybe one-
hundred years.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

In this śloka, the gopīs meet with Kṛṣṇa in Kurukṣetra
after a long, long time. When they all arrived from
Vraja, at first Yaśodā-maiyā, Nanda Bābā, and Baladeva
Prabhu were present with Kṛṣṇa, and meanwhile the gopīs’
life airs were about to leave them. Yaśodā-maiyā
understood this fact, and therefore she made some excuse
for everyone else to leave and go elsewhere. The gopīs

                             126
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

and Kṛṣṇa then met.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When Kṛṣṇa saw that the gopīs were feeling an intense
separation mood, He wanted to console them. He thus
uttered this śloka, which we will all learn for
tomorrow.


mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām

amṛtatvāya kalpate

diṣṭyā yad āsīn mat-sneho

bhavatīnāṁ mad-āpanaḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.82.44)


[Rendering devotional service to Me qualifies a living
being for eternal life. But by your good fortune you
have developed a special loving attitude toward Me by
which you have obtained Me.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, were the gopīs only cursing Brahmājī
before, in Vṛndāvana [when Kṛṣṇa would return from the
forest in the evenings], or were they cursing Brahmājī
in Kurukṣetra also?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They cursed him in Vṛndāvana, and Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī
referred to this when he described the meeting of Kṛṣṇa
and the gopīs in Kurukṣetra. They cursed Brahmā in two
ways: for giving them only two eyes, and for giving them
eyelids; moreover when tears would come, again they
could not see Kṛṣṇa. So they declared, “Fie on us!”

If you want to know the meaning of these Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam verses, you will have to read Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā, Chapter 13), where we find very
long and clear explanations.




April 28, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrī Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 13.122

[Acyutānanda dāsa recites Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
śloka which, quoted from Sāhitya-darpaṇa and uttered by
Mahāprabhu at the Ratha-yātrā festival, was later
recorded in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā
13.121):]


                            127
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017


yaḥ kaumāra-haraḥ sa eva hi varas tā eva caitra-kṣapās

te conmīlita-mālatī-surabhayaḥ prauḍhāḥ kadambānilāḥ

sā caivāsmi tathāpi tatra surata-vyāpāra-līlā-vidhau

revā-rodhasi vetasī-taru-tale cetaḥ samutkaṇṭhate


[That very personality who stole away my heart during my
youth is now again my master. These are the same moonlit
nights of the month of Caitra. The same fragrance of
mālatī flowers is there, and the same sweet breezes are
blowing from the kadamba forest. In our intimate
relationship, I am also the same lover, yet my mind is
not happy here. I am eager to go back to that place on
the bank of the Revā under the Vetasī tree. That is my
desire.]

[Brajanāth dāsa, Madhuvrata dāsa, and Acyutānanda dāsa
recite this parallel verse (below), which was written by
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in order to express Mahāprabhu’s
inner moods as He chanted the verse above. In the verse
composed by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is
speaking the following words:]


priyaḥ so ’yaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ saha-cari kuru-kṣetra-militas

tathāhaṁ sā rādhā tad idam ubhayoḥ saṅgama-sukham

tathāpy antaḥ-khelan-madhura-muralī-pañcama-juṣe

mano me kālindī-pulina-vipināya spṛhayati

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 13.122)


[My dear friend, now I have met My very old and dear
friend Kṛṣṇa on this field of Kurukṣetra. I am the same
Rādhārāṇī, and now We are meeting together. It is very
pleasant, but still I would like to go to the bank of
the Yamunā beneath the trees of the forest there. I wish
to hear the vibration of His sweet flute playing the
fifth note within that forest of Vṛndāvana.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Thank you for remembering. Nowadays it is very hard to
remember new things. Very good.

What is the meaning?

[Brajanāth dāsa, Madhuvrata dāsa, Acyutānanda dāsa, and
Vṛndāvana dāsa explain the meaning.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Vṛndā-devī dāsī] If you don’t know the śloka, no
harm. What is the purport?

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:


                          128
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

I know the śloka a little bit.

[After reciting the śloka:]

This śloka is quoted in Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Padyāvalī,
and it describes Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s meeting with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in Kurukṣetra. When She saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa there, She
remembered Him in Vṛndāvana, where, in the rays of the
moonlight, She and He used to meet and have such a good
time. But now She is meeting Him in Kurukṣetra.

When Mahāprabhu, in the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, was
dancing at the Ratha-yātrā festival, He remembered this
instance of Her meeting with Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra and
recited that śloka. Except for Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who had come that year to the Ratha-
yātrā festival, no one understood Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s mood.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote down a parallel śloka on a palm
leaf, which he put on the top of his roof when he went
to take bath in the ocean. When Śrīman Mahāprabhu came
to meet him, He saw the leaf and read the śloka. He was
amazed that Śrī Rūpa had understood His moods. He
blessed Rūpa Gosvāmī by imbibing in him all the
knowledge needed to preach His inner moods throughout
the world.

In this śloka Śrīmatī Rādhikā tells Her sakhīs, “O
sakhīs, now, after so many years of separation, I am
meeting the Lord of My life, My Kṛṣṇa. I am that same
Rādhā and He is that same Kṛṣṇa. Although it is very
nice to meet Him, My heart is not happy to be here.
There is so much opulence here; so many elephants,
horses, armies, family members, and especially the
queens. We cannot meet freely as We did in Vṛndāvana.

“I want Kṛṣṇa to come in My heart, which is non-
different from Vṛndāvana. I want to take Him on a
chariot and bring Him back to Vṛndāvana, where I can
please Him in all ways.

“He can be so happy there. He can wear His peacock
feather, and He can play the fifth note on His muralī
flute which attracts everyone in Vṛndāvana. We gopīs
will be able to spend time with Him on the banks of the
Yamunā, where we can serve and please Him to His heart’s
desire. We know that He is not happy here in Kurukṣetra.
He really wants to be in Vṛndāvana, so We want to bring
Him back.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. She explained this so well.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

How is it possible for Śrīman Mahāprabhu to taste rasa
by quoting a worldly poem? Are examples from the
material world okay for describing spiritual matters?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Of course no material words or examples are perfect, but

                          129
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

unless an example is given of the moods of love in
separation in this world, no one would be able to
understand the nature of kṛṣṇa-prema.

In India there is a class of people known as Santal. One
male among them stands in the middle, and many females
surround him on all sides with musical instruments in
their hands. They sing kīrtana, sometimes moving
forward, sometimes backwards; sometimes the male sings,
sometimes the females sing. We say, “It is like rāsa-
līlā – they are singing, dancing, and playing
instruments.” Actually, is it possible for this display
to be compared with Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā? How many rāgas
and rāgiṇīs3 do they know? Although we may say that it
is something like rāsa-līlā, this is far from a perfect
analogy.

If we say, “Rādhājī is beautiful. Her face is like the
moon,” what do we mean by this comparison? Is Her face
like the moon? Do we feel some pleasure in comparing Her
face to the moon?

The faces of females are very beautiful, so much more so
than the face of the moon. The moon cannot attract
anyone as well as ladies can. Men don’t want to marry
the moon; they want to marry only beautiful ladies.
Still, the comparison is given that Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
face resembles the moon.

One more thing: pañcama-juṣe in this second verse
indicates that during rāsa-līlā Kṛṣṇa was singing in the
fifth (pañcama) note and the gopīs were singing in the
seventh note, the last note. Kṛṣṇa was not able to reach
that last note, so He congratulated the gopīs by saying,
“Sādhu, sādhu! Well done, well done!”

He and the gopīs performed varieties of dancing during
rāsa-līlā, and all the rāsa-līlā moods are present in
this śloka by the words pañcama-juṣe. Kṛṣṇa sings while
the gopīs dance, and the gopīs sing while Kṛṣṇa dances.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Gurudeva, this śloka mentions Kṛṣṇa’s muralī flute.
Kṛṣṇa has different kinds of flutes, so what is the
specific quality of the muralī flute?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The muralī flute4 plays many tunes. Kṛṣṇa can reach up
to the fifth note on that flute, and the gopīs can sing
to the seventh note. Kṛṣṇa then exclaims, “Oh, sādhu,
sādhu!”




May 2, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.4, 6

                             130
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


[Śrīla Gurudeva called on the devotees present to recite
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam verses 1.7.4 and 1.7.6 in Sanskrit,
and then to explain the verses in English.]


bhakti-yogena manasi

samyak praṇihite ’male

apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ

māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.4)


[He fixed his mind, perfectly engaging it by linking it
in devotional service (bhakti-yoga) without any tinge of
materialism, and thus he saw the Absolute Personality of
Godhead along with His external energy, which was under
full control.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Despite having written so many scriptures, like Brahma-
sutra, the Purāṇas, Mahābhārata, and Bhagavad-gītā,
Śrīla Vyāsadeva was feeling despondent. At that time his
Guru Mahārāja, Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi, appeared, and he asked
him, “You are my Guru Mahārāja. Why do I feel like
this?”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

“I am not satisfied.”

Brajanāth dāsa:

Nārada Ṛṣi took his pulse and said...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He did not really take his pulse; he knew.

Brajanāth dāsa:

He could understand.

Nārada Ṛṣi said, “You have written so many books to help
everyone; to make them all understand who the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is and what creation is. But have
you written anywhere that Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead? Have you written that
His mother binds and chastizes Him? Have you written
about Kṛṣṇa sitting on the shoulders of Śrīdama and
playing like an ordinary human being?

“Kṛṣṇa and Śrīdama were wrestling. Having won the
wrestling match, Śrīdama sat upon the chest of Kṛṣṇa and
claimed victory. Kṛṣṇa refuted this, saying, ‘No, no, I

                            131
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

am victorious. I am the winner, because My nose is up
and yours is down.’ Have you written about this? Śrīla
Vyāsadeva said, ‘No Gurudeva, I have not.’ ”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

“Have you written that although Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Lord, He danced with the gopīs?”

Brajanāth dāsa:

Śrīla Vyāsadeva replied, “I have not written this
anywhere.”

Nārada Ṛṣi then said, “You should enter into meditation,
and then all these pastimes will be automatically
revealed in your heart. You should write all these
glories for the benefit of the world. Then you will be
happy.”

At that time Śrīla Vyāsadeva entered into meditation –
bhakti-yogena manasi – concentrating fully on the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then, he directly saw
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in his meditation,
with all the Lord’s energies, including all living
entities and the entire spiritual world.

At that time he realized that…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He also saw Mother Yaśodā binding Kṛṣṇa. He saw Kṛṣṇa
performing rāsa and so many other pastimes. He saw all
this.

Brajanāth dāsa:

In his meditation.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Directly; as a darśana.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[Gesturing toward Madhuvrata dāsa] And you?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

By the mercy of Śrī Nārada Muni and the power of bhakti-
yoga, Śrīla Vyāsadeva saw in his samādhi (trance) the
puruṣaṁ-pūrṇaṁ, the complete Personality of Godhead,
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, with His multifarious
śaktis, or potencies.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is that śakti?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

                          132
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Rādhā pūrṇa-śakti, Kṛṣṇa pūrṇa-śaktimān – Rādhā is
Kṛṣṇa’s complete potency, and Kṛṣṇa is the complete
potent Lord. Vyāsadeva saw the original Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Not Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā Mātā?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

He saw them also.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And all the sakhās?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And the sweet pastimes?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Top to bottom?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

But Brajanāth and Acyutānanda prabhus have already said
this. So I am saying some special thing, which is that
because he saw Kṛṣṇa in His complete form, it must also
be true that he saw Rādhikā. He also saw māyā, the
shadow of…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If Śrīmatī Rādhikā is present, but Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā,
and the sakhās are not, is He complete? And if Kṛṣṇa is
there, and all other associates are there, but there are
no pastimes, is He still pūrṇa-puruṣa (the complete,
Supreme Personality of Godhead)?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

All these must be combined; then He is pūrṇa-puruṣa.
These pastimes include even dvārakā-līlā. They include
rāsa-līlā and the pastime of Kṛṣṇa offering His flute at
the feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and begging for Her
forgiveness. They include all of the sweet pastimes of
His Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:


                          133
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

Here it is described that Vyāsadeva engaged in bhakti-
yoga perfectly, without any material contamination –
samyak praṇihite ’male – without touching any of the
modes of material nature. Samyak means ‘perfectly.’
Praṇihite ranitah means that he engaged his mind
perfectly in bhakti-yoga, and the result was that he saw
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and all of His complete śaktis (potencies). He
also saw māyā-śakti5, and that māyā-śakti was fully
under His

control.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

She was behind Him. Why? Because she felt some shame.
She was thinking, “I am giving trouble to…

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

The living entities.

It is also described that this māyā-śakti is always far
away from the spiritual world.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Where there is no Kṛṣṇa, there is māyā.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

Where there is sunlight, there is no darkness. The
significance of this is that when we take shelter of the
Supreme Lord, māyā is very far away.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

(To Vṛndāvana dāsa) You? What is the purport?

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

They have told everything, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

But yet…

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

There is nothing left.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

But what have you understood?

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

In this verse, Vyāsadeva has been inspired by Nārada Ṛṣi
to meditate on the Supreme Lord. By pure meditation, he
is seeing the Personality of Godhead. He is seeing the
Personality beyond Brahmān and Paramātmā, and he is
seeing the līlās of the Lord. Also, he is seeing the
material energy that is some distance to the Lord.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                          134
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017


Some distance; but from behind, not in front.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

He is seeing that the Lord is in complete control of
that material energy.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

If Śrīla Vyāsadeva had darśana of Kṛṣṇa and His
pastimes, then he must be at the stage of prema. Is that
correct?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes. Without prema, how could he have related rāsa-līlā,
Gopī-gīta, Veṇu-gīta, and Brahmāra-gīta? He also taught
this to Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, so he must have
realization of mādhurya-rasa.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

If Śrīla Vyāsadeva was in prema, did he get prema after
he met with Nārada Ṛṣi, or did he always have it?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Śrīla Vyāsadeva is personally a manifestation of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, and therefore he does not have very much
realization of the prema of the devotees. His guru told
him to realize this; this is the mercy of Gurudeva. By
the mercy of his Gurudeva he entered samādhi, and then
he realized who is Kṛṣṇa, who are the attendants of
Kṛṣṇa, and what are His śaktis. He saw everything –
rāsa-līlā, dvārakā-līlā, and all other līlās – and then
he composed Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Vyāsadeva is Kṛṣṇa’s śaktyāveśa-avatāra (empowered
incarnation). Showing the glory of sad-guru, what to
speak of Vyāsadeva, who is a śaktyāveśa-avatāra, even
Maryādā-Puruṣottama Lord Rāmacandra demonstrated that He
had to take initiation from Vasiṣṭha Ṛṣi, Līlā-
Puruṣottama Śrī Kṛṣṇa was initiated from Bhāguri Ṛṣi,
and Prema-Puruṣottama Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu took
initiation from Īśvara Purī. This śloka shows the glory
of the bona fide guru.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Nārada is a bhakta and Vyāsadeva is a manifestation of
Bhagavān; but even so, Nārada Muni is Vyasa’s Gurudeva.
This is a very amazing thing, as Mādhava Mahārāja
explained. Kṛṣṇa is Svayam Bhagavān, the original
Supreme Lord, but He took initiation from Bhāguri Ṛṣi,
and Śrīman Mahāprabhu took initiation from Īśvara Purī.

For tomorrow, I request you all to learn this śloka:


yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ


                            135
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ

śoka-moha-bhayāpahā

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.7)

[To Rādhā dāsī] Can you explain these ślokas as they
did?

Rādhā dāsī:

Explain all this? No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You cannot? If you want to preach, then you will have to
learn all these ślokas. These devotees will become
better preachers than me. I will be very happy when my
sons and daughters become better than me.

Rādhā dāsī:

Impossible.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Today is the appearance of Sītā-devī and Jāhnavā-devī in
the Hawaii local calendar.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, thank you.

Yamunā-prasāda, do you read my books?

Yamunā-prasāda dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I think not.

Yamunā-prasāda dāsa:

Not enough.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You must read.

Yamunā-prasāda dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

First read Jaiva-dharma and Bhagavad-gītā.

Yamunā-prasāda dāsa:

I have read Jaiva-dharma, somewhat.

                            136
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

You have Jaiva-dharma. I know that you have all of my
books, but you should read them.

Yamunā-prasāda dāsa:

Yes, I will. Thank you.




May 3, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.7


yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ

kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ

śoka-moha-bhayāpahā


[Simply by giving aural reception to this Vedic
literature, the feeling for loving devotional service to
Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sprouts
up at once to extinguish the fire of lamentation,
illusion, and fear.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[After hearing the above-mentioned Sanskrit verse
uttered by Brajanāth dāsa, Rādhā-kānta dāsa, Vṛndā-devī
dāsī, Rādhā dāsī, Kṛṣṇa-bhāminī dāsī, and Rati-kalā
dāsī] Rati-kalā has defeated her husband, Rādhā-kānta.

[Kṛṣṇa-bhāminī dāsī explains the meaning of the verse.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. Can Kṛṣṇa-bhāminī’s husband Vrajeśa speak
like her?

[To Vrajeśa dāsa] She can teach you.

[Now Vrajeśa dāsa explains the verse.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Her explanation was better.

Vrajeśa dāsa:

Much better. She is doing a good job of teaching.

[Rati-kalā dāsī explains the verse.]

                           137
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. You and Rādhā-kānta prabhu are preaching here
and there. Kṛṣṇa-bhāminī and her husband Vrajeśa are
perhaps also preaching?

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

They preach so much.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Kṛṣṇa-bhāminī dāsī and Vrajeśa dāsa] You must
preach. This is bhakti.

Now, another śloka.

[Śrīla Gurudeva leads his students in chanting the śloka
below.]


tasmin mahan-mukharitā madhubhic-caritra-

pīyūṣa-śeṣa-saritaḥ paritaḥ sravanti

tā ye pibanty avitṛṣo nṛpa gāḍha-karṇais

tān na spṛśanty aśana-tṛḍ-bhaya-śoka-mohāḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.29.40)


[My dear King, in the place where pure devotees live,
following the rules and regulations and thus purely
conscious and engaged with great eagerness in hearing
and chanting the glories of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, in that place if one gets a chance to hear
their constant flow of nectar, which is exactly like the
waves of a river, one will forget the necessities of
life – namely hunger and thirst – and become immune to
all kinds of fear, lamentation, and illusion.]

The meaning of this śloka is like that of the previous
one. For tomorrow you should all learn this one, but
most of you won’t be here tomorrow.

[To Rādhā dāsī] Try to learn more ślokas, and preach
everywhere like the Gaṅgāmātās.




* * *




1 Nagara-saṅkīrtana – public chanting of the mahā-mantra
and other devotional songs, usually done in a procession
through a city or village.


                          138
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017



2 An excerpt from Śrī Vraja Maṇḍala Parikramā, Part2,
Chapter 7:


“This kuṇḍa [Uddhava-kuṇḍa] is situated exactly west of
Kusuma-sarovara on the right side of the parikramā path.
The Skanda Purāṇa, quoted in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Māhātmya,
gives a very interesting description of this place.
Vajranābha Mahārāja manifested Uddhava-kuṇḍa under the
guidance of Śāṇḍilya and other ṛṣis. Uddhavajī always
resides here as grass and shrubs in order to be
sprinkled by the foot-dust of the gopīs. After the
disappearance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, His queens in Dvārakā were
greatly afflicted by sorrow. Once, Vajranābhajī came
here with them, and they performed a very loud
saṅkīrtana. In that mahā-saṅkīrtana, all the parikāras
of Kṛṣṇa started to appear one by one. The parikāras of
Dvārakā all began to sing kīrtana and dance in the
saṅkīrtana maṇḍala, and Arjuna began to dance and play
mṛdaṅga. Suddenly, the mahā-bhāgavata Uddhava emerged
from the grass and shrubs, and he also became immersed
in dancing. How could Kṛṣṇa now remain behind when this
mahā-saṅkīrtana was taking place? In that mahā-
saṅkīrtana rāsa, Kṛṣṇa finally also appeared along with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the other sakhīs and, after some
time, disappeared again. Uddhavajī thus pacified the
queens at this place.”




3 Rāgas and rāgiṇīs are rhythms, tunes, modulations of
the voice, etc.



4 “Kṛṣṇa has three kinds of flutes: vaṁśī, veṇu, and
muralī. The veṇu is twelve fingers long and as thick as
a thumb, and it has six holes. The muralī is two hands
in length and has four finger-holes, besides the hole in
the mouthpiece. The vaṁśī is seventeen fingers long and
has a clear space of three finger-widths at the tail
end. At the head end of the flute is another space of
four finger-widths, which is also clear, except for the
hole for blowing, which is half a finger’s width from
the end. In the middle is a space containing eight
finger-holes separated from each other by a gap of half
a finger’s width. The vaṁśī therefore has a total of
nine holes.” (Jaiva-Dharma Chapter 26)



5 Māyā-śakti is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s illusory potency, which
creates bewilderment and is responsible for the
manifestation of the material world, time, and material
activities.




                          139
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

May 7, 2009


Morning Walk

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: We now have five children in our school. We are
starting classes with them. We are teaching them
Upadeṣāmṛta.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: More children should come – more than thirty or forty
children. It will be good if you can create a school
here, like the one in Badger.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: Okay, Gurudeva.

Nirguṇa dāsa

: This is Rick. He has come to see you.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: My blessings to you. May you be happy.

Who will be Prahlāda?

Śrīdhāma dāsa

: We have two Prahlādas. For tonight we have a boy named
Cakra, who is a very good actor.

Brajanāth dāsa

: How old is he?

Śrīdhāma dāsa

: He is eleven years old.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Is he better or the same as Govinda-priya?

Śrīdhāma dāsa

: Who can be as good as Govinda-priya? He is eleven
years old, but he is good. He is really good.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: The drama today is about Jaya-Vijaya?

Śrīdhāma dāsa

: Two black boys are going to play the roles of Jaya-
Vijaya – big black boys. And we have big golden clubs
for them that are going to be good for the play.

Śrīla Gurudeva

                            140
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


: Your drama will be performed today?

Śrīdhāma dāsa

: Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: At about what time?

Śrīdhāma dāsa

: Any time between four and eight – whenever you end
your class.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: We will speak up to the point where Prahlāda Mahārāja
instructs the boys, and after that you can begin the
drama play.

Śrīdhāma dāsa

: We’ll be ready, Gurudeva. We’ll be ready.

This time we will have an elephant to lift Prahlāda,
which will be made of three people under a big cloth.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: You are a good player.

Śrīdhāma dāsa

: For you, Gurudeva. I am your dancing monkey. I love
that.

Gopa-vṛnda-pāla dāsa

: You said that today you will speak up to Prahlāda
teaching his classmates. Will you speak more tomorrow?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: The drama will complete the evening. Tomorrow we will
speak on some other topic.

Śrīdhāma dāsa

: Tomorrow the drama will be very short, with no
narration.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: You can show any other teachings of Prahlāda Mahārāja.

[To Rick] Do you know that one day you will become old?
Can all the doctors and scientists combine together and
stop your old age?

Rick

: No.

                           141
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva

: Then, after some days, you will have to give up this
body. Will any doctor be able to help you at that time?

Rick

: No.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: When you die, will you be able to take even a penny
with you from this world?

Rick

: No.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Nothing? Will you be able to take your sister,
brother, father, mother, or son with you?

Rick

: No.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Then why are you so busy hankering in this world for
money – day and night – like a donkey? Why? If you
cannot take even a penny with you, then why are you
doing all these things? You should know that you are not
your body; you will give it up.

But your soul is transcendental, and the Supersoul, who
is greater than the individual soul, has all powers. The
Supersoul can demolish the whole universe in a second,
and He can create millions of universes. He has
mercifully given us this human body. Only in this human
body can you realize that, “I am not this body, I am
soul.”

And soul is the eternal servant of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Without this understanding,
again you will become a donkey, monkey, pig, hog, fish,
etc. Do you eat meat?

Rick

: No.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Very good. Don’t eat meat. Otherwise, M-E-A-T. Me-eat.
Whom you are eating will take revenge and eat you. Don’t
eat meat or eggs, don’t take wine, and don’t smoke – and
be happy. Thank you.

Ajaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: Gurudeva, Rick met Tridaṇḍī Mahārāja at my house last
year. He wanted to take initiation last year.

                          142
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


[To Rick] Then you decided to do it another time?

Rick

: I took initiation over the phone.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: You have taken harināma?

Rick

: Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Oh, I remember.

Ajaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: He does not have a name, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: No name? What is your name?

Rick

: My birth name is Rick.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Your new name is Rādhā-ramana. Please attend our
classes.

Radha-ramana dāsa

: I will.




May 8, 2009


Morning Walk

Nirguna dāsa

: I was reading in Brahma-saṁhitā that personalities
known as Sādhyas and Viśvadevas guard the ten directions
around Goloka (the outer region of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s supreme
abode). I was wondering if those divine personalities
who are outside Goloka, guarding the ten directions,
have vision of vraja-līlā. Do they see Vṛndāvana?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: They may see. There are so many pastimes on the
outskirts of Kṛṣṇa’s abode where they are guarding.
Goloka is the vaibhava, or opulence manifestation, of
Gokula (the inner region of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s supreme abode),

                             143
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

where only aiśvarya (opulence) prevails […]

When Nanda Bābā, his brother Upānanda, and all the other
gopas were shown Goloka, they saw its great opulence.
They saw so many Brahmās and other demigods who were all
folding their palms and praying to Kṛṣṇa. Nanda Bābā and
Upānanda had no time to even say, “Oh, my Kṛṣṇa.” There
was no time for Kṛṣṇa to ask them to feed Him. Nanda
Bābā and Upānanda therefore considered, “We cannot meet
with Kṛṣṇa here. We don’t want this opulence; we want
Vṛndāvana. We want to take Kṛṣṇa in our laps. Kṛṣṇa has
no appetite here. He does not want anything from us
here, whereas in Vraja, He weeps for bread and butter.”

Brajanāth dāsa

: Gurudeva, is Kṛṣṇa married to Śrīmatī Rādhikā in
Goloka?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: They are not married, but it is as if They are
married.

Śrīpada Mādhava Mahārāja

: It is like svakhya-bhāva.

Viśvambhara dāsa

: When we preach, we tell people that we all have a
connection to something beyond this world. What would be
a simple way to show somebody who has no knowledge or
faith that what we are saying is real?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: You can explain to new people that in this world we
are suffering from birth, death, old age, and so many
problems. We are always experiencing misery here. In our
youth we think that we are happy, but when old age comes
we realize there is no happiness in this world; and then
we give up this body. Who gives up the body? The soul
gives up the body. Do you understand?

Moreover, besides the individual soul, there is also the
Supersoul, and there is relationship between the two.
You can tell them that; not more than that.

Viśvambhara dāsa

: In this world, especially in the Western world, it is
very common that people think of science as very real.
This is because science invents things like airplanes
and cars, which are very real; things they can see and
know as real.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Do you see any evidence that they have minimized
death?

Viśvambhara dāsa


                           144
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

: They think that maybe, someday, it will be possible.

Brajanāth dāsa

: They die faster with the airplane.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Since the beginning of creation, no one has been able
to stop old age and death.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: By this technological development, suicide rates have
become higher and higher.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: They have developed the ability to die faster.

Viśvambhara dāsa

: But a scientist can say, “I can talk with someone…”

Śrīla Gurudeva

: They are creating so many – so many – problems with
their atom bombs and nitrogen bombs. They have created
varieties of new inventions, but with what result? The
only result is destruction; not any peace and happiness.
They are not able to discover the soul.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: One more thing: When Gurudeva was in New York in 1996,
five or six people came to him and asked how he could
come from poor India to preach here. They asked what he
imagined he could possibly give to America.

Gurudeva replied, “I have not come from poor India. I
came from prosperous India. It may be possible that the
Prime Minister of our country will come to you to beg
something; but from my birth I have never learned how to
beg. I have only learned how to give; nothing else.”

Then they asked, “What will you give to America?”

Gurudeva said, “I will give you an example. If you throw
a pebble in the water, what will be the result?”

One of them answered, “Some ripples will come, and then
subside.”

Gurudeva said, “No, this is not true. Ripples will come,
and they will become bigger and smaller, but unless the
ripples touch the shore, they will not subside. In the
same way, we are performing harināma-saṅkīrtana. The
vibration of that holy name will travel through the air
and touch each and every corner of the world. In this
way, the greatest problem of the era – the sound problem
– will subside.1

They asked Gurudeva, “Are you a scientist?”


                           145
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Gurudeva replied, “No. I am not a scientist.”

Then they said, “Without being a scientist, how are you
able to give such an example?”

Gurudeva replied, “I am really not a scientist. I heard
this from my Gurudeva, then I performed bhajana, and by
my Gurudeva’s mercy I realized his words.”

They said, “No, no. You must be a scientist?”

Then Gurudeva asked, “Are you scientists?”

They began to laugh, and one of them said, “We are
scientists, and we came to get some help from you in our
preaching. We traveled all over the world and recorded
many sounds – machinery, animals, birds, and so on, and
we played those sounds in our laboratory. While
traveling in India, we saw devotees chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa
for several hours without getting tired. We were
surprised by this, so, we played their chanting in our
laboratory. We found that their Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra caused
sound pollution to subside, and all other sounds
increased it.”

Gurudeva told him, “Go and preach. You will do vast
preaching, and no one will be able to check you.”

This is the scientific proof – sound pollution.

Viśvambhara dāsa

: Is there some way we can objectively show someone who
has no faith that bhakti is real?

Brajanāth dāsa

: He wants to know how we can explain in an objective
way how there is really a transcendental world and that
we have a relationship with that world. Is there any
proof we can give to anyone who has doubts or who has no
interest?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Have you been to Australia?

Viśvambhara dāsa

: No.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: How is it that you believe Australia exists?

Viśvambhara dāsa

: By other people who have been there.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: How?

Viśvambhara dāsa

                          146
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


: By photographs.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Those other people may be lying. I don’t believe them.
How can you objectively prove to me that their words are
true?

Viśvambhara dāsa

: I accept photographs, usually.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: You read about geography from time to time, and you
believe in what you read. You did not have any practical
experience of what you read, but you believed it. You
can believe in me in the same way, and in the śāstras
told by God, Kṛṣṇa, Himself.

Can you prove who your father is?

Viśvambhara dāsa

: Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: How? Have you seen him uniting with your mother?

Viśvambhara dāsa

: There is a way to look at the cells of each person.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Suppose I say “I don’t believe in that.” What is the
answer? Without belief, you cannot progress even an
inch. You will have to hear from your mother, your
father, and your superiors, and you will have to accept
what they tell you. Otherwise, you would not be able to
do anything. Without belief, you cannot go anywhere. You
go to school, but if you have no trust, or belief, in
your professor, you cannot learn anything. You would not
be able to study.

So, you will need to first think that these things are
true; to think, “I must believe this.” Then you can
progress.

Our ṛṣis (sages) have stated, and in the Purāṇas Śrīla
Vedavyāsa has written, that in this world, the Vedas are
our only transcendental evidence, because they have been
spoken by Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
Bhagavad-gītā has been spoken by Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Do you have faith in the Vedas?

Viśvambhara dāsa

: Some parts.

                           147
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva

: If you chant Hari’s name, your doubts will go away.
You chant very rarely. It is essential to chant at least
sixteen rounds daily.




* * *




1 The following is an excerpt from a lecture by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja (August 2,
2002):


Water is polluted, air is polluted, ether is polluted,
everything else is polluted; and all life-forms are
dying by pollution. So many poisons are floating in
water, and so many poisons are floating in the air, and
therefore there is so very much anxiety.

Intelligent persons are thinking about how to save the
world from such pollution, but a day will come when the
whole ocean will be polluted with poisons, all fish will
thus be poisoned, and if anyone will eat fish or any
food from the sea, he will die. In the name of saving
the agriculture, people spray poisons everywhere to kill
insects, that poison comes in the grains, and thus all
the grains are polluted. You eat those grains, you
become mad, you are besieged by so many diseases, and
then you die.

If you are abusing anyone, criticizing anyone, or
quarreling with anyone, those sounds will evaporate in
the air and travel throughout the universe. If you are
speaking any nonsense, it will not ‘go in vain.’ It will
travel throughout the entire world via the air.

An example may be given of a big pond. If you take a
stone and throw it into a pond, some waves will be
created, and they will touch all ends of the pond. This
universe is like that pond, and air is everywhere in the
universe. When one chants “Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma Hare
Hare,” this will ‘evaporate’ and create so many waves of
air, which will touch everywhere – up to the ends of the
world – moving here and there and purifying the entire
universe from all these pollutions.

Kṛṣṇa is so powerful. He can create the whole universe
in a second, and He can destroy it, and again he can
create so many worlds. He has invested all His mercy,
power, and opulence in His names, and that is why they
are so powerful. His holy names very quickly travel
throughout the universe by the help of airwaves, and the
pollution is gone at once.


                          148
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

You know that the trees, creepers, animals, and insects
cannot speak. They cannot understand our language.
Still, everyone – not only humans, but trees, creepers,
and insects here and there in this universe – is touched
by this powerful name, whether they know it or not.
There is no question of whether or not they are aware;
they will be touched. If knowingly or unknowingly you
touch fire, it will burn you. Similarly, these names are
very powerful. They will inject all and purify all,
whether they are aware of what is happening or not.

Here the trees are very fortunate, the grass is
fortunate, and the persons are fortunate – whether they
are coming to our classes or not. The trees, creepers,
grass and all other entities are somehow attending our
classes by hearing the sound.

Similarly, although Muslims don’t utter the holy names
Hari, Kṛṣṇa, or Rāma, the sound will somehow go and
touch them, even if they are in Arabia or Iran. Even
hogs, pigs, bears, and other creatures in jungles and
forests, attacking persons and eating them, will also be
liberated.

Kīrtana is so powerful that if you are meditating on
anything and we are doing kīrtana, you cannot continue
to meditate. If you are doing kīrtana and someone else
is not doing kīrtana, he is bound to do kīrtana by mind.
If you cannot meditate, then chant “Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare
Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma
Rāma Hare Hare.” This will engage all your senses. You
will forget where you are and what you are doing. If you
chant louder and louder, all your senses will be
controlled; there will be nothing to criticize, and
nothing to remember about your bad activities or anyone
else’s. Otherwise, without this kīrtana, while
meditating, all kinds of bogus things will come in your
head. You are not able to check this by yourself, but by
kīrtana it will be checked very easily.




[In these morning darśanas, at the home of Gopāla-kṛṣṇa
dāsa and Gītā dāsī, and their daughters Kundalatā dāsī
and Sītā dāsī, Śrīla Gurudeva is training the family to
learn and imbibe the message of various verses.]




May 15, 2009


Darśana

Śrīla Gurudeva:



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau


                          149
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 1.4)


[May the Supreme Lord who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacī-devī be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the Age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation has ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant mellow of
devotional service, the mellow of conjugal love.]

What does unnata-ujjvala-rasa refer to?

Kundalatā dāsī:

Parakīya-rasa (the paramour love between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
the gopīs).

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And śrī refers to the maidservants of Rādhārāṇī, such as
Rūpa Mañjarī and others like her.

Rādhikā is compared with a kalpa-latā, a transcendental
desire-creeper, and the gopīs are the flowers and leaves
of that creeper. Lalitā, Viśākhā, and others like them
are the leaves, and the mañjarīs are the flowers. If a
desire-creeper is devoid of mañjarīs and leaves, then it
is without value – it looks like it has dried up. The
bhāva of Lalitā cannot be given to the jīvas of this
world. Mahāprabhu came to give the bhāva of the
mañjarīs.

Now, please explain the meaning of the verse beginning
with ārādhyo bhagavān.

Kundalatā dāsī:



ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma vṛṇdāvanaṁ

ramyā kācid-upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavatam pramāṇam-amalaṁ premā pumartho mahān

śrī-caitanya mahāprabhor matam idaṁ tatrādaro naḥ paraḥ

(Caitanya-manjusa, by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura)


[Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is our only
worshipable object. In the same way that He is
worshipful, so is His transcendental abode, Śrī
Vṛndāvana-dhāma. The mood in which the young brides of
Vraja (the gopīs, especially Śrīmatī Rādhikā) worship
Him is the highest perfectional form of love of God.

                          150
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam alone is the immaculate scriptural
evidence of this. Kṛṣṇa-prema is the supreme objective
of life [the fifth and highest goal of human life,
beyond mundane religiosity, economic development, sense
gratification, and impersonal liberation]. These are the
teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu (His gaura-vāṇī).
We hold this conclusion in supreme regard. We have no
inclina-tion or respect for any other conclusion, or any
cheating

opinions.]

Our supreme worshipful object is Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, as is Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
is our evidence. This is the teaching of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and we accept no other.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, no. You have missed the main point: What is the
meaning of vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā.

Kundalatā dāsī:

Oh! The worship of the vraja-vadhūs, meaning the gopīs,
is the topmost.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Among the moods of all those who worship Kṛṣṇa, the most
superior is the mood of the gopīs. It was to give this
mood that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to this world.

In this way, keep some ślokas memorized and utter them
in a completely fearless manner. Then you shall become a
preacher.

What is the proof in the Bhāgavatam that Kṛṣṇa is Svayam
Bhagavān, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the source of all other incarnations?

Kundalatā dāsī:



ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ

kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ

mṛḍayanti yuge yuge

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.28)


[All of the above-mentioned incarnations are either
plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions of
the Lord, but Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality
of Godhead. All of them appear on planets whenever there
is a disturbance created by the atheists. The Lord
incarnates to protect the theists.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                             151
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017


Say it properly; otherwise, you will have to continue
saying ‘half here and half there.’

[To Sītā dāsī] Do you know any of this?

[To the rest of the family)]Why don’t you teach her
something as well?

[To Sītā dāsī] It is very important for you to learn
some ślokas and their meanings; from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
Bhagavad-gītā, and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.

Sītā dāsī:

Yes, I will.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

[To Gītā dāsī] Please cook something very nice today.

[To Sītā dāsī and Kundalatā dāsī] Neither of you know
how to cook.

Kundalatā dāsī:

No, not much.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Sītā dāsī] And you?

Sītā dāsī:

Very little. We have to look at the cookbook.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you do not cook, then what will you feed Kṛṣṇa?

Brajanāth dāsa:

They make pizza and cheesecake.

Kundalatā dāsī:

In India, I sometimes try to do a little service in the
kitchen.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Your mother knows proper Bengali; this is very good. It
will help a great deal if you also learn it properly.

[To Brajanāth dāsa] I will give a few words of reply to
the letter I received from Tripurāri Svāmī. You can take
the dictation:

“If you have strong belief that Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja is in sakhya-rasa [a relationship with
Kṛṣṇa as a cowherd friend], I have no objection. I don’t
want to enter into argument and counter-argument. But

                          152
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

you should know that I have known him from the
beginning; from 1946. He was my śikṣā-guru and my bosom
friend. We laughed and joked together; so I know him.

“I have strong belief that he is in gopī-bhāva, in the
mood of Rūpa Mañjarī. You cannot change me; don’t try to
change me. I am satisfied that you have strong faith
that he is of sakhya-rasa.”

Brajanāth dāsa:

And rūpānuga?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

“Also, I want to tell you that rūpānuga means ‘a
follower of Rūpa Gosvāmī and Rūpa Mañjarī.’ I know that
he knew the deep meaning of this śloka: ārādhyo bhagavān
vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma vṛndāvanaṁ, ramyā kācid-
upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā. I know that he
knew it. He has also read Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu and
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, and he was fully qualified to select
which is the best rasa.

“Also, anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau,
samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to give worldly persons
rāgānuga-mārga (the path of rāgānuga-bhakti), and
especially, within rāgānuga-mārga, the mood of Rūpa
Mañjarī. So I cannot agree with you, but I appreciate
your strong belief.”

I am writing in a polite way.

[To Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa] You read Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
and the other Vedic scriptures, don’t you? Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam?

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t you read aloud to all of them? In particular, you
should read to Sītā, so that she will develop in bhakti.

[To Sītā dāsī] Do you understand? You must do kīrtana,
hear Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta from your father, and read
Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

One day you will become old, and no doctor or scientist
will be able to prevent this. Moreover, one day you will
have to give up your body, and your money will not be
able to save you. You will not be able to take with you
a farthing from this world; you will leave empty-handed,
and you will have to come to this world again – as a
dog, pig, hog, monkey, or donkey. To protect yourself
from this, try to develop your Kṛṣṇa consciousness with
full attention and great care.

[To Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa] When was the first time I met
you?


                          153
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

It was in Badger, in 1998.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How did you come to know about me?

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Avadhūta Mahārāja gave us some videos of your classes,
and Mithilādhīśa prabhu used to come to our house for
Sunday programs every week in 1997. Kiśorī-Mohana prabhu
and Sudevī dīdī were here also. We used to have nice
kīrtanas at that time.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, they do nice kīrtanas.

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

That is how we came to hear about you; through Avadhūta
Mahārāja.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Did you know him from before that?

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Yes, when I came to Las Vegas, we were in contact with
the devotees there.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Were you ever in Los Angeles?

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

No, I was never there.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

So, how did you become acquainted with him?

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

He used to visit our home. We lived in a rented
apartment then.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, I see.




May 16, 2009


Darśana


                             154
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the essence of all the instructions of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī?

Kundalatā dāsī:

It is the verse beginning anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the essence of all the instructions of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī?

Kundalatā dāsī:

Oh [softly recites the verse]:


tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

(Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Verse 8)


[While living in Vraja as a follower of the eternal
residents of Vraja, who possess inherent spontaneous
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one should utilize all his time by
sequentially engaging the tongue and the mind in
meticulous chanting and remembrance of Kṛṣṇa’s names,
form, qualities, and pastimes. This is the essence all
instruction.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Has anyone spoken anything?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva is asking you to speak more loudly.

[Kundalatā dāsī and Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa chant the verse
loudly.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

[To Sītā dāsī] Listen very carefully.

Kundalatā dāsī:

The meaning is that we should reside in Vraja and
perform bhajana there. If one can’t live there
physically, then he can be there by mind.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Your explanation is not clear.

                             155
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Tan means ‘His’ or ‘Kṛṣṇa’s’ – Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, and
activities. Su-kīrtana means ‘always doing kīrtana and
remembering Kṛṣṇa.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Anu means ‘continually,’ and it also means ‘under the
guidance.’ Under whose guidance? We will come to this in
a minute.

What is the meaning of krameṇa?

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Krameṇa means ‘steadily,’ and rasanā-manasī niyojya
means ‘engaging the mind and tongue.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By one’s tongue one chants the names of Kṛṣṇa, and by
mind one meditates on His pastimes. For example the name
Dāmodara leads to remembrance of the pastime of Mother
Yaśodā binding Kṛṣṇa, and the name Rāsa-bihārī inspires
remembrance of rāsa-līlā.

Furthermore?

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

In order to do this, tad anurāgi janānugāmī, tiṣṭhan
vraje. Even if one cannot be in Vraja physically, he can
meditate on Vraja and be under the guidance of the
residents of Vraja.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Tad anurāgi janānugāmī means ‘being under the guidance
of those who are anurāgi (deeply attached) to Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, such as Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.’

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram. One must do this
continuously, all the time. This is the essence of all
instructions.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you have no taste in chanting the holy name, what
should you do?

Kundalatā dāsī:

Keep chanting… Hmmm, what is that verse in Upadeśāmṛta?
Sitāpy avidyā… Mmmm. Because right now we have jaundice
[the jaundice of ignorance], so the medicine is to keep
chanting and then one day the taste will come.

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                          156
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

[To Brajanāth dāsa] Can you explain?

Brajanāth dāsa:

In Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī tells us that if
we have no taste for chanting, it is because of some
spiritual disease. If in a jaundiced condition we take
sugar candy, that sugar candy tastes very bitter.
Nevertheless, sugar candy is the medicine for jaundice.
Therefore, if we continue to take the sugar candy,
gradually our disease will go away and we will be able
to taste the sugar candy’s sweetness.

Similarly by chanting harināma, even if in the beginning
it is a little difficult and our minds don’t want to
continue, if we practice daily as a discipline, and
especially if we follow the order of śrī gurudeva, then
everything becomes sweet. Our disease of wanting to
enjoy this world will gradually decrease, and we will
only want to serve śrī guru and the Vaiṣṇavas. Then,
under their guidance we can follow this verse: tan-nāma-
rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By what activity can we engage in sādhu-saṅga?

Kundalatā dāsī:

By following the sādhu’s instructions.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Can you utter the śloka?

Kundalatā dāsī:

Uh… sādhu saṅga, sādhu saṅga, sarva śāstra kaya.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What sort of conduct is required in relating with the
sādhus?

Kundalatā dāsī:

Oh, from Upadeśāmṛta:


dadāti pratigṛhṇāti

guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati

bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva

ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ prīti-lakṣaṇam

(Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Verse 4)


[Offering pure devotees items in accordance with their
requirements, accepting prasādam, or remnant items given
by pure devotees, revealing to devotees one’s
realizations concerning bhajana, inquiring from them

                             157
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

about their confidential realizations, eating with great
love the prasādam remnants given to devotees and
lovingly feeding them prasādam – these are the six
symptoms of loving association with devotees.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Kundalatā dāsī:

There are six loving exchanges between devotees: Giving
something, accepting the prasādam remnants… uh…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What does dadāti mean?

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Dadāti means ‘giving.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Giving what? Giving that which is necessary and of use
to that sādhu. What might these items be? Cloth, shoes,
foodstuffs, and whatever is necessary for his services.
We first give these things to the Vaiṣṇavas, and then we
take their remnants.

Guhyam means ‘confidential topics.’ What confidential
topics? Regarding bhajana. The disciple asks about the
confidential methods of bhajana, and the sādhu explains
(ākhyāti). Pṛcchati means that whatever is needed to
know, the disciple will ask gurudeva and Vaiṣṇavas.
Bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva means that one offers foodstuffs
to the Vaiṣṇava and then accepts his remnants. By this,
sādhu-saṅga will develop.

If one has no taste for sādhu-saṅga, no taste for
harināma, and no taste for hearing and chanting, but he
knows that there is no other remedy, what should he do?
If we know intellectually that bhajana is essential but
we are devoid of taste and interest in its engagement,
what should we do? Should we give up chanting, hearing,
and remembering?


utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt

tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt

saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ

ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

(Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Verse 3)


[Progress in bhakti may be obtained by the following six
practices: (1) enthusiasm to carry out the rules that
enhance bhakti, (2) firm faith in the statements of
śāstra and guru, whose words are fully in line with
śāstra, (3) fortitude in the practice of bhakti, even in

                             158
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

the midst of obstacles, or patience during the practice
stage of bhakti, even when there is delay in attaining
one’s desired goal, (4) following the limbs of bhakti
such as hearing (śravaṇa) and chanting (kīrtana), and
giving up one’s material sense enjoyment for the
pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, (5) giving up illicit connection
with women, the association of those who are overly
attached to women, and the association of Māyāvādīs,
atheists, and pseudo-religionists; and (6) adopting the
good behavior and character of pure devotees.]

What is the meaning?

Kundalatā dāsī:

We must have utsāha, enthusiasm. We must have firm faith
that…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That what? “So many bhaktas, like Prahlāda, Nārada, and
others attained bhakti, so why shouldn’t I? I need
patience.” What type of patience?

Kundalatā dāsī:

Patience that it will come one day.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Even if we do not feel anything now, in due time we will
feel the result of our practices.

What is the meaning of tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt?

Kundalatā dāsī:

Following the proper process.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is that process?

Kundalatā dāsī:

Following the rules and regulations.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Hearing hari-kathā.


śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.5.23)


[Hearing and chanting about the transcendental holy

                             159
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

name, form, qualities, paraphernalia, and pastimes of
Lord Viṣṇu, remembering them, serving the lotus feet of
the Lord, offering the Lord respectful worship with
sixteen types of paraphernalia, offering prayers to the
Lord, becoming His servant, considering the Lord one’s
best friend, and surrendering everything unto Him (in
other words, serving Him with the body, mind, and words)
– these nine processes are accepted as pure devotional
service.]

Also this:


sādhu-saṅga, nāma-kīrtana, bhāgavata-śravaṇa

mathurā-vāsa, śrī-mūrtira śraddhāya sevana

sakala-sādhana-śreṣṭha ei pañca aṅga

kṛṣṇa-prema janmāya ei pāṅcera alpa-saṅga

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.128–129)


[One should associate with devotees, chant the holy name
of the Lord, hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, reside at Mathurā,
and worship the Deity with faith and veneration. These
five limbs of devotional service are the best of all.
Even a slight performance of these five awakens love for
Kṛṣṇa.]

Are you able to understand this? If you do not perform
bhajana, what will be the result?

Sītā dāsī:

We will continue our material existence.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What harm is there if we are in the rotation of the
world? We will enjoy very well. What is the harm? We are
young, we can make money, and we can bring all
facilities as Gopāla prabhu has brought here. He is like
a king. Everything is here, so no harm to remain in this
material world.

Is this a fact? No. One day you will become old, and you
will have to give up everything and die. You will not be
able to take your televisions or anything else; and
then, in your next life you will become hogs, pigs,
dogs, cats, etc.

Do you chant sixteen rounds?

Sītā dāsī:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Never chant less than this, and also read the
scriptures. Your father has all the scriptures.


                          160
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017




May 17, 2009


Darśana

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the reason behind Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
appearance in this world?

Kundalatā dāsī:

śrī-rādhāyāḥ praṇaya … svādyo… Lost…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why lost?

Kundalatā dāsī:

I didn’t practice, so I forgot the verse.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Try again.

Kundalatā dāsī:

śrī-rādhāyāḥ praṇaya-mahimā kīdṛśo vānayaivā...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why are you looking towards your father?

Kundalatā dāsī:

Because I forgot the verse.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you don’t remember it, I will chastise you.

[To Anupama dāsa] Do you remember?

Anupama dāsa:

No.

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

śrī-rādhāyāḥ praṇaya-mahimā kīdṛśo vānayaivā, svādyo
yenādbhuta-madhurimā kīdṛśo vā madīyaḥ… saukhyaṁ cāsyā
mad-anubhavataḥ

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And what about the śloka beginning with anarpita-carīṁ?

Kundalatā dāsī:


                          161
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 1.4)


[May the Supreme Lord who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacī-devī be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation has ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant mellow of
devotional service, the mellow of conjugal love.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is so important that you remember this well. What is
the meaning of anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ
kalau?

Kundalatā dāsī:

May the son of Mother Śacī [Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu] be
situated in the innermost recesses of your heart. He has
appeared in this age of Kali to bestow what has not been
given in a long time; the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
love, which is mañjarī-bhāva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Kṛṣṇa came to this world in the form of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and the first reason for this is the
following:


yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

(Bhagavad-gītā 4.7)


[O descendant of Bharata, whenever there is a decline of
religion and an increase in irreligion, at that time I
manifest My eternally perfect form in this mundane
world.]

paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya


                           162
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

sambhavāmi yuge yuge

(Bhagavad-gītā 4.8)


[To protect My unalloyed devotees, to annihilate the
wicked, and to firmly establish religion, I appear in
every age.]

When adherence to religious principles decreases, the
demons are able to create many problems and sanātana-
dharma becomes hidden. Kṛṣṇa descends in order to kill
the demons and save the sādhus. This is the meaning of
dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya.

The second reason for His descent is that, seeing the
world overwhelmed in sin, Advaita Ācārya prayed to Him,
“If You do not come and give the people kṛṣṇa-prema, I
will destroy the entire universe.” In this way, Advaita
Ācārya brought Him from Goloka Vṛndāvana.

The third reason is that Kṛṣṇa wanted to give the prema
that had not been given since the previous day of
Brahmā: unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam, or
mañjarī-bhāva, personal service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

And the fourth reason is this:


śrī-rādhāyāḥ praṇaya-mahimā kīdṛśo vānayaivā-

svādyo yenādbhuta-madhurimā kīdṛśo vā madīyaḥ

saukhyaṁ cāsyā mad-anubhavataḥ kīdṛśaṁ veti lobhāt

tad-bhāvāḍhyaḥ samajani śacī-garbha-sindhau harīnduḥ

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 1.6)


[Desiring to understand the glory of Rādhārāṇī’s love,
the wonderful qualities in Him that She alone relishes
through Her love, and the happiness She feels when She
realizes the sweetness of His love, the Supreme Lord
Hari, richly endowed with Her emotions, appeared from
the womb of Śrīmatī Śacī-devī, as the moon appeared from
the ocean.]

What is the significance of rādhā-praṇaya, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s love for Kṛṣṇa? Before praṇaya comes prema,
sneha, and māna; then comes praṇaya.1 It is a most
exalted stage of prema.

What is its nature? Rādhā is the only one who fully
tastes Kṛṣṇa’s beauty, name, sweet pastimes, qualities,
and love. She is the only one. In order to personally
realize the happiness She feels in Their relationship,
Kṛṣṇa took Her intrinsic mood and beauty, and appeared
in the form of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

If Mahāprabhu had not come to this world, how could we
have known what is pure bhakti, what is love and
affection, who is Kṛṣṇa, who is Rādhikā, and what is the
significance of Vṛndāvana? We know this only by the

                          163
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Mahāprabhu inspired Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and through Rūpa
Gosvāmī He preached the glory of the gopīs’ upapati-
bhāva (paramour love). This mood of the gopīs is
special; it is not found in any other sampradāya in the
world. If one realizes this mood, that person will
factually know the identity of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

What is the necessity of dīkṣā? What is the necessity of
harināma initiation? The Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is written in
śāstra: Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare,
Hare Rāma Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma Hare Hare. It is written
in so many scriptures, so what is the need of guru? The
answer is that the chanting of those persons who are
without guru is not śabda-brahma, or transcendental
sound. Such chanters will not get much fruit; they
cannot get the highest fruit as long as they remain
without the shelter of guru. At first their sorrows and
suffering will diminish, then they will attain sādhu-
saṅga, then they will take shelter of a bona fide guru,
and then guru will give them their relationship with
Kṛṣṇa. Without sambandha-jñāna, or realized knowledge of
one’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa, one’s kṛṣṇa-bhajana will
not be pure.

This is why dīkṣā initiation is needed. It may be
compared to a marriage ceremony, wherein the priest
gives some relation: “You are the wife, and you are the
husband. Now, and throughout your life, you will be
together.”

Do you have any questions?

[To Sītā dāsī] You are a gurukulī (a former student in
gurukula), so you must have some questions.

Sītā dāsī:

No, I already asked Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yesterday he gave class.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. Whatever questions may arise, please feel
free to ask.

[To Kundalatā dāsī] Do you have any questions?

Kundalatā dāsī:

I asked one question to Umā dīdī, but she said to ask
you. How is it possible that Kṛṣṇa’s sakhās are married
to Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs? During brahma-vimohana-līlā, all the
gopīs were married to Kṛṣṇa when He manifested in the
form of all the gopas. But after that year, the original
gopas returned. Do those gopas have the conception that
they are married to the gopīs? Would that not create
problems?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                             164
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


At first, all the gopas were Kṛṣṇa’s expansions, who
were imitating perfectly the gopas’ forms, dress, and
mannerisms. The marriage of the young gopīs was arranged
with Kṛṣṇa, but no gopī could ever think, “Kṛṣṇa is my
husband.” By the power of Yogamāyā, in order to
perpetuate their paramour mood, the gopīs never thought
of Kṛṣṇa as their husband, and Kṛṣṇa also never thought
of the gopīs as His wives.

It is not that all the sakhās in Vraja are Kṛṣṇa’s
sakhās. There are so many gopas – thousands upon
millions of gopas, and some are like Abhimanyu. It
seemed that Śrīmatī Rādhikā was married to Abhimanyu,
but in reality She was not. Abhimanyu was like a shadow
of Kṛṣṇa, and he was married to Rādhikā’s shadow.
Yogamāyā orchestrated all these mysterious events.

Kundalatā

dāsī:

Oh, all right.

Anupama dāsa:

In this age of Kali, how can one identify a real guru?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can do so by surrendering to Paramātmā (the
Supersoul) in your heart. Although we do not realize it,
Paramātmā is everywhere; without Him we cannot exist. We
can pray to Him, “I want a real guru.” Then, a sādhu
will come to you, or you will be able to go to a sādhu,
and that sādhu will tell you the symptoms of a bona fide
guru:


tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsaḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.3.21)


[Therefore any person who seriously desires real
happiness must seek a bona fide spiritual master and
take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of
the bona fide guru is that he has realized the
conclusions of the scriptures by deliberation and is
able to convince others of these conclusions. Such great
personalities, who have taken shelter of the Supreme
Godhead, leaving aside all material considerations,
should be understood to be bona fide spiritual masters.]

When the jīvas are no longer satisfied with worldly
intoxications; when they realize that there is actually
no happiness in this world and that they cannot take
anything with them at the time of death, not even a

                          165
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

cent, they begin to contemplate how to attain real
happiness. Such jīvas take shelter of a bona fide guru.

One of the symptoms of a bona fide guru is that he is
qualified in all śāstras (śabda-brahma), such as the
Vedas and Upaniṣads. Another symptom is that he has
realized Parabrahma, or Kṛṣṇa. And the third is that he
is detached from worldly desires.

If one knows all śāstras and can give many examples and
evidence from śāstra, but he has not realized Kṛṣṇa,
Parabrahma, then he is not guru. He must have some
realization of Kṛṣṇa; only then can he give Kṛṣṇa from
his heart to others. Without realizing Kṛṣṇa, his
prayers will not be heard by Kṛṣṇa. He must also be
detached from worldly desires and intoxications. Such a
person is qualified to be selected as guru.

If you have unknowingly chosen a guru who cannot help
you, who has no self-realization, and who is not
detached from worldly things, then give him up and take
shelter of a real guru, a sad-guru. If your guru is a
Vaiṣṇava but he does not know śabda-brahma, if he has
insufficient knowledge of śāstra-jñana but he is a
sincere Vaiṣṇava, then when you finally meet a real guru
you can take permission from that sincere Vaiṣṇava: “I
want to develop my bhakti, so I want to associate with
this pure devotee.” That sincere Vaiṣṇava, your first
guru, will happily permit you. If he does not permit you
to go, he is not guru; you can reject him.

For example, suppose you have bought a cow for milking,
but after some time she has stopped giving milk and will
never again give milk. You still want milk, so you will
have to get another cow.

Anupama dāsa:

Although some bhaktas have a desire in their heart for a
pure guru, still they go to an unbona fide guru and
don’t realize it. Why is this? Is it due to committing
aparādhas?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That person does not have sufficient sukṛti and does not
want bhakti in the true sense; otherwise Kṛṣṇa would not
deprive him. If you are sincere and really want kṛṣṇa-
bhakti, Kṛṣṇa will certainly arrange that you take
shelter of a real guru.

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

You first discussed the reasons for Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s appearance. In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Ādi-līlā 4.15) it is stated:


prema-rasa-niryāsa karite āsvādana

rāga-mārga bhakti loke karite pracāraṇa


[The Lord’s desire to appear was born from two reasons:

                          166
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

the Lord wanted to taste the sweet essence of the
mellows of love of God, and He wanted to propagate
devotional service in the world on the platform of
spontaneous attraction.]

But later in the fourth chapter it is stated:


ei mata caitanya-kṛṣṇa purna bhagavan

yuga-dharma-pravartana nahe tanra kama

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 4.37)


[For Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, promulgating the dharma of the age is
incidental.]

From this it seems that paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ (delivering
the saintly devotees) and dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya
(establishing religious principles) are not the real
reasons for the Lord’s descent.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In this connection, sādhunam refers to the gopīs. The
gopīs are the real sādhus. The followers of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu are thus the real sādhus because their only
desire is to attain gopī-bhāva. This is the true meaning
of sanātana-dharma: to protect and preach this mission
of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So, it is not wrong.

[To Sītā dāsī] Please sing one kīrtana: Gaurāṅga balite
habe.




* * *




1 Prema-bhakti is the perfectional stage of devotion,
characterised by the appearance of divine love, or
prema. Within this stage of prema-bhakti, the pure love
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa progresses further from prema to sneha,
māna, and then praṇaya. In the stage of sneha, which
follows just after the stage of prema, the love for
Kṛṣṇa is characterized by intense affection that causes
the heart to melt. The next stage is māna, wherein the
mood of transcendental jealousy or contrariness prevents
uninhibited meeting with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Yet, when prema
progresses more, māna assumes a feature of unrestrained
intimacy, in which complete confidence, devoid of any
restraint or formality, causes one to consider one’s
life, mind, intelligence, body, and possessions to be
one in all respects with the life, mind, intelligence,
and body of the beloved. This stage is called praṇaya.
Detailed definitions of sneha, māna, and praṇaya can be
found in Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.79, 96, 108).

                          167
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017




May 20, 2009


Morning Walk

Rāmacandra dāsa (from Delhi):

In Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīpāda
narrates Gopa-kumāra’s discussion with the Mathurā
brāhmaṇa. Therein Gopa-kumāra tells the Mathurā brāhmaṇa
that all the demons killed by Kṛṣṇa when He appeared in
this material world are also present in Goloka Vṛndāvana
beyond the universe. However, the demons present in
Goloka are of a spiritual nature, and in fact Kṛṣṇa does
not kill them there.

For example, regarding the pastime of Keśī, the horse
demon, Śrī Kṛṣṇa defeats him and then Kṛṣṇa friends sit
on him and ride him.1 In the case of Ariṣṭāsura, in
Goloka Kṛṣṇa makes him pull a bullock cart. In the case
of Kāliya-nāga, in Goloka Kṛṣṇa overpowers him, and then
He and the gopīs dance together on his hoods.2 Regarding
the pastime of Kṛṣṇa going to Mathurā and leaving all
the Vrajavāsīs in a very deep mood of separation,3 in
Goloka that departure is only for a short time; Kṛṣṇa
very soon returns to Vraja.4

In one or two places you have said that the pastimes of
leaving Vṛndāvana for Mathurā and the pastimes with the
demons do not take place in Goloka Vṛndāvana. You said
that the Vrajavāsis have the bhāva, or mood, that such
pastimes have taken place, but that these pastimes take
actual form only when Kṛṣṇa is in this world. However,
from what Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī tells in Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta, it seems that Kṛṣṇa again and again
leaves and comes back to Vṛndāvana from Mathurā,5 and
that the demons do come there but they are not killed.

This is what Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīpada narrates in
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmīpada says that
there are no demons in transcendental Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī says is correct.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

It is all right? That would mean that in Goloka
Vṛndāvana He leaves for Mathurā. It is written in Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta that Akrūra came to Vraja, and Kṛṣṇa left
with him.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That separation lasted for three months; ninety days.

Regarding the pastimes of killing demons, other śāstras
also say that they do not occur in Goloka Vṛndāvana;

                          168
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

only the bhāva, or conception, of killing pastimes is
there.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

Yes, this is the consideration of Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmīpāda. But Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī says that
pastimes with the demons actually occur.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī says is perfect. Both are
perfect. We reconcile the two opinions; it is not that
one is right and the other is wrong. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
is in the line of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī. He came after
him, so he knew his mood. He read Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta,
so why does he appear to give a different opinion? We
will have to consider this. We may also consider whether
or not Kaṁsa is there in Goloka Vṛndāvana, and whether
or not Kṛṣṇa kills him there.6

Rāmacandra dāsa:

According to Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīpada, Kaṁsa was there
and Kṛṣṇa killed him.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We may also consider whether or not Kṛṣṇa takes birth
from Yaśodā in Goloka.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

This is not addressed in Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. It is just
stated that He is the son of Mother Yaśodā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Jīva Gosvāmī says that Mother Yaśodā always thinks,
“Kṛṣṇa is my son,” but He does not take birth from her
womb. Or Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā – they are present in Goloka
Vṛndāvana, but in our position we cannot understand in
what way. Some of the pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
are nitya-līlā; they are eternal, manifest both here and
there in Goloka Vṛndāvana. And other pastimes are
naimittika-līlā, manifest in form here, but only in mood
there. Jaṭilā’s service to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is part
of Their nitya-līlā.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

In Mukta-caritra, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
describes that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were engaged, and then
Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā. He does not mention Rādhārāṇī
being married to someone else. His narration is in a
different mood.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He is a līlā-parikara, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
associate. He is always remembering aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā,
Their daily twenty-four hour pastimes.

Viṣṇu dāsa:

                          169
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


In Goloka Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s variegated
bhāvas, or moods, have different forms. According to
this logic, we can understand that bhāva has form.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Suppose someone has the bhāva that “Rādhājī is my
mistress, my Svāminī.” What is the form of this bhāva?
So it is not that all bhāvas have form. Some may have,
and others may not.




May 21, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I want to discuss the subject matter of our discussions
at this festival. I was thinking that we will first
speak about the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, First Canto, Second
Chapter:


sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.6)


[The supreme occupation (dharma) for all humanity is
that by which men can attain loving devotional service
unto the transcendent Lord. Such devotional service must
be unmotivated and uninterrupted to completely satisfy
the self.]

Then we will discuss niṣṭhā-bhakti (steady devotion),
and then the subject of prema, which is the goal of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. After that we will speak about the
principle of guru and disciple, with reference to the
dialogue between Nārada and Vyāsa. After that we will
discuss something of Prahlāda-caritra (the history and
character of Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja), and then the Tenth
Canto. We will briefly go as far as we can in
discussions of the Tenth Canto –

up to brahma-vimohana-līlā (the pastime of Kṛṣṇa
bewildering Lord Brahmā), indra-vimohana-līlā, and other
such pastimes. Is that okay?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Yes, Gurudeva.


                            170
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There are so many mysterious truths in Brahmā-stuti
(Lord Brahmā’s prayers) in brahma-vimohana-līlā.
Similarly, there are many mysterious things to know in
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with the dvija-patnīs (the wives of the
brāhmaṇas), and especially with the nāga-patnīs (the
wives of the serpent Kāliya). There are so many
instructions given therein – so we will discuss these
topics.

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Gurudeva, you have been coming to Houston for fourteen
years, but we have never gone beyond the first half of
the Tenth Canto. Is there a possibility that you can
discuss the second half of the Tenth Canto, as well as
the eleventh and twelfth Cantos?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We can do that.

Govinda dāsa:

This is Kṛṣṇa dāsa; he comes from ISKCON. He was
previously a disciple of Romapada Svāmī, for the past
eighteen years, but he wants to take shelter of you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Kṛṣṇa dāsa] Why have you left ISKCON? Was your guru
not qualified?

Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Actually, I lost my faith.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why? You know that if you give up a qualified guru it is
against the principles of bhakti and it is an offense.
It is important that you carefully consider the matter
before making your decision.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He was there for about eighteen years, so now he has
decided.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

All right. I will give you shelter.

Umesh:

Mahārāja, I have had no job for the past three months
due to layoffs. I am struggling.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I can’t help you in this matter. But I can guide you in
the process of bhakti.


                             171
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Girirāja Govardhana fulfills the desires of everyone,
and all the Vrajavāsīs take shelter of him. If you take
shelter of Girirāja Govardhana and chant his prayers,
then all your desires will be fulfilled. You can talk
with Tīrtha Mahārāja; he will tell you the prayers to
chant every day. We can give you a picture of Girirāja
Mahārāja – meaning Girirāja Govardhana – so that you can
pray to him. Om girirājaya nāmaḥ.

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Gurudeva is giving you the mantra, om girirājaya nāmaḥ.
Girirāja is the mountain that Kṛṣṇa picked up and
balanced on the pinky-finger of His left hand.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Any questions?

Viṣṇu dāsa:

When Gopa-kumāra reached Vaikuṇṭha, the residents of
Vaikuṇṭha prohibited him from speaking about the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. They told him that the
Lord’s pastimes as a gopa were performed for the purpose
of deception [to deceive demons like Kaṁsa and Pūtanā].
So my question is this: Are the Vaikuṇṭha residents
unaware of the glory of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vṛndāvana?
Are they unaware that these pastimes in Vṛndāvana are
higher than those of Vaikuṇṭha?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If the residents of Vaikuṇṭha knew the glory of
Vṛndāvana, they would not be residing in Vaikuṇṭha. They
do not know its glories.

Viṣṇu dāsa:

But even the people staying on this planet are aware.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That is why this planet is called sādhana-bhūmi (the
land of sādhana). Neither the heavens nor the lower
planetary systems are called sādhana-bhūmi. It refers
only to this planet Earth, and especially to Vraja-
maṇḍala, Vṛndāvana, and Navadvīpa, which is non-
different from Vṛndāvana. Here, whatever mood in which
you perform your spiritual practices, you will attain
that perfection.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

We can practice here, whereas in other planetary systems
we cannot do so.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Even those who worship Rāmānujācārya and his followers
think that Śrī Kṛṣṇa and all other incarnations come
from Nārāyaṇa. They think that Kṛṣṇa is a expansion of
Nārāyaṇa. They challenge, “It is not possible for us to
serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs, or His mother and father, or

                            172
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

His other associates. Nārāyaṇa never comes to this
world, so Nārāyaṇa’s manifestation, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, comes

here.”

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Sometimes we meet devotees, even in ISKCON, who cannot
understand that there is something higher than
Vaikuṇṭha. They have no desire to understand, so their
faith does not develop when we speak to them. Should we
just consider that at present this is their adhikāra
(spiritual qualification), and there is not much we can
do to change their minds?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes. That is okay.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

One more point about this, Śrīla Gurudeva. You have said
many times that the jīva’s svarūpa (eternal
constitutional nature and identity) is already fixed.
So, is it that this is the svarūpa of some of the
persons in other sampradāyas who are worshiping Lakṣmī-
Nārāyaṇa? Even though they are here on this Earth
planet, where Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared, could it
be that according to their svarūpa they are meant to go
to Vaikuṇṭha?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is also true in Mahāprabhu’s pastimes. Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita, Anupama, Murāri Gupta, and other associates
were worshipers of Nārāyaṇa and Kṛṣṇa’s other
incarnations.

Veṇu-gopāla dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, it is stated in Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta
that Gopa-kumāra’s sādhaka and siddha form are the same.
How is this possible?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Gopa-kumāra was a special case. He was actually from
Goloka Vṛndāvana, and he came here to help us
conditioned souls. He thus took birth in the Govardhana
area, as a cowherd boy, and he received a guru named
Jayanta, who was personally sent by Rādhikā. There was
some change in his sādhaka body here, and when he went
to Vaikuṇṭha, his body became transcendental.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

His body was not four-handed when he visited Vaikuṇṭha,
but it was cinmaya (transcendental, of spiritual
substance)

Śrīpāda Tīrtha Mahārāja:

I have a question regarding this verse:


                            173
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017


tāsāṁ tat-saubhaga-madaṁ

vīkṣya mānaṁ ca keśavaḥ

praśamāya prasādāya

tatraivāntaradhīyata

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.29.48)


[Seeing the gopīs’ intoxication due to their good
fortune, and also the māna (sulky mood) of Rādhārāṇī,
Lord Keśava wanted to quell the first and pacify the
second. He thus disappeared at that very spot.]

This verse states that the vraja-gopīs became
intoxicated by their good fortune.

[He continues to ask his question, in Hindi, on the
subject of this verse.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There are many types of gopīs – taṭasthā (neutral to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s party of gopīs), suhṛdā (friendly to
Her party), svapakṣa (in Her party) and vipakṣa (against
Her party). Such subjects are not for discussion among
ordinary society; they are discussed among elevated
devotees. For others we discuss topics like Prahlāda
Mahārāja, Citraketu Mahārāja, and the Eleventh Canto.

Here we will discuss some of the Eleventh Canto, and the
Tenth Canto as well. We will discuss some of the last
parts of the Tenth Canto, such as Sudāmā-caritra
(Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with the brāhmaṇa Sudāmā), Rukmiṇī-
caritra (the history of Kṛṣṇa’s marriage with Rukmiṇī),
and then mausala-līlā (the pastimes leading to Kṛṣṇa’s
disappearance from the vision of this world), and
Uddhava-saṁvāda (the conversation between Kṛṣṇa and
Uddhava).

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

We discussed the Eleventh Canto in Badger last year.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We discussed the Tenth Canto ten or twelve times.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Yes, but we discussed the Eleventh Canto in Badger
recently, and most of the devotees who heard it there
last year are coming here for this festival.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No harm.

Brajanāth dāsa:

They forget.

                           174
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

Most of the same devotees will be coming here from out
of town, and there will be only a very few local
devotees.

Viṣṇu dāsa:

A very lot.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very few.

Brajanāth dāsa:

This is Sam from Bengal.

Sam:

I have been a Buddhist most of my life, but I am
encouraged to submit to the Hare Kṛṣṇa organization.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I went to China. There is a Buddhist leader with 40,000
disciples, and his prominent preachers have a total of
about 1,100,000 disciples. He wants to surrender all of
his followers to me, and he is making a very big
preaching center.

Sam:

I can understand why this is more appealing in
comparison to the philosophy we are used to.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You should know that Buddhism came from Gautama Buddha
who is from Gāyā in India. His birthplace was in Nepal.
He preached that the world was created from zero, and in
the end we become zero. His doctrine claimed that there
is no God and no jīva, nor is there anything else: There
was and is only zero.

If anyone wants to be zero, or nothing, that person will
do well to accept this Buddhist doctrine. The Buddhist
preachers pose many arguments in support of their
conception and can attract general people very easily,
but they cannot attract anyone who is knowledgeable. The
Buddhist doctrine was driven out of India, to Tibet, and
then to Japan, China, and other places. This doctrine is
again being rejected, and people are now coming to

kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

You are very lucky that you want to surrender yourself
and be happy. You are a spirit soul, part and parcel of
Kṛṣṇa. You are His eternal servant. There is happiness
in the process of bhakti, whereas in Buddhism there is
no happiness. After all, if all is zero, there is no one
to be happy.


                           175
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

In reality, the soul is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, His
eternal servant. He can enjoy the service of Kṛṣṇa.

[At the end of the walk, Śrīla Gurudeva enters the home
of Suśīla dāsa and Bimalā dāsī, where the devotees sing,
Gaurāṅga Bolite Habe.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Whether you are a gṛhastha, householder, or a tyāgī,
renounciant, you must somehow maintain your life – by
business, by service, or by some other means. In any
case, in your gṛhastha-āśrama, the center must be Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. If Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa are not the center of your gṛhastha life and you
are not performing bhajana by chanting and remembering,
your money will not save you. One day you will become
old, and after that you will give up your body. At the
time of death whatever you have collected – the money
you’ve earned, the position you have attained, your
wife, children, and all your possessions – will all
remain here. Moreover, where will you go? In your next
life you may again be born as a dog or hog, a donkey or
a monkey.

Always remember these instructions. There is no harm in
being a gṛhastha. So many followers of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and so many devotees of Kṛṣṇa were gṛhastha;
but they were gṛhastha only to serve Kṛṣṇa.

[To Asish, the son of Suśīla dāsa and Bimalā dāsī] We
have come to your house today, so now it is Vaikuṇṭha.
But always remember that gṛhastha life is to be
maintained only to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Follow your
mother’s and father’s path – the way in which they are
serving Vaiṣṇavas and guru, and giving their whole
energy for kṛṣṇa-bhakti. You should also be like that.
Don’t forget this.

Gaura premānande.




May 23, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How are you?

Padmanābha dāsa (from Delhi):

You know everything Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You have a good job now?

Padmanābha dāsa:


                           176
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Yes, I have a good job.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Collect some money, and then come to India.

Rāmacandra dāsa (from Delhi):

He is preaching in America now. He is doing very nice
preaching, and he is planning to start a temple in
Kentucky. If he does that, how will he go back to India?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, you are preaching?

Padmanābha dāsa:

Gurudeva, even ISKCON is not visible where I am
preaching. I had two programs. In one program around
sixty or seventy people came, and in another program
about thirty-five or forty people came.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Indupati is helping with the preaching center in
Alachua, holding programs and helping in so many other
ways.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He is very qualified; very qualified.

Indupati dāsa:

Gurudeva, I am drowning in an ocean full of crocodiles
and sharks.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Crocodiles may come, but they are not able to touch you.
In fact, they cannot even smell you.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:




saṁsāra-duḥkha-jaladhau patitasya kāmakrodhādi-

nakra-makaraiḥ kavalī-kṛtasya

durvāsanā-nigaḍitasya nirāśrayasya

caitanya-candra mama dehi padāvalambam

(Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta 54,

by Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī)


[O Caitanya–candra, trapped in the evil net of material
existence, I have fallen into an ocean of misery where I
am being devoured by the crocodiles and sharks of lust,

                            177
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

anger, greed, and so forth. Please give this destitute
person, who is chained to wicked desires, shelter at
Your feet.]

“Gurudeva mama-devī padavalambam – Oh Gurudeva, please
give me shelter at your feet.”

Indupati dāsa:

May I ask a question Gurudeva?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is that?

Indupati dāsa:

Vicitra dīdī was giving some classes in Alachua. In one
class she was explaining Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. Then,
after a couple of days, she was talking about the
glories of śrī guru. She mentioned that our ācāryas –
maybe not all – have achieved perfection in previous
lives. Previously they were baddha-jīvas (conditioned
souls); then they achieved perfection, and then they
came again from Goloka to deliver other conditioned
souls.

When I asked some other devotees about this, they said
it is not possible to think of guru like this. I made
the point that in Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, as well as the
case of Nārada, the guru explains to his disciple how he
achieved perfection – just to encourage the disciple.

So, is it proper to even consider the possibility that
one’s guru was once a baddha-jīva who achieved
perfection and then came back to deliver the fallen
souls?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

A guru may be like that, but we should understand our
guru-paramparā in this way:


sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair

uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ

kinto prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

(Śrī Guruvāṣṭakam, Verse 7)


[All the scriptures proclaim that śrī gurudeva is
sākṣāt-hari, the direct potency of Śrī Hari, and is thus
considered by saintly authorities to be His non-
different representative. Because śrī gurudeva is so
dear to the Lord, being His confidential servitor
(acintya-bhedābheda prakāśa-vigraha, the inconceivable
different and non-different worshipable manifestation of
the Lord), I offer prayers unto his lotus feet.]


                          178
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

We should consider that “My Gurudeva is nitya-mukta.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Eternally liberated.

If you think that he was conditioned, you may minimize
his glory and then commit offenses.

Indupati dāsa:

Why, then, did Gopa-kumara explain to his disciple how
he achieved perfection?

Rāmacandra dāsa:

His point is that our ācāryas and gurus have sometimes
explained to their disciples their own progress – only
to inspire their disciples to follow them. Nārada and
Gopa-kumara inspired their disciples in this manner.

Because of this, it is sometimes said that those who
come here as guru do not come from Goloka Vṛndāvana, but
that they attained their perfection from here. People
say that only the sādhana-siddha gurus, those who were
previously conditioned souls, can know the problems of
the conditioned soul; otherwise they cannot preach.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, if we follow that logic, we would have to say
that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī were
previously baddha-jīvas (conditioned souls) who were
working for Muslims.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Some gurus were baddha-jīvas who were liberated and
became associates; they are also considered ācāryas. And
some are directly nitya-mukta kṛṣṇa-parikaras, eternally
perfect associates. We will have to reconcile this.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is best to consider guru as eternally liberated. Guru
speaks of himself as an ordinary jīva just to inspire
the conditioned souls that they too can follow the
process of bhakti and achieve perfection: Otherwise,
those conditioned souls might become hopeless. They
might develop a tendency to delay their bhakti process.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Whatever it may be, [this phrase can also be taken as
Śrīla Gurudeva’s own humility] we should think, “My Guru
Mahārāja is an associate of Kṛṣṇa, and he has come from
Goloka Vṛndāvana.” We should not think of him as a
baddha-jīva.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:




                            179
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

rādhā-sanmukha-samsaktim

sakhi-saṅga-nivasinim

tam aham satatam vande

guru-rupam param sakhim


[I forever worship my guru, who in his form as an
exalted sakhī is happily immersed in the company of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the other sakhīs.]

Padmanābha dāsa:

The way Nārada speaks makes it look like he was formally
a conditioned soul.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Nārada has shown by his own life: “I was a baddha-jīva,
and, by the process of bhakti, I became liberated.” But
he is eternally liberated. He spoke in this way to show
an example for others.

Anything else?

Indupati dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, in Alachua, most of the devotees are
householders. I am a householder because I am holding a
house, and Lakṣmī-pati lives there with me, but he is a
brahmacārī.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you have a wife or children?

Indupati dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, so you are now vānaprasthī (renounced from household
life but not brahmacārī or sannyāsī).

Indupati dāsa:

I am simply mūrkha, a fool, Śrīla Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I have inspired you, and therefore you are not a fool.
You are okay.

Indupati dāsa:

What should I do, Śrīla Gurudeva?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You should preach as you are preaching now.


                           180
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Indupati dāsa:

I am also running a business, so I do not give full time
for preaching.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No harm. The fruit of that work is given to my service –
Thakurjī’s service. You help so much.

Indupati dāsa:

If that is the case, why am I suffering so much?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do not think that you   are suffering. All suffering
conditions are due to   your previous lives’ good and bad
actions, and also the   special mercy of Kṛṣṇa. You should
tolerate this, and do   bhajana.


tat te ’nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo

bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam

hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te

jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.8)


[My dear Lord, one who earnestly waits for You to bestow
Your causeless mercy upon him, all the while patiently
suffering the reactions of his past misdeeds and
offering You respectful obeisances with his heart,
words, and body, is surely eligible for liberation, for
it has become his rightful claim.]

Think in this way.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Indupati prabhu says that sometimes he thinks about
whether or not to marry again.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, don’t marry.

Indupati dāsa:

Please place your lotus foot on my head, Śrīla Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, I will do so.

Indupati dāsa:

When you send your preachers to Alachua and when I’m
with you, all my problems fly away. When I’m alone in
Alachua, it is not so easy.

                            181
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

You are not alone. I am with you. Kṛṣṇa is with you. So
many Vaiṣṇavas are with you.

Indupati dāsa:

Can you send more preachers? After they are gone,
everything becomes like a void.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Jīvas journey through thousands upon thousands of
births. This transmigration is endless; it has been
continuing since the beginning of creation. The jīvas
have been moving around and around this world, so they
will not achieve perfection in only one birth. It will
take time. They will come again and again in their
practice of bhakti-yoga. After so many births rati will
come, then prema will come, and at that time you will be
liberated.

Indupati dāsa:

Sometimes I think that it is because of some vaiṣṇava-
aparādhā that I am suffering.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do not think that way. Do you quarrel with Vaiṣṇavas,
and abuse them?

Indupati dāsa:

No, not now; but maybe before.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That may be.

Indupati dāsa:

What can I do if I don’t remember whom I’ve offended?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can pray to all Vaiṣṇavas:


vāñchā-kalpa-tarubyaś ca

kappa-sindhubhya eva ca

patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo

vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ


[I offer praṇāmas unto the Vaiṣṇavas, who are just like
wish-fulfilling desire trees, who are an ocean of mercy,
and who deliver the fallen, conditioned souls.]

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

                            182
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


When do you think you will give him saffron, Gurudeva?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When he agrees to it.




May 23, 2009


Darśana

After the Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Vicitra dāsī] Is your Gurudeva an eternally
liberated associate (parikara) of Kṛṣṇa, or was he a
baddha-jīva (conditioned soul) who became liberated?

Vicitra dāsī:

I’ve been told that Mahāprabhu’s associates are
eternally liberated – the personalities who appeared
with Him are eternally liberated. Those in our guru-
paramparā who came after He departed are sādhana-
siddhas.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What about Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura?

Vicitra dāsī:

According to my understanding he is sādhana-siddha, as
is Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They are sādhana-siddha?

Vicitra dāsī:

This is what I have been told.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do not think of them as sādhana-siddha. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita:


namo bhaktivinodaya

sac-cid-ananda-namine

gaura-śakti-svarūpaya

rūpānuga-varaya te



                           183
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

[I offer praṇāma unto Saccidānanda Śrī Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, who is the foremost of rūpānugas and the
embodiment of Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu’s śakti, Gadādhara
Paṇḍita.]

Some in our guru-paramparā are sādhana-siddha, but not
all. There is no need of putting forward this argument.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

There is no need at all for this subject matter.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You should speak exactly what you have learned from me,
and what is exactly true, and in such a way that
everything is reconciled.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

I heard about a book on the subject of an exchange of
letters between Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Lalitā-
prasāda. There it is said that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura studied Christianity.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is not that he converted to Christianity. He studied
Christianity, Muslim-dharma, brahma-dharma, and Hindu-
dharma. He also studied all the books of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī.

He has personally written about his own identity.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

[from Gītā-mālā, Siddhi-lālasā, Song 8:]


baraṇe taḍit bāsa tārābalī

kamala mañjarī nāma

sāḍe bāra barṣa bayasa satata

svānanda-sukhada-dhāma


[This maidservant has a complexion just like lightning,
and she is wearing a sari which has star-like patterns
all over it. My name is Kamala Mañjarī. Eternally
appearing to be only twelve-and-a-half years of age, I
always live within the abode of Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja.]

śrī karpūra-sevā lalitāra gaṇa

rādhā jutheśvarī hana

mameśvarī-nātha śrī-nanda-nandana

āmāra parāṇa dhana


[I render the service of preparing camphor within the

                             184
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

group of Lalitā-sakhī. Śrī Rādhā is the leader of our
group, and the center of all our activities. And the
Lord of my Queen Rādhā is the delightful son of Nanda
Mahārāja, Who is the treasure of my life.]

śrī rūpa mañjarī prabhṛtira sama

jugala sevāya āśā

avaśya se-rūpa sevā pabo āmi

parākāṣṭha su-viśvāsa


[I always desire to execute confidential service to the
Divine Couple similar to that which is rendered by Śrī
Rūpa Mañjarī and her associates. Thus I will certainly
get this kind of service, for I so intensely desire it
with the absolute totality of my faith.]

kabe bā e dāsī saṁsiddhi labhibe

rādhā-kuṇḍe bāsa kori’

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevā satata koribe

pūrva smṛti parihari’


[When will this maidservant thus attain such completely
fulfilled spiritual perfection, living by the banks of
Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa? I will eternally serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa,
and all of my previous memories will be long since
forgotten.]

This is his identification.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

Yes, but this book says that although he is now siddha,
when he was young he took non-vegetarian foodstuffs for
some time.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No. That is not possible. That statement is an offense.
It is not only false; it is fully false. Lord Rāmacandra
was in the role of a kṣatriya7 and therefore hunted; so
does this mean He ate meat? Because he killed a deer, he
ate meat? Kṛṣṇa was also in the role of a kṣatriya, and
He was also hunting. Do you want to say that Kṛṣṇa ate
meat? This is totally false.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

People also say he wrote his autobiography with the help
of Lalita-prasāda.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That book is not authentic. Śrīla Prabhupāda was his
favorite son. What Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura did not reveal
to Prabhupāda, he revealed to Lalita-prasāda? That is
not possible. Lalita-prasāda is not in the line of our

                          185
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

guru-paramparā.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

When Śrīla Prabhupāda was born, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura said to Bhagavatī-devī, “A mahāpuruṣa (fully
self-realized soul) has come.” He didn’t say this about
his other children. He saw all the auspicious markings
on his son’s body, such as the tilaka and kānti mark,
and he told Bhagavatī-devī to nourish him very
carefully.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Vicitra dāsī] You should give classes very
carefully, so that no one will have any doubts.

Rūpa-raghunātha dāsa:

I have a question. Many times it is said that Lord
Śaṅkara is a manifestation of Lord Kṛṣṇa in the same way
that yogurt comes from milk. We also hear that he is
Gopīśvara. So, is Sadāśiva ultimately a manifestation of
Gopīśvara, or a manifestation of Kṛṣṇa?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Kṛṣṇa personally manifested as Śaṅkara (Śiva), but
Śaṅkara cannot again become Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the root,
and analogously, milk is the root. By the addition of
some agent, milk is transformed into yogurt, and once
transformed, yogurt cannot again become milk. We can
understand Śaṅkara in that way.

Sadāśiva is a root tattva (viṣṇu-tattva), and from Him
comes the group of Rudras. The Rudras are not viṣṇu-
tattva. It is Rudra (a manifestation of Śaṅkara) who
destroys this world, not Sadāśiva. Sadāśiva is Gopīśvara
Mahādeva.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

So, Sadāśiva becomes Gopīśvara Mahādeva?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He does not ‘become’ Gopīśvara Mahādeva. He is Gopīśvara
Mahādeva. The term ‘becomes’ implies that one is
transformed into the other.

Brajanāth dāsa:

We have heard that Kṛṣṇa manifests Rādhikā from His left
side, and from His other side He manifests Gopīśvara.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Gopīśvara is Sadāśiva.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Rūpa-raghunātha prabhu is asking, who comes first?
Gopīśvara or Sadāśiva?


                            186
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Both are eternal. Which comes first – Sunday or Monday?
No one can decide. A circle can start from any point.

It seems that Rāmacandra appeared first, and then Kṛṣṇa.
But if Kṛṣṇa is the reference point, then Kṛṣṇa appeared
first, and afterward Rāmacandra.

Gaura premānande!




May 25, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Last night’s drama [the sannyāsīs’ improvised drama on
the pastime of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva] was very good – very
attractive.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

He thought I [playing the part of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva] was
really going to kill him.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I was happy with both parts.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

All the devotees enjoyed the drama very much. One
devotee came to my door last night and said, “Mahārāja,
I never laughed so much in my whole life.”

Sthāyī-bhāva dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, Kṛṣṇa is ever-fresh and His beauty is
unlimited. When Śrīmatī Rādhikā sees Him, does He appear
the same as when She last saw Him; or does He look
different each time?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

New, new; not as before. Sometimes Rādhikā cannot
recognize that He is the same Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, this is Dāmodara dāsa. He is nine years
old. He wants to take dīkṣā from you. He asks for your
blessings of mantra initiation.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How many rounds do you chant per day?

Dāmodara dāsa:

                            187
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017


Twelve.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can receive dīkṣā when you are chanting sixteen
rounds per day. Can you chant sixteen rounds per day?

Dāmodara dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In that case, you can take dīkṣā.

Devotees:

Jaya! Haribol!

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yesterday evening I spoke something about Nārada. What
did I say?8

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Nārada has an eternal form, and the other form that is a
partial Nārada. The Nārada who was the son of the
maidservant appeared to be a sādhana-siddha devotee (a
devotee who becomes perfect by the performance of
regulative spiritual practices). He is an expansion of
the original Nārada.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then?

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Nārada is an eternal associate of Mahāprabhu.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Can you give another example?

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

You gave the example that Droṇa and Dhāra are expansions
of Nanda and Yaśodā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What did I say about Bharata Mahārāja in yesterday’s
class? Who can explain?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

You said that just as Bharata made the mistake of
becoming so absorbed in the baby deer that, even though
he was highly qualified in bhakti, he had to take birth
as a deer.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                            188
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


This answer will not suffice. The point is that what one
remembers at the time of death determines what one will
become.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Yes, I was going to say that. You said that just as he
was absorbed at the time of death, similarly, if we
practice in this life to meditate upon the aṣṭa-kālīya-
līlā (the daily twenty-four hour pastimes) of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, there is a chance that at the time of death we
can remember Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes and take birth there in
the form of a gopī to serve under Rūpa Mañjarī. You said
this will especially happen if we can remember Rūpa
Mañjarī and her service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Qualified jīvas with a constitutional form in mādhurya-
rasa can achieve service only like that of Rūpa Mañjarī.
No jīva can attain service like that of Lalita or
Viśākhā.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

One question in this regard, Śrīla Gurudeva. Many
devotees do not understand when the time is appropriate
to begin to practice meditation upon aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The time is appropriate when all anarthas have been
removed, and when the devotee doesn’t see a difference
between ladies and men; at that time, not before.

Devotee:

But you also quote this verse:


vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ

śraddhānvito ’nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ

bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ

hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.39)


[Anyone who faithfully hears or describes the Lord’s
playful affairs with the young gopīs of Vṛndāvana will
attain the Lord’s pure devotional service. Thus he will
quickly become sober and conquer lust, the disease of
the heart.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The proper meditation will come naturally as one
actually advances in bhakti. If a devotee has any lust
for women, his life will be ruined by imitative
meditation. When rati appears, after āsakti, he can

                          189
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

meditate on aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā; only then. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written this in Jaiva-dharma.
When can we wear paramahaṁsa-veṣa (the garb of
paramahaṁsa, or self-realized soul)? Only at this stage
can it be worn; not before.

Devotee:

Before that stage, is there something called mantra-
mayi-upāsanā? What is the process?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Gurudeva has given that process; the process you are
following. Klīṁ-kṛṣṇāya: this is also a part of the
process.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

He is asking, “What should we meditate on?”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I have already explained that.

[To Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja] Do you have anarthas or
not?

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

Oh yes – so many.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Is anyone here free from anarthas?

Devotees:

Only you, Śrīla Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, I am not free. I see that there is a difference
between ladies and men.

Devotees:

Never, never.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can say that, but I really...

Devotee:

You are like Śukadeva Gosvāmī.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

So try to give up anarthas.

Śrīpāda Vaikhānas Mahārāja:

What about reading books that contain detailed

                            190
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

information about Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā? Some
books have very confidential information. Should we
refrain from reading those until we reach a certain
level?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Mahārāja is saying that some books, such as Gīta-
govinda, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, and Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta have so
much detailed information about aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā. Should
we not read these?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you are qualified, you can read them. Otherwise, if
you are not qualified, you will become overwhelmed by
lust when you read, and you will sink in that lust.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

So it is very necessary for every devotee to examine
their level of qualification?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes; and if you are qualified, then enter. Especially,
it is essential to take the help of guru.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, your Guru Mahārāja has written a
maṅgala-ārati song, wherein there is meditation on
niśānta-līlā9. Is it good even for the sādhakas who have
anarthas to meditate on this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, it is good. By meditating on this kīrtana, aspiring
devotees will make that highest service the aim of their
sādhana-bhajana.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja’s Śrī Govinda-līlāmṛta and
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī’s Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta
discuss the highest topics, such as aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā,
but the devotees who are qualified to read these
literatures are rare. If unqualified persons read these
literatures, lust will envelop them. Be very careful.

[Sureśa dāsa presents Śrīla Gurudeva with some newly
printed Spanish books.]

Brajanāth dāsa:

In Venezuela, Bhaktivedānta Sagara Mahārāja and others
are printing books and magazines in Spanish. They have
an ‘on-demand’ printing press.Their press can print one
book, or ten books, or as many as a person orders.

Līlānātha dāsa:

Anyone who wants Spanish publications, please contact
Sureśa prabhu. He will supply your order.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                          191
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


[After looking at the publications] Very good. I
appreciate this.

Raghunātha Bhatta dāsa:

Gurudeva, sometimes I feel that I would like to
communicate better, but I cannot communicate with you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why do you feel this way?

Raghunātha Bhatta dāsa:

Because my situation…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You are free to communicate with me.

Raghunātha Bhatta dāsa:

Okay, then I will speak. In San Francisco, I was
evicted; kicked out of the house. I had no money and no
place to live. You had ordered me to go there for
preaching, but I had no place to go. I had no
alternative but to leave and move to Austin, Texas. We
are distributing many books there, and we have been
there for only three or four weeks.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What can I do? I thought that because you are senior to
Āśrama Mahārāja you would do more preaching than he is
doing. But look where he has advanced to, and where you
are. He is preaching everywhere, but although you are
more qualified than he is, you cannot do much.

Raghunātha Bhatta dāsa:

Gurudeva, I have to prepare myself. I am doing one
particular activity; I have to progress gradually. But
we are distributing many books.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Anupama dāsa] How are you feeling here? Okay?

Anupama dāsa:

I’m very good, thank you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Now, learn everything that you are hearing from me, and
then preach in Las Vegas. Perhaps you are a brahmacārī?
Or, are you in married life?

Anupama dāsa:

No, not married yet.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                            192
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


One way or the other, you should preach.

Are there any special questions?

Devotee:

In gaura-līlā, Anaṅga Mañjarī is Jāhnavā-īśvarī, the
consort of Balarāma Nityānanda, but who is Baladeva’s
consort in kṛṣṇa-līlā?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is not mentioned that He has any consort there.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are there no questions on a less elevated platform than
the topic of Anaṅga Mañjarī?

Where is Vrajendra-nandana prabhu?

Vrajendra-nandana dāsa:

I’m here, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You have given your daughter in marriage.

Vrajendra-nandana dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And she is now with her husband. Your son wants to be in
the maṭha. Are you happy about this?

Vrajendra-nandana dāsa:

Yes, very much so.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Now all your family responsibilities are finished.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Guru Ma is there.

Vrajendra-nandana dāsa:

She is meeting with you this morning.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

She is very qualified.

So what do you want to do now?

Vrajendra-nandana dāsa:

Whatever you tell me to do.

                            193
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

Better to enter the vānaprastha-āśrama. Up to now you
have taught smaller boys, students; now you should
preach to adults. You can preach here and there. By
preaching, your maintenance will automatically come.

Vrajendra-nandana dāsa:

By your blessings, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Okay?

Vrajendra-nandana dāsa:

Okay, by your blessings.

Devotees:

Gaura premānande! Haribol!

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You are very qualified. You can preach – not in one
place; in many places.

[To Mādhava dāsa] How are you? Okay? Are you preaching?

Mādhava dāsa:

Yes, but I want to ask you what to do now.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can meet me at any time. Where is Sanātana prabhu?
And Bhūmipati?

[To Sanātana dāsa] Are you okay? Are you preaching and
helping our devotees to preach?

Sanātana dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are you in Washington?

Sanātana dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And you?

Mādhava dāsa:

I am still in Pennsylvania, but now I have no place to
go.


                             194
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No place? Why are you ‘in the sky’? Why are you not
staying in a maṭha?

Sanātana dāsa:

Gurudeva, I am looking for property to establish a
maṭha, but I need direction from you. Should we do
something similar to what is being done here in Houston,
or should we do something on a small scale?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Try to do what you can do easily.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, Bhūmipati is here.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are you living in the same place as before?

Bhūmipati dāsa:

Same place.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Where?

Bhūmipati dāsa:

I am in New York, Gurudeva. Sometimes we have phone
conferences. All the devotees call in, and we have a
study group. We study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Jaiva-dharma, and Bhakti-tattva-
viveka. Devotees come together by telephone.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. Thank you. I am very happy.

[After the walk]

Bimala dāsī:

Śrīla Gurudeva, when I received dīkṣā from you, my mind
was not focused. I didn’t actually know what was going
on, so my meditation is not very good. Can I hear the
mantras from you again?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, you can.

Tulasikā dāsī:

[Translating from Russian] She needs help. She needs
blessings.

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                          195
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

(To the Russian devotee) My blessings to you. Chant, and
always remember me. I will inspire your heart. Don’t
fear.




May 25, 2009


Darśana

Devotee:

[Reading a letter] If a family member knowingly or
unknowingly speaks offensively to guru, should we cut
off our association with him?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, don’t keep a relationship with such a family
member.

Devotee:

Are we able to judge the level of someone else’s bhakti?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why not? By seeing the degree of honor that person has
for harināma, and the niṣṭhā (strong faith) he has in
his Gurudeva, we can understand and thus honor him.

Devotee:

I have a lot of anger. How can I control my tongue?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Try to control your tongue, otherwise you will lose
everything.

Dr. Asha:

That is good for everybody Gurudeva – male and female.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Everyone should control their tongue. Draupadī once made
fun of Duryodhana and said, “As the father is blind, so
is the son blind.” As a result of her uncontrolled
tongue, the Mahābhārata war began wherein many millions
of warriors were killed10

Devotee:

What can I do to serve you?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can serve me by chanting and remembering, and
preaching as far as you are qualified.


                          196
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Devotee:

Please accept my humble obeisances. I am looking to
understand and deepen my connection with śrī guru. I
joined Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandira over thirty years ago,
just after Śrīla Prabhupāda left the vision of the
world. I had one divine experience when my guru came to
me in a dream and said, “You are full of material
desires, but I accept you.” For many years I considered
this to be Śrīla Prabhupāda, but I don’t understand my
connection with him. I feel very confused about my
connection with our paramparā. I would like your
guidance, please.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Guru is everywhere; he knows the heart of all. If you
meditate upon him, and ask him for instruction, he will
inspire you. Always chant and remember, and read bhakti
books.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

He is reading your books. He wants to accept you as his
śikṣā-guru and hear the mantras from you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, you can see me in this way. I will help you.

Dr. Asha:

You said that an insincere disciple can become a dog, or
hog, or monkey, or donkey in his next life. Can you tell
me what is written on my forehead?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You will become a devotee again, and you will progress;
and after that you will be liberated.

Devotee:

I brought my Deities to be installed.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Tīrtha Mahārāja will install them.




May 26, 2009


Morning Walk

Priyanātha dāsa:

Gurudeva, I know that in order to attain pure devotional
service, I must remove the material attachments from my
heart. I feel that I want to please you and serve you,
but I have so many impure things in my heart. How can I

                            197
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

remove them?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The only remedy is sādhu-saṅga – sādhu-saṅga: hearing
hari-kathā from sādhus. Do you understand? Associate
with the devotees who are in all respects superior to
you. Hear their hari-kathā and try to follow them. In
this way your anarthas will disappear very soon.

Is my answer okay?

Priyanātha dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In the coming year, after visiting Hawaii I may go to
Los Angeles and hold a two or three-day hari-kathā
festival there. Gaurasundara and others will arrange it.
Where is Gaurasundara? Can you arrange it?

Gaurasundara dāsa:

Absolutely.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Only for two days.

Gaurasundara dāsa:

No problem.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I want to appeal to the Indian community in Los Angeles,
so that the Indians there will become like those in
Houston. The Indians here in Houston are doing so much
service. I want to inspire them so that they will help
our mission in Los Angeles.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Before you come, for this entire year, we will canvas
among the Indian community. We will advertise that you
are coming.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Not only Los Angeles, but nearby San Diego as well. In
the meantime, I will send Tīrtha Mahārāja to San Diego
this year, and about five hundred Indians will come to
join his classes.

Any questions?

Raghunātha Bhatta dāsa:

Gurudeva, I want to say that I am a bad disciple. I want
to propose that I go to preach in Austin. Austin is the
capital of Texas. I’m already there. The only reason
people did not come here from there is that one leader

                          198
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

is influenced by ISKCON. But there is a doctor who is
giving us a storefront. Āditya-kṛṣṇa prabhu is now
helping, and other devotees are helping with finances. I
want your blessings.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What do you want? Do you want to preach there?

Raghunātha Bhatta dāsa:

I want your blessings to preach as you like. Austin is
three-and-a-half to four hours from Houston. We also
have the support of the Houston devotees; they can help
us preach, and Avadhūta Mahārāja also wants to help.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You will preach there?

Brajanāth dāsa:

He has already been there for one month.

Raghunātha Bhatta dāsa:

We beg for your blessings, as we had your blessings in
San Francisco. We were feeling some empowerment in San
Francisco, but financially it was difficult for us.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

My blessings will not    do anything until you yourself
have fixed your mind.    You have been to so many cities,
but your mind was not    fixed and that is why you could
not achieve anything.    You are qualified to be a very
good devotee, but you    misuse your mind.

Are there any questions about bhakti?

Ben (now Gaura-kṛṣṇa dāsa):

My name is Bhakta Ben. My question is this: I am
surrendering my intelligence unto you, so that you may
be my spiritual father; but I wish to surrender my heart
fully to you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Thank you. I accept.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

Yesterday there was a question. Is hearing the pure name
and chanting the pure name equal? Also, when we hear the
pure name uttered by gurudeva, does it remain pure when
it enters our heart?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura was chanting and the prostitute
was hearing. What was the result? After three nights she
was totally changed by his śabda-brahma (transcendental
sound vibration, or God in the form of sound), which has

                             199
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

great power to change anyone.

Ben:

We would like to hear śuddha-nāma (pure chanting of the
holy name), Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Try to chant and remember Kṛṣṇa, read Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja’s books and my books, and
thus become qualified. I desire that in your future life
you will not marry.

What is your name?

Abhaya-caraṇa dāsa:

My name is Abhaya-caraṇa dāsa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are you married?

Abhaya-caraṇa dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Priyanātha dāsa] And you? What do you want?

Priyanātha dāsa:

I think I want to get married.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you know that in your past millions of births you
were married without marrying – when you were hog, pig,
donkey, and monkey? You had sufficient chance to enjoy
sense gratification at that time. Now, Kṛṣṇa has
mercifully given you this human form of life, only to
serve Him, to chant His holy name, and to practice
bhakti-yoga with all your energy. This life is not meant
for material purposes.


labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte

mānuṣyam artha-dam anityām apīha dhīraḥ

tūrṇaṁ yateta na pated anu-mṛtyu yāvan

niḥśreyasāya viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.9.29)


[After many, many births and deaths one achieves the
rare human form of life, which, although temporary,
affords one the opportunity to attain the highest
perfection. Thus a sober human being should quickly
endeavor for the ultimate perfection of life as long as

                          200
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

his body, which is always subject to death, has not
fallen down and died. After all, sense gratification is
available even in the most abominable species of life,
whereas Kṛṣṇa consciousness is possible only for a human
being.]

The time of our death is not certain. Death is dancing
on our heads. No one can decide when it will come; only
Kṛṣṇa knows. This human life is not meant for sense
gratification or for tasting worldly things. If you
taste marriage, you will still not be satisfied. All of
you please think about this.

If you want to be a gṛhastha, be like the Pāṇḍavas. Do
you know the Pāṇḍavas? Do you know Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita? When
his son died, he was not at all disturbed. Mahāprabhu
was at his home at the time of his son’s death, and he
continued dancing and singing kīrtana in Mahāprabhu’s
association. Be ideal gṛhasthas, ideal brahmacārīs, or
ideal sannyāsīs.

First establish the one goal of your life – what you
really want. Why do you want to practice bhajana, or
bhakti-yoga? Why?

Ben:

So that we can awaken our own spiritual identity.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is your goal?

Ben:

My goal is to obtain bhāva-bhakti.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In order to obtain bhāva-bhakti, or prema for Kṛṣṇa, you
will have to sacrifice many worldly attachments. Pure
bhakti is such a precious and highly valuable treasure –
far more valuable than jewels. If someone tells you,
“Give up your wife, and I will give you one million
dollars,” what would you do?

Ben:

I would give her up for pure devotional service; no
problem.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Know that although you are gṛhasthas, it is essential to
fix your aim and object. If needed, give up this
gṛhastha-āśrama to achieve that aim; but if your
gṛhastha situation is favorable for that aim, then it is
very good. Serve Kṛṣṇa like the Pāṇḍavas.

Abhaya-caraṇa dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I have one comment and one question. My
comment is that as I was coming here to see you I was
thinking of this amusing situation. My father was the

                          201
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

chairman of the GBC in the year that ISKCON decided to
ban you, and now I am here trying to take shelter of
you. My father is Navīna-kṛṣṇa.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

His father is Indian, Gurudeva. His name is Mr. Naveen
Khurana (or Navīna-kṛṣṇa dāsa). He is from Delhi. I have
been to his house with Lokanātha Mahārāja when I was in
ISKCON. I remember his house. His mother was also there
at that time. Now they are totally against you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What harm have I done to them?

Devotee:

Gurudeva, I have a question. I want to understand the
relationship between the harināma mahā-mantra and the
gāyatrī-mantra.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

After receiving initiation you will know.

[To Mukunda dāsa from California] Do you know vaiṣṇava-
sadācāra?

Mukunda dāsa:

I don’t know the definition of sadācāra.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It refers to vaiṣṇava behavior. Do you see anyone
looking like you?

Mukunda dāsa:

No, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why have you pierced your nose and ears, and why have
you tattooed yourself in this way? To achieve bhakti?

Mukunda dāsa:

It was due to bad association.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why have you taken bad association? Are you married?

Mukunda dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Today, I want to see everything gone.

Mukunda dāsa:

                          202
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Okay.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Be like a Vaiṣṇava.

Mukunda dāsa:

Yes, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are there any more questions?

Kamala-kānta dāsa:

Gurudeva, after Viśvarūpa (Mahāprabhu’s brother) took
sannyāsa and left home, Nimāi smashed everything in the
house a few times. Why did He do this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is one of His sweet pastimes – to act like other
ordinary human children. Kṛṣṇa used to steal butter from
house to house. Why? Was the butter not available in His
mother’s house? This is the nature of ordinary children.
In this way, no one would think Him to be the Supreme
Lord. He did this to hide Himself.

Govinda dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, in Daśa-mūla 8, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
says:


hareh sakteh sarvam cid-acid akhilam parinatih syat

vivartam no satyam srutim iti viruddham kali malam

harer bhedabhedau sruti vihita tattvam suvimalam

tatah premnah siddhir bhāvati nitaram nityā-visaye

(Daśa-mūla, Verse 8, in Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 18)


[The entire spiritual and material creation is a
transfor-mation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s śakti. The impersonal
philosophy of illusion (vivarta-vāda) is not true. It is
an impurity that has been produced by Kali-yuga, and is
contrary to the teachings of the Vedas. The Vedas
support acintya-bhedābheda-tattva (inconceivable oneness
and difference) as the pure absolute doctrine, and one
can attain perfect love for the Eternal Absolute when he
accepts this principle.]

He is saying here that the material and spiritual
creations are products of Kṛṣṇa’s śakti, and that the
philosophy of illusion (vivarta-vāda) is not true. The
vivarta-vāda theory is an illusion produced by Kali-
yuga. We see, though, that the Māyāvāda philosophy was
present in other ages as well. So my question is this:
Why is Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda writing that the philosophy

                          203
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

of vivarta-vāda is a product of Kali-yuga?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of ‘Kali-yuga’ in this connection?
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is referring to Śaṅkarācārya.
Before Śaṅkarācārya came, there was no vivarta-vāda. He
was the first to introduce it, and he attracted so many
learned persons.

Govinda dāsa:

In the next Daśa-mūla śloka, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
says, “śrutiḥ kṛṣṇākhyānaṁ smaraṇa-nati-pūjā-vidhi-gaṇāḥ
– by performing vaidhī-bhakti, one can attain pure
kṛṣṇa-rati.” But from your books and from the
interpretation of so many of our ācāryas we learn that
it is not through vaidhī-bhakti, but rāgānuga-bhakti,
that one attains kṛṣṇa-rati. So, what kind of kṛṣṇa-rati
is he referring to?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Without following vaidhī-bhakti, you cannot enter
rāgānuga-bhakti – especially the way in which Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī explained vaidhī-bhakti. If you read Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta and the books of the Gosvāmīs, you
will automatically reach kṛṣṇa-bhakti from vaidhī-
bhakti.

You will have to practice bhakti-yoga first, as Prahlāda
Mahārāja and others practiced it. We can enter rāgānuga-
bhakti only by that means. One day, you will be able to
reach there.

Sugata dāsa:

Gurudeva, I have a question about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja says Kṛṣṇa is the energetic
and Rādhārāṇī is the energy. Please elaborate on this.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Kṛṣṇa is the embodiment of rasa, śakti, power, energy,
and everything. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is His energy, His
power, His rasa, and everything.

Sugata dāsa:

Together They are God?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No. Kṛṣṇa is viṣṇu-tattva.

Sugata dāsa:

What is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

She is His internal potency, and sometimes She comes out
of His body for līlā-vilāsa (pastimes). Ekātmānāv api
bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau – Kṛṣṇa is one, but,

                             204
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

for līlā-vilāsa He becomes two.

Devotee:

Śrīla Gurudeva, may I please hear from your lotus lips
something more about the phrase ‘janme janme prabhu
sei?’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Where is Padmanābha Mahārāja? Please answer.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has prayed in his song Śrī
Guru Carana Padma to śrī guru: “Janme janme prabhu sei –
He is my Lord birth after birth.” The question is: Does
the same guru who is now our guru in this life become
our guru in our next life – and in our following lives?
Does that guru personally come back to save his
disciple?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You must know that Nityānanda Prabhu, or Balarāma
Prabhu, is akhaṇḍa-guru (the complete, undivided,
original guru), and He may come in any form. Gurudeva in
this present form is His manifestation. You should have
the belief that the same guru will come.




May 26, 2009


Darśana

After the Walk

[As Śrīla Gurudeva enters his residence, all the
devotees sing, Govinda-dāmodara-mādhaveti.]

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

This is the sketch of the painting you and I were
discussing a few days ago. It illustrates this verse:


smara-gṛham aviśantī vāmyato dhāma gantuṁ

śaraṇim anusarantī tena samrudhya tūrṇam

bala-savalita-kākvā lambhitāntaḥ-smitākṣī

kṣaṇam api mama rādhe netram ānandaya tvam

(Śrī Stavāvalī, Śrī Śrī Prema-pūrābhidha-stotra, Verse
2,

by Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī)



                          205
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

[O Rādhā, who out of contrariness refuses to enter the
cottage of amorous pastimes, begins walking on the path
home, is stopped by Him with a mixture of brute force
and plaintive appeals, and responds with a smile from
deep within Your eyes, please, for even a moment,
delight my eyes.]

It shows Śrīmatī Rādhikā having come to the kuñja
(secluded forest grove) with Rati Mañjarī and Subala.11

When She sees Kṛṣṇa, She immediately begins to leave, to
return home. Kṛṣṇa is trying to block Her, and She says,
“Don’t block My way.” I am wondering if the composition
of the sketch is good. There will be a lot of forest,
but are the people okay?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Both hands should be like this [He stretches his arms
way out to the sides, as if to block something very
big].

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

I will open His arms.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

His desire was that She would not be able to escape by
any direction.

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

I will make His arms fully stretched. When I take
photos, I will ask the devotees to pose in that way.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Tears should be coming from Her eyes, and She should
also be laughing.

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Kṛṣṇa too? Tears and laughing?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He should be a little grave, and begging.

[To Prema-prayojana dāsa] You should know that my age is
ninety. I don’t know when death will come, but I can say
that it will come very soon. I am waiting for you to
return. I want to give you sannyāsa again, and then
peacefully go to Goloka.

Premā-prayojana dāsa:

Therefore all are telling me, “Don’t come back.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t delay. If you don’t do this now, then I will not
be in this world to give it to you later. Please
consider this.

                          206
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


I want to renew your sannyāsa during Kārtika parikramā.
That is why I called you now. If you cannot fulfill my
desire, then what to do?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Then you will have to stay, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You are qualified. Because you have not followed my
instruction to take sannyāsa, at present so many
devotees do not want to listen to your hari-kathā. It is
only because of my wish that they hear you. I want them
to fully hear you and follow you, but I want first that
you become ideal. That is why I called you.

Are you ready?

Premā-prayojana dāsa:

Not today. Maybe by Kārtika time.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You will come? Be ready.

Premā-prayojana dāsa:

I will pray to Kṛṣṇa for some strength.




May 27, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I request that all the preachers come to meet with me at
nine o’clock – Rāmacandra also. We will discuss the
scheduling of the preachers’ visits.

Two or three preachers should not go to the same place
at the same time. There needs to be a minimum of one or
two months interval between preachers, otherwise it is
too much pressure for the local gṛhastha devotees.

Where is Vinaya?

Vinaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Here I am, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Please be present at that meeting.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:


                           207
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva, your lecture last night melted
everyone’s hearts.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, everybody thought we had planned the drama
[regarding the pastimes of Śrī Rāmacandra] to coincide
with your lecture.

But Gurudeva did not know anything about the drama.

Devotees:

Wow!

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Rādhā-priya, Vrajendra-nandana’s daughter, compiled this
drama from my hari-kathā. She was in Govardhana when I
spoke on this subject, and she recorded everything
exactly.

[To Vinaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa] Vinaya, please explain the
problem that arises when two or three preachers go to a
place at the same time.

Vinaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Hare Kṛṣṇa. We have a request regarding preachers coming
to North America. When Śrīla Gurudeva comes to North
America, so many preachers come at that time. Many are
traveling from India and they stop in the New York/New
Jersey area. We want all preachers to come, but the
problem arises when they all come around the same time
that Śrīla Gurudeva is there.

From this past April up until June, preachers have been
coming almost every week; and sometimes two preachers
come at the same time.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

At the same time?

Vinaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

We have a very small congregation. We call a large
number of people to attend the programs, but most people
cannot attend so many programs, which come one after the
other. Also, it is very hard to maintain and host so
many preachers, because we have to go to work and we
have numerous responsibilities. We want all the
preachers to come, but we are having this problem.

Brajanāth dāsa:

There are ten sannyāsīs traveling, and other preachers
as well.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How can this matter be solved?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

                          208
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva, we already have a calendar of every
preacher’s tour schedule. It is now online, so every
other preacher can see it. The next step is to discuss
these schedules amongst the preachers and organize the
annual schedule. We started to do this, but it needs to
be completed.

Padmanābha dāsa:

My suggestion is that we divide North America into
tiers: tier one, tier two, and tier three. For example,
tier two can be places where there has not been much
preaching, like Louisville and the Midwest. The cost
will also be less for this kind of preaching, because
one can drive from Badger to Los Angeles to San
Francisco. This would cost less than flying all across
the country.

Vinaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: Particularly what happens is that because it is
cheaper to have a stop-over in New York and New Jersey
when flying, this area is becoming a place to land, and
also to fly out from. The preachers want to stop there
and have programs.

Mukunda dāsa:

The same problem occurs in Miami and South Florida. It
is a problem when Śrīla Gurudeva comes for a program and
the preachers want to come and do programs around the
same time.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

All the preachers go to places where Śrīla Gurudeva has
already preached. For example, although Austin is very
close to Houston, where Gurudeva comes each year, no one
goes to Austin for preaching. In America there are fifty
states.

Mahābuddhi dāsa:

That is the point; existing preachers are going to the
existing centers. There should be some sannyāsīs or
senior preachers who go to new places, where saṅgas are
not formed yet, and generate interest there.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

It takes coordinating. Actually what we need to do is
consult amongst all of the preachers to make an actual
database of all of the places they have gone and all of
the contacts they have. It is also not a bad idea to
divide North America into tiers, to determine which
places are frequently visited by preachers and which
places are not – and actually coordinate who is going
where.

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Maybe the leaders of each saṅga can come together and
create a North American Preaching Council. We have so

                            209
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

many contacts in other cities.

Mahābuddhi dāsa:

As part of my outside work, I create organizations and
organizational structures. I would be willing to offer
service to you, to help organize exactly what Viṣṇu
prabhu and Padmanābha Mahārāja were saying. We can work
under the Bhakti Trust for North America in order to
create some levels of organization for the temple saṅga
leaders; to create the type of structure that you want.
It would function in such a way that the devotees in
North America, including Canada and Mexico, can
coordinate activities and grow nicely under your
direction.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can do that.

I also suggest that the preachers go to new places, as
Viṣṇu Mahārāja just went to the Midwest USA. This will
be better.

Śrīpāda Viṣṇu Mahārāja:

There are many devotees here at the festival who don’t
get preachers in their areas. I have been talking with
some people. They come from far away to attend the
festivals and they never get preachers in their areas,
but they do not know how to connect. If an announcement
is made at the festival, they can write their names and
invite preachers to their places. There are enough
preachers here.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Is there any need to come to me?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

No. We will organize this on our own, and then we will
report to you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Now let us stop this matter and discuss bhakti.

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Guru Mahārāja, you said in your class that the night
before Janaka Mahārāja was to make the decision as to
whether or not Lord Rāmacandra should stay in the
forest, Bharatajī went to meet the wife of Janaka
Mahārāja, Sunāyanā. At that time Bharata requested her
to tell Janaka Mahārāja what to say the next day. Was
Janaka Mahārāja influenced by Sunāyanā, or was his
decision independent?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He was not influenced by anyone. He was only influenced
by his guru, Śaṅkara. His example is ideal. All devotees
should be guided only by their guru or guru-paramparā.

                          210
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Rāmacandra dāsa:

You said earlier that after the exile, Bharata never
addressed His mother as “Mother.” One time you also told
the history that Kaikeyī came to Rāma and told Him that
Bharata refused to call her “Mother.” Lord Rāma then
called Bharata and said, “I want you to promise Me
something.” Bharata said, “I will do anything for You –
anything except calling Kaikeyī ‘Mother.’ ”

But yesterday in your class you mentioned that He did
call her “Mother.” What did He really do?12

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When Lord Rāmacandra returned from exile, He first went
to Kaikeyī’s house. When he arrived there, he asked,
“Where is Bharata? Up until now Bharata was with Me; so
where has he gone?”

Someone said that Bharata did not want to see the face
of his mother. He had broken his relation with Kaikeyī
and determined, “I am not your son, and you are not my
mother. I will only call you “Mahārāṇī Kaikeyī.”

While Rāma was still in exile, all the subjects of
Ayodhyā would go to Bharata in Nandigrāma and seek
advice. One day Kaikeyī went to him and said, “Bharata,
you are my son, so please keep me here with you in
Nandigrāma. I cannot tolerate living in the king’s
palace. So many ‘serpents and scorpions’ (memories) are
biting me, so I cannot remain there.” Bharata replied,
“This is very good for you. This is your atonement, and
by this you will be purified. There is no other way. It
is better, Kaikeyī Mahārāṇī, that you return to the
palace.”

But now, upon His return, Lord Rāmacandra called for
Bharata, because it was by the will of Rāma that the
relationship between Bharata and Kaikeyī had been
broken. When Bharata arrived, Lord Rāmacandra offered
obeisances to Mother Kaikeyī, and then He told Bharata
to offer obeisances to her and to call her “Mother.”
Bharata then offered obeisances to Kaikeyī and addressed
her, “My dear Mother,” or “My darling Mother,” at which
Kaikeyī began to weep due to immense happiness. Lord
Rāmacandra’s heart also melted, and the hearts of all of
the people present also melted.

Mahābuddhi dāsa:

Did Lord Rāmacandra ever tell Bharata that He had made
that arrangement with Kaikeyī when He was young?13

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

We went two times with Śrīla Gurudeva to Citrakūṭa, the
place where Lord Rāmacandra, Lakṣmaṇa, and Bharata met
together. There are many footprints still there, so many

                            211
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

footprints, just as in Vraja where there are so many
footprints of Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

What is the lesson, or philosophical point, behind this
history?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The lesson is that if anyone is against guru and Kṛṣṇa,
we will have no connection with them. We will cut off
all connection, even if that person is our mother,
brother, sister, father, or any other dear-one. If a
guru is opposed to Kṛṣṇa and is insulting Him, we will
also reject that guru.

Devotee:

Is there any difference between the siddha-jīva and Your
Grace?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

As a disciple, you should think I am a perfected soul,
but I am not. I don’t want to cheat you. I am not
perfect. I am a baddha-jīva (conditioned soul).

Govinda dāsa:

That is not possible.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

This can be compared to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who never
wanted to be called Bhagavān, but who actually is
Bhagavān.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, no. I don’t want to cheat you. But it is true; a
disciple should think, “My Gurudeva is perfect, and he
is the associate of Kṛṣṇa.”

Are there other questions?

Sahadeva dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, in your classes you give so many
beautiful narrations of the Lord’s glories, with many
nice expressions and moods. Why are these moods not
coming into my heart?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Your heart is not melting?

Sahadeva dāsa:

No, Gurudeva, my heart is a stone.

Śrīla Gurudeva:



                             212
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017



hena kṛṣṇa-nāma yadi laya bahu-bāra

tabu yadi prema nahe, nahe aśrudhāra

tabe jāni, aparādha tāhāte pracura

kṛṣṇa-nāma-bīja tāhe nā kare aṅkura

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Adi-līlā 8.29–30)


[If one chants the exalted holy name of the Lord again
and again and yet his love for the Supreme Lord does not
develop and tears do not appear in his eyes, it is
evident that because of his offenses in chanting, the
seed of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa does not sprout.]

tad aśma-sāraṁ hṛdayaṁ batedaṁ

yad gṛhyamāṇair hari-nāma-dheyaiḥ

na vikriyetātha yadā vikāro

netre jalaṁ gātra-ruheṣu harṣaḥ

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Adi-līlā 8.25)


[If one’s heart does not change, tears do not flow from
his eyes, his body does not shiver, and his bodily hairs
do not stand on end as he chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-
mantra, it should be understood that his heart is as
hard as iron. This is due to his offenses at the lotus
feet of the Lord’s holy name.]

If one is chanting the holy name and hearing hari-kathā,
but his heart is not melting, tears are not flowing from
his eyes, and the hairs of his body are not standing on
end, it is understood that he has committed uncountable
offenses in his past lives and in this life. He will
therefore always pray to Gurudeva and Kṛṣṇa, and
continue to chant the holy names. By chanting again and
again in this way, he will come to the right
consciousness.

Are you going to buy the Badger property?

Devotee:

We are discussing it.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you try to improve it and make it an āśrama, as I
heard is the plan, that will make me happy. Then, from
time to time I may go there.

Mūrti dāsa:

My name is Mūrti dāsa. I travel and distribute books. Do
you have any special instructions on how to distribute
more books or how I can better serve in the saṅkīrtana

                          213
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

mission? A devotee donated many of your books to me, so
I have been distributing your books along with Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s books. I like your books very much. They
are inspiring. I have been reading your Jaiva-dharma.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. Yes, study Jaiva-dharma. Book distribution is
very good, but it is essential to read the books as
well.

Sudarśana dāsa:

The Vedas state, “ahaṁ brahmāsmi – I, the jīva, am
brahma14.” But in Bhagavad-gītā it is stated that the
jīva is parā-prakṛti, the śakti (energy) of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. How do we reconcile these two
seemingly contradictory points?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The transcendental constitution of the jīva (the
individual soul) is kṛṣṇa-dāsa, the servant of Kṛṣṇa, as
stated in Bhagavad-gītā. The conditioned souls have come
from taṭasthā-śakti, and they have forgotten their
constitutional position. Although they are all
conditioned souls at present, by transcendental
constitution they are all eternal servants of Kṛṣṇa.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

His question is this: Is the individual soul brahma
(meaning the impersonal God), or is he śakti?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He is the śakti, the power, of Parabrahma (the Supreme
Spirit Whole, the Supreme Personality of Godhead),
Kṛṣṇa. All living entities are Kṛṣṇa’s parts and
parcels. Kṛṣṇa possesses many śaktis, or potencies, but
when He is present only with His jīva-śakti, at that
time He manifests as the jīvas.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Once, an elderly man came to our temple in Mathurā and
said that he was brahma (God). I was cooking at the
time. That man began arguing with Tīrtha Mahārāja about
this point; he was not listening to Tīrtha Mahārāja’s
evidence.

When Śrīla Gurudeva came out of his room, Tīrtha
Mahārāja told him that this man was saying that he is
Brahma. Śrīla Gurudeva said, “Brahma (God, or Kṛṣṇa)
lifted Govardhana Hill, and He swallowed a forest fire
on two occasions.” Śrīla Gurudeva then called me from
the kitchen to bring a burning piece of wood so that the
man could prove that he was brahma by swallowing the
small fire from the piece of burning wood. The man
quickly ran away.

Sugata dāsa:

In your books you say that the gopīs are expansions of

                            214
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Rādhārāṇī.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The nitya-siddha gopīs are Her expansions, not the
sādhana-siddha gopīs.

Sugata dāsa:

So, the nitya-siddha gopīs are not jīva-tattva?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, but the sādhana-siddha may be jīva-tattva.

Sugata dāsa:

What tattva are the nitya-siddha gopīs?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

They are kāya-vyūha, or bodily manifestations of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They should be treated like Rādhikā. In other words,
having emanated from Rādhikā, the origin of svarūpa-
śakti, they are non-different from Her.




May 28, 2009


Morning Walk

Raghunātha Bhatta dāsa:

Gurudeva, I want to ask one question. Sometimes a
disciple thinks that the guru cannot understand what’s
going on. Is this due to Yogamāyā (Kṛṣṇa’s spiritual
desire potency)? Or, is guru testing the disciple?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If it is Yogamāyā, then what will be the job of Mahāmāyā
(Kṛṣṇa’s deluding material potency)? In this world there
is no Yogamāyā; there is only Mahāmāyā. There is no need
of Yogamāyā here. Yogamāyā plays a part only in eternal,
transcendental matters, like Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, His
associates, and His dhāma. That very Yogamāyā, when in
the hands of Kaṁsa, became Mahāmāyā; and in the hands of
Vasudeva Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa’s father, She remained as
Yogamāyā.

Raghunātha Bhatta dāsa:

If the disciple thinks that the guru does not
understand, then he himself is in Mahāmāyā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                            215
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


I don’t think that all disciples feel this way. It may
be that you do, but my other disciples don’t think like
this.

Kanhaiyā dāsa (a child):

I have a question. In Vṛndāvana the devotees love Kṛṣṇa
a lot, and in Dvārakā they treat Him like a king. Is the
love in Dvārakā a lot different than it is in Vṛndāvana,
or just a little bit?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By comparison, there is less love in Dvārakā. There, in
Dvārakā, Kṛṣṇa is a king, so He is beyond the reach of
His subjects. His subjects offer Him praṇāmas and
stutis, or prayers, from a distance.

In Vṛndāvana the relationship is more intimate. Kṛṣṇa’s
devotees embrace Him, and they play and joke with Him.

Atula-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Gurudeva, thank you for coming to this planet.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why thank me? Why not thank Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa sent me.

All devotees:

Haribol!

Janārdana dāsa:

Gurudeva, how many sets of clothes should a brahmacārī
have?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He should have the least amount possible; only two or
three sets – two dhotīs, two kurtās, and one cādar.
Minimize all your personal possessions, and don’t engage
in sense gratification. The more you can minimize your
requirements, the better off you will be.

Rāmacandra dāsa (from California):

Gurudeva, can you speak for a moment on the importance
of book distribution?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By distributing books, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja preached throughout the world. His books went
house-to-house; to all cities, to forests, mountains,
hotels, trains, bookstores, and practically everywhere
else.

I want my disciples to distribute my books in the same
way. My books should reach every house, and every part
of the world.


                           216
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

[To Rāmacandra dāsa] Thank you for distributing so many
books. Perhaps Rāmacandra is the number-one distributor?

Brajanāth dāsa:

On the days he goes out to distribute books, he
distributes more than one hundred.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

So why not others? Others should also try.

Śivānanda Sena dāsa:

Gurudeva, you have used an example comparing Kṛṣṇa to a
bumblebee. You said that the bumblebee sometimes visits
a very fragrant flower and becomes intoxicated. He
becomes so intoxicated by that one flower that even when
he visits other flowers that are not as fragrant, he
thinks they are also fragrant. You compared this example
with Kṛṣṇa visiting Kubjā.15

Similarly Kṛṣṇa is visiting you, who are very fragrant
and full of love for Him. I am thinking that since we
are close to you, maybe in Kṛṣṇa’s mood of love for you
He will visit us also – even though we are not so
fragrant. Is that possible?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is your question? There should be questions, not
lectures.

Rāmacandra dāsa (from Delhi):

His question is that when Kṛṣṇa is visiting you, will He
visit us?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He has no time.

Govinda dāsa:

[Translating for a Spanish devotee] At which point can
one consider that the jīva is liberated from vanity?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Padmanābha Mahārāja] Did you understand the
question? You can answer.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

He is asking: At which stage of bhakti can the jīva be
considered liberated from the false ego of identifying
with his material body?

Govinda dāsa:

From vanity.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:


                          217
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Vanity means false ego.

The answer is that when someone has reached the stage of
bhāva, he has no more identification at all with the
body.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Even at the stage of bhāva-bhakti there is some kaṣāya
(obstacle); but when prema appears in the heart,
identification with the body fully disappears. This is
called ātyantikī.16

When the devotee attains prema, all kinds of anarthas
are totally washed away, whereas at the stage of rati or
bhāva the scent of some bodily identification may
remain.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

But in the stage of bhāva-bhakti, hasn’t the devotee
realized his svarūpa (eternal constitutional nature and
identity)?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What I have explained is written in Mādhurya-kādambinī.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Is it true that among all incarnations, only Advaita
Ācārya manifested old age?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What about Nityānanda Prabhu and Mahāprabhu?

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

They did not become old.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What do you consider the age of forty-eight to be? It is
not kiśora (teenage).

Rāmacandra dāsa (from Delhi):

He was forty-eight years old, but did He look like
forty-eight?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Only Kṛṣṇa is always kiśora – nava-kiśora-naṭavara (the
ever-fresh and youthful teenage dancer). That is the
nature of His transcendental body.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

When Kṛṣṇa was in Kurukṣetra during the solar-eclipse,
still He appeared as a teenager.17 So, Mahāprabhu must
be the same.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

                             218
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


When Lord Rāmacandra appeared, He also always had the
form of a sixteen-year-old.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When His age was 11,000 years old, He looked like a full
youth – not old, but not kiśora.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Dāmodara Mahārāja is saying that Advaita Ācārya looks
like an old man. So, what about other incarnations, like
Vyāsa?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Vyāsa had the appearance of an old man. He had a long
beard.

Mukunda dāsa:

As part of Lord Caitanya’s pastimes, He brought the
yuga-dharma (the religious practice prescribed for that
particular millennium) for everyone in the world. We
also understand from you that most people who come to
His line are in mādhurya-rasa, and sometimes in sakhya-
rasa. So it appears there is some conflict, or
difference, in these two statements.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When Caitanya Mahāprabhu came here from Goloka
Vaikuṇṭha, the associates of Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, and all
other incarnations descended with Him (within His body).
Therefore, although most of His devotees were in
mādhurya-rasa, some were in other rasas. A few examples
of this are Murari Gupta, Anupama, and Nṛsiṁhānanda
Brahmacārī; and there were so many more. However, those
who actually followed the instruction of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu regarding the gift He specifically came to
give were all in mādhurya-rasa.

Devotee:

But we have also heard that Mahāprabhu came for the
whole world. How can both principles be true?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, both statements are true. Vātsalya (parental love),
sakhya (friendship), and dāsya (servitorship) are all
included in mādhurya-rasa (amorous love). For example,
those who are attracted to dāsya-rasa, due to having
dāsya as their constitutional form, attain dāsya.

It is not that all rasas are equal. One can withdraw
from the bank as much as one has in his account, and
there are so many thousands of devotees who have a great
deal in their account.

Mukunda dāsa:

Gurudeva, in a class in Alachua, some discussion came up

                          219
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

about svarūpa-siddhi and vastu-siddhi regarding this
verse:


duḥsaha-preṣṭha-viraha-

tīvra-tāpa-dhutāśubhāḥ

dhyāna-prāptācyutāśleṣa-

nirvṛtyā kṣīṇa-maṅgalāḥ


tam eva paramātmānaṁ

jāra-buddhyāpi saṅgatāḥ

jahur guṇa-mayaṁ dehaṁ

sadyaḥ prakṣīṇa-bandhanāḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.29.10–11)


[For those gopīs who could not go to see Kṛṣṇa,
intolerable separation from their beloved caused an
intense agony that burned away all impious karma. By
meditating upon Him they realized His embrace, and the
ecstasy they then felt exhausted their material piety.
Although Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Soul, these girls
simply thought of Him as their lover and associated with
Him in that intimate mood. Thus their karmic bondage was
nullified and they abandoned their gross material
bodies.]

You’ve said that it is not that the sādhana-siddha-gopīs
gave up their physical bodies. Does this automatically
mean that those who go to Kṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlā are
already in vastu-siddhi18, or are they still in svarūpa-
siddhi19 until they have the association of nityā-
siddhas and then achieve vastu-siddhi at that time?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I have already explained this.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Gurudeva said previously that they have begun vastu-
siddhi.

Mukunda dāsa:

So automatically, by going there...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Bās. Bās, bās, bās. [meaning “No need for more questions
on this subject. I have already spoken and written so
much about it.”]

Vrajendra-nandana dāsa:

Regarding those devotees who already have a relationship

                            220
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

with Nṛsiṁhadeva or Rāmacandra, do they not taste the
mood of Vraja when they come in Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
association?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

All incarnations, including Nārāyaṇa, are present in the
body of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Brajanāth dāsa:

He is asking if Their devotees also taste the mādhurya
mood.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, no, no. Never.




May 29, 2009


Morning Walk

Nityānanda dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, regarding the Gopī-gīta drama last night
– the part when Kṛṣṇa returned to the gopīs: The actress
who played Śrīmatī Rādhikā did not seem to display any
māna (loving anger) at all. She accepted Kṛṣṇa very
quickly. Is this accurate for that particular pastime?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Rādhikā remained some distance away, as did Lalita and
Viśākhā. From there, Rādhikā was shooting the arrows of
Her māna-filled glances at Kṛṣṇa.

It was an excellent drama performance, but not
everything can be shown in a drama.

Rāmacandra dāsa (from Delhi):

Somewhere in the translation of the verses that they
were singing in the drama, they were saying, “O Kṛṣṇa,
You are in everyone’s heart as antaryāmī, Supersoul.”
They were referring to Him as God. They were praying,
“If You are in everyone’s heart, why don’t You appear?
Why are You not with us?” How do we reconcile this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Sometimes, in the mood of separation, these types of
unnatural ideas come to them, and this is not against
their rasa.20

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

They were not accepting this as their own idea. They
told Kṛṣṇa that they had heard from Gargamuni,
Paurṇamāsī, and others that He is antaryāmī, but they

                            221
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

did not personally accept it.

Devotee:

While speaking about Brahmā-vimohana-līlā yesterday, you
mentioned that there were three sets of cowherd boys and
calves. The set that was placed in the cave by Brahmā
was created by Yogamāyā, and another set was Kṛṣṇa’s
expansions. Where were the original cowherd boys and
calves?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, you said previously that they remained in the
same place, taking prasādam, and it seemed to them that
Kṛṣṇa returned a moment after He had left them.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yogamāyā covered them so that Brahmā could not see them.

Brajanāth dāsa:

So they were taking prasādam for one year?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, by the influence of Yogamāyā.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, I have a question about jīva-tattva. I am
trying to understand jīva-tattva. Speaking about a
regular jīva like myself, śāstra says that the jīva has
no beginning and no end; he is eternal. Have I always
been in the material world, trying to work myself up to
the spiritual world? Or, did I commit an offense and
come down to the material world?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The jīva’s presence in the material world is described
as anādi – without beginning, from a time immemorial:


kṛṣṇa bhuli’ sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛita, Madhya-līlā 20.117)


[Forgetting Kṛṣṇa, the living entity has been attracted
by the external feature from time immemorial. Therefore,
the illusory energy [māyā] gives him all kinds of misery
in his material existence.]

[To Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja] What is the meaning?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Anādi means ‘without beginning,’ and bahir-mukha means
‘turning away from Kṛṣṇa.’ So, from time immemorial the
jīvas have been bahir-mukha, turned away from Kṛṣṇa.

                            222
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


In his Tattva-sandarbha, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says that
anādi does not mean ‘eternal;’ rather it means ‘from the
beginning of the material creation.’ The time is of such
a long duration that it is considered to be beginning-
less.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Prabhu’s question is this: “Is it because of some
aparādha that I came here from the spiritual dimension,
or have I always been here?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Kṛṣṇa bhuli’ sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha. No one commits
any offense in Goloka Vṛndāvana. The jīvas have not come
here from Goloka Vṛndāvana. They have come from
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. There is a very thin marginal line
that is analogously compared with the edge of a sword;
if something is dropped onto a sword’s edge it will fall
to one side or the other. Similarly, if you had looked
towards Vaikuṇṭha from that marginal line you were at
once attracted to Vaikuṇṭha, and if you looked towards
this world, you were at once attracted to this world.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is mentioned in the Bhāgavatam that there is no
action of Mahāmāyā in Vraja. The gopīs uttered the
kātyāyanī-mantra in this way:


kātyāyani mahā-māye

mahā-yoginy adhīśvari

nanda-gopā-sutaṁ-devī

patiṁ me kuru te namaḥ

iti mantraṁ japantyas tāḥ

pūjāṁ cakruḥ kamārikāḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.22.4)

[Each of the young unmarried girls performed her worship
while chanting the following mantra: “O goddess
Kātyāyanī, O great potency of the Lord, O possessor of
great mystic power and mighty controller of all, please
make the son of Nanda Mahārāja my husband. I offer my
obeisances unto you.”]

Praying, they used the word Mahāmāyā, although Mahāmāyā
cannot manifest there in Vraja. The truth is hidden in
the Sanskrit meter. The word Mahāmāyā refers to mahati-
māyā, and mahati-māyā is Yogamāyā, not the external
illusory potency, Mahāmāyā.

Devotee:

If we did not do anything to displease the Lord when we
came to the material world, are we here to please the

                            223
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Lord by participating in His deliverance pastimes?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja] Please answer.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

The jīva is here in the material creation, which is
Kṛṣṇa’s sṛṣṭi-līlā, His creation līlā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The jīva is not jaḍa (inert); he is cetanā (conscious).
He is independent, and Kṛṣṇa does not interfere with his
independence. So, the jīva had the choice of going to
the spiritual world or the material world.

Sanātana dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I have a question regarding proper
etiquette. Many devotees come to take shelter of you and
want to take harināma and dīkṣā. Some are not properly
qualified and therefore haven’t been authorized by the
local authorities. An incident happened during this
festival, wherein a devotee made arrangements for some
other devotees to take initiation but did not go through
the proper channel.

We would like some clarification, because this does not
only happen in our local saṅga, but all over. We want to
know what kind of process you want. What is your
standard?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The candidates must be recommended by sannyāsīs,
brahmacārīs, and someone from their local saṅga.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Sometimes, Gurudeva, the local devotees would not
recommend some of the candidates for initiation. They
may observe that someone is weak because he or she
doesn’t chant sixteen rounds.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We will have to give importance to that.

Brajanāth dāsa:

And sometimes a sannyāsī will encourage someone to take
dīkṣā who may not be chanting.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, no. That is not good. There must be local
permission.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Who will take responsibility? If someone is chanting
four rounds, and a sannyāsī says, “You can come for

                          224
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

dīkṣā,” and a local devotee says otherwise…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The local devotee will have precedence.

Padmanābha dāsa:

The local devotee should also be qualified.

Brajanāth dāsa:

They know the situation.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

They are taking care.

Padmanābha dāsa:

What I see is that gṛhasthas don’t have the proper mood
towards sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs. Everyone respects
sannyāsīs, but no one knows how to treat brahmacārīs.
Likewise, brahmacārīs do not know how to treat
gṛhasthas.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

One’s āśrama does not matter. What matters is one’s
gradation of bhakti. For example, if there is a
householder devotee who is very senior and knows all
siddhānta (philosophical conclusions), and a brahmacārī
who has only taken up the bhakti process a few months
prior and knows nothing about bhakti, who is superior?
Who should offer obeisances to whom? The devotee with
more bhakti is superior.




May 30, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are there any good questions?

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Gurudeva, yesterday you explained that in Gopī-gīta,
when the gopīs addressed Kṛṣṇa as Nārāyaṇa, it was due
to aśvabhāvika-sthiti (overwhelmed because of intense
separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they were not in their
natural mood or state at that time). Then, yesterday
evening we were hearing that Śrīmatī Rādhikā did this in
Bhramara-gīta as well. She referred to Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
when He took the forms of Rāma and Vāmanadeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva: Tīrtha Mahārāja was discussing this
śloka:


                            225
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


mṛgayur iva kapīndraṁ vivyadhe lubdha-dharmā

striyam akṛta virūpāṁ strī-jitaḥ kāma-yānām

balim api balim attvāveṣṭayad dhvāṅkṣa-vad yas

tad alam asita-sakhyair dustyajas tat-kathārthaḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.47.17)


[Like a hunter, He cruelly shot the king of the monkeys
with arrows. Because He was conquered by a woman, He
disfigured another woman who came to Him with lusty
desires. And even after consuming the gifts of Bali
Mahārāja, He bound him up with ropes as if he were a
crow. So let us give up all friendship with this dark-
complexioned boy, even if we can’t give up talking about
Him.]

But he made a mistake. When he was talking about this
śloka, he said that Rādhikā addressed Kṛṣṇa by name. But
the śloka neither mentions Kṛṣṇa’s name nor the names of
Rāmacandra or Vāmana. It only refers to ‘black persons’
(asita). Because Kṛṣṇa is black [the color of a fresh
blackish rain cloud], Śrīmatī Rādhikā was speaking about
the faults in the nature of ‘black persons.’ I told this
to Tīrtha Mahārāja, but he did not remember at the time
explaining the śloka.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

In the pastime of killing Śakaṭāsura, the cart demon,
which anartha21 is referred to? Which anartha is
removed?22

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The anartha is kapaṭatā, hypocrisy23, because in order
to avoid detection Śakaṭāsura made his body look like
the air.

Padmanābha dāsa:

Gurudeva, you said yesterday that Yaśodā-maiyā is
somewhat blackish in complexion.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Her complexion is like that of Kṛṣṇa.

Padmanābha dāsa:

Yes. She is the same color as Kṛṣṇa, but if we look at
the pictures that were painted, such as dāmodara-līlā,
it appears that her complexion is golden.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

When you go to Vinodinī dīdī’s house, you can see a big
painting photo [called a giclee]. There you can see that
her complexion is the same as Kṛṣṇa’s.


                            226
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Devotee:

Previously the artists made her complexion golden, but
then Gurudeva told them to change the color.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Suradāsa wrote that her complexion is gaura-varṇa,
golden. He wrote that all the cowherd boys were talking
among themselves, and then they told Kṛṣṇa, “Nanda Baba
is golden in complexion, and Yaśodā-maiyā is as well.
So, You cannot possibly be Yaśodā’s son.” Kṛṣṇa began to
weep. He ran to His mother and told her, “Oh, I am not
your son.” Yaśodā-maiyā replied, “No, no, no, no. I take
an oath on Nārāyaṇa that You are my son. You have come
from my womb.”

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Is Suradāsa correct?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No.

The child receives the qualities of either the mother or
the father. Kṛṣṇa has all the qualities of Mother
Yaśodā. Just as Mother Yaśodā has a very sweet voice,
Kṛṣṇa has a very sweet voice. So, actually, Kṛṣṇa is
bluish because Yaśodā is bluish.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Previously, Śrīla Gurudeva, you have said that Mother
Yaśodā is not as dark as Kṛṣṇa; that she has a lighter
bluish color than Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No harm.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Some similarity must be there.

Devotee:

I am wondering if Śrī Kṛṣṇa performs the same pastimes
in Goloka Vṛndāvana that He performs when He comes here.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja] You can answer.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

Some of the pastimes are different. For example, during
Kṛṣṇa’s bhauma-līlā, His pastimes in the material
universes, He actually takes birth from the womb of
Mother Yaśodā. On the other hand, in His nityā-līlā in
Goloka Vṛndāvana there is only the conception that He
takes birth.

In this world He kills demons like Keśī and so forth. He

                            227
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

actually performs that līlā of killing demons. But in
Goloka Vṛndāvana there are no demons; there is only a
conception that He kills demons.

In this way, there is some difference between bhauma-
līlā and nityā-līlā.

Devotee:

Does He perform the pastime of leaving Vṛndāvana for
Mathurā in Goloka Vṛndāvana?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

In order to foster the separation mood, there is a
conception that Kṛṣṇa leaves, but He never actually
leaves Vṛndāvana.

There are different sections of Goloka – Vṛndāvana,
Mathurā, and Dvārakā – where He is situated eternally,
performing pastimes with His various associates.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Okay.

Mādhava dāsa:

Gurudeva, I have two questions. I was listening to
Dāmodara Mahārāja’s class the other day. He said that
when Śukadeva Gosvāmī refused to come out from his
mother’s womb, Śrīla Vyāsadeva invoked Kṛṣṇa’s presence
from Dvārakā. I said, “At that time, Kṛṣṇa had already
left the planet. How could Vyāsadeva have invoked
Kṛṣṇa’s presence from Dvārakā?” So, I want to know the
true explanation.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

What Dāmodara Mahārāja told was correct. Kṛṣṇa was no
longer manifest in this world. He was already in
aprakaṭa Dvārakā (Dvārakā in Goloka Vṛndāvana).
Vyāsadeva meditated on Him, and then He appeared.

Mādhava dāsa:

Yes, I know He appeared, but was it from Dvārakā?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is not mentioned clearly in any scripture.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Vyāsadeva prayed, and by his prayer Kṛṣṇa appeared
before him. It could have been either Dvārakādhisa or
Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa, but I think it was Vrajendra-
nandana Kṛṣṇa. Śukadeva Gosvāmī was Śrī Rādhikā’s parrot
named Suka, so his worshipful Deity was Śrī Rādhikā.

Mādhava dāsa:

The second question is this: After Parīkṣit Mahārāja
heard from Śukadeva Gosvāmī – after the seventh day –

                            228
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

the snake-bird bit him.24 But we also hear that his
mother asked him, “Can you explain, in simple terms,
what you just heard?” My question is: How much time did
Parīkṣit have to speak to her?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva spoke about this in his Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta lectures in Mathurā. He told us that there
was very little time. Parīkṣit’s mother, Uttarā-devī,
approached him and said, “O my dear son, I am not so
intelligent, so please very briefly tell me the essence
of what you have heard.” Thus, Parīkṣit Mahārāja spoke
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

This devotee, Premadāsa prabhu, was previously in
Vṛndāvana, and I spoke with him there about coming and
doing special preaching in Los Angeles. He is very
qualified to preach in the yoga communities, so can you
give your blessings that he can go there?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He’s not married?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, actually, he is in Houston.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:

He came from Miami, and then you told him first to go to
Houston. Can he go now to Los Angeles to do this type of
preaching?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What does Abhirāma (the temple coordinator in Houston)
say?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Avadhuta Mahārāja (resident sannyāsī in the Houston
temple) can also say what he thinks.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Abhirāma prabhu, what would you like him to do? What is
your idea?

Abhirāma dāsa:

My idea, Śrīla Gurudeva, is that sometimes Premadāsa
prabhu can stay with us in Houston, and sometimes he can
serve with Padmanābha Mahārāja.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And where is Avadhuta Mahārāja?

Padmanābha Mahārāja:


                            229
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

He already went to the āśrama.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, he has returned. In that case, we will follow
Abhirāma’s advice.

Now, are there any good questions about bhakti?

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

We heard that Uddhava was accepted in the school of the
gopīs, but…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, no, no. I explained that he was never admitted in
that school. He went there and saw the college
classroom, and he saw the professors and principals, but
he was not admitted.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

Yes, he went there and failed his entrance examination.
What questions was he asked that he could not answer?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You don’t know?

The gopīs asked, “Uddhava, can you explain something to
us? Kṛṣṇa loved us without any selfishness, and we also
loved Him in that way.

“Regarding selfish love, prostitutes love a man only as
long as he can give them money; no money, no love.

“Students go to school, but when their desires are
fulfilled, they give up that school. They study at
school, but after passing their examinations they never
come back to see the professor.

“A beggar goes everywhere, calling out, ‘Radhe, Radhe,’
and gets donations; and after receiving his donation, he
is gone.

“Birds situate themselves in trees, but when the trees
lose their leaves and fruits the birds go away. The deer
live in the forest, but if the forest is burned, the
deer no longer want to live there. These are all
examples of selfishness, so-called love.

“But our prema, the prema of Kṛṣṇa and we gopīs, was not
like that. So how could it have broken?”

Puzzled, Uddhava could only scratch his head. He had no
reply, so he could not gain admission and he had to
return to Mathurā.




May 31, 2009

                           230
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017



Morning Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Any bhakti questions?

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Gurudeva, we accept that the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is amala-
purāṇa (the spotless Purāṇa), declaring that besides
bhakti, there is no path to success. On the other hand,
in many places of the Bhāgavatam, after relating a
history of the character of a great devotee, or an
instructive pastime, it states that if someone reads
this narration every day, all his material desires will
be fulfilled. In other places in the Bhāgavatam it
states that if someone takes some form of vrata (vow),
like payovrata (a vow to subsist only on milk), all his
desires will be fulfilled; he will get a son or wealth.
Why is this stated in the different passages?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In order to catch a fish, a fisherman attracts it with
some bait. Similarly, such statements give a greed to
people with desires to be happy by worldly achievements.
These statements are for persons who have no taste for
spiritual topics. They give a greed to such persons to
read or listen to the Bhāgavatam’s instructive pastimes,
and such people are thus inspired to read or hear about
them.

All the pastimes and histories in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam lead
the world’s people towards renunciation and bhakti.
Especially if people read or hear the Tenth Canto
regarding Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes and sublime qualities,
all their material desires will be removed and they will
receive śuddha-bhakti, pure devotion.

Venu-gopāla dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, you explained in your narration of rāma-
līlā that it was by Rāma’s own request that Queen
Kaikeyī had Rāma banished to the forest. But most people
believe that it was Mantara who convinced Kaikeyī to do
so.

Is this an instance of an external reason and an
internal reason?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

Avadhuta Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, when I was talking to the ācārya of the Arya
Samaj yesterday, he said that Śrīla Vyāsadeva did not
write the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; it was written by Bopadeva.
Is this totally bogus?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                          231
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


They say this, but they know the truth. They know that
it was written by Śrīla Vyāsadeva. They say this because
the sweet pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, like rāsa-līlā, are
recorded in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. They don’t go deep. They
say, “We don’t accept Kṛṣṇa of Vṛndāvana. We accept the
Kṛṣṇa of the Mahābhārata, who fought and killed so many
warriors on the battlefield. We accept the Kṛṣṇa who
spoke Bhagavad-gītā.”

Moreover, they deny the topics in Gītā that are related
to bhakti. They accept only one-fourth of the Gītā as
genuine. They say that the other three-fourths are
written by someone else. Do you understand?

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Gurudeva, they are also very offensive to Rādhārāṇī. If
a person speaks to anyone in Arya Samaj, the Arya Samaj
spokesman will say so many bad things about Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

What will be their destination?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Their destination will be hell.

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Because of their offenses to Rādhārāṇī, they will have
to go even lower than hell. They say such bad things
that I cannot even talk to them.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They don’t accept the forms of Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, Śaṅkara, or
any other incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. In Delhi there was once
a debate in which a very high-ranking Arya Samaj leader
told Madhvācārya, “We do not accept the form of God.”

Madhvācārya replied, “You do not accept the form of
God?”

“No.”

Madhvācārya immediately took a picture of Dayānanda (the
leader of Arya Samaj) from his pocket and said, “If you
truly don’t accept śrī vigraha, the Deity form of the
Lord, then stomp on this photo with your feet. Then I
will believe you.”

As soon as he challenged them in this way, the entire
Arya Samaj – many thousands of them – at once began to
shout at him; and they expelled him.

So they accept God’s form, but externally they say that
they don’t. Moreover, they don’t have logical arguments
to prove that God has no form.

[To Kṛṣṇa dāsa of Houston] What happened? It seems that
you have completely changed. Come here. Are you looking
for the path to hell?


                          232
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You are now going to Svāmī Nārāyaṇa.

Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

I go to their temple because they have Deities of Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

But we have been holding programs here for seven or
eight days, and you didn’t come to any of the classes.

Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

I didn’t know, Mahārājajī. I was out of town, so I
didn’t know.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t give up harināma.

Do you know about the method of worship of Svāmī
Nārāyaṇa?

Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I know them. It is not that they worship four-handed
Vaikuṇṭha Nārāyaṇa. One of their previous gurus’ name
was Svāmī Nārāyaṇa, and it is he whom they worship. They
place Deities of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa or Śrī Rāma on
their altar, but then they place a statue or photo of
their guru in the middle – that is larger than the
Deities. They actually have no relationship with
Bhagavān. So, be careful. Chant harināma; don’t give it
up. And, come to our programs.

[To the local devotees] If there are any programs,
please make sure to inform him.

[To Kṛṣṇa dāsa] From now on, whenever I am here, you
must come. How is your son?

Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

He is fine.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is he studying?

Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

He is going into class four.


                          233
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Is he staying with you?

Kṛṣṇa dāsa:

He is staying in India. He stays with my parents in
Amnabhad during the week. During the weekends he visits
his mother, who also stays in Amnabhad.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Okay.

Govinda dāsa:

[Translating for a Spanish devotee] Śrīla Gurudeva,
since the jīva is part of Kṛṣṇa, and since Kṛṣṇa sends
liberated souls like Śrīla Gurudeva to this world, are
our activities considered to be one of Kṛṣṇa’s līlās?

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Since the jīva is the aṁśa of Kṛṣṇa…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t think like that. It is essential for you to know
the meaning of aṁśa (the plenary portion of the Lord)
and vibhinnāṁśa (the infinitesimal, separated energy of
Kṛṣṇa, known as the jīva). It is incorrect to say that
we are aṁśa of Kṛṣṇa; we are vibhinnāṁśa.

Viṣṇu dāsa:

He is asking: Since we are associated with you and Kṛṣṇa
has sent you to this world, are we also part of Kṛṣṇa’s
līlā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t think that we are part of Kṛṣṇa’s līlā. It is best
for you to think, “I am a conditioned soul, and I must
follow the principles of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.” In this way, we will gradually
become like Kṛṣṇa’s associates.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, He is saying that Kṛṣṇa is sending so many
associates to this world in order to help the
conditioned jīvas. Is Kṛṣṇa doing this as a pastime?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, Kṛṣṇa is sending them out of His mercy.

Viṣṇu dāsa:

Gurudeva, please be merciful so that bhāva will come in
our heart.

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                          234
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

It is for this reason that the Houston maṭha (temple) is
being built. The temple is not being built only for the
purpose of having a temple; it is for giving śikṣā,
teachings. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam establishes Vedic knowledge
and Vedic culture. There must be śikṣā, so that everyone
becomes aware of the established truths in the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. Temples are for kaniṣṭhā-adhikārīs (neophyte
devotees). Whereas we are engaged in bhāva-sevā
(devotional service performed by mood, within the heart)
and therefore we don’t require an external temple, we
must have a temple for others.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

It is a Vedic education center.

Abhirāma dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, when you go to Italy, how can we perform
viśrambha guru-sevā (intimate service to śrī guru) in
separation from your lotus feet?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By mind; by heart. I am satisfied with what you are
doing. Your heart is mine.




* * *




1 An excerpt from Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Part 2,
Chapter 6, Verses 255-262):


Once, two dear servants of the wicked Kaṁsa, Keśī and
Ariṣṭāsura, came to Vraja. Keśī assumed the form of a
fearful horse, Ariṣṭāsura assumed the form of a bull,
and they both began terrifying the cowherd boys and the
cows. Their bodies were so massive that it was as if
they could touch the sky, and when they both roared very
loudly at the same time, all living entities became
terrified and fell to the ground. Because they were
frightened of those demons, the dear friends of Kṛṣṇa
forcibly prevented Him from going near the demons.
Still, after consoling them, with pride like that of a
warrior, He flexed His muscles and went before those
demons.

First, with great ferocity, Keśī came before Kṛṣṇa, who
kicked him so forcefully that he landed far away. Next
Ariṣṭāsura came. Kṛṣṇa pierced his nose, passed a rope
through it, and then brought him before the Deity of Śrī
Gopīśvara Mahādeva. The Keśī demon attacked again, at
which time the greatly valorous Śrī Kṛṣṇa forcibly
jumped on him and climbed upon his back. To subdue him,
He made the demon run in such a way that it was as if it
was being trained. In this way His taming of the demon

                          235
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

was immensely splendid.

His countless cowherd friends quickly grabbed the horse
with their hands and climbed upon it. Playing with the
horse in a marvelous fashion, they made it jump here and
there, sometimes in the sky and sometimes on the earth.
Having within an instant bridled the horse and brought
it fully under His control, for the purpose of enjoying
riding pastimes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa kept it tied up with a rope
in Vraja. He also kept the bull to pull carts.




2 An excerpt from Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Part 2,
Chapter 6, Verses 239-250):


The topic of this prema is very profound. Even great
personalities cannot understand it through their powers
of reason. This is the naturally wonderful glory of this
deep prema that overpowers one with rasa. O brāhmaṇa, at
that time the gopīs were crying out various kinds of
lamentations and, immensely aggrieved, were fainting
again and again. After regaining consciousness and being
mindless due to extreme anguish, to be with Śrī Kṛṣṇa
they entered the lake.

Meanwhile, Śrī Kṛṣṇa concluded that pastime and,
climbing upon the thousands of Kāliya-nāga’s raised
hoods, extended His two lotus hands and called the gopīs
there. He then helped His beloved gopīs to quickly climb
upon Kāliya’s hoods, which were dazzling with their
lines of splendid jewels. When those maidens of Vraja
began wandering on those hoods, they became even more
lustrous. On that immensely wonderful dancing arena of
Kāliya’s hoods, playful Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the damsels of
Vraja sang and danced in various ways, enjoying the
amorous pleasure of the rāsa-līlā.

Then, making a long rope from the garments of the
serpent’s wives, He bound it to the serpent’s nose and
held it in His left hand. He forcibly rode the serpent
as though it was a horse, and with His right hand He
played the flute with great pleasure. Sometimes He
smacked the serpent with the flute, as if it was a prod,
and by doing so He bestowed upon Kāliya mercy equal to
that which was bestowed upon His own carrier, Garuḍa.

Kāliya’s wives offered Him priceless jewels, ornaments,
garments, garlands, and sandalwood paste, and after
accepting them, He placed them on the serpent’s hoods.
Then He took those articles, along with lotuses and
other flowers from the Yamunā, and decorated Himself and
the gopīs with them.




3 An excerpt from Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Part 2,
Chapter 6, Verses 296, 309-320):


                          236
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


We don’t know how difficult it will be for You to kill
Kaṁsa and his followers, or how much time will be spent
in relieving the distress of Your dear ones there. We
also don’t know upon going there whether You will
remember us or not.” In this way, in great distress,
those ladies spoke pitiful words, hearing which everyone
present cried bitterly and fainted.

The vraja-gopīs could not tolerate even a one second
separation from Kṛṣṇa, so upon seeing the chariot begin
to pull away, they cried out, “Alas! Alas!” Being
severely aggrieved, their mouths dried up, their steps
faltering, and the broken sounds of their loud crying
filling all directions, they ran after the chariot. Some
grabbed the chariot, others fell under the wheels, some
fainted, and some stood here and there unable to even
move. Then, the cows, bulls, calves, deer, and other
animals, crying out and their faces soaked by their
tears, surrounded the chariot.

Distressed, the flocks of birds made a tumultuous sound
and began flying over the chariot. The leaves of all the
trees and plants suddenly withered. The rocks of
Govardhana ruptured and fell to the ground, dragging
trees down with them, and the lotuses withered, snapped
off their stems, and began to flow away with the river’s
current.

When Kṛṣṇa saw the condition of His supremely beloved
gopīs, He also became immensely distressed and, unable
to stop crying, He became diligently engaged in wiping
away His own tears.

On the pretext of preventing Śrī Kṛṣṇa from fainting and
falling from the chariot, Akrūra, the elder of the
Vṛṣṇis, grasped Him around the waist; but he really did
it to ensure that He wouldn’t jump off. When Akrūra saw
that Kṛṣṇa appeared as if He had fainted, with the
consent of Śrī Balarāma and Śrī Nandarāya, he cracked
his whip at the chariot’s horses and made them gallop
faster.

Gopīs, cows, and other animals lay on the ground here
and there, and Akrūra had to swerve to avoid hitting
them while quickly moving away from there. The gopīs
lamented loudly as they looked in the direction of the
Lord of their lives, whom Akrūra had snatched from them
just as a falcon snatches a piece of meat from a smaller
bird.

Akrūra drove the horses very fast, and soon the chariot
could no longer be seen. Then, Śrī Nandarāya and the
gopas, who were all sitting on their own carts yoked
with great bulls, quickly pursued the chariot.




4 An excerpt from Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Part 2,
Chapter 6, Verses 348–358):



                          237
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

After having sent Uddhava and others to Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
told the residents of Mathurā that the Vrajavāsīs were
exceedingly distraught in His absence and that they
could not be pacified by any means. Then, being
overpowered by the prema of the residents of Vraja, He
quickly returned there.

Enthralled by the mercy of the crest jewel of the
skillful, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Vrajavāsīs’ very lives returned
to them. He enjoyed with them in such a way that they
forgot the root cause of their suffering, meaning they
forgot that Akrūra had come and taken Him away. If any
of them ever remembered His absence, they would think
that while sleeping they had seen an ill-boded dream.
Frightened by this, they would weep and feel various
types of sorrow.

Enjoying with Kṛṣṇa for a very long time, the
Vrajavāsīs’ senses became completely absorbed in Him.
They became so spellbound that they had no recollection
of the past or any concern for the future.

O brāhmaṇa, after some time, in the same way as before,
Akrūra again came to Vraja with his chariot. And when he
began to take the very life of Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, away to
Mathurā, the condition of the residents of Vraja became
as it was before. Kṛṣṇa again went to Mathurā and killed
Kaṁsa, and again He returned to Vraja and enjoyed
pastimes with the Vrajavāsīs as He had before. In this
way, just as before, time and again He goes to Mathurā,
and then returns and enjoys in Vraja.

In this way, He who steals the hearts of devotees time
and again performs wonderful pastimes in Goloka such as
subduing Kāliya and lifting Govardhana. Being bewildered
by the deadly poison of kṛṣṇa-prema, the Vrajavāsīs
always consider those amazing pastimes to have never
happened before. Therefore, by continuously experiencing
union and separation, the prema of the Vrajavāsīs is
forever increasing.




5 An excerpt of a darśana with Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja (Mathurā, India: May 26,
1992):


Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

It says in Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta that after Kṛṣṇa left for
Mathurā, He came right back to Vraja and performed more
pastimes with His associates there; and then He went
back to Mathurā, and then He again returned to Vraja and
again performed the pastime of chastising Kāliya.

This is a new concept for me. I have never heard this
before.


Śrīla Gurudeva:


                          238
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

All the explanations and stories in Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta
are of Goloka Vṛndāvana, not of Vṛndāvana here in this
world. Try to understand this. In Goloka all these līlās
come in repetition, but everyone thinks that they are
happening for the first time.

In this world, suppose someone sees someone else for the
first time; there is a sense of newness in the
experience. The next time he sees that person, the
experience is no longer new and the interest may have
died down. In Goloka Vṛndāvana, on the other hand, the
līlās of Kṛṣṇa are ever-increasingly new. Even when a
līlā occurs again and again, in repetition, everyone
considers it to be quite new. The residents of Vṛndāvana
think that Kṛṣṇa is going to Mathurā for the first time,
and the Mathurāvāsīs see that Kṛṣṇa is coming there for
the first time. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called nityā-nava-
navāyamāna, always fresh and new.


Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Do the pastimes happen in exactly the same way each
time, or differently?


Śrīla Gurudeva:

It may or may not be different, but Kṛṣṇa’s associates
see it as happening for the first time. Even if a
pastime occurs innumerable times, the residents of
Vṛndāvana do not consider whether it is the same or
somewhat different; rather, they see and experience it
as happening for the first time.


Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

I thought that all the pastimes there are eternal, that
they have no beginning and no end. Now it seems that
they happen again and again, not eternally.


Śrīla Gurudeva:

No beginning and no end.


Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

If there is no beginning and no end, where is the
question of repetition?


Śrīla Gurudeva:

There is no actual repetition; it is all brand new. This
is the effect of Yogamāyā, who is so clever, so
intelligent, so powerful, and so sweet that she even
covers the intelligence of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhikā. She makes
Them taste each experience in newer and newer ways. She
makes them taste everything as brand-new.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā has seen Kṛṣṇa unlimited times. Just

                           239
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

last night She spent the entire night with Him. Then, in
the morning, Yaśodā called Her from Her home to cook.
When She arrived at Yaśodā’s house, She thought it was
Her first day there, and also the first time She had
ever seen Kṛṣṇa. She considered that although She had
heard the name of Kṛṣṇa, She had never seen Him. And
Kṛṣṇa felt the same way as Her. Eager to meet Her, He
would think, “She is so qualified, so beautiful, so
sweet, and so generous.” He is always so eager to see
Her, and She is always eager to see Him.

When Rādhikā sees Kṛṣṇa, Her eyes don’t blink; they are
like the wide-open eyes of a doe. Neither Rādhikā nor
Kṛṣṇa have time to watch whether anyone is seeing Them
or not. Rādhikā is simply drinking the beauty of Kṛṣṇa,
as if seeing Him for the first time, and He feels the
same about Her.


Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta states that the pastime of Kāliya
happens again and again.


Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is explained in this way only for the sādhaka-jīvas.
We are sādhakas, and actually we are not even sādhakas.
What are we?


Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Trying to be sādhakas?


Śrīla Gurudeva:

You are a sādhaka; I consider that I am not even a
sādhaka. You are doing so much labor, coming here to see
me in this hot weather because you have a taste to
understand this subject, whereas I am staying here
comfortably, not having to leave and go anywhere else.

Actually, though, when you have taste, this question
will not arise. You will see that all of Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes are quite new. Even if something in relation to
Kṛṣṇa is not new, it will seem quite new and you will
always want to see it. There will be no questions; all
questions will be forgotten.




6 An excerpt from Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Part 2,
Chapter 6, Verse 355):


Again He went to Mathurā and killed Kaṁsa, and again He
returned to Vraja and enjoyed pastimes with the
Vrajavāsīs as He had before. In this way, just as
before, time and again He goes to Mathurā, and then

                          240
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

returns and enjoys in Vraja.




7 Kṣat means ‘hurt’ and trāyate means ‘to give
protection;’ so one who gives protection from harm is
called kṣatriya. The kṣatriya caste is the caste of
administrators and warriors.



8 “There is a hidden mystery in the life history of
Nārada. In his previous life, Nārada performed
austerities and had momentary darśana of Nārāyaṇa. We
should know that there is an eternal Nārada, who is an
associate of Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, and Nārāyaṇa, who are the same
tattva. The Nārada who engaged in austerities and became
perfect is an expansion of the original Nārada” (Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Evening class
in Houston, Texas, on May 24, 2009).



9 Niśānta-līlā – Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s daily pastimes that takes
place at the end of night, just prior to dawn.



10 The Pāṇḍavas resided in a magical palace. In some
areas of the palace water looked like land, and in some
places land looked like water. Having come to visit
there, Duryodhana thought that the marble floor was
water, so he picked up his dhotī very daintily and
walked over it. Then he thought that a little pond was
land, so he walked on it and fell in. Draupadī laughed
to see this, and said, “Like father, like son. Your
father is blind, and you are blind.” Duryodhana became
so furious that he created a war in which hundreds of
millions of people died. Draupadī can never be at fault,
but she performed these pastimes to teach us a lesson.



11 An excerpt from Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, Verse 3, Purport
by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:


Śrīmatī Rādhikā sees Kṛṣṇa and is ready to return to Her
home. Rādhikā’s hands are so vilasi; they take so many
poses. Especially this pose comes out, and Kṛṣṇa becomes
mad.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has described this in
Prema-pūrābhidha-stotra. Facing so many difficulties,
and with a very great desire, having one hand on the
shoulder of Rati Mañjarī and with Subala in front, She
comes to meet Kṛṣṇa in a kuñja. After so many days, She
is finally coming.

Kṛṣṇa has been eagerly waiting for Her, for a long time,
and when She finally comes He becomes so pleased. He
comes out from the kuñja to welcome Her, but as soon as

                          241
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

She sees Him, She at once turns around and tells Her
sakhī, “Now we should return to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, our home.”

Seeing Rādhikā walking in the direction of Her home,
Kṛṣṇa at once begins running, at which time He stretched
out His two arms, indicating, “You cannot go.” He was
also prayerful: “Please do not return. I am praying to
You very humbly.”

Kṛṣṇa is intensely requesting and Rādhikā wants to
forcibly go, so Kṛṣṇa also uses His force, His power,
saying, “You cannot go.” Kṛṣṇa’s hands are telling Her,
“I will not let You go,” and Her hand is saying, “No,
no! I will not stay here.”

There is a speciality about these hands. Kṛṣṇa always
desires that “Her hands should touch My body,” but
Rādhikā is always saying, “No, no.” This time, however,
when Kṛṣṇa spread out His arms, She automatically took
Her hands and pushed Him. Kṛṣṇa wanted this, and now She
is doing it automatically, so Kṛṣṇa’s desires are

fulfilled.

In that way Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are both overwhelmed with
kila-kiñcita-bhāva, of which there are seven kinds:
virodhi, avirodhi, taṭasthā, and so on. All our Gosvāmīs
have prayed for this kila-kiñcita-bhāva, and Mahāprabhu
has also enjoyed it.”




12 An excerpt from a lecture by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja in Mathurā, India, on April
12, 2000:


There is a secret meaning behind the pastime of Queen
Kaikeyī asking two boons from Mahārāja Daśaratha.
Kaikeyī was not cruel. She loved Śrī Rāma more than she
loved Bharata. When Rāma was a young boy, He sat on the
lap of Mother Kaikeyī and requested, ‘I want to ask you
something. When I grow up and return home after My
marriage, My father will think of giving his kingdom to
Me. I want you to ask him to give the kingdom to Bharata
and send Me to the forest for fourteen years.’ Hearing
this, Kaikeyī fainted. When she regained consciousness
she said, ‘I cannot do such a cruel thing.’ But then
Lord Rāma told her, ‘For the benefit of the whole world,
you will have to do this.’ She finally agreed.

There is another important point in this connection.
When King Daśaratha married Kauśalya, he did not beget
any sons from her. He further married 360 queens, but
still there was no son. One day, when he was out in the
forest hunting ferocious animals, he traveled all the
way to the border of Afghanistan. He was very tired and
therefore went to visit his friend Mahārāja Kaikeya, the
king of that area, to rest. Mahārāja Kaikeya ordered his
daughter to take care of the king. The next day, very
pleased by her service, Mahārāja Daśaratha asked him if
he could marry his daughter. The king said, “Yes, you

                          242
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

can marry her, but with one condition: If she begets a
son, that son will become the king of your entire
kingdom.” Mahārāja Daśaratha replied, “There is nothing
that would please me more. I have no son, so if she
begets a son, I will be very happy to give him my entire
kingdom.” This was another reason that Bharata was
destined to become the king instead of Rāma.”




13 An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 17:


Two kinds of jīvas are free from māyā’s control: (1)
nitya-mukta (the jīvas who were never under māyā’s
control), and (2) baddha-mukta (those who were once
under māyā’s control, but are now free). The nitya-
mukta-jīvas are divided again into two categories: (1)
aiśvarya-gata (those who are attracted by Bhagavān’s
feature of opulence and majesty), and (2) mādhurya-gata
(those who are attracted by His feature of sweetness).
Those jīvas who are attracted by Kṛṣṇa’s aiśvarya are
personal associates of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, the Master of
Vaikuṇṭha. They are particles of spiritual effulgence
emanating from Śrī Mūla-Saṅkarṣaṇa, who resides in
Vaikuṇṭha. Those who are attracted by Bhagavān’s
mādhurya are personal associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
Master of Goloka Vṛndāvana. They are particles of
spiritual effulgence manifesting from Śrī Baladeva, who
resides in Goloka Vṛndāvana.




14 Here, ‘brahma’ does not refer to the demigod
‘Brahmā.’ In this connection it may mean ‘spirit, not
matter,’ or ‘soul,’ or ‘the Supreme Truth, or God;’ it
is interpreted by the Māyāvādīs to mean ‘the impersonal
God’



15 Kṛṣṇa became so intoxicated by the sweetness of the
gopīs’ love that He went to taste even the selfish love
of the hunchback Kubjā.



16 An excerpt from Mādhurya-kādambinī, Shower Three:


Now we shall talk further on the anarthas (unwanted
desires) that crop up in the execution of devotional
service. Unwanted desires tend to smother the natural
growth of the creeper of bhakti. At first glance
unwanted desires look like off-shoots from the bhakti-
latā (the creeper of devotion), but in reality they are
mundane desires for position, adoration, and opulence,
which color and taint the practitioner’s consciousness.
Thriving in this way, these anarthas arrest the growth
of the creeper of devotional service.

                          243
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


The four anarthas mentioned in the beginning of this
chapter can be mitigated in the five following ways: (1)
eka-deśavarttinī (partially); (2) bahu-deśavarttinī
(substantially); (3) prāyikī (almost completely); (4)
pūrṇā (completely); (5) ātyantikī (absolutely
thoroughly).

The many anarthas stemming from aparādhas are partially
destroyed in the final stages of bhajana-kriyā
(rendering devotional service under the guidance of a
spiritual master). This is known as eka-deśavarttinī.
When bhajana-kriyā gains maturity it turns to niṣṭhā, or
steadiness, in devotional activities. In this stage of
development the mitigation of anarthas is substantial
(bahu-deśavarttinī). Thereafter, on the platform of rati
(attraction) the unwanted desires in the heart are
almost completely absolved (prāyikī). With the first
awakening of prema, or divine love, these anarthas are
completely removed (pūrṇa). Finally, the anarthas are
totally uprooted (ātyāntikī) when the devotee receives
the mercy and shelter of the Lord’s lotus feet and is
directly engaged in His personal service.




17 He was ninety years old at that time.



18 Vastu-siddhi is the spiritual body one receives upon
attaining prema and taking birth in Vraja.



19 Svarūpa-siddhi is a vision of one’s svarūpa, or
internal spiritual form and identity, while still in
this material world. This vision is attained at the
stage of bhāva.



20 An excerpt from a lecture by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja in Mathurā, Holland, on June
28, 2002:


Devotee:

In the middle of your class you were explaining that
none of the Vrajavāsīs know, or believe, that Kṛṣṇa is
the Supreme Lord.


Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.


Devotee:

Someone who doubted that principle once asked you, “What

                          244
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

about the pastime in which Kṛṣṇa became Viṣṇu and
Rādhikā became Lakṣmī?” You replied, “No. There’s a deep
meaning there…”


Śrīla Gurudeva:

This was a play.


Devotee:

Can you please explain this further?


Śrīla Gurudeva:

It was only a play. No associates – even the grasses,
creepers, parrots, and birds, what to speak of any
Vrajavāsī like Nanda Bābā or Yaśodā Mā – ever believe
that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord. Kṛṣṇa may be the Supreme
Lord, the Lord of lords. He may be, but to the
Vrajavāsīs, Kṛṣṇa is a friend, a son, or a beloved; only
this.


Devotee:

They were playing a game?


Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, for the recreation and entertainment of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. Actually they do not know. They are
all greater than Brahmā, Śaṅkara, and even Nārada. They
can teach Nārada bhakti, but still they don’t know that
Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord. If anyone would say that He
is, a Vrajavāsī would reply sarcastically, “Oh yes, you
are right. Be right. Very good. If He is the Supreme
Lord, then I desire that bhakti be performed to His
lotus feet.” Then, bās; nothing is felt regarding
Kṛṣṇa’s being God, and nothing is said further.




21 Anarthas are unwanted desires, activities or habits
which are likened to weeds hindering one’s advancement
in bhakti.



22 Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes of killing of the demons are not
allegorical. At the same time, each demon killed
represents a different anartha that Kṛṣṇa and kṛṣṇa-
bhakti destroy.



23 ‘Hypocrisy’: pretending to be what one is not, or
pretending to feel what one does not feel; especially, a
pretense of virtue, piety, etc.

                            245
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017




24 Parīkṣit Mahārāja actually left his body before the
snake-bird bit him.




June 3, 2009


Darśana

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You have decorated this room like Vṛndāvana, the forest
of Vṛndā.

Anaṅga-mohinī dāsī:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are here, and also Gaura-Nityānanda.
You have made it like Vṛndāvana.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Good morning, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Last night I read your opinion about the economic
crisis.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Oh, yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Although I could not understand it fully, I can tell
from what I did understand that it is a good suggestion
for solving economic problems.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Thank you, Gurudeva. I wanted you to be proud. The
Financial Times is the top newspaper on this subject in
the world.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They placed so much value on your opinion.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Yes; it was very sweet, and I was happy. Thousands of
people write to this newspaper, the Financial Times.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                          246
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


Will you be writing more papers?

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Yes, if I have something intelligent to say. If not, no.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

What was the opinion you expressed?

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

I said that the pollution in the world occured because
carbon emissions are not properly priced, and therefore
the pollution aspect is not priced. There should be more
tax. If you have oil, you should pay more tax; if you
are emitting industry carbon, you should pay more tax.

Anaṅga-mohinī dāsī:

He often listens to my opinion, but this is his own
special opinion.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I thought that you had given him this opinion.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

The article suggested that President Obama draw
parallels between our world’s dependence on hydrocarbons
and, in the 19th century, our world’s dependence on
slavery. Given that he is a black president, this would
resonate. These two economic dependencies exhibited
several similarities. First, they led to immorality,
injustice, and suffering. Second, they were defended by
strong vested interests. Third, they caused political

instability.

The abolition of slavery may have harmed some short-term
interests, but ultimately led to more economic growth.
Employers had to invest in more machinery rather than
rely on free labor, and this led to having more
consumers to sell to.

Hydrocarbons cannot be abolished, but they can be taxed
to reflect the pollution they cause. Higher costs for
hydrocarbons would create predictable pricing, thus
boosting investment in alternative energy. Such
investment would lead to a predominance of alternative
choices.

As with slavery, such political action is thwarted by
the powers of vested interests, who profit from the
status quo. But, as with slavery, the economic damage
suffered by these vested interests would be dwarfed by
the benefits to society globally. There would be less
pollution, there would be ecological benefits, the
dangers of sudden increases in energy costs would be
assuaged, and the bankruptcy of international relations
dependent on oil production would be exposed and
antiquated.

                            247
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

How is my business doing?

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Mixed, Gurudeva. Some places are stable, some have
problems, and some are prosperous. We have many
companies – in Spain, Argentina, Montenegro, Turkey, and
Morocco. For example, Morocco is not doing so bad; it is
okay. Spain is difficult, and Argentina is good. So it
is mixed.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You have bought some land in Argentina?

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

For what purpose?

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

To develop and then sell it. We are also thinking of
doing farmland in Brazil.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You have a big company.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

It’s big. Yes. We are in seventeen countries, Gurudeva.

Anaṅga-mohinī dāsī:

Our business used to have forty people, and now it has
twenty.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How are the employees doing? Are they free of
complaints?

Anaṅga-mohinī dāsī:

They don’t complain. They want to meet you, Gurudeva.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

They are all coming to meet you tomorrow.

Anaṅga-mohinī dāsī:

We told them that it is your business, so they are
coming to meet you. You are like the chief CEO.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:


                            248
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Chairman.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There is good progress in the Navadvīpa construction.
The construction workers are now making the domes, and
the temple is almost complete. After that, they will
install the cakra and flag, as well one kalaśa1.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

How big is the cakra?

Brajanāth dāsa:

It is as big as the one on top of the dome at our
Govardhana temple.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Bigger. And vaṁśī, the flute, will also be installed on
one of the domes.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

It is the biggest temple in Navadvīpa. Is that right?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes. The biggest in Navadvīpa. It is also bigger than
our temple at Govardhana.

Will you be coming to Italy?

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Yes. I will be flying with you, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Once, Nārada Ṛṣi went to the royal palace of a great
king. The king welcomed him, washed his lotus feet, and
began to offers prayers. Nārada Ṛṣi kindly told him,
“Now you are old. What will you ultimately gain from
your kingdom and money? And after death, what use will
you have for this palace? Can you take with you your
kingdom, palace, queen, sons, or any farthing from

this place?”

The king answered, “No, I cannot take anything.”

Nārada asked, “If you cannot take anything from this
world, why are you working so hard day and night like a
donkey? You work all day and night without sleep.

“O King, no one can become happy by money, sons,
daughters, wives, husbands, or anyone or anything else.
Try to realize that you are soul, that the Supersoul
resides in your body, and that you are not this body. If
you are the body, then why is it that when the soul
leaves the body, the body cannot speak, move, think, or
perform any activity?


                             249
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

“So don’t waste your time in material pursuits. Give
your king-dom to your son. Come with me at once to
Vṛndāvana, to chant and hear and meditate on the sweet
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa. By doing this you will achieve prema-
bhakti very soon. You will be liberated from this world,
and you will go to serve Kṛṣṇa in Goloka Vṛndāvana.
There is no death, no birth, no suffering there – only
the eternal happiness of serving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.”

Hearing this, the King exclaimed, “My eyes have been
opened. I no longer want to be in this kingdom with my
family. I will give this up at once and come with you to
Vṛndāvana. There, on the bank of the Yamunā, I will
somehow maintain my life by begging, and I will do
bhajana.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva is referring to King Suvarṇa Sena.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The king did this, and after some time he was liberated.
In his next life, perhaps, he entered into Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s pastimes and, after that, he went to Goloka
Vṛndāvana.

We must gradually give more and more importance to
bhakti. Worldly persuits cannot save us. If you cannot
give up worldly attachments, then somehow maintain your
life and at the same time practice bhakti-yoga. By this,
you will surely become happy.

Gaura premānande!




June 4, 2009


Morning Darśana

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Gurudeva, yesterday I went to London to attend four
business meetings. The people there know that I am not
really at work these days. They were asking me about my
time away from work. I told them my guru is staying in
my house with his entourage, and they began asking me
questions like, “How do you learn from your guru? When
did you meet your guru? Why do you have a guru?” So, I
explained to all those non-devotees about guru.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do they understand the principle of guru?

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Not really, no. I explained about guru meaning ‘from
darkness to light.’


                            250
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

If you read my book on guru-tattva, you will be able to
get some pointers.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Yes. I’ve read your book; I love it. I tried to explain
from my small knowledge about guru. They liked the idea.
It’s good that they asked questions; it’s a good sign.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The philosophy of the Bhagavad-gītā first presents the
teaching that we are not our bodies. The soul is
different from the body.


vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya

navāni gṛhṇāti naro ’parāṇi

tathā śarīrāṇi vihāya jīrṇāny

anyāni saṁyāti navāni dehī

(Bhagavad-gītā 2.22)


[Just as a person discards his old garments and acquires
new ones, the soul similarly gives up old bodies and
accepts new ones.]

We wear clothing – as Anaṅga-mohinī is wearing a sari –
and when the clothing becomes old and torn, we change it
for something new. Similarly, the soul is eternal, and
the soul ‘wears’ this body upon himself. His fruitive
activities, both good and bad, award him his body. When
the fruits of one’s karma in relation to the body are
finished, at that time the body is considered dead. This
is the first principle.

Without karma, or activity, you cannot exist in this
body for even a moment. Karma includes breathing,
drinking water, and seeing an object with the eyes. All
activities should first be offered to Kṛṣṇa, and if you
do so, there is no fruitive reaction. On the other hand
without dovetailing one’s activities in Kṛṣṇa’s service,
one must suffer the fruits of his actions.

Here is an analogy: A grain that is planted in the soil
will sprout and grow, but if it is roasted before
planting it will neither sprout nor bear fruit. [The
grain represents our karma, the sprouted grain
represents the fruits of our karma, and the roasting of
the grains represents our offering all our activities to
Kṛṣṇa.] Therefore, we should offer everything to Kṛṣṇa.

One thing more: Are you the doer of actions, or karma?

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

No, we are not the doer.


                             251
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is?

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, Kṛṣṇa. But we think, “Oh, we are the doers.”

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Yes, sometimes we become illusioned.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Therefore, better to offer yourself to the lotus feet of
Kṛṣṇa, and then perform activities.

First surrender yourself to Kṛṣṇa. Then, whatever you do
will automatically be for Kṛṣṇa. Your sleeping, eating –
anything you do – all will automatically be offered to
Kṛṣṇa. Take mahā-prasādam. Don’t take anything for your
own sense gratification, otherwise you will be involved
in fruitive karma. Offer everything first to Kṛṣṇa –

wherever you are going, whatever you are going to eat –
but not meat, eggs, and other prohibited things. Offer
to Kṛṣṇa what is fit to be offered.

Even if you cannot offer your food to a Deity, you can
offer it to Kṛṣṇa in your mind. You can utter, etat
naivedyam, klīṁ gaurāya svāhā; śrīm klīṁ rādhā-
kṛṣṇābhyām svāhā, and then take. When whatever you do is
bhakti, you will not have to come back to this material
world. By this you will be liberated from the material
world, you will be able to go to Kṛṣṇa, and you will be
happy forever.

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

By your mercy, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In the Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa spoke of four kinds of
knowledge: guhya (confidential), guhyatara (more
confidential), guhyatama (still more confidential), and
sarva-guhyatama (most confidential). The first is guhya,
which is ātma-jñāna, or knowledge that we are not this
body. Second is guhyatara, which is paramātmā-tattva-
jñāna, or knowledge that Kṛṣṇa in His feature as
Paramātmā resides everywhere. Third is guhyatam, which
is bhagavān-jñāna, or knowledge of the Supreme Lord as
the Supreme Controller. And fourth is sarva-guhyatam,
the most confidential knowledge, which is that
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the cause of all causes
and all that is.

Devotees offer everything to Kṛṣṇa:



                           252
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te

pratijāne priyo ’si me

(Bhagavad-gītā 18.65)


[Offer your mind to Me, become My devotee by hearing,
chanting, and so forth about My names, forms, qualities,
and pastimes; worship Me, and offer obeisances to Me. In
this way, you will certainly attain Me. I promise you
this truthfully because you are most dear to Me.]

What is the meaning of man-manā bhava? Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
saying, “Give your mind and heart to Me.” How? Here is
an example. A newly-married gopī girl came to reside in
Nandagaon, where her new mother-in-law instructed her,
“Be careful of the black serpent, Kṛṣṇa. He may bite
you. If you see Him and behold His beauty, your heart
will be attracted to Him forever. You will be forced to
give Him your heart and your entire self. So, don’t go
to see Him.”

One day, Kṛṣṇa was passing by with His cowherd
boyfriends and millions of cows. That newly-married girl
heard Kṛṣṇa’s flute, and at once wanted to go to a
window or door to see Him. Her mother-in-law told her,
“Don’t go. That black serpent will bite you, and you
will never be cured.”

The daughter-in-law replied, “Your daughter and all the
other Vrajavāsīs are going to see Him. Why are you
yourself going? Even if you expel me from your house, I
must go to see Him.”

Thus she went to the door and saw Kṛṣṇa, who knew her
heart. He at once held onto the tail of a calf, which
then ran right to her door. He touched her with His
flute, and she immediately became stunned.

Her mother-in-law then approached her and said, “What
are you doing here? I warned you, but you didn’t listen
to me.” Her mother-in-law then brought her inside and
told her, “You should churn yogurt. Bring the pot of
yogurt from inside, and start churning.” But that young
gopī was so absorbed in Kṛṣṇa that instead of bringing
the yogurt pot, she brought a pot of mustard seeds and
began to churn them. Again her mother-in-law came and
said, “What are you doing? You don’t follow my orders.
You must follow.”

Trying to find a way to cure the girl’s problem, her
mother-in-law considered that if she would tell her to
bring water from a faraway well, this may take her mind
off Kṛṣṇa. Thus, after ordering her to go, she gave her
one pitcher, and then another. She also gave her a baby
to carry, along with a rope and bucket.

The newly-married gopī went to the well, but she kept
the pitcher aside. Having no external awareness at all,

                            253
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

instead of tying the rope around the pitcher, she tied
it around the baby and began to lower the baby into the
well. Some gopīs nearby saw her, and one of them
exclaimed, “What has become of her? Has she become
haunted by a ghost?” Another gopī replied, “She is not
possessed by a ghost. It is the son of Nanda Mahārāja
who has possessed her mind.” They saved the baby and she
returned home, but she could not bring her heart home
with her for it had gone with Kṛṣṇa. This is the meaning
of man-manā bhava.

Give your heart and mind to Kṛṣṇa. If you cannot do
that, then mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru – worship Him and
offer Him obeisances. Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna to engage his
mind in Him, to perform śravaṇa, kīrtana, and smaraṇa.
Arjuna explained that he could not do that on the
battlefield. So Kṛṣṇa told him that he could simply
offer praṇāma to Him, and declared, “I will liberate
you.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa has given us a chance; He has given us this human
form of life. If you fail to perform bhakti in this
life, you will lose hundreds of thousands of lifetimes.
Kṛṣṇa is very merciful. He cannot tolerate the suffering
of the living entities, so He has given His holy name.
He has invested all of His power, mercy, and qualities
in His name. The holy name is non-different from Him. It
is not a worldly thing that will give only gold or other
such things. It can bestow something millions of times
more than money can give; but we have no taste for it.
Our version of ‘bhajana’ is not sufficient.

You will have to give your whole energy. If you are not
giving your whole energy, then give part of your energy;
but if you only give part, it may take a ling time to
advance. If you give your energy fully, you will very
soon enjoy success.

Yaśodānanda is giving partly. How is he giving? He is
helping so much with my Navadvīpa project.

[To Sundara-gopāla dāsa] You are also helping me, in
legal matters and in book publishing. In this way we
should gradually develop.

I told him, “Don’t go into married life,” but he could
not follow my instruction. He saw her, and at once māyā
attracted him.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, your daughters are very good. The Gaṅgāmātās
are here.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Gaṅgāmātās? Where?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Here are two.


                          254
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Where is the Gaṅgāmātās group?

Brajanāth dāsa:

They now have a center here in Brighton.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The others will not come?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Most of them have left for Italy, but there are two
girls here, and they are opening a center. They will
also go to Italy. Rādhikā is from Australia. She is the
daughter of Sahadeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, Sahadeva?

Brajanāth dāsa:

She is sixteen years old.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And this other girl is from where?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Holland. She is Mañjukeśī.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, I have so many sons and daughters.

Anaṅga-mohinī dāsī:

You are very busy, and we are very fortunate.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They are doctors, engineers, businessmen, lawyers…

Anaṅga-mohinī dāsī:

Pilots.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, pilots also.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Many unemployed.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Also, a politician from Peru.

Brajanāth dāsa:

                             255
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017


He was running for election. The political elections
were going on, but he left all the elections to come to
Houston to be with Gurudeva. He is a minister in the
government.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And one from Australia, from Cessnock.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Prahlāda.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And there is also one Buddhist leader in China.




June 4, 2009


Evening Darśana

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In ancient times there was a king named Citraketu, who
had many wives. King Citraketu married one woman after
another, but he was very unhappy because none of them
bore a child. One day a great saint named Aṅgirā Ṛṣi
arrived at his palace, whereupon the king welcomed him
and, honoring him, washed his feet. Seeing the king
despondent, Aṅgirā Ṛṣi enquired, “Why are you so
unhappy? Your military is under your command; you behave
well with them, and you give them a good salary.
Moreover, your wives are very qualified.”

The king replied, “Everything is okay except that I have
no son. Who will take responsibility for the kingdom
after me? Who will sit on my throne? When I die, who
will perform my śrāddha ceremony and offer me piṇḍa2?
For this reason I am aggrieved.”

The great sage said, “I see in your destiny that you
have no son.”

The king said, “I know that you are very powerful and
can grant me a son. I want a son.”

The sage replied, “No one can be happy in this world by
having a son or daughter, a wife or wealth. This world
is full of miseries due to the endless pain of repeated
birth and death. You will have to become old one day,
one day you will have to give up this body, and at death
you will not be able to take anything with you from this
world – not even a penny.

“You can be peaceful and satisfied only if you have love
and affection for Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Offer yourself at the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and surrender unto Him. By this
you can be happy; there is no other way.

                             256
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


“You should know that you are not this body; you are
soul. Both the soul and the Supersoul are present in
this body. If by the help of guru you realize this, then
you will be liberated; otherwise not. Otherwise you will
have to reincarnate in this world as a hog, pig, donkey,
monkey, and countless other species, always seeking
happiness without obtaining it.

“Don’t think, ‘I will have a son and thus become happy.’
Rather, engage in bhajana to Kṛṣṇa.”

The king replied, “Oh, sage, you are powerful. I want
only a son. Please give me a son”

Finally the sage told him, “Very well, you will have a
son, but he will be the cause of both your happiness and
distress.”

The king thought, “No harm, I will have a son and be
happy. And, because he will sometimes disobey me, I will
be inconvenienced. This will not be a problem. At the
appropriate time I will give my kingdom to my son, and I
will go to the forest and do bhajana.”

Aṅgirā Ṛṣi gave the king some sweet-rice and advised
him, “Give this to your dearest, most beloved queen.”

King Citraketu gave the sweet-rice to his eldest and
most lovely wife, named Kṛtadyuti, and after ten months
a beautiful son, as beautiful as the moon, took birth
from her womb. Thus, day by day, like the moon, that
child grew.

When the boy reached about five years of age, the king’s
other queens met together. One queen said, “The king
used to be affectionate to us, but since the birth of
this son he does not even look after us. We are like
maidservants now. He doesn’t give us any aromatic oils
for bathing, or any gift, and he doesn’t even ask, ‘How
are you?’

“Even maidservants who are constantly engaged in
rendering service to the husband are honored by the
husband; they have nothing for which to lament. Our
position is that we are like maidservants of the
maidservants. We are most unfortunate, and the root
cause of all these problems is this son.” The queens
conspired: “We should somehow give poison to this boy.
He will die, and all our problems will be solved.”

Unaware of the poison administered by her co-wives,
Queen Kṛtadyuti walked within the house, thinking that
her son was sleeping deeply as he was not weeping for
her. She ordered the nurse, “My dear friend, please
bring my son here.” When the maidservant approached the
child, who lay motionless on his bed, she saw that his
eyes were turned upward and his body was black. There
were no signs of life, as all his senses had stopped
functioning.

Understanding that the child was dead, she cried, “Now I
am doomed!” and fell to the ground. In great agitation,
the maidservant struck her breast with both hands and

                          257
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

cried loudly in regret. Hearing her piercing voice the
queen immediately arrived at that spot. Now realizing
that her son was dead, in great lamentation and her hair
and dress in disarray, the queen fell to the ground
unconscious.

Hearing the loud crying, all the inhabitants of the
palace, both men and women, ran to that place. Being
equally aggrieved, they also began to cry. The queens
who had administered the poison also cried
pretentiously, even louder than that dear-most queen.

When King Citraketu heard of his son’s death from
‘unknown causes,’ he became almost blind. Because of his
great affection, his lamentation grew like a blazing
fire, and as he went to see the dead child, he kept
slipping and falling on the ground. Surrounded by his
ministers and other officers, as well as his learned
brāhmaṇas, the king fell unconscious at the child’s
feet, his hair and dress in disarray. When the king
regained consciousness, his eyes were tearful, he could
not speak, and his breathing was heavy. He had forgotten
the words of Aṅgirā Ṛṣi, warning him that he would also
have to suffer.

There was no one present to console anyone else, but in
the meantime Aṅgirā Ṛṣi returned to the palace with
Nārada Ṛṣi, a very exalted sage. Such saintly persons as
he and Nārada can perform any activity they desire. They
can give life to a dead person, and if a man has
committed any offense, they can effectively curse him by
saying, “You should die at once.”

Aṅgirā Ṛṣi asked, “Why are you all weeping?” but at
first no one could recognize that he was the saintly
person who had granted the son some years earlier. He
asked many times, “What has happened?” but no one
replied. Finally someone told him, “Oh, this boy has
gone.” Aṅgirā asked, “Where has he gone? When will he
return?” That person replied, “He has gone to a place
from where there is no return at all.”

Aṅgirā Ṛṣi then told the king and his associates, “All
those who come to this world take birth, and one day
they will have to die. This is the rotation of birth and
death; so don’t be unhappy. Rather, try to perform
bhajana.”

When Aṅgirā Ṛṣi completed his instructions, Nārada Muni
initiated the king into sacred Vedic mantras. Nārada
then brought the departed soul of the boy back into his
dead body and requested him to speak to everyone
present, immediately after which the son spoke about the
philosophy of the soul. Thus enlightened by the
instructions of the brāhmaṇas Aṅgirā and Nārada, King
Citraketu became fully aware of spiritual knowledge. As
an elephant becomes free from a muddy reservoir of
water, King Citraketu came out of the dark well of
material family life.

This narration is from the Sixth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, and there is another narration, found in the
Eleventh Canto, which illustrates a similar truth. In
the Eleventh Canto it is stated that there was a pair of

                          258
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

pigeons who had many babies. One day the pigeon parents
went to the forest to collect some food for their
children and themselves. While in the forest they sat on
a branch of a tree, under which there was very green
grass. They were remembering their marriage ceremony and
other amorous pastimes, and they were very happily
kissing each other with their beaks.

Just then, the she-pigeon saw several grains of pearl-
like rice on the grass, and she said, “O my beloved, let
us go and pick up these grains of rice.” The male pigeon
replied, “There is no businessman or farmer around. From
where has this rice come? Don’t go. It is someone’s
trap. A hunter may capture you in his trap.” The she-
pigeon said, “I think you are wrong,” and flew down to
pick up the grains of rice.

At that moment, lurking behind a tree, was a black
hunter, very tall and fearsome. The hunter pulled a
string, and the female pigeon became entrapped in a net
that fell down upon her. The female pigeon now began to
weep bitterly. The male pigeon saw this and exclaimed,
“My wife has been caught in the hunter’s trap! He will
kill her!” Overwhelmed with worry, he flew near to that
trap, weeping. He considered, “God is very cruel. Why am
I not dead in that trap, with my wife outside? My wife
can support our children, but I cannot.”

While the father pigeon was fully absorbed in weeping,
the hunter, from behind the tree, took up his bow and
arrow, and shot and killed him. Clapping, that hunter
came and took the dead body of the male pigeon, pulled
the she-pigeon out from under the net, tied their legs
together, and carried them to his home. And what did he
do there?

Brajanāth dāsa:

He cooked them.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Kentucky Fried.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He cooked them with some vegetables, and then ate them.

Death is always on our head. Maybe today, maybe
tomorrow, in five years, in ten years, in a hundred
years, or in 125 or 150 years, you will have to die. It
is therefore imperative to know who you really are.

You are not your body. You are eternal souls, the
eternal servants of Lord Kṛṣṇa. You have forgotten
Kṛṣṇa, and that is why you have come to this world. The
Supreme Lord is very merciful and has given you a human
form – not for sense gratification, but only to realize
your true identity. If you miss the opportunity of this
human life without realization of soul and Supersoul,
you will have to again enter the rotation of birth and
death as dogs, pigs, and hogs; and it may be millions
upon millions of births before you will again attain
this human form.

                             259
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


The wise and intelligent perform bhajana. Try to know
who you really are, who the Supersoul is, who has
created this world, and the personal nature of that
Supreme Creator. The Supreme Lord has form. In the Old
Testament of the Bible it has been written, “God created
man after His own image.” He is very beautiful, and that
is why mankind has beauty – after His image.

So, my request is that if you want to be happy in this
world, you must try to realize these truths. Find a
qualified guru and try to engage in sādhana, spiritual
practices, under his guidance. In this way you will soon
be liberated from the bondage of this world, and you
will become happy forever.

Gaura premānande!

Devotees:

Haribol!

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Prema-vilāsa dāsa] Oh, you are here?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Prema-vilāsa prabhu will come to India.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Prema-vilāsa dāsa] When are you coming?

Prema-vilāsa dāsa:

Janmāṣṭamī.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are you translating something?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He is going to school.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

For…?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

For learning.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Learning bhakti?

Prema-vilāsa dāsa:

Psychology.

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                            260
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Psychology will not save you.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He is learning both.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Your daughter Prabhā is here.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Ah, yes.

Brajanāth dāsa:

She brought her sister.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Your sister?

Prabhā dāsī:

And my brother-in-law.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. They must do bhajana. There is no time to
lose. There is no certainty when death will come; it is
dancing on our head.

Are there any questions?

Yaśodānanda dāsa:

Some of the beautiful people of your company
[Ready2Invest] have come. This is Tanya, Vira, Ruby,
Binko, and Lee. Seeing you, everyone has become very
shy.

Anaṅga-mohinī dāsī:

Some of the people who have been coming to our weekly
programs are also here to meet you. Juliet is here, and
Garret, Anushya, Kamara, and Aila.

Brajanāth dāsa:

They are from the Gaṅgāmātās.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The Gaṅgāmātās have gone to Italy?

Gaṅgāmātā:

Kamala has left, and the rest are leaving on Saturday.
They all send their praṇāmas to you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I am very happy that the Gaṅgāmātās are preaching and
doing book distribution. I am very, very happy.

                            261
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Brajanāth dāsa:

Rāma, the son of Nikuñja, is here.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Nikuñja dāsī] He was in Badger? What is he doing
now?

Nikuñja dāsī:

He is in school here in England.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In what class?

Nikuñja dāsī:

Eighth class.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, very good. [To Rāma dāsa] But you must chant. You
will be happy by that. Chant some rounds daily; even
one, two, or three rounds will suffice. Studying alone
will not save or protect you.

Yaśasvinī dāsī:

This is Hari-priya dāsī. She is a disciple of Śrīla
Bhakti-vaibhava Purī Mahārāja. She has a question.

Hari-priya dāsī:

I am sorry that this is not a very elevated question. In
the Bhagavad-gītā it says that if one tries to perform
devotional service and doesn’t succeed, in his next
birth he takes birth in an aristocratic or wealthy
family, or in a Vaiṣṇava family. If a devotee is trying
to practice but he isn’t fully pure when he leaves his
body, does he keep taking birth again and again in a
Vaiṣṇava family?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If he continues his bhakti but could not achieve
perfection, he will take birth in such a family.

Hari-priya dāsī:

If we are not perfect at the time of death, how many
times will we take birth again in a Vaiṣṇava family?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It depends on one’s eagerness to do bhajana. Eagerness
is required. If your bhajana is high-class, then you
will very soon reach perfection. Otherwise, the process
may take thousands of births.

Hari-priya dāsī:


                          262
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

If one is trying to perform bhajana, will one always
take a human birth?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Rādhikā dāsī] What are you doing now?

Rādhikā dāsī:

Teaching in London.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In a school?

Rādhikā dāsī:

Yes, in London.

Gurudeva, my father has come. I am staying with him.
Will you give him your mercy? He wants to take harināma
initiation.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I will be happy to give him initiation.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He is advanced in age. He cannot come to Italy. So he is
asking for harināma today.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When I go upstairs to my room, please bring him there
and I will give him initiation. He is very fortunate.
His life will be successful.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, this boy has already had three gurus who left.

Devotee:

I am on my third one now.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Two have left, and the third is still going on.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They left him, or he left them?

Devotee:

My two previous gurus have fallen down, and after that I
took re-initiation with the third one.

Brajanāth dāsa:

                             263
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


He wants to take dīkṣā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why not take from your present guru?

Devotee:

I don’t think he can give me kṛṣṇa-prema.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Can you get his permission?

Devotee:

It is better if I can get it, but I don’t know if he
will give it.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If he will give permission, that is okay; and even if
not, still you can come to me.

[To Prema-vilāsa dāsa] Prema-vilāsa prabhu, why are you
not translating anything?

Prema-vilāsa dāsa:

I think I’m a little lazy.

Brajanāth dāsa:

He is very qualified.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I want your help again. You made me world famous by the
books you translated.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Bhakti-rasāyana, Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha, and Nectar of
Govinda-līlā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They are very attractive and easy to read. My desire is
that you will translate and publish some books again.

Prema-vilāsa dāsa:

Your wish is my command.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Maybe he can help us with Mādhurya-kadambiṇī. We need so
much help with that. We need someone to check the Hindi.
The Hindi is very hard.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can give it to him and he will check it. This is his

                             264
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

sevā.

Tarunī dāsī:

I have read in Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Jaiva-dharma
that a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī chants Hare Kṛṣṇa occasionally,
a madhyama-adhikārī chants constantly, and an uttama-
adhikārī induces others to chant by his mere presence.
Is he talking about pure nāma, or nāma-ābhāsa (a
semblance of pure nāma)? Is a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī who is
chanting nāma-aparādha (chanting nāma with offenses) a
kaniṣṭha as well, or is not even kaniṣṭha yet?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

A kaniṣṭha-adhikārī is full of unwanted desires in his
heart, so his chanting is nāma-aparādha; sometimes there
may be a tinge of nāma-ābhāsa, but it is always nāma-
aparādha. Those who think “I am this body” always chant
nāma-aparādha. A madhyama-adhikārī chants nāma-ābhāsa,
and an uttama-adhikārī chants the pure name.

[Upstairs, after the darśana, where an initiation is
just about to take place and some guests have come to
request initiation.]

Guest:

I would like to take initiation.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Are you following the four regulative principles?

Guest:

No, I drink and smoke.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then I will not give initiation. How can I help you if
you are smoking? I cannot help you.

[To a guest] Are you strong in bhakti, or not? If not,
you cannot be happy. You are weak. You must have strong
belief in bhakti, otherwise you will be like ordinary
people. If you cannot chant or engage in other
devotional practices, then what can I do?

Guest:

I am not weak. I am still chanting. I have been chanting
for six years.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

But your family is disturbing you and making problems
for you. Don’t fear them. Go on chanting. They cannot
help you. Only the holy name can help you. Have strong
belief in this.

[To another guest who wants to take harināma initiation]
Why are you wearing rudrākṣa beads? We wear tulasī
beads. There is no need to wear rudrākṣa. Good blood

                          265
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

circulation, purification of your heart, and kṛṣṇa-
bhakti all come by wearing tulasī.




* * *




1 A kalaśa is a golden colored waterpot. Its presence on
a gate or building is considered an auspicious sign.



2 Śrāddha is a ceremony in honor of and for the benefit
of deceased relatives, in which the forefathers are
offered piṇḍa. Generally, piṇḍa is an offering of small
balls of rice cooked in milk with black sesame, ghee,
and honey. The offering is made to the deceased and his
forefathers, in order for the deceased to attain a body
suitable for enjoyment in Pitṛloka.




June 6, 2009


Morning Walk

Excerpt

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How is your health?

Nṛhari dāsa:

Oh, good.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[Gesturing towards Bhavatāriṇī dāsī] And she has also
come.

Nṛhari dāsa:

Yes. If we have to purchase a ticket to Brahmaloka to
follow you there, we will also go there.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

But our plane will not go to Brahmaloka. Our plane will
go directly to Goloka Vṛndāvana.




                          266
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

June 7, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you   cannot follow the principles of the sannyāsa
order,   then what is the use of taking sannyāsa and
giving   up your house, father, mother, sister, and so
forth?   We should be very strict in our behavior.

Gṛhasthas must not   be attached to home, wife, and
children. They may   maintain them, but without
attachment; giving   importance to chanting the holy name,
reading books, and   distributing books; continuing in
this way.

There is no time to lose. Death is always dancing on our
heads, so do not neglect harināma and guru (gāyatrī)
mantra. It is essential to chant them daily.

Does anyone have questions?

Devotee:

Gurudeva, I heard that there are five rasas
(relationships) that the living entity can have with
Kṛṣṇa. Regarding our relationship with Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, is it only in dāsya-rasa?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes. First practice dāsya-bhāva. Then, when you become
mature in bhakti, Mahāprabhu will automatically be seen
as Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and you will enter Their
pastimes. But first, only dāsya-bhāva.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Rūpa-manohara from Hawaii is here. Today is his
birthday.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, you are here. Very good. [Giving birthday blessings]
Maṅgalam bhavatu, kalyāṇam bhavatu – May this birthday
bring you auspiciousness. May you be happy in this world
and the transcendental world. May kṛṣṇa-bhakti enter
your heart.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

This prabhujī wants to take vānaprastha. He is currently
separated from his wife. He is from Slovenia, but he is
French.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Is he in a position to give up his house and children,
and everything he possesses?

Devotee:


                            267
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Yes. I only have one child. There is no difficulty.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You have a son?

Devotee:

Yes, one.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How old is he?

Devotee:

Seven years old. His name is Vālmīki.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who will maintain him?

Devotee:

My wife is at home with him. She will maintain him.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Your wife has agreed to this?

Devotee:

Yes. When I distribute books with Āśrama Mahārāja in
England, sometimes I give a little something. I don’t
maintain them, but sometimes I send a little money to
them.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

He sends something to his family every month at present,
but he is not obligated to do so.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gokula-candra was in charge of the maṭha in Stuttgart.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is in charge now?

Gokula-candra dāsa:

Ṭhākuraji is here with me.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very unfortunate.

[To Brajanāth dāsa] Has he decided to marry an
Australian girl?

                             268
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Brajanāth dāsa:

He wanted to, yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I don’t want my brahmacārīs to deviate. ISKCON says
there is no harm for a brahmacārī to deviate from the
principles of his āśrama, but we must not do this.

Kṛṣṇa has given us this human life solely by His mercy.
If you lose this opportunity by indulging in sense
gratification, then for hundreds of thousands of births
you will be born as dogs, hogs, monkeys, donkeys, and
honkeys, at which time you will have no chance for
bhakti.

There was once a blind beggar. When he went to beg one
day, feeling his way around, he found a door and
thought, “Maybe there are some gṛhasthas here who I can
beg from.” He entered the compound, an extremely large
compound of 8,400,000 yojanas (a yojana equals eight
miles). Touching the wall with one hand and using his
stick with the other, he began to walk. After millions
of years, he again found his way to the door. However,
just before reaching the door he felt an itch. He began
scratching that itch, and because of this he missed the
door. In fact, again and again he missed the door in
this way.

The door represents the human form of life. If we miss
the opportunity of this human birth, we will again wait
millions of births for another opportunity – and again
we may miss it. Always remember this, and try to
exercise control. This is the reason I travel, and the
reason my disciples and sannyāsīs travel; to inspire
you.

He is qualified; very, very qualified.

[To Gokula-candra dāsa] Now you are like a jewel, but
when you marry, your value will become like that of
glass.

Dhruva Mahārāja lamented. “I was searching for broken
glass and I found cintāmaṇi (a wish-fulfilling gem), the
darśana of Nārāyaṇa, but then I lost it. He gave me rule
over a kingdom for 36,000 years, but He did not give me
His abode and service.” You will also lament in this
way.

Does anyone have questions?

Śrīpāda

Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

One question, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, you were traveling with Nemi Mahārāja?


                          269
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

We will travel together after the festival.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I thought that you were with Nemi Mahārāja. Where were
you?

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

I was in France and Germany.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

For three months?

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

Yes. I was writing a lot, and…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Did you also go to your house?

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

Yes, I saw my children. They were all crying.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In the future, don’t go there. If you want to keep your
sannyāsa, then wait twelve years before going there.
Before that time, don’t have contact with your former
family in any way. You are expert in many things, so
also be an ideal sannyāsī.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

You say that if someone is a brahmacārī and wants to
marry, it may be that he will not take a human form in
his next birth. But in the Bhagavad-gītā it says that
even if one makes a little progress on this path, he is
guaranteed not to go down.


nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti

pratyavāyo na vidyate

sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya

trāyate mahato bhayāt

(Bhagavad-gītā 2.40)


[Endeavours on the path of bhakti-yoga are neither
fruitless, nor is there any flaw. Even a little practice
frees one from the great danger of transmigrating
endlessly within the cycle of repeated birth and death
in this material world.]

How do we reconcile this?

                            270
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

It has been written in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that he will
lose the chance of the human form of life in his next
birth. So be careful.

It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:


labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte

mānuṣyam artha-dam anityam apīha dhīraḥ

tūrṇaṁ yateta na pated anu-mṛtyu yāvan

niḥśreyasāya viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.9.29)


[This human birth is very rare, because it is only
attained after many lifetimes. Although temporary, it
can give the highest benefit and be a springboard
leading to spiritual perfection. After all, sense
gratification is available even in the most abominable
species, whereas spiritual perfection is possible only
for a human being. Therefore, before death comes, an
intelligent person should immediately, without wasting a
single moment, begin to endeavor with one-pointed
dedication to achieve the ultimate good fortune. And
what is this ultimate good fortune? The cultivation of
kṛṣṇa-bhakti.]

Brajanāth dāsa:

In the history of Bharata Mahārāja, Bharata became a
deer in his next life.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, yes.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Regarding the Bhagavad-gītā verse, this refers to one
who has no connection with Vaiṣṇavas and somehow or
other gets that connection. If such a newcomer dies, in
his next birth he comes again in this bhakti line. On
the other hand, for one who knowingly misuses his
chance, he gets a very negative result.

Gurudeva will exercise now. During the exercises, there
will be no filming and no photos.

Devotee:

How can we break through our anarthas?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

By sādhu-saṅga, sādhu-saṅga, sādhu-saṅga.



                            271
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

‘sādhu-saṅga’, ‘sādhu-saṅga’—sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.54)


[The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that through
even a moment’s association with a sādhu, a pure
devotee, one can attain complete spiritual perfection.]

This verse does not refer merely to living with a sādhu,
but to hearing his hari-kathā and following his
instructions. The term sādhu-saṅga indicates samyak
rūpeṇa gamanaṁ. When the instructions given by the sādhu
are followed completely, in all ways, that is sādhu-
saṅga.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, this is Janārdana prabhu from France. He met
you when you came to the festival in France almost ten
years ago.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Whose disciple are you?

Janārdana dāsa:

Bhagavān dāsa.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

He needs guru-āśrayā. He needs some shelter and mercy.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I have made Bhagavān a devotee again.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī

Mahārāja:

Bhagavān’s daughter is your disciple.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

And his ex-wife is your śikṣā-disciple.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I know Kṛṣṇa-bhāmini, and also his son, Vaiṣṇava dāsa.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

Can he meet with you some time during this festival?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, after nine o’clock. Come along with him.

I have come here only to inspire weak persons.


                           272
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Śrautī

Mahārāja:

Like us.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

All devotees should be solid in their bhakti. Whether
they are gṛhasthas or in the renounced order, they need
not be weak.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

Please forgive me for disobeying you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t go there again. Be determined in this way: “My
house may be destroyed, no harm; but I will not go
there.

Śrīpāda

Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

All my children are calling, writing, and crying, “You
have abandoned us. We need our father.” So, my heart…I
went there, trying to give them some solace. But…

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

I have just arrived from Nigeria.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Will you perform the Jagāi and Mādhāi drama?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Jagāi and Mādhāi? I don’t know.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Good preaching in Nigeria?

Śrīpāda

Āśrama Mahārāja:

Very good, very good. I am now doing things a little bit
differently. I am doing some charity work, social work,
like Parama-gurudeva did. I am doing this to make the
people open their hearts.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Charity work for the poor?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Yes, for the poor. And now their hearts have become
open. Now I have many contacts, from the government
minister on down.

                             273
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

The minister also?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Now they are my friends. Everything has opened for my
preaching.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. Can you come with me to South Africa?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

I will be going there in September.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Come and be with me in South Africa and Mauritius.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Okay.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

This is Madana-gopāla prabhu. He is a disciple of Śrīla
Bhakti-vallabha Tīrtha Mahārāja. He regularly invites
our sannyāsīs to his home.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Which country is he from?

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

Slovenia. He is very scholarly; he likes to hear
philosophy. I invited him to come and take darśana of
you, and now he is very happy. He came with five other
persons.

Devotee:

Yesterday Bhāgavata Mahārāja was mentioning svarūpa-
jñāna. What was he referring to?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There are many kinds of svarūpa-jñāna, the first of
which is sva-svarūpa: who are you? Next is para-svarūpa,
or kṛṣṇa-svarūpa: what is the intrinsic nature of Kṛṣṇa?
Who is Kṛṣṇa? Next is sādhya-sādhana-svarūpa: what is
sādhana (the process to achieve the goal of life) and
what is sādhya (the goal of life)? Then māyā-svarūpa:
what is māyā?

These are svarūpa-tattva, and it is essential to our
bhakti to know them all. They are discussed in Caitanya-
caritāmṛta and also in Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s
Bhajana-rahasya. Do you have that book?

Devotee:

                            274
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Try to get all my books. I have published so many books,
and you will be greatly benefitted by reading them.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva clarifies this very nicely in his commentary of
Bhajana-rahasya. Not everyone’s Bhajana-rahasya will be
so clear.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Nowadays Śrīla Bhakti-vallabha Tīrtha Mahārāja does not
come to the West. He has stopped. Sometimes he is in
Calcutta, or Chandigarh, or especially in Delhi. He is
my friend.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, here in the West some people donate
their organs to help others. How should we understand
this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We do not think about such things. We do not give away
our eyes; they are only for the service of Kṛṣṇa. This
is simply social work. We should always think about
Kṛṣṇa and Mahāprabhu, and how to serve and remember
Them. We place no value on this type of activity. In
fact, if you give your organs away, you will have to
take birth again.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

If I donate my kidney to help others, will I get a
reaction from that?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

If the person to whom you donate is a very bad person,
like a criminal, you will get a very bad reaction. If
the person is a highly qualified devotee, you will be
benefited, but it is very rare that you will have the
opportunity to donate to such a devotee.

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Right, right.

Dhruva dāsa:

My bhajana is always suffering, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is the reason I have come – to help you follow my
instructions.



                            275
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017




June 8, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

You once said that Madhvācārya was preaching only an
ābhāsa (shadow, or semblance) of vātsalya-rasa. What did
you mean by that?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He and his followers worshiped the Deity of Bāla-gopāla,
Dadhi-manthana Gopāla, or that Gopāla who carries a
stick for churning yogurt. In that way it is worship in
vātsalya-bhāva (worshiping Kṛṣṇa as the child of Mother
Yaśodā).1

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

But you said this was an ābhāsa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There is also some gopī-bhāva. In fact, Madhvācārya gave
his eight sannyāsīs gopī-bhāva and instructed them to do
bhāva-sevā in that mood.2 These eight sannyāsīs
worshiped in that special way, in gopī-bhāva.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

But you said ‘vātsalya-ābhāsa.’ In what way is it an
ābhāsa?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Because there is a mood of aiśvarya (awe and reverence).

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They do not worship Kṛṣṇa as Vallabhācārya worships Him.

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, Mādhavendra Purī is well. He will
probably come back today.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How is he?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Giri Mahārāja was with him when he got his heart attack,
but nobody went with him to the hospital. Nobody is
asking about his health, so nobody knows how he is.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who took him to the hospital?

                             276
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

I was with him in the morning when it happened, and we
called an ambulance. The ambulance came right away.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In this stage we ought to help anyone in such a
situation. Anyone who knows him should have gone to the
hospital or helped him further.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

In prakaṭa-līlā, Lord Caitanya displays much opulence,
showing that “I am the Lord.” Also, He has to leave
Navadvīpa in order to be educated about rādhā-bhāva by
Rāmānanda Rāya. But you say also that Lord Caitanya’s
Navadvīpa-līlā is the topmost līlā. How do we reconcile
this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Navadvīpa is known as Guptā Vṛndāvana (hidden
Vṛndāvana). There is no opulence in Navadvīpa. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s bālya-līlā (childhood pastimes) is
like Kṛṣṇa’s bālya-līlā. He performs pastimes similar to
those of Kṛṣṇa. Joking with the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa asked them,
“Will you marry Me?” Similarly, Mahāprabhu joked with
the girls who were worshiping demigods to obtain a good
husband.3

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, you previously explained that Mahāprabhu’s
behavior with the girls appears to be a manifestation of
His opulence mood, because He says, “I am the master of
Śiva and Pārvatī. Worship Me, and I will give you a
benediction.” But no one believed Him.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

But Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavata describes that there is so
much opulence in Navadvīpa, because Mahāprabhu showed
His devotees, “I am Viṣṇu. I am Varāha. I am
Nṛsiṁhadeva.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

That was only for one day, in His sāta-prahariyā bhāva
(the ecstasy of twenty-one hours). Kṛṣṇa told this so
many times in Vraja. He would boast that, “I am Rāma. I
can do this and that.” But no one believed Him.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

So there is some speciality in prakaṭa-līlā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In a certain sense, prakaṭa-līlā (Mahāprabhu’s pastimes
in this world) is more important for us than aprakaṭa-
līlā (Mahāprabhu’s pastimes in Goloka Svetadvipa). In
prakaṭa-līlā Mahāprabhu gave kṛṣṇa-prema; brahmāra-

                            277
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

durlabha prema. “Brahmāra durlabha prema sabākāre jāce,
dīna hīna patita pāmara nāhi bāche – Lord Nityānanda
freely offered this exalted prema, which is difficult
for Lord Brahmā to attain, even to the fallen and
wretched souls who did not desire it” (Nitai Guna Mani,
by Locana dāsa Ṭhākura). Animals, such as tigers, bears,
and elephants, received this prema in prakaṭa-līlā.

Kanhaiyā-lāla dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I heard in your class that all the
golden mūrtis (Deities) of Sītā, who were all
established by Rāma, became gopīs in kṛṣṇa-līlā. But we
also hear that Lakṣmī cannot enter the rāsa dance. How
do we reconcile this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Because Sītā was svakīya (Rāma’s married wife) in rāma-
līlā, she was abandoned. The golden Sītās understood
that Kṛṣṇa is mādhurya [so they would be able to have a
more intimate relationship with Rāma in that way]. That
is why they wanted to become gopīs, and they became
gopīs.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Lakṣmī-devī had the abhimāna (self-conception) that, “I
am a brāhmaṇī.” With this conception she was not willing
to become the wife of a cowherd boy, and thus she could
not enter a paramour relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Sītā had no brāhmaṇī abhimāna.

Aristanasana dāsa:

Gurudeva, what was the destination of the dvija-patnīs
(the wives of the ritualistic brāhmaṇas)? They could not
have Kṛṣṇa as their paramour in that situation. Did they
become gopīs later?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In their next lives they will be gopīs, and then they
will join Kṛṣṇa’s service. Out of great respect for
brāhmaṇas and brāhmaṇa’s wives, Kṛṣṇa could not accept
the brāhmaṇīs as lovers; but when they will take birth
as gopīs He will accept them.

How many devotees have registered for the festival?

Harināmānanda dāsa:

I think eight or nine hundred.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Is it eight hundred, or nine hundred?

Harināmānanda dāsa:

I am not sure.

                            278
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

Your wife knows.

Harināmānanda dāsa:

She knows. She will be here in a moment.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, come nearer, Madana-mohana. Why are you hiding?

Madana-mohana dāsa:

I am feeling nervous, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why are you nervous? Are you doing any service?

Madana-mohana dāsa:

I am trying to do something, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What are you doing? Are you writing?

Madana-mohana dāsa:

I’m not writing, but I’m helping with the preaching in
Wales.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

Śrīpāda Giri Mahārāja:

We will be doing a festival in Wales with Vana Mahārāja.

Aristanasana dāsa:

How is it that Śiśupāla was able to blaspheme Kṛṣṇa by
saying that in His former āśrama He was a gopa and had
love affairs with young ladies? How is it that Śiśupāla
knew about such confidential matters?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He had heard from Nārada, who instructs both those who
are inimical to Kṛṣṇa and those who are favorable.
Nārada instructs all parties. He is the guru of daityas
(demons) like Kaṁsa. Kaṁsa would address him, “O
Gurudeva.” For Kṛṣṇa’s service, Nārada is very tricky.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

Gurudeva, when preaching to a new person, a female, how
would we explain that Kṛṣṇa has so many girlfriends and
at the same time loves Rādhikā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                          279
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017


No, no. Those who are newcomers should be told, “You are
not this body,” just as it was told in the Bhagavad-
gītā. Bhagavad-gītā is the primary level, and therefore
we give a new person Gītā knowledge. Then, gradually,
she will be able to hear Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

But Gurudeva, what if a person is already hearing these
things?

Brajanāth dāsa:

He brought his friend yesterday.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I see that many of the devotees here are very senior,
and they have heard these topics from me on previous
occasions. Maybe there are a few new people here, but
most are senior.

Vṛndāvana dāsa:

So how do we explain to new people after they hear? They
cannot understand.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When they come to me, I tell them, “You are not this
body; you are soul. You are an eternal part and parcel
of Kṛṣṇa, but now you have forgotten this. This
forgetfulness has covered you with many anarthas
(unhelpful habits and thoughts). You must give up these
things, and you will be able to do so by good
association, sādhu-saṅga. I tell them these things at
the time of initiation.

For such new persons, it’s good to discuss the character
and life of Prahlāda Mahārāja.

Nṛhari dāsa:

We have to make clear the difference between kāma
(material lust) and prema (spiritual love), and explain
that what Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are feeling is different from
the lust that we see in this world. We can explain that
to them.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

What song did you sing last night? No one could
understand the words, and I also could not understand.

Nṛhari dāsa:

It was about Lord Caitanya. You couldn’t hear
Bhavatāriṇī when she sang?

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                          280
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

I could hear, but I could not understand what words she
sang. I think it was the same for others as well. Please
tell your wife to sing in such a way that all can
understand the words.

Jīva-pāvana dāsa:

Gurudeva, there is so much party spirit; different
parties of Vaiṣṇavas. How can we unite everybody?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You cannot unite everyone. Party spirit is the nature of
this world.

Jīva-pāvana dāsa:

Should we try?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You cannot do it; you will not be successful. Just chant
Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Jīva-pāvana dāsa:

But Vaiṣṇavas are one family.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If your two sons are quarrelling among themselves, you
cannot unite them; can you?

Jīva-pāvana dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then why do you think you can help in this situation?
Don’t waste your time. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and be happy.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Purandara Ācārya wants to get married.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you want to be like Kṛṣṇa dāsa? You are very
unfortunate.

Purandara Ācārya dāsa:

I am under your shelter.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, you are not under my shelter. When you give up
everything and fully surrender, then you will be under
my shelter. The desire of marry is due to lust.

Purandara Ācārya dāsa:

I have problems with my mind. What should I do?

                            281
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

Pray. I told Kṛṣṇa dāsa, “If you preach to collect
money, that money will make you get married. If you give
me whatever you are collecting, you will not be poisoned
by any sin.” He didn’t listen, and he destroyed himself.
Although he stayed with me for thirty years, actually he
did not stay with me at all. Unless you quickly try to
rectify your mistakes, you will become unfortunate like
him.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is like a big market here at the festival. Everything
is there: books, beads, etc.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Did they put up a book table?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yes, everything is there.

Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja:

By performing bhajana, gradually, step-by-step thru
śraddhā, how far can a madhyama-adhikārī go?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

First madhyama-kaniṣṭha, then madhyama-madhyama,   and
then madhyama-uttama – one will reach up to ruci   and
āsakti (spontaneous attachment for Kṛṣṇa). Then,   when
rati (bhāva) manifests, that is the beginning of   uttama-
adhikāra.

Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja:

Does the uttama-adhikārī have prema?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The uttama-adhikārī goes up to the level of prema, but
when he achieves prema his body changes. His physical
body can no longer exist.

Jagannātha dāsa:

Gurudevajī, we are all kaniṣṭhas (third-class devotees,
of meager faith).

Śrīla Gurudeva: That is not true. You can speak for
yourself; not for others. It is not that all the
devotees are kaniṣṭha. Some are kaniṣṭha and some are
madhyama.

Jagannātha dāsa:

But aren’t there levels in kaniṣṭha: kaniṣṭha-kaniṣṭha,
kaniṣṭha-madhyama, and kaniṣṭha-uttama?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                             282
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017


I think that most of the senior devotees are at the
madhyama stage.

Jagannātha dāsa:

Really? If you think it’s true, it must be true.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What are the symptoms of a madhyama-adhikārī?

Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja:



īsvare tad-adhīneṣu

bāliśeṣu dviṣatsu ca

prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā

yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.46)


[An intermediate or second-class devotee, called
madhyama-adhikārī, offers his love to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is a sincere friend to all the
devotees of the Lord, shows mercy to ignorant people who
are innocent, and disregards those who are envious of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The word prema in this verse means prema (not the prema
of the uttama-adhikārī) to Kṛṣṇa. The word maitrī
(friendship) in this connection refers to love and
affection for Vaiṣṇavas. Kṛpa indicates that the
madhyama-adhikārī inspires kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs by his
hari-kathā. Then, regarding those who are against
bhakti, the word upekṣā (neglect) is used.

I think that most senior devotees are like madhyama-
adhikārīs; but they may be madhyama-kaniṣṭha or
madhyama-madhyama, not madhyama-uttama.

Jagannātha dāsa:

Okay.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They have taste for hari-kathā, and that is why they
have come here.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Jagannātha is an old devotee, yet he hasn’t come to your
festivals in years. He is here now, but only after a
long time.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                             283
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


And he is leaving tomorrow, returning to his home.

Jagannātha dāsa:

I am kaniṣṭha.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Jagannātha dāsa] Give up all those duties which you
consider important enough to leave here. Better to
remain here for five more days; don’t go. If you go, I
will think that you are not even kaniṣṭha. Those who
have no taste for hari-kathā fall into the category of
this śloka:


dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.8)


[The occupational activities a man performs according to
his own position are only so much useless labor if they
do not provoke attraction for the message of the
Personality of Godhead.]

What is the meaning?

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

Even if one has been practicing [the varṇāśrama system
of occupational duties] for a long time, if he has not
developed a taste for hearing hari-kathā, then śrama eva
hi kevalam – all his activities, in truth, are
completely useless.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

We have left our position, our father, mother, wife, and
children for hari-kathā – but you cannot do so. Even
though you are a gṛhastha, you ought to have taste for
this. If you cannot hear hari-kathā for even seven days,
from where will your bhakti come?

Does anyone have questions?

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, can you tell the kathā about the time
Nārada Muni purchased Kṛṣṇa from Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā
at Kurukṣetra?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Śrīpāda Vana Mahārāja] Do you know this kathā?
Please speak.


                             284
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Vana Mahārāja:

It’s better if Mādhava Mahārāja speaks.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

During the solar eclipse, all the Vrajavāsīs went to
meet with Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra; and all the kings,
Pāṇḍavas, and queens of Dvārakā also came. The queens of
Dvārakā brought a large quantity of gold to donate in
charity, and as they were getting ready to make the
donation, Nārada came to receive it.

The queens wanted to donate Kṛṣṇa’s weight in gold, and
Nārada was very happy to hear this. But Kṛṣṇa is Svayam
Bhagavān, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead.
How can He be measured by gold? It is not at all
possible.

In order to determine how much gold to give Nārada, the
queens decided to use a scale, with all the gold on one
side and Kṛṣṇa on the other. However, no matter how much
gold the queens placed on the scale, Kṛṣṇa was heavier
than the gold. The queens then took all of their
ornaments and placed them on the scale; but still Kṛṣṇa
was heavier.

Finally Nārada said, “I am taking Kṛṣṇa from here,
because you could not produce enough gold to equal His
weight. I will make Him my disciple.”

Kṛṣṇa became ready to leave, at which time all the
Queens began looking at each other, wondering what to
do. They decided it would be best to go to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. They approached Rādhikā and told Her of their
dilemma. Rādhikā then came to the palace, took one
tulasī leaf and washed it with Her tears, and chanted
Kṛṣṇa’s name. She then removed all the gold from the
scale and placed on it the tulasī leaf, which
immediately outweighed Kṛṣṇa. The side of the scale with
the tulasī leaf went down, and Kṛṣṇa went up.

It was Nārada Ṛṣi’s desire to show everyone present that
the combination of all the queens of Dvārakā was not
equal to one Rādhikā; and all of their gold was not
equal to the value of one of Rādhikā’s teardrops. It is
for this reason that he created that drama.

Purandara Ācārya dāsa:

Gurudeva, you say those who get married are very
unfortunate.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When you marry, your love will shared by your wife and
children; and then you will go to Rasātala (one of the
hellish planets). Those who are not brahmacārīs can get
married, but you always associate with brahmacārīs.

Purandara Ācārya dāsa:

I am not a brahmacārī. My mind is not accepting
brahmacārī life.

                            285
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then get married like Kṛṣṇa dāsa, and live with your
wife and children.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Haribol. Gurudeva will do his exercises now. No more
photographs, please.

Śrīpāda Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja:

All the devotees in China are amazed and impressed that
you came to mainland China to visit them.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And I became so very happy that the Buddhist came with
his friends and followers.

Śrīpāda Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja:

There will be many thousands more coming soon.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

Śrīpāda Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja:

It’s amazing. Everyone is preaching now because you
came.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

All the glory goes to you.

Śrīpāda Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja:

No.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

First you entered China and preached, and then I came.

Śrīpāda Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja:

No, no. I could not have gone without you. I am grateful
that you have sent me to China, because, by your mercy,
I can repeat all the glorious things that we’ve heard
from you.

This is dakṣiṇa from devotees who were initiated by you
last month by phone.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I want all my preachers, sannyāsīs, and brahmacārīs to
preach like you.

Śrīpāda Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja:

Only by your causeless mercy can we do anything at all.

                             286
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

As I am preaching in my old age, my preachers should
also preach, and my books should be distributed. So much
preaching can be done by book distribution, especially
by distributing Bhagavad-gītā, Jaiva-dharma, and other
such books.

Śrīpāda Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja:

We have translated four more books into Chinese in the
last two months.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. They are doing so much. How many books have
been translated into Chinese?

Śrīpāda Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja:

Twenty-five.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Sādhu Mahārāja] How many books in your language?

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

Six in Lithuanian.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Thirty-five in Russian.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Thirty-five?

Brajanāth dāsa:

And eighty in English.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Eighty? How many in Spanish?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Who is Spanish here?

Śrīpāda Vaiṣṇava Mahārāja:

In only one-and-a-half years, the Chinese devotees have
translated so many books.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

One-and-a-half years? Very good.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

About fifteen books have been published in Spanish.


                             287
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Brajanāth dāsa:

Maybe more. If you check with Sāgara Mahārāja, more are
available. Also, he has a printing press on which books
can be printed on demand, even one, at once. If someone
wants ten, one hundred, or one thousand, he can print
that at once.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I will inspire him. We can give him some help.

Śrīpāda Viṣṇu Mahārāja:

How many books have been published in Hindi?

Brajanāth dāsa:

More than one hundred.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa from England] You should preach
like Kiśorī-mohana and Sudevī.

Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

For the past two or three months, Sarasvatī and I have
been traveling with them to many countries.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, very good. And you must also try and give classes.

Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

Yes, they are encouraging me so much.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good. All gṛhasthas ought to be like that.

Kiśorī-mohana dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, you have said many times that chanting
nāma-aparādha (chanting nāma with offenses) – even for
millions of lifetimes – cannot give us perfection. While
preaching, we often quote this verse: Harer nāma, harer
nāma, harer nāmaiva kevalam [meaning that there is no
way to attain perfection other than chanting the names
of the Lord]. Because I’m materially conditioned, my own
chanting of nāma-aparādha won’t give me perfection. Is
it correct to think that this verse suggests that
perfection will come not by my chanting, but only by
hearing the chanting of the pure devotee?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

First hearing (śravaṇam), then chanting (kīrtanam);
both. And remembering (smaraṇam) also. We must follow
all the nine limbs of bhakti. There is no harm if one is
kaniṣṭha. You can preach.



                          288
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017




June 9, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīla Gurudeva

: The topic of Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda’s conversation with
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is very high, very high. It is
very difficult to even touch by one’s intelligence. The
first part is not difficult to understand. It is the
second part that is difficult – the part in which Rāya
Rāmānanda begins to discuss pure bhakti, then bhakti-
rasa, then sakhya (friendship), vātsalya (parental
love), mādhurya (conjugal love), and sumādhurya (Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s service mood), and then the process to obtain
that most exalted love. It is so high; it is the most
elevated chapter in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s manifesting as rasarāja-mahābhāva
is not told even in kṛṣṇa-līlā. In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes we
read about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, but not about this.

Are there any questions?

Devotee

: Śrīla Gurudeva, you said that an aspiring devotee who
is reading Bhagavad-gītā and starts chanting the mahā-
mantra mostly chants nāma-aparādha (offensive chanting),
and sometimes nāma-ābhāsa (chanting in the clearing
stage). My question is this: When we go on nagara-
saṅkīrtana, so many people hear the mahā-mantra. They
don’t know any rules or regulations and they chant
without faith and without offenses (aśraddha-nāma-
ābhāsa). You said that when the aspiring devotee chants,
his chanting is nāma-aparādha, as it is done in the
bodily conception of life. But regarding those new
people who are innocent and who don’t know anything,
what kind of chanting and hearing are they doing?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Even nāma-aparādha is not ordinary, it is high-class.
Nāma-aparādha is of so many of kinds and gradations, not
only one kind. For example, one of the varieties is
vaiṣṇava-aparādha. Actually, it is very good that one is
chanting nāma-aparādha. That will bring one to nāma-
ābhāsa, nāma-ābhāsa will bring one to śuddha-nāma (pure
chanting of the holy name wherein Kṛṣṇa is revealed as
non-different from His name), and that will bring one to
a still better stage, namely prema-bhakti.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: In Brāhmaṇa and Vaiṣṇava, a book by Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, it is written that
when the jīva falls down from the taṭasthā region, he
first becomes Lord Brahmā in one of the universes. He
becomes one Lord Brahmā.

Śrīla Gurudeva

                           289
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


: If hundreds of millions of jīvas are coming from the
taṭasthā realm to this world at the same time, will they
all become Brahmā?

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: They will become Brahmā, but not in the same universe.
They will be Brahmās in different universes. It is
written in that book by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: I read the entire book a few months ago, and I never
saw that statement there.

Śrīpāda

Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: I have the paper in my…

Śrīla Gurudeva

: I doubt that it is there.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: My question is this: When we go walking, we see
billions of blades of grass. How did those blades of
grass come from a high position to that lowly position
as grass?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: It is by their free will.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: What kind of karma makes one fall from the human form
all the way down there?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: The analogy is given of a very small seed. If that
seed is thrown on the edge of a sword’s blade, it will
immediately fall on one side or the other. It will not
remain on the blade’s edge.

Even without the fruit of karma it will go here or
there. Similarly, even without being subjected to
enjoying or suffering the fruit of one’s past
activities, because the jīva’s nature is to be taṭasthā
(marginal), he must always choose this or that. He must
go from the taṭasthā realm.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: But where is the free will? It seems like there is no
free will. The jīvas are going either here or there.

Śrīla Gurudeva


                            290
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

: Kṛṣṇa has given them independence, free will. That
independence is always with them, whether they are in
the realm of taṭasthā-śakti or when they become
conditioned souls. That independence must always be with
them. Even when they become liberated, that taṭasthā-
bhāva (the mood of the marginal living being, with the
free will to choose) will be present within them.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: But when he hits that demarcation, that sharp edge of
the blade, going this way or that way…

Śrīla Gurudeva

: In all situations the jīva has his natural, intrinsic
marginal nature, and this is also true when he is in
Goloka Vṛndāvana. However, there in Goloka Vṛndāvana,
Yogamāyā always protects him, so he never falls to this
world from there.

Kṛṣṇa never interferes with his freedom. Wherever he
wants to go, he can go.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: The human form is the platform on which one performs
karma. How does one fall from human life all the way
down to being a blade of grass?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Freedom has so many possibilities. Someone may think,
“I will be grass.” You cannot control his freedom. One
may think, “I will be a mountain,” or “I will be river,”
or “I will be human,” or “I will be a tiger.” There is
no control over freedom.

Ramanātha dāsa

: Gurudeva, when we are out distributing books or
preaching, sometimes we meet people who say, “Yes, we
know about reincarnation. I want to be a dog in my next
life,” or “I want to be a cat,” or “I want to be a
tiger.”

Śrīla Gurudeva

: They want that? Well, what can we do?

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: Who would want to be a blade of grass?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja and others

: Uddhava.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Why would he not want to be a blade of grass? In that
way Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs will walk by him, and thus he
would be bathed by the dust of their lotus feet.


                          291
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Devotee

: One little question, Gurudeva. I heard that one can go
to Vaikuṇṭha by chanting nāma-ābhāsa. Is this true?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: At first Ajāmila chanted nāma-ābhāsa, and by that
chanting a platform was created to prepare him for going
to Vaikuṇṭha. His gurus, the four Viṣṇudūtas, taught him
about śuddha-nāma. Then, later on, by his chanting of
śuddha-nāma, he actually went to Vaikuṇṭha.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja

: At the time of the jīva’s choosing which way to turn,
he may look left and right. What does he see exactly?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: He sees in this world that all are enjoying sense
gratification – as some of our brahmacārīs sometimes
think, “Oh, sense gratification is very, very good. It
is greater than Kṛṣṇa’s service. There is nothing of
value in Kṛṣṇa’s service.”

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja

: Sometimes it is said that the jīva falls to this world
by chance, and sometimes it is said that the jīvas’ fall
is his own fault. Which is correct?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Try to understand that both are the same.

Madhusūdana dāsa

: Gurudeva, does the jīva wear clothing?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Kṛṣṇa is ‘smaller than the smallest,’4 but still He
has form. In the same way, although by one’s
transcendental nature one is infinitesimal [1/10,000 the
tip of a hair particle], he has a very good form. He can
be in the body of a mountain, he can be in the body of a
blade of grass, or he can be in an entity that is
smaller than an ant.

And certainly he wears clothing. Is Kṛṣṇa naked?

Madhusūdana dāsa

: No.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Is Rādhā naked?

Madhusūdana dāsa

: No.


                           292
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva

: They wear clothing, certainly; and in the same way,
the jīva wears clothing.




June 12, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

I am so happy to be with you and your devotees.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Will you go to Russia again?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

I will go straight to Moscow with Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja.
We are going to travel in Russia for three months.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

[To Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja] And you?

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

I am going back to France for fifteen days, then
Germany, and then former Yugoslavia and Turkey.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja] And you?

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Tomorrow I will go to Spain, and then to South America,
Brazil, Peru, and Venezuela.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When I go to South Africa, will you be there?

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I also requested Āśrama Mahārāja to go.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

I will also go to Mauritius. I had a conversation with
the minister of cultural affairs there. I told him you
are coming, and he said he would make arrangements for

                            293
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

your welcome.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Any questions?

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:



śrī-caitanya-mano-’bhistam

sthapitam yena bhu-tale

svayaṁ rupah kada mahyam

dadāti sva-padantikam

(Śrī Prema-bhakti-candrikā, Introduction Verse 2,

by Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura)


[When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has
established within this material world the mission to
fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter
under his lotus feet?]

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has realized Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s mano-’bhīṣṭaṁ, His innermost heart’s
sentiment. Your disciples would like to know how they
can realize the mano-’bhīṣṭaṁ of their Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If one does not know the mano-’bhīṣṭaṁ of Gurudeva, he
is not a disciple; a real disciple would know this. Try
to be a real disciple, and then you will understand.
Okay?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, you are a very beautiful leader. Will
you tell us what is the meaning of ‘leadership’?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can learn by my example; by my life and behavior. Be
equal to all, be kind to all, and preach. Don’t be
selfish. Be broadminded.

No questions at all?

Aristanasana dāsa:

Gurudeva, I think your next class will be about Śrīla
Haridāsa Ṭhākura.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It will be about Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī…

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

                             294
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


And something still remains to be discussed about Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī.

Aristanasana dāsa:

What is the significance of Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s daily
chanting sixty-four rounds loudly, sixty-four rounds
softly, and sixty-four rounds in his mind? What are the
teachings in that?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He did mānasī-japa (chanting within the mind) for
himself, and he chanted aloud for the benefit of the
trees, creepers, animals, and all living beings. Śrīmān
Mahāprabhu told him, “You are doing both ācāra,
devotional activities performed for the benefit of
oneself, and pracāra, devotional activities performed
for the welfare of all living beings.”

On one of his visits to the home of Hiranya and
Govardhana Majumadāra [the father and uncle of
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī], Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura was
preaching about the glory of the holy name. Perhaps you
know this history. At that time there was a dispute
regarding the power of the holy name. A brāhmaṇa named
Gopāla Cakravartī could not tolerate Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s
words, and challenged him in the assembly: “After many
millions upon millions of births, when one is complete
in absolute knowledge, one still may not attain
liberation, yet this man says that one may attain it
simply by the awakening of a glimpse of the holy
name!?!” He told Haridāsa Ṭhākura, “You don’t know
anything. If I am right, then your nose will fall off
from leprosy.”

Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura was not unhappy, but all the
members of that learned assembly began to rebuke that
brāhmaṇa, who was struck with leprosy on the next day.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

His nose and his fingers fell off.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Mahāprabhu once asked Haridāsa Ṭhākura “On this Earth
there are many living entities, some moving and some not
moving. What will happen to the trees, plants, insects,
and other living entities? How will they be delivered
from material bondage?”

Haridāsa Ṭhākura replied, “My dear Lord, the deliverance
of all moving and nonmoving living entities takes place
only by Your mercy. You have already granted this mercy
and delivered them. You have loudly chanted the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mantra, and everyone, moving and not moving, has
benefited by hearing it. When loud chanting of the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mantra is performed all over the world by those
who follow in Your footsteps, all living entities,
moving and nonmoving, dance in ecstatic devotional
love.”


                            295
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Balabhadra dāsa (From Glastonbury):

I just want to say that it is a great honor to be in
your presence. I feel very touched by your sādhu-saṅga.
Yesterday, I especially felt the importance of being in
sādhu-saṅga, so, my question is this: If devotees have
the chance to travel with sādhu-saṅga and they feel the
desire to do that, should they take that opportunity and
leave everything else behind?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Kṛṣṇa has given everyone free will, and by that free
will devotees can take the opportunity of sādhu-saṅga.
They can travel with a sādhu and hear hari-kathā. You
can also do so.

Śrīpāda Sadhu Mahārāja:

Śrīla Gurudeva, young devotees are usually advised to
chant loudly in the first stages. What is the
significance of chanting loudly for young devotees?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This instruction is not only for beginners. It applies
to beginners and seniors.

Śrīpāda Sadhu Mahārāja:

Many devotees chant silently or…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yesterday, Bhagavat Mahārāja was loudly chanting, RAMĀ
RAMĀ, HARE HARE. Ramā Ramā refers to Ramā-devī, meaning
Lakṣmī-devī.

Kiśorī-mohana dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, when we travel around the world, we tell
our audiences that everyone should hear from the mahā-
bhāgavata rasikā-vaiṣṇava; this is the cure for all
diseases of the heart. But then, when we came to the
festival here, I see that most of the time you have the
sannyāsīs and other senior devotees speak. You don’t
speak very much, whereas others speak for a long time.
So, what is the benefit of hearing from the others in
comparison to hearing your kathā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They are telling my kathā, not theirs. They have heard
so much from me. When they speak, they say, “My Gurudeva
has told this.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Also, if they make any mistakes, Gurudeva corrects them.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In the past I used to speak for two or three hours, but
now the doctors have advised me against this. Therefore

                            296
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

I tell something, and they tell something. Moreover,
because they are being trained to speak, after I leave
this world they will be able to preach everywhere. The
ISKCON leaders are preaching in ISKCON, but they cannot
speak like my brahmacārīs, what to speak of my
sannyāsīs.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, when this question arose before, you expounded
on the glory of sādhu-saṅga. You said that if one goes
to a kerosene-oil go-down, after some time his clothing
will begin to smell like kerosene. In the same way, if
gurudeva is present somewhere, then by his mercy you
will greatly benefit simply by his presence, without his
speaking at all.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, I am leaving today.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

My blessings to you. Chant, remember, and distribute my
books.

[To everyone] This instruction is for all of you.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Is there any benefit for the many ISKCON leaders who
read your books and hear your hari-kathā but don’t give
you credit for being the source of what they speak?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They will get something.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, will you bless me today?

Brajanāth dāsa:

It is his birthday today.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Maṅgalam bhavatu, kalyāṇam bhavatu. May your birthday be
auspicious. May you be happy in this world and in the
next world. May kṛṣṇa-bhakti enter your heart. May you
attain the service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Nṛhari dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, I have a question about book
distribution. Śrīla Prabhupāda asked us to distribute
books. ISKCON is doing that, and they are so proud that
they are distributing half a million Bhagavad-gītās a
year. Is there any benefit for them in this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, yes, yes. If you are serving your Gurudeva with

                            297
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

pride in him, with the sentiment that “I am serving my
Gurudeva,” what harm is there in that?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Whoever reads the books will benefit, and therefore the
distributors will benefit.

[After the walk]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Śyāmārāṇī dāsī] What is your program?

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

My program? We are going to Germany, England, Ireland,
and South Africa, and then back to India.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

South Africa also? Will you be there when I go?

Śyāmārāṇī dāsī:

Yes.

This is Lavaṅga-latikā. She is a disciple of Śrīpāda
Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī. She wants to have a
relationship with you, but because she associates with
ISCKON devotees, she is influenced by bad propaganda.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Lavaṅga-latikā dāsī] You can treat me as your śikṣā-
guru. Your Gurudeva was my bosom friend.




* * *




1 Worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa (Gopāla) in vātsalya mood is of
two types: in opulence (accepting Him as God) and
sweetness (accepting Him as merely the darling son of
Mother Yaśodā). Worship of Gopāla outside of Vraja is in
the mood of opulence, whereas mādhurya-vātsalya (pure
parental love) for Gopāla is only found within Vraja.

In general, devotees in Śrī Madhvācārya’s line worship
Gopāla in a mood of opulence, because they see no
difference between Nārāyaṇa and Kṛṣṇa. Their worship is
called vātsalya-ābhāsa, meaning that there is a shadow
of vātsalya in their worship.

Someone may worship Gopāla in what they call a mood of
vātsalya, but when a problem arises they call out,
“Gopāla, Gopāla, please save me, save me.” In this way,
that person’s mood is one of opulence, thinking that

                            298
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Gopāla is God – Śrīpāda Bhaktivedānta Tīrtha Mahārāja.



2 “Śrīla Madhvācārya established four main maṭhas
(temples). In each of these maṭhas there were two
sannyāsīs, so in total there were eight sannyāsīs. These
eight sannyāsī ācāryas practiced worshiping Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
the mood of the gopīs, but this worship was not given to
the general population” (Lecture by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja. India: October 13, 2005).



3 “When the girls engaged in worshiping the different
demigods after bathing in the Ganges, the young Lord
would come there and sit down among them. Addressing the
girls, He would say, ‘Worship Me, and I shall give you
good husbands or good benedictions. The Ganges and
goddess Durgā are My maidservants. What to speak of
other demigods, even Lord Śiva is My servant.’ Without
the permission of the girls, the Lord would take the
sandalwood pulp and smear it on His own body, put the
flower garlands on His neck, and snatch and eat all the
offerings of sweetmeats, rice, and bananas. All the
girls became very angry at the Him for this behavior.
‘Dear Nimāi,’ they told Him, ‘You are just like our
brother in our village relationship. Therefore it does
not behoove You to act like this. Don’t take our
paraphernalia for worship of the demigods. Don’t create
a disturbance in this way’ ” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Ādi-līlā 14.49–53).



4 An excerpt from Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda’s
purport to Bhagavad-gītā 8.9:




He is smaller than the smallest. The living entity is
one ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair, but the
Lord is so inconceivably small that He enters into the
heart of this particle. Therefore He is called smaller
than the smallest. As the Supreme, He can enter into the
atom and into the heart of the smallest and control him
as the Supersoul. Although so small, He is still all-
pervading and is maintaining everything. By Him all
these planetary systems are sustained. We often wonder
how these big planets are floating in the air. It is
stated here that the Supreme Lord, by His inconceivable
energy, is sustaining all these big planets and systems
of galaxies. The word acintya (inconceivable) is very
significant in this connection. God’s energy is beyond
our conception, beyond our thinking jurisdiction, and is
therefore called inconceivable (acintya). Who can argue
this point? He pervades this material world and yet is
beyond it. We cannot comprehend even this material
world, which is insignificant compared to the spiritual
world – so how can we comprehend what is beyond?



                          299
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017




June 17, 2009


Śloka Class

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.3.25–26

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you know the śloka beginning sarva-dharmān
parityajya?

Premānandī dāsī:

Yes

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you remember it?

Premānandī dāsī:

[Reciting the verse very quickly.]


sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

(Bhagavad-gita 18.66)


[Completely abandoning all bodily and mental dharma,
such as varṇa and āśrama, fully surrender to Me alone. I
shall liberate you from all reactions to your sins. Do
not grieve.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Not so fast.

[Premānandī dāsī recites the verse more slowly.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Premānandī dāsī:

This is a śloka from Bhagavad-gītā, which explains how
to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa tells Arjuna, “Completely
surrender to Me. Don’t worry.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

“Give up all kinds of religion.”


                           300
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Premānandī dāsī:

Give up all kinds of dharma and all your family
troubles. Surrender completely to Me, and I will take
complete care of you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In this connection, dharma does not refer to family.
“Sarva-dharmān parityajya – Give up all kinds of laukikī
and vaidikī activities, and surrender to Me.”1 This is
śaraṇāgati, full surrender, the door of bhakti.

And do you remember the śloka beginning with sa vai
puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje? Please
memorize it.

[To all present] What is today’s śloka?

[All the students recite their homework verse.]


kṣāntir avyartha-kālatvam viraktir māna- śūnyatā

āśābandhaḥ samutkaṇṭhā nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ

āśaktis tad-guṇākhyāne prītis tad-vasati-sthale

ity ādayo’ nubhāvāḥ syur jāta-bhāvaṅkure jane

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.3.25–26)


[When the seed of ecstatic emotion for Kṛṣṇa fructifies,
the following symptoms manifest in one’s behavior:
forgiveness, concern that time should not be wasted,
detachment, absence of false prestige, hope, eagerness,
a taste for chanting the holy name, attachment to
descriptions of the Lord’s transcendental qualities, and
affection for those places where the Lord resides and
performs His pastimes. These are all called anubhāva,
subordinate signs of ecstatic emotions. They are visible
in a person in whose heart the seed of love of Godhead
has begun to fructify.]

[Premānandī dāsī recites the verse.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Good. You can preach my mission, like your mother. Very
good.

[To Sundara-gopāla dāsa] What is the meaning?

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

Kṣāntir means… These are symptoms of bhāva that are just
coming.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Begin from the beginning. What is the meaning of ity
adayo’ nubhava?


                          301
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

It means ‘all these symptoms.’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When rati, the sprout of prema, begins to manifest, the
symptoms will be like this. Best to begin in that way.
What did I tell you?

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

When rati, the sprout of prema, begins to manifest, the
symptoms will be like this. Kṣāntir means ‘tolerance,’
like that of Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Avyartha-kālatvam means
‘completely using all of one’s senses twenty-four hours
a day in the service of Kṛṣṇa and śrī guru,’ like
Ambarīṣa Mahārāja. Viraktir means ‘complete detachment
from worldly things.’ Māna-śūnyatā means ‘complete
absence of pride.’ Āsa-bandha means ‘to perform sādhana
and bhajana very diligently, maintaining the hope that
Kṛṣṇa will certainly be merciful.’ Samutkaṇṭhā means
‘intense greed to attain the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.’
Nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ means ‘constant chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s
name with great attachment and eagerness.’ Āsaktis tad-
guṇākhyāne refers to the thirst to always hear about the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa. Prītis tad-vasati sthale means
‘eagerness to always stay in a holy place; the pastime
places of Kṛṣṇa, like Vṛndāvana and Navadvīpa-dhāma.’
The manifestation of these symptoms means that rati has
appeared in the heart.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.

Can you tell me the reason I request you to memorize
these ślokas?

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

This particular śloka?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I give you so many śloka to memorize. Why?

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

So that we can have a proper understanding and grounding
in tattva-siddhānta?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

So that we can see where we are?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The reason I ask you to learn these ślokas is so that
you will perfectly practice them in your life. At that
time the fruit of learning will manifest. Remembering
alone will not suffice.

I told Prema-prayojana to remember this śloka:

                          302
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017



niskincanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya

param param jigamisor bhāva-sagarasya

sandarśanam visayinam atha yositam ca

ha hanta hanta visa-bhaksanato ’py asadhu

(Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka 8.23)


[Alas, for a person who seriously desires to cross the
material ocean and engage in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord without material motives, seeing a
materialist engaged in sense gratification or seeing a
woman who is similarly interested is more abominable
than drinking poison willingly.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

The first line, niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya,
refers to the understanding that if someone wants to do
bhāgavata-bhajana (absorption in the Lord’s devotional
service), he must be niṣkiñcana.

The word niṣkiñcana has two meanings. In general it
refers to someone who has no worldly wealth, and the
spiritual meaning is that Kṛṣṇa is one’s only wealth. We
have no wealth other than Kṛṣṇa.

Pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya means that whoever
wants to cross over this material existence, this
endless cycle of birth and death, and whoever wants to
go to the Lord’s abode and live there permanently, then,
what to speak of associating with viṣayīs (sense
enjoyers) and yoṣit (the female body, or women engaged
in sense enjoyment), even looking at them with greedy
eyes, or thinking “I want that,” is tantamount to
drinking poison.

Our ācāryas have written in their commentaries to Rāsa-
pañcādhyāya that although there are many objects of
enjoyment, the greatest object of enjoyment is the
female body. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam tells the allegorical
history of King Purañjana, who was so attached to his
wife that he took birth as a lady in his next life. If
you look at a materialistic lady or any sense enjoyer
with greedy eyes, it will be very bad for you. This will
spoil your present life as well as many lives after this
one. If you take poison you spoil only one life and
after that you get another chance to do bhajana.
However, hā hanta hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato ’py asādhu – if
you become entangled with ladies, you suffer a fate more
wretched than taking poison.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This instruction is not only for males. It is for

                            303
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

females also.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

For both. Vice-versa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It refers to ladies in the case of men, and men in the
case of ladies.

I told him to remember this śloka. He remembered it, but
he didn’t practice. Don’t be like that. Whatever you
remember, or memorize, try to practice in your lives.
Then, very easily, you will be able to attain the
personal service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gurudeva told us about a pastime of the Pāṇḍavas and
Kauravas in which Droṇācārya gave his disciples a lesson
consisting of one sentence: “Always speak the truth.”
The next day, Droṇācārya asked his students if they had
memorized the lesson.

Duryodhana replied, “Yes, yes, yes, Gurudeva.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They all said, “I remember it. I have memorized it.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And what did Yudhiṣṭhira say? “No, I have not memorized
it.” They all said, “I have memorized it,” but
Yudhiṣṭhira said, “I have not.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Droṇācārya asked Yudhiṣṭhira, “Why not?” Yudhiṣṭhira
replied, “I have not yet practiced that lesson in my
character. When I do this, then it can be said that I
have memorized it.”

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What did Droṇācārya tell the others? He then told them
that Yudhiṣṭhira had memorized the lesson, but the rest
of them had not.

What is the śloka for tomorrow?


śṛṇvan su-bhadrāṇi rathāṅga-pāṇer

janmāni karmāṇi ca yāni loke

gītāni nāmāni tad-arthakāni

gāyan vilajjo vicared asaṅgaḥ

                            304
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017


(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.39)

For tomorrow you will learn this śloka and its meaning.

[To Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī] Oh, have you translated my Gītā?

Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī:

Starting. Yes. We want to finish by the end of the…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How much have you done?

Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī:

We completed the first chapter, and all the five
introductions including yours.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You should publish this very soon. This is most
important.




June 18, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.39

[Śrīla Gurudeva called on his śloka students –
Acyutānanda dāsa, Sundara-gopāla dāsa, Premānandī dāsī,
Brajanāth dāsa, Vṛndā-devī dāsī, Govinda dāsa, Balarāma
dāsa, Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī, and finally Līlā-puruṣottama dāsa
– to individually recite the day’s verse.]


śṛṇvan su-bhadrāṇi rathāṅga-pāṇer

janmāni karmāṇi ca yāni loke

gītāni nāmāni tad-arthakāni

gāyan vilajjo vicared asaṅgaḥ


[An intelligent person who has controlled his mind and
conquered fear should give up all attachment to material
objects such as wife, family, and nation. He should
wander freely without embarrassment, hearing and
chanting the holy names of the Lord, the bearer of the
chariot wheel. The holy names of Kṛṣṇa are all-
auspicious because they describe His transcendental
birth and activities, which He performs within this
world for the salvation of the conditioned souls. Thus
the holy names of the Lord are sung throughout the
world.]


                            305
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Acyutānanda dāsa:

The nine Yogendras are giving teachings to Nimi
Mahārāja. The first Yogendra, Kavir, explains that one
should wander without any attachment to house, family,
sons, daughters, wife, etc. One should wander freely
without any shame (vilajjo), singing and hearing the
names of rathānga-pāṇer Śrī Kṛṣṇa, because these names
are all-auspicious (subhadrāṇī), as they describe the
birth and activities of the Lord.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of gītāni nāmāni tad-arthakāni?

Acyutānanda dāsa:

Mmmm. The...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Gītani means ‘all the songs that are composed by ṛṣis,
maharṣis, and bhakta-kavis.’ Nāmāni refers to the names
of Kṛṣṇa, such as Dāmodara, Rādhā-kānta, Rāsabihārī,
Nandanandana, with pastimes appropriate to those names.
Tad-arthakāni indicates the meanings behind those
pastimes. And gāyan vilajjo means ‘singing without
shame.’

Very good.

[To Sundara-gopāla dāsa] Can you explain this?

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

One should, without any sense of shame, wander...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is speaking these words, and why? This reference
should be given first.

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

The Nava Yogendras, headed by Śrī Kavir, is saying this
to...

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Not ‘headed’ by him. He is one of them.

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

He is explaining in this verse that one should wander
without any vilajja, or any sense of shame, without any
material association (asaṅga); always hearing the
pastimes – the birth and activities – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
holds in His hand a chariot wheel (rathāṅga-pāṇeḥ). One
should also continuously sing the songs about Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and chant His names.

Śrīla Gurudeva, I was thinking to add the words ‘in the
association of pure Vaiṣṇavas,’ because in his
commentary to the second śloka of Upadeśāmṛta, Śrīla

                          306
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Sarasvatī Ṭhākura says that avoidance of bad association
is only possible, and automatically possible, if one has
the association of a pure Vaiṣṇava.

Premānandī dāsī:

The Eleventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes the
conversation between Nimi Mahārāja and the Nava
Yogendras. Therein one of the Nava Yogendras, named
Kavir, is explaining the goal of life to Nimi Mahārāja.
Kavir says that an intelligent person who has left
material life – wife, family, and material possessions –
should wander, simply chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names and
remembering His pastimes. Just as Kṛṣṇa was running to
kill Bhīṣma with the chariot wheel, the devotee must be
bold. Regarding the devotee, the ‘weapon’ to conquer
material life is to chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Sufficient.

[To Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī] Can you explain?

Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī:

This śloka from the Eleventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
describes how a person who has conquered fear and has
conquered the mind should wander around the world
without any fear or embarrassment, preaching Kṛṣṇa
consciousness and chanting the holy names. Here, Kṛṣṇa
is described as the holder of the chariot wheel as He is
rushing towards Bhīṣma-deva. I believe this means that,
without attachment, one should be very bold. Wandering
and preaching, free from material association (asaṅga)
and in the association of pure devotees, one should
chant the glories of the names of Kṛṣṇa for the benefit
of the conditioned souls.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Very good.




June 23, 2009


Śloka Class

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.3.18

[On Śrīla Gurudeva’s indication, the students utter this
śloka:]


karmāṇy ārabhamāṇānāṁ

duḥkha-hatyai sukhāya ca

paśyet pāka-viparyāsaṁ


                            307
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

mithunī-cāriṇāṁ nṛṇām


[Accepting the roles of male and female in human
society, the conditioned souls unite in sexual
relationships. Thus they constantly make material
endeavors to eliminate their unhappiness and unlimitedly
increase their pleasure. But one should see that they
inevitably achieve exactly the opposite result. In other
words, their happiness inevitably vanishes, and as they
grow older their material discomfort increases.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Mādhava Mahārāja] Please explain.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

In this world everyone wants to be happy; no one wants
distress. For that reason human beings engage in karma.
They think they will be happy by this, but due to their
conditioned position they do not know that only bhajana
will bring them happiness. Males and females combine and
try their level best for happiness, but if we look
closely we can see that they get only distress after
distress.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is the meaning of mithunī-cāriṇāṁ nṛṇām?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It means that males and females combine.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It also refers to the United Nations. Those who are
supposed to be the most intelligent persons in the world
combine together as part of the United Nations. This is
also called mithunī-cāriṇāṁ. Males and females also
combine together, but this is not the important point in
this śloka. The important point is that although all the
world leaders try to cooperate in combined effort, they
have yet to see happiness. Can you give an example of
this?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Nowadays there are so many financial problems in the
world. Everyone tries their level best to decrease their
financial burden, but it is only increases.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

An example may be given of Bush’s government. His
leaders wanted money, and therefore they wanted Iraqi
oil. Overwhelmed by self-interest, they endeavored to
improve America’s economic situation. But what happened?
There was disaster not only for America, but for all
nations of the world.

Why do we marry? We do so to be happy. A male alone
cannot be happy, and a female alone cannot be happy.

                            308
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Brahmā has created, or Kṛṣṇa has arranged, that both are
equally māyā, illusion, for each other.

[To Sundara-gopāla dāsa] You were a very good
brahmacārī, but then māyā came and attracted you in such
a way that you could not follow my wish for you. You
requested me, “I want to marry.” I said, “Yes, you are
not able to remain brahmacārī.” Yet, in the end what
will happen? You will lament, “Why did I do this?” This
day will come.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Gurudeva, I have a question. Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
states that when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu traveled in
South India, He met some Buddhists and defeated the nine
principle truths of Buddhism. Are these nine truths the
original nine truths of Viṣṇu Buddha, or are they of
Gautama Buddha, or are they the teachings of disciples?
Or, where are they coming from?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There are two Buddhas – Bhagavān Buddha and human
(Gautama) Buddha. Bhagavān Buddha is foretold in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.


tataḥ kalau sampravṛtte

sammohāya sura-dviṣām

buddho nāmnāñjana-sutaḥ

kīkaṭeṣu bhaviṣyati

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.24)


[Then, in the beginning of Kali-yuga, the Lord will
appear as Lord Buddha, the son of Añjanā, in the
province of Gayā, just for the purpose of deluding those
who are envious of the faithful theist.]

Kīkaṭeṣu bhaviṣyati. Kīkat refers to Gāya, and bhavṣyati
indicates that he will take birth in Bihar, Gāya. He did
not accept the killing of cows, horses, and other
animals in sacrifice, and taught that this was quite
violent. He said that if the animal sacrifices are able
to give those animals life again, then they can be
performed; otherwise not.2

“Ahiṁsā paramo dharmaḥ – nonviolence is the supreme
religion.” What does ‘nonviolence’ mean?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Nonviolence, meaning ‘not causing any distress for
others,’ is the best principle of religion.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If someone obstructs us in our service to Kṛṣṇa, that is
also violence. Generally people regard the killing of

                             309
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

animals as violence, but even the obstruction of
another’s bhakti is violence.

Unlike Bhagavata Buddha, Gautama Buddha was not a
theist. He took birth in Nepal, in Kapilavastu, as the
son of a king. Gautama Buddha was somewhat confused
about the origin of the world, who created it, and why
was it created, but he was very sympathetic and merciful
to animals and others. Once, his brother shot a pigeon
with some arrows, and that pigeon fainted but did not
die. Gautama Buddha somehow took the arrow from his
body, gave him medicine, and nourished him until he
became well.

He once told his father, “I want to go out of the
palace.” He then left the palace, for the first time, on
the chariot with his chief minister. Outside the city he
saw a baby coming from the womb of his mother, crying,
“Ah, aahh,” and thought, “What is this? A baby boy is
taking birth.” He understood the baby was suffering
pain, and that was why he was crying. Then, after some
distance he saw a bride and groom with their very large
wedding procession, with horses and abundant
paraphernalia, thus creating a very good festival. He
asked, “What is this?” “A marriage party.” “What is a
marriage party?” “A young lady is given to a young man
for the rest of her life; this is called marriage.”

After some time he saw an old person and thought, “Oh,
after some time that very baby boy will become old like
this person who cannot walk.” Then he saw a funeral,
with many people carrying a dead body and shouting,
“jagat mitya rāma nāma satya hai – this world is false,
Rāma’s name is truth.” He thought, “What is this? Oh,
after some more time that baby who took birth became big
and then married, after that he became old, and now he
is dead. Oh, what is this?”

After seeing these things, he left his home and went to
Gāya. He heard that buddha, meaning ‘realized
knowledge,’ was present there, and he thought, “I want
to know what is this world, who created it, and where I
came from.” He did not go to a guru or Vaiṣṇava for the
answers to his queries. Rather, he sat down in
meditation, alone, and nothing came – zero. Thus he
concluded, “This world is zero, it has come from zero,
and in the end it will be zero.”

He began to preach that there is no God, and that the
world was manifest automatically. A cow makes cow dung,
and after one or two days worms ‘automatically’ come out
of it. Similarly, he speculated, this world manifested
automatically, out of nothing, there is no prakṛti, or
material nature, working under any higher supervision,
and there will be nothing in the end. He refused to
accept the authority of Veda and the existence of God.

This is his theory, not the theory of Bhagavān Buddha,
Kṛṣṇa’s incarnation. There is so much difference between
them.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Did Bhagavān Buddha ever mention what is sādhana or

                          310
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

sādhya?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He left that to others, and He personally only preached
ahimsā, non-violence.

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, was Emperor Aśoka a follower of Gautama
Buddha or Bhagavān Buddha?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Initially he was like other general people, in that he
had faith in God. Once he went to war and saw the death
of thousands of soldiers. He thought. “Why did I do
this? I will also die in the end, so why am I doing
this?” In the meantime, Gautama Buddha met him and said,
“Do not worry about anything in this world. This world
is zero, it comes from zero, and the end will be zero.”

It is said that one becomes like those with whom he
associates. The king was consoled, and by the
association of Gautama Buddha he accepted atheistic
Buddhism.

Vṛndā-devī dāsī:

Today is also Guṇḍicā mandira-mārjana3.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, yes. We should try to clean our heart. The first
thing to clean out is aparādha (offenses to Vaiṣṇavas,
to the holy name, to the holy dhāma, and to other living
beings), which are represented by huge stones. After
that is kuṭināṭī (hypocritical behavior), jīva-hiṁsana
(violence to any living entity), lābha-pūjā (the desire
to be worshiped), and pratiṣṭha (the desire for honor
and fame); these are represented by dust.

Even after big grasses and stones are cleared away, dust
remains, and merely sweeping with your broom will not be
able to fully clear away the dust. That dust must be
washed with water. In fact, water alone will not
suffice. We must take a wet cloth and rub it on that
area, after which the area will become clean.

In this way we have so many anarthas, unwanted and
unhelpful habits and thoughts, which must all be cleaned
out.4

Committing aparādhas is considered greater in degree in
terms of its inviting severe reactions, and other sins
are less in degree. Being a thief or beating a person is
considered relatively less in degree, in comparison to
vaiṣṇava-aparādha. The results of all other sins can be
eradicated, but it is very difficult to become free from
the grave reaction to vaiṣṇava-aparādha.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said that if we want to
bring Kṛṣṇa (Jagannātha) into our heart, we will have to
clean it as He Himself cleaned the temple. Who will

                          311
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

clean our hearts? Vaiṣṇava and guru will do so, but we
must try to follow their instructions to us. The
performance of bhajana will not suffice without taking
full advantage of sādhu-saṅga.

It is essential to take care against offenses. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written that merely chanting,
remembering, and reading will not suffice in the
development of bhakti unless it is accompanied by
avoiding vaiṣṇava-aparādha and engaging in any other
sinful activity or activity that is unfavorable for
bhakti.

Gaura premānande, hari haribol!




June 26, 2009


Śloka Class

Bhagavad-Gītā 2.27

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Balarāma dāsa and Govinda dāsa, the two teenage sons
of Śrīla Gurudeva’s hosts in Italy, Līlā-puruṣottama
dāsa and Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī] What śloka have you learned?

[Balarāma dāsa and Govinda dāsa individually recite:]


jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyur

dhruvaṁ janma mṛtasya ca

tasmād aparihārye ’rthe

na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi


[One who has taken his birth is sure to die, and after
death one is sure to take birth again. Therefore, in the
unavoidable discharge of your duty, you should not
lament. *

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You did not fully remember the verse.

What is the meaning?

Balarāma dāsa:

In this world we take birth, and then we have to die,
and then we take birth again. But we don’t have to
lament. We just do our duty.

Govinda dāsa:

One who takes birth in this world also has to die. In

                           312
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

this way, a person has to take birth and die. He has to
suffer reversals, but he does not have to lament.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Will you die?

Govinda dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

And after that, what will happen?

Govinda dāsa:

I will take another birth.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Then again you will have to die. And after that, what
will happen?

Govinda dāsa:

Again I will have to die.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It continues in cyclic order. It will not be stopped,
and it is full of so much misery and suffering. So, what
is our main duty?

Govinda dāsa:

To chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and try to stop this cycle of birth
and death.

Balarāma dāsa:

To serve guru and try to reach Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Giving up all material activities before your next
death, chant and remember Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Under the guidance of Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

[Sundara-gopāla dāsa, Acyutānanda dāsa, Brajanāth dāsa,
Madhuvrata dāsa, Vṛndā-devī dāsī, and Kṛṣṇa-devī
individually recite this verse and then explain it:]


arcāyām eva haraye

pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate

                             313
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu

sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.47)


[A devotee who faithfully engages in the worship of the
Deity in the temple but does not behave properly toward
other devotees or people in general is called a prakṛta-
bhakta, a materialistic devotee, and is considered to be
in the lowest position.]

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

Śrī Havir is explaining to King Nimi the qualities of
the kaniṣṭha-bhakta. He has given the qualities of the
uttama-bhakta and madhyama-bhakta, and now is giving the
qualities of the kaniṣṭha-bhakta. The kaniṣṭha-bhakta is
one who serves the Deity of the Supreme Lord with faith,
but is unable to properly respect Vaiṣṇavas and people
in general.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why has it been told that such a person is a bhakta? Why
has he been called a kaniṣṭha-bhakta?

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

Although he is like the shadow of a bhakta, he is
worshiping Hari on the altar.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The verse states that he does not honor ordinary
persons. Why should he honor them? Do you understand my
question?

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

The madhyama-adhikārī bhakta can differentiate between
different levels of devotees and non-devotees, but the
kaniṣṭha does not know how to make that differentiation.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

My question is this: To say that he has the flaw of not
respecting bhaktas (tad-bhakteṣu) is all right. But why
should he honor ordinary people (anyeṣu)?

Sundara-gopāla dāsa:

Oh, you are asking, “Why should he?”

Śrīla Gurudeva:




uttama hañā vaiṣṇava habe nirabhimāna

jīve sammāna dibe jāni’ ‘kṛṣṇa’-adhiṣṭhāna

                             314
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 20.26)


[Although a Vaiṣṇava is the most exalted person, he is
prideless and gives all respect to everyone, knowing
everyone to be the resting place of Kṛṣṇa.]

Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, whether or not we are aware of it.
Therefore, we must honor even a blade of grass.

Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī:

After explaining in the previous verses the
characteristics of the uttama-bhakta and madhyama-
bhakta, Havir explains in this verse the characteristics
of the kaniṣṭha-bhakta. He is a materialistic devotee
because although he is worshiping Śrī Hari according to
the rules and regulations of śāstra, he is not able to
discriminate between one who is an uttama-bhakta, one
who is a madhyama-bhakta, one who is a kaniṣṭha-bhakta,
and those who are common people. His śraddhā is not
developed, and he is in a very precarious position.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Premānandī dāsī, Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī’s daughter] Why are
you late?

Premānandī dāsī:

Usually my mother calls me, but today she didn’t.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You yourself must be eager. You should go to her, and
tell her, “Let us go now.”

What is the meaning of the śloka?

Premānandī dāsī:

This verse is describing the…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Who is saying this?

Premānandī dāsī:

Śrī Havir, one of the Nine Yogendras discussed in the
Eleventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, is describing the
kaniṣṭha-bhakta. The kaniṣṭha-bhakta worships the
Deities in the temple, but at the same time he doesn’t
give proper respect to devotees or people in general.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is tomorrow’s śloka?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

We are packing and traveling tomorrow.


                            315
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Now, our ‘school’ is closed for summer vacation. We are
going back to India.

Will next year’s festival again be held in Italy?

Līlā-puruṣottama dāsa:

I hope so. Do you want to come to Italy again?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Everyone wants to come here.

Līlā-puruṣottama dāsa:

Then, for sure we will arrange it.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It will be a burden for you?

Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī:

No. By your mercy it is no burden.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If some devotees request that it be held in their
country, we can think about that; otherwise it will be
here in Italy.

Brajanāth dāsa:

If we do it in Holland, it will be twice as expensive.

Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī:

If possible, we will take the same place.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, this is a very big place. Everyone can fit
comfortably. It is also near the ocean, so we can easily
go there to walk.

Bās. Hare Kṛṣṇa.




* * *




1 Laukikī means ‘worldly work: activities of this
material world that are performed for the maintenance of
one’s life and social relationships.’ Vaidikī means
‘Vedic injunctions regarding material piety’ (Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu).

                          316
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017




2 “The brāhmaṇas entrusted with the performance of yajña
were very realized souls, and to test their realization
an old animal... [footnote continues on the next page]
...was offered in the fire and rejuvenated. That was the
test of a Vedic mantra. The animals gathered were not
meant to be killed and eaten. The real purpose of a
sacrifice was not to replace a slaughterhouse but to
test a Vedic mantra by giving an animal new life”
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.4.6, purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja).



3 Guṇḍicā mandira-mārjana is the cleansing (mārjana) of
the Guṇḍicā temple (mandira). This festival is performed
every year in Jagannātha Purī on the day before the
Ratha-yātrā festival in which Lord Jagannātha travels
from the main Jagannātha temple, representing Dvārakā,
to the Guṇḍicā temple, representing Vṛndāvana. While
residing in Jagannātha Purī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
used to lead all of His associates in cleansing the
Guṇḍicā temple on this day.



4 An excerpt from Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindhu,
Verse 3, Commentary of Śrīla Visvanatha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura:




Anarthas are of four kinds: (1) svarūpa-bhramā –
illusion about spiritual identity; (2) asat-tṛṣṇā –
thirst for that which is unreal, that is, material
enjoyment; (3) aparādha – offenses; and (4) hṛdaya-
daurbalyaṁ – weakness of heart.

Svarūpa-bhramā is of four kinds: (1) sva-tattva- or
jīva-svarūpa-bhramā – illusion about one’s spiritual
identity; (2) para-tattva-bhramā – illusion about the
spiritual identity of the Supreme Absolute Truth; (3)
sādhya-sādhana-tattva-bhramā – illusion about sādhana-
bhakti, the means of spiritual perfection, and sādhya,
the object to be obtained by such sādhana, or in other
words prema-bhakti; and (4) māyā-tattva-bhramā –
illusion about the Lord’s external energy, māyā.

Asat-tṛṣṇā is of four types: (1) varieties of desires
for material enjoyment in this world; (2) desires for
enjoyment in the higher planetary systems of Svargaloka;
(3) desires for the attainment of the eight mystic
siddhis; (4) the desire for impersonal liberation.

Aparādha is of four kinds: (1) offenses towards Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; (2) offenses towards kṛṣṇa-nāma; (3) offenses
towards kṛṣṇa-svarūpa –the Deity form of the Lord; and
(4) offenses towards the jīvas – living entities who are
infinitesimal particles of spirit belonging to the Lord.


                          317
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Hṛdaya-daurbalyaṁ is also of four kinds: (1) tuccha-
āsakti – attachment for useless things; (2) kuṭi-nāṭi –
deceitful behavior. The word kuṭi-nāṭi may be broken
down into the constituent parts ku, bad or evil, and nā
or nāṭi, that which is forbidden. In that case it would
mean doing wicked deeds or doing that which is
forbidden; (3) mātsarya (envy); and (4) sva-pratiṣṭhā-
lālasa – desire for one’s own fame and prestige.




June 29, 2009


Morning Walk

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

Can we attain rati by śrī guru’s grace? That is, can one
who is lusty, lazy, and a little crazy develop rati at
some point by the grace and mercy of gurudeva?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If by great fortune, by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, one attains
the association of a high-class Vaiṣṇava – even an
advanced madhyama-adhikārī, he will gradually achieve
śraddhā, or faith, that by chanting harināma and
associating with sādhus one’s life will be perfect.
After that he will select a bona fide guru and receive
initiation, and he will then begin to chant more
seriously. Thus aniṣṭhitā-bhakti (unsteady devotional
service) will manifest, after that niṣṭhā
(steadfastness), after that ruci (taste), and then
āsakti (attachment). Finally, after that, he will come
to the stage of bhāva-bhakti, or rati.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

His question refers to someone who is initiated by a
bona fide gurudeva and is performing bhajana, but whose
mind is crazy and who is lusty and lazy.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What to speak of the qualified guru who has initiated
him, even Mahāprabhu would not be able to help a person
who is always lusty. Even though Kālā-kṛṣṇa dāsa was
traveling with Mahāprabhu, Mahāprabhu could not do
anything to help him, and finally sent him home.

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

There is no hope for people like that?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No hope.

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

But Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam says:

                            318
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017



prāyeṇālpāyuṣaḥ sabhya

kalāv asmin yuge janāḥ

mandāḥ sumanda-matayo

manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.1.10)


[O learned one, in this iron age of Kali men have but
short lives. They are quarrelsome, lazy, misguided,
unlucky, and above all, always disturbed.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This verse has been told for the benefit of such
persons. How will they benefit? In the next chapter,
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī explains how:


sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.6)


[The supreme occupation (dharma) for all humanity is
that by which men can attain loving devotional service
unto the transcendent Lord. Such devotional service must
be unmotivated and uninterrupted to completely satisfy
the self.]

In what way will unmotivated, uninterrupted service
manifest in a person’s heart? It will manifest by sādhu-
saṅga, by the association of high-class Vaiṣṇavas; not
otherwise. First comes sādhu-saṅga. Sādhus travel in
order to create sukṛti for the general people. If you
have accrued sufficient sukṛti from your past births,
you will have the opportunity for their association.

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

Gurudeva, it is stated in the Bhāgavatam that when
Akrūra was going to Vṛndāvana, he had this realization:
“I will be blessed by the hand of Kṛṣṇa, which wiped the
faces of gopīs at the time of rāsa-līlā in order to
remove their perspiration. That hand is powerful and
auspicious.” How is it that Akrūra was able to have such
a realization about Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It was by the grace of Nārada Ṛṣi and others like him.

Devotee:

                             319
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Gurudeva, you are tri-kāla-jña; you know everything. The
demons control the planet, and people say that sooner or
later they will force us to put a microchip inside our
body. What will happen at that time?

[To Brajanāth dāsa] Do you know about this?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, prabhu is saying that you are tri-kāla-jña;
you know future, past, and present. Nowadays, the
demoniac leaders of this world want to put a small
microchip under the skin of each human, so they can know
where everyone is going and what everyone is doing, so
that at any time they can check up on anyone. Will this
happen, or not?

Devotee:

What will happen if they do this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This may happen, but what good will result? Will they
never die? Will they know the soul? Will they be happy
by knowing what they will find out? If not, then what is
the point? They do so many things to attain happiness,
but still they are not happy.

They are not intelligent. If they were intelligent they
would become Kṛṣṇa conscious. They are so foolish;
eating meat and eggs, drinking wine, and always engaging
in sense gratification; divorcing their wives and again,
again, and again getting new, new, new ones.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

He is very worried that in the near future there will be
chaos.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What can you do? Why are you so anxious? Depend on
Kṛṣṇa. Depend on Kṛṣṇa.

Devotee:

It is good to know because…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You cannot do anything to change what happens in the
material world. Just pray to Kṛṣṇa; He will protect you.
I heard many years ago that Los Angeles would soon sink
into the ocean, and that the world would soon be
demolished. What became of that? Nothing has yet come of
it.

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

People are afraid of dying.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                           320
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja was very, very
intelligent, and very, very merciful. He collected so
many devotees, and even though they were not qualified,
he gave many of them sannyāsa. He knew they would not be
able to maintain their sannyāsa; he knew that they were
lusty. He knew this, but he also knew that he had to do
something in this world. So, he gave them sannyāsa and
somehow preached through them.

In order to create their sukṛti he told them, “Bring
money.” The sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs then collected
money, by book distribution, by preaching, and even by
doing nonsense things, and they gave it to him. Thus,
they gained sukṛti. He knew that even if they would
later on leave their sannyāsa āśrama, there would be no
harm ultimately – because again, in the future, they
might come in the proper devotional line.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

It is stated in Bhagavad-gītā:


nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti

pratyavāyo na vidyate

sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya

trāyate mahato bhayāt

(Bhagavad-gītā 2.40)


[Endeavours on the path of bhakti-yoga are neither
fruiteless, nor is there any flaw. Even a little
practice frees one from the great danger of
transmigrating endlessly within the cycle of repeated
birth and death in this material world.]

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In order to attain bhakti, you must give some energy.
What is energy? Money is a manifestation of energy, so
if you give money for Kṛṣṇa’s service, that activity
creates your sukṛti. If you have money, it will somehow
or other disappear; you are not able to keep it in your
pocket. Why, then, should that money not go to Vaiṣṇavas
so that you will gain sukṛti and very soon become Kṛṣṇa
conscious?

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

He is getting seven hundred euros a month from the
government. But he is very worried that if he travels
with me the long distance to Turkey, and then from
Turkey to India, he will no longer receive that money.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is good that he travels with you, and from time to
time comes back to France. You said he needs to be back
every month. So he can go there, and then again join

                            321
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

you.

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

What about India?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If he wants money he will come here to France, and if he
wants Kṛṣṇa consciousness he may go to India.

I was a very high-class government servant, but I left
that service. So many people want to have a job like
that, but I left it for bhakti.

Bhakta-svarūpa dāsa:

Gurudeva, can you explain why Lord Śiva has a half moon
on his head?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The half-moon is more beautiful than the full moon.
Another reason is that Śiva is crooked.1 He therefore
wants everything connected with him to be crooked.

Bhakta-svarūpa dāsa:

There is no siddhānta (conclusive philosophic truth)
regarding that half-moon? It is only for beauty?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The moon is auspicious, especially during the tṛtīya
(third) day of the waxing moon. This is the phase of the
moon that is situated on the head of Śiva.

Prakāśātmā

dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, in Madhvācārya’s commentary on Brahma-
sūtra he quotes many Purāṇas, and he also quotes
scriptures that some people say are unknown or un-
authoritative. Such persons say that this is contrary to
Rāmānujācārya’s commentary, and to others’ commentaries
that quote the Upaniṣads. Why did he do this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Madhvācārya has written three commentaries on Brahma-
sūtra. In his commentaries he quoted the Purāṇas,
because the Purāṇas are most important for disclosing
the meaning of both Vedānta and the Upaniṣads. The
language of Vedānta and the Upaniṣads is very complex
and difficult to understand, whereas the Purāṇas are
relatively simple in that they are full of histories;
thus they easily explain the Upaniṣads. It is for this
reason that Madhvācārya gave more importance to the
Purāṇas than the Upaniṣads.

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

Madhvācārya also quotes the Ṛg Veda.

                           322
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

But he has quoted many explanations of the Upaniṣads as
well.

Śrīla Vyāsadeva wrote Brahma-sūtra, but he was not
satisfied. Then he wrote the Purāṇas, but again he was
not satisfied. Then he wrote Mahābhārata, within which
is the Bhagavad-gītā, but still he was not satisfied.

Moreover, he was not able to ascertain the reason for
his dissatisfaction until Nārada came and told him, “In
writing the topics contained in these scriptures you
have given importance to dharma (material religiosity),
artha (economic development), kāma (sense
gratifications), and mokṣa (liberation), but you have
not glorified the sweet pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, which are of
main importance.

“Have you written that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord?”

“No.”

“Have you written that, even though the length and
breadth of Kṛṣṇa’s body is endless, He was bound by
ropes by His mother?”

“No, Gurudeva.”

“Have you written about Kṛṣṇa’s dancing with the gopīs?”

“No, I don’t know what to write about that.”

“Have you written that He is controlled by the gopīs?”

“No.”

“Have you written Bhramara-gīta and Gopī-gīta?”

“No.”

“Then, you have done nothing; everything you have done
is useless. Now, enter a trance of meditation in full
surrender to Kṛṣṇa. By this you will attain His mercy.”




June 30, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

If someone wants   to preach about the glory of the holy
name, where does   he start from? Should he begin with Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭakam, Śrī   Harināma Mahā-mantra or Bhajana-
rahasya? What is   the best way to preach the holy name?

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                            323
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

He should first read Jaiva-dharma – at least the first
and second parts. He must know these first two parts,
and if he can read the third part, that is very good. He
should also read the Bhagavad-gītā. Gītā is popular
throughout the world, more so than Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

Even for devotees?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What Kṛṣṇa gave to Arjuna was primary-school education,
whereas Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the post-graduate course.
The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam vividly explains the reason to
perform bhajana and the means by which one can be happy.
This is explained in the teachings of Prahlāda, as well
as in the Eleventh Canto’s history of the nine
Yogendras, which also extols the glory of gurudeva.
Without guru’s mercy we can neither be happy nor attain
kṛṣṇa-prema. Our own effort and knowledge will not
suffice.

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

The conclusion of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is chanting the
holy name?

Śrīla Gurudeva:




nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ yasya

sarva-pāpa praṇāśanam

praṇāmo duḥkha-śamanas

taṁ namāmi hariṁ param

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 12.13.23)


[I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord,
Hari, the congregational chanting of whose holy names in
the form of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra destroys all
sinful reactions, and the offering of obeisances unto
whom relieves all material suffering.]

This is the last verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. It states
that nāma-saṅkīrtana removes all kinds of sufferings –
all kinds of sufferings – and gives kṛṣṇa-prema.

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

Will you give us the last part of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the
part that our Prabhupāda has not given?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He has inspired me to complete his work, and in fact I
am fulfilling all his desires. ISKCON leaders cannot do
this. They have only learned the art of making money and

                           324
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

attracting ordinary people.

Maharṣi dāsa:

Śrīla Prabhupāda stopped translating during the Tenth
Canto, and we always wondered how we would receive the
rest of the translations and purports. Now you are
giving us the rest of ten, and also eleven and twelve.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Thank you.

He has sent me, and he has written about our
relationship in his letter to me.2

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

How can I curb my tendency to always speak prajalpa
(mundane talk) and criticize others?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can do so by always being in sādhu-saṅga and hearing
hari-kathā. While Parīkṣit Mahārāja was hearing Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, he had no time to speak with anyone, or to
sleep, eat, or drink. He was drinking only the nectar of
kṛṣṇa-līlā.

Sādhu-saṅga is the best medicine. Chant the holy name in
sādhu-saṅga, and don’t associate with persons who
chatter and indulge in idle gossip. Read śāstra and
engage your mind at all times. If the mind is not
engaged by you, it will automatically engage itself in
unfavorable thoughts. The mind is hungry for something
to eat, so we should feed it hari-kathā – as much as you
can hear and chant and meditate upon.

Prakāśātmā

dāsa:

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī wrote Manaḥ-śikṣā, which
contains very elevated instructions for rāgānuga-bhakti.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is for both – rāgānuga-bhakti and vaidhī-bhakti.
Without vaidhī-bhakti, there is no rāgānuga-bhakti. One
cannot jump at once to rāgānuga-bhakti, which is for
liberated persons, not for others.

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

In Manaḥ-śikṣā, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī mentions
apūrva-rati. There are two kinds of rati – ordinary and
apūrva. Is apūrva-rati the same as rāgānuga-bhakti, or
lobha (greed)?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Apūrva means ‘unprecedented.’

Brajanāth dāsa:

                          325
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Dāmodara Mahārāja is now in South Africa. He is
organizing programs for your visit there in December and
January.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

For me?

Brajanāth dāsa:

He is together with Āśrama Mahārāja. He is ordering
many, many books. He is asking us to send as many books
as we have. He wants to distribute thousands upon
thousands of books.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How will it be sent?

Brajanāth dāsa:

From India.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Have you told anyone?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes. We will manage.

He is very inspired. He wants to go everywhere in South
Africa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Will Āśrama Mahārāja go there?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes.

Mādhava dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa told Uddhava to see beyond the duality of good and
bad.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

‘Duality’ means this: As a result of what the general
people are doing in the world, suffering and happiness
come to them. Also, regarding the suffering and
happiness they are experiencing now, that has come as a
result of their previous births’ karma.

You cannot avoid this, neither is there any material
remedy for it. You can think, “This happiness and
suffering stem from my karma,” and, “It is coming by the
mercy of Kṛṣṇa.” Being far away from attachment to both
happiness and misery, chant, remember, offer praṇāma to
Vaiṣṇavas, and hear hari-kathā. In this way your life
will be successful.


                          326
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

After one or two months of traveling, Mādhava prabhu
feels the necessity to be autonomous and to stay with
his parents.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Mādhava dāsa] Your real mother and father is
‘eternal Kṛṣṇa.’ If you perform His bhajana, your father
and mother of this world will be liberated. On the
contrary, if you remain attached to your material
parents, you will not be able to do anything for them.

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

He knows this, because he is from a Christian
background. Jesus taught the same thing. He knows, but
somehow he cannot go beyond it.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Those who serve Kṛṣṇa and guru are automatically serving
their material mother and father. Otherwise what real
benefit can you provide your parents by giving them
money or taking theirs? If you chant and remember Kṛṣṇa,
your parents will receive some of the fruit of that
chanting and remembering.

Nimāi dāsa:

I am wondering about the reason we came to the material
world.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You should know that although all living entities are
part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, they have not
fallen here from Goloka Vṛndāvana. There is a marginal
point – not in this world and not in Vaikuṇṭha. This
point, or place, is in the middle of both worlds, where
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu sleeps in the Causal Ocean.

The incarnation of Kṛṣṇa is Baladeva, Baladeva’s
incarnation is Lord Nārāyaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha, and Lord
Nārāyaṇa’s incarnation is Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. We can
say that all jīvas come from Baladeva, or from Kṛṣṇa, or
from Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, for these three are all the
same tattva, or truth. Why? From Kṛṣṇa comes Baladeva,
from Baladeva comes Vaikuṇṭha Nārāyaṇa, and from
Nārāyaṇa comes Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu.

All jīvas have emanated from Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu’s
glance. What happens from there? If tiny round mustard
seeds are dropped upon the sharp edge of a sword’s
blade, some seeds will fall to one side and some will
fall to the other. Like those mustard seeds that fall to
one side or the other, from the taṭasthā-śakti region
the jīvas are either elevated to the spiritual world or
degraded to this material world.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa has given the jīva free-will, independence. As
Kṛṣṇa is independent, the jīva is independent; and at
the same time the jīva is dependent on Kṛṣṇa. The jīvas

                           327
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

can use their intelligence in any way they like; that
is, they can come to this world or go to the spiritual
world. Those whose first glance was towards this world
were attracted and came here, whereas those who first
looked towards the spiritual world were attracted there
and became eternally liberated.3

Do you have my book, Jaiva-dharma?

Nimāi dāsa:

No. I only know the name.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Try to get this book.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Gurudeva, we see that in Goloka Vṛndāvana there is no
birth or death. Since Kṛṣṇa never takes birth, how do we
understand that vātsalya-rasa – the relationship of
mother and child – exists there?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā both think, “Yesterday,
Kṛṣṇa took birth.” Although Kṛṣṇa is always a teenage
youth (kiśora), and although He never takes birth, this
mood is present. Mother Yaśodā sees Kṛṣṇa as “my baby.”
The cowherd boys think, “He is my friend,” and the gopīs
think, “He is my most beloved.” Although He is the same
Kṛṣṇa, He is seen differently – at different ages – by
different associates. We cannot imagine at this stage
what it is like there. When you go there, you will
forget all your questions.

Madhuvrata dāsa:

If I go.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you want to go?

Madhuvrata dāsa:

Sure.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I have come to take you.

I am inviting you all to come with me there.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, can I also go?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you follow the instructions of our guru-paramparā,
you will surely go. Our guru-paramparā has descended
from Goloka Vṛndāvana. It seems that Śrīla Śukadeva

                            328
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

Gosvāmī took birth in this world, but this was only a
pastime.

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

And in recent times Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja have also come.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Although they showed that they became liberated by their
sādhana, in actuality Kṛṣṇa sent them.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura used to go to court in the
daytime and return home at 4:00pm. At about 6-7:00pm he
would take his evening prasādam and go to sleep, and
then wake up at midnight. At that time he would remember
verses and also translate. Sometimes, fully absorbed in
bhajana, his sādhaka-rūpa (his external, male body)
would disappear, and his siddha-rūpa (his spiritual body
as a twelve-and-a-half year old gopī) would manifest. In
that form he would make preparations of purī, halvā, and
other items for Kṛṣṇa to take after rāsa-līlā. He was so
absorbed in bhajana that he would think, “I am in
Vṛndāvana. I am cooking for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and all the
gopīs.” He considered, “I am Kamalā Mañjarī, my birth
was in Varsānā, my marriage was performed in Jāvaṭa, and
I am a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.”

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

What is the significance of our Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Prabhupāda giving us the beautiful tulasī kīrtana
to chant all over the world?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

From whom has he taken this? Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
has given it through Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and by Prabhupāda’s order and
inspiration, your Gurudeva has traveled the entire world
and given these things.

Brajanāth dāsa:

In your book, Gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe, you explained what
he came to give.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Please tell him what that is.

Brajanāth dāsa:




anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ


                          329
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 3.108)


[May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī Śacī-
devī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what has not been given in a
very long time – mañjarī-bhāva, the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā as Her confidential maidservant.]

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja came to give the same
thing that Gurudeva is giving and all of our ācāryas are
giving. He gave it in kīrtanas like Jaya Rādhā Mādhava,
the tulasī kīrtana, and so many others.

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

Who wrote this tulasī kīrtana?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Dīna-kṛṣṇa dāsa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He is a disciple in the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

How can we keep our minds in Vṛndāvana? How can we stay
on that platform?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you remember the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, like His lifting
Govardhana, His playing with the gopīs at the Yamunā,
His playing the flute with His sakhās everywhere in
Nandagaon, His killing of numerous demons in Vṛndāvana,
like Dhenukāsura in Tālavana, and His performance of
innumerable pastimes in Madhuvana, your mind will always
be there.

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

But here in the West we see only material places.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to see Vṛndāvana wherever
He traveled. He saw all hills as Govardhana, and any
forest as Vṛndāvana. Try to be like Him.

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

Will you bless me that I will be able to do that,
Gurudeva?

What is the meaning of arundhatī-darśana4?

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                            330
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Someone may say, “Do you see that big thing?” Then he
will say, “Nearby, do you see something very small?”
That is arundhatī-darśana. There is a star named
Arundhatī, but it is not seen by most persons. We tell
such persons, “It is near this large twinkling star –
nearby, but somewhat lower, and minute.” Similarly, we
first tell someone the prominent teaching: “You are not
this body. You are soul.”

Śrīpāda

Śrauti Mahārāja:

Okay, now I understand.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If such persons first learn tattvas like “Kṛṣṇa is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is the embodiment of
rasa-tattva, and He is all powerful,” then you can
gradually go deeper and deeper, teaching them all
tattvas.

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

Deeper and deeper.

And what is the example of ‘the moon on the branch’?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is the same thing; that very thing. Someone might
say, “Do you see that tree? In the midst of the tree’s
branches, peeping through the branches and apparently
sitting on one of them, the Sun is present.”

Is the Sun really there on the branch? Where is it?

Śrīpāda Śrauti Mahārāja:

It is far away. So, what is the use of seeing the Sun
here?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is called śākhā-candra-nyāya. This logic (nyāya) of
the moon (candra) on the branch (śākhā) is for those who
don’t know the A, B, C, D’s of spiritual life, those who
don’t know anything about the spiritual world. It is for
them.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja:

Okay.




* * *




                           331
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


1 Lord Śiva is crooked in the sense that his
transcendental, out-of-the-ordinary activities are not
possible for one to understand without Kṛṣṇa’s mercy.
One side of him can be seen easily, while another is
hidden. The moon also has two sides; one is seen and the
other is hidden.



2 Excerpt from a letter, written by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja to Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, dated September 28, 1966:


I received your letter, dated 20.9.66 on time. Our
relationship is certainly based on spontaneous love.
That is why there is no chance of us forgetting one
another. By the mercy of Guru and Gaurāṅga may
everything be auspicious for you; this is my constant
prayer. From the first time I saw you I have been your
constant well-wisher; as, at his first sight of me,
Śrīla Prabhupāda also saw me with such love.

It was in my very first darśana of Śrīla Prabhupāda that
I learned how to love. It is his boundless mercy that he
has engaged an unworthy person like me, in fulfilling
some of his desires. It is his causeless mercy to engage
me in preaching the message of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī
Raghunātha.




3 Excerpts from Journey of the Soul, Part 1, Chapters 3
and 4:


A certain type of jīva (spiritual living being)
manifests in the spiritual world – from Kṛṣṇa’s first
expansion, Śrī Baladeva. The jīvas who manifest from
Baladeva are called nitya-unmukha, meaning that they are
eternally serving Kṛṣṇa. Although all taṭasthā-śakti
jīvas are servants by constitution, the second kind of
jīva has not come from Goloka Vṛndāvana. The conditioned
souls of this world have never been in Goloka Vṛndāvana.
They are coming from Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, in the realm
between the spiritual and material worlds.

Journey of the Soul, Part 1, Chapter 3).


Regarding the souls coming from the divine light-filled
glance of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu: Within that light, Kṛṣṇa
in His form as Viṣṇu gives them the intelligence and
freedom to consider, “What should I do?” There is a very
fine, imaginary line between the transcendental and
material worlds. Kṛṣṇa gives the jīvas some freedom,
saying in effect, “From here you can look either towards
this world of māyā or towards the spiritual world. Your
choice depends entirely upon you. I will give you a
moment to decide.”


                          332
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Certain jīvas looked from the taṭasthā region towards
the spiritual world and were attracted there. Yogamāyā
at once gave them the power of bhakti to go there, to
serve Kṛṣṇa for eternity. Others looked toward the
material world, they were attracted, they decided to
relish it, and thus they were granted their desire. The
jīvas in this region were within the body of
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, in seed form, and when they came
out through His glance, some fell in māyā. This truth
has been substantiated in Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā.(Journey of
the Soul, Part 1, Chapter 3):


The Lord of the mundane world, Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu
(Mahā-Viṣṇu), possesses thousands upon thousands of
heads, eyes, and hands. He is the source of thousands
upon thousands of incarnations in His thousands upon
thousands of subjective portions. He generates thousands
upon thousands of individual souls.

(Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā, Text 11)


An unlimited number of atomic conscious particles emerge
from the spiritual rays of Paramātmā as the aggregate of
the living entities. These innumerable jīvas have no
relation with the mundane world when they come to know
themselves to be the eternal servants of the Supreme
Lord. At that time, they are incorporated into the realm
of Vaikuṇṭha.

(Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā, Text 16, purport)


The svarūpa-śakti, or internal potency of Kṛṣṇa, which
is spiritual, functioning as His own personal power, has
manifested His pastimes of Goloka. By Her grace,
individual souls who are constituents of the marginal
potency can have admission into even those pastimes.

(Śrī Brahmā-saṁhitā, Text 6, purport)


Kṛṣṇa did not create this world with a desire that the
jīvas should suffer. Rather, the material creation is
one of the very valuable, pleasant, and sweet pastimes
of Kṛṣṇa, which the jīva can understand and appreciate
only when he transcends his materially conditioned
consciousness and attains an advanced stage of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.

Journey of the Soul, Part 1, Chapter 4




4 An excerpt from An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter
15:


This material world is a reflection and transformation
of the spiritual world. Yet, because there are certain
characteristics in material nature that are similar to

                          333
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

those of the spiritual world, spiritual subjects are
discussed by using appropriate explanatory analogies.
Another method is called the arundhatī-darśana-nyāya,
the logical principle of recognizing something more
hidden and subtle by the aid of a large and easily
noticeable object that is near to the subtle object. The
dim Arundhatī star is found in the night sky by first
finding the bright and obvious star nearby. By comparing
the gross characteristics of matter with its opposite
nature, spirit, we can surmise the esoteric truths of
the spiritual nature.

The pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are absolutely spiritual;
there is no contamination by mundane characteristics.
However, when these supra-mundane topics of Vraja from
the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam are discussed in assemblies,
individuals in the audience receive different results,
each according to their level of spiritual
consciousness. The gross materialist thinks that these
narrations are stories similar to those in fiction
novels about ordinary heroes and heroines. The madhyama-
adhikārī applies the arundhatī-darśana principle and
perceives the spiritual truth underlying the
descriptions. He experiences sublime bliss because of
his devotional mood and faithful approach to the
subject. The uttama-adhikārī becomes immersed in these
sublime pastimes and thus relishes the pure
transcendental rasa.




August 3, 2009


Gopīnātha Bhavana

Ladies Āśrama Darśana

[Vasanti dāsī and Citra dāsī give Śrīla Gurudeva the
ladies’ book distribution collections.]

Vasanti dāsī:

This is for book distribution in Gopīnātha Bhavana over
the past six months.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Vṛndāvana-vilāsinī will introduce the ladies to you.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Are the ladies happy?

Girls:

Yes, Gurudeva.

Vṛndāvana-vilāsinī dāsī:

Kuñja-kalikā does the scheduling. She is doing so much
service. Every day she figures out who will do this and

                           334
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

who will do that.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Has she studied management?

Vṛndāvana-vilāsinī dāsī:

She is naturally good at it.

Jāhnavā dīdī takes care of Ṭhākurajī, and also cooks.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

How many devotees do you cook for?

Tuṅgavidyā dāsī:

About fifteen, sometimes twenty, sometimes ten.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If any guest comes to Gopīnātha Bhavana, where does he
take prasādam?

Tuṅgavidyā dāsī:

They take here, with us. We have to ask for some money,
though, because we don’t have enough money to give free
prasādam.

Vṛndāvana-vilāsinī dāsī:

All the girls are doing so many services.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Is there anything to discuss?

Tuṅgavidyā dāsī:

Narmadā has a deep desire to study Sanskrit and English,
but especially Sanskrit. She has a donor who will give
three hundred dollars so that she can be admitted into
the Sanskrit school in Miami, by internet.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

She can do it without paying any paisa? You can ask
Acyutānanda how he learned Sanskrit. He can read, and
speak, and write. If it is favorable, she can do as he
did, otherwise she can be admitted into that school.

Vṛndāvana-vilāsinī dāsī:

We have a question regarding maintenance. We have had
some donations, but how would the girls maintain
themselves when the donations are finished? Should they
distribute books and collect, or do some business?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Not business. Best to do only what is favorable for
bhakti. Try to collect some donations from here and

                           335
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

there, especially from wealthy ladies. You can go out to
preach, and at that time ask for donations.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

People hear that they should come to Vṛndāvana and do
bhajana. What percent of time should the ladies in the
āśrama spend in their own personal bhajana, and what
percent in preaching your mission – distributing books
and other such services?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They should surely do their bhajana. They can see how
much time it takes to do their own bhajana, and the rest
of the time spend on other services. Bhajana is
necessary. It is for this reason that I have brought
them.

Vṛndāvana-vilāsinī dāsī:

There should be maṅgala-ārati, bhajanas, hari-kathā, and
japa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

Vṛndāvana-vilāsinī dāsī:

They should do this every day.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

Yaśodā dāsī:

I heard that my japa beads are not tulasī. Should I keep
them, or change?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[examining the beads] Better to change.

Citra dāsī:

Nowadays, many people come in to have darśana of Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Gopinātha, and they sit down and sing in front of
Ṭhākurajī. What kind of benediction do they receive from
this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They will get a good result. Gradually they will come to
serve guru and begin their bhakti.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

The āśrama ladies live in other people’s rooms. That is,
some Western devotees have purchased the rooms, but they
still live in the West. They allow the āśrama ladies to
stay in their rooms, and the āśrama pays the monthly
maintenance. But such rooms are limited. How can we

                           336
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

accommodate the many ladies coming from all over the
world?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

[To Tuṅgavidyā dāsī] You have established this temple,
so you must do something.

Ānandinī dāsī:

How can I stop myself from criticizing?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can criticize yourself, but not others. This is an
offense, and bhakti will go away. Be careful.

Vasanti dāsī:

How shall we decide who stays back at the temple to do
Ṭhākurajī’s services during Govardhana parikramā and
Navadvīpa parikramā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can all decide. Everyone should get a chance to
attend. Some can go to Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā, and some
to Navadvīpa.

Nava-latikā dāsī:

How can I increase my faith in chanting harināma?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It depends on you. Have strong faith in guru’s words.
Without faith, you cannot so anything. Neither money nor
any other material facility can help you. Nāma is Kṛṣṇa
Himself. What Kṛṣṇa can do, nāma can do. We must be very
careful. Have strong faith in this conception: “When I
am chanting, I am serving Kṛṣṇa.”

Nava-latikā dāsī:

Can I have your permission to keep the govardhana-śilā
that Gopījana-vallabha prabhu gave me?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why did he give Him to you? Why has he stopped
worshiping Him? Perhaps it has become a burden for him,
so he gave to you. Why should you take his burden? You
live in the temple āśrama, so better to engage in the
various temple services like ārati, cooking, and so on.

Vasanti dāsī:

It will take time to make more rooms. Now we have four
to five rooms allotted for us. When I travel around the
world, I invite girls to come here. What should be our
mood in welcoming more girls to come here?

Śrīla Gurudeva:


                          337
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

I think they should make more available rooms. Wealthy
ladies may be kind-hearted and donate for orphan girls
(ladies who have given up their homes to live in the
temple).

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Should more girls stay in each room? At the present
time, three or four girls live in one apartment that has
two rooms. Should more girls stay in one apartment?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes. When I was a brahmacārī, we used to have twenty
brahmacārīs in one room – half on one side and half on
the other.

Śyāmarāṇī

dāsī:

The Gaṅgāmātās have seven or eight girls in a room.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, so why not here? They have left their houses,
mothers, and fathers to do sādhana-bhakti.

Jāhnavā dāsī:

How many new dresses should Ṭhākurajī have?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

At least for Janmāṣṭamī and Gaura-pūrṇimā, and if you
can get donors, then you can make five, six, eight, or
ten outfits.

Taruṇī dāsī:

In the beginning you gave me so much enthusiasm. But now
I’m feeling that I’m losing it. What can I do?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why are you giving up your enthusiasm? Don’t give it up.
Go on with your services. This is the process.




March 2, 2009


Morning Walk

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

In Mahāprabhu’s navadvīpa-līlā, we can see pastimes of
dāsya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, and vātsalya-rasa; but we
cannot see mādhurya-, or śṛṅgāra-rasa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

                             338
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Mahāprabhu’s navadvīpa-līlā is audārya-līlā (pastimes of
magnanimity). He has not appeared as the enjoyer, the
Supreme Lord (viśaya-vigraha), but rather in the role of
a devotee (āśraya-vigraha), to teach others. One of the
meanings of mādhurya is ‘sweet,’ or ‘human-like.’
Mahāprabhu’s bālya-līlā (baby pastimes) are also
mādhurya-līlā in that sense. However, when mādhurya-līlā
refers to śṛṅgāra-rasa, or the conjugal mellow, it is
not manifest in navadvīpa-līlā; it is hidden.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

How is it hidden?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Mahāprabhu is the hidden avatāra (channa-avatāra).1

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Rāmānanda Rāya and Śrīman Mahāprabhu are conversing on
the bank of the river Godāvarī, aren’t they relishing
mādhurya-rasa at that time?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Internally yes, but not externally.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Mahāprabhu knows that He is Kṛṣṇa and Rāmānanda Rāya is
Viśākhā; so is this the way they are internally
relishing mādhurya-rasa?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Mahāprabhu is Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and therefore He
possesses all opulence. He is the embodiment of both
sarvajñātā (knowing everything) and mugdhatā (innocence,
unawareness). Both reside in Him.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Which mood is prominent at the bank of Godāvarī –
sarvajñātā or mugdhatā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Mugdhatā is prominent. Aiśvarya (the sense of
Mahāprabhu’s Godhood) is somewhat present, but it is
covered.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Is there any speciality between Mother Śacī and Mother
Yaśodā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Mother Yaśodā is Śacī-devī, but she does not act exactly
as she does in kṛṣṇa-līlā. Mahāprabhu and Navadvīpa are
audārya, magnanimous, so she is also magnanimous.


                             339
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

She has dāsya-rasa?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No. She is His mother. She is in vātsalya-rasa.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Like Mother Yaśodā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

She is more magnanimous than Yaśodā. Yaśodā-maiyā bound
Kṛṣṇa to the grinding mortar, but Śacī-maiyā does not
bind her son even when He engages in mischievous
activities.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

From our study of Mahāprabhu’s pastimes, it seems that
Mother Śacī is more immersed in dāsya-bhāva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No. Where it is stated that she has any dāsya-bhāva?

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

She committed an aparādha to Advaita Ācārya, and
Mahāprabhu threatened that if she would not nullify the
offense she would not attain love of God.2

Śrīla Gurudeva:

At that moment, Mahāprabhu was absorbed in the bhāva, or
mood, of being Bhagavān. At that time He was not like a
son. Regarding Śacī-devī, she was not in dāsya-bhāva;
she always has vātsalya-bhāva.




March (undated), 2009


Morning Walk

[Having heard from Śrīla Gurudeva that without Śrīmatī
Rādhikā Kṛṣṇa would be zero, or nirviśeṣa-brahma (an
impersonal God without qualities), and having determined
from Jaiva-dharma that even without Her, He is the
Supreme Person with independent desire, Śrīpāda Nemi
Mahārāja asked the following question:]

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: Jaiva-dharma states that Kṛṣṇa is not impersonal
brahma. He is puruṣa (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); He has desire. You said we will have to
reconcile. I would like to know how we reconcile these
two.

                             340
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva

: I have said that without Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa is nirviśeṣa-
brahma. What has been written in Jaiva-dharma?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: It is stated there that He is not nirviśeṣa-brahma.
Because He is puruṣa, He has His own desire.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Desire is also a power, and that desire-power is
called icchā-śakti. Rādhikā is present [as the
personification of that icchā-śakti]. Without Rādhikā,
there is no existence of Kṛṣṇa. He is nirviśeṣa-brahma.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: She is always present as Krsna’s śakti, His icchā-
śakti. She may be perceived sometimes externally, as
mūrta-rūpa, meaning in Her personal feature, and
sometimes as amūrta-rūpa, meaning internally.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: It seems that Kṛṣṇa is walking, but His ‘walking-
power’ is Rādhikā.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Kṛṣṇa’s smiling, speaking, seeing, and everything else
is a power. Without power, how can He do these things?

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Rādhikā is Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa-śakti. Without Rādhikā’s
śakti, Kṛṣṇa has no existence.3




August 7, 2009


Morning Walk

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa manifests as Mathureśa Kṛṣṇa
when He goes to Mathurā. Who does Baladeva manifest as
in Mathurā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He manifests as His expansion, Saṅkarṣaṇa.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa requested Baladeva Prabhu (Saṅkarṣaṇa) to return
to Vṛndāvana in order to pacify the gopīs. So, if
Saṅkarṣaṇa takes one step back into Vṛndāvana, will He

                           341
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

not become Baladeva again?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Saṅkarṣaṇa carries a plough and a club.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Will Saṅkarṣaṇa be able to perform rāsa dance at Rāma-
ghāṭa? Will the gopīs also be there?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Saṅkarṣaṇa does not carry a buffalo horn, and He thinks
that He is the son of Devakī. He does not identify
Himself as being the son of Nanda Bābā.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Do you mean to say that whatever rāsa He performed at
Rāma-ghāṭa is in the mood of Saṅkarṣaṇa?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Oh, I thought you were speaking about Saṅkarṣaṇa of
Mathurā or Dvārakā. Now I understand that you are
speaking about Baladeva. No, Baladeva Prabhu’s mood
during His performance of rāsa-līlā at Rāma-ghāṭa was
not as Saṅkarṣaṇa. He was in His own mood, as Baladeva.

Baladeva Prabhu performed rāsa here, but not completely.
‘Completely’ refers to the way in which Kṛṣṇa would do
rāsa-līlā. In other words, the mood of Nanda-nandana
(Kṛṣṇa) was not present at Rāma-ghāṭa.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Does this mean that the rāsa-līlā of Baladeva cannot
reach to the level that Kṛṣṇa performs it?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Baladeva has His own gopīs.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs are not there with them? I thought you
said previously that He danced with Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has said that
Baladeva danced with His own gopīs.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

But is this okay? Should we accept this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Baladeva did not perform rāsa with Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs. It may
be that He gave some consolation to Rādhikājī, Lalitājī,
and Viśākhājī, but He did not perform rāsa with them.


                             342
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

On the other hand, from a transcendental point of view,
even among the higher demigods there is no fault in
connection with women. For example, Urvaśī sometimes
associates with a particular man on one day, and then
with someone else on another day. What to speak, then,
of the aprākṛta (transcendental) rāsa-līlā of Baladeva;
the consideration of lust is not present there at all.

However, because ordinary people cannot understand
transcen-dence, it was explained for them that Baladeva
has His own gopīs.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

What is your opinion on this?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

My opinion is to accept that which is widely accepted;
that is fine.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Disregarding widely acceptable viewpoints, if I ask your
opinion from a spiritual point of view, what would you
reply?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

From the spiritual point of view, Baladeva can perform
rāsa with Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs. Rāsa-līlā is not a bad thing;
it is just dancing.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

But you have explained in Rāsa-pañcādhyāya that during
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā there are exchanges taking place
beyond dancing – like embracing and kissing.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

These exchanges do not occur with Baladeva – only
dancing and singing take place.

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

Gurudeva, I have a question. We say that Kṛṣṇa kills the
demons through Viṣṇu. In other words, it is actually
Viṣṇu killing the demons, not Kṛṣṇa. In vraja-līlā, the
pastimes of killing are dhīra-lalita, meaning that Kṛṣṇa
is revealing some personal desire to show His prowess to
the gopīs. So, is it Kṛṣṇa, or Viṣṇu, who kills demons
like Keśī and Ariṣṭāsura?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

All those demons are killed by Viṣṇu. Kṛṣṇa Himself
engages only in pastimes of being dear to Mother Yaśodā,
Nanda Bābā, the sakhās, and the gopīs. With the love and
affection of the gopīs, nitya-rāsa, the eternal rāsa-
līlā pastimes, and all other loving pastimes take place.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:


                             343
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

In Rāma’s sevā, is there also some bhakti-rasa?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Rāma? which Rāma?

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Lord Rāmacandra. There was bhakti-rasa in His pastimes,
wasn’t there? How can we say that before Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī there was no bhakti-rasa? In Rāma’s sevā there
is āśrayā (the devotee, the abode of loving service) and
viśaya (the Lord, the object of that loving service).4

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In rāma-līlā we find the mood of vātsalya-rasa in
Kauśalya. We find also sakhya-rasa, although that
sakhya-rasa is mixed with aiśvarya (the mood of awe and
reverence). Vibhīṣaṇa and Sugrīva are examples of this
type of sakhya-rasa, whose spirit of friendship was
mixed with that of a servant. Their friendship with the
Lord was not as sweet as the sakhya-rasa of Vṛndāvana.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

But some bhakti-rasa is there, isn’t it?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In rāma-līlā, mādhurya-rasa reached only up to the level
of svakīya, wedded-love, not parakīya, the love of
paramours.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Then what is the difference in the bhakti of Ayodhyā and
bhakti-rasa?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That is a different thing. Rāma is second to Kṛṣṇa. He
is superior to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, Dāmodara Mahārāja is saying that you often
explain that before Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the ācāryas did
not explain bhakti-rasa. My understanding of your words
is that in rāma-līlā there is bhakti-rasa, but nobody
explained it before Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Is this correct?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What about Hanumān? Does he have any relation with Rāma?

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is that relation?


                             344
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Dāsa; he is a servant.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Dāsa, or dāsya-rasa? Is there is no rasa?

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

In this relationship there is no rasa, is there?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do Lakṣmaṇa and Bharata have no relation with Rāma?

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

[Translating Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja’s question into
Hindi] Was bhakti-rasa present in rāma-līlā, or not?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Bhakti-rasa was explained by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Besides
him, who else explained the stages of prema beyond
sthāyī-bhāva5? Who explained its different levels?

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

So, bhakti-rasa was present before Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
but it was not explained by anyone before him? It is
that all these stages of prema – like bhāva, anubhāva
and so on – were simply not explained until Rūpa
Gosvāmī?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Was bhakti-rasa present in Goloka Vṛndāvana? Was Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī not present there as well?

[To Dāmodara Mahārāja] Only you can ask questions like
this; this is not a question.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

I didn’t ask this question.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is a ridiculous question. What would happen if Kṛṣṇa
were to die? Do you think such a question is
appropriate?




August 9, 2009


Morning Walk

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:


                             345
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

Some persons in ISKCON challenge your statement about
Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura not being able to give prema.
They told me, “If you say that Haridāsa Ṭhākura cannot
give kṛṣṇa-prema, then why does it say in Harināma
Cintāmaṇi that…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He is able to give kṛṣṇa-prema, but he cannot give
parakīya-madhura-rasa (service to the amorous paramour
love between Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs). I explained that he
was an associate of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and he was
chanting the holy name, but his chanting and his bhakti
were not like that of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. He was not
rūpānuga; he was nāmācārya. He may give kṛṣṇa-prema, but
he cannot give upapati mādhurya-bhāva6 (service to the
amorous paramour love of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs).

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

He cannot give vraja-prema?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Especially not the upapati-bhāva of the gopīs.

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

They said that if your statement is correct, then how is
it that Haridāsa Ṭhākura explained the ekadāsa-bhāvas
(the eleven moods of service for the devotee performing
rūpānuga-bhajana)? How is it that he explained that the
highest sādhya (goal of life) is service to Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī as a mañjarī?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He can describe it, but he cannot bestow it. Someone may
be able to describe upapati-bhāva, but this does not
mean that such a person can give it.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, Haridāsa Ṭhākura is an incarnation of Prahlāda
Mahārāja and Brahmājī.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He is the combination of Brahmā and Prahlāda Mahārāja.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Brahmā is the ādi-guru (first guru) in our sampradāya.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Still, without being rūpānuga, no one can attain that
gopī mood.

Ariṣṭāsana dāsa:

I read your book called Five Essential Essays: Refuting
Common Misconceptions in our Vaisnava Community. There
you quote the Sanat-kumāra-saṁhitā saying that Śivajī

                          346
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

taught Nāradajī that one should meditate on one’s
mañjarī form.

Śrīla Gurudeva:




vṛndāvanāvani-pate! jaya soma soma-maule

sanaka-sanandana-sanātana-nāradeḍya

gopīśvara! vraja-vilāsi-yugāṅghri-padme

prema prayaccha nirupādhi namo namaste

(Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma 103,

by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura)


[O gatekeeper of Vṛndāvana! O Soma, all glories to you!
O you whose forehead is decorated with the moon, and who
is worshipable for the sages headed by Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanātana, and Nārada! O Gopīśvara! Desiring
that you bestow upon me prema for the lotus feet of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava who perform joyous pastimes in Vraja-
dhama, I offer praṇāma unto you time and again.]

He can give prema.

Śrīpāda Niṣkiñcana Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, some jīvas in the taṭasthā region turned
towards māyā. Is there some compensation for them? Is
their compensation that they can join Mahāprabhu’s
sankīrtana movement? Or, are they just very unfortunate?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It is for them that Kṛṣṇa comes here and performs all
His mādhurya-līlā. It is for them that Rāmacandra comes
here and performs His audārya-līlā, and Mahāprabhu also
comes here. So how are they unfortunate? Moreover, if
any of these souls becomes rūpānuga, followers of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, they can attain upapati-bhāva, or mañjarī-
bhāva. This is exalted to the extreme extent.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Prema-vilāsa prabhu is here. He first came to you in
1986.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

1986.

[To Prema-vilāsa dāsa] For what reason have you come to
India?

Prema-vilāsa dāsa:

I am making a plan to obtain bhāva-bhakti in this
lifetime.

                            347
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

But you are not chanting, you are not hearing, and you
are not doing kīrtana. How will rati come? If you want
that high class of rati, you will have to give up
everything, chant sixty-four rounds daily, and regularly
hear hari-kathā.




August 10, 2009


Morning Walk

Devotee:

I want to know how one can identify the mercy of the
guru; it is not always tangible. How can one know that
he is receiving that mercy or blessing?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When one’s soul becomes happy, and when some inspiration
for bhakti comes in one’s heart, then one can realize,
“I am receiving śrī guru’s mercy.” At that time bhakti-
siddhānta gradually enters his heart. This is the fruit
of guru-sevā.


sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.6)


[The highest pursuit for all humanity is śuddhā-bhakti –
bhakti performed in order to please Kṛṣṇa, the transcen-
dent Lord Adhokṣaja, by all one’s efforts of body, mind,
and soul. Such uttama-bhakti is continuously performed
without any personal desire and without any break. In
this way one can fully satisfy the soul.]

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

In Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s līlā, some devotees worship
Him in an aiśvarya mood and some in a mādhurya mood.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Those who consider Mahāprabhu’s navadvīpa-līlā to be
full of aiśvarya do not know the true nature of that
dhāma. Such persons have not heard hari-kathā from the
lotus mouth of a sādhu.

For the sādhaka, however, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has

                             348
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017

written that the devotee first worships Gaurāṅga
Mahāprabhu in dāsya-rasa. Then, when his devotion
matures, his bhakti is naturally transferred to Śrī Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Jaiva-dharma states that Sannyāsī Ṭhākura had a vision
of Māyāpura, at which time he saw Brahmā with four-
heads. This is aiśvarya.

Brajanāth dāsa:

He also saw so many palaces.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It may be so,7 but Mahāprabhu’s pastimes in Navadvīpa
are mādhurya-maya, full of the sweet mood of naravata-
līlā (human-like pastimes).8

Although Mahāprabhu showed so many aiśvarya forms in
Murāri Gupta’s house, and also in Śrīvāsa Ācārya’s
house, that was not His natural mood.

Draupadī called to Kṛṣṇa to save her, but this was not
her natural mood; it was a special mood. Similarly, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu exhibited aiśvarya-līlā in certain
special cases, in order to show Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, “I am
Vaikuṇṭha-deva, the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha,” and to show
others, “I am Rāma.”

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Is Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita a mādhurya-bhakta?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

He is said to be Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi. Nārada has both
aiśvarya and mādhurya moods.

Śrīpāda Niṣkiñcana Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, how does an aspiring devotee worship
Mahāprabhu in a mood of dāsya, servant?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That devotee considers, “I am His servant.” In   kṛṣṇa-
līlā Raktaka and Patraka are in this mood, and   in rāma-
līlā it is the mood of Hanumān. Similarly, the   aspiring
devotee of Mahāprabhu thinks, “I am an eternal   servant
of Mahāprabhu.”


jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya—kṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’

kṛṣṇera ‘taṭasthā-śakti’ ’bhedābheda-prakāśa

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.108)


[It is the living entity’s constitutional position to be
an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa because he is the marginal

                             349
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

energy of Kṛṣṇa and a manifestation simultaneously one
with and different from the Lord.]

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī are in the
mood of sakhya (friends) towards Mahāprabhu?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No. They have dāsya-bhāva towards Mahāprabhu, and with
Kṛṣṇa they are in mañjarī-bhāva.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Mother Śacī is also in dāsya-bhāva?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

So how is this mādhurya-maya (full with the sweet mood
of human-like relations)?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

She has dāsya-bhāva, but in vātsalya-rasa.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Vātsalya-rasa is prominent.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The gopīs are servants of Kṛṣṇa in mādhurya-rasa, and
Baladeva Prabhu is also a servant. However, in the
‘eyes’ of rasa, this is seen as vātsalya, sakhya, and
mādhurya.

Vīrān:

Mahārāja, back home in the West where I live in South
Africa, I am single. I find that when I go to work there
are so many distractions. How can I keep focused so that
I can always chant the holy name?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Make your heart strong. Chant the holy name with strong
belief that the holy name is as powerful as Kṛṣṇa. Know
that whatever Kṛṣṇa can do, the holy name can do. This
strong belief will do everything for you.

Vīrān:

My second question is this: How do I increase my rounds?
Having to work, it is a struggle to finish my rounds,
what to speak of increasing the number.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Spiritual success comes only by chanting the holy name.

                             350
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has written all answers to all
questions in his Upadeśāmṛta (Nectar of Instruction).
Have you read this?

Vīrān:

I have seen it, but I haven’t read it.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

It will be greatly beneficial for you to read this book,
and also to wear tulasī neck-beads and tilaka like the
devotees here.

Vīrān:

It is said that for our spiritual progress we must have
the blessings and receive the dust of the lotus feet of
Vaiṣṇavas and guru. So all I am asking is that you bless
me.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

I am trying my best to give this blessing to the entire
world. Those who are lucky accept it, and those who are
unlucky cannot. The sun gives light to all, but how can
those who remain in a cave or dark house get the mercy
of the Sun?

Acyuta dāsa:

Was the universal form that was seen by Arjuna on the
battlefield of Kurukṣetra the same universal form as
seen by Mother Yaśodā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, this was Kṛṣṇa’s aiśvarya-līlā. Arjuna was
bewildered and became scared by this, thinking that he
had committed an offense to Kṛṣṇa by considering the
Lord to be his ordinary friend, whereas Mother Yaśodā
thought that perhaps the phenomenon was caused by a
ghost. Mother Yaśodā was not at all bewildered about the
identity of her ‘ordinary son,’ whereas Arjuna addressed
Kṛṣṇa, “O Prabhu, I will no longer call you sakhā, or
friend. Please excuse me.”




August 10, 2009


Darśana

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This age of Kali-yuga is a very difficult time. There is
only one good quality in this age, which is that by
performing a little of Mahāprabhu’s bhakti, one becomes
free from the influence of Kali-yuga. Such a person can
develop prema for Bhagavān, at which time he no longer
has to take birth from a mother’s womb. Therefore, for

                          351
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

one who has taken a human form of life, it is imperative
to perform bhajana.

Kṛṣṇa-bhakti is very rare in the world. People usually
worship demigods and demigoddesses, and serve them in
various ways. Rare is one engaged in the worship of Lord
Nārāyaṇa, and a devotee of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
millions of times more rare.

Bhakti to Kṛṣṇa is very easy to perform; just give your
heart to Him. If you can’t do this, then you can perform
śravaṇa and kīrtana (hearing and chanting about Him).
And, if you can’t do that, then offer your obeisances to
Him, even if only once. That is also bhakti.

Devotee:

Some people say that they are able to speak to Bhagavān
directly.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If a person has darśana of Bhagavān and is able to speak
with Him directly, it means he has achieved the stage of
prema. This material body can tolerate up to the stage
of bhāva, but it cannot tolerate the emotions and
transformations of prema. A person who reaches that
stage can no longer maintain the material body. If he is
actually speaking with Kṛṣṇa and has Kṛṣṇa’s darśana,
and if he does not die, he will surely go crazy.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Some people say they have darśanas in dreams.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Such darśanas in dreams have no value.

Devotee:

Gurudeva, who is qualified for bhakti?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

All living entities are qualified. There is no one who
is not qualified, because we are all Kṛṣṇa’s separated
portions and have originated from Him. Bhakti is the
birthright of the soul, but we are forgetful of this.

Devotee:

Some qualification must be required.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No qualification is required. Even the most fallen can
come to bhakti.


api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk


                            352
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt        5/8/2017

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

(Bhagavad-gītā 9.30)


[Even if one commits the most abominable action, if he
is engaged in devotional service he is to be considered
saintly because he is properly situated in his
determination.]

A well-behaved person may not be qualified for bhakti,
whereas a most fallen person may be qualified.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

There are examples of this, such as Ajāmila,
Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura, and Jagāi and Mādhāi.

Sulatā dāsī (from Delhi):

But Gurudeva, there are some people who take sādhu-saṅga
and still…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

They are unfortunate. They are just like the lice in
hair or the worms sucking blood in the belly. Śāstra
explains that even a fraction of a second (lava mātra9)
of sādhu-saṅga is enough to liberate you from this
material existence. One hundredth part of a minute is
enough.

The process of bhakti may be compared with the sowing of
a mango seed. You sow the seed, water it, and protect
it. Then, after a few years, that seed becomes a tree
and gives hundreds of thousands of fruits. Still, even
when the tree is fully grown, it gives fruit only in the
proper season. First the tree develops buds, then un-
ripened fruits, and after about six months you will have
fruits that are fully-ripened and fragrant. You may
understand the path of bhakti by this analogy.

Devotee:

In Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa says, “Mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja –
take My shelter alone.” What is the meaning of ‘taking
His shelter?’

Śrīla Gurudeva:

This refers to the development of śaraṇāgati:


ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ

prātikūlyasya varjanam

rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso

goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā

ātma-nikṣepa kārpaṇye

                            353
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ

(Vaiṣṇava-tantra,

and Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 11.676)




There are six symptoms of self-surrender (śaraṇāgati).
The first two are ānukūlyasya saṅkalpa and prātikūlyasya
varjanam: “I will only do that which is favorable for
unalloyed bhakti, and I will reject all that is
unfavourable.” This is called saṅkalpa or pratijñā, a
solemn vow. The third symptom is rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso,
faith in Bhagavān as one’s protector: “Bhagavān is my
only protector. I can derive absolutely no benefit from
jñāna, yoga, and other such practices.” This is an
expression of trust (viśvāsa). The fourth symptom is
goptṛtve varaṇaṁ, deliberate acceptance of Bhagavān as
one’s maintainer: “I cannot obtain anything, or even
maintain myself, by my own endeavor. I will serve
Bhagavān as far as I am able, and He will take care of
me.” This is what is meant by dependence (nirabharatā).
The fifth symptom is ātma-nikṣepa, absence of
independent mood. “Who am I? I am His. My duty is to
fulfill His desire.” This is submission of the self
(ātma-nivedana). The sixth symptom is kārpaṇye,
meekness: “I am wretched, insignificant, and materially
destitute.” This is what is meant by humility (kārpanya
or dainya).

The main thing is that if you are totally surrendered to
Bhagavān, then, even if you face some difficult
situation you will not turn towards your friends,
relatives, or parents; you will look towards Kṛṣṇa for
help. You will have this conviction: “Kṛṣṇa is my only
protector and maintainer.”

Tulsi dāsa says that having surrendered, one does not
look towards other people for help. I am doubtful that
you have reached this stage of śaraṇāgati. Why? Whenever
some problem comes, you approach others and beg, “Oh,
please help me, please protect me.” When one has
actually reached the platform of śaraṇāgati, one’s mood
becomes like that of Draupadī: “O Govinda! Please help
me and protect me.” There is only one support for a
surrendered soul.

[To Vṛnda-devī dāsī] I read your letter; it is very good
and very just. I am extremely sorry about what happened.
I have sympathy for Akhilesh and his wife. They both
used to take very good care of this dharmaśālā10. I know
this fact.

But some awkward circumstances have occurred. I thought
about this deeply, for a long time, and finally I took
this very sad decision. I know that I have done an
injustice. I did not want to tell him to leave his
service here, but the situation was such that I was
bound to do so.


                          354
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

There is one thing more that I want to tell you.
Akhilesh prabhu’s wife is very young and very beautiful.
Once, at our Durvāsā temple, there was another person
whose wife was young and beautiful. Some brahmacārīs
were enchanted by her, and when I went there I heard
complaints. That person was very, very good, and very
active. He was doing the entire management of Durvāsā,
but due to that circumstance I requested him to go to
Ānanda Dhāma and serve there instead. I knew that he and
his wife did not want to leave. They had no salary, no
money at all. Still, I considered that it was necessary
for him to leave his position at Durvāsā. In the end he
went to Ānanda Dhāma, where the management is paying him
and where he is very happy.

I will carefully consider this matter. Akhilesh has
recently gone to his house and is staying there, so when
he returns I will adjust the situation. You have written
so many good things in your letter. Still, you are not
at my stage of bhakti. You cannot actually understand
what is justice and what is injustice.

You should have trust – not just trust, but implicit
faith – in me, that I cannot do wrong. It may appear
that Kṛṣṇa has so many times done injustice, and an
ordinary person cannot reconcile this. But Kṛṣṇa cannot
do anything wrong. With our mundane vision we ‘see’ so
many times that He has done wrong – so many times. Some
persons say that He was a politician, or that He was
like this or that. Members of the Ārya-samāj and others
don’t accept Him at all.

Strive to come to the position that you will not give me
up for any reason – even in dream or in your
imagination. My request is that you have strong faith in
me. It has been told in śāstra that everything in this
world is available, but the attainment of a bona fide
guru is very rare. Continue doing your service. What you
are doing is very important; it is really bhakti. So
don’t derail from bhakti; this is my request. I will
make this situation all right.

Sulatā dāsī:

Mahārājajī, just now you said that dreams have no value.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you see a dream during the time of brāhma-muhūrta,
and that is the only dream that you see, then it has
some value. Do you understand what brāhma-muhūrta is? It
is the time period that begins from one hour and thirty-
six minutes before sunrise.11 If you go to sleep after
such a dream and you don’t see any other dream, then
that dream may have value.

Sulatā dāsī:

Suppose I see you in a dream…

Śrīla Gurudeva:

There are two considerations in this connection. Either
I may give some instruction, or you may be seeing me in

                          355
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

your own mood. Suppose Gurudeva hits you in your dream.

Sulatā dāsī:

No, no. You didn’t hit me. Suppose I have some question
in my mind, and you come and answer that question in my
dream.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That may be okay.

Devotee (from Nashik, India):

Gurudeva, we have heard instructions about bhakti and we
have received knowledge about it, but still we are not
able to follow. What should we do?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

‘Do or die.’ Just as people of this world go to all
lengths to achieve their goals of material sense
gratification, devotees have similar determination for
the sake of the supreme goal. In his Śrī Upadeśāmṛta,
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda explains how to achieve our goal.


utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt

tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt

sato vṛtteḥ sādhu-saṅge

ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

(Upadeśāmṛta, Verse 3)


[Progress in bhakti may be obtained by the following six
practices: (1) enthusiasm to carry out the rules which
enhance bhakti, (2) firm faith in the statements of the
śāstra and the guru whose words are fully in line with
the śāstra, (3) fortitude in the practice of bhakti,
even in the midst of obstacles, or patience during the
practice stage of bhakti, even when there is delay in
attaining one’s desired goal, (4) following the limbs of
bhakti such as hearing (śravaṇa) and chanting (kīrtana),
and giving up one’s material sense enjoyment for the
pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, (5) giving up illicit connection
with women, the association of those who are overly
attached to women, and the association of Māyāvādīs,
atheists, and pseudo-religionists, and (6) adopting the
good behavior and character of pure devotees.]

Utsāha means ‘enthusiasm.’ Even though we are not able
to fully follow the limbs of bhakti, we must remain
enthusiastic. In that connection it is beneficial for us
to read all the instructions from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
Śrī Upadeśāmṛta.

Devotee:

We have come to have darśana of Girirāja Govardhana.


                            356
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes, perform parikramā of Girirāja Govardhana, and ask
him for whatever you desire. He is very magnanimous. His
two hands are always in the position of giving. He
considers, “I will fulfill the desires of whoever comes
to Me.” Even if someone asks for Kṛṣṇa Himself, Girirāja
Govardhana will give that. Even Kṛṣṇa is not as merciful
as Girirāja. The Vrajavāsīs never ask anything of anyone
else. They only go to Girirāja. For example, Nanda Bābā
goes to Girirāja and begs him, “Please keep my son
healthy and strong.”

There is one thing to understand, which is certain in
this world: Once you were a child, walking here and
there completely naked. Then you became a youth, and now
you are around fifty. You may or may not reach the age
of one-hundred; it is not certain. As you get older, you
will lose the power of vision, you will lose your teeth,
you will have to take the support of a walking stick,
and then you will leave your body.

Understand that you are not this body. We are the soul.
In this body there is soul and Supersoul. Forgetting the
Supersoul, we are wandering in this material existence,
sometimes taking birth as a donkey, sometimes as a dog,
and sometimes as a demigod. After millions of such
births we attain this very rare human form of life,
which is given by the mercy of the Lord in order to
perform bhagavad-bhajana12. If you lose this rare
chance, then again you will enter the cycle of birth and
death as hogs, dogs, and so forth.

Our duty in the human form of life is to perform
bhajana, but that is not possible on your own. It is
absolutely necessary to take the shelter of a bona fide
guru. That guru knows all the śāstras and is renounced
from material sense enjoyment. Whoever comes to me, I
give them the instruction to perform bhagavad-bhajana.




August 11, 2009


Morning Walk

Acyuta dāsa:

We have two different areas in South Africa – Durban and
Johannesburg – which are quite distant from each other.
Because of the distance, part of the difficulty we
experience is for devotees from Johannesburg to come to
Durban. We are suggesting that in order for there to be
peace in South Africa, the Durban devotees arrange and
have their own programs, and the Johannesburg devotees
arrange and have their own programs, and we get together
for big events. Is this approved by you?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

When will they meet?

                          357
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Acyuta dāsa:

For Janmāṣṭamī and other such important events, and
during your visits.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You can make a program to get together at least once a
year. It will not be impossible for special days.

Gokula-candra dāsa (from Germany):

Śrīla Gurudeva, Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja
writes that guru takes different degrees of
responsibility for different disciples, but he does not
say how this is determined.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Why should guru take the responsibility? I give you
instructions, and you will have to follow them. My
responsibility is that I will give you bhakti if you
follow me. This is my only responsibility. Do you
understand?

Gokula-candra dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja compares this
principle to a family doctor who takes full
responsibility for a patient, whereas a consultant
physician may say, “I can do my level best, but it is up
to Kṛṣṇa whether or not the patient is cured.” The
family doctor will try to help the patient, even if
Kṛṣṇa does not allow.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The disciple should fully surrender and obey gurudeva;
then gurudeva will accept full responsibility.
Otherwise, if the disciple does not follow, if he does
not obey, if he is not surrendered, gurudeva will give
him nothing.

Gokula-candra dāsa:

Sometimes we see that there may be a disciple who might
not be surrendered, and he tries to run away; but still
guru tries to catch him and pull him back every time.
For example Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja had a
disciple, who is ācārya now, who tried to marry three
times. But every time he….

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If a disciple fully surrenders, then, not only in this
birth, but birth after birth guru will save him. For
such a disciple guru takes responsibility. He
determines, “I will give him bhakti.”

I understand why you have asked these questions. The
disciple has to surrender to gurudeva first. Then, even

                          358
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

if some lust enters the disciple’s heart, guru will try
to help him. I did this for you. Do you remember?




October 22, 2009


Darśana

Candra-mukhi dāsī:

I find it very difficult to speak the truth when someone
is coming with apasiddhānta (unauthorized statements) or
a mood of sahajiyism. What mood should I have when
approaching that with them so as not to offend them?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Be like me.

Rāseśvarī dāsī:

That would be very difficult, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Don’t fear. Be firm, but speak with very polite
language.




November 1, 2009


Darśana for Russian devotees

Śrīla Gurudeva

: Sahajiyā bābājīs will give you [so-called] siddha-deha
(your spiritual form) at once, without delay. They will
tell you, “This is your spiritual form, this is your
name, this is your duty; these are your ekādaśa-
bhāvas13. But, what is real and unreal attainment of
siddha-deha has been clearly explained in our guru-
paramparā, by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī,
Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura instructs us to perform
bhajana under the guidance of an expert devotee.

In my class on Bhajana-rahasya, I clearly told that
Russian devotees are very sentimental. They don’t want
to climb up the tree [of devotion] from the root; they
want to at once climb to the top. They don’t want to do
any labor of practice. They want their siddha-deha at
once, and they want to immediately meditate on aṣṭa-
kālīya-līlā (Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s eight-fold daily
pastimes).

First try to remove your anarthas. Then niṣṭhā will

                          359
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017

come, and after that, ruci will come. When all anarthas
totally disappear, siddha-deha will then come
automatically. At that time guru will give some
guidance, and by his guidance, one’s siddha-svarūpa
(constitutional spiritual form) will automatically
manifest. It is at that time that one can think about
one’s siddha-śarīra (internal, perfect spiritual form)
and everything in relation to it.

Although some persons do not engage in any practice,
they want their ekādaśa-bhāvas at once. A Russian
devotee came to me and said, “Oh Gurudeva, give me
ekādaśa-bhāvas.” I asked him, “Do you have any
attachment to your body?” He said, “Yes, I have.” I
said, “Does attraction for a lady sometimes come in your
heart?” He replied, “Yes, it comes.” Then I asked, “Do
you chant regularly, twenty-four hours a day, as our
Gosvāmīs do?” He said, “Oh, never.” Finally I replied,
“In that case, ekādaśa-bhāvas will not come to you. If
you artificially accept these moods, then after some
time you will give up all your devotional practices, you
will marry a widow lady, and your life will be ruined.”

I know so many devotees like this, since the time of my
Gurudeva. I also know many disciples of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, both Russian and others,
who left him and went to the bābājīs. After six months
they left their devotional practices, collected widows,
and went to hell.

I recently met with Abhirāma and some other Russian
devotees, and I told them, “You are doing wrong.” If you
desire your own welfare, then practice bhakti-yoga.
Then, automatically, when your heart becomes pure, your
Gurudeva will inspire you in your heart and all these
moods will come.

[Prema-prayojana dāsa informs Śrīla Gurudeva that some
bābājīs are giving devotees what they consider siddha-
praṇālī (the perfection of becoming an associate of the
Lord).]

Śrīla Gurudeva

: They don’t know what is siddha-praṇālī. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura quotes from Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta:


tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

(Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, Verse 3)


Thinking oneself to be   even lower and more worthless
than the insignificant   grass which is trampled beneath
the feet of all, being   more tolerant than a tree,
accepting no honor but   offering respect to all others

                            360
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

according to their respective positions, one should
continuously chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.

When one is able to follow the instruction of this
verse, then siddha-praṇālī will come. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī have not given siddha-
praṇālī to unqualified persons. When you are qualified,
when all your attachments will disappear, then it may be
possible to receive siddha-praṇālī.

In your present stage it is essential to hear from a
qualified tattva-jñāna rasika-guru, for by such hearing,
all kinds of siddhānta and līlās will manifest. There
will be no need of separate endeavors. We are speaking
hari-kathā here. We are explaining all varieties of
guru-tattva, kṛṣṇa-tattva, jīva-tattva, māyā-tattva,
rādhā-tattva, and śakti-tattva. In this way, by such
hearing, you will receive understanding of siddhānta and
also hear pastimes of Kṛṣṇa.

Sahajiyā bābājīs say they are giving siddha-praṇālī, but
if I ask them, “What is siddha-praṇālī?” they are not
able to answer. So, be very careful. Don’t try to follow
them. I think that if you are under my guidance you will
very easily attain this perfection, but it is not
possible to receive it from them.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written in Jaiva-dharma
that there were two disciples: Vrajanātha and Vijaya
Kumāra. Their guru explained to them all kinds of
siddhānta, and only in the end did he individually tell
them, “You are a sakhā,” and “You are a sakhī.”

So try to follow the correct process. Don’t try to jump
up to the top of the tree to take the fruit there. Try
to climb up from the bottom.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.




* * *




1 He is God, Kṛṣṇa, covered by the mood of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, but He is playing the role of a devotee.



2 Excerpts from Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja’s
purport to Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 17.10:


One day Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was sitting on the
throne of Viṣṇu in the house of Śrīvāsa Prabhu, and in a
mood of His own He said, ‘My mother has offended the
lotus feet of Advaita Ācārya. Unless she nullifies this
offense at the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava, it will not be
possible for her to achieve love of Kṛṣṇa.’

                          361
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt         5/8/2017


Hearing this, all the devotees went to bring Advaita
Ācārya there. While coming to see the Lord, Advaita
Ācārya was glorifying the characteristics of mother
Śacī-devī, and thus upon arriving He fell down on the
ground in ecstasy. Then, under the instruction of Lord
Caitanya, Śacī-devī took advantage of this situation to
touch Advaita Ācārya’s lotus feet. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu was very much pleased by His mother’s action,
and He said, ‘Now My mother’s offense at the lotus feet
of Advaita Ācārya has been rectified, and she may have
love of Kṛṣṇa without difficulty.’

By this example Lord Caitanya   taught everyone that
although one may be very much   advanced in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, if one offends   the lotus feet of a
Vaiṣṇava his advancement will   not

bear fruit.




3 Excerpts from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 14:


Bābājī:

Now see how the śakti of para-tattva (the Supreme
Personality of Godhead) is never absent in Him. Para-
tattva is always self-illuminated and self-manifesting.
The Vedic mantras describe the three types of śakti of
that self-manifested tattva as follows:


That Paramātmā is omniscient and the creator of the
world. He is Self-born (ātmā-yoni), the controller of
kāla (time), the knower of all, the Īśvara of pradhāna
(māyā), and the Īśvara of all kṣetrajñas (jīvas). He is
full of all transcendental qualities and beyond all
material qualities, yet He is their Master. He binds the
jīvas in saṁsāra, places them in their positions, and
liberates them from it.

(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.16)




This mantra describes the three states of parā-śakti.
The word pradhāna denotes māyā-śakti; the word kṣetrajña
denotes the jīva-śakti; and the cit-śakti has been
alluded to by the word kṣetrajña-pati. The Māyāvādīs
explain that brahma is the condition of para-tattva
without śakti, and that Īśvara is of this state with all
śakti, but this doctrine is simply imaginary. In
reality, Bhagavān always possesses all śakti. Śakti is
present in all of His aspects. He is eternally situated
in His svarūpa, and although He has all śakti in that
svarūpa, He Himself remains the Supreme Person, full of
His own independent will.


                          362
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Vrajanātha

: If He is fully associated with śakti, He only works
with the assistance of śakti, then where is His
independent nature and desire?


Bābājī

: Śakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ – according to this statement
in Vedānta, śakti (potency) and the śaktimān puruṣa (the
Supreme Person who possesses all śakti) are non-
different. Work shows the influence of śakti; that is,
all work is accomplished only by the means of śakti.
However, the desire to do work is an indication of
śaktimān. The mundane material world is the work of
māyā-śakti, all the jīvas are the work of jīva-śakti,
and the cid-jagat (spiritual world) is the work of cit-
śakti. Bhagavān inspires the cit-śakti, jīva-śakti, and
māyā-śakti to be engaged in their respective activities,
but He Himself is still nirvikāra (unattached and
unaffected).


Vrajanātha

: How can He remain nirvikāra when He works according to
His independent desire? Indeed, to be possessed of
independent desire (sva-icchāmaya) means that He
experiences vikāra (transformation).


Bābājī

: Nirvikāra means to be free from any material
transformations (māyika-vikāra). Māyā is the shadow of
svarūpa-śakti. The work of māyā is reality, but it is
not an eternal reality. Thus the defect of māyā is not
present in the para-tattva. The vikāra that is present
in Śrī Hari in the form of His desire and pastimes is
nothing but the highest manifestation of prema. Such
wonderful manifestations of transcendental
variegatedness are present in advaya-jñāna Bhagavān. In
spite of creating the material world by His desire
through His māyā-śakti, this cit nature remains in
eternal, unbroken existence. Māyā has no connection with
the astonishing, variegated līlā of Bhagavān in the
spiritual world.




4 “Prior to Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
different Vaiṣṇava ācāryas had established, preached,
and propagated bhakti-tattva. However only Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī, being empowered by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
further developed that bhakti-tattva into bhakti-rasa.
He described this subject elaborately in his Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu and Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. He wrote that the
bhakti-lātā-bīja in the form of kṛṣṇa-sevā-vāsanā (the
tendency or inclination to serve Kṛṣṇa) develops
sequentially from śraddhā to niṣṭhā, ruci, and āsakti.

                          363
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

When it comes to the stage of rati, it is called sthāyī-
bhāva. When the four bhāvas, namely vibhāva, anubhāva,
sāttvika, and vyābhicārī meet together in a combined
form in this sthāyī-bhāva, then rati in the form of
sthāyī-bhāva is transformed into a relishable and
supremely astonishing condition called bhakti-rasa”
(Ācārya Kesarī Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
– His Life and Teachings, Part 5).



5 “Bhakti-rasa is of twelve varieties and each of these
has its own sthāyī-bhāva. For example: (1) the sthāyī-
bhāva of śānta-rasa is śānta-rati (tranquillity); (2)
the sthāyī-bhāva of dāsya-rasa is dāsya-rati (affection
in servitude); (3) the sthāyī-bhāva of sakhya-rasa is
sakhya-rati (friendship); (4) the sthāyī-bhāva of
vātsalya-rasa is vātsalya-rati (parental affection); (5)
the sthāyī-bhāva of mādhurya-rasa is madhura-rati
(conjugal love); (6) the sthāyī-bhāva of hāsya-rasa is
hāsa-rati (laughter); (7) the sthāyī-bhāva of adbhuta-
rasa (wonder) is vismāyā-rati (astonishment); (8) the
sthāyī-bhāva of vīra-rasa (heroism) is utsāha-rati
(enthusiasm); (9) the sthāyī-bhāva of karuṇa-rasa
(compassion) is śoka-rati (sorrow or lamentation); (10)
the sthāyī-bhāva of raudra-rasa is krodha-rati (anger);
(11) the sthāyī-bhāva of bhayānaka-rasa is bhaya-rati
(fear); and (12) the sthāyī-bhāva of bībhatsa-rasa is
jugupsā-rati (disgust). Although bhakti-rasa is accepted
to be of twelve varieties, in the final analysis five
rasas are predominant” (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu,
Verse 14, Overview).



6 An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 31:


Vijaya:

‘Kindly explain the distinctive roles of an upapati,
male paramour, and a parakīya, female paramour.’


Gosvāmī:

‘Any man who because of intense love for a married or
betrothed lady trespasses all religious principles to
win her love is an upapati. A married woman who by
disregarding the nuptial vows ignores the religious
edicts of heaven and earth and surrenders to a man who
is not her husband is called a parakīya. Parakīya women
are of two categories: kanyā, unmarried; and paroḍhā,
married.’ ”




7 Excerpts from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 3:


One night, just after ten o’clock, Sannyāsī Mahārāja sat
chanting harināma on a raised mound in a secluded part

                          364
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

of his grove within Śrī Godruma. Gazing northward, he
saw that the full moon had already risen, diffusing an
uncommon luster throughout Śrī Navadvīpa-maṇḍala.
Suddenly, a divine manifestation of nearby Śrī Māyāpura
became visible before his eyes.

Sannyāsī Mahārāja exclaimed, “Oh! What an extraordinary
vision! I am seeing a most astonishing and blissful holy
place! Towering jeweled palaces, temples, and ornamented
archways are illuminating the bank of the Jāhnavī River
by their glittering splendor. The tumultuous sound of
harināma-saṅkīrtana is rising from many places, as if to
pierce the sky. Hundreds of Vaiṣṇavas, like Nārada
playing upon his vīṇā, are chanting śrī nāma and
dancing.

“On one side is fair-complexioned Mahādeva, with his
ḍamarū drum in his hand. He cries out, ‘O Viśvambhara,
please bestow Your mercy upon me!’ Saying this, he
dances tāṇḍava-nṛtya wildly, and then falls to the
ground, unconscious. On another side, the four-headed
Brahmā sits in an assembly of ṛṣis who are well-versed
in Vedic lore.”



8 “Whether or not great opulence (aiśvarya) is present,
if Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are experienced as nara-līlā(human-
like pastimes), then it is mādhurya” (Rāga-vartma-
candrikā, Preface).



9 “According to astronomical calculations, a lava is one
eleventh of a second” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-
līlā 22.54).



10 A dharmaśālā is a free or inexpensive guesthouse for
pilgrims, found at holy places.



11 “In the last part of the night, the segment of time
consisting of the two muhūrtas (one hour and thirty-six
minutes) before sunrise, is called aruṇodaya, or dawn.
The first of these two muhūrtas is called the brāhma-
muhūrta. This brāhma-muhūrta is the most beneficial time
of the day for the cultivation of spiritual life”
(Arcana-dīpikā, Chapter 2).



12 Bhagavad-bhajana – full absorption in the dedicated
service ofŚrī Kṛṣṇa, following the bona fide guru,
sādhus (self-realized souls) and śāstra.



13 Excerpts from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 39:


Vijaya

                          365
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


: Kindly explain these ekādaśa-bhāvas to me thoroughly
once again.


Gosvāmī

: The ekādaśa-bhāvas are: (1) sambandha (relationship),
(2) vayasa (age), (3) nāma (name), (4) rūpa (personal
form and beauty), (5) yūtha (group), (6) veśa (dress),
(7) ājñā (specific instruction), (8) vāsa (residence),
(9) sevā (exclusive service); (10) parākāṣṭhā-śvāsa (the
highest summit of emotion, which is the aspirant’s very
life breath), and (11) pālya-dāsī-bhāva (the sentiment
of a maidservant under the protection of Śrī Rādhā).


Vijaya

: What is sambandha (relationship)?


Gosvāmī

: The sentiment of sambandha is the very foundation of
this subject. The sentiments with which one relates to
Kṛṣṇa when one establishes sambandha determine one’s
corresponding state of perfection (siddhi). One who
accepts Kṛṣṇa as master when he establishes his
relationship with Him becomes dāsa. One who accepts
Kṛṣṇa as his sakhā or son when he establishes his
relationship becomes sakhā or parent, respectively. One
who accepts Him as husband in the marital (svakīya)
relationship becomes a beautiful young lady in Dvārakā.
Śānta-rasa is absent in Vraja, and even dāsya-rasa is
very inhibited. In any case, this relationship is
established according to the worshiper’s ruci.

Your nature is feminine, and your inclination is in
parakīya-rasa, so you are a subordinate attendant of
Vraja-vaneśvarī. The sambandha that you have to
cultivate and realize fully is: “I am a maidservant of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s most confidential attendant maid.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the mistress of my very life, and
Kṛṣṇa is Her life; therefore Śrī Rādhā-vallabha Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is certainly the Lord of my life.”


Vijaya

: I have heard that our ācārya, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, was
in favor of sambandha in svakīya-bhāva (the marital
relationship). Is this true?


Gosvāmī

: None of the followers of Śrīman Mahāprabhu were
outside the pure, transcendental parakīya-bhāva. Śrī
Svarūpa Gosvāmī is the sole guru of this transcendental
parakīya-rasa. He has given instruction on the purest
transcendental parakīya-bhāva, and Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī –
as well as Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
– followed in his footsteps and maintained the same

                          366
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

opinion. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has never cherished any
independent sentiments of svakīya-bhajana. However, he
observed the scent of svakīya-bhāva in some of the
upāsakas (worshipers) of Vraja. The svakīya-bhāva of
Vraja is found only where the samarthā rati has a scent
of samañjasā rati in it. Those who maintain a slight
sense of svakīya-bhāva when they establish their
relationship with Kṛṣṇa are actually svakīya-upāsakas.
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī had both types of disciples: those
with śuddha parakīya-bhāva, and those whose worship was
mixed with a sense of svakīya-bhāva. Consequently, he
left separate instructions according to his disciples’
different inclinations. This fact is clearly established
by the śloka: svecchayā likhitaṁ kiñcit in his Locana-
rocanī ṭīkā on Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi.


Vijaya

: Very well. I have understood that only the
unadulterated parakīya-bhajana is accepted in the
viśuddha (pure) Gauḍīya conception. Now that I have
understood sambandha, please tell me about vayasa (age).


Gosvāmī

: The sambandha that you have established with Kṛṣṇa has
resulted in your unprecedented and unparalleled
intrinsic svarūpa (vraja-lalanā-svarūpa) of a vraja-
gopī. Now, to render service in that svarūpa, you need
to have a suitable age (vayasa). The appropriate age is
kaiśora (the age from ten to sixteen), also known as
vayaḥ-sandhi. In your svarūpa, you will begin from the
age of ten, and grow up to sixteen years. Vraja-lalanā’s
do not have the three ages of bālya (infancy, ages 0 –
5), paugaṇḍa (childhood, ages 5 – 10), and vṛddha
(adulthood), so you should always foster the spiritual
identification of being a kiśorī.


Vijaya

: Please explain to me about nāma (name). I have already
received the name of my svarūpa, but still, please give
me firm instructions in this regard.


Gosvāmī

: After hearing about the services of various damsels of
Vraja, your own service tendency has awakened. According
to that natural tendency for service, you are a
maidservant of Rādhikā-sakhī. The name of that
maidservant is your name. Your Gurudeva has given you
your name after examining your inclination or ruci. That
name is to be considered your nitya-nāma. You will be
delighted (manoramā) by this name among the vraja-gopīs.


Vijaya

: Prabhu, now please tell me about rūpa (eternal form).


                          367
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Gosvāmī

: Your intrinsic, transcendental identity is that of a
beautiful, youthful kiśorī, which means that your Śrī
Gurudeva has defined your siddha-rūpa according to your
inclination and ruci. How can one be the maidservant of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā without having been endowed with an
inconceivably divine form and personal beauty?


Vijaya

: Please consolidate my faith regarding yūtha (group).


Gosvāmī

: Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself is the yūtheśvarī (leader of
the yūtha), and you have to live as an attendant in the
group of one of Her eight principal sakhīs. Your
Gurudeva has put you under the guidance of Śrīmatī
Lalitā, so now you should render loving service to
Yūtheśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Līlāmaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa, under
Śrī Lalitā’s order.


Vijaya

: Prabhu, what sort of sādhakas become followers in the
groups of yūtheśvarīs such as Śrī Candrāvalī?


Gosvāmī

: The intense desire to be the attendant of a yūtheśvarī
awakens in one’s heart only after accumulating fortune
(sukṛti) for many births, so only the most fortunate
sādhakas have access to Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s yūtha. The
efforts of Śrī Candrāvalī and other yūtheśvarīs are
simply to enhance the līlā, and it is only to nourish
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava’s transcendental rasa that the
other yūtheśvarīs have accepted the mood of an opponent.
In fact, Śrīmatī Rādhikā alone is yūtheśvarī.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s variegated pastimes are full of abhimāna
(spiritual self-conception). Those who have a particular
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His pastimes identify themselves
as being perfectly fitted for just that service.


Vijaya

: Now I wish to become resolute with regard to guṇa
(qualities).


Gosvāmī

: You are expert in the various types of fine skills
required for your assigned service. You need suitable
qualities and dress in order to render your service
perfectly, and your Gurudeva has already ascertained
these for you.

                          368
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017



Vijaya

: Now, please tell me about ājñā (specific orders).


Gosvāmī

: There are two types of ājñā: nitya and naimittika.
Your nitya-ājñā is whatever ājñā your compassionate
sakhī has bestowed upon you regarding your sevā during
the aṣṭa-kālīya līlā, and you must continue to render it
regularly at that particular time, without any
negligence. Apart from that, from time to time, she may
give you ājñā about other services when the necessity
arises, and this is called naimittika-ājñā (occasional
orders). You should also attend to these services with
the utmost diligence.


Vijaya

: What is vāsa (residence)?


Gosvāmī

: To reside in Vraja eternally – this is vāsa. You
should realize your identity as a gopī who is born in
the house of some gopa in one of the villages of Vraja,
and you have been married to a gopa of some other
village of Vraja. However, the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s
muralī has captivated you. Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
confidential sakhī has taken you under her guidance and
has appointed a place of residence for you in a
beautiful kuṭīra in a grove on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa.
The residence that you have realized internally, by your
intrinsic spiritual identity, is your true vāsa. Your
parakīya-bhāva is actually your nitya-siddha-bhāva.


Vijaya

: Kindly give more specific details about my sevā
(service).


Gosvāmī

: You are a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and your
eternal service is to render loving service unto Her.
Sometimes, out of necessity, She may send you to be
alone with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a solitary place, and at that
time, Kṛṣṇa may express His desire to enjoy with you.
However, you should never agree to His proposals. You
are a dāsī of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and you never
independently serve Kṛṣṇa for His pleasure without Her
permission. You have equal loving attachment for Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa, but still you should maintain greater
earnestness for Her loving service (dāsya-prema) than
for Kṛṣṇa’s. This is the meaning of sevā. Your sevā is
to care for Śrī Rādhikā’s comfort and pleasure in all
the eight-fold pastimes of the aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā. Śrīla

                          369
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has presented the outline of
your service in Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjalī, based on Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara’s treatise.


Vijaya

: How can the parākāṣṭhā-śvāsa (the utmost summit of
sentiments, and the very breath of the aspirant) be
ascertained?


Gosvāmī

: Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has explained parākāṣṭhā
in the following two ślokas (Vilāpa-kusumāñjali 102–
103):


asa-bharair amrta-sindhumayaih kathancit

kalo mayatigamitah kila sampratam hi

tvan cet krpam mayi vidhasyasi naiva kim me

pranair vrajena ca varoru vakarinapi


Hā Varoru Rādhe, I am spending my days in great
distress, maintaining the highest expectation of
attaining the ocean of nectar. Now please bestow Your
kindness upon me, for if You do not do so, what is the
use of my life, my residence in Vraja, or even my
servitude to Kṛṣṇa? All will be completely in vain.


ha natha gokula-sudha-kara supresanna-

vaktraravinda madhura-smita he krpardra

yatra tvaya viharate pranayaih prayarat

tatraiva mam api naya priya-sevanaya


Alas, Gokulacandra! Alas, Kṛṣṇa, with a smiling,
blissful, lotus face! Alas, You whose heart is soft and
melting, wanting to bestow mercy on all! Kindly take me
where You lovingly take Śrīmatī Rādhikā and sport with
Her eternally, and allow me to render confidential,
loving service to You both.

Vijaya

: Please explain pālya-dāsī-svabhāva (the disposition of
the maids who have accepted the protection of Śrī
Rādhā).


Gosvāmī

: Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī has explained the disposition of
the pālya-dāsīs in his Vraja-vilāsa-stava (29) as
follows:

                          370
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt          5/8/2017



sandra-prema-rasaih pluta priyataya pragalbhyam apta
tayoh

prana-prestha-vayasyayor anudinam lilbhisaram kramaih

vaidagdhyena tatha sakhim prati sada manasya siksam
rasair

yeyam karayatiha hanta lalita grhnatu sa mam ganaih


Śrī Lalitā-devī is drowning in the utterly unfathomable
prema-rasa. Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are her prāṇa-preṣṭha
(her dearest beloved, the life of her life), and every
day, with the pragalbhatā (boldness) born of her love
for Them both, she arranges for Their loving meetings.
With great expertise she instructs her sakhī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. May she accept me as pālya-dāsī, one of the
attendant maids in her personal group.

Vijaya

: What sort of attitude should a pālya-dāsī have towards
Śrī Lalitā-devī’s other attendant maids, and how should
she deal with them?


Gosvāmī

: All of Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī’s writings are enriched with
transcendental rasa, which are but illustrations of Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī’s instructions. In this
respect, he has written:


tāmbūlārpaṇa-pāda-mardana-payodānābhisārādibhir

vṛndāraṇya-maheśvarīṁ priyatayā yās toṣayanti priyāḥ

prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhī-kulād api kilāsaṅkocitā bhūmikāḥ

kelī-bhūmiṣu rūpa-mañjarī-mukhās tā dāsikāh saṁśraye

(Vraja-vilāsa-stava 38)


I take shelter of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and the other
maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the great Queen of
Vṛndāvana. Those maidservants perpetually satisfy Her by
their loving services, such as offering tāmbūla,
massaging Her feet, bringing water, and arranging for
Her trysts with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhīs are
dearer to Śrīmatī Rādhikā than Her very life, but these
maidservants are still more dear, because without
feeling shy they can enter the area where the Divine
Couple enjoy Their most confidential pastimes.




September 10, 2009

                          371
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017



Darśana

Devotee:

This is Aśokajī and his family from Kolkata.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

What is he doing?

Devotee:

He has done engineering and is now doing an MBA.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You are not this body. If your life-airs leave your
body, will you be able to speak? How will you speak? Try
to understand this clearly.

After the soul leaves the body, the body will decay, and
therefore it is either cremated or buried. This body,
for which you are studying engineering, reading law,
becoming a doctor, and earning money to support
yourself, is not the real you. After death, how much
money will you be able to take with you? We cannot say,
“Oh, this lawyer is earning nicely, so he will take
something with him at the time of death.” You cannot
take anything with you. Neither your wife, nor your
children, nor any of your family members can come with
you.

Inside this body resides the ātmā, the real ‘I,’ and
inside everyone’s body the Paramātmā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
resides. From the time of creation we have been in the
bodies of demigods, animals, horses, pigs, dogs, fish,
and trees. But now, by great fortune you have been given
a human form. God has given you this chance. When you
were in the womb you prayed to Him, “After coming out, I
will perform Your bhajana. Please release me from this
hell.” But after birth you forgot that prayer.

The human form is not meant only for sense enjoyment,
marriage, or earning money. Do everything, but do it
along with performing the Lord’s bhajana; then your
human life will become successful. If you don’t perform
bhajana and don’t chant the names of the Lord in this
life, you will become ants, dogs, fish, meat, eggs, or
hogs in your next life.

It is not difficult to perform bhajana. Kṛṣṇa is very
merciful. He has invested all His energies, mercy, and
qualities in His holy names. Whatever Kṛṣṇa can do, His
name can also do. This is why the chanting of His holy
names is the easiest sādhana to perform, whether
sitting, standing, moving, sleeping, at night, in the
day, after bathing, without bathing, in a pure state or
impure state. The Lord has given such a great chance
that even if you chant His holy names only one time, He
will very quickly take you to Goloka Vṛndāvana where
there is no birth, death, lamentation, or distress;
where we find only transcendental service to Rādhā and

                          372
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Kṛṣṇa, for an eternal life is full of bliss, devotion,
happiness, and peace.

Do bhajana, chant the holy name, and observe Ekādaśī,
Janmāṣṭamī, and other festivals. You are already earning
money, so you can maintain your family and at the same
time do bhajana.

What I have just taught you is the essence of all
śāstras, Vedas, Purāṇas, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Don’t
say, “I will start doing bhajana tomorrow.” What you
have decided to do tomorrow, do it today; what you have
decided to do today, do it now. Tomorrow may be the end
of the world. Nobody can be sure whether or not
‘tomorrow’ will come at all. So from today, from this
very day, start doing bhajana.

Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍī Mahārāja:

How will they have time for bhajana when they have to
look after their families?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Kṛṣṇa will look after their families. If a person’s wife
is dying, the only thing he can do is take her to the
hospital. Kṛṣṇa has created rules and regulations that
everyone has to die, and those who are dying will come
again in rotation. Only those who perform bhajana will
not come again; they will go to Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Gṛhasthas should maintain their families, but at the
same time always remember Kṛṣṇa and do bhajana. This is
essential.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

Can one attain sādhu-saṅga by engaging in pious acts?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, this is not possible. By performance of pious acts
you can get money, beautiful women, husbands, sons, and
other facilities, but you cannot come to bhakti. In
order to come to bhakti, one must visit the dhāma, do
parikramā, follow Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī, offer ghee
lamps, and do some sevā for the sādhus residing there.
Bhāgavata-sukṛti will arise, and from this one can get
sādhu-saṅga. Even millions of lifetimes of pious acts
cannot get you sādhu-saṅga; you will continue roaming in
this material world.

Saṅkarṣaṇa dāsa:

I would like to ask how one can realize that śrī guru is
omniscient?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Guru is sarvajña (all-knowing), because Kṛṣṇa is
sarvajña. Kṛṣṇa is present within guru; therefore guru
is sarvajña. He knows what will happen to whom.

Vasanta dāsa:

                             373
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Gurudeva, if someone knows that you are sarvajña but he
still performs wrong acts and does not speak the truth,
can that person get bhakti?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Is Kṛṣṇa sarvajña or not? He is. Did Kṛṣṇa not know
whether or not the Mahābhārata War would take place? He
did. Similarly, guru knows.

Within Kṛṣṇa is guru, and within guru is Kṛṣṇa. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam says that guru is a manifestation of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s intrinsic nature (svarūpa). The disciple must
consider guru in this way, and follow him.

Candra-kānta dāsa:

Gurudeva, here in Bangalore there are a lot of North
Indian people, but there are no Hindi preachers. People
come for one or two weeks, listen to hari-kathā in
English, and then go away. Can you bring Hindi
preachers?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Where is Mahārāja?

Candra-kānta dāsa:

We have been requesting them for the past few months to
get us some Hindi preachers. Gurudeva, please.

Śrīpāda Vaikhānas Mahārāja:

Śrīnidhi prabhu speaks Hindi.

Candra-kānta dāsa:

The speaker’s mother tongue should be Hindi.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Śrīnidhi prabhu speaks broken Hindi.

[To Rāma-keśava dāsa] Can you speak Hindi?

Rāma-keśava dāsa:

I can sing Hindi kīrtanas.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

All right, I will go to Mathurā, consider this matter,
and send you Hindi speakers.

Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍī Mahārāja:

You told me at Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana Gauḍīya Maṭha, “You
should be more than the jñāna-bhakta.” I asked, “How is
this possible?” You said, “You are like clay. I can mold
you in whichever way I desire.” I still do not
understand how this is possible.


                             374
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

If you follow my instructions, I will make you like a
rādhā-dāsī.




September 11, 2009


Darśana

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja says that divya-jñāna
(being situated in transcendental knowledge of one’s
relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa) is man’s second birth. What
is the meaning of this second birth?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Do you know the meaning of dīkṣā? One’s first birth
takes place by one’s worldly father and mother, and the
second is by the transcendental guru – not by an
ordinary guru. Guru gives dīkṣā, meaning ‘second birth.’
He gives his disciple transcendental birth and a
relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Transcendental birth from a
high-class guru is greater than the first birth by one’s
father and mother. Why? By our material birth alone we
cannot make our life successful.

Devotee:

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī says that Kṛṣṇa never sets even
one foot outside of Vṛndāvana, because He loves the
gopīs so much. It was saṁyoginī Rādhā who went to
Kurukṣetra to meet with Kṛṣṇa, not Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Rādhā. Why did saṁyoginī Rādhā go? Does Rādhā ever leave
Vṛndāvana?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Kṛṣṇa met with Rādhā at Kurukṣetra after They had not
met for many years. Rādhā came with Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā-
maiyā, and all the other Vrajavāsīs.

Saṁyoginī means ‘complete meeting.’ By mood, saṁyoginī
Rādhā said to Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra, “Please come back
with us to Vṛndāvana, to meet with Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī.”
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī never leaves Vṛndāvana. Saṁyoginī
Rādhā (Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhā’s expansion) brings Kṛṣṇa
to Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhā and, uniting Them, merges
into Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhā.

This is difficult to understand. After hearing for many
days you will understand.

Saṅkarṣaṇa dāsa:

Gurudeva, you have explained that we are not the body.
After hearing this from you, why does māyā cover and
bewilder us to think that we are the body?

                          375
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva:

This is māyā’s power. We have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, and for
this fault māyā punishes us in two ways. First, she acts
by picking us up and throwing us far away from Kṛṣṇa.
Secondly, she gives us a subtle and gross body which
make us think that we are the body, and as a result we
act in a certain way. While undergoing this punishment
of māyā, if by great fortune you happen to meet a sādhu,
you will be released.

Devotee:

Along with saṁyoginī Rādhā, many gopīs went to
Kurukṣetra. Were these the original gopīs, or their
expansions?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

The original gopīs never leave Vṛndāvana. They are kāya-
vyūha expansions of Rādhārāṇī, but they never leave Her
to go elsewhere. When saṁyoginī Rādhā went to
Kurukṣetra, the expansions of Her kāya-vyūha expansions
went with Her.




November 14, 2009


Darśana

Saṣjaya dāsa:

Gurudeva, we are trying by our intelligence to
understand Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu and Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi, but we have no realizations regarding the
moods. Can we be counted as sādhakas?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

You have no realization yet; but if you are on the path
to realizing, then you are a sādhaka.


kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya-

bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya

prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.2)


[When devotional service, by which love for Kṛṣṇa is
attained, is executed by the senses, it is called
sādhana-bhakti, or the regulative discharge of
devotional service. Transcendental devotion eternally
exists within the heart of every living entity. The

                             376
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

awakening of this eternal devotion is the potentiality
of devotional service in practice.]

When devotional services are performed by the eleven
senses for the sake of attaining bhāva-bhakti, that is
called sādhana-bhakti and the performer is called a
sādhaka. Bhāva is nitya-siddha (eternally and perfectly
present, in potency, in the heart of all living
entities), but it is realized by sādhana.

Saṣjaya dāsa:

I try to understand pure bhakti by my intelligence, for
a half-hour or one hour maximum. Then, again I get
absorbed in the material world.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

But you are chanting harināma.

Saṣjaya dāsa:

I am chanting harināma, but however much I try by my
intelligence to properly remember bhakti subjects, I
become again absorbed in the material world – again and
again. I am not able to develop my śraddhā.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

In this way you will gradually progress. One day you
will lose interest in everything material, like me, and
then gradually you will become an uttama mahā-bhāgavata,
a pure devotee. It may happen in this lifetime, or it
may take several lifetimes.

Saṣjaya dāsa:

After gurudeva gives harināma, his disciples begin their
sādhana; some of them seriously and some not so
seriously. Just as the fish maintains its eggs by
vision, turtles by meditation, and birds by physical
closeness, will gurudeva meditate on all his disciples
equally?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

No, not equally. The more a person desires bhakti, the
more he surrenders, the more Kṛṣṇa reciprocates.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Kṛṣṇa reciprocates according to the surrender of the
devotee. So, if Kṛṣṇa’s pure devotees behave like Kṛṣṇa,
how can they be considered more merciful?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

A madhyama can somewhat give mercy, but an uttama can
give it fully; this is certain.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa:

Isn’t gurudeva supposed to be more merciful than Kṛṣṇa?
Or, will he also respond only according to the surrender

                          377
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

of the disciple?

Śrīla Gurudeva:




ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

(Bhagavad-gītā 4.11)


[O Pārtha, in whichever way a person renders service to
Me I reciprocate with him accordingly. Everyone follows
My path in all respects.]

The uttama-adhikārī will behave in such a manner.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

How is one an uttama-adhikārī if he is not more merciful
to devotees than their ratio of surrender?

Umā dīdī:

Gurudeva is giving mercy, and Bhagavān is giving mercy.
But realization of that mercy will come only to the
degree of our surrender?

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Yes. This is correct.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

In this situation, people like me, who are good for
nothing, lose hope because we are very laid-back.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

Gurudeva is the mediator. He has made a contract to take
his disciples to transcendental Vraja.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

Gurudeva is the mediator, so that is how he is more
merciful than Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva:

That is why you first offer your praṇāma to gurudeva.

Anything else?

Sushil dāsa:

What is the meaning of ‘Ramaṇa-bihārī’?


                             378
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva:

‘Ramaṇa’ comes from the root rāma1. Kṛṣṇa performs His
sweet pastimes everywhere – there is not a single
entity, from the ant to the elephant, in whom He does
not reside and perform His pleasure pastimes.




* * *




1 Excerpt from Śrī Harināma Mahā-mantra, ‘Commentaries
on Mahā-mantra’:


The extraordinary beauty of His form (rūpa-lāvaṇya)
always surcharges the minds and senses of the cowherd
damsels with ever-increasing bliss. For this reason He
is glorified as Rāma. (Śruti-śāstra)




Appendix


It was in Odessa, Russia, in September of 2008 that
Śrīla Gurudeva first requested his followers to publish
transcriptions of his morning walks, “so that in the
future everyone will be able to know all the established
truths we have discussed.” He requested a series of
books; one book for each year.

In the course of readying the publication of these walks
and darśanas, the editors considered removing the names
of Śrīla Gurudeva’s spiritual daughters and sons, as
well as the names of others, who were corrected or
chastised by him. They were worried that these persons
would be embarrassed by this, and they worried that his
followers might also feel free to imitate him by
similarly criticizing and chastising others. In response
to their concerns, Śrīla Gurudeva directed them to be
transparent and not omit anything. He said there was no
need for the text to be adjusted in this way. He said
that his correction or chastisement of his own
disciples, or of others, would be beneficial for those
particular individuals as well as for the world. He
added, however, that those who are not self-realized
souls are not at liberty to find fault with others,
because “they have no power to do so.”1 He agreed that
the publishing team include some relevant quotes from
his lectures in this regard, and therefore we are happy
to present them here:


If a high-class, self-realized guru criticizes someone,
that criticism is a blessing and a medicine. That person

                          379
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

should not oppose him, thinking, “Now Gurudeva is
against me.” Rather, he should understand that
Gurudeva’s chastisement is like medicine; his curse and
benediction are one and the same. When a guru chastises,
he is thinking, “I should make this person so fortunate
that he can realize all the truths of pure bhakti.”

(France: 1996)


My instruction is the same as the instruction of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī in Śrī Upadeśāmṛta: never criticize anyone.
If someone is doing bad things, he harms only himself.
But if you criticize him, thinking, “What he is doing is
wrong,” or “This fellow is very bad,” then the bad
qualities you are contemplating will enter your heart.
At the time of death, the Yamadūtas (representatives of
the god of death) will come to punish you first. Always
try to remember the good qualities of real Vaiṣṇavas and
of Kṛṣṇa, by hearing, chanting, and remembering hari-
kathā.

(Badger, California: June 26, 1997)


Do not criticize anyone. You can correct a person only
if you can change him. For example, Nalakūvara and
Maṇigrīva were doing wrong, so Nārada came to them and
cursed them out of pity. He did not pay specific
attention to what they were doing. He considered only
this: “Oh, their lives have gone in vain. How shall I
reform them?” It was only because he had the power to do
what was necessary that he pointed out their fault.
Thus, his curse turned out to be a benediction.

(Johor Bahru, Malaysia: January 27, 2009)


If you find that your mind is criticizing others, simply
turn it away and forcibly focus it on Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

It is very, very difficult to bring someone from the
clutches of māyā. Whatever lust and other attachments
are present in that person’s heart will go away very
soon if he is chanting, remembering, and listening to
hari-kathā. Be very careful. First look at your own
condition and try to purify yourself. Is there any lust
in you? Is there any deceit and hypocrisy in you? Be
worried about that; do not worry about others. Guru and
Kṛṣṇa are responsible for others. You cannot do anything
to help them, so you have no right to criticize. This
instruction is for all.



(Hilo, Hawaii: February 7, 2005)


One should think oneself lower and more worthless than
insignificant grass that has been trampled beneath
everyone’s feet. One should be more tolerant than a
tree, without pride, and ready to offer respect to all
others according to their respective positions. In such
a humble state of mind, one can chant the holy name of

                          380
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrī Hari constantly. All devotees should follow this
principle, especially sannyāsīs, giving honor to others.
Don’t worry about what others are doing. Don’t look to
see whether others are doing nonsense or acting
improperly. Don’t criticize anyone. Rather, ask
yourself, “How well am I developing in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness? Am I following tṛṇād api sunicena, taror
api sahiṣṇunā, amāninā mānadena?”

(Murwillumbah, Australia: April 29, 2005)




* * *




1 You can find a transcription of this conversation in
the appendix of Walking with a Saint, 2008.




About Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


On the sacred and auspicious day of Maunī Amāvasyā,
1921, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
took his divine birth in a devout Vaiṣṇava family in
Tivārīpura, in the state of Bihar, India.

In February, 1946, he met his gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and his life of
complete and exemplary dedication to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism,
or the path of kṛṣṇa-bhakti in the line of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, began to manifest.

He accompanied his gurudeva on his extensive preaching
tours throughout India, actively assisting him in
propagating the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu for
the eternal benefit of the living entities in this
world. This included regularly hosting the thousands of
pilgrims attending the yearly circumambulation of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, the appear-ance place of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the appearance
place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

His gurudeva had instructed him to translate the
writings of prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas into Hindi, a
task he assiduously assumed throughout his entire life
and which resulted in the publication of nearly fifty
Hindi sacred texts. Later, most of these invaluable
masterpieces were translated into English and other
major languages of the world.

For many years, he traveled throughout India to spread
the message of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, and it was for this
end, also, that in 1996, he journeyed abroad. During the
next fourteen years, he circled the globe more than

                          381
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

thirty times. Whether he was in India or abroad, his
preaching always bore the distinctive characteristic of
boldly unmasking any misconception obscuring the
specific purposes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s advent,
in strict adherence to the desire of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda and in
perfect congruence with the conceptions of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s foremost follower.
Thus, in present times, in upholding the glorious tenets
of the Gauḍīya sampradāya, he performed the function of
a true ācārya.

At the age of ninety years, on December 29, 2010, he
concluded his pastimes in this world at Cakratīrtha, in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma. The following day, in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, Śrī Gaurasundara’s fully empowered
emissary, the very embodiment of His unique compassion,
was given samādhi. He will never cease to reside in his
divine instructions and in the hearts of those who are
devoted to him.




English titles published by

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


Arcana-dīpikā • Beyond Nīrvāṇa • Bhagavad-gītā •
Bhajana-rahasya • Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindu-bindu • Bhakti-
rasāyana • Bhakti-tattva-viveka • Brahma-saṁhitā •
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Vol. 2.1) • Butter Thief • Caitanya
Mahāprabhu – The Original Form of Godhead • Camatkāra-
candrikā – A Moonbeam of Complete Astonishment •
Controlled by Love • Dāmodarāṣṭakam • Discerning the
True Sentiments of the Soul • Distinctive Contribution
of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī • Essence of All Advice • Essence of
Bhagavad-gītā • Eternal Function of the Soul • Fearless
Prince • Five Essential Essays • Gauḍīya Gītī-Guccha •
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism versus Sahajiyāism • Gaura-vāṇī
Pracāriṇe • Gift of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu • Gīta-
govinda • Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha • Gopī-gīta • Guru-
devatātmā • Happiness in a Fool’s Paradise • Harināma
Mahā-mantra • Harmony • Hidden Path of Devotion •
Impressions of Bhakti • Jaiva-dharma • Journey of the
Soul • Kṛṣṇa – the Lord of Sweetness • Letters From
America • Maharṣi Durvāsā and Śrī Durvāsā-āśrama •
Manaḥ-śikṣa • My Śikṣā-guru and Priya-bandhu •
Navadvīpa-dhāma Māhātmya • Navadvīpa-dhāma Parikramā •
Nectar of Govinda-līlā • Śrī Jagannātha Ratha-yātrā •
Our Eternal Nature • Our Gurus: One in Siddhanta, One at
Heart • Pinnacle of Devotion • Prabandhāvalī • Prema-
sampuṭa • Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā • Rāga-vartma-
candrikā • Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda • Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ
• Secrets of the Undiscovered Self • Secret Truths of
the Bhāgavatam • Shower of Love • Śikṣāṣṭaka • Śiva-
tattva • Ślokāmṛtam • Ślokāmṛtam-bindu • Soul of Book
Distribution • Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
– His Life and Teachings • Their Lasting Relation • To
Be Controlled by Love • True Conception of Guru-tattva •
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa • Upadeśāmṛta • Utkalikā-vallarī
• Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā • Veṇu-gīta • Śrī Vraja-

                          382
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017

maṇḍala Parikramā • Walking with a Saint (2007, 2008,
2009, 2010) • Way of Love • Rays of the Harmonist
(periodical)




Gaudiya Vedanta Publications (GVP)


publishes, preserves and distributes the books of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. For more
information on the contents of these books, please
visit:




www.purebhakti.com

for news, updates, and free downloads of books, lectures
and bhajanas.




www.purebhakti.tv

to watch and hear classes online, or get links and
scheduled updates for live webcasts




www.harikatha.com

to receive, by email, the lectures and videos of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja on his
world tours




If you are interested to know more about the books,
lectures, audio recordings, videos, teachings, and the
international society of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, please contact us at

connectwithussoon@gmail.com




or find a center in your area on

www.purebhakti.com/contact-us



                          383
Walking-With-a-Saint-2009-_1Ed-2011_.txt       5/8/2017




YOUR COMMENTS AND FEEDBACK



We humbly invite our readers to submit any errors they
may find in this publication at

www.purebhakti.com/gvp




YOUR SUPPORT



If you would like to support GVP’s publication,
preservation and distribution of Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s books, you
can:




sponsor the endowment fund of a printed book will assure
that when a book is first printed, there will always be
funding to keep that book in print. For more
information, please visit

www.mygvp.com




sponsor books for the GVP Book Distribution Program.
This program is a federally approved 501 c3 non-profit
religious organization that places Śrīla Gurudeva’s
books in stores, libraries, prisons, hospitals, and many
other locations. It makes the books available to all
people at no cost or low cost. For more information,
please visit

www.gvpbookdistribution.com




                             384
