Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

Walking with a Saint 2010



* * *




Morning Walks and Conversations with




Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




© 2015 Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights
Reserved.



To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/



Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

Digital Edition:



ePub: ISBN 978-1-63316-082-8

Kindle: ISBN 978-1-63316-083-5

Printed Edition:

ISBN 978-1-935428-99-2

First Edition: December, 2014 (2,000 copies)

Photo of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja ©
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, Intl. Used with permission.
www.krishna.com

Translation of quoted verses that are marked with an
asterisk (*) are by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja ©
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International. All other verse
translations are by Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

Contributors




                            1
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

Editing

• Brajanāth dāsa, Balabhadra dāsa (England), Dāmodara
dāsa (Toronto), Sudevī dāsī (Malaysia), Śyāmarāṇī dāsī •
Editorial consultation

• Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja, Brajanāth dāsa, Balabhadra
dāsa, Mañjarī dāsī (Vṛndāvana), Vaijayantī-mālā dāsī •
Sound files

• Īśa dāsa (Purebhakti.tv) • Sound file fidelity check

• Lolā-devī dāsī • Layout

• Jānakī dāsī • Proofreading

• Jaya Govinda dāsa (from Finland), Kāntā dāsī, Sanātana
dāsa, Sulatā dāsī • Reader Input

• Ratikalā dāsī, Vasanti dāsī • Transcriptions

• Devānanda dāsa, Keśava dāsa, Rādhikā dāsī
(California), Vasanti dāsī, Viṣṇurāta dāsa • Typed
corrections

• Jayaśrī dāsī (Kentuky), Lalit-kiśorī dāsī, Mādhavī
dāsī (Alachua) • Cover and Layout Design

• Anupama dāsa (Mexico) • Cover photo

• Dhruva dāsa • Inside photos

• Anurādhā dāsī, Kṛṣṇamayī dāsī, Madhuvrata dāsa,
Subala-sakhā dāsa, Tuṅgavidyā dāsī, Vasanti dāsī • Verse
reference check

• Kumudinī dāsī • Translation of the Hindi walks and
darśanas

• Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja, Damayantī dāsī (Brisbane),
Rāgalekhā dāsī, Karuṇā dāsī (Brisbane), Sundara-gopāla
dāsa • Production Co-ordination

• Vasanti dāsī • Acknowledgements

• Alexander Muir, Ānitā dāsī, Gaura-priya dāsī (Los
Angeles), Kiśorī-mohana dāsa, Mālinī dāsī (Canada/Los
Angeles), Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa (England) • ePub Encoding

• Sanātana dāsa




Contents


Editor’s Introduction

Note to the Reader

Pietermaritzburg, South Aftrica


                            2
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

January 5, 2010 – Morning Walk

January 5, 2010 – Darśana After the Walk

January 6, 2010 – Morning Walk

Durban, South Africa

January 8, 2010 – Darśana After the Walk

January 8, 2010 – Dharma Moments TV Interview

Sao Paulo, Brazil

January 15, 2010 – Morning Walk

January 15, 2010 - Morning Darśana with ISKCON Gurukula
Alumni

January 15, 2010 – Pure Bhakti-Yoga Society Interview

January 17, 2010 – Morning Walk

January 17, 2010 – Darśana After the Walk

Johannesburg, South Africa

January 29, 2010 – Darśana

New Delhi, India

March 6, 2010 – Darśana

Govardhana, India

March 14, 2010 – Morning Walk

March 16, 2010 – Morning Walk

March 19, 2010 – Morning Walk

March 20, 2010 – Morning Walk

Frankfurt, Germany

March 28, 2010 – Interview for a Magazine Article

Orlando, Florida

May 24, 2010 – Darśana

May 26, 2010 – Morning Walk

May 27, 2010 – Morning Walk

May 28, 2010 – Morning Walk

Houston, Texas

May 30, 2010 – Morning Walk

May 31, 2010 – Hindi Darśana

Badger, California

                              3
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt     5/8/2017


June 11, 2010 - Morning Walk

June 12, 2010 – Morning Walk

June 12, 2010 – Darśana After the Walk

June 12, 2010 – Darśana

June 13, 2010 – Morning Walk

June 14, 2010 – Morning Walk

Ojai, California

June 16, 2010 – Morning Walk

June 16, 2010 – Evening Darśana

June 18, 2010 – Darśana

June 19, 2010 – Darśana

June 20, 2010 – Darśana

June 23, 2010 – Darśana

Marina di Massa, Italy

July 2, 2010 – Morning Walk

July 3, 2010 – Morning Walk

July 4, 2010 – Morning Walk

July 5, 2010 – Darśana

July 6, 2010 – Morning Walk

July 6, 2010 – Darśana for the Dutch Saṅga

July 7, 2010 – Morning Walk

July 7, 2010 – Darśana After the Walk

July 8, 2010 – Morning Walk

July 9, 2010 – Morning Walk

Massarosa, Italy

July 15, 2010 – Darśana

New Delhi, India

August 1, 2010 – Darśana

August 2, 2010 – Darśana

August 3, 2010 – Darśana

Ethnomir, Russia

August 11, 2010 – Morning Darśana

                              4
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


August 11, 2010 – Afternoon Darśana

August 13, 2010 – Darśana

Moscow, Russia

August 14, 2010 – Last Airport Darśana, Domodedomo
Airport

New Delhi, India

August 31, 2010 – Morning Walk

August 31, 2010 – Evening Walk

Mathurā, India

September 5, 2010 – Darśana

New Delhi, India

September 16, 2010 – Copyright Darśana

Govardhana, India

November 13, 2010 – Darśana

November 21, 2010 – Darśana

Appendix 1: How to Read Śrīla Gurudeva's Books

Appendix 2: Copyright License

Appendix 3: Śrīla Gurudeva's Final Manifest Pastimes in
this World

Glossary

About the Author

Book List

Websites




Editor’s Introduction


It is well known throughout the world that association
with a saintly person has one profound effect: it
changes the heart. The Vedic scriptures explain that
this is due to the purity of the saint, which comes from
his absorption in the Absolute Truth. An element of his
saintly qualities enters our heart and we thus yearn for
absorption like his.

The words of a saint are eternally beneficial for all.
Even reading accounts of those fortunate to have walked
and talked with him can stir our spirit and we, also,
can feel ourselves to be with him. They are not just

                              5
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

words on paper but the living presence of the saint’s
fathomless grace and wisdom.

Lord Kṛṣṇa’s intimate associate, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī,
spoke the essence of Vedic literature, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, over 5,000 years ago, just after Kṛṣṇa’s
departure from the world’s vision. Yet his words are as
vital today as they were then, for all realized souls as
well as for we who are bereft of spiritual vision due to
the dense darkness of this age of quarrel and hypocrisy.

The Lord’s associate, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, revealed the
most confidential of all Vedic wisdom 500 years ago, and
still today he is nourishing the hearts of fortunate
souls throughout the world.

In this book, Walking with a Saint 2010, you will have
the rare fortune to meet, walk with, and hear directly
from another of Kṛṣṇa’s associates, that is, Śrīla
Gurudeva Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who
has come in a disciplic succession of spiritual masters
of the same calibre as him. Herein he gives his powerful
words of spiritual guidance, which flow in a stream from
the hearts of these enlightened beings and are always
fresh and illuminating. Although he left the vision of
this mortal world in December of 2010, his profound,
purifying presence is perceived by fortunate souls who
read, hear, and remember his words.

These transcriptions of Śrīla Gurudeva’s morning walks
and other conversations have no sound or video
accompaniment. Therefore they do not contain his
laughter, his soft, sweet voice so full of tender
compassion, and his intonations which reveal further
meanings. One who reads sincerely, however, will
experience the sweetness and depth of his nature and
personal dealings.

In previous years, Śrīla Gurudeva would give elaborate
replies to the questions he received during his walks
and informal meetings. But you will notice that in this
2010 book, he generally gives short answers. This was
one of the specialties of his final manifest pastimes
with us mortal beings. He was entering more and more
into deep, internal, transcendental states of
consciousness, indicating that very soon his
disappearance pastime would take place. His brief
answers also indirectly indicated that in his books,
lectures, and previous walks and informal conversations,
he had already said and written everything he wanted to
give the world. Now we are able to approach him through
those doors, ever-increasingly.

Since he instructed his editors to publish all of his
morning walks, we knew that we must publish these last
walks as well. Besides the fact that these walks are
especially historical (as they are his last), it is
stated in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta that even one eleventh
part of a moment’s association with such a self-realized
saint is enough to change the direction of a living
entity who comes in contact with him and award the
complete perfection of life – pure, selfless love of
God.


                           6
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017

Who is the self-realized saint you will be walking with
and hearing from in this book, and what are his
qualities? What is it about such gurus, or spiritual
masters, that enthuses the depths of the heart of the
sincere spiritual seeker?

Some of the answers to these questions will come to you
intuitively. Just by your reading this book, you will
feel something supra-mundane. But also, we’d like to
share with you some things about him that have been
revealed in Vedic literature. With our naked eye we
perceive the sun-globe to be some glaring substance, but
when we see through authorized books of science, we can
understand how much greater and more powerful it is than
this Earth planet. Similarly, seeing through the eye of
Vedic scripture gives clearer vision about the self-
realized soul than does our naked eye.

Śrī Guru is an Empowered Manifestation of the Supreme
Lord


All the demigods and their exalted qualities, such as
religion, knowledge and renunciation, become manifest in
the body of one who has developed unalloyed devotion for
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva [Kṛṣṇa].*

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.18.12)


The true ācārya, the spiritual master of the entire
world, must be considered an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa’s
mercy. Indeed, he is personally embracing Kṛṣṇa.*

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 7.12),

purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja


So this Paramātmā [the Supersoul, the Lord in the hearts
of all beings] is also an incarnation of God. And the
same Paramātmā, when He comes before you, being very
much merciful upon you, to teach you from outside, that
is guru.*

Lecture by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja,

October 1, 1972, in Los Angeles


An authorized spiritual master    empowered by Kṛṣṇa can
spread the glories of the holy    name of the Lord, for he
has power of attorney from the    Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In the mundane world,    anyone possessing his
master’s power of attorney can    act on behalf of his
master.*

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 10.136),

purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja


By their actions the pure devotees of the Lord can
render any place into a place of pilgrimage, and the

                              7
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

holy places are worth the name only on their account.
Such pure devotees are able to rectify the polluted
atmosphere of any place.*

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.13.10),

purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja


Even a moments association with a pure devotee cannot be
compared to being transferred to heavenly planets or
even merging into the brahma effulgence in complete
liberation. For living entities who are destined to give
up the body and die, association with pure devotees is
the highest benediction.*

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.30.34)

Śrī Guru, The Pure Devotee, is All-knowing


Kṛṣṇa and His representative are the same. Just like
Kṛṣṇa can be present simultaneously in millions of
places. Similarly, the spiritual master also can be
present wherever the disciple wants. A spiritual master
is the principle, not the body. Just like a television
can be seen in thousands of places by the principle of
relay monitoring.*

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja’s letter to Mālatī,

May 28, 1968


Bharadvaja

: I understand, Śrīla Prabhupāda, that the pure devotee
can be as pervasive as Supersoul? By the mercy of
Supersoul, he can be present in many places at once?


Prabhupāda

: Yes. By the grace of Kṛṣṇa, a devotee can become
anything.


Duryodhana-guru

: So in other words that means the pure devotees can be
omniscient?


Prabhupāda

: Everything. God is omniscient, so a pure devotee can
become omniscient by the grace of God.*



Morning Walk with Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja,

June 8, 1976, in Los Angeles


                              8
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


This is called tri-kala-jña: past, present and future.
So Yamarāja or Lord Brahmā or great personalities, and
even great sages, saintly persons, they know the three
features of time.*

Lecture by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja,

June 14, 1976, in Detroit


“My lord [Nārada Muni]! Everything that is mysterious is
known to you because you worship the creator and
destroyer of the material world and the maintainer of
the spiritual world, the original Personality of
Godhead, who is transcendental to the three modes of
material nature.” PURPORT: … As such, the eightfold
perfections of mystic power (aṣṭa-siddhi) constitute
very little of his godly opulence.*

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.6),

purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja


Agādha-dhiṣaṇam dvijam: the ācārya is a perfect brāhmaṇa
and has unlimited intelligence in guiding the activities
of his disciple.*

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.7.15),

purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja


The Vedic mantras say: yasmin vijñāte sarvam evaṁ
vijñātaṁ bhavati. When the devotee sees the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by his meditation, or when he
sees the Lord personally, face to face, he becomes aware
of everything within this universe. Indeed, nothing is
unknown to him. Everything within this material world is
fully manifested to a devotee who has seen the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.*

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (8.6.9),

purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja


All-cognizant – the 52nd quality of Kṛṣṇa and His pure
devotees: "Any person who can understand the feelings of
all persons and incidents in all places at all times is
called all-cognizant."*

Nectar of Devotion (Chapter 22)


Although a devotee may apparently express himself to be
ignorant, he is full of knowledge in every intricate
matter.*

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.7.8,

purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja


                              9
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017


On the contrary, I see so many who are covering what is
there in their hearts. Such persons think, ‘Mygurudeva
doesn’t know anything; he is foolish. I can cheat him.’
They don’t say this directly, but they think in this
way. They think they can bluff a pure devotee, but a
pure devotee cannot be bluffed. How can you bluff he who
can control Kṛṣṇa? If one is really guru, he can never
be cheated or bluffed. You should know the identity of
guru.

Lecture by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja,

January 24, 2001, in Murwillumbah

He Is Not an Ordinary Human Being, He Is Transcendental


Such a person is an eternally liberated associate of the
Lord, and his body is completely spiritualized. Although
he is visible to material eyes, he is spiritually
situated, and all his activities are spiritual. By the
will of Kṛṣṇa, such a devotee is understood to possess a
spiritual body.*

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 5.49–50)


The eternal form of the ācāryadeva [śrī guru] is
composed of knowledge and bliss, and remains
constitutionally unchangeable – just like a dramatic
performer who appears to go through various
transformations during his performance, but remains the
same unaltered person.

Rays of The Harmonist #16, Kārtika 2006,

“Remembering Śrīla Prabhupāda”

by Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja


The Lord comes to this material world through the agency
of His internal potency, and similarly, when a devotee
or associate of the Lord descends to this material
world, he does so through the action of the spiritual
energy.*

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.1.35),

purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja


As the contamination of the germs of a particular
disease can influence a weaker person, similarly the
influence of material nature, or illusory energy, can
act on the weaker, or conditioned soul but not on the
liberated soul.*

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.18),

purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja

He Is Eternal

                              10
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017



And thus the sun fails to rob the pure devotee of his
duration of life, inasmuch as he is constantly busy in
the devotional service of the Lord, purifying his
existence. Death is a symptom of the material infection
of the eternal living being; only due to material
infection is the eternal living entity subjected to the
law of birth, death, old age and disease.*

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.3.17),

purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja


For example, Rāmānuja took initiation from a guru of low
caste who was a disciple of Yāmunācārya, and later
Rāmānuja wanted to take the renounced order from
Yāmunācārya himself. When he reached Śrī Raṅgam, he saw
that Yāmunācārya had just left this world, and his
divine body was coming in procession for being given
samādhi. He saw that three fingers of Yāmunācārya’s hand
were closed. He asked some other disciples of
Yāmunācārya why this was so, but they could not answer.
He then promised, “I will take sannyāsa here, from him.
Just now I am taking sannyāsa.” And at that moment one
of his gurudeva’s fingers relaxed and opened. Then he
promised, “I will write a commentary on Vedānta.” The
second finger became relaxed. Then he promised, “I will
preach pure bhakti and I will write many bhakti books,”
and at once the third finger relaxed and opened. He thus
accepted Yāmunācārya as his sannyāsa-guru, knowing, “My
gurudeva did not die; he is eternal.”

Discerning the True Sentiments of the Soul, Part 3,

“True Guru is Eternal”


By using the words ‘birth’ and ‘death,’ a kind of
mournful mood, full of disbelief, grief, and lamentation
arises in the heart. But such moods do not arise when we
use words like avirbhāva and tirobhāva(appearance and
disappearance), or prakaṭa and aprakaṭa (manifest and
unmanifest). Factually, for the Vaiṣṇava [pure devotee],
pain is completely absent in his appearance and
disappearance, unlike the experience of birth and death.

We understand this from a statement from Śrī Caitanya-
bhāgavata, the scripture describing the pastimes of Śrī
Caitanyadeva: Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is still
performing His pastimes to this day, but only a few,
very fortunate souls can see them.



Rays of The Harmonist #25, Tirobhāva Edition 2011,

“Transcendental Vaiṣṇavas – Non-different in Body and
Soul”

by Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Some Things about the Book

                              11
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva’s full honorific title is Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. For the
respected readers’ ease, whenever he is speaking in the
text, he is called ‘Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja.’
When we, the editors, refer to him otherwise in the
text, we use the title ‘Śrīla Gurudeva.’

Following the tradition of our spiritual preceptors, we
use standard diacritical markings to indicate the
pronunciation of the Sanskrit words. Pronounce ā

like a in fa

ther, ī

like ea in nea

t, ū

like oo in roo

t, ṛ

like ri in ri

p, ṁ

and ṇ

like ng in hung

, ś

and ṣ

like sh in sh

y, and c

like ch in ch

ap.

The ancient Sanskrit and Bengali verses and terms quoted
by Śrīla Gurudeva in the text are always accompanied by
an English translation. You will be happy to know that
whenever a Sanskrit word needs further explanation, you
will find a glossary in the back.

On occasion, the editors have given further background
information on the topics that are being discussed, or
have described certain going-on’s during the morning
walk or darśana (for example, ‘the devotees show
Gurudeva a picture’) by adding footnotes, endnotes, or
bracketed statements within the text. Unless otherwise
referenced, these interventions were all written by the
editors and are based on the explanations of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

You will also be happy to know that we added an appendix
in the back of the book, which includes beautiful
inspiration from Śrīla Gurudeva himself regarding how to
read his books in such a way as to get the quickest and

                           12
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

highest spiritual benefit.

Despite our best efforts, we may make some mistakes in
presenting Śrīla Gurudeva’s words. We invite you to
assist in correcting any errors for the next print run.
You can submit what you deem to be an error at
www.purebhakti.com/gvp.




Your aspiring servants,

The Editors

Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta

Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s disappearance day,

December 15, 2014




Note to the Reader


Throughout the year 2010, Śrīla Gurudeva was gradually
preparing his followers for the fact that soon he would
be entering nitya-līlā. As the months progressed, he
showed his disciples that he was less and less in
external consciousness and more exclusively absorbed in
transcendental līlā. As the words on paper don’t always
fully convey Śrīla Gurudeva’s deep mood, we would like
to encourage the reader to also listen to the sound
files of the morning walks and darśanas that are
presented here. To download these sound files, please go
to www.purebhakti.tv and look for the dates mentioned in
this book.




January 5, 2010


Morning Walk

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

This is Roy. He is a member of our saṅga. One thing,
though. He has some attachment. He needs some help.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Where are you from originally?

Brajanāth dāsa:

He is from Central India. His forefathers are from
India, but he is living in South Africa.

                             13
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


[To Roy] Do you speak Hindi?

Roy:

Very little.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

He is doing lots of sevā, but he has some attachments –
maybe meat.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do you know the meaning of meat? Me-eat. Those who you
have eaten are standing in a row to take revenge. They
will kill you and eat you. “Māṁ sa khādati – Those who
you are eating will eat you.” So, be fearful. Don’t take
meat, eggs, or any other forbidden things. Otherwise, in
a future life you will become a dog, cat, donkey,
monkey, and so on; and people will kill and eat you. So,
be careful. Only ignorant persons eat meat.

Acyuta dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, ever since we have been advertising your
programs in South Africa, ISKCON has been organizing
programs with sannyāsīs and senior musicians on the same
days and in the same city as your programs. Under the
circumstances, what should be our mood towards ISKCON?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Don’t bother about it. They should preach; no harm. And
we will preach also. But they should not disturb our
programs.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

What if we go to their programs and distribute
invitations there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What is the necessity? There is none. Why disturb them?
They will be disturbed.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Gurudeva, they are saying, “Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is
traveling everywhere, always coming near our temples to
do programs.” But actually, we see that wherever you are
going, they purposely come nearby to do programs.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are all fearful. They are fearful that those who
come to hear Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja will not return to them;
rather those persons will become mine.

On one hand they came to me in Govardhana apologizing
[for banning Śrīla Gurudeva from coming to ISKCON
temples and for not allowing ISKCON devotees to hear
from him], saying, “We want the same relationship as

                           14
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

before.” I told them, “I am very happy to hear this.”
They said that they [the GBC members] will decide what
to do in Māyāpura at the time of the holy Gaura Pūrṇimā
Festival.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Gopāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja came, Badrī-Nārāyaṇa, Lokanātha
Mahārāja, and others came, and they all asked for
forgiveness from Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

All the prominent GBC members came. The chairman also
came. But on the other hand they are doing this here.

Acyuta dāsa:

Gurudeva, this is Mukunda Prabhu. He is doing all the
cooking for these two days.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Expert?

Acyuta dāsa:

Yes, expert.

Mukunda dāsa:

We thank you Gurudeva, for coming and giving us your
darśana.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

All of his family members are your disciples.




January 5, 2010


Darśana

After the Walk

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Today and tomorrow, what subject shall we discuss in
class? Where is Sajjana Mahārāja?

Acyuta dāsa:

Gurudeva, you said on the morning walk that you will
talk about the meaning of bhakti and how one can be
happy only by doing bhakti. You said you will discuss
why one should do bhajana.

And also, because there will be many new people, can you
speak about who is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu?


                            15
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They don’t know?

Acyuta dāsa:

Many of them don’t know. And you can discuss your
relationship with Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Is that okay?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

Yes. You often speak about your relationship with our
Śrīla Prabhupāda, and also the importance of initiation
from a bona fide guru.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I want to tell about my relationship with him, and also
about the śikṣā-guru being not less than the dīkṣā-guru.
In a letter, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja accepted
me as his [śikṣā] disciple.

So, I am not ISKCON, but rather the mother and father of
ISKCON. It was from our guru-paramparā, from my
gurudeva, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja,
that Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja took sannyāsa.
He took harināma and dīkṣā from Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī. So he is in that line, and I am also
in that line. But it is they [those who assert that
Śrīla Gurudeva is not in the line of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja] who are not in line.

And why, at the last moment before Śrīla Svāmī
Mahārāja’s departure from the vision of this world, did
he tell me to give his samādhi? Why? His god-brother Bon
Mahārāja was there in Vṛndāvana, and all his disciples,
like Tamāla-kṛṣṇa and Bhavānanda, were there as well.
But he didn’t request any of them to do so. Why did he
choose me? It is because I am his first and real
disciple.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī:

And you are his real successor.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. They can fall down. I cannot fall down.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, before Śrīla Svāmī Mahārāja Prabhupāda founded
ISKCON, he co-founded Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti with your
guru mahārāja. And you were both the secretary and vice-
president of that Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti.

Acyuta dāsa:

Śrīla Gurudeva, we have developed a relationship with
the public and with members of Hindu temples. Also,

                            16
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

ISKCON phoned me and told me that they want to have a
good, cordial relationship with us.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

We should do that, no harm. But why are they making
propaganda against us? And why are they not having their
programs on another day? This is a symptom that they do
not want a relationship.

They can come to our programs and give classes, or we
can go to their programs and give classes. Are they
ready? You can ask them. That would be very good; they
should come to our classes. But actually, they don’t
want a relationship.




January 6, 2010


Morning Walk

Acyuta dāsa:

We informed everybody of your relationship with Svāmījī,
A. C. Bhaktivedānta Śrīla Prabhupāda. And now everybody
knows all the propaganda against you is false.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Distribute that book, Letters from America1.

Acyuta dāsa:

Yes. We will do that.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Very, very nice program.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

The book sales were good. Many people took books.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

How many?

Devotee:

I’m not sure, Gurudeva. I haven’t gotten the figures for
yesterday’s book sales.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I think more than 600.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Oh, you mean people. More than 350 people.


                             17
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Devotee:

500.

Devotee:

I counted 480.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Tapana Miśra dāsa] You have brought your guitar?
Will you sing today?

Tapana Miśra dāsa:

I will try, Gurudeva.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Ānanda-vardana Prabhu and his wife do professional
singing together.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

So you will sing today? :

Ānanda-vardana dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, yes. First you will sing, and then we will begin.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, this is Yasin. He likes you, but he is a
little afraid to take initiation. He is not sure if he
wants to take initiation, because ISKCON is putting some
pressure on him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He can take.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, this time 400-500 people. Next time you come,
1,000 people.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Next time?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Yes, because this time is the first time. Then next
time…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The hall is small.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

                             18
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017


They will get a big, big hall.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

In Durban, 1,000 people.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The program was very good.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Very, very good.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Kiśorī-mohana and his saṅkīrtana maṇḍala did so nicely.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

So, he should take harināma?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why not? Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura was Muslim, and so many
from Iran and Turkey have taken initiation.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He goes to ISKCON and has so many friends there, so he
is thinking about whether or not he should take
initiation from you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No. Don’t worry. You should take harināma.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Gurudeva, how did Rāmānujācārya see Kṛṣṇa? Did he see
him as Nārāyaṇa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

His worshipful Deity is Viṣṇu, or Nārāyaṇa.2

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

And Madhvācārya?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He saw Kṛṣṇa as Bāla-gopāla, as Yaśodā-nandana.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

As Svayam Bhagavān?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes. That is why Mahāprabhu came in his sampradāya. He
also saw Kṛṣṇa as gopī-upāsanā [He who is worshiped by
the gopīs or He who worships the gopīs].

                             19
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


Kiśorī-mohana dāsa:

I have a question. What is the duty of a disciple when
someone spreads false information about his guru? What
would you do, Gurudeva, if someone spreads false
propaganda about your gurudeva?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The disciple should defeat all of that person’s
arguments. If he cannot do that, he should cover his
ears, come back home, and take a bath wearing all his
clothes, because his clothes have now become
contaminated.

Kiśorī-mohana dāsa:

And if someone has made false allegations against your
gurudeva, our parama-gurudeva, what would you do?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I would beat him, meaning that I would destroy all his
arguments by śāstric evidence.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

So Gurudeva, for the devotees in South Africa, in the
future or even now, if someone makes some false
allegations against you – should they very, very
strongly, without regard for the public, make that
person speechless by smashing all his arguments? Here in
South Africa, the devotees are thinking that it is
better to go softly because of their concern for public
opinion.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If they are powerful enough, then they can do so, but if
they are not as powerful as the offenders, they should
leave immediately.




* * *




1 Letters from America is a collection of some of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja’s letters to Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja.



2 His Deity is Viṭṭhalanātha, who is Nārāyaṇa.




                           20
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


January 8, 2010


Darśana

After the Walk

[During the walk]

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

If you could stay here for more days, the preaching
would be very big, but there is no time.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Five days program: three or four days in
Pietermaritzburg and then two days here.

[After the walk]

Cāru-candrikā dāsī:

Gurudeva, they gave us the hall for free last night, and
they even did the decorations for free.

Vasanti dāsī:

[showing My Śikṣā-guru and Priya-bandhu, Their Lasting
Relation, and Our Gurus, One in Siddhānta, One in Heart]
Gurudeva, we gave everybody these books for free last
night.1

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Free?

Vasanti dāsī:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[Pointing to one of the three books] And this also?

Vasanti dāsī:

Yes, everybody was grabbing them.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Do we have more for tonight’s program?

Kiśorī-mohana dāsa:

Yes, 2,000 more of each are coming tonight.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Sponsored?

Vasanti dāsī:


                             21
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Yes, sponsored [by Mahā-mantra dāsa and Anurādhā dāsī].

Kiśorī-mohana dāsa:

The devotees at the book table said that everyone rushed
to the table for these books especially.

Cāru-candrikā dāsī:

Many people are buying your books, in Pietermaritzburg
and here as well. They are buying sets of books.

Vasanti dāsī:

The book table is so crowded. So many are taking your
books and posters.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[to Acyuta dāsa] What books you have, you should
distribute.

Acyuta has a stock of books.

Vasanti dāsī:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You cannot finish.

Vasanti dāsī:

We’re trying.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[to Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja] Oh, you spoke very well
last night. By hearing you speak on stage, he [Prince
Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the Traditional Prime Minister of
the Zulu Nation] could understand that we don’t
discriminate between black and white – no caste or
creed.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

He was a very nice man, Śrīla Gurudeva. I spoke to him
after the program.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Now you should prepare.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

He told the Prime Minister that it will be better if he
would surrender to Gurudeva and do bhajana.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

I have his card, so I will speak to him again. He is a
very nice man.


                            22
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

What is tonight’s subject?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Tenth Canto: Kṛṣṇa’s birth, dāmodara-līlā, then brahma-
vimohana-līlā, and then at the end I will touch on the
vraja-gopīs – mādhurya samarpayet [meaning “all should
end sweetly”]. In total it is a five days program here.
So many books will be distributed and so many will take
initiation. If I knew this before, I may have come
earlier.




January 8, 2010


Dharma Moments

TV Interview

Charles:

What does it mean to be following in your guru’s
footsteps?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Before I came to serve the mission of my gurudeva full-
time, I was a police-officer. I had the good fortune to
meet the disciples of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura, who preached the message of sanātana-dharma
throughout India and the entire world. I met one of his
main disciples, Śrī Narottamānanda Brahmacārī, where I
was residing in Tiwaripur. Hearing his lecture, I became
so attracted that I left my house, wife, and children,
and moved into the temple. After this, I received so
many teachings from my spiritual master.

Then I took initiation from him, and from him I could
understand the guru-paramparā and the necessity of the
disciplic succession. From him I heard that we are not
this material body. Under the misconception that, “I am
this body,” the souls of this world have completely
forgotten their relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Because of this
forgetfulness, they are constantly transmigrating
throughout thousands of cycles of creation and
dissolution, and they are not able to find any
happiness. From this guru-paramparā and from hearing the
teachings of my spiritual master, I understood that the
goal of life is devotion to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa and
to go back to God, back to home.

This guru-paramparā began with the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa
Himself. He instructed His teachings to the first
created being, Brahmā. Brahmā instructed his disciple,
Nārada, Nārada instructed his disciple, Vyāsa, and in
this way the teachings came down to Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, the Six Gosvāmīs, Śrīla Narottama dāsa
Ṭhākura, Śrī Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Śrī Śyāmānanda, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura, then to my gurudeva, and I am receiving these

                             23
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

teachings from him. I am now traveling throughout large
and small countries, and giving people the chance to
hear this same message of sanātana-dharma.

What is sanātana-dharma? It is the teaching that the
individual soul is eternal, the Supreme Lord is eternal,
and our relationship with the Supreme Lord is our
eternal natural function (dharma). When the individual
soul becomes situated in his dharma, he becomes happy.

Hearing these instructions, I left everything, moved
into the maṭha, and gradually began engaging in giving
this message to others. By following the programs in the
maṭha, I could appreciate the great benefit I was
receiving and knew that by instructing others there
would be so much benefit for them. With this intention I
am traveling the entire world, giving this message that
I heard from my gurudeva.

Charles:

Each country you go to has a different way of living, a
different cultural heritage, and different problems. How
do you think your message will be geared towards South
Africans?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No matter which country I go to, I find that many people
are wealthy, and they have big positions like chief
ministers or advisors in the government. Despite having
such good positions, however, they are desperately
unhappy and many even commit suicide. Despite having
vast wealth, large families, good positions in society,
and great opulence, still they are not happy.

I tell people, “You cannot be happy by eating nicely and
having nice clothing and possessions. Death comes to
all, and with death comes so much suffering.” When
people hear this from me, they develop faith and give up
all bad habits like drinking, smoking, meat-eating, and
taking garlic and onions.

I instruct them to chant the name of Kṛṣṇa, which is
Kṛṣṇa Himself. There is no difference between God and
His names – Hare, Kṛṣṇa, and Rāma. His names are very
powerful. In fact, Kṛṣṇa has invested all of His power,
mercy, and qualities in these three names, or sixteen
words [of the mahā-mantra]. Therefore, these names can
do what Kṛṣṇa can do. They can give liberation and they
can take us to Goloka Vṛndāvana. In Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa
will engage us in the service of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
Himself, and thus we will be happy forever.

Everyone who meets me and begins chanting the names of
Kṛṣṇa says the same thing: “By chanting I am happier
than ever before.” We find this in all countries,
including America, South America, Malaysia, Australia,
Russia, and China. In fact, we find that in Russia and
China people are more receptive than in most other
countries. So many people have come to me. I have made
many of them full-time celibate monks, and now they are
also traveling around the world and spreading this
message.

                           24
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Charles:

In South Africa, we focus on the problems that we have –
HIV/AIDS and crime being the topmost on our minds. What
would be your message for South Africans in order that
they may lead a happier life; so they can release
themselves from thinking about these problems?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Devotees who are with me have given up all criminal
activity, all bad habits, and all kinds of wicked acts –
naturally and automatically. One who is engaged in
bhakti, devotion to the Lord, has no time for any other
activity, so they automatically give up bad habits. They
are happy, and by their association and instructions
they are making others happy.

Charles:

What can we do to change the mindsets of those who are
causing pain to others, so that they become people who
bring happiness to others?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The problems of this world, such as crime, can only be
stopped by preaching the glories of the Supreme Lord. We
have to understand why people are performing such
activities like beating others, killing others, and
stealing others’ money. They are doing this with one
intention: to become happy. We tell them, “No one can be
happy by material activities. The individual spirit
souls will become happy only if they keep the Supreme
Lord in the center of their lives and perform all of
their endeavors to please Him.”

We request everyone to advertise this in the newspapers,
on television, from house-to-house, and from person-to-
person. Everywhere we go we invite thousands of people
to attend our programs. Those who come and hear are
fortunate, and those who do not come are unfortunate.
Even though we offer delicious food to the people who
come, still most people are so unfortunate that they do
not come. Five hundred to one thousand people come to
hear us, but when a politician gives a speech, hundreds
of thousands of people go to listen. For the politicians
there is so much reporting, loud speakers, and coverage
in the press; that is the situation in the world today.

Charles:

If there is one mantra and one verse from scripture that
can actually be used to bring happiness to the world and
change the mindset of the people, what would this mantra
and verse be?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma
hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare. This mantra is very
influential; it will change everyone’s mindset. You
should chant hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa for at least one day.

                           25
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

First do this yourself, and then tell others to chant.
Then, automatically, they will give up meat, eggs, wine,
drinking, smoking, crime, and all other bad habits.

Charles:

Is there one verse from Bhagavad-gītā that is sufficient
to bring happiness to people?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:




sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (18.66)


[Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender
unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions.
Do not fear.*]

Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, “One should give up all
impious – and even materially pious – activities. Giving
up everything, one should be one-pointed in My service.
Thus, I will deliver you from sinful activities and you
will be happy forever.”




* * *




1 These three books describe the intimate relationship
between Śrīla Gurudeva and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja.




[Śrīla Gurudeva arrived in Sao Paulo, Brazil, on January
10th, after a long absence since 2003. He held a one-
week hari-kathā/vyāsa-pūjā festival at a very large
resort-hotel called Del Verde, a ten minute drive from
his accomodation at the home of Sundarānanda dāsa and
Gītā dāsī. In the attendance were about 600 devotees,
mostly from South America, and some had come from
England, Russia, North America, and other countries.]




                           26
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017



January 15, 2010


Morning Walk

Devotee

: Gurudeva, I want to ask if it’s okay to chant the
pañca-tattva mantra [śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya, prabhu
nityānanda, śrī advaita, gadādhara, śrīvāsādi gaura-
bhakta-vrnda] on my japa beads?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Why? What is the need?

Devotee

: Because if we chant to Pañca-tattva, there is no
aparādha.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You can do this on another mālā [not tulasī-mālā]. The
mahā-mantra is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Pañca-tattva is Pañca-
tattva. Nityānanda Prabhu is present in the pañca-tattva
mantra, so how can both be together?1

Brajanāth dāsa

: Gurudeva, in ISKCON they are teaching that after
finishing one mālā...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Have I told you to do this? Do not follow what I have
not instructed you to do. In kīrtana you can chant this.

Any further questions?

Priyanātha dāsa

: Gurudeva, I want to give my life in your service, but
sometimes I am scared to surrender my material life.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Chant more loudly, and try to be śaraṇāgata
(surrendered). Try to hear hari-kathā from superior
Vaiṣṇava sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs.




January 15, 2010


Morning Darśana

for ISKCON Gurukula Alumni


                             27
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Brajanāth dāsa

: These are gurukulīs from the ISKCON farm. They were
told not to come to you. They have been coming to your
programs, and they want to ask you some questions about
initiation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [First addressing Prema-prayojana dāsa] O Prema-
prayojana, how are you?

Prema-prayojana dāsa

(formerly Aranya Mahārāja): I’m okay, Gurudeva. By your
grace I could come here.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Has your wife divorced you?

Prema-prayojana dāsa:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I want that she should divorce you or you should
divorce her. I have not left my hope that you will again
return back [to the sannyāsa āśrama].

Prema-prayojana dāsa

: By your grace, at the last moment before the festival
I got the ticket to come.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: That is okay, but I want divorce. Either you or she
should divorce.

Prema-prayojana dāsa

: But in many lectures you told everyone, “No divorce.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Last night after your class, I remarked something. Did
you understand?

Prema-prayojana dāsa

: Yes. Āpane nā kaile dharma śikhāna nā yāya, ei ta’
siddhānta gītā-bhāgavate gāya. [“Unless one practices
devotional service himself, he cannot teach it to
others. This conclusion is indeed confirmed throughout
the Gītā and Bhāgavatam” * (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Ādi-līlā 3.21).]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Only you and a few others understood my words. Most of
the audience could not understand. Don’t lose your life.
Be totally towards me. Why [you left sannyāsa], I don’t

                              28
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

know – being such a learned scholar, having everything,
and still you fell in the dark well. We have given you a
rope. Please hold onto it.2

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Now the gurukulīs can ask their questions.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Have the ISKCON leaders told you that if you go to see
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, then don’t return to ISKCON?

Devotee:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Are you attending my classes?

Devotee:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, you should attend. ISKCON cannot give you what we
are giving.

Mādhavī dāsī

(from Brazil, initiated by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja and studying in the ISKCON Gurukula): Gurudeva,
I have a question. We are supposed to always respect our
parents in many ways. I would like to know what kind of
attitude we should have if our parents are not favorable
or even committing offenses to your lotus feet.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Do you know Prahlāda Mahārāja? He remained very
tolerant even though his father tried to kill him. At
least your father is not saying that he will kill you.
It is better to wait and tolerate their behavior, but
don’t be derailed. Be very strong like Prahlāda Mahārāja
– more so than Prahlāda. Of course you cannot be more
tolerant than he was; yet, try.

What do the ISKCON gurukulīs want to say?

Kīrtanānanda dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, many of us boys and girls were born
and raised on the ISKCON farm close to here. We went to
gurukula there, and lived there during our childhood.
Today the place is very disgraced, as so many devotees
who have lived there for many years have no taste in
bhakti and are so offensive towards you.

Within our hearts we like that place. Whenever we return
there from another place, we feel as if we are going
back home. Is there anything we can do to change the
attitude of those devotees? Is it right to do anything

                           29
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

to change them?

Prema-prayojana dāsa

: To affect the community there?

Kīrtanānanda dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Three books have been published about my relationship
with my śikṣā-guru, Śrīla A. C. Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja, as well as a book of his letters to me.3 You
should try to read them.

Prema-prayojana dāsa

: When those who are against Gurudeva read these books
and understand his relationship with Śrīla Prabhupāda,
they may change.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja wrote the letters
in his own handwriting, and in those letters he told
about their relationship.4

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In truth, they do not have the respect for Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja that I have. They cannot
properly glorify him as I do. They know practically
nothing of his real glory. They cannot even explain –
not even one of them – the definition of bhakti. Can you
explain it? You have been there for so many years. I
know you don’t know it.

If you want money, then be in ISKCON. And if you want
bhakti, then strictly come to me. I will give you
bhakti.

There is one thing more I want to say. About a month and
a half ago, a delegation of the ISKCON GBC members –
Śrīpāda Gopāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Lokanātha
Mahārāja, Śrīman Bhadrī-Nārāyaṇa dāsa, Śrīman Rāvindra-
svarūpa dāsa, and Śrīman Anuttama dāsa – came to me [in
Govardhana] and said, “We have done so many wrong
things. Please excuse us, please excuse us, please
excuse us. We want to have the same relationship with
you that we had before.”

I told them, “I am   very happy to hear this. I want to go
to your classes in   your maṭhas (temples) and speak hari-
kathā, and for you   to come to my classes and maṭhas. We
should be together   in that way, as we were before.

I said, “You know that your gurudeva took sannyāsa in
Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha. I was a witness to this. At
the time of his sannyāsa ceremony, I taught him how to
wear his sannyāsa cloth, I prepared his daṇḍa, and I
assisted him in all other ways. I have had a
relationship with him since 1946.”

                             30
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


You should know that almost ninety percent of the
sannyāsīs of ISKCON have entered gṛhastha life, and many
even went against ISKCON and took a lot of money. On the
other hand, it is very rare for my sannyāsīs to fall
down; only a few have fallen. He is practically the only
one. [Pointing to Prema-prayojana dāsa] He is the black
sheep of my sannyāsīs.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: But he [Prema-prayojana dāsa] is not against bhakti.
He is not against devotees and devotion. He is in line
[trying to follow the process of pure bhakti].

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I appreciate that although he has somewhat gone down,
he is very strong in siddhānta and is always following
me wherever I go. But in ISKCON, so many sannyāsīs gave
up the path of bhakti. I hope he [Prema-prayojana dāsa]
will soon come back [to sannyāsa].

Prema-prayojana dāsa:

I am here.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Have you no shame? Are you not ashamed?

Brajanāth dāsa

: More gurukulīs have arrived.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To the gurukulīs] You should deeply think about
whether you want money or pure bhakti. If you want pure
bhakti, then attend my classes at any cost.

Devotee

: We are so young, and there are so many things in the
world that pull us. Māyā is very strong. What is your
advice for us to keep strong and develop in bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If there is a strong rain-shower, you can be protected
by a big umbrella. Do you understand? Similarly, if you
take shelter of a pure Vaiṣṇava, you can very easily be
protected from māyā.

Anything more?

Devotee

: Gurudeva, what will happen if there is no association
in the place where we live?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Without good association you will not attain pure

                           31
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

bhakti. You can chant the holy name, but it is very
difficult to chant properly without good association.

Devotee

: What should we do if we are not in good association?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You should all come under the umbrella of a powerful
Vaiṣṇava at once.

You should know that all of my Western sannyāsīs and
thousands of my brahmacārīs are from ISKCON, having
lived there for twenty-five, twenty, ten, or five years.
They became so much attracted by hearing my classes that
they came to me and joined.

Ṭhākura dāsa

: Yesterday I had a dream, and you were in it. I was
very scared in that dream, and I woke up with that
feeling of fear in my heart. I want to ask if being
scared is a normal thing. I was scared because all of my
close, intimate friends, and the people who I really,
really care about and who are important in my life, are
in ISKCON. I am afraid that once I accept your lotus
feet, I will be very much discriminated against by them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In your childhood and as you grew up, did you not have
a deep connection with your father, mother, sister, and
other relatives?

Ṭhākura dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: And now you have even more of a relation with the
ISKCON leaders and other devotees. Do you understand?

Similarly, you can again give up your present
relationships for relationships that are better for your
bhakti. Everyone wants success in his or her life, and
the most successful thing is pure bhakti. If you want
bhakti, especially pure bhakti, then come to me.

Do you know the definition of bhakti? I know that you
cannot explain it.


anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11)


                           32
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


[The cultivation of activities that are meant
exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or in other
words the uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
performed through all endeavours of the body, mind, and
speech, and through the expression of various spiritual
sentiments (bhāvas), which is not covered by jñāna
(knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation) and karma
(reward-seeking activity), and which is devoid of all
desires other than the aspiration to bring happiness to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is called uttama-bhakti, pure devotional
service.]

Can all of you bravely come to my evening class?

Devotees:

Yes.

Brajanāth dāsa

: They have all been coming every day.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Come to my class this evening, and there we will
define pure bhakti. In pure bhakti there is no
anyābhilāṣa, no desires other than the desire to please
Kṛṣṇa.

[To Prema-prayojana dāsa] Please explain this verse in
brief.

Prema-prayojana dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva is saying that it is important to
understand the definition of pure bhakti, uttama-bhakti.
In brief, the meaning of the verse is this: Pure bhakti
is the continuous, unbroken cultivation of all
activities of the body, mind, words, and spiritual
feelings that are meant exclusively for the benefit of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which are completely free from all other
desires, and which are not covered by karma (fruitive
activities), jñāna (knowledge to get liberation), yoga,
and other things.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Almost all the ISKCON leaders are anyābhilāṣitā, which
means that they have desires other than the desire for
bhakti. They want money – and also bhakti. They have
bhakti, but it is ‘adhama-bhakti,’ meaning the lowest
class of bhakti. I request you all: don’t lose your
time. Try to achieve pure bhakti.

Thank you all. Gaura-premānande!




January 15, 2010



                           33
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Interview

Pure Bhakti-Yoga Society

Yaśodānandana dāsa

: Gurudeva, in our Bhakti Trust meeting you asked me,
“Where is the Society?” We are working on getting the
Society functioning, and we want to have an interview
with you on the front page of the Society’s website. In
that way people will be clear on what the Society is.

[Announcing to all present] I am asking Śrīla Gurudeva a
few questions, in Brazil, on January 15th, about the
International Pure Bhakti-Yoga Society that he has
ordered us to create.

[To Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja] Gurudeva, do you
want there to be a society, and if so, why?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I want everything that is going on now to be continued
after me, such as my book distribution and my preaching
by the sannyāsīs and all others. The preaching of our
sannyāsīs is the main factor. They should sit in a
meeting and decide who will go where. Otherwise, they
will all end up in one place at the same time. Also, my
Navadvīpa parikramā and Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā should
go on as usual. For all these purposes there should be a
society.

Yaśodānandana dāsa

: You asked me to set up the Society. Why the Society,
Gurudeva?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If there is no society, everyone will be separated.
They will scatter here and there; there will be no
control.

In the [Bhakti Trust] meetings, even though we are
twelve members, all the sannyāsīs should attend. They
are the main factor, and they should be given respect.

Yaśodānandana dāsa

: What role do you envisage the Society having in the
mission of Lord Caitanya?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We are preaching the life and philosophy of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu everywhere. We are also publishing
so many books.

Yaśodānandana dāsa

: Gurudeva, after a lot of feedback, response, from
devotees, and with your input, the name International
Pure Bhakti-Yoga Society, to be known as Pure Bhakti
Yoga Society for short, was decided upon. Can you please

                           34
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

confirm that this is your desire?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes. So like ISKCON, like BHAKTI [the Bhakti Trust
International]. This should be preached everywhere. All
should know that we are the Bhakti Trust.5

Yaśodānandana dāsa

: You are happy with that name, Gurudeva?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, very happy. I think you are not happy with that
name.

Yaśodānandana dāsa

: I am happy, because it is the desire of the majority
of devotees and yourself. I just wanted to confirm with
you on video, because different devotees have different
ideas. I am happy because you are happy.

How do you wish the devotees to serve the Society?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: As I am doing – preaching everywhere, publishing
books, and distributing books. Like Śyāmarāṇī has
devoted her life for me, preaching everywhere, editing
my books.

Brajanāth dāsa

: In Miami last year, you had very nice exchanges with
Mahābuddhi Prabhu and Padmanābha Mahārāja. Mahābuddhi
Prabhu asked you how your mission will go on in the
future. At that time you replied that all preachers,
especially sannyāsīs, should be ideal – tṛṇād api
sunīcena, not having any interest for themselves – and
then it will easily continue.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Giving each other honor.

Yaśodānandana dāsa

: Thank you, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Thank you. Thanks to Anaṇga-mohinī for giving the
inspiration to ask all the questions. If she will be
present where the meetings take place, she should also
be called to the meetings.

Yaśodānandana dāsa:

Yes, good.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


                           35
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

: Śyāmarāṇī is a preacher; she must be called too.

Yaśodānandana dāsa

: Good. We need some strong women in the meetings.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

At least one.

Anaṇga-mohinī dāsī

: How can ladies participate in the Society for you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They will call you, and you should sit in the
meetings. If there is anything relevant to speak, you
should speak, just as we call on Śyāmarāṇī to speak.




January 17, 2010


Morning Walk

Kṛpārāma dāsa

: I have one question. In one limb of śaraṇāgati
(surrender to Kṛṣṇa)6 we should think that Kṛṣṇa is
always maintaining us, but when we think of Kṛṣṇa in
Vṛndāvana, He is only thinking of how to meet with the
gopīs. How can we reconcile this?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. He will save those who are
surrendered.

Brajanāth dāsa

: But which Kṛṣṇa? Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Whoever is the devotee’s worshipful Deity.

If one claims to be totally surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, but
when any problem comes he takes shelter of others, it
means he has not really taken shelter of Kṛṣṇa.

We are not really surrendered. It will take time to
develop that kind of surrender. Draupadī was
surrendered; she called and Kṛṣṇa came. Prahlāda
Mahārāja was also surrendered.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Gurudeva, you said that when we offer prayers, Kṛṣṇa
will not hear us. Gurudeva will accept our prayers, and
he will offer our prayers to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa will hear him,

                           36
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

because he is the Lord’s surrendered soul. Similarly, we
should think…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, that is correct. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has
written:


ṣaḍ-aṅga śaraṇāgati hoibe jāhāra

tāhāra prārthanā śune śrī nanda-kumāra

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Caitanya Prabhu Jīve Dayā Kori’ (5)


[Whoever embodies each of these six facets of śaraṇāgati
has their prayers heard by the son of Nanda Mahārāja.]

[Referring to some people in the audience] Who are they?

Brajanāth dāsa

: They are your sons and daughters.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

From where?

Brajanāth dāsa

: From Brazil. His father passed away. When?

Devotee

: In the beginning of December.

Brajanāth dāsa

: One month ago their father passed away. They want your
blessing that he will be okay.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: My blessings to him that he should be a kṛṣṇa-bhakta,
wherever he may be.

[To Prema-Prayojana dāsa] What is your program after
today?

Prema-prayojana dāsa

: I was going to leave tomorrow, but I did not know that
you will be staying a longer time. I will extend my
ticket to stay here a longer time; maybe another three
or four days.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There will be no classes. I will write.




                           37
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


January 17, 2010


Darśana

After the walk

Brajanāth dāsa

: These devotees are from Bolivia and Venezuela.
Yesterday Sagara Mahārāja asked if they can briefly have
your darśana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Where is he?

Brajanāth dāsa:

He is sick.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: How many devotees are here from Venezuela? [The
devotees from Venezuela raise their hands.]

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: And how many from Bolivia?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Bolivia, and also Peru? Not Argentina?

[To devotee] You brought such a small baby? How many
days old?

Devotee

: One month.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Why did you bring such a young baby?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

For your darśana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Son, or daughter?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Daughter.

[Four of five people then ask Śrīla Gurudeva for
birthday blessings.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Maṅgalaṁ bhavatu. Kalyanama bhavatu. Laukika (in this

                            38
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

world), pāralaukika (beyond this world), pāramārthika
(for the highest goal of pure bhakti) maṅgalaṁ bhavatu.
Kṛṣṇa bhakter bhavatu. Sukhī bhavatu. My blessings for
auspiciousness in your life. May material and spiritual
auspiciousness be yours. May you especially be blessed
with the happiness of kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

Today our classes will be finished, and you will return
to your homes. What we have given you, take that in your
[heart’s] pocket, and always remember that. Especially,
you have heard the teachings of Prahlāda Mahārāja,
Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, and Bharata Mahārāja. Always remember
these narrations of their life and character.

Don’t be weak in any way. Always be strong. Kṛṣṇa will
save you. Have faith in Kṛṣṇa that He must surely save
you. And try to be surrendered.




* * *




1 The tulasī-mālā, or string of 108 beads, represents
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and the principle gopīs. Nityānanda
Prabhu is Baladeva Himself. As Baladeva Prabhu does not
remain with Kṛṣṇa when Kṛṣṇa is together with Śrī Rādhā
and the gopīs, so Nityānanda Prabhu’s name, which is
non-different from Nityānanda Prabhu Himself, is not
chanted on the tulasī beads.



2 Vedic śāstra forbids a sannyāsī (one in the renounced
order of life) to become a householder. Still, due to
their respect for any devotee who was being chastised by
Śrīla Gurudeva, the editors had reservations about
publishing this section of the darśana. They expressed
their concerns to Śrīla Gurudeva, who replied, “Why
should you publish my words only when I give praise? My
entire talk with Prema-prayojana must be given in print.
I have chastised him. A guru has the power [authority]
to chastise, and others will learn if it is given in
print.”



3 These four books are Their Lasting Relation, My Śikṣā-
guru & Priya-bandhu, Our Gurus – One in Siddhānta, One
at Heart, and Letters from America.



4 An excerpt from Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja’

s letter to Śrīla Gurudeva – Return address c/o Gopal
Agarwal from Butler, Penn., Sept. 28, 1966 *:



                           39
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

I received your letter dated September 20, 1966, on
time. Our relationship is certainly based on spontaneous
love. That is why there is no chance of us forgetting
one another. By the mercy of guru and Gaurāṅga, may
everything be auspicious for you. This is my constant
prayer. From the first time I saw you I have been your
constant well-wisher. At his first sight of me, Śrīla
Prabhupāda also saw me with such love. It was in my very
first darśana of Śrīla Prabhupāda that I learned how to
love. It is his boundless mercy that he has engaged an
unworthy person like me in fulfilling some of his
desires. It is his causeless mercy to engage me in
preaching the message of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Raghunātha.



5 In both instances of referring to the Bhakti Trust,
the editors have understood that Śrīla Gurudeva actually
meant to say the International Pure Bhakti-Yoga Society.



6

There are six symptoms of śaraṇāgati (self-surrender).
The first two are ānukūlyasya-saṅkalpa and
prātikālyasya-varjanam: ‘I will only do that which is
favorable for unalloyed bhakti, and I will reject all
that is unfavourable.’ This is called saṅkalpa or
pratijñā, a solemn vow. The third symptom is
rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso, faith in Bhagavān as one’s
protector: ‘Bhagavān is my only protector. I can derive
absolutely no benefit from jñāna, yoga, and other such
practices.’ This is an expression of trust (viśvāsa).
The fourth symptom is goptṛtve varaṇam, deliberate
acceptance of Bhagavān as one’s maintainer: ‘I cannot
obtain anything, or even maintain myself, by my own
endeavour. I will serve Bhagavān as far as I am able,
and He will take care of me.’ This is what is meant by
dependence (nirabharatā). The fifth symptom is ātma-
nikṣepa, absence of independent mood. ‘Who am I? I am
His. My duty is to fulfill His desire.’ This is
submission of the self (ātma-nivedana). The sixth
symptom is kārpaṇye, meekness: ‘I am wretched,
insignificant, and spiritually destitute.’ This is what
is meant by humility (kārpaṇya or dainya).

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 11.676).




January 29, 2010


Darśana

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: We are working on the first of your morning walks
books – Walking With A Saint 2008. On some of those
walks you discuss the pastime of Brahmā stealing the
calves and cowherd friends of Kṛṣṇa. We want to add an

                              40
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

endnote from you, for further clarity of the topic.

Was it Yogamāyā or Mahāmāyā who created the set of
cowherd boys stolen by Brahmā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It was actually Yogamāyā, but she acted through the
agency of her shadow, Mahāmāyā. It was the action of
Yogamāyā, but through Mahāmāyā. Do you understand?1

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: Are you referring to the same Mahāmāyā who controls
the material world?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes. She who was Yogamāyā with Yaśodā, and who came
with Vasudeva Mahārāja to Mathurā, at once became
Mahāmāyā for Kaṁsa.2 They are the same māyā, but by
action, or function, they are known as Yogamāyā or
Mahāmāyā.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Mādhava Mahārāja said that the gopīs worshiped
Kātyāyanī, Mahāmāyā, and it was that same Mahāmāyā who
bewildered Brahmā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: For the gopīs, that Māyā was Yogamāyā. Māyā is one,
and by her function she is two. When she acts upon Kṛṣṇa
and His associates, she is Yogamāyā. When she acts to
bewilder the conditioned living entity, then she is
Mahāmāyā.

Someone may say, “Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is a most angry
person.” Another person may say, “No, he is very
loving.” The first person saw me chastising someone, and
therefore his idea is that I am an angry person. The
second person saw my very sweet behavior and thinks,
“Oh, he loves everyone.”




* * *




1 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
morning walk conversation in Miami, Florida, on May 24,
2008:


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: When Kṛṣṇa killed Aghāsura, Lord Brahmā saw Aghāsura’s
soul enter into Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. He thought, “How

                           41
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

wonderful this is! I want to see more sweet pastimes.”
That is why he thought of stealing the calves and boys.

In the meantime, Kṛṣṇa had been thinking how to fulfill
four wishes: (1) the desire of all of the teenage gopīs;
(2) the desire of the cows and mothers; (3) the desire
of Lord Brahmā; and (4) His own desire to taste the
affection of these associates.

When Kṛṣṇa was contemplating in this way, Yogamāyā at
once appeared to Him and said, “Prabhu, you are thinking
about tasting these relationships, so I will arrange for
this right away.” This is why she caught hold of Brahmā
and brought him under her influence. She made this
thought arise in him: “I am Brahmā. I should steal away
the cowherd boys and calves. Then I will see what He
will do. Maybe He will come to me and ask where they
are.”

Brahmā saw all the cowherd boys sitting together, with
Kṛṣṇa in the center, absorbed in laughing and joking and
enjoying prasādam. By the influence of Yogamāyā, Brahmā
thought, “This is the perfect time to steal the boys and
calves.” He created very green grass far away, and the
calves became allured to go there and graze. At the same
time Brahmā stole them and put them in a cave.

Kṛṣṇa told His friends, “Just wait here and take
prasādam while I personally go to look for the calves.”
Then, as soon as Kṛṣṇa left the cowherd boys, Brahmā
took them as well and put them in the cave, and then he
returned to Brahma-loka.

Who were the calves and cowherd boys stolen by him? The
real cowherd boys and calves are nitya-parikaras
(eternal associates) of Kṛṣṇa. Lord Brahmā is not
qualified to even touch the dust of their feet, what to
speak of kidnap them.

Actually, there were three sets of boys. The first set
was the original cowherd-boys and calves. Yogamāyā
created the second set, which Lord Brahmā stole, and
Kṛṣṇa personally expanded as the third set.


Brajanāth dāsa

: Where did the first set stay when the illusory set was
stolen?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Kṛṣṇa told Yogamāyā, “Please cover them in such a way
that they will sit and take their meal, and the calves
will graze as usual. No one, not even Baladeva Prabhu or
any Vrajavāsī, should see them.”

Yogamāyā thus covered the original cowherd-boy
associates of Kṛṣṇa for one year. No Vrajavāsī could see
them, and even Baladeva could not see them. When Kṛṣṇa
was with them, they had been eating yogurt and rice just
as He was doing. Now that Kṛṣṇa had left just as they
were about to put their next morsel of prasādam in their

                           42
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

mouth, they began thinking, “We will not eat anything
until our sakhā, Kṛṣṇa, returns to us. Being worried
that we are not eating without Him, He will surely
return very soon.” In this way, for one year Yogamāyā
influenced their minds in thinking that Kṛṣṇa would
return in the very next moment, and this year passed for
them like a moment.


Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: Was this something like the rāsa-līlā in relation to
time? Kṛṣṇa’s yogamāyā potency expanded the rāsa-līlā to
last for the duration of a night of Brahmā, but the
gopīs experienced it to be less than a moment.


Brajanāth dāsa

: When Lord Brahmā went to his own planet, his guards
questioned him, “Who are you?”


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Lord Brahmā said, “You are my guards. You do not
recognize me?”

The guards replied, “You are not Brahmā. Our Prabhu
[Brahmā] is on His throne and managing everything. He
told us that if an imposter tries to come in, we should
not allow him entrance.

Lord Brahmā wondered, “Why is this happening?” Then, in
his trance of meditation he realized, “I have made a
mistake.”

There is so much deep siddhānta in this pastime.


Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: This brings a question. There is a similar occurrence
in Rāma’s pastimes. The demon Rāvaṇa could not take the
real Sītā-devī; he could only take an illusory Sītā. We
were discussing this in Alachua the other day. It was
the illusory Sītā who was taken by Rāvaṇa. The whole
pastime of her residing in Rāvaṇa’s kingdom took place
with this illusory Sītā. It was this Sītā who was in the
aśoka garden, feeling great separation from Lord Rāma.

So the question is, how can an illusory Sītā feel such
separation?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Because she was created by Yogamāyā, she had such
power and mood. The illusory material māyā, Mahāmāyā,
would not have been able to do something like this, but
Yogamāyā can do so.


Brajanāth dāsa

                              43
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: And the real Sītā was protected by Agni all that time.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Later, when Lord Rāmacandra finally met the real Sītā,
it seemed like only one second had passed.

[…] This is very mysterious. What can you pay me for
this? Only daṇḍavat praṇāma?




2

Vasudeva took Kṛṣṇa to Gokula and brought the girl
Yogamāyā back from the bed of Yaśodā. As long as she was
with Vasudeva, she remained as Yogamāyā; but when she
arrived in the jail of Kaṁsa, and Kaṁsa lifted her up to
kill her, then the activities of Mahāmāyā began, and
Yogamāyā, in an invisible form, began her own
activities. Exactly when she changed to her shadow form,
no one knew. Seeing this, it must appear to most persons
that they are one and the same potency, but they are not
one. When she was placed in the jail and Kaṁsa grabbed
her, she became eight-armed Durgā. He became astonished
and frightened, and said, “Oh! You are directly my
worshipable goddess!” But ultimately, when she left her
form as Yogamāyā, and how she did this and that – it is
all durvitarkyā, inconceivable.

Going Beyond Vaikunṭḥa, Chapter 8




March 6, 2010


Darśana

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: Śrīla Gurudeva, in relation to your Morning Walks
books, we are almost finished with the first book
[Walking With A Saint 2008]. Some of editors we are
working with have brought up some concerns.

During some of your morning walks and darśanas you
lovingly chastise disciples, and sometimes, out of your
compassion, you tell about the faults of certain
disciples and others to the devotees present with you.
Some of the editors are thinking that these statements
should not be in the book. They are concerned that on
one hand we are supposed to quote our gurudeva, and on
the other hand we are not supposed to criticize others.
If the readers see your chastisements or apparent
criticisms in the book, they might feel comfortable to
also criticize those same persons – or anyone else. How
do we reconcile this?

                           44
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: What I have told, I have told. There is no need for
adjustment; there is nothing to ask about that. By this
chastisement he will correct himself. I gave him this
good instruction for him and for others.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: So, should we write in our Foreword to the book that
the self-realized guru has a right to chastise, but
others do not?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: Suppose a disciple is doing something wrong and you
instruct him or chastise him for his betterment, and
after that he changes for the better. Then, although he
has already changed, one or two years later people may
read the Morning Walk book and think, “He is doing
wrong,” or “He has done wrong.” Do we need to keep in
the name of the devotee who is being corrected or
chastised?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes. I have chastised disciples for those disciples’
well-being, but others should not chastise or find
fault. They have no right or power to do so.1

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: When you say ‘no power,’ do you mean that they have no
power to change the person or make him Kṛṣṇa conscious,
so they have no authority to criticize or chastise?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.




* * *




1 Excerpts from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
previous lectures, explaining the effect of criticizing
others:


To bring a person from the clutches of the Lord’s
deluding material potency, māyā, is very, very hard. If
lust or any other attachment is present in that person’s
heart it will go away very soon if he is chanting,

                           45
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

remembering, and listening to hari-kathā.

Be very careful. Don’t criticize devotees or non-
devotees. First look at your own condition and try to
purify yourself. Is there any lust in you? Is there any
deceit in you? Be worried for that; don’t worry for
others. Guru and Kṛṣṇa are responsible for others. You
cannot do anything to help them, so you have no right to
criticize.

Hilo, Hawaii: February 7, 2005.




If we think of others’ bad qualities, we will have to
absorb those qualities in ourselves.

India: September 4, 2005




March 14, 2010


Morning walk

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: In Jaiva-dharma, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that
Kṛṣṇa is Puruṣa (the Supreme Person). He has desires and
Śrīmatī Rādhikā fulfills His desires.1

Sometimes you say that without Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa is
impersonal brahma. You said some time ago that we have
to resolve this, but I do not know how to resolve this.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Rādhā is Kṛṣṇa’s power. Without power, Kṛṣṇa is
nirviśeṣa-brahma (the impersonal absolute); He cannot do
anything. He is like zero.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: And when He is with Rādhikā, He becomes a hero.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: He has His own desires?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It may be so, but without Śrīmatī Rādhikā, He cannot
move here or there. He cannot do anything.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Also, icchā (desire) is another kind of power. It is
called icchā-śakti (the power by which all of Kṛṣṇa’s
desires are fulfilled). Rādhikā is the embodiment of all
kinds of power.

                            46
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śuka and Sārī, the male and female parrots of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, are discussing this. Śuka says, “My Kṛṣṇa is
jagat-mohana – He attracts the entire universe.” Then
Sārī says, “My Rādhikā is jagat-mohana-mohinī. She is so
attractive that She attracts the mind of Kṛṣṇa, who
attracts the mind of everyone in the universe.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has supported this conclusion.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: I think you are very pro-Rādhikā.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: Regarding the same point that Nemi Mahārāja is asking
about, you are saying that Kṛṣṇa cannot do anything
without Śrīmatī Rādhikā. But śakti (the power) is
dependent on śaktimān (the possessor of the power).
Kṛṣṇa is śaktimān and Rādhikā is śakti. Just like the
sun and the sunrays…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You can say whatever you are saying, but you should
try to understand my view.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī says there is a competition between Kṛṣṇa and
the gopīs, and that nobody wins.2

But you are saying that...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Without Rādhikā, what can Kṛṣṇa do?3

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Nothing.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Sometimes śakti (Kṛṣṇa’s power, or potency) is amūrta-
rūpa and sometimes mūrta-rūpa – sometimes within His
body, and though it is non-different from Him, sometimes
in a separate form.

Īśa dāsa

: A devotee asked me how one can determine for sure
whether one is experiencing Gurudeva giving instruction
in his heart, or whether it is only the mind’s
speculation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Worldly things may come without guru, but paramārtha
(spiritual) things come by the medium of guru.

                              47
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017




March 16, 2010


Morning Walk

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: In our stage of perfection we have two svarūpas
(spiritual forms): one in kṛṣṇa-līlā and one in gaura-
līlā. The Gosvāmīs have given so much instruction how to
develop our svarūpa in rādhā-kṛṣṇa-līlā, but we haven’t
heard so much about developing our svarūpa in gaura-
līlā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There were so many examples of this at the time of
Mahāprabhu. For example, Rūpa Gosvāmī has shown that he
is both Rūpa Gosvāmī and Rūpa Mañjarī. At the time of
practicing bhakti-yoga, the devotee worships Mahāprabhu
as Prabhu, or Lord, and considers himself as servant.
Then, when the devotee matures in bhakti, both svarūpas
manifest.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

Automatically?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Yes.


sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa

siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.295)


[A sādhaka who has greed for rāgānuga-bhakti should
serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa both in the sādhaka-rūpa and the siddha-
rūpa, in accordance with the bhāva of the Vrajavāsīs who
possess the same mood for which he aspires.]

Acyutānanda dāsa

(from Spain): When you are here with us, it is easy to
do bhajana; we are so inspired by you. When you go to
foreign countries, we somehow become weak and cannot do
bhajana in the same way as when you are near us. In what
way can we do the same bhajana as when you are here with
us?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

                            48
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: If you think, “Mahārāja is here in my heart,” then
everything will be solved.

Īśa dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, the first day that I met you, you
asked me, “How do you know who is a pure devotee?” I
said, “I don’t know.” You said, “Ask that person, ‘What
is Kṛṣṇa doing now?’ ” Now my heart desires to hear your
kathā regarding what is Kṛṣṇa doing now.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It is morning līlā. He has returned from being with
the gopīs and is engaged in His sweet morning pastimes.

Īśa dāsa

: Your kathā like this, and your Vilāpa-kusumāñjali
conversations, are the only satisfying thing for the
soul.




March 19, 2010


Morning Walk

Īśa dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, your daughter Sudevī from Alachua said
she was told that you said it is okay to read the books
of Ananta dāsa Bābājī. I am asking, for her, if this is
true.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Gurudeva never told this to anyone.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I have not told that.

Paramānanda dāsa

(from Ireland): The ahaṅkāra (false ego) of the baddha-
jīva (conditioned soul) is making the body dance
according to the vibration of the ahaṅkāra. By guru’s
mercy, is it possible to rise above this?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If you practice the principles of bhakti, the rest
will be done by gurudeva. If you are not practicing,
gurudeva will not give you the spiritual result. He can
do so, but he will not.

Īśa dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, is it possible to make advancement by

                           49
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017

just doing service without doing harināma japa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No. Nothing will be there.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: By a sādhaka’s chanting, he cannot achieve prema-
bhakti in this body. The maximum he can achieve in this
body is bhāva-bhakti. You told us that when he achieves
bhāva, vastu-siddhi is still very far away.

When he leaves his body, he will gradually go to that
planet where Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is performing
his sādhana, and later, in a future birth, where the
Gosvāmīs are performing their sādhana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You will hear their kathā, and you will follow them.
Then you will take birth at the time of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura and others. Then, gradually, you will
come to Mahāprabhu. When you attain svarūpa-siddhi (the
stage of bhāva in its maturity), you will reach
Mahāprabhu.4

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: So my question is this: will we go there and see the
same svarūpa of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura that we are
seeing now in his photographs? For example, he is a
little heavyset and Śrīla Gaura-kisora dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja is hunched over. Every day we perform āratī to
them, and it is the vision from their photos that comes
in our heart.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Uni thākben5. Himself. He will not have a proxy (a
person empowered to stand in for another). He will
personally be there, and he may have the same features.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja will be
there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: That is what I am telling. He himself will be there.

Īśa dāsa

: Gurudeva, you are the sum total of our guru-paramparā
– Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Lokanātha
Gosvāmī, etc. You are giving everything that they are
giving us. So, why can’t we take all of this from you?
Why do we have to take so many births?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It is necessary to take many births. When a devotee
attains the stage of svarūpa-siddhi, there will be no

                             50
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

more births after that.

Īśa dāsa

: How high can we go by your association?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You can progress to an advanced stage of bhakti by
this association; by hearing daily. You will
progressively graduate to higher stages by the
association of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī, and then Mahāprabhu.

Īśa dāsa

: You can give us everything Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
can give us.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Gurudeva, you were telling that if we are lucky in
this life, and if we are performing sādhana-bhajana, we
will take our next birth in the association of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura to receive more
training, because we have not attained the level of
rati, or āsakti. So they will help us further and
further.

Īśa prabhu is saying that you can give us everything,
and I am telling him that our container is not so good.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, you are not able to take what I am giving. Can
you take it?

Īśa dāsa

: Not yet, but I am begging, begging, begging for your
mercy.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja

: Our container is full of holes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: But you cannot take, meaning that at present you are
not able to receive much. I give according to your
stage. There are so many things I am telling that you
cannot follow.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: Yesterday, Brajanāth Prabhu was telling me that in
Vṛndāvana ISKCON they are playing Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
lecture, with a microphone in front of his mūrti.
Everyone sits and watches, as if his mūrti is speaking.

Is the siddhānta all right?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                              51
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


It is not all right.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: But you have said he is eternally present.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He is eternally present; that is true. But there is no
need to do this. What is the necessity to put the
microphone in front of his mouth? What is necessary is
that we repeat his instructions to each other and to
others.

Will he speak from the mūrti what is on his mind at the
moment? Will he speak, or not? Why this imitation?

Young man

: I came from Brazil to study yoga. By accident I came
to this association. I found out that bhakti-yoga is the
highest form of yoga, so I have come to learn from you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You should follow me, otherwise you will not be able
to understand. First take harināma initiation, and also
hear hari-kathā and read my books.




March 20, 2010


Morning Walk

Acyutānanda dāsa

(from Spain): Can you give us one instruction on how to
stop being greedy with food.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: By chanting the holy name. Don’t give any time for the
tongue to chatter-patter.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja

: One devotee from East Europe, a disciple of Śrīla
Bhakti Ballabha Tīrtha Mahārāja, asked me through the
internet how to develop firm attachment to Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: By always chanting the holy name and having attachment
for Vaiṣṇavas and guru.

Devotee

: What should be our meditation while preaching and
distributing books?

                           52
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You are doing good for others. Always be absorbed in
that understanding, and in chanting.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, is there any relation between the form of
gurudeva that we see in this world and his form in
Mahāprabhu’s līlā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Here his form is vivid; his form is obvious. In
aprakaṭa-līlā6 he will have any good form, as a very
qualified, very beautiful, and attractive gopī lady.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: What about in mahāprabhu-līlā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [Pointing to his chest] Like that.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

But young.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Like Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa with the mood of
Rādhārāṇī – śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya rādhā-kṛṣṇa nahe anya.
So, does this mean that Rādhārāṇī is fully present in
Mahāprabhu?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, in Mahāprabhu.

Jayadeva dāsa

(from Delhi): What are the symptoms of a fully
surrendered soul?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He will always be happy. He knows that, “I am always
with my Prabhu.” He has no fear at all.

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: You have explained that as we progress in bhakti, in
our next birth we may go to Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura,
and then we may go to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, and then we may go to Śrīla Rūpa-Raghunātha
Gosvāmī Prabhupāda and so on, for our training to
increase. You have explained that the relationship
between guru and disciple is eternal, but also that

                             53
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

guru-tattva is one. So, I have some doubt – that when
our perfection comes, do we have an eternal relationship
with you specifically? Will we always be under your
guidance and association in gaura-līlā and kṛṣṇa-līlā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Guru is akhanda-tattva (an indivisible truth or
principle). Nityānanda Prabhu and Baladeva Prabhu are
akhanda-guru-tattva (the undivided principle of guru),
so guru can be seen in them. Do you understand?

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: But my question, my fear…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Guru is akhaṇḍa-tattva, Nityānanda Prabhu is akhaṇḍa-
tattva, Baladeva Prabhu is akhaṇḍa-tattva. So we can see
our gurudeva as a manifestation of Kṛṣṇa, or Baladeva
Prabhu, or akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva.

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: But your personality is unique and wonderful. Will we
always have the fortune of your personal connection?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should think like that.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Our gurus tell us that there we will know everyone –
who is Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is our Guru Mahārāja, who
is everyone.

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa dāsa:

In one group?

Brajanāth dāsa

: Yes, in one yūtha (group).

Acyutānanda dāsa

: When chanting harināma, if any realization comes, how
will we know if it is coming from guru and Kṛṣṇa, or if
it is coming from our own speculation?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If you are genuine and sincere, you will know;
otherwise not. It depends on you – how sincere you are
and how you have surrendered.

Mādhava dāsa

: Gurudeva, how do we chant the holy names? Do we chant
silently or loudly?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

                              54
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: Both. You can chant without mālā also.




* * *




1 An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 14:


Vrajanātha

: If He is fully associated with śakti, He only works
with the assistance of śakti. Then where is His
independent nature and desire?


Bābājī

: Śakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ – according to this statement
in Vedānta, śakti (potency) and the śaktimān puruṣa (the
Supreme Person who possesses all śakti) are non-
different. Work shows the influence of śakti; that is,
all work is accomplished only by the means of śakti.
However, the desire to do work is an indication of
śaktimān. The mundane material world is the work of
māyā-śakti, all the jīvas are the work of jīva-śakti,
and the cid-jagat (spiritual world) is the work of cit-
śakti. Bhagavān inspires the cit-śakti, jīva-śakti, and
māyā-śakti to be engaged in their respective activities,
but He Himself is still nirvikāra (unattached and
unaffected).


[…] Vrajanātha

: All of this is simply the work of śakti. Apart from
this, the spiritual world, the spiritual body, and the
spiritual pastimes are also indications of śakti alone.
Then what is the indication of śaktimān Kṛṣṇa?


Bābājī

: This is a very difficult problem. Do you want to kill
this old man with the sharp arrows of your arguments? My
dear son, the answer is as simple as the question, but
it is difficult to find a person who is qualified to
understand it. Anyway, I shall explain it, so please try
to understand.

I agree that Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, qualities, and pastimes
all indicate the function of śakti. However, freedom
(sva-tantratā) and free will (sva-icchāmayatā) are not
the work of śakti; they are both intrinsic activities of
the Supreme Person, and Kṛṣṇa is that Supreme Person who
has free will and is the abode of śakti. Śakti is the
enjoyed and Kṛṣṇa is the enjoyer; śakti is dependent but

                           55
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Kṛṣṇa is independent; śakti surrounds that independent
Supreme Person on all sides, but He is always conscious
of śakti. The independent puruṣa is the master of śakti,
even though He is covered by śakti. Human beings can
only realize that Supreme Person (parama-puruṣa) by
taking shelter of that śakti. That is why the
conditioned jīva cannot realize the identity of śaktimān
independently from realizing the identity of śakti.
However, when the bhaktas develop love for śaktimān,
they are able to perceive Him, who is beyond śakti.
Bhakti is a form of śakti, and that is why she has a
female form. Being under the guidance of Kṛṣṇa’s
internal potency (svarūpa-śakti), she experiences the
pastimes of the puruṣa. Those pastimes indicate that
Kṛṣṇa is possessed of both free will and the intrinsic
quality of being the predominating enjoyer.]




2 “The beauty of Lord Kṛṣṇa increases at the sight of
the beauty of the gopīs. And the more the gopīs see Lord
Kṛṣṇa’s beauty, the more their beauty increases. In this
way a competition takes place between them in which no
one acknowledges defeat”* (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-
līlā 4.192–193).



3 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
purport to Gopī-gīta, Verse Six:




Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī thus describes the
competition between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs, which ended
in a draw. Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī ‘whistled’ and gave
judgment that neither side had won. Actually, we Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas do not want this. We want the whistle to be
blown to indicate Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s victory. Rādhikā
will be so happy, and we will applaud and celebrate.

This is the real mood of Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī. If Śrīmatī Lalitā-devī is the mediator in a
game, she will blow the whistle to say it is a draw,
that no one has been defeated. But Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī will
whistle to announce that Śrīmatī Rādhikā has defeated
Kṛṣṇa.

It is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself who will experience the greatest
pleasure when He is defeated, although His friends like
Madhumaṅgala and others will not be pleased at all.
Kundalatā-gopī will also be sorry that Kṛṣṇa has lost,
and Dhaniṣṭhā-gopī may even faint. Kṛṣṇa’s defeat causes
such friends great distress, and His victory fills them
with joy.




                           56
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017


4 After attaining svarūpa-siddhi, the devotee first
takes birth in a place where where Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is performing His parkaṭa-līlā
(transcendental pastimes within the material world).
Next, he or she will take birth in a place where Śrī Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are performing Their parkaṭa-līlā.



5 Uni thākben is a Bengali phrase meaning “he will
stay,” or “he will remain.” Uni means “him,” and thākben
means “staying the same.”



6 Aprakaṭa-līlā – unmanifest pastimes; the word
‘unmanifest’ means that when a transcendental
personality leaves this material world, he enters the
pastimes of Śrīman Mahāprabhu and/or Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
in the eternal spiritual world, and these pastimes
cannot be seen by material eyes.




March 28, 2010


Interview for a Magazine Article

Rāma dāsa

(editor and publisher of a German New Age Magazine):
What is the definition of ‘pure bhakti’?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Bhakti begins with śraddhā, and it develops to:


anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11)


[The cultivation of activities that are meant
exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or in other
words the uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
performed through all endeavors of the body, mind, and
speech, and through the expression of various spiritual
sentiments (bhāvas), which is not covered by jñāna
(knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation) and karma
(reward-seeking activity), and which is devoid of all
desires other than the aspiration to bring happiness to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is called uttama-bhakti, pure devotional
service.]

                           57
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


Every endeavor, including all endeavors of the mind and
above all, one’s internal moods, should be done for the
benefit of Kṛṣṇa. That is bhakti. Next, actions and
moods for Kṛṣṇa are bhakti if they are devoid of all
varieties of anyābhilāṣitā1 (the natural tendency
towards material desires). A special circumstance is
examplified in the bhakti of Draupadī. When she was in
danger, she remembered Kṛṣṇa and called out to Him [to
protect her]. Her prayer was not in the category of
anyābhilāṣitā.

Jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam. Without knowledge (jñāna) and
action (karma), we cannot survive. However, that jñāna
and karma should not be more prominent than one’s
bhakti, or in other words it should not cover one’s
bhakti. If knowledge and action are favorable for
bhakti, they can be included in the category of bhakti,
otherwise not.

Devotion that is imbued with these qualities, rises up
to the mood of bhāva, and it then further develops to
the moods of sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga, bhāva,
and mahābhāva.2 Even further, bhakti develops to the
stages of adhirūḍha and modana, and still higher than
modana is madana, Rādhikā’s mādanākhya mood.2 Kṛṣṇa’s
own moods are experienced up to and including mahābhāva,
but not madana, which is Rādhikā’s alone.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Madana is the monopoly of Rādhikā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Bhakti reaches up to that stage.


anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitah

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.4)


[May Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari, resplendent with the
radiance of molten gold, be forever manifest within the
innermost core of your heart. He has descended in the
age of Kali out of causeless mercy to bestow that which
had not been revealed for millions of eons –
unnatojjvala-rasa, the most elevated, brilliant
devotional service in paramour love.]

Here, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī is praying to
Mahāprabhu to become a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā…

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is praying to Śrīman Mahāprabhu.


                           58
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: …under the guidance of Rūpa Mañjarī. This is the goal.
This is the essence of all the Vedic literature.3

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

This is it for now. Śrīla Gurudeva’s health is not so
good.

Harernāmānanda dāsa:

Okay, so we finish now. Okay. All right.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Thank you.

Rāma dāsa

: Thank you.




* * *




1


It is especially noteworthy here to consider why it is
that the term anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ has been used rather
than anyābhilāṣa-śūnyaṁ. A very deep and confidential
idea of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda has been concealed in
this statement. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has used the term
anyābhilāṣita-śūnyaṁ after giving a great deal of
consideration to this matter. The term anyābhilāṣa means
a desire for other objects. To this word the Sanskrit
suffix in has first been added. This suffix indicates
the natural or acquired way of living or acting. When
used in conjunction with the word anyābhilāṣa, it means
the innate tendency to act under extraneous desires. To
this the suffix ta is added, which indicates the quality
or state of being of anything. This means that in his
natural condition a sādhaka should have no desires other
than for bhakti. But if on the appearance of some
unexpected calamity (in an unnatural condition) a
sādhaka prays, ‘O Bhagavān, I am Your devotee. Please
protect me from this calamity,’ then in spite of this
desire, no damage is done to his bhakti. It is only due
to some calamity that there is a reversal of his natural
condition. Therefore he becomes compelled by
circumstances to pray in an unnatural way. It should be
understood that this desire is not his innate condition.

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Verse 1,

Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti).


                             59
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017




2 See glossary for the definitions of these terms.




3 An excerpt from Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, Verse 3, purport:


In his Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī has employed a similar device by citing Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s anarpita-carīṁ cirāt verse as the fourth
verse of his own maṅgalācaraṇam (auspicious invocation).
The opening three verses are his own composition, but
the anarpita-carīṁ cirāt verse is from the Vidagdha-
mādhava of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī saw that his śikṣā-guru, Rūpa
Gosvāmī, had offered this prayer to his worshipful Deity
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, as a blessing. This prayer begs
Mahāprabhu’s mercy for all jīvas in general, and
particularly for those who have a special desire for the
mercy of Lord Kṛṣṇa in His form as rasarāja-mahābhāva
svarūpa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself. Thinking that
no one else can write like his guru, and feeling, “I
cannot express an idea like this,” Śrīla Kavirāja
Gosvāmī has included Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s verse ‘as it
is.’ In this way he has accomplished two objectives: he
has offered his praṇāma to both Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.




May 24, 2010


Darśana

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: Gurudeva, what topic will you speak about when you
come for the festival in Badger?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: A very difficult topic. I want to deal with the
subject of what Vyāsadeva saw in his trance regarding
the Tenth Canto. I will speak about the sections that no
one knows, but I will give the chance to others to speak
about other subjects. Do you understand?

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: In Gopāla-campū, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has written about
how Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā-devī followed dvādaśī-
vrata for one year in order to have a son, because they
were not able to have a son. I was just wondering,
Gurudeva, I know the meaning of ekādaśī-vrata, but what

                           60
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

does dvādaśī-vrata mean?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There are some Ekādaśīs that are called Mahā-dvādaśī.
[There are eight Mahā-dvādaśīs per year.] When Ekādaśī
and Dvādaśī both fall on the same day, then the Ekādaśī
vows are followed on the Dvādaśī day. That is what
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was doing.1

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: Ah. And also Nanda Mahārāja?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Nanda Mahārāja also.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Gurudeva, it is said that after Nanda and Yaśodā
followed dvādaśī-vrata for one year, they got the
benediction to have a son.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: That’s how they got Kṛṣṇa.

But Ambarīṣa Mahārāja was following Ekādaśī, and then
Durvāsā Ṛṣi came to him on the next day, Dvādaśī. He was
following regular Dvādaśī, not Mahā-dvādaśī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We should try to give more time to the activities and
practices of Mahāprabhu.2 That is called bhāva-bhakti,
and after that comes prema-bhakti. He taught sādhana-
bhakti, bhāva-bhakti, and prema-bhakti. What are Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s activities in both mahāprabhu-līlā and
kṛṣṇa-līlā, as Rūpa Gosvāmī and Rūpa Mañjarī? Rūpa
Mañjarī could not give this idea to anyone, but Rūpa
Gosvāmī did so.3

Raghunātha dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, you have said several times that while
chanting japa, one has to meditate on Kṛṣṇa. Should we
meditate also on mahāprabhu-līlā? Can we meditate on
both mahāprabhu-līlā and kṛṣṇa-līlā? Or should we
meditate only on rādhā-kṛṣṇa-līlā while chanting japa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It is better to do what Caitanya Mahāprabhu ordered us
to do. Mahāprabhu told us to chant “Hare Kṛṣṇa,” so we
do this. This practice is sādhana-bhakti – to achieve
bhāva-bhakti and then prema-bhakti.

A man wants to be in a place where there is more prema,
or pure love. Why then did Kṛṣṇa leave for Mathurā and
then to Dvārakā? If He had come to Mathurā only to kill
Kaṁsa and establish full peace and order there, then why
could He not return? The love and affection of the gopīs
for Kṛṣṇa is the highest in the world, so why did Kṛṣṇa

                           61
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

not return there? And if He could not go to Vṛndāvana,
why could He not at least bring the gopīs to be with Him
in Mathurā?

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: It would have been rasābhāsa4.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I will tell about this in Badger.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: Very good. Is this what you have been writing about in
your commentaries?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I am translating all of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s commentaries on the Tenth Canto. Very
pathetic, very pathetic.5 I will speak in Hindi, and
someone can translate my words. In that way I can more
fully express all the ideas. There are some difficult
Sanskrit words that are not in the English dictionary.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: How can there be a translation if there is no English
equivalent word?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The word ‘love’ is used to translate the various
stages of love (prema), such as sneha, māna, praṇaya,
rāga, anurāga, bhāva, mahābhāva, modana, and madana. The
only English word for all these stages of prema is
‘love,’ but ‘love’ cannot explain all these stages. The
Sanskrit language explains this well, even more so than
when it is translated to Hindi.

[To Rādhā-kānta dāsa] While hearing and telling this,
you will forget your father, mother, wife, and all other
material relations. You will have to give up your wife.
Can you?

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: Yes, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: For Kṛṣṇa, you will have to forget what is most
beloved to you in this world.

What is your age?

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

Fifty-six.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You cannot easily give up your wife. I left my home in

                           62
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

a minute.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: If I have proper engagement in sevā, and if I have
vaiṣṇava-saṅga and your mercy, then no problem.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: But that thing you will also forget.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

Forget?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You will forget, and then you will be fully absorbed
in Kṛṣṇa. This is sādhana.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: I didn’t understand.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You cannot understand?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: He is asking which thing he must forget.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Your wife, your children, your business – everything
material. Bharata Mahārāja was a king. He had a big
kingdom, a beautiful wife, sons, daughters – everything
materially desirable. He left it all as one passes
urine, but then he came in the trap of a deer.6

Brajanāth dāsa

: In Vraja, do the gopīs speak Sanskrit or Vraja-bhāṣā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They spoke the local language of that time, not in
Sanskrit.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Hmm. But all the prayers in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, like
Gopī-gīta and so on, are spoken in Sanskrit.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is told like that.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: In nitya-līlā do they speak in Sanskrit, or Vraja-
bhāṣā, or…?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

                           63
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: I cannot say, because I am not from there.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: But you have a connection with that place. You once
told me you have a trunk-line to there; an automatic
connection.

Brajanāth dāsa

: But all their songs are in Sanskrit, like Gopī-gīta.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: When we speak about the explanation of Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakaravati Ṭhākura, you will certainly cry.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, when we read the works of Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, we hear him address Rādhārāṇī
as his Svāminī. How do the other kiṅkarīs (Rādhārāṇī’s
maidservants) speak to Her? What do they call her?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

: Don’t imitate Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. You are not
like him. You should follow and practice according to
your capacity.

[To Brajanāth dāsa] If you can call Dāmodara Mahārāja to
Badger, I will explain the topic in Hindi and he can say
that in English. But he is very far away.

Brajanāth dāsa

: China is not so far.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not far?

Brajanāth dāsa

: No, China is nearby California.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa:

Twelve hours.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Well, it is comparatively nearby.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

From the Western side?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                           64
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Tell him to come.




May 26, 2010


Morning Walk

Mahābuddhi

: How do we attract the mercy of śrī guru and the
Vaiṣṇavas?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: By following them – their words, their examples, the
manner in which they chant the name – in all respects.
In this way, mercy will come personally.

Brajanāth dāsa

: The disciples of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda
– Bhagavān Prabhu and Brahma-tīrtha Prabhu – send their
respectful obeisances to you. You met them two years
ago. They are trying very hard to make a good dialogue
between you and the ISKCON leaders. They are remembering
you and trying very hard to improve the relationship
between you and ISKCON.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They [ISKCON leaders] will not agree.

Brajanāth dāsa

: They are saying that Rādhānātha Svāmī is also trying
very hard to make a good relationship between you and
ISKCON, as you desire. He is very upset about the paper
that they wrote. He and the others are still trying, and
Bhagavān is hopeful; these devotees are all hopeful.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They should be.




May 27, 2010


Morning Walk

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja] Is everything going okay
in the Birmingham Temple?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

                           65
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: Very good. Śrīpāda Vana Mahārāja is now there. The
pūjā (worship of the Deities) is very, very good.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: How many brahmacārīs are there?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Now it is a brahmacāriṇī āśrama.

If the brahmacārīs are not helping, what can I do? They
are not coming to stay. I am doing the full pūjā myself.
Brahmacārīs come and go, come and go. I think this is
not only my situation. This is the situation all over
the world.

Gurudeva, unless you give an order to brahmacārīs to
come and stay, it is not possible.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Whom can I tell?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: They have some independent will. They want to collect
for themselves and travel. This is the thing. They don’t
want to stay in any maṭha.

Brajanāth dāsa

: They want to go to India.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Also.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: How many devotees were in last night’s program?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: About two hundred fifty.

Mahābuddhi dāsa

: And it was only a one-day program.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

But the hall was full.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Gurudeva, one sannyāsī – Padmanābha Mahārāja – from
Śrīla Bhakti Pramoda Purī Gosvāmī’s maṭha was also
there.

Mahābuddhi dāsa

: He asked me to tell you that he was very thankful that

                              66
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

you allowed him to be there and speak something to the
audience.

[After some minutes]

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, because I had some special program with a
western audience in New York – new people – I shaved
before Gaura Pūrṇimā.7 In the future should I not do
this, or is it all right?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You are thinking that they will respect you if you are
fully shaved. That idea is against the principle of
bhakti.

Brajanāth dāsa

: They will respect you for what you say, not...

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: So, Gurudeva is saying I should not do this?

Brajanāth dāsa

: It depends on you.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: It depends on Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You should not do like this. You should follow us,
especially since you are a sannyāsī.

Brajanāth dāsa

: One time in Malaysia, a sannyāsī who had just shaved
came to Gurudeva. Gurudeva said, “Why have you shaved?”
He replied that it is better for book distribution.
Gurudeva became very angry and said, “Are you a sannyāsī
or not? Are you following or not?”

Devotee

: But Gurudeva, in America, if a person has a beard,
everyone thinks he is Bin Laden [the terrorist].

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We should follow our own principles.8

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Sometimes on Pūrṇimā we are doing so much sevā in the
maṭha, especially pujārī sevā, that practically speaking
we have no time to shave. Should we then wait till the
following Pūrṇimā to shave?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

                            67
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: Not more sevā than me. You are just making an excuse.

Mahābuddhi dāsa

: Gurudeva, how can we best serve you as gṛhasthas
(householders)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: As Brajanāth. Being gṛhastha, he and Vṛnda are serving
day and night. Sweeping, cleaning, going forward [as our
‘advance party’] to establish our programs – Vṛnda is
doing everything.

Mahābuddhi dāsa

: What’s the next level down? [meaning “This is such a
high standard. Is there any lower standard that we can
practically aspire for?”]

Ramesh dāsa

: Gurudeva, will you please give your blessings to all
our devotees in the Costa Rica maṭha?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Ramesh dāsa

: There are new people coming – young people – every
day.




May 28, 2010


Morning Walk

Devotee

: We all have a tendency within us to control – all the
time. Small or big, we all have that tendency. How do we
overcome this?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Ants are very small, elephants big, mountains bigger.
According to one’s karma, one receives his body. Do you
understand?

Devotee

: So how do we overcome this tendency?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: By chanting harināma and by serving gurudeva with
intimate affection (viśrambhena).

                           68
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Mukunda dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, some years ago a devotee with whom I
preached in Africa committed a crime for which he had to
stay in prison for more than twenty years. Every day he
chanted his harināma, but he did not chant his āhnika
(dīkṣā-mantras). Can he start chanting them again? He
wants to.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He can. He can.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: When you go to Houston, can you speak with him by
telephone or Skype?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

If this is better for him.

Mahābuddhi dāsa

: Gurudeva, it is not sure whether you will be returning
to us here in Orlando, so can you give us some
instructions regarding how we can serve you here?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They already have so much for that. My books are with
them, and also my instructions.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Sannyāsīs will come, Uma Dīdī will come – all will
come to help you.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: I can also come, Gurudeva.

[After some minutes]

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Sadāśiva’s abode is in Vaikuṇṭha, and Śambhu resides
in Kailāśa. Are their abodes distinctly different? And
if so, where are they in relation to each other?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Kailāśa-pati (Śambhu, or Śiva) is a manifestation of
Vaikuṇṭha-pati Sadāśiva.9 They are not the same.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Kailāśa is not in Vaikuṇṭha?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Those who worship Śambhu and go to Kailāśa – do they
stay there eternally?

                             69
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I have not seen this discussed in any scripture.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: I am asking because many Hindu people worship him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Not so many. Very few persons worship Śambhu.10

Devotee

: The consort of Śambhu in Kailāśa is Pārvatī. Is this
eternal?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Sadāśiva and Lakṣmī are also eternal?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Devotee

: Is a pure devotee in sakhya-rasa completely happy with
that? Does he think he is experiencing the highest
happiness even though he is not in mādhurya-rasa? He
doesn’t feel like he is missing the happiness of
mādhurya-rasa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is okay, correct.




* * *




1 If Daśamī (the tenth day of the moon) is completed
before 3:30 am of the Ekādaśī day (the eleventh day of
the moon), then we follow the Ekādaśī fast on the
Ekādaśī day. If Daśamī overlaps Ekādaśī, that is, if it
ends after 3:30am, then that Ekādaśī is not a pure
Ekādaśī. In that circumstance, one follows the ekādaśī-
vrata on the Dvādaśī day. If there is a doubt as to the
timings, then one follows Ekādaśī on the Dvādaśī day.

Mahā-dvādaśī and Ekādaśī are both considered to be
mādhava-tithi (the day of Mādhava, Śrī Kṛṣṇa). The
Ekādaśī fasting must be broken (the taking of pāraṇa) in

                           70
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

the second part of the dvādaśī-tithi. Lord Viṣṇu lives
with Tulasi-devī on the Dvādaśī day, therefore we don’t
pick tulasī leaves on that day.



2 Rules and regulations (such as following Ekādaśī, and
Mahā-dvādaśī) and renunciation are the doorway to
bhakti, but they are not bhakti itself unless the
emphasis is attention on the main purpose of the vow –
to remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him.



3 As mentioned in the introduction, the words on paper
don’t always fully convey Śrīla Gurudevas mood. If you
would like to hear the sound files, please go to
purebhakti.tv and look for the dates mentioned in the
book.



4 “Rasābhāsa has been defined in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(4.9.1) as follows: pūrvam evānuśiṣṭena, vikalā rasa-
lakṣmaṇā, rasā eva rasābhāsā, rasajñair anukīrtitāḥ.
That which appears to be rasa, but in which there is a
deficiency or impropriety in any of the elements that
comprise it is called rasābhāsa, a semblance of rasa, by
those learned in the science of rasa” (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindu-bindu, Verse 27, Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti).



5 Śrīla Gurudeva is particularly referring to the parts
of the Tenth Canto in which the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana
felt intense separation from Kṛṣṇa during the time of
Kṛṣṇa’s imminent departure from Vṛndāvana, during His
leaving Vṛndāvana, and then during His residing in
Mathurā and Dvārakā. These parts contain great pathos.



6 The life history of Bharata Mahārāja is described in
the fifth canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. After renouncing
his family and entire kingdom, Bharata Mahārāja went to
live alone a remote forest, where he worshiped the
Supreme Lord. In the last part of his life, however, he
became attached to an infant deer. At the time of his
death, he did not remember the Supreme Lord and His
associates; he was absorbed in thinking of the deer. As
a result he took birth as a deer in his next life.



7 In the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition there is a
scriptural injunction for male devotees, especially for
brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs, to shave their head and face
only once a month, on Pūrṇimā (the full-moon day).



8 “Actually, in our cult we don’t shave daily.
Brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs should only shave one time in
a month, as we have seen Śrīla Prabhupāda

                           71
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī and his followers do, and as
we have also heard about Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His
followers doing” (Letter by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja. July 11, 1993).



9 “According to the principle of philosophical truth
(tattva), Lord Śiva is a partial manifestation of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s plenary expansion, Sadāśiva. When Kṛṣṇa desires
to create, He expands Himself as Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa, and
possessing this creative desire, Saṅkarṣaṇa expands as
Mahā-Viṣṇu (also know as Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, or
Sadāśiva). Mahā-Viṣṇu then desires to create, and His
desire takes the form of a light that emanates from
between his eyebrows. The semblance or dim twilight
reflection of that light is called Śambhu-liṅga (Śiva)”
(Śiva-tattva, Chapter 3).

The respected reader is invited to read Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s Śiva-tattva for more information on
this subject.



10 Śrīla Gurudeva is saying that very few people worship
Śambhu with the aim of attaining his association in
Kailāśa. Most people worship him for material benefits.




May 30, 2010


Morning Walk

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Any question?

Abhirāma dāsa

: Gurudeva, in the second verse of Manaḥ-śikṣā, in the
line beginning śacī-sūnuṁ nandīśvara-pati-sutatve, do we
meditate on Śacīnandana Gaurahari as Nīlācala
Mahāprabhu, or in His navadvīpa-līlā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

In Navadvīpa.

Brajanāth dāsa

: This is explained in Gurudeva’s purport of that verse.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Navadvīpa-līlā is the highest. It is said to be
Vṛndāvana, and Nīlācala is said to be Dvārakā.

Taruṇa-kṛṣṇa dāsa


                           72
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

: Mahārāja, in the beginning of the Seventh Canto
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was asking
Nārada Muni, “How can it be said that the Lord is equal
to all? He favors the devotees and is opposed to the
demons.” This is reconciled very nicely in Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s commentary.

Now, in relation to only devotees, Kṛṣṇa says in
Bhagavad-gītā, “Ye yathā mam prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva
bhajāmy aham – As they surrender to me, I reward them
accordingly.” How is this a symptom of being equal to
all?

Brajanāth dāsa

: How do we reconcile these two ideas?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There is nothing to reconcile. The sun will shine on
those who come to an open place. How can those in a dark
room see the sun? Do you understand? Kṛṣṇa is naturally
sama-darśī (equal to all), just as the sun is sama-
darśī. In this way we can reconcile. Do you understand,
or not?

Taruṇa-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: For devotees who are doing sādhana and bhajana, Kṛṣṇa
reciprocates accordingly, and these devotees do sādhana
according to their qualifications. Who gives the
qualification that determines which devotee gets more
reciprocation than another?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Kṛṣṇa arranges this. The jīva’s capacity to understand
and realize is independent. Different, different jīvas –
different, different qualities. Actually, Kṛṣṇa has made
this arrangement; the jīvas are dependent on Kṛṣṇa.

You are not understanding? [To Brajanāth dāsa] Tell
them.

Brajanāth dāsa

: According to his qualification, every living entity
has that much interest to develop bhakti. But this
qualification is dependent upon Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has
arranged that we have a particular qualification
according to how we use or misuse our independence, and
as we develop our qualification we’ll increase our
capacity.

That capacity depends on our stage of bhakti – śraddhā,
niṣṭhā, rati, etc. – but it is Kṛṣṇa who has given every
individual living entity the capacity to develop his
full potency (uttama-bhakti). This is His arrangement.
It is not our arrangement.

[After the walk]

Vrajendra-nandana dāsa


                           73
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

: Gurudeva, the other day we were reading a little bit
in Jaiva-dharma about śānta-rasa [the stage of devotion
in which the devotee is free from all material desires,
and attached only to Kṛṣṇa, the Absolute Truth, but does
not engage in service to Him]. The question came up –
why is śānta-rasa included in the category of bhakti,
since those in śānta-rasa have no inclination to serve
Kṛṣṇa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: What to speak of dāsya (servitorship), even śānta is a
rasa.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: He’s asking why it is considered rasa. There is no
sevā at all in śānta-rasa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Still, how can it not be? The devotee in śānta-rasa
has some mamatā (a sense of possessiveness, or ‘mine-
ness’) for Kṛṣṇa. That is why it has been taken as a
rasa.




May 31, 2010


Hindi Darśana

Viṣṇu dāsa

: [Translating his conversation] I asked Gurudeva: You
said that if one chants the holy name, it has an effect
even without understanding the meaning. So, if one
chants the gāyatrī mantras without understanding the
meaning, will that also have an effect?

Gurudeva replied that one should understand the meaning
of the gāyatrī mantras from the spiritual master; that
is, he must understand the five limbs that are
associated with the mantras. Only then will it have the
full effect.1

Then I asked: “If the person who gives the gāyatrī
mantras has not realized those mantras, will that have
any effect?” Gurudeva said, “No, the mantras have effect
only if you receive them from someone who has realized
them.”

[Hindi conversation]

Viṣṇu dāsa

: [Translating] He asked Gurudeva if we can do bhajana
with mañjarī-bhāva.

Gurudeva replied: “First, anarthas must go away, then
you can think in that way. Don’t try to artificially

                           74
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

jump that high. Don’t just hear from here and there and
then try to do it.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If there are anarthas, there can be no mañjarī-bhava.2

Do you have anarthas?

Devotee

: A lot of anarthas.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I think that ninety-nine-percent of you have anarthas.
Why would mañjarī-bhāva come to you?

[Hindi conversation]

Viṣṇu dāsa

: [Translating] He asked Gurudeva: “Mahāprabhu said that
one can get liberated by the chanting of the holy name.
What is the importance of accepting a guru if one can
just chant the holy name?”

Gurudeva replied: “Where is it told that He said you
should not accept a guru? In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
from beginning to end, the importance of the spiritual
master has been glorified.”

[Hindi conversation]

Viṣṇu dāsa

: [Translating] He asked: “What is the process for
attaining uttama-bhakti?”

Gurudeva replied: “That is what I’m telling all the
time. That is what is given in Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and in the teachings of Rūpa Gosvāmī
and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. All our ācāryas
have explained in detail about uttama-bhakti, but we
have to start from step one – kaniṣṭha-bhakti. Then
slowly, by the blessings of gurudeva, we rise above and
go higher – first sādhana-bhakti, then bhāva-bhakti, and
then prema-bhakti. Uttama-bhakti is nothing but prema-
bhakti.”

[Hindi conversation]

Viṣṇu dāsa

: [Translating] He asked: “What is the difference
between guru and Kṛṣṇa?”

Gurudeva replied: “Guru and Kṛṣṇa are the same – have
you understood? No, you haven’t understood clearly. In
Gurvāṣṭakam it is stated:


sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair


                           75
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

uktas thatā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ

kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

Gurvāṣṭakam (7)


[Scriptures unanimously proclaim śrī guru to be sākṣāt-
hari, directly Śrī Hari. This is a fact jointly
corroborated by all saintly persons. Yet at the same
time, śrī guru is very dear to Bhagavān. I adore the
lotus feet of that śrī gurudeva (who is inconceivably
one with and different from Bhagavān).]

‘Priya’ means that he is a servant. Even though he is a
non-different manifestation of Kṛṣṇa, he is āśraya-
bhagavān (the servitor Godhead) and Kṛṣṇa is viṣaya-
bhagavān (the master, or served, Godhead). Guru is the
servant of Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Guru is Kṛṣṇa, but dāsya (servant). Guru is āśraya-
bhagavān and Kṛṣṇa is viṣaya-bhagavān.

Abhirāma dāsa

: Regarding the sneha (transcendental affection) Śrīla
Gurudeva was discussing in the lecture – is it possible
to have any glimpse of that before anarthas are gone?

Brajanāth dāsa

: Gurudeva said ruci (taste), not sneha. Sneha comes
after bhāva.

Gurudeva, Abhirāma Prabhu is asking: We have so many
anarthas. Can we have some ruci before our anarthas are
gone?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes. Then, when bhāva will come, the eradication of
anarthas will be almost complete; and when prema will
come, anarthas will totally go.3

[Hindi conversation]

Viṣṇu dāsa

: [Translating] The question was: “What is bhāva?”

Gurudeva replied: “Right now, you cannot understand what
bhāva is. When we are in the beginning stages of bhakti,
at the kaniṣṭha level, we cannot comprehend these
things. Even though gurudeva may explain the meaning,
you will not be able to do so. You will conceive of it
based on your level of understanding. Slowly and
gradually, this understanding will develop as you do
more bhajana.



                           76
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017




* * *




1 An excerpt from Bhajana-rahasya, Chapter 1, Text 33,
Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti:


While chanting the holy name, the sādhaka should
remember Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes of meeting (milana) and
separation (vipralambha). When he chants his mantras, he
should practice in the following five ways: (1) The
sādhaka should know the meaning of the mantra, and
remember the predominating Deity of the mantra (the
mantra-devatā) and his own specific relationship with
that Deity. (2) Nyāsa – “The Deity of the mantra is my
protector” – this conviction is called nyāsa. It is true
that success can be attained by uttering the mantra one
time only; nonetheless, the mantra is uttered 10 or 108
times for the pleasure of the mantra-devatā. This is
also called nyāsa. (3) Prapatti – “I take shelter of the
lotus feet of the mantra-devatā” – this is called
prapatti. (4) Śaraṇāgati – “I am a jīva who is suffering
extremely, and therefore I surrender to the Deity [in
six ways]” – this resolve is śaraṇāgati. (5) Ātma-
nivedana – “Whatever I have belongs to Him; it is not
mine. I am not mine either; I am His for Him to enjoy.”
This is ātma-nivedana. If one follows the process
comprised of these five limbs, he will quickly attain
perfection in chanting his mantras.



2 An excerpt from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindhu, Verse
3, Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti:


Anarthas are of four kinds: (1) svarūpa-bhrama (illusion
about spiritual identity), (2) asat-tṛṣṇā (thirst for
that which is unreal; that is, material enjoyment), (3)
aparādha (offenses), and (4) hṛdaya-daurbalya (weakness
of heart).

Svarūpa-bhrama is of four kinds: (1) sva-tattva- or
jīva-svarūpa-bhrama (illusion about one’s spiritual
identity), (2) para-tattva-bhrama (illusion about the
spiritual identity of the supreme absolute truth), (3)
sādhya-sādhana-tattva-bhrama (illusion about sādhana-
bhakti, the means of spiritual perfection, and sādhya,
the object to be obtained by such sādhana, or in other
words prema-bhakti), and (4) māyā-tattva-bhrama
(illusion about the Lord’s external energy, māyā).

Asat-tṛṣṇā is of four types: (1) varieties of desires
for material enjoyment in this world, (2) desires for
enjoyment in the higher planetary systems of Svargaloka,
(3) desires for the attainment of the eight mystic
siddhis, and (4) the desire for mukti, impersonal
liberation.

                           77
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Aparādha is of four kinds: (1) offenses towards Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, (2) offenses towards kṛṣṇa-nāma, (3) offenses
towards kṛṣṇa-svarūpa (the deity form of the Lord), and
(4) offenses towards the jīvas (living entities who are
infinitesimal particles of spirit belonging to the
Lord).

Hṛdaya-daurbalya is of four kinds: (1) tuccha-āsakti
(attachment for useless things), (2) kūṭī-nāṭī
(deceitful behavior). The word kūṭī-nāṭī may be broken
down into the constituent parts kū, bad or evil, and na
or nāṭī, that which is forbidden. In that case it would
mean doing wicked deeds or doing that which is
forbidden), (3) mātsarya (envy), and (4) sva-pratiṣṭhā-
lālasā (desire for one’s own fame and prestige).




3 An excerpt from Mādhurya-kādambinī, Chapter 3:


Four types of anarthas have been mentioned, namely,
those arising from previous sinful activity, from
previous pious activity, from nāma-aparādha, and from
cultivation of bhakti. They have five grades of anartha-
nivṛtti (nullification): (1) limited to one anartha
(eka-deśa-vartinī), (2) affecting many anarthas (bahu-
deśa-vartinī), (3) almost complete (prāyikī), (4)
complete (pūrṇa), and (5) absolute (ātyantikī). Thus
immediately after starting performance of devotional
activities (bhajana-kriyā), there is nullification, but
it is limited, according to the famous logic: The town
burned, the cloth is torn. In other words, when we hear
that a town burned, we can imagine that some of it must
still be existing, or if a cloth is torn, the pieces are
still existing. By continued practice, with the
appearance of niṣṭhā, the eradication is pervasive
(affecting many anarthas). With the appearance of rati,
or bhāva, the eradication is almost complete. With the
appearance of prema, the eradication is complete. With
the attainment of the Lord’s association, the
eradication is absolute, with no possibility of their
reappearance.




[Śrīla Gurudeva arrived in the beautiful, mountainous
town of Badger in the Sequoia Mountains around noon on
June 10th. A few hundred devotees were there in New
Vraja to receive him, and by the weekend, over seven
hundred devotees and guests were present.]




June 11, 2010



                           78
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Morning Walk

Brajanāth dāsa

: Prabhu is asking about what you explained in Hawaii
some years ago, that sambhoga (the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and
His associates in meeting) is higher than vipralambha
(the pastimes in the mood of separation).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I have also sometimes told that vipralambha dances on
the head of samhhoga. But, do any of you want the
separation of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa?

Devotees:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do any of you want this?

Devotees

: No, never.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

So, which is greater?

Devotees

: Sambhoga.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yet, Kṛṣṇa wants everyone in the world to know that
Rādhikā’s love for Him is superior to anyone else’s love
– not only in meeting, but also in separation.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja

(from Canada): Śrīla Gurudeva, now, because you have
written the book Journey of the Soul, some persons are
saying that the jīvas have not fallen from Goloka
Vṛndāvana, but that they are in Goloka sleeping, and
their dream is the dream of this world.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They are the ones who are seeing a dream.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja

: They are trying to change their philosophy now.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: Why does the jīva forget his previous life? I never
got a good answer about this.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


                             79
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

: Lokavat tu līlā kaivalyam.1 Kṛṣṇa has made the world
like this. If we do not forget everything after taking
our next birth, we would not be able to survive. We
would die. We cannot imagine how much suffering one
experiences at the time of death.

Śrīpāda Viṣṇu Mahārāja

: Rāgānuga-bhakti is very high; it is rare that a person
can follow it. And in vaidhī-bhakti there are so many
rules and regulations and mantras for arcana (worship).
So, what are we doing here? Vaidhī-bhakti, or rāgānuga-
bhakti, or something else?2 Vaidhī-bhakti leads to
Vaikuṇṭha. We are hearing hari-kathā from you and the
Vaiṣṇavas – not about Vaikuṇṭha – but still I don’t
think we are following rāgānuga.

Brajanāth dāsa

: He is saying that rāgānuga-bhakti is very rare and
difficult to attain. Vaidhī-bhakti is also very
difficult, because there are so many rules, regulations,
mantras…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No. Vaidhī-bhakti is easy. Anyone can perform vaidhī-
bhakti – anyone.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja

: What are your followers practicing? Are we practicing
vaidhī or rāgānuga?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You are doing vaidhī-bhakti and aiming for rāgānuga-
bhakti. Some, those who are qualified, are practicing
rāgānuga, and some propose to be qualified but are not.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Sajjana Mahārāja is preaching everywhere – in South
America, North America, Middle America…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Dāmodara Mahārāja is not doing less.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, some devotees say that they are following
rāgānuga-bhakti, so there is no need for them to perform
the activities of vaidhī-bhakti – no need for maṅgala-
āratī or any other regulations.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Do they think they are also higher than Kṛṣṇa?

Nityānanda dāsa

(from Los Angeles): I have read, that part of our
siddhānta is that there must be at least one devotee in

                             80
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

the world who is performing worship of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
on the level of bhāva – otherwise the world would be
destroyed. I read this in an article by Śrīla Vāmana
Gosvāmī Mahārāja.3 I don’t understand why the world will
be destroyed if there is no such devotee in the world.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This is correct, but such devotees are rare.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: He can’t understand why the world will be destroyed.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This is the rule and regulation of Kṛṣṇa; no one can
change it.

Prāṇa-govinda dāsa

(from England): When the jīva first falls into the
material world, does he always take a human form first,
or might he take any other form?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He may take any form among any of the 8,400,000
species of life.

Abhirāma dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, when you will perform prāṇa-pratiṣṭhā
(installation of the Deities) in Houston, will the
temple be the same as your temples in Vṛndāvana?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I have told them to make their temple like our temple
in Govardhana.

Abhirāma dāsa

: Will the speciality of the Govardhana temple – which
is Girirāja Govardhana Himself – be the same in Houston?
Will you bring the same Girirāja Govardhana to Houston?
Will both places be non-different?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I will see.

Śyāmasundara dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, I also have a question about prāṇa-
pratiṣṭhā. On page 422 of the biography of your
gurudeva, that is, our parama-gurudeva, you quote
Parama-gurudeva saying that if the vigraha (Deity) is
not installed by a mahā-puruṣa, a fully self-realized
soul, then Ṭhākurajī (the Lord in His Deity form) is not
present – only a statue is present there. But some
persons are saying that if we simply have some faith
that Kṛṣṇa is there, then He is there. How do we
reconcile that?

                           81
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: That is right. The Deity should be established by a
mahā-puruṣa. It is not that anyone can do this. “Kṛṣṇa
se tomāra…” Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, is resting in the heart of
the mahā-bhāgavatas, or mahā-puruṣas.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: If a mahā-puruṣa (topmost transcendentalist) doesn’t
establish Ṭhākurajī, then is Ṭhākurajī not there?

Brajanāth dāsa

: Gurudeva, Mahārāja is asking that if any general
devotee – not a mahā-puruṣa – performs the prāṇa-
pratiṣṭhā ceremony, then is Ṭhākurajī not there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Not there.4

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: If people who are worshiping the Deities commit
vaiṣṇava-aparādha, offenses to any pure devotee, is it
possible that Ṭhākurajī may leave, or is He always
there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In that case, there is no use of their Ṭhākurajī
worship. If one is committing such aparādha, no fruit
will come from such worship and that person will go to
hell.

Are there any more questions?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Sometimes devotees worship their Deities for a long
time, and their Ṭhākurajīs are not installed by a mahā-
puruṣa. Yet, sometimes Gurudeva has said to continue
worshiping Them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.5

Brajanāth dāsa

: Jñāna-śakti Prabhu is from Canada. He is the father of
Kṛṣṇa-prema.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [to Kṛṣṇa-prema dāsa] He is your father? Very good.

[To Jñāna-śakti dāsa] You are happy that he is in the
maṭha?

Jñāna-śakti dāsa:


                           82
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Very happy.

Devotee

: Gurudeva, if the jīva’s constitutional position is
that he is an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, then why do some
jīvas go to Vaikuṇṭha to serve Nārāyaṇa there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Oh, Nārāyaṇa is Kṛṣṇa. All the manifestations of Kṛṣṇa
are Kṛṣṇa, in tattva (by philosophical truth).

Vṛndāvana dāsa

(from Hawaii): If a madhyama-adhikārī performs prāṇa-
pratiṣṭhā, is there no result?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, there is some result.6

Devotee

: What is the method for a sādhaka to perform
viśrambheṇa guru-sevā (intimate loving service to
gurudeva) from far away?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: One simply needs to have the ambition to do that sevā,
and then one can serve him by his money, his energy, and
by doing the needful in any circumstance.

Brajanāth dāsa

: One time you told us that if a person has to go far
away for his job, he is always remembering his family.
He saves money for them, sends them that money, calls
them, and writes them letters; he is always serving
them. Similarly, this can be done with gurudeva.

Paṅkaja dāsa

: This is Danny. He is coming from Indiana. He wants to
take harināma tomorrow.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, if he wants to take, he can take.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, there is this verse:


kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya

preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam

tat tat kathā rataś cāsau

kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā


                              83
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.294)


[The devotee should constantly remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa along
with the dear most associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa whom he
chooses to follow. While permanently living in Vraja, he
should become attached to always hearing about them. (If
one is unable to live in Vraja by body, then one should
live in Vraja by mind.)]

Preṣṭhaṁ nija samīhitam. What is that process of
choosing a very near and dear associate? Is it
manifested through our sādhana, or do we choose him by
hearing?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has written:


tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

Upadeṣāmṛta (8)


[While living in Vraja as a follower of those who are
attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one should utilize all his time
by gradually transferring the absorption of his tongue
and mind from matters other than Kṛṣṇa to the chanting
and remembering of narrations of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, form,
qualities, and pastimes. This is the essence of all
instructions.]

This verse tells the process. The devotee will be in
Vṛndāvana, the place of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Tan nāma – He
will always chant the holy names. And smaraṇa – he will
remember the pastimes connected with these particular
names, such as Dāmodara, Rāsa-bihārī, and Rādhā-kānta.
Under the guidance of a rāgānuga-bhakta he will remember
these important names – names that are connected with
Rādhā.

This is the process. If one cannot physically reside in
Vṛndāvana, then he should think, “I am in Vṛndāvana.”

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: Are we personally choosing, or is it something that
manifests in the heart?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It will come by hearing. We should try to hear more
and pray more, and then it will come.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: The second part of the verse says that one should

                           84
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

always hear and chant about those dear associates. But
in preaching, so many subjects need to be told, like
Prahlāda caritra and Dhruva caritra (the life and
character of Prahlāda Mahārāja and Dhruva Mahārāja).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You are not engaged in preaching all the time – only
from time to time. In the end, everything external will
go away and you will become internally absorbed. Kṛṣṇaṁ
smaran janaṁ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija. You will follow the
dear associate for whom you have greed in rāgānuga-
bhakti. In this regard, you will remember Rūpa Gosvāmī
and Rūpa Mañjarī: Rūpa Gosvāmī as an associate of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu [his sādhaka-svarūpa], and his
siddha-svarūpa in Vraja as Rūpa Mañjarī.

Who has brought that chair?

Brajanāth dāsa:

Śivānanda.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Śivānanda Sena dāsa] Oh, you. That is why I sat on
it.

Devotee

: I would like to ask you a question. I now live in
Oregon and work as a mechanic. I would like your
permission to change my occupation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Devotee

: My friend has many cows that she offered to me. I
would like to start a dairy. I would like to ask your
blessings.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can do that.




June 12, 2010


Morning Walk

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is the last.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja:

Last what?

                              85
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The last of my speaking in a general class. I will
speak in Rome, Italy, but not in public.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, how did Nanda Bābā feel when Kṛṣṇa and
Balarāma told him that the people in Mathurā are saying
They are the sons of Vasudeva and Devakī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: On one side he was very happy to be returning to
Vṛndāvana with Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva. On the other side,
alone, without Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, he was weeping in
separation and saying to himself, “I have come to
Mathurā only to receive ornaments? I have left Kṛṣṇa
there?” 7

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: Mother Yaśodā and all the other motherly gopīs were
angry [when Nanda returned to Vṛndāvana without Kṛṣṇa
and Balarāma]. They told Nanda Bābā, “You sold Kṛṣṇa for
ornaments and clothes!”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma also returned from the chariot of
Akrūra.8

Brajanāth dāsa

: Gurudeva, what will you speak about tonight, Dāmodara
Mahārāja wants to hear that now.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: Will you also speak about why Kṛṣṇa did not return to
Vṛndāvana from Mathurā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He is already there; what is the need to return?
Mathureśa Kṛṣṇa lives in Mathurā, but Kṛṣṇa is always in
Vṛndāvana.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: In class, will you tell the kathā about Prema-
sarovara?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I have told all of that. I will see what to tell.

Today is Govardhana Annakūṭa. You will have to speak
about Govardhana.

                            86
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja

: This is Mohammed from Morocco. He stays in your Los
Angeles temple.

Mohammed

: Do we have to be born in a Vaiṣṇava family in order to
become a bona fide guru?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No. Anyone who is hearing hari-kathā from preachers
and who has developed śraddhā (strong faith) can become
qualified; even wretched persons can become qualified.
Bhakti will take them upon the head of those born in
aristocratic Vaiṣṇava families [meaning that regardless
of their birth status, all pure devotees are the best
among all Vaiṣṇavas].

Mohammed

: Even someone like me, who was born in a Muslim family?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No harm; you can also become qualified to be guru. Do
you have śraddhā?

Mohammed:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Then you are qualified.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja:




ṣaṭ-karma-nipuno vipro

mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ

avaiṣṇavo gurur na syād

vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ

Padma Purāṇa


[A scholarly brāhmaṇa, expert in all subjects of Vedic
knowledge, is unfit to become a spiritual master without
being a Vaiṣṇava, or expert in the science of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. But a person born in a family of a lower
caste can become a spiritual master if he is a Vaiṣṇava,
or Kṛṣṇa conscious.*]

Śrīpāda Viṣṇu Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, what is the difference between prakaṭa

                              87
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

(manifested) Vraja and aprakaṭa (unmanifested) Vraja?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: One is up and one is down. In other words, there is no
difference. What is going on there is also going on
here.

We cannot see aprakaṭa-līlā (Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in
Goloka Vṛndāvana), whereas prakaṭa-līlā (Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes as they are manifest here in this world) can be
seen by all those who are present at the time of Kṛṣṇa’s
appearance here.

Śrīpāda Viṣṇu Mahārāja

: When Kṛṣṇa goes back with Nanda Bābā in another
prakoṣṭha (another section of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes), is this
also happening in prakaṭa Vraja, or is this happening in
aprakaṭa Vraja and the other [wherein Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma
didn’t return with Nanda Bābā] in prakaṭa Vraja?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

: This is in prakaṭa Vraja.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: He is asking that when Nanda Bābā became very happy by
returning with Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva, did they all go to
aprakaṭa Vraja or prakaṭa Vraja?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Prakaṭa Vraja.7

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: In each of the innumerable universes there is prakaṭa
Vraja. Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are going on everywhere at
different times. For example, at the same time that
Nanda Mahārāja left for Mathurā in this universe, in
another universe he returned with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma.9

Abhirāma dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, is Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
a manifestation of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

If Śrīla Visvanath Cakravartī Ṭhākura had not written an
explanation to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhāgavatam would have
remained only in the heart of Vyāsa. No one would be
able to understand it.

Puṣpadanta dāsa

: Gurudeva, this is my godbrother. He is a disciple of
Śrīla Prabhupāda from Eugene. I told him about you and
gave him your books, so he came here. He is an old book
distributor. His name

                              88
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017


is Padmanābha Prabhu.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Padmanābha dāsa] Very good. You should associate
with them.

Padmanābha dāsa

: Puṣpadanta Prabhu is saving my life.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do you have any questions?

Dhruva dāsa

: You have such a big and wonderful family now. You are
telling us that this is the last time you are coming to
America; so what do we do?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should weep.

[To all the devotees present] You have all come to
liberate me from this world. That is why I am telling
hari-kathā. You are all like my father and mother.

Devotee

: Does uttama-bhakti come from vaidhī-bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: All conditioned souls begin from vaidhī-bhakti and go
up to there, except those who are eternal associates of
Kṛṣṇa.

Madhuvrata dāsa

: Why is the prakoṣṭha (compartment of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes)
of separation emphasized in Bhāgavatam, and not the
prakoṣṭha of meeting?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Viraha (the mood of separation) is superior for us
conditioned souls.

Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa

(from England): With what mood should we chant kīrtana?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The mood that, “I am a very high class of singer”
should not come at any time.


keno vā āchaye prāṇa ki sukha pāiyā

narottama dāsa keno na gelo mariyā

                             89
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Prārthanā, Ākṣepa (Song 42, Verse 5)


[For what happiness does this life continue? Why doesn’t
Narottama dāsa simply die?]

Don’t look here and there to see whether or not all are
appreciating you. This is very bad. Cultivate the same
mood as the writer.10

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja

(from Canada): A disciple of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has told that Svāmī Haridāsa, who
discovered Baṅkī-bihārī, is the same Haridāsa in
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, Chapter 8, who Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja says encouraged him to write this Caitanya-
caritāmṛta. Is this true?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No, definitely not. This is not said anywhere in
scripture. Moreover, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has
said, “I have taken permission from the entire society
of Vrajavāsī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.”

Brajanāth dāsa

: But was there any Haridāsa at the time of Mahāprabhu
who discovered Baṅkī-bihārī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, he was from the Nimbārka sampradāya. He was not
participating in the pastimes of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja

: Would a madhyama-adhikārī remain in a spiritual
institution that has resolutions against pure devotees
and bans them from their society?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There was an imitation Rūpa Gosvāmī named Rūpa
Kavirāja. He banned others indiscriminately, and he was
expelled from our sampradāya by Śrīmatī Hemalatā
Ṭhākurāṇī. Have you heard this story about the atibāḍī
Kavirāja?11

Vidura dāsa

: Did Mahāprabhu come earlier in Kali-yuga because
Advaita Ācārya petitioned him to come?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He would have come in the end of Kali. There was no
certainty exactly when He would have come. By the prayer
of Śrī Advaita Ācārya He came earlier.

Jñāna-śakti dāsa

                             90
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


: I am trying to understand the difference between
Paurṅamāsī-devī and Vṛndā-devī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Vṛndā-devī is the head of vraja-līlā’s sṛṅgāra-rasa
(amorous pastimes), and Yogamāyā is every-where for all
rasas.

Jñāna-śakti dāsa

: Paurṅamāsī serves outside of Vṛndāvana as well?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [Gestures to Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja to reply]

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Paurṅamāsī is only in Vṛndāvana, but she is in charge
of all rasas there. Yogamāyā is serving everywhere in
the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and His manifestations that take
place in both the spiritual and material creations.

Nimāī-caitanya dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, can you clarify the difference in the
behavior and activity of gopīs like Lalitā and Viśākhā,
and gopīs like Rūpa Mañjarī and Rati Mañjarī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Different, different.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Prabhu wants to know what the difference is.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: What can I tell to you? You are not qualified. If I
will tell you, you will not understand.

Mohammed

: Why are ladies not allowed to come on the morning
walk?

Brajanāth dāsa

: There is some etiquette. Vaiṣṇava sannyāsīs…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Why are you not able to have a child from your womb?

[To Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja] At the time of
Prabhupāda, did ladies used to go with him on his
morning walks?

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja

(from USA): Not often. Once in a while, but not always.

                             91
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Brajanāth dāsa

: Sometimes ladies also come with Gurudeva, but not
always. Everyone mixing so easily is not favorable for
bhakti. In class all can sit, with ladies on one side,
gents on the other.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: There is some etiquette.

Padmanābha dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, on saṅkīrtana, sometimes it is easier
to distribute the small books rather than the large
books. It is sometimes much easier to give out more
books by using the small ones. Would you be happier if
we distribute the small books so that the quantity is
greater?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The other books I have written should also be
distributed, like Bhagavad-gītā. Although big, they
should be distributed. Otherwise, only small books will
go and the bigger books will remain; that is wrong. Try
to distribute more big books.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: In the time of our Guru Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja, he also had small books and large books,
but all were being distributed. In the beginning the
devotees were not so expert to understand how to
distribute larger books. It was easier to distribute
smaller books. Then they discovered a method, and
millions and millions of very large books were
distributed to the public.

Mādhava dāsa

(From Washington, D. C.): You have created a very
wonderful spiritual organization. How do you want it to
be run? As a centralized unit, or a decentralized unit?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: After me all will try, but what will be the situation,
no one can say. Even with Kṛṣṇa Himself – everything was
destroyed after He left; Dvārakā sank in the ocean.
Similarly, no one ever thought that Rāmacandra would go
with all His associates, the Ayodyā-purīvāsīs, to His
transcendental abode in the spiritual world, and that
new living entities would appear to inhabit Ayodhyā-purī
in this world.

Devotee

: Gurudeva, I don’t want you to go.

Jayanta dāsa

: It says in śāstra that if there is fighting in the

                              92
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

family, then Lakṣmī-devī goes away. How can we in our
saṅga avoid fighting and havoc? How can we instead all
work together in harmony to please you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja] What is the answer?

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: It is the nature of kaniṣṭhas (neophyte devotees) to
quarrel and not offer respect to each other. Śrīla
Gurudeva has warned us, “Don’t criticize each other,
don’t commit offenses to each other, and even in your
laughing and joking with each other, be careful because
you may commit offenses unknowingly.” Śrīla Gurudeva has
given the directions, and it is up to us to follow. We
have to mature. We have to advance and to understand
that we are here to take his mercy and his hari-kathā to
purify ourselves and to advance in bhakti.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Where there is quarreling, Lakṣmī-devī will leave,
thinking, “I should not live here with all this
quarreling.” Why should she remain there?

Puṣpadanta dāsa

: Gurudeva, you are the perfect example. When your
gurudeva, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja,
left this world, Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja, Śrīla Trivikrama
Mahārāja, and you worked together, and you were very
successful.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: When Śrīla Trivikrama Mahārāja resigned from his
secretary post, at that time everyone elected me and I
became secretary. Pūjyapāda Trivikrama Mahārāja and
pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja were superior to me, yet they
would consult with me on what to do, and then they would
act. So, Lakṣmī was there.

But after they left this world only I was here, and
there was so much quarreling. Daṇḍa – do you know the
meaning of daṇḍa?12




June 12, 2010


Darśana

After the walk

Vicitrī dāsī

: Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīpāda has described that when
Kṛṣṇa goes to Mathurā to kill Kaṁsa, He stays for some
time, and then He comes back after a short time and

                              93
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

makes the Vrajavāsīs forget He had gone. Then He leaves
again, and this goes on again and again. He comes and
goes, comes and goes, many, many times.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is right.

Vicitrī dāsī

: So beautiful, but no one else is telling this.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam has told only that He left. But
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta has told all these details in
brief.13

Vicitrī dāsī:

You didn’t mention that last night.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Whatever Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta has told, top to bottom,
is all correct.

Bimalā dāsī

: Śrīla Gurudeva, what does it mean to ‘serve’ harināma
and mahā-prasādam?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They are the same thing.

Hear Kṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlā, His pastimes as manifest in
this world, and remember those pastimes while you chant
harināma. By that, Kṛṣṇa will give you a chance to serve
Him. He will manifest in His youthful form and engage
you in His service.




June 12, 2010


Darśana

[On the evening of June 11th, on the way to class, Śrīla
Gurudeva passes by the book table and stops to talk to
Rādhā dāsī and Gopīka dāsī, who are responsible for the
table.]

Rādhā dāsī

: There were more books at this festival than in
previous years.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They should all be distributed.

                           94
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


[Then, on the second evening, June 12th, at the
beginning of his class, after requesting Rādhā dāsī to
give a presentation about the books:]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Book distribution is one of the chief supporting
factors of preaching. In a couple of days parama-
pūjyapāda Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja preached
all over the world by the medium of books, and I desire
my books be distributed just as his were. I have written
not less than one hundred books. So many books are being
translated into different languages, and I want all
these books to go from door to door.

There is a small book stall here, and I request that in
a day or two not a single book remains there. All the
books should be taken and distributed everywhere. There
are calendars, and also the posters of Śyāmarāṇī Dīdī,
and so many other things to collect.




June 13, 2010


Morning Walk

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Vijaya-kṛṣṇa Prabhu is asking what you meant by your
statements in last night’s class regarding rāsa-kīrtana
(singing of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s intimate amorous pastimes) and
rāsa-kathā (discussion of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s intimate amorous
pastimes). He wants to know if it was his kīrtana you
were warning us about.14

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: [To Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa] Not your kīrtana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa] You don’t have enough
intelligence to catch the meaning of my words?

Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: I understood what you said, but many people are asking
me, “Is Gurudeva talking about your kīrtana?” I told
them, “No, I don’t think so, I hope not.”

Devotee

: Gurudeva, did you say last night not to associate with
that person who is doing rāsa-kīrtana?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You cannot understand a simple thing?


                           95
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Yes, that’s what Gurudeva means.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja

: In your Vraja-maṇḍala Parikramā book you say that
Govardhana is a manifestation of Rādhārāṇī’s heart, but
from yesterday’s class we understood that Govardhana is
a priya-narma-sakhā (Kṛṣṇa’s intimate cowherd friend).
How can we reconcile this?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: What is written there is okay; you will have to
somehow reconcile.15

If a man is alone with his wife, after some time they
will have a son. In other words, they will not feel shy
to conceive a son when they are alone. Similarly, if all
the most confidential pastimes of Kṛṣṇa take place in
Govardhana, and Govardhana is thus seeing these
pastimes, it means that he is the most intimate
servant.16 Do you understand?

Tri-lokanātha dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, some devotees are desirous to
understand more of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s pastimes
before He took sannyāsa. But I’m concerned. I would like
to understand the difference between worship of Gaura-
Gadādhara and straying into gaurāṅga-nāgarī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: What is the meaning of gaurāṅga-nāgarī? It is the idea
that “Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself. Since Kṛṣṇa has
engaged in rāsa dance, Mahāprabhu should also, and we
will dance with Him as the gopīs performed such pastimes
with Kṛṣṇa. Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa, and I am His most
beloved.” This is gaura-nāgarī. To worship Gadādhara
with Gaura is not gaura-nāgarī.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Gaura-nāgarī is not authentic; it is apasiddhānta
(philosophically incorrect conclusion).

Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: If gaurāṅga-nāgarī is apasampradāya (outside any of
the four authorized systems of Vaiṣṇava philosophy), why
does Narahari Sarakāra write in this way?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If in any books we find something, which seems not to
be exactly in accord with the understanding of our
Gosvāmī’s line, and also something that is exactly in
accordance with it, we should only follow what is
good.17

Brajanāth dāsa


                           96
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

: Vijaya-kṛṣṇa Prabhu is telling that Narahari Sarakāra
has written some padāvalī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We don’t give his books much importance regarding
siddhānta.

Śrīpāda Avadhūta Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, I found a book about gaura-nāgarī, quoting
Narahari Sarakāra. It was done by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
disciple who had converted to that. It is very shameful.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Let them be. They cannot do anything.

Śrīpāda Avadhūta Mahārāja

: Is this also why it is so important not to put the
peacock feather on Mahāprabhu?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You should not do so. And you should not read those
books.

Tri-lokanātha dāsa

: Gurudeva, I understand also that Śrī Locana dāsa
Ṭhākura’s book Caitanya-maṅgala describes in very
gorgeous fashion Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s līlā before
taking sannyāsa – His pastimes in married life and so
on. Is this bona fide? Is this is okay to read?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We can take his book like bona fide…18

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: But not completely. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura said not to read it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura’s Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata
was at first named Śrī Caitanya-maṅgala. Then, when
Locana dāsa Ṭhākura later wrote another book named Śrī
Caitanya-maṅgala, the Vaisnavas requested Vṛndāvana dāsa
Ṭhākura to change the name of his book, which he then
retitled as Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata.

Jñāna-śakti dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, is it okay to put tulasī leaves on
Mahāprabhu’s lotus feet?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Yes, yes, sure – to Mahāprabhu, Nityānanda Prabhu, and
whoever is viṣṇu-tattva.


                            97
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: This is Jim. He’s been chanting for two or three
years.

Jim

(later to be initiated as Jagannātha dāsa): My wife once
met Gurudeva on an airplane, and this is what brings me
here. Gurudeva, what is the best advice for gṛhasthas?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They will take harināma and dīkṣā, chant the holy
name, read the books – Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, and other books. What more? You can serve
according to your abilities.

You are doing okay.

Dhruva dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, in a morning walk in New Zealand, you
were telling that the svarūpa (intrinsic form and
nature) of the jīva is due to one’s sādhana. At the time
of performing sādhana, the meditation determines the
svarūpa. But we also hear that the potential is already
present in seed form.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Whatever svarūpa is in the seed-form, that svarūpa
will manifest.

Dhruva dāsa

: Like a mango seed becomes a mango tree. But Gurudeva
also said that according to the meditation…

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Meditation comes at an advanced stage. Whatever
svarūpa is in a latent position, that meditation will
come.19

Brajanāth dāsa

: Before that advanced stage comes, any ‘meditation’
will be imaginary.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Solved.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: The other day we were discussing about Deity worship
regarding the installation of the Deity, or prāṇa-
pratiṣṭhā. Suppose a mahā-bhāgavata does the prāṇa-
pratiṣṭhā – for instance he installs Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda. Then, for another Deity, general devotees do
harināma before the Deity and maybe also some prāṇa-
pratiṣṭhā ceremony.


                            98
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Kṛṣṇa is there in that Deity of the general devotees and
also in the Deity of the mahā-bhāgavata, but what is the
speciality of that prāṇa-pratiṣṭhā of that mahā-
bhāgavata, who has his worshipful Lord, or Deity, in his
heart? General devotees cannot bring the Lord out from
their heart. So what is the difference in the mūrti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In the form of a Deity, Kṛṣṇa told Sanātana Gosvāmī,
“You are not giving Me even salt?” Sanātana Gosvāmī then
asked the Deity, “From where will I get salt?”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: “Today you are asking for salt, tomorrow it will be
sugar.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The Deity replied, “Oh, but what if I will arrange
this Myself?” Sanātana Gosvāmī said, “Oh, You can do
that. You are the Supreme Lord.” Thus, Kṛṣṇa made the
arrangement.20

The Ṭhākura (Deity) of an uttama-adhikārī, or even a
madhyama-adhikārī, has a speciality. He can speak or do
anything in order to reciprocate with His devotee. For a
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, He will not do so.

Even if an uttama-adhikārī worships grass, thinking it
to be Kṛṣṇa, this is so much better than the kaniṣṭha
adhikārī’s worship of the Deity in His original form.
For that devotee, Kṛṣṇa acts even through grass.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Is this because an uttama-adhikārī has the mood of
sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed?


sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed

bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ

bhūtāni bhagavaty ātmany-

eṣa bhāgavatottamaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.45)


[One who sees his own mood of attraction for Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
candra, the Soul of all souls, in all jīvas, and who
also sees all living entities residing within the
shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is an uttama-bhāgavata.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This is certainly true for an uttama-adhikārī. If the
devotee is really madhyama-madhyama (an intermediate-
intermediate devotee) or madhyama-uttama (the highest of
the intermediate devotees), who is just about to become
an uttama devotee, then his Deity installation (vigraha

                              99
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

prāṇa-pratiṣṭhā) is also accepted as bona fide. He has
something – a special attachment towards Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. So, if a general devotee is doing
prāṇa-pratiṣṭhā, the installation ceremony…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We are madhyama-adhikārīs. I am madhyama-adhikārī…

Devotees

: No, no, no.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: …but still, I perform this ceremony around the world.

Tri-lokanātha dāsa

: You are uttama-uttama (the topmost of the topmost
devotees), Śrīla Gurudeva.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: I have a further question about this point. Ordinary
devotees may be making an altar and worshiping a picture
of Kṛṣṇa. They may be offering their bhoga just as our
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja taught at the very
start of his mission in America, by saying the praṇāma
mantras such as the one beginning namaḥ oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya.
So, a question may be there: are they actually getting
reciprocation from Kṛṣṇa? Is Kṛṣṇa reciprocating? Is He
accepting their bhoga? Is He accepting their worship?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: A kaniṣṭha-adhikārī should think, “My Ṭhākura (Deity)
is taking what I give Him.” Whether or not Ṭhākurajī is
actually accepting his offering, the kaniṣṭha should
think that He is.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: If a devotee is simple-hearted, then Kṛṣṇa must take
his offering. Bhāva-grāhī-janārdana. This means the Lord
accepts service when there is devotional emotion. If he
is not simple-hearted, then Kṛṣṇa does not accept that
offering.21

Śrīpāda Niṣkiñcana Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, one of the pujārīs wants to know if it is
okay to put peacock feathers on the dress of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No; this is apasiddhānta (a statement against
conclusive philosophical truth). Peacock feathers are
only for Kṛṣṇa.


                           100
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: I read Vaiṣṇava-vijaya, and there it says that Rāvaṇa
would meet with Buddha. Is that Viṣṇu Buddha, or…?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There are sixteen buddhas. Māyāvāda has been present
in this world since Satya-yuga. Śaṅkarācārya, who is
said to be a māyāvādī, appeared so much later on. Rāvaṇa
was a Buddhist.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: Viṣṇu Buddha has his own planet?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Kikatesu bhaviśyati. Kikata refers to the province of
Gayā (Bihār). Viṣṇu Buddha appeared in Gayā.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: Viṣṇu Buddha has his own planet?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It may be.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: His devotees are in śānta-rasa? This book, Vaiṣṇava-
vijaya, is very strong – very nice, wonderful.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Why did Śyāmarāṇī show so much appreciation for the
lady who sang that song last night [George Harrison’s My
Sweet Lord]?

Devotee

: For preaching.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Loka-saṅgraha (to bring ordinary persons to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness).

Puṣpadanta dāsa

: To encourage.

[Devotees discussing among themselves how Śrīpāda
Bhāgavata Mahārāja’s sister sang the song My Sweet Lord
very nicely.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Ask good questions.

Devotee

: In Navadvīpa-dhama, Govardhana is in Koladvīpa. Rādhā-

                            101
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are in Ṛtudvīpa. What is the
speciality of them being in different places? In
Vṛndāvana, they are very near each other.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It has been written by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura that
this is the wish of Kṛṣṇa. In Navadvīpa there is some
difference. The pastime places are somewhat here and
there [not in the same order as they are seen in
Vṛndāvana]. But why? By the wish of Gauracandra.

Vidura dāsa

: When we meditate on Mahāprabhu, do we only think of
Him before He was a sannyāsī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In boyhood, when He was in Navadvīpa. This is better.

Devotee

: It says that Mādhavendra Purī is the first sprout of
mādhurya-rasa in the line of Madhvācārya. Did he get
this sprout from his guru? Or from Kṛṣṇa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: A seed came into his heart. Especially it is told that
he is personally the first sprout.

Padmanābha Mahārāja will answer further.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: My understanding is that it is by the will of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In the same way, Caṇḍīdāsa and
Vidyāpati came before the time of Mahāprabhu, by His
will, so that He would have the opportunity to hear
their expressions of separation.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: In gaurāṅga-līlā, do the devotees remember Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
or Mahāprabhu?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Mahāprabhu did not think of Himself as
God, Kṛṣṇa. Only a few knew.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Once, when Mahāprabhu was in Navadvīpa, He went with
Jagadānanda Paṇḍita to the bank of the Ganges, and there
He caught a parrot and told it to chant, “Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.”
But instead it was chanting, “Gaura Gaura.” When
Mahāprabhu said, “Don’t chant, ‘Gaura Gaura,’ ” it
replied, “I am living in this place, so I prefer to
chant ‘Gaura, Gaura.’ ” Jagadānanda Paṇḍita wrote this
in his Prema-vivarta.

Devotee

                            102
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017


: Gurudeva, if we want to ask you good questions, we
must read all of your books. I am reading your books
every day. Now I am reading Journey of the Soul.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Good.

Devotee

: I will penetrate your mind with good questions,
Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Without reading, no good question can come.




June 14, 2010


Morning Walk

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: In Bhagavad-gītā (9.30), Kṛṣṇa says:


api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ


[Even if a man of abominable character engages in
ananya-bhajana, exclusive devotion to Me, he is still to
be considered a sādhu, because his intelligence is
firmly fixed in bhakti to Me.]

If we see that a devotee has a fall-down, we cannot say
what is in his heart or whether the fall-down was
accidental or premeditated. But if guru gives an order
to that devotee for rectification and the devotee
repeatedly fails to follow the order, can we still apply
api cet su-durācāro, sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ to that
devotee?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No, he is not in that category of sādhu.

Brajanāth dāsa

: This is Amogha-līlā Prabhu, a disciple of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. He knows Hindi and
Sanskrit.


                          103
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Amogha-līlā dāsa

: I want to start a gurukula. My idea is that this
school will attract people from other faiths as well as
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. I want to make it an interfaith
gurukula in which the students from other religions are
invited to come and attend. They would study their
scriptures and do their own religious worship in their
place. Is this a good idea?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Good.

Sthāyī-bhāva dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, this is my nephew Rohan. His sister is
your disciple Nandini.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What would he like?

Sthāyī-bhāva dāsa

: He wants your blessings.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Maṅgalam bhavatū22.

Cirañjīva dāsa

: Gurudeva, what is the proper mood for hearing hari-
kathā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śraddhā, or firm faith. If you have śraddhā, you will
be able to properly hear, and you will receive the
association of qualified speakers from whom to hear.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: If a devotee has some fall-down and his guru is giving
him some instructions for rectification, but the devotee
is not following those instructions, and yet he is
continuing to give hari-kathā, is that hari-kathā
effective for the listener?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The result of such hari-kathā will be zero, and also
problems will come.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: But one may consider that so much information is being
given in that hari-kathā. Is it a fact that for one who
hears that hari-kathā, an unfavorable effect will come
in the heart?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


                             104
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

: Abhimāna (false ego, a bodily concept of life) will be
transferred to the listener.

Jñāna-śakti dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, I have a question about the origin of
Daśa-mūla23. We understand that the Vaiṣṇavas depicted
in Jaiva-dharma are factual, not fictional, because
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura wrote Jaiva-dharma from his
samādhi trance. My question is that did Daśa-mūla
originate with Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī [the guru who is
speaking Daśa-mūla in Jaiva-dharma], or with Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura wrote down what he realized
in his heart.

Devotee

: When we see the world and we live around the
negativity of the world, how do we not get desensitized
by the evil and the mistakes of us human beings on this
planet?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: For a qualified person, nothing in this world is
negative and no one is an enemy. Someone will see that
something is very good, and others may see the same
thing in other ways. One’s vision depends on his
qualification in bhakti.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja

: Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja says that the environment is
always favorable.

Haridāsa dāsa

(from Canada): We are always asking you questions, Śrīla
Gurudeva. Do you have any questions for me about our
school [in Navadvīpa]?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No, no questions. Those who have the qualification
(adhikāra) for participating in the school will do so –
not all. Those who have the inclination for that will do
so.

Devotee

: Śrīla Gurudeva, it’s my birthday today.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [Placing flowers on the devotee’s head] Maṅgalam
bhavatū (may your life be auspicious), kalyānaṁ bhavatū
(may your well-being be established), kṛṣṇa-bhakti
bhavatū – may kṛṣṇa-bhakti come in your heart.

[To Nanda-gopāla dāsa] Where are your horses?

                           105
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Nanda-gopāla dāsa:

In Fresno.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Who is there looking after them?

Nanda-gopāla dāsa

: A lady there is looking after them.

Haladhara dāsa

(from Alachua): Jaya Śrīla Gurudeva.

When Uddhava was sent by Kṛṣṇa to Vṛndāvana, he found
the residents of Vṛndāvana in dire separation from
Kṛṣṇa. Was Kṛṣṇa also simultaneously meeting with the
gopīs and Nanda Mahārāja and Mother Yaśodā in pastimes
that Uddhava was not aware of?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: He is saying that Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes were going on in so
many universes where Kṛṣṇa was meeting with the
Vrajavāsīs. He is asking whether or not Uddhava knew
this fact.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If we know, how will Uddhava not know?

Haladhara dāsa

: Would Uddhava not be covered by Yogamāyā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Uddhava knows that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord. He is an
aiśvarya-bhakta, not a mādhurya-bhakta, so he knows.

Kiśorī-mohana dāsa

: Gurudeva, in the abhidheya-tattva chapter of Jaiva-
dharma, Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī explains that after
receiving dīkṣā from śrī guru, the disciple should
inquire about śuddha-bhakti (pure devotional service)
and arcana (Deity worship). My question is that why has
arcana been mentioned separately from śuddha-bhakti, as
if given separate significance?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja] You should answer.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: Śuddha-bhakti has nine limbs: śravaṇam, kīrtanam,
viṣṇu-smaraṇam, pāda-sevanam, arcanam, vandanam, dāsyam,
sakhyam, and ātma-nivedanam.24 In the practice of
bhakti, all the nine limbs, including arcana, are
practiced. These limbs may also be practiced in bhakti

                           106
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

which is not pure, but here it refers to entering the
path of śuddha-bhakti, uttama-bhakti.

In the performance of those nine limbs, the process of
arcana is there. Not only that, but in the five most
important of the sixty-four limbs of bhakti, the arcana
process is there – worshiping the form of the Lord. So
arcana is there as one of the five most powerful
processes of bhakti-yoga.

Kiśorī-mohana dāsa

: But why is it mentioned separately?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Arcana is emphasized for beginners, in order for them
to know some discipline; it requires a regulated life.
You have to wake up before maṅgala-āratī, take your
bath, and do your āhnika (utterance of the gāyatrī
mantras). You cannot think, “Oh, maṅgala-āratī is going
on, but I will keep sleeping.”

When we joined the maṭha, arcana was the first thing
Gurudeva taught us, and then cooking and all other
Vaiṣṇava services. First we have to do arcana, which
includes performing all our prescribed devotional
activities at the proper time.

Kiśorī-mohana dāsa:

Thank you.

Devotee

(from Mumbai): Gurudeva, in the third canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, Lord Kapila is explaining about the catur-
vyūha (quadruple) expansions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, namely
Aniruddha, Pradyumna, Saṅkarṣaṇa, and Vāsudeva. In the
purports, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda explains
that Aniruddha is in charge of the mind, Pradyumna of
the intelligence, and Saṅkarṣaṇa of the false ego [and
Vāsudeva of consciousness]. He wrote that if one
worships Aniruddha one’s mind is purified, by worshiping
Pradyumna one’s intelligence is purified, by worshiping
Saṅkarṣaṇa one’s false ego is purified, [and by
worshiping Vāsudeva one’s consciousness becomes
purified], and thus one can become Kṛṣṇa conscious.

So my question is, how does one worship Aniruddha,
Pradyumna, Saṅkarṣaṇa, and Vāsudeva? Is this worship
required for us?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Some worship is needed for that quality of bhakta; and
for those who are more qualified, there is no need.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Is this because all incarnations are included within
Kṛṣṇa, who is Svayam Bhagavān?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                           107
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


Yes.

Where are you from?

Devotee

: I come from Mumbai and I am living in Florida.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Whose disciple are you?

Devotee

: I am a disciple of Śrīpāda Bhakti Svarūpa Dāmodara
Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, good.

Devotee

: Śrīla Gurudeva, if you are the successor of Śrīla A.
C. Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda, why did you write
your own version of Bhagavad-gītā?

Brajanāth dāsa

: It is not his own version. It is the commentary of
another ācārya. Different ācāryas have commented on
Bhagavad-gītā. One ācārya is Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, and another is Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja translated the
commentary of Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu, and
Śrīla Gurudeva translated the commentary of Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, who is the guru of Śrīla
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu.

Devotee

: So we should read both?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja and others:

Yes.

Vṛndāvana dāsa

: What is the importance of brāhmaṇa-dīkṣā 25?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Without dīkṣā, one will not achieve divya-jñāna
(transcendental knowledge). He will not be able to
properly understand kṛṣṇa-tattva (the established truths
about Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s identity as the Supreme Being), jīva-
tattva (the established truths regarding the unlimited
living entities), māyā-tattva (the established truths
regarding Kṛṣṇa’s deluding material potency), prema-

                            108
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

tattva (the truths regarding pure love of God), or
rādhā-tattva (the truths regarding Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s supreme
potency and dearmost beloved), and his anarthas will not
go away. So, this brāhmaṇa-dīkṣā is essential.

Devotee

: Is this transcendental knowledge revealed in the
heart, or is it actually heard from the spiritual
master?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It will come from guru.

Devotee

: When we sing saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka in the
morning, whom do we meditate upon? The dīkṣā-guru
(initiating guru), the śikṣā-guru (instructing guru), or
the sannyāsa-guru (the guru who initiates the disciple
into the renounced order of life)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You meditate on the guru who is most prominent for
you. Dīkṣā-guru should be meditated upon, but if śikṣā-
guru is more qualified, then he should also be meditated
upon.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: When Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja was asked
the same question, he explained that if the disciple’s
dīkṣā- and śikṣā-gurus are both elevated souls, he will
consider the guru from whom he perceives he has received
the most spiritual benefit to be his most prominent
guru.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Okay.

Tribhaṅga dāsa

: Gurudeva, how can I know what is best for my bhakti
without having to consult you at every step?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You should have full faith in gurudeva. If one has no
faith, he will not realize anything, and if one has full
faith in gurudeva, everything will be revealed.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, two years ago you said that loyalty is the
key to success. If one is loyal to the words and
instructions of Gurudeva, then he will automatically
know how to proceed.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Also, Śrīla Gurudeva said that if the disciple has any

                           109
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

question and he meditates on Gurudeva, then Gurudeva
will manifest the answer if that disciple is sincere.




* * *




1 This is a quote from Vedānta-sūtra (2.1.33), meaning
“this is how the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa are taking place.”



2 Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.109 defines
vaidhī-bhakti as follows:


“Those who have not attained the platform of spontaneous
attachment in devotional service render devotional
service under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual
master according to the regulative principles mentioned
in the revealed scriptures. According to the revealed
scriptures, this kind of devotional service is called
vaidhī-bhakti.” *

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.149–153 defines
rāgānuga-bhakti as follows:


“The original inhabitants of Vṛndāvana are attached to
Kṛṣṇa spontaneously in devotional service. Nothing can
compare to such spontaneous devotional service, which is
called rāgātmikā-bhakti. When a devotee follows in the
footsteps of the devotees of Vṛndāvana, his devotional
service is called rāgānuga-bhakti. When one becomes
attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his
natural inclination to love is fully absorbed in
thoughts of the Lord. That is called transcendental
attachment, and devotional service according to that
attachment is called rāgātmikā, or spontaneous
devotional service. Thus, devotional service which
consists of rāga [deep attachment] is called rāgātmikā,
spontaneous loving service. If a devotee covets such a
position, he is considered to be most fortunate. If one
follows in the footsteps of the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana
out of such transcendental covetousness, he does not
care for the injunctions or reasonings of śāstra. That
is the way of spontaneous love.” *



3 “Performing bhajana with the inclination to serve
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the best type of bhajana. It cannot
be said that no one is qualified to perform this kind of
bhajana. In this world there is always a rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇava who is capable of doing such bhajana. Past,
present, and future, there will always be someone with
this qualification. To say otherwise is incorrect
because the world would face destruction if it lacked

                          110
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

the presence of such a qualified person” (“Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, Remembering the
transcendental nature of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Gosvāmī Mahārāja,” Rays of The Harmonist, No. 15,
Kartika, 2005).



4 Ṭhākurajī is always present everywhere, even without
installation, because Kṛṣṇa is present in each and every
atom. But Gurudeva is saying here that only the mahā-
bhāgavata devotee can invite that Ṭhākurajī – Rādhā-
vallabha, Rādhā-Govinda, etc. – from his heart into the
mūrti form. Others, those who are not mahā-bhāgavatas,
cannot do so because they have not yet conquered that
Ṭhākurajī within their heart. Of course, each and every
person is only allowed to interact with the Supreme Lord
according to his level of advancement, but if the
Deities are properly installed by the mahā-bhāgavata
Vaiṣṇava, Their darśana is spiritually very potent.

An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 11:


The Deity form is always cinmaya (spiritual and
conscious) for those who are on the highest platform of
eligibility. Those on the intermediate level see the
Deity as endowed with perception and awareness
(manomaya). This means that the intermediate devotee has
faith that the Deity is conscious of his thoughts and
prayers, and accepts his mood of worship. However, the
intermediate devotee, unlike the advanced devotee, does
not directly perceive the Deity as the spiritual all-
conscious form of Bhagavān. Those on the lowest level
initially see the Deity as material (jaḍamaya), but in
time, the Deity reveals His pure spiritual form to the
intelligence purified by spiritual love. Consequently,
the Deity form of Bhagavān is suitable to be worshiped
and served by all classes of devotees. It is unnecessary
to worship an imaginary form, but it is highly
beneficial to worship Bhagavān’s eternal Deity form.

An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 11:


The irrevocable conclusion is that sat-saṅga is the root
of all spiritual advancement. When one associates with
bhaktas of Bhagavān who are fully situated in divine
consciousness, one awakens transcendental affection
toward Bhagavān. The more this transcendental affection
increases, the more the material idea of the Deity
vanishes and through great good fortune this divine
consciousness gradually unfolds.



5 By such worship a person’s life will become regulated.



6 This is Vedic culture. He is under the guidance of the
uttama-adhikārī. He is remembering his gurudeva,
thinking, “You are doing this, and we are helping.” Some
result will be there. Everything depends on the degree

                          111
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

of surrender of that madhyama-adhikārī to his gurudeva.



7 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
evening class in Badger, California, on 12 June, 2010:


As Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma sat on the lap of Nanda Bābā,
Kṛṣṇa said, “Father, Vasudeva and Devakī are saying to
Me, ‘You are our son. You are our son.’ And all the
Mathurāvāsīs are saying likewise. I wanted to come to
you earlier, but all the residents of Mathurā obstructed
Me from coming to meet you.”

Balarāma said, “Listen, Father, those parents who give
up their baby cannot be called real parents. Rather,
those persons who look after the child, like the eyelids
protect the eyes, are the real parents. One who merely
gives birth is not the real parent, but one who protects
and nourishes like a parent is the real parent. You are
certainly My real father, and Yaśodā is My real mother.”

In the course of the conversation, Nanda Bābā said,
“What do You want? What is Your decision?”

“You were saying that I should stay here in Mathurā
alone, without Kṛṣṇa, but that is completely
impossible,” Balarāma replied. “Even if Lord Brahmā, the
creator of the universe, comes to Me thousands of times
with the instruction, ‘Be without Kṛṣṇa. Be without
Kṛṣṇa,’ I cannot be without Him.”

“And there is another problem,” said Nanda Bābā.
“Vasudeva and Devakī were tortured by King Kaṁsa for so
many years.”

Nanda Bābā never thought of Kṛṣṇa as the son of Vasudeva
and Devakī. He was thinking, “No one will ever criticize
me for taking my own son away from here. However, if I
take Balarāma as well, I will be considered very selfish
for taking Vasudeva and Devakī’s son. I will be
considered very unfair.”

The essence of this pastime is very difficult to
understand, and most confidential. Externally, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam describes that after hearing the arguments of
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, Nanda Bābā was pacified by Them.
They gave him many of Their golden ornaments, and Nanda
Bābā, with tears of affection in his eyes, returned to
Vṛndāvana.

But how could this have possibly happened? Did Nanda
Bābā sell Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma? Did he travel all the way
from Vraja to Mathurā to collect wealth? This is quite
impossible, because prema, pure devotion, never takes –
it always gives. Therefore, the hidden meaning of the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam statements, as revealed to us in the
commentary of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura,
should also be understood.

Kṛṣṇa had promised at the time of going with Akrūra from
Vṛndāvana to Mathurā that He would definitely return.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is satya-saṅkalpa; He always speaks the truth.

                          112
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

However, we cannot see any direct evidence in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam that Kṛṣṇa did indeed return to Vṛndāvana. We
hear that Balarāma returned for two months, but we don’t
hear that Śrī Kṛṣṇa ever returned.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes that many years later, at
the time of the solar eclipse, Kṛṣṇa went to Kurukṣetra
with His 16,108 queens, and He met the Vrajavāsīs there.
The Bhāgavatam describes only that Śrī Kṛṣṇa went back
to Vṛndāvana by being carried in the minds of the vraja-
gopīs, but not that He Himself directly returned. So,
was Kṛṣṇa’s promise broken?

There is a Padma Purāṇa reference, which we accept as
true, which states that after Kṛṣṇa killed Dantavakra,
when there were no more enemies of Kṛṣṇa left on the
Earth planet, Kṛṣṇa took all the Vrajavāsīs back to
Goloka Vṛndāvana, but that He simultaneously stayed on
Earth in His form as Dvārakādīśa-Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of
Dvārakā. But this Padma Purāṇa reference does not prove
Kṛṣṇa’s words true – that He honored His promise –
because it does not say that He personally returned to
Vraja. Therefore the question remains: was Kṛṣṇa’s
promise broken?

How are we to reconcile this? Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord.
Everything is possible for Him. He performs all His
pastimes under the direct shelter of His yogamāyā
potency, His transcendental spiritual deluding potency.
So how should we understand this pastime?

What the Bhāgavatam describes must be true – that Kṛṣṇa
and Balarāma came at night to meet Nanda Bābā, who after
conversations with Them took the golden ornaments They
had offered him, and weeping and weeping returned alone
to Vraja, leaving Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma in Mathurā.

But Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma each manifested two forms, and
thus there were two prakoṣṭhas, or chambers, of Their
pastimes. Like two different rooms in a house, there
were two different sections of Their pastimes. In
another prakoṣṭha, another section or manifestation of
Their pastimes, They accompanied Nanda Bābā back to
Vṛndāvana on the bullock cart, in great ecstasy.

Two manifestations were in play at that time; that is
how we understand this pastime. Both these pastimes
happened simultaneously. In this way, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura has reconciled the apparent
inconsistency.

In truth, Kṛṣṇa cannot give up Vṛndāvana for even a
moment, as it is said in śāstra: vṛndāvanam parityajya
padam ekaṁ na gacchati. He never takes one step out of
Vṛndāvana; He is always there. This being so, who went
to Mathurā and Dvārakā? In one prakoṣṭha – as Vasudeva-
nandana – Kṛṣṇa went there. Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa
did not go.

Here is another very important point which supports
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s explanations: When
Kṛṣṇa instructed Uddhava to go to Vṛndāvana to console
Nanda Bābā, Mother Yaśodā, and the gopīs, Uddhava asked
Kṛṣṇa, “How can I live without You? I cannot live

                          113
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

without You.” Kṛṣṇa replied, “I am partly here in
Mathurā, but I am always fully in Vṛndāvana.”

When Uddhava entered Vṛndāvana, he saw some bulls
fighting over some cows, and he saw that the gopīs had
burnt ghee lamps emanating a very beautiful fragrance.
He saw Kṛṣṇa herding the cows, and he saw that the cows’
hooves had kicked up the Vṛndāvana dust that now covered
his golden chariot. It was as if Kṛṣṇa was fully there
in Vṛndāvana.

Thus, in one pastime manifestation, Nanda Bābā, weeping,
returned to Vraja alone, and in another, overjoyed, he
returned to Vraja with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. In this way
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has reconciled the
apparent contradictions and revealed the hidden
pastimes.




8 Kṛṣna and Balarāma never leave Vṛndāvana. When They
left on the chariot of Akrūra to go to Mathurā, They
actually only went as far as Akrūra Ghāṭa, which marks
the borderline between Mathurā and Vṛndāvana. There,
Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Rohiṇī-nandana Śrī Rāma
jumped off the chariot and remained in Vṛndāvana in
their aprakaṭa forms, whereas it were Devakī-nandana or
Vasudeva-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Balarāma who
continued on to Mathurā with Akrurā.



9 An excerpt from a lecture by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja on January 1, 1967 *:


As the planets – sun planet, moon planet, and other
planets – are moving in their orbits, similarly, kṛṣṇa-
līlā has got an orbit, and the līlā is going on… Exactly
after certain millions of years, Kṛṣṇa’s līlā will be
seen in this planet… There are innumerable universes,
and it is moving from this, that, this, that...

Kṛṣṇa is born at the prison house of Kaṁsa... Vasudeva,
father, and Devakī, mother. Immediately, as soon as the
child is born, in the next universe, there is birth. So
same very thing.

Just like now it is quarter-to-eight according to sun
calculation. Immediately, you’ll find some other place
quarter-to-eight. Immediately you’ll find quarter-to-
eight in other place. Immediately… So quarter-to-eight
you cannot change. Quarter-to-eight will exist within
this movement of the sun planet or earthly planet.
Anywhere… Somewhere it must be there quarter-to-eight.
At any time. Even at 12 o’clock at night you inquire,
“What is quarter-to-eight of the sun planet?” you’ll
have. Is it not a fact? This is called nitya-līlā. How
nicely Caitanya Mahāprabhu has described it.

So kṛṣṇa-līlā is always going on like that. Kṛṣṇa’s
birth, Janmāṣṭamī... We observe Janmāṣṭamī. But that

                          114
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Janmāṣṭamī is going on every moment. Janmāṣṭamī is going
on.




10 For example, in the case where the kīrtana is the one
mentioned above, the writer would be Śrīla Narottama
dāsa Ṭhākura.



11 Atibāḍī refers to one who acts beyond his adhikāra.
In other words, by definition and qualification, a
madhyama-adhikārī will never stay in unfavorable
association. Śrīla Gurudeva is saying that those who
cannot distinguish between non-devotees and devotees are
never madhyama.



12 Daṇḍa here refers to destruction.



13 Excerpt of a darśana with Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja in Mathurā, on June 25, 1992:


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam states that
when Kṛṣṇa went from Vṛndāvana to Mathurā and was there
for a short time, He returned to Vraja and had more
pastimes with the people there. And then He went back to
Mathurā again – and after that He again returned to
Vraja and again performed the Kāliya pastime. And then
again, and then again, He went back and forth. I don’t
understand. This is a new concept for me.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Those explanations and stories are of Goloka, not of
here. Try to understand. In Goloka, all these līlās come
in repetition, but everyone thinks that they are
happening for the first time. In this world the exciting
freshness of relationships dwindles by repeated
exchanges. But, there, in the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa,
everything becomes newer and newer. Even when the
pastimes come in repetition, everyone sees them as quite
new.

The Vrajavāsīs see that Kṛṣṇa is going from Vṛndāvana to
Mathurā for the first time, and the Mathurāvāsīs see
that He is coming for the first time. Nitya nava
navāyamāna (eternally ever-fresh and new). Everyone in
the spiritual world considers that this is the first
time the pastime is going on.


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī


                          115
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

: Is the pastime different each time, or is it the same?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Whether it is different, or not different, still, they
are seeing it as though it is happening for the first
time. If they were to think that it is coming and going
so many times, they would then judge whether or not it
is the same or there are some differences. But, if all
are seeing that, “This is a new one,” never having taken
place before, then there is no question of whether it is
the same or different.


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: I thought that all the pastimes are eternal. Now it
seems like they are happening again and again. I thought
each pastime didn’t have any beginning or end.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, no beginning and no end.


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: If there is no beginning and no end, then where is the
question of repetition?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There is no repetition – it is all brand new. This is
the effect of Yogamāyā. She is so clever, so
intelligent, so powerful, and so sweet, that she covers
the intelligence of even Kṛṣṇa and Rādhikā. She makes
Them taste all Their pastimes as newer and newer.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā has seen Kṛṣṇa so many times. In fact,
on the previous night She spent the entire night with
Him. But then, when She returned to Her room in the
morning and Yaśodā called Her [to come to Yaśodā’s home
to cook Kṛṣṇa’s breakfast], She was thinking that this
would be Her first day of going to Yaśodā Bhavan
(Yaśodā’s home). She considered that She had heard the
name of Kṛṣṇa but had never seen Him.

Kṛṣṇa considers that He had heard the name of Rādhikā,
and the fact that that She was so sweet, beautiful, and
generous. He was thus eager to see Her. Rādhikā is also
always eager to see Him, and when She sees Him, She
becomes like a deer with unclosing eyelids. Rādhikā and
Kṛṣṇa have no time to see whether or not anyone is
watching Them look at each other. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
simply tasting – drinking and drinking, and continuing
to drink.


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: If the pastime of Kāliya is eternal, where is the

                          116
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

question of repetition?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

There is no repetition.


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: But it says in Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta that it has
happened again and again.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It is said in this way only for sādhaka jīvas. We are
sādhakas, and actually we are not even sādhakas. What
are we?


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: Trying to be sādhakas.


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: When you attain the stage of taste in bhajana, this
question won’t arise. You will see the pastimes as quite
new; quite new. Even if something is not new, all things
of Kṛṣṇa will seem quite new, and you will always want
to see it. All questions will be forgotten.

Have you understood my answer? Everything there is so
beautiful, and quite new. The idea that these pastimes
have come again – no eternal associate of the Lord ever
thinks in this way. Even though Rādhikā has seen Kṛṣṇa –
tasting pastimes with Him the entire previous night,
still, [the next time She sees Him] She says, “I have
not seen Him before. Who is He?”

This is so beautiful.


Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: Also in Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Gopa Kumāra was addressed
as a newcomer and it seemed like he entered…


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: All others consider that he is a newcomer, but Kṛṣṇa
treats him as one of His old companions.




14 An excerpt from the previous night’s class:


“Rāsa-kīrtana is going on, and ladies are somewhat more

                           117
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

interested in that. I have seen that rāsa-kathā [spoken
by unqualified speakers to unqualified audiences] is
very dangerous. Only a person like Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is
qualified do this. I want that rāsa-kathā and rāsa-
kīrtana should be stopped. I have seen all this at
Rādhā-kuṇḍa. My age is 91; I have seen so much.

“Be careful. That hari-kathā – rāsa-kathā – and rāsa-
kīrtana should be stopped. Otherwise you will be
sahajiyā and of nowhere [meaning that you will lose your
bhakti and become degraded]. I request that the hari-
kathā speaker should also be careful; I am telling this
for his good.

“You should all be careful. You should not hear that
rāsa-kathā or that rāsa-kīrtana, otherwise you will be
like a sahajiyā and of loose character. This is my
request to all.

“Do kīrtana. [Śrīla Gurudeva instructs that kīrtana be
started, and as it is starting…] We have seen some
letters demonstrating how persons of loose character are
always roaming on the back of ladies.”




15 An excerpt of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī’s
lecture on Aug 14, 2001, in Mathurā, India:


All of Vraja is a manifestation of Balarāma. Balarāma
has also manifested as Giri Govardhana, but there are
many subtle intricacies here. According to rasa-tattva,
Govardhana is a manifestation of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, but in
general everything comes from Balarāma.

An excerpt of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī’s
lecture on May 7, 2001, in Badger, California:


In addition, we understand that Girirāja Govardhana is
the fractional manifestation of the heart of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. In all existence, the Supreme Absolute Truth is
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Rādhikā is the complete svarūpa-śakti, the
complete facilitator of Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure. She expands in
order to give Kṛṣṇa pleasure in different ways. She
expands as Yogamāyā, as Mother Yaśodā, as the gopīs, as
the queens, as the Lakṣmīs, and in so many other ways.
In Her beautiful mādhurya love, She even expands as the
dhāma and Baladeva, and as Giri Govardhana. Ultimately,
therefore, even greater than Hari-dāsa-varya, Govardhana
is a sakhī. Only the sakhīs, the gopīs, can witness the
most confidential pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the
kuñjas and caves. Even the most intimate sakhās, like
Subala and Arjuna, cannot witness these pastimes.



16 “Why is Govardhana in the form of stone? Being
stunned is one of the symptoms of aṣṭa-sāttvika bhāva,
the eight-fold ecstatic symptoms of love. Girirāja
Govardhana is so stunned in seeing these beautiful

                          118
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

pastimes, which he himself has facilitated by becoming
the caves and kuñjas, that he is now like stone. In this
way he can witness the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and
at the same time Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa don’t feel encumbered
or embarrassed by anyone else seeing them. After all, he
appears only as stone. In this way, Girirāja Govardhana
can be worshiped in more and more intimate ways, for
more and more advancement in Kṛṣṇa Consciousness” (Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Lecture on May
7, 2001, in Badger, California).



17 Narahari Sarakāra is understood to be Madhumatī-gopī,
one of the sakhīs in kṛṣṇa-līlā. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura states in Jaiva-dharma that most of Mahāprabhu’s
associates have what is called svarūpa-vyūha, which
means they have two spiritual bodies simultaneously –
one in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes (or in any other līlā, like that
of Lord Rāmacandra) and another one in Mahāprabhu’s
pastimes.

Narahari Sarakāra is absorbed simultaneously in both
līlās. He is so caught up in his own bhāva in kṛṣṇa-līlā
that he is seeing and describing Mahāprabhu as Kṛṣṇa
from his own perspective as a sakhī. In his writings he
is not intending to teach siddhānta. He is simply
internally absorbed, relishing his own intrinsic bhāva
in kṛṣṇa-līlā. He has no connection with this theory of
gaurāṅga-nāgarī, which is not bona fide.

Since Mahāprabhu is not different from Kṛṣṇa, there is
no fault on the part of Narahari Sarakāra. Nevertheless,
devotees acquainted with both rasa and tattva do not
relish reading the parts of his literatures that do not
take both into consideration. –Śrīmatī Gaura-priya dāsī

In this regard, Śrīla Gurudeva said that we require the
association of experienced sādhus to clear any doubts.
Our ācāryas have recommended certain scriptures and
prayers that are favorable for those in the line of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, to assist them in attaining their
goal. Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas follow āmnāyaḥ-prāha, those
transcendental literatures that are approved by our
bhāgavata-paramparā. –Ed




18 Locana dāsa Ṭhākura was a disciple of Narahari
Sarakāra Ṭhākura. In his book Caitanya-maṅgala, he,
also, describes the līlā of Mahāprabhu from his own
internal perspective, making no distinctions regarding
rasa and tattva.

In Mathurā, in the early 1990’s, when a publication of
Śrī Locana dāsa Ṭhākura’s book had just been printed,
Śrīla Gurudeva explained that Locana dāsa Ṭhākura is a
nitya-siddha, an eternal associate, of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. He explained that this book is written in a
general way, and that the līlās are not presented in the
context of rasa. From the point of view of tattva, since
Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa, there is also no fault on the part

                          119
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

of Locana dāsa Ṭhākura. Still, in his book the rasas are
indistinctly mixed. Knowledgeable devotees to not relish
reading literatures that do not make those distinctions.

Śrīla Gurudeva was also asked about Garga Saṁhitā’s
descriptions of Śrīmatī Rādhikā cursing Vṛndā-devī and
Śrīdhāmā to come to the material world, this being
different from the śastra accepted by Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.
How are we to view all this?

He replied that there are different kinds of scriptures
and they are written for different kinds of people, who
have different levels of consciousness and thereby
different adhikāra (degrees of qualification).
Everybody’s necessity is considered in the Vedas, so
there are scriptures written in the different modes of
nature. Some scriptures are for those in sattva-guṇa,
some for those in raja-guṇa, and some for those in tama-
guṇa, and in some there are mixtures of the three. But
the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is amala, transcendentally pure.
The way to reconcile all of these scriptures is to
compare them to the Bhāgavatam and follow the version
presented there. –Śrīmatī Gaura-priya dāsī

“One should not criticize other śāstras. They are
created by Vyāsadeva for persons of different adhikāra”
(Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, Morning class in
Govardhana on October 30, 2009).



19 For further reading on this subject, you may read
Ācārya Kesarī, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja – His Life and Teachings, Part Four, Śrī
Gurudeva on the svarūpa of the jīva.



20 An excerpt from Vraja-maṇḍala Parikramā, Part 2,
Chapter 19:


Sometimes in the morning, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī walked
the sixteen miles from Vṛndāvana to Govardhana to
perform the fourteen-mile long parikramā of Govardhana.
From there, he would walk another sixteen miles to
Mathurā to collect alms (mādhukarī) and then again walk
back to his bhajana-kuṭī in Vṛndāvana. One day, he came
to the house of a Caube brāhmaṇa in Mathurā for alms.
What did he see there? In the house of the Caube, two
beautiful boys were playing the game gullī-daṇḍā.
Madana, the restless, fidgety boy with a dark-bluish
complexion defeated the son of the Caube. Madana climbed
upon the shoulders of the defeated boy and enjoyed a
‘horse ride’. But when the Caube’s son defeated Madana
the second time they played, and it was his turn to
enjoy a ride on Madana’s shoulders, Madana ran into the
temple room. Seeing this, the son of the Caube angrily
abused and pursued Him. He wanted to enter the temple,
but the priest scolded him and chased him away. Pointing
his forefinger at Madana, who had turned into the Deity,
the son of the Caube said, “You just wait, I will see
You tomorrow!”


                          120
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

This scene amazed Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī. The next day, he
arrived a little earlier, at breakfast time, desiring to
again have darśana. Although she had not yet taken bath,
the Caubāin was making khichrī for both boys, who were
sitting waiting for their breakfast. Maiyā was brushing
her teeth with one end of a stick and was stirring the
khichrī with the other end. When she had finished
cooking, she served the boys the hot khichrī in bowls,
cooling it down by blowing on it with her mouth. The
boys were relishing this khichrī with great love.

Sanātana Gosvāmī could not tolerate her improper
conduct. “Maiyā, it is not proper to cook khichrī
without taking bath, to stir it with the stick you use
to brush your teeth, and then to serve this contaminated
breakfast to the boys.”

The Caubāin realized her mistake, and replied, “Bābā,
from tomorrow, I will be clean when I cook and serve the
boys their breakfast.”

Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī wanted to see some more pastimes of
the Deity of Śrī Madana-Mohana, so on the third day he
went there again. Breakfast was delayed that day because
Maiyā was taking bath. She then had to clean the pots.
The hungry boys were demanding breakfast. Maiyā pacified
them, and after completing her morning chores, she
started cooking khichrī. The two boys were pulling on
her cloth and insisting on eating at once. Sanātana
Gosvāmī was unable to tolerate this. He approached her
and said, “Maiyā, there is no need for you to be clean
by bathing and so forth. If this Madana is pleased with
your unclean and impure breakfast, then you should do as
such. I have committed an offense at your feet. From
tomorrow, you should do whatever you think is proper to
satisfy them.”

Just as Sanātana Gosvāmī was about to leave, the boy
Madana came out of the temple room and said, “Bābā, I
will come with you.”

But Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī replied, “I am a completely
renounced person. I have neither a place to live, nor
any arrangement to cook palatable food. If even Yaśodā-
maiyā could not completely satisfy You, how can I take
care of You?” The child Madana nonetheless insisted on
coming with him. Sanātana Gosvāmī said, “If You really
want to come, then You will have to follow me on foot. I
cannot carry You on my shoulders.”

The boy said, “I will walk behind you, but don’t turn
around along the way to look at Me. You can look at Me
only at your bhajana-kuṭī.”

When Sanātana Gosvāmī had reached his bhajana-kuṭī, he
turned around and saw the boy Madana smile and change
into His Deity form. Sanātana Gosvāmī constructed an
altar by putting a board on top of a few stones and
seated Him there. Every day, he would cook some balls of
dough without salt on live coals, and offer them to the
Deity. One day, as Sanātana Gosvāmī was making his
offering, Madana-Mohanajī asked him for some salt.
Sanātana Gosvāmī would happily have given salt if only
he had some, but there was no salt in the hut. Madana-

                          121
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Mohanajī told him, “I am not able to swallow this dry
dough-ball.” Upon hearing this, Sanātana Gosvāmī began
to repent.

At that time, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kapūra, a rich merchant from the
Multāna province, happened to be travelling along the
Yamunā carrying valuable articles for trade in large
boats. As the boats approached Sanātana Gosvāmī’s
bhajana-kuṭī, they got stuck in the sand. Despite
several efforts, the boats could not be released from
the sand. The merchant came ashore and saw the extremely
beautiful Deity of Śrī Madana-Mohana in front of the
hut. Sitting down on the invitation of Sanātana Gosvāmī,
the merchant began to weep and lament to him about his
situation. In his mind, he firmly vowed, “As soon as my
boats are freed from the sand, I will construct a
beautiful temple for Śrī Madana-Mohana with the profits
I make from this journey. I will also make proper
arrangements for His service and offerings.” The moment
he resolved this, his boats were dislodged and started
drifting again. He made an enormous profit from his
trade and, on the inspiration of Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī,
constructed a huge temple for Śrī Madana-Mohana.
However, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī entrusted all the
arrangements of service, worship, offering, and so forth
to the priests and again began performing mādhukarī in
Vraja. In this way, he maintained his life by living
under a different tree every night and performing rigid
sādhana-bhajana.




21 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
lecture in December 1999, in Germany:


I heard a question regarding a person who is not
initiated, or a person who has only received first
initiation (harināma). The question was asked, “Has such
a person the right to make offerings to Kṛṣṇa? What
should he do?”

Suppose a person is not initiated at all, but he has
faith and honor for Kṛṣṇa and he knows that Kṛṣṇa is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Or, he believes in
Nṛsiṁhadeva or Rāma or any viṣṇu-tattva as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He wants to serve, he is engaged
in some pūjā (worship of the Deity), and he has learned
something from his family – his father, mother, or
anyone else.

He can offer preparations to Kṛṣṇa. We have heard from
śāstra:


nānopacāra-kṛta-pūjanam ārta-bandhoḥ

premṇaiva bhakta-hṛdayaṁ sukha-vidrutaṁ syāt

yāvat kṣud asti jaṭhare jaraṭhā pipāsā

tāvat suchāya bhavato nanu bhakṣya-peye

                          122
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Padyāvalī (13),

quoted in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.69)


[As long as there is hunger and thirst within the
stomach, varieties of food and drink make one feel very
happy. Similarly, when the Lord is worshiped with pure
love, the various activities performed in the course of
that worship awaken transcendental bliss in the heart of
the devotee.*]

If you are fully initiated but you do not have love and
affection for Kṛṣṇa, then even if you offer something by
mantra and sixteen kinds of paraphernalia, Kṛṣṇa will
not accept your offering. On the other hand, if you have
prema, Kṛṣṇa will have so much hunger for taking
whatever you offer. Kṛṣṇa thinks, “When My devotee
offers anything to Me, I will take it. I will accept it,
because he has prema.” If that pure devotee is bringing
something to Kṛṣṇa and he has not yet offered it, Kṛṣṇa
will run after him to take it.

Even if one has not received second initiation, if he
offers anything with bhakti, Kṛṣṇa is bound to accept
his offering. It may be that one has devotional
impressions from past births, and in this birth he has
surrendered to a sad-guru. The above mentioned verse is
for him only. It is not meant for kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs,
those who are without such past impressions and who are
just beginning to receive impressions in this birth by
somehow associating with devotees. If one has some
transcendental śraddhā, he can make an offering. The
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī Vaiṣṇava does not have very much
faith. He is not of that high caliber.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja introduced something
for his new disciples. Even if they had not received
second initiation, he told them, “You can offer bhoga to
Kṛṣṇa by the mantras: namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-
pradāya te, kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne gaura-tviṣe
namaḥ and namo brahmaṇya-devāya…”

A question may arise here: did Śrīla Svāmī Mahārāja take
initiation from his gurudeva or not? Did he know all the
rules and regulations for offering bhoga? Did he give
those mantras [which are not for offering bhoga, but
rather for offering obeisances] out of his ignorance, or
did he purposely and knowingly give them? What is the
reality?

The reality is that Śrīla Svāmī Mahārāja considered,
“Somehow I should gradually introduce all the rules and
regulations. For these neophytes, the only rule and
regulation is that they should not take meat, eggs, and
alcohol. They should not smoke or engage in other
abominable activities. They should think that they are
devotees.” For that purpose your Prabhupāda gave
initiation into the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and he told his
young disciples, “Now you are devotees. You can now
offer bhoga by this mantra: Namo brahmaṇya devāya…”

This is not an offering mantra. He knew this, but he

                          123
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

purposely did not give the offering mantra because at
that time his disciples were not qualified to receive
it. Proper following was very difficult for them. Now,
however, so much water has passed under the bridge. Now
they are very qualified, even more so than Indians. They
can do it now. Now they should make offerings according
to the proper procedures, and your Prabhupāda has
therefore sent me. He told me, “Go and introduce all
these principles.”

Don’t discover new things. Follow what is written in the
authorized śāstras. Śrīla Svāmī Mahārāja somehow engaged
them. It was very, very difficult for him, as it would
have been for any pure guru at that time, to introduce
the actual strict procedures. Yena tena prakāreṇa. He
introduced them to the line of bhakti and engaged
them.26

Now the time has come for us to reform and progress. At
the time of offering your preparations, you should utter
the correct mantras: idaṁ naivedyaṁ sa tulasī pānīya
jalaṁ, klīṁ gaurāya svāhā, and so on.

At first you should remember your gurudeva and think,
“Kṛṣṇa may reject my offering, but He cannot reject my
gurudeva’s offering.” You should offer the bhoga to
gurudeva, not for his eating it, but for his offering it
to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Mahāprabhu. Then you should call the
Deity. Still now, in Purī, at the Rādhā-kānta Maṭha, the
vigraha of Śrī Gopāla Guru is presented the bhoga, and
after that, thinking that Gopāla Guru is making the
offering, the bhoga is offered to Ṭhākurajī. Try to
follow all these principles.

Those who have not received second initiation,
therefore, should take initiation. Otherwise, if the
guru thinks they should wait for some time [and thus
they don’t have the Sanskrit mantras], they can offer in
this way: “Prabhu, I don’t know anything. Gurudeva,
please offer this.” And he can do it. Kṛṣṇa is bhāva
grāhī janārdana. He accepts an offering according to the
level of devotional qualification of the devotee making
the offering. Such a devotee can offer according to his
ability.




22 This is a blessing, meaning, “May your life be
auspicious”.



23 The ten esoteric essential truths, which eloquently
contain the entirety of Vedic knowledge.



24


Hearing and chanting about the transcendental holy name,
form, qualities, paraphernalia and pastimes of Lord

                          124
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Viṣṇu [śravaṇam and kīrtanam], remembering them [viṣṇu-
smaraṇam], serving the lotus feet of the Lord [pāda-
sevanam], offering the Lord respectful worship with
sixteen types of paraphernalia [arcanam], offering
prayers to the Lord [vandanam], becoming His servant
[dāsyam], considering the Lord one’s best friend
[sakhyam], and surrendering everything unto Him (in
other words, serving Him with the body, mind and words)
[ātma-nivedanam] – these nine processes are accepted as
pure devotional service. One who has dedicated his life
to the service of Kṛṣṇa through these nine methods
should be understood to be the most learned person, for
he has acquired complete knowledge. *

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.5.23–24



25 Brāhmaṇa-dīkṣā – second initiation; initiation into
the regulations of Deity worship and certain other
devotional principles.



26 In his lecture of December 20, 1966, Śrīla Prabhupāda
explained, “Rūpa Gosvāmī, one of the big ācāryas, says,
“Yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet – The first
business is that somehow or other people should be Kṛṣṇa
conscious.” So as far as rules and regulations are
concerned… Yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet,
sarve vidhi-niṣedhā syur etayor eva kiṇkarāḥ. [Meaning,
“If one takes to that line of activities, Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, then all regulations will follow as a
servant follows a master. If the master starts, the
servant follows. Similarly, the rules and regulations
will follow automatically.”]




June 16, 2010


Morning Walk

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Any question?

Vrajeśa dāsa

: I have one. You are our spiritual master forever. When
we come back in future lives, how do we find you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Until you are liberated you will somehow attain the
association of akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva (the undivided
principle of guru) [in other words, any bona fide
manifestation of Nityānanda/Baladeva Prabhu; any bona
fide representative of Kṛṣṇa].

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

                           125
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: This question came to Gurudeva so many times. Last
time in India, Gurudeva said that the bona fide guru
comes in this world again and again in different forms
as different manifestations of akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva. But
Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura said that,
“If there is one of my disciples present in the world, I
will personally come back for him.”

Gurudeva said, “How to reconcile this? Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
are going on in so many universes, and after that
Mahāprabhu’s pastimes are also going on. Mahāprabhu came
with so many associates, and after that He sends His
representatives from time to time – like Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura and Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura – and in
this way He sends our guru-paramparā. You will get the
association of that bona fide guru who appears on the
same planet where you have taken birth.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: Will it be that same particular guru, or another?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: It may be another, and it maybe the same. If you have
a strong desire for the same guru then you can get the
same guru. You may not recognize him, but he will
recognize you. Mahāprabhu will arrange that the disciple
will take birth, and His manifestation, the bona fide
guru, will appear on the same planet.

Nṛhari dāsa

: So if you have a śikṣā- or dīkṣā-guru, and you are
very attached to him, do you get that guru?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: If guru is a liberated soul, a bona fide guru, you can
get that same guru.

Vṛndāvana dāsa

: Some question comes up. We were talking in Badger
about prāṇa-pratiṣṭhā (installation of the Deities).
When Kṛṣṇa manifests in a Deity form, are there
different degrees that the Lord will manifest in that
form? Or, if He is there, is He there fully?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, there is so much difference. If one is not
qualified and he has done pratiṣṭhā, the effect of
worshiping may be of lesser degrees. An uttama-adhikārī
or madhyama-adhikārī will give more fruit. An uttama-
adhikārī like Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī used to talk with
his Ṭhākurajī [Madana-mohana]. The Deity of Madana-
mohana asked him, “Oh can you not give me salt?”
Ṭhākurajī will not ask us about our worship.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: What is more important – the qualification of the

                           126
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

worshiper or of the person who performs the prāṇa-
pratiṣṭhā?

[Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja relates to Śrīla Gurudeva in
Bengali the history of the young brāhmaṇa who enthused
the Deity of Sākṣī Gopāla to talk and walk.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It depends on one’s faith. We are not like that. We
think, “Oh, will He speak, or not?” But those with full
faith are confident that Ṭhākurajī can and will speak.1

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: If someone who is a kaniṣṭha or madhyama performs the
prāṇa-pratiṣṭhā ceremony, but then an uttama is
worshiping that Deity…

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: For the uttama-adhikārī there is no need for prāṇa-
pratiṣṭhā at all.

Vṛndāvana dāsa

: Gurudeva said on a morning walk that the uttama-
adhikārī realizes Kṛṣṇa even in the grass.

Nṛhari dāsa

: And our Prabhupāda explains that Prahlāda Mahārāja saw
Nṛsṁhadeva in the pillar.

Rādhā-kānta dāsa

: In our house, Ratikalā and I have no vigraha-mūrti. We
only have a picture vigraha. You also worshiped these
pictures.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, yes.

[After the walk]

Bhāvatāriṇī dāsī

: Should we aspire to go to the ultimate attainment,
mañjarī-bhava, in this lifetime, or should we think,
“Oh, I am going through the different stages of meeting
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura in our next life, and
then Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in our life after that, and
then Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and so on?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: That I cannot say. It is a very high question. If
after many millions of lifetimes you can have mañjarī-
bhava, this is a very short time.




                           127
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017


June 16, 2010


Evening Darśana

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Before death, we should try to chant the holy name,
hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rama
hare rama rama rama hare hare. By His mercy, Kṛṣṇa has
invested all His power and all His qualities in these
names. So, if you will chant harināma, you will be
happy. If you are not chanting, you will come back again
and again in your next lives as a hog, pig, dog, or cat,
and when you will again receive this human birth is not
certain.

So, you must try to chant harināma, giving up eggs,
wine, meat, drugs, smoking, and all other degrading
things. This human form has been created only for
engaging in bhajana; otherwise you will have to bear
very difficult times.

Sāvitrī dāsī

: In Badger you were talking about how Nanda Bābā and
Yaśodā-maiyā felt separation from Kṛṣṇa in prakaṭa-līlā
(Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes that are manifest in this material
world). In the spiritual world, is there not always
happiness? Is there separation there?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If there is no separation mood there, from where will
it come in this world? Everything that is here is also
in that world.

Sāvitrī dāsī

: Thank you for your nice hari-kathā in Badger.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Thank you for being there.

Rādhikā dāsī

[the grand-daughter of Śrīla Gurudeva’s hostess, Kṛṣṇa-
bhāminī dāsī]: Why are we given independence?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Because we are soul. Kṛṣṇa has no ban on the freedom
of jīvas. The natures of souls are such.

Brajanāth dāsa

: If there is no independence, then we are inert. Jaiva-
dharma describes that independence is like a jewel.

Kṛṣṇa-bhāminī dāsī

: It is out of love. Without independence, there is no

                             128
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

love. If somebody says, “You must,” then there is no
choice. We always have choice.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You wanted to enjoy this world; so you came here. If
from the marginal point you had looked towards Goloka
Vṛndāvana, you would have been liberated.2 This is the
līlā of Kṛṣṇa. One of His līlās should be like this
[giving this choice to the jīvas, the souls manifest by
His marginal potency].




June 18, 2010


Darśana

Brajanāth dāsa

: Rādhikā learned one śloka (Sanskrit verse).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

What śloka?

Bhāvatāriṇī dāsī and Rādhikā dāsī:




yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ

kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ

śoka-moha-bhayāpahā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.7.7)


[Simply by giving aural reception to this Vedic
literature, the feeling for loving devotional service to
Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sprouts
up at once to extin-guish the fire of lamentation,
illusion, and fear-fulness.*]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Louder.

[Bhāvatāriṇī dāsī and Rādhikā dāsī chant the verse
louder, accompanied by Śrīla Gurudeva]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Bhāvatāriṇī dāsī and Rādhikā dāsī] What is the
best śloka in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam?

Bhāvatāriṇī dāsī:

                            129
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017


I don’t know.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You cannot say?

Rādhikā dāsī

: Ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad dhāma vṛndāvanaṁ?

Brajanāth dāsa

: That is not Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Acyutānanda dāsa:




jayati jana-nivāso devakī-janma-vādo

yadu-vara-pariṣat svair dorbhir asyann adharmam

sthira-cara-vṛjina-ghnaḥ su-smita-śrī-mukhena

vraja-pura-vanitānāṁ vardhayan kāma-devam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.90.48)


[All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is known as jana-nivāsaḥ,
He who lives in the hearts of all living entities
[especially in the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the
heart of His pure devotees], or He who is their ultimate
resort. He is famous as Devakī-nandana and Yaśodā-
nandana, the son of Devakī and Yaśodā [it is only a
vāda, theory, that He has taken birth from the womb of
Devakī]. He is served by the exalted Yadus, who are His
associates. With His mighty arms, the Pāṇḍavas, He kills
the demons and thus destroys irreligion. By His
effulgent, blissful smiling face He dispels the
sufferings of all living entities, both moving and
inert, and increases the kāma (prema) of the gopīs of
Vṛndāvana, as well as the queens of Mathurā and Dvārakā.
May He be all-victorious.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [Repeating the verse along with Śrīpāda Mādhava
Mahārāja] The entire Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam comes in this
śloka.

Everyone has to go; no one has come permanently. We want
that suffering should not come to us at the time of
death. It may or may not come, according to our karma.

Is there any question?

Rādhikā dāsī

: Śrīla Gurudeva, one question. In Badger you were
speaking about Kṛṣṇa’s viraha (separation) pastimes,
when He went to Mathurā. Why didn’t all the Vrajavāsīs –

                          130
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

if they were feeling so much separation – why didn’t
they go to Mathurā and take Him back to Vṛndāvana by
force?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [Joking] That was their fault. They should have gone
and forcibly brought Kṛṣṇa back.

Māyeśvara dāsa

: Gurudeva, I have a question. In spiritual life, when
we first come in contact with devotees, there is great
enthusiasm and faith built. But because of rough
dealings, sometimes from ‘senior devotees,’ our faith
gets crushed and we lose it. We have the desire to
regain faith. How can we regain faith?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If you are strong – if you have actually come for
bhajana – this problem will not come. It comes when you
are weak.

You will have to be strong. If you have really come for
bhajana, why would you face so many problems?

Māyeśvara dāsa

: Sometimes people who…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Don’t look in the direction of problems. Go on with
your bhakti. It is your fault that you are seeing
obstacles. Don’t see obstacles. No trouble was ever able
to come to me – never in my entire life.




June 19, 2010


Darśana

Brajanāth dāsa

: This guest is following many different masters, and
one is Paramahaṁsa Yogānanda from India.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We are Vaiṣṇavas. We worship the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is our authoritative book. We practice
bhakti. We have regard for all, Yogānanda and others,
but we don’t follow them.




June 20, 2010

                          131
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017



Darśana

Mahā-lakṣmī dāsī

: This is Bodhi. We have known him for five years. He
has been coming to your temple for five years. When he
thought he had missed the initiation a few days ago, he
stayed up and chanted the entire night. He was praying
to Kṛṣṇa, “Somehow let me get initiated.”

Bodhi

: For one year I have been chanting to you, Gurudeva –
“Gurudeva, Gurudeva” – for one year. I will chant hare
kṛṣṇa after initiation.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Do you know him, also?

Devotee

: Yes. He comes to the Rose Temple [in Los Angeles] a
lot. He is a good devotee.

[Brajanāth dāsa asks Bodhi about the regulative
principles. Bodhi says he eats fish and eggs sometimes.
Brajanāth tells Śrīla Gurudeva.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Can you give up eating those things?

Bodhi

: Oh yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

At once, without delay.

Bodhi

: Yes. Sure, I can do that. You just tell me what to do.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You must give these up first, and then take harināma.

Bodhi

: [showing his artwork] I am a painter, and this is my
first devotional painting of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā. It’s
modern. Here is Kṛṣṇa in blue and Rādhā in red, and They
are dancing in divine love. It is in the Rose Temple.
It’s a bit different.

Brajanāth dāsa

: He is a famous artist. Many important people and
celebrities purchase his art.


                           132
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Is he gṛhastha or brahmacārī?

Brajanāth dāsa

: Twenty-four years brahmacārī.

Bodhi

: I am fifty-four now.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If you want initiation, you will have to promise to
give up eggs, fish, and all other prohibited foodstuffs.

Bodhi

: All right. I will.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Can you promise that?

Bodhi

: I promise that.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

After that, your beard.

Bodhi

: I knew you were going to say that. If you want me to,
I will cut it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: At least for initiation you will have to do it. Repeat
after me: hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare.

Bodhi

: [with help] Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare
hare.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare.

Bodhi

: [with help] Hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare
rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare.

Bodhi

: [with help] Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare

                          133
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

hare / hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare. I will
have to write it down.

Brajanāth dāsa

: We have written it down for you.

Bodhi

: Ah, thank you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Now read it and say the mantra.

[Bodhi recites the mantra while reading.]

All

: Haribol!!

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Now understand. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is very powerful. He has all qualities. For
all conditioned souls, He has invested all His power,
all His mercy, and all His qualities in His sixteen
names: Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare /
hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare.

These names can fulfill any of your desires, and in the
end they will liberate you from this world and take you
to Goloka Vṛndāvana. At that time your body will be
changed.

This holy name is the mahā-mantra, the topmost mantra.
You can chant it in the daytime, night-time, morning,
evening, while walking, and while driving in a car, and
you can chant with or without mālā (the string of japa
beads).

Bodhi

: [Showing Śrīla Gurudeva his beads] I wear mālā every
day.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: This is not tulasī. We will give you new beads.

Bodhi

: All right.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In this mantra, hare is the power of Kṛṣṇa. She is a
very beautiful personality. By Her beauty, She can take
the heart of Kṛṣṇa and control Him. Hare rāma. Hare is
Rādhā, the power of Kṛṣṇa. And rāma is Rādhā-ramaṇa Rāma
(He who enjoys loving pastimes with Śrī Rādhā); not
anyone else, only Kṛṣṇa. So, the whole mantra is Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa – Kṛṣṇa and His power.


                           134
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

[While personally demonstrating how to chant on the japa
beads, and how to advance each of the counter beads
until four sets of sixteen – or sixty-four rounds – have
been chanted.] First begin from sixteen, then gradually
increase to eighteen, twenty, and more.

[Handing Bodhi his new beads] Thank you.

[To a little girl named Rūpa-kisori] Will you chant? Oh,
chant this mantra: hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa
hare hare / hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare.
[Seeing that the girl is asleep and does not answer] If
she does not speak, I will not give her harināma.

Rūpa-kisori’s mother

: [to her daughter] Will you speak the hare kṛṣṇa
mantra? You speak it at home. Will you say it in front
of Śrīla Gurudeva? I’ll say it with you. Ready?

[Then, seeing Śrīla Gurudeva trying to hand the little
girl her new beads] Come get your beads from Śrīla
Gurudeva. Stand up. Right hand.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

[To Rūpa-kisori] Both hands.

[To Bodhi] Your name is Balarāma dāsa.

Bodhi

: Thank you. I love you.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Where do you live?

Bodhi

: I live in LA, where I paint. This is my first
devotional painting to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They are dancing
in ecstasy.




June 23, 2010


Darśana

Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: How can we know when we have made gurudeva happy?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You will be happy by doing so. If gurudeva is happy by
your activities, then you will be happy by pleasing him.

Śrīpāda Bhāgavata Mahārāja


                             135
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

(from Canada): Yasmin tuṣṭe jagat tuṣṭam. When Kṛṣṇa is
satisfied, the whole world is satisfied. Guru is like
Kṛṣṇa; so when guru is satisfied, we will also be
satisfied.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Ask Prema-prayojana whether he is happy or not. Ask
him.

Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa

: [to Prema-prayojana dāsa] Are you happy?

Prema-prayojana dāsa

: Well, I’m not drowning in an endless ocean of ānanda
(bliss).

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He is very qualified and very expert, but kidnapped. I
am not happy.

Any more questions?

Devotee

: If parents or one parent does harm to their children,
should the children honor their parents – or make a
court case against their parents?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Be like Prahlāda Mahārāja. The father and mother have
supported and nourished the child since childhood. Even
if they have done something wrong, give up any malice in
your heart.




* * *




1 An excerpt from Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā
5, Summary, by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja:


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura gives the following summary
of the Fifth Chapter in his Amṛta-pravāha-bhāṣya. Once
there were two brāhmaṇas, one elderly and the other
young, who were inhabitants of a place known as
Vidyānagara. After touring many places of pilgrimage,
the two brāhmaṇas finally reached Vṛndāvana.

The elderly brāhmaṇa was very satisfied with the service
of the young brāhmaṇa, and he wanted to offer him his
youngest daughter in marriage. The young brāhmaṇa
received the promise of his elder before the Gopāla

                          136
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Deity of Vṛndāvana; thus the Gopāla Deity acted as a
witness. When the two brāhmaṇas returned to Vidyānagara,
the younger brāhmaṇa raised the question of this
marriage, but the elderly brāhmaṇa, due to obligations
to his friends and wife, answered that he could not
remember his promise. Because of this, the younger
brāhmaṇa returned to Vṛndāvana and narrated the whole
story to Gopālajī. Thus Gopālajī, being obliged by the
young man’s devotional service, accompanied him to
southern India. Gopālajī followed the younger brāhmaṇa,
who could hear the tinkling sound of Gopālajī’s ankle
bells. When all the respectable gentlemen of Vidyānagara
were assembled, Gopālajī testified to the promise of the
elderly brāhmaṇa. Thus the marriage was performed.
Later, the king of that country constructed a fine
temple for Gopāla.




2 An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 15:


Vrajanātha

: What is the taṭasthā-svabhāva (marginal nature)?


Bābājī

: It is the nature that enables one to be situated
between both worlds, and to see both sides. Taṭasthā-
svabhāva is the eligibility to come under the control of
either of the śaktis. Sometimes the shore is submerged
in the river because of erosion, and then again it
becomes one with the land because the river changes its
course. In the same way, if the jīva looks in the
direction of Kṛṣṇa – that is, towards the spiritual
world – he is influenced by Kṛṣṇa śakti. He then enters
the spiritual world and serves Bhagavān in his pure,
conscious, spiritual form.

However, if he looks towards māyā, he becomes opposed to
Kṛṣṇa and is incarcerated by māyā. This dual-faceted
nature is called the taṭasthā-svabhāva (marginal
nature).



An excerpt from a morning walk conversation with Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja on June 14, 2008, in Badger,
California:


Candraśekhara dāsa

: In regards to those jīvas who look towards Kṛṣṇa and
the spiritual world from the taṭasthā-śakti, from where
does their eligibility come to make such a choice? One’s
choices in his present life are generally made according
to his sukṛtis (past and present spiritual pious
activities) and saṁskāras (impressions on the heart,
coming from past pious or impious acts, or from

                          137
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

reformatory procedures).


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: At that time [when the jīvas make the choice from the
taṭasthā region] there are neither sukṛtis nor
saṁskāras.


Candraśekhara dāsa:

Nothing at all?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Nothing, nothing.


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: This question was asked before, and Śrīla Gurudeva
replied that the very act of their looking toward the
Vaikuṇṭha planets was their sādhana (spiritual
practices), sukṛti, and saṁskāra.


Candraśekhara dāsa

: How can the jīva look toward Kṛṣṇa or be attracted to
Kṛṣṇa without sukṛti and saṁskāra?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Oh, this is chance. [There is a chance that he may do
so.]


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Gurudeva replied before that there was no other sukṛti
or saṁskāra required. Those jīvas used their
independence properly, and that is sufficient.


Śrīpāda Viṣṇu Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, how is chance possible, since everything is
the desire of Kṛṣṇa?


Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja

: Kṛṣṇa desires this pastime with the jīvas, to rectify
them and to bring them back to Him?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You should read thoroughly Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s Jaiva-dharma and try to follow its teachings.
At this stage you cannot reconcile all these things. Do

                           138
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

bhajana, and when you become advanced in bhakti, at that
time all doubts and questions will be solved
automatically. Try to increase your bhajana.



An excerpt from a morning walk conversation with Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja on June 18, 2006, in Badger,
California:


Raghunātha Bhatta dāsa

: Can the taṭasthā-jīvas go to Goloka from the taṭasthā
region or only to Vaikuṇṭha?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They will move according to what they have inside as
their transcendental form. Not all can go to Goloka
Vṛndāvana. Some may go to Vaikuṇṭha, some may go to
Dvārakā, some to Rāmacandra, and some to Vṛndāvana.


Devotee

: Somebody said those jīvas have to come here first to
get sādhu-saṅga, in order to go to Goloka. Is this
correct? Is my understanding correct?


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Anyone who has as his sthāyibhāva (permanent
transcendental emotion or relationship) a relation with
Kṛṣṇa in Vraja, in Mathurā, in Dvārakā, in Ayodhyā, in
Vaikuṇṭha or anywhere in the spiritual world, and they
look towards the spiritual world from the taṭasthā
region, they do not have to come to this world in order
to perfect their bhajana. Only if Kṛṣṇa desires that
they come with Him and His pastimes to this world do
they come; otherwise not.




July 2, 2010


Morning Walk

[The festival was held in the west-coast town of Marina
di Massa, Italy, between the Marble Mountains and the
Mediterranean Sea. Over twenty-five countries – from
every continent but Antarctica – were represented,
including Russia, Poland, Brazil, Argentina, Costa Rica,
Australia, New Zealand, Jamaica, Canada, Iran, Mexico,
and South and West Africa.]

Devotee

: Guru is one. He is everywhere, omniscient, and

                          139
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017

omnipresent.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If they are in the line of Nityānanda Prabhu, then
they have those qualities. Different gurus are in
different categories; it is not that all gurus are
equally qualified, even if they perform the actions of
guru or play the role of guru. Those who are not
qualified should not play that role. Bona fide gurus are
those who are strictly following Nityānanda Prabhu, who
is akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva (the complete, undivided
principle of guru).

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has prayed, “Cakṣu-dāna
dilā jei, janme janme prabhu sei – You are my master
birth after birth.” Guru is one. Guru is coming birth
after birth. In what stage does the devotee have to be,
in order to have that particular manifestation of guru-
tattva come back to him for a relationship birth after
birth?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There is no certainty that it will be the same guru.
But Nityānanda Prabhu is akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva, so a bona
fide guru, one who is in His line, will come.

Rāmanātha dāsa

: I read in an article in The Harmonist that a pure
rasika devotee doesn’t worship Nityānanda Prabhu as
akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva, but rather he worships Rādhārāṇī as
akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No, no, no, no. This is not right.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Do you have that Harmonist with you?

Rāmanātha dāsa

: No, but I think it is an article written by Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: I think the point of the article is that one cannot
achieve the mercy of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa without the mercy of
Nityānanda Prabhu. One has to go through Nityānanda
Prabhu.

Although Nityānanda, as Balarāma, is not present in a
pastime where there is Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, still, without
His mercy one cannot attain Their mercy?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Oh, you should know that just as Śrī Caitanya

                           140
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa, in the same way Nityānanda Prabhu
is Baladeva. Baladeva can appear in all forms, and thus
He can serve in all rasas. He manifests as Anaṅga
Mañjarī, and thus we can worship Nityānanda Prabhu in
the form of Anaṅga Mañjarī. Do you understand or not?

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

(from Lithuania): Many devotees worship the Deities of
Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda Prabhu. Is it possible to achieve
the same result in worshiping Nityānanda Prabhu as
Anaṅga Mañjarī and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu as Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, as is achieved when worshiping Deities of Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Vinodabihari?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This is okay. The devotees can think, “I am worshiping
Nityānanda, but in His form as Anaṅga Mañjarī.”1

Balarāma dāsa

: At what stage does our siddha-svarūpa (internally
contemplated spiritual form) manifest?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

At the time of bhāva.

Kanhaiyā-lāla dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, it is very easy for devotees to commit
aparādha (offenses) if they are not very advanced – and
then advancement is not possible. What is the best way
to stay free from aparādha?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Each person must be alert not to commit aparādha. If
someone thinks, “I must do that,” then what can I do? It
depends on that person. He should always be alert.

Dāū-dayāla dāsa

[at that time Giri Mahārāja]: Yesterday, Āśrama Mahārāja
explained this verse in his class:


nehābhikrama-nāśo ‘sti

pratyavāyo na vidyate

svalpam apy asya dharmasya

trāyate mahato bhayāt

Bhagavad-gītā (2.40)


[In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a
little advancement on this path can protect one from the
most dangerous type of fear.*]

What kind of fear does this refer to?

                             141
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Kṛṣṇa has told about bhakti in the madhyama
(intermediate) stage.2 [The mature madhyama-adhikārī,
who is at least on the level of madhyama-madhyama, is
free from committing offenses.] If one is not doing
anything wrong – not committing any aparādha – then he
will gradually develop in his bhakti. But:


yadi vaiṣṇava-aparādha uṭhe hātī mātā

upāḍe vā chiṇḍe, tāra śukhi’ yāya pātā

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 19.156)


[If the devotee commits an offense at the feet of a
Vaiṣṇava while cultivating the creeper of devotional
service in the material world, his offense is compared
to a mad elephant that uproots the creeper and breaks
it. In this way the leaves of the creeper are dried
up.*]3

So, we should be alert in this regard.




July 3, 2010


Morning Walk

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: The jīvas are going left, going right – this is free
will. At this point, is there any knowledge to go left
or right, or any knowledge of what will happen when they
go left or right? Or, is their free will only to go left
or right? Free will is left or right, but when they are
making that free choice, do they know, “If I go left, I
am going towards material energy, and if I go right I am
going towards Vaikuṇṭha?” Or, is their free will only
thinking, “I go left, I go right” without knowing what
will happen to them at the place where they will end up?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The jīva always has freedom.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja:

Always freedom.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He must go up or down. The marginal point is even
subtler than the edge of a blade of a sword. Whether
balanced or not balanced, if a mustard seed is dropped
on that blade’s edge, it will go to one side or the
other.4

                           142
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: He is asking if the jīva has knowledge of the
consequence of his choice.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He does not have that knowledge.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Okay. We understood it in this way, but some people
were saying, “No, no. The jīvas have some knowledge.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He has free will, but he does not know where to go in
order to be happy or not happy.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Next question: The jīva always has free will. Suppose
there are conditioned souls, devotees, who may have
developed upto niṣṭhā, some going to the madhyama level,
but they are still conditioned. Is their free will the
same as that of somebody who is just on the street, who
is a complete non-devotee?

Some say that when one is very conditioned, his free
will is only to surrender to Kṛṣṇa or not to surrender;
that he is completely bound. The modes of nature are
covering his body, mind, and intelligence. His free will
is very, very small. But as one raises his
consciousness, is the free will increasing? Is his
independence and ability to use his free will becoming
greater? This is my question.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The jīva is free, but without the help of dīkṣā-guru
or śikṣā-guru, he does not have the knowledge to choose
properly what to do. And that knowledge will come
according to one’s capacity. Some jīvas may be
mountains, some may be in rivers, some may be trees, and
so on. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has explained this in
Jaiva-dharma, but especially in Śrī Caitanya-śikṣāmṛta.
There, in Śrī Caitanya-śikṣāmṛta, he has given a
marvellous explanation. If you want to know more, you
can read that book.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: How is free will manifest in a mountain? Where is the
mountain’s ability to manifest its free will?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He will remain in a mountain body for millions of
years. Mountains also grow. In India, Mount Everest is
gradually growing taller.

Mountains have no freedom at all. There are so many
categories, or levels, of consciousness, namely those

                           143
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

whose consciousness is completely covered (ācchādita-
cetana), those whose consciousness is shrunken or
contracted (saṅkucita-cetana), those whose consciousness
is budding slightly (mukulita-cetana), those with
developed consciousness (vikasita-cetana), and those
with fully developed consciousness (pūrṇa-vikasita-
cetana).5

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: Sahajiyā bābājīs like the ones at Rādhā-kuṇḍa say
that, “The brahma-gāyatrī [the first of the gāyatrī
mantras] is one of the duties of those in varṇāśrama6,
so why do the members of the Gauḍīya Maṭha chant brahma-
gāyatrī?”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, this is right. All these things were re-
established by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.7
He said that we cannot imitate the true bābājīs [the Six
Gosvāmīs and those like them]. We cannot pretend that we
are already on their level. He said that true bābājīs
are in the stage of paramahaṁsa, and we are within
varṇāśrama-dharma. We follow the bhakti process from the
beginning stages, whereas the Rādhā-kuṇḍa sahajiyā
bābājīs simply try to jump to the top without any
ladder.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: Śrīla Gaura Kisora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja did not give
Prabhupāda brahma-gāyatrī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Oh, it was present from the beginning.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Yes. It is there in the Purāṇas; even in Satya-yuga.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrīla Gaura Kisora dāsa Bābājī was brahmacārī for many
years. He then went to Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja,
and then he returned to Navadvīpa.8

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: Isn’t it that all those types of jīva-tattva questions
are asked from the point of view of a jīva who has not
fully accepted that Kṛṣṇa can do anything He wants, and
that we are fully for His pleasure, to offer Him
whatever He wants?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is correct.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: How can it be said that when the jīva chooses to look
towards māyā he is called kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha (averse to

                            144
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

Kṛṣṇa), since he has no knowledge about which direction
he is going?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Better   to give up the topic of jīva-tattva for now.
Whatever   Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has told, keep his
words as   your outline and examples for understanding,
and only   follow that.9

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: The bābājīs are saying, “We are Jāhnavā vaṁśa
(dynasty).” “We are Nityānanda vaṁśa.” From which vaṁśa
are the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We are also in the Nityānanda vaṁśa.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: But didn’t Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda take dīkṣā in Jāhnavā
Ṭhākurāṇī vaṁśa?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Not vaṁśa; line [the disciplic line of Jāhnavā
Ṭhākurāṇī].

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda did
not accept that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura accepted
dīkṣā in her line.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

Vipina-bihārī Gosvāmī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: For a transcendental person, an ordinary family guru
cannot be accepted as guru. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
has cheated the worldly audience, for he accepted his
dīkṣā-guru, Vipina-bihārī Prabhu, only as a formality,
not for transcendental attainment.10

Kamala-kānta dāsa

: Gurudeva, I heard that Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura is an incarnation of Jīva Gosvāmī. I heard this
from Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja on a tape-
recording.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is right.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: I have a question regarding the jīva who is going from
taṭasthā to Vaikuṇṭha. Does he have to do any particular
sādhana to be admitted?

                            145
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: His looking towards Vaikuṇṭha alone is his sādhana.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: Can he go even to Kṛṣṇaloka, to Goloka?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: To go to Goloka is not easy. Most go up to Nārāyaṇa-
loka (Vaikuṇṭha). Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came and
disclosed all these truths about Goloka Vṛndāvana
[through His followers]. Before that, no one knew them.




July 4, 2010


Morning Walk

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: Kṛṣṇa comes to this    world, then Lord Caitanya, and
then the ācāryas. So,    each time Lord Caitanya comes, do
the same ācāryas come    after Him, and in the same
sequence? And do they    perform the same pastimes each
time they come?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Where is this written?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

I am asking you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It is not written in śāstra whether or not the same
ācāryas will come each time. Śāstra discusses the
incarnations, but the ācāryas are not incarnations, so I
cannot tell. I have not seen this written anywhere.
Whether Rāmānuja will come at the same time, or at
another time, or whether there will be no Rāmānuja, or
no Madhvācārya, I cannot say what will be.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: And what about you, Gurudeva?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: His question is this: after Mahāprabhu came, others
came in His line, like Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhakura…

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja


                             146
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

: My Guru Mahārāja [Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja],
and then you, Gurudeva…

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Will the sequence be like this, or will there be some
change? This is his main question.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: That is not written anywhere. I have not read about
this in Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhakura’s own books
or in his explanations of others’ books, or anywhere
else.

Brajanāth dāsa

: But Nṛsiṁhadeva will come.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: These kinds of questions are not relevant.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, in Jaiva-dharma, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhakura
sometimes mentions the names of Mahāprabhu’s associates
who were not necessarily present with Mahāprabhu when He
came. So, are they from different kalpas, or…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This is also not written anywhere; we cannot say.

Kiśori-mohana dāsa

: I’ve heard from many speakers that when the jivātmā
(individual spirit soul) goes to brahma-sāyujya, he can
come back to this material world of birth and death,
whereas if that soul goes to īśvara-sāyujya, he is
annihilated.11 But I have also heard from Bhagavad-gītā
that the soul can never be destroyed. So, I am confused
on this point.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In a special case, one who goes to brahma-sāyujya may
come back to this world, as we see with Gopa-Kumāra. He
went there, but he did not merge into the Lord’s body or
effulgence. Rather, He left there at once. For others,
though, it is as you are telling.

Who has come from īśvara-sāyujya? Can you say?

Kiśori-mohana dāsa

: Is īśvara-sāyujya real, or only imagination?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It is not imagination.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja


                           147
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

: Īśvara-sāyujya is more dangerous than brahma-sāyujya.

Baladeva dāsa

: What’s the meaning of kāma-gāyatrī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This cannot to be told in public. You can come to me
alone, after taking bath. I will explain it to you then.

Devotee

: Gurudeva, in Jaiva-dharma, the guru of Premadāsa
Mahāśaya Bābājī [Pradyumna Brahmacārī] served
Nṛsiṁhadeva. Why did he serve Nṛsiṁhadeva and not Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: But his aim was Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: His aim was Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, but he lived in Devapallī,
the place of Nṛsiṁhadeva. We have to give honor.

For example, we do bhajana of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. We also
observe the holy days of Rāma-navamī vrata and Nṛsiṁha
Caturdaśī, but our aim is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrīdhara Svāmī’s worshipful Deity was Nṛsiṁhadeva, but
his ultimate goal was rādhā-kṛṣṇa-prema, as evidenced by
his commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

So many persons chant japa of Nṛsiṁhadeva [Nṛsiṁha-
kavaca or any other special nṛsṁha-mantra], but only for
vighna-vināśa (to remove obstacles or give special
protection in case of emergency). Do you understand? It
is only for vighna-vinasa.12 But our ultimate goal is
Mahāprabhu’s line – rādhā-kṛṣṇa-prema.

Devotee

: Is it bona fide if someone in our saṅga has a śiva-
liṅga inside the temple room next to the Deities?

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: And they worship him as Gopīśvara Mahādeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No. The liṅga may be kept anywhere separate – not in
the same temple, unlike Girirāja Govardhana, who can be
kept everywhere.




July 5, 2010

                           148
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017



Darśana

Brajanāth dāsa

: Rāmanātha Prabhu is asking a practical question. In
England there are some brahmacārīs who will be going to
India at the time of Kārtika. They want to distribute
books. They are asking if they can use the center in
Glastonbury, which is available for them to stay, and
distribute books from there.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Rāmanātha dāsa] If you like, and if it is of
benefit, you can do so.

Rāmanātha dāsa

: Thank you, Gurudeva. We want to serve you in this
regard.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You are serving me so much.

Brajanāth dāsa

: He is the best book distributor, after Rādhā and
Gopīka.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: In Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṁhitā, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains
that the conception of hellish planets is imaginary, not
real. Can you discuss that?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Whatever Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has told is true.
There is nothing to change.

Śrīpāda Dāmodara Mahārāja

: So, there are no hellish planets? But Śukadeva Gosvāmī
says there are hellish planets.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Who translated that book? In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
there is a completely clear description of those
planets. I think this book was wrongly translated. It is
not possible that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura would say
anything opposed to the conclusions of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This was Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s first book.
Here, he wanted to defeat the arguments of the Brahmo
Samaj, whose members try to establish that the caste
brāhmaṇas are the highest and best persons in society.
Whatever he wrote there was meant to defeat their

                            149
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

arguments.13

Brajanāth dāsa

: Rabindranath Tagore?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

His father.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Devendranath Tagore.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Brahmo Samaj.14

Harernāmānanda dāsa

: It is like when Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja
used to say that we have come from Goloka Vṛndāvana – as
a tactic?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He has never told this. They say he told this, but he
would never say this. There is no māyā in Goloka, so
what would be the need to come here? If māyā were to
exist in Vaikuṇṭha, then what would be the difference
between Goloka Vṛndāvana and here?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: And there would be no need to do bhajana.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There would be no difference. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja would not say anything wrong.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: I am asking for a confirmation from yesterday. You
said that we should not have a deity of Lord Śiva in the
temple. What if it is a śiva-liṅga that is being
worshiped as Gopīśvara Mahādeva?

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja

: What about the mūrti of Gopīśvara Mahādeva [in the
form of a gopī] at Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana Gauḍīya Maṭha?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: In our Rūpa-Sanātana Maṭha he is not in the form of
śiva-liṅga [as in other Lord Śiva temples, such as in
Mathurā or the various dhāmas, where Gopīśvara is
present and worshiped in the form of śiva-liṅga]. There
is no harm in having a picture or mūrti of Gopīśvara in
Kṛṣṇa’s temple, but not for official, formal worship.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


                            150
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

: Gopīśvara Mahādeva is established only in Vṛndāvana.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: His question is: if a śiva-liṅga is kept in a temple
and worshiped as Gopīśvara Mahādeva…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Both cannot be kept in one temple. Śiva worship should
be kept outside of the temple. Even in Vṛndāvana, he is
not present in any Viṣṇu temple. Śaṅkara, Gopīśvara
Mahādeva, is the gatekeeper of the dhāma.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: In Mathurā there are separate temples of śiva-liṅgas
of Bhūteśvara Mahādeva, Gokarṇeśvara Mahādeva,
Raṅgeśvara Mahādeva, and Pīppaleśvara Mahādeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Without his mercy, no one can enter Vṛndāvana.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: In Vṛndāvana there are temples of Gopīśvara Mahādeva,
in Kāmyavana there is Kāmeśvara Mahādeva, and in
Govardhana there is Cakaleśvara Mahādeva. In Navadvīpa-
dhāma he is also there, and in Purī-dhāma there is
Lokanātha Mahādeva.

Devotee

: Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has said in Caitanya-
caritāmṛta that when Mahāprabhu was present in this
world, all the jīvas were liberated.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Those whom Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu saw, and whom His
devotees saw – only they were liberated. The words
‘whole world’ does not include those places where
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His associates have not gone.
But now, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja has come and
I have come. By our contact, so many will be liberated.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja:

Jesus said, “I am not a fisherman; I am a fisher of
men.” We are being caught in your net, and you are
giving us your net in the form of your books, to go
[cast out] and catch others.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: All questions have been solved.

Acyutānanda dāsa

: How can we become free from the desire for honor?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


                            151
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017

: You cannot say that all have such desire. There are
many liberated persons in this world. Without the
presence of liberated persons, the world cannot exist.
But, you can ask about yourself.

There may be so much desire, but gradually, by chanting,
by reading my books, and by association with exalted
devotees, you can get rid of all these nonsense
conceptions.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has written the same
thing:


pratiṣṭhāśā dhṛṣṭā śvapaca-ramaṇī me hṛdi naṭet

kathaṁ sādhu-premā spṛśati śucir etan nanu manaḥ

sadā tvaṁ sevasva prabhu-dayita-sāmantam atulaṁ

yathā tāṁ niṣkāśya tvaritam iha taṁ veśayati saḥ

Manaḥ-śikṣā (7)


[(Why is it that deceit still lingers in the heart
despite one’s having given up all material sense
enjoyment? This verse has been composed in order to
answer this question.) O mind, how can pure divine love
appear in my heart as long as the shameless dog-eating,
outcaste woman of the desire for prestige is audaciously
dancing there? Therefore always remember and serve the
immeasurably powerful commanders of the army of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the beloved devotees of the Lord. They will at
once banish this outcaste woman and initiate the flow of
immaculate vraja-prema in your heart.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has not told this for
himself. He has told it for others’ benefit.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja

: Is jīvātmā (the spirit soul) active, or not active, in
the conditioned state?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The jīva cannot be silent. He must be doing something,
whether he is in Goloka Vṛndāvana or here. Moreover,
Kṛṣṇa does not interfere with the jīva’s freedom, either
here or there. So the jīva always has freedom.

Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja

: But is he always active?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Are we not doing something? Is this person not doing
something?

                             152
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīpāda Śrautī Mahārāja

: I’m talking about the soul. The senses are the
apparent self. The senses are active, but what about the
soul in the back stage? Is the ātmā sometimes sleeping?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Gurudeva said “always active.” In Vedānta-sūtra there
is a commentary by Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa: deha bala
kovat, meaning “the soul is always active.” If you read
that commentary, you can understand what Gurudeva is
saying.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We are all doing something. Some are doing nonsense.
Some are doing good. Some better, some still better than
that, and some are in Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa states that the fruits of whatever
actions the jīvas perform do not go to Him. This is
because Kṛṣṇa has no sense of possessiveness in relation
to their actions, whereas they have that sense. The
jīvas are yantra-ārūḍhāni, mounted upon machines [these
bodies], and the fruits of their actions are awarded to
them by Kṛṣṇa. The jīva can do anything he likes, but he
will have to personally suffer or enjoy the karmic
reactions of his activities.


īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām

hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

Bhagavad-gītā (18.61)


[O Arjuna, the indwelling Supersoul is situated in the
heart of all living beings. By His illusory potency, He
is causing them to wander in the cycle of birth and
death, as if they are mounted on a machine.]

Kanhaiyā-lāla dāsa

: In Bhagavad-gītā, the description is that a yogī sees
that all the senses are working, and everything is going
on. But he, the soul, is different from that; he is not
doing anything.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Those who are liberated will see that all are in
Goloka Vṛndāvana, doing something. They will not see
that anyone in this world is not serving Kṛṣṇa somehow
or other. Śukadeva Gosvāmī never sees that anyone is not
serving. Nārada Ṛṣi is the guru of the demon Kaṁsa, and
also of the Vrajavāsīs. He is happy with them all; he
sees that all of them are serving in some way.

                           153
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


How are you? Okay?

Devotee

: Yes, by your mercy only.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

How are you?

Devotee

: It is so good to see you, Śrīla Gurudeva. You always
save me.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

How are you?

Bhūdhara dāsa

: I am a very fallen person, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I don’t think so.

Bhūdhara dāsa

: I am, but I want to explain.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I was only asking you why you first took saffron cloth
and then gave it up.

Bhūdhara dāsa

: I had very good intentions, but I think I was confused
at the time. My life was changing a lot at the time, and
I was quite confused. I had good intentions, but I
cannot be a hypocrite. So, I want you to please be
merciful to me. I am a very fallen person.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I know that some circumstances have come and that is
why you adopted this; otherwise, you have left all these
things. But I want that despite any circumstance, none
of my disciples will give up their saffron cloth.

Bhūdhara dāsa

: I gave a bad example, Gurudeva. It wasn’t my
intention. I am actually every day full of bad feelings
about myself for that. I can’t live with it. So I need
your forgiveness and your mercy. I don’t know what to
do.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Be like that.


                             154
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja

: Keśava Prabhu and Rādhā dāsī have a big āśrama, called
Shaken Ashram, in Glastonbury. They are very surrendered
to Gurudeva. They have morning and evening classes in
their āśrama, and they have established a new center in
Argentina. I visited there.

Rādhā dāsī

: We have opened a center in Argentina.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

How can you open a center?

Keśava dāsa

: It is already opened, Gurujī.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja

: By Gurudeva’s mercy they are following…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Your preaching is not preaching. You should give up
all these things, like other gṛhasthas (household
couples). Gṛhasthas do not keep such long, long hair.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Gurudeva is asking why you keep such long hair like
your wife, like a lady?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You should cut it.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja

: Their programs are very nice. They are preaching and
making many new devotees.

Rādhā dāsī

: These devotees are from Glastonbury. They want to take
initiation.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Okay. 9 A.M. tomorrow morning.

Keśava dāsa

: And we are asking Gurudeva to speak harināma into our
baby Tulasī’s ear.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: She is too small, and she is also sleeping.

Rādhā dāsī


                             155
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

(from San Fransisco): Gurudeva, we have a report. A
Badger report and an Italy report – for the festivals.
So, in Italy, over eight hundred books were distributed,
three hundred posters, and over two hundred fifty
calendars. Everything is gone from the book table, and
eight thousand Euros were collected.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

And Badger?

Gopīka dāsī

: Badger was over eight thousand books.

Rādhā dāsī

: Eight thousand books; it never happened before.

Gopīka dāsī

: And over $28,000 collected.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: That was in Badger. And here?

Rādhā dāsī

: Eight hundred books.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Even though in Italy the devotees spoke so many
different languages, and there were books in all those
languages [distributed on other tables by other
devotees], still, whatever you brought has been
distributed.

Thank you, and your company.

Rādhā dāsī

: Thank you, Gurudeva. You did everything. We cannot do
anything. You did everything by your mercy.

Gopīka dāsī

: Can I sing a song for you?

Brajanāth dāsa

: She wants to sing for you tonight before your class.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, she can do that.




July 6, 2010


                          156
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


Morning Walk

Harernāmānanda dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, sometimes devotees wonder what is the
meaning and significance of wearing Vaiṣṇava dress,
because it is a five-hundred-year-old tradition.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If a person wearing red (saffron) cloth commits any
sin, he will easily be caught. It is for this reason
that our ācāryas have given red cloth. Many kinds of
persons can dress in white, but if one engages in
nonsense while wearing this red cloth, at once he will
be caught.

Geru raṅga15 (saffron color) contains something
mysterious. It gives something to the body that makes
the wearer better able to resist kāma (lust); that is
why it has been given. But nowadays geru is not real
geru; we use artificial color.

Harernāmānanda dāsa

: Some devotees think that it is not necessary to wear
kurtā, dhotī, or sārī. They say that it is acceptable to
walk around in ordinary non-devotee clothing.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No. They are wrong. All of our ācāryas were very, very
careful. Rāmānuja, Madhva, and Viṣṇusvāmī have all taken
daṇḍa and this cloth. They discovered that this geru
raṅga helps in so many ways.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Some think that for gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas, with wife and
children, there is no need for dhotī, kurtā, and sārī,
and that they can wear things like half-pants [shorts].

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Illegal.

Harernāmānanda dāsa

: Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja   used to say that
when we are wearing devotee clothes,   everyone can see
that we are for spiritual life, just   like a policeman is
known by his uniform. Everyone knows   what his business
is.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This evening we will speak about Kṛṣṇa’s killing of
Dhenukāsura, Kṛṣṇa’s destroying Indra’s pride, Kṛṣṇa’s
chastisement of Kāliya, and perhaps Kṛṣṇa’s meeting the
Yajña-patnīs. [To a sannyāsī] You, especially, can
prepare to speak about Dhenukāsura.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

                           157
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: Śrīla Gurudeva, it is stated [in Padma Purāṇa],
sampradāya-vihīnā ye mantrās te nisphalā matāḥ. [“A
mantra received from an unauthentic source will not give
any fruit.”] The mantra is meant for one to achieve the
goal of bhāva, and ultimately prema. If a kaniṣṭha-
adhikārī gives this mantra to a disciple, is there any
effect?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: A kaniṣṭha-adhikārī should not do so. He should take
that person to a high-class Vaiṣṇava to be initiated.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: So, in a case where a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī gives the
mantra to a disciple, is there no effect?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If he does this, what is there to say? Many kaniṣṭhas
are doing this.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Somebody may say that because in some societies there
are no high-class Vaiṣṇavas, there is a need for
kaniṣṭhas to give initiation.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In fact, even those who haven’t reached the level of
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī – those with no adhikāra at all – are
giving ‘initiation.’

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: So, the fruit is not bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Millions of persons are doing this. Those with
nothing, not even the qualification of kaniṣṭha, are
doing this, and nothing can be done about it.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: But will the fruit of this initiation be bhakti, or
sukṛti only? The disciples will not get bhakti – is this
correct?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The result will be nothing.

Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja

: Śrīla Madhvācārya has not written any commentary to
Brahma-vimohana-līlā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Brahmā was Śrī Madhvācārya’s guru, so Madhvācārya

                            158
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

considered, “My gurudeva can have no fault.” It is for
this reason that he has not written a commentary to this
pastime.

Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja

: Lord Brahmā is our guru also, so how are we to
understand this ‘fault’ of his?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Mahāprabhu was very liberal. He did not see this from
only one angle.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: It was through Brahmā that Kṛṣṇa performed so many
pastimes. Kṛṣṇa was able to fulfil the vrajagopīs’
desires, the mothers’ desires, and the cows’ desires.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: So many of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes manifested from this one
incident, so why should Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī refrain
from commenting on it? Why should Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
or Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī leave this out?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Or Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They did not avoid writing commentaries on this
pastime.

Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja

: Brahmājī is our ādi-guru (first, original guru). He is
a great Vaiṣṇava. Being a great Vaiṣṇava, why could he
not see the original cowherd boys and calves?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He was influenced by some māyā. He was born from a
lotus flower, so some defect must be there. That was the
defect.16 The influence of Kṛṣṇa’s māyā was so much
greater than the power of Brahmā.

Baladeva thought, “Why are all these things going on?”
He told Kṛṣṇa, “O Prabhu, without Your mercy, no one can
understand Your pastimes. Even I cannot understand; what
to speak of Brahmā and others?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: Are the gopīs with whom Kṛṣṇa dances married to the
same cowherd boys with whom He plays in the daytime?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Brajanāth dāsa] What did he say?

Brajanāth dāsa

                            159
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: At the time of Brahma-vimohana-līlā, all the gopīs
married the gopas. Then, after the līlā was over, did
they remain married to those gopas?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes. They married only one time, not two. After that
one time, they simply thought, “This is my husband.”

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, in the Upadeṣāmṛta of Śrīla A. C.
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, at the end of Purport
Five, he says not to take a guru if he is not uttama-
adhikārī. He also says, “Don’t become guru if you are
not uttama-adhikārī.” Then he says that both the
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī and madhyama-adhikārī may also take
disciples, but that such disciples cannot make much
progress due to insufficient guidance. The question is
this: Below which level would you say that one should
not venture to take disciples?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It is not written anywhere. But I think that, at the
least, one requires the qualification of a madhyama-
madhyama devotee in order to give initiation.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: Does his giving of the dīkṣā-mantra have the power to
give divya-jñāna (transcendental knowledge)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It is not as powerful as if Nārada would give it. If
Nārada gives initiation, at once, in a second, divya-
jñāna will manifest. But we are not like him.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: What are the symptoms of a madhyama-madhyama-adhikārī,
Śrīla Gurudeva?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: He is asking: what is the qualification of a madhyama-
madhyama? Is it ruci, or āsakti, or niṣṭhā, or what?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [He must have come] up to āsakti. And, if bhāva
comes...

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: The definition of divya-jñāna is that the guru is
putting the form of Bhagavān in the heart by the mantra,
like a seed. From that seed manifests bhagavatā
sambandha viseṣa jñānaṁ ca (Bhakti-sandarbha, Anuccheda
283), meaning specific realized knowledge of one’s
relationship with Bhagavān. At which level can guru know
this?

                           160
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If I know, and you know, why will that madhyama-
madhyama not know?17 However, realization of that
knowledge will come at bhāva. Without bhāva, or rati,
realization will not come; but even at that level the
realization will be as though ‘covered with glass.’

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: So, does ‘up to āsakti’ mean ruci? Is ruci not
madhyama-madhyama? ‘Up to āsakti’ begins from where?18

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

Ruci.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: [To Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja] He didn’t say ruci
with his mouth. You said ruci.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: [To Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja] But it is understood in
all śāstra.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Gurudeva said, “Āsakti.”

Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja

: If we look closely, we see that so many gurus take
disciples although those gurus’ anarthas have not gone.
They have not passed anartha-nṛvrtti, yet they are
taking disciples. How can they do this?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Nowadays there is no consideration of qualification at
all – nothing. All are allowed to give, especially
unqualified persons.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Śrīla Gurudeva, you said, “up to āsakti.” Do you mean
niṣṭhā-ruci madhyama-madhyama, or only ruci-āsakti
madhyama-madhyama?19

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Ki sab? [Bengali phrase, meaning, “What is it that you
continue to ask again and again?”]

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: If one is not madhyama-madhyama and he gives dīkṣā,
what reaction will he receive?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Good result (gati); there is no harm in this. Kṛṣṇa

                             161
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

will do what is needful.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: No, I am not referring to the madhyama-madhyama. I am
asking about one who is less than that.

Brajanāth dāsa

: What is the result of an unqualified guru giving
dīkṣā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He should be qualified.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: But what if he is unqualified? Then?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: What will be the result? You know.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: So madhyama-madhyama begins at ruci; yes?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Do you know the meaning of māna (honor) and sammāna
(honor, or respect)? The desire for these things will
grow. That unqualified person will thus think, “I am the
only guru,” and then he will fall down.




July 6, 2010


Morning Darśana

For the Dutch Saṅga

Dīnanātha dāsa

: How to be a good father and good husband?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: By chanting, but with bhāva (transcendental moods in
devotion to Kṛṣṇa), one will be a good father, sister,
and everything else.

Madana-mohana dāsa

(the young son of Dhaniṣṭhā dāsī): When will we see you
again?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: When Kṛṣṇa will want, He will send me.

                           162
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Vinītā dāsī

: Is it true that gurudeva can come in our dreams?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Dhaniṣṭhā dāsī

: How can we help those who do not believe in God to
believe in God?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: By giving them association and hari-kathā, and to tell
them that without chanting the holy name of God, life is
in vain. Kṛṣṇa is very powerful. He has invested all His
qualities and power and mercy in His name, so His name
can do anything that He can do. Tell them in this way,
and bring them.

Madana-mohinī dāsī

: Now we are initiated and Gurudeva has given us a
spiritual name. Will we have the same spiritual name in
our next life?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The body will change and the name will change. A new
body will come and you will be known by that name. This
body does not go with you to the next life.

Devotee

: At the moment when we could decide to come to this
material world or the spiritual world, did we have free
will? If yes, did we know that we would find suffering
in this world?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No.

Devotee

: So we don’t have free will, because...

Brajanāth dāsa

: We do, but it is limited. Like a small baby. Babies
have free will, but they don’t know if putting their
hand in the fire will bring happiness or not.

Rāghava Paṇḍita dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, by your blessings we would like to do
more service for you and engage your sons and daughters
in translating your books into the Dutch language. So,
we are asking your blessings that we can all work
together as a very nice team, to please you and to give
you nice sevā.

                          163
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Oh, yes. You can do this, and others can help.

Rāghava Paṇḍita dāsa

: Yes, we should all work nicely together for your
pleasure.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Who is on the team?

Rāghava Paṇḍita dāsa

: We will make a team. I’m on it.

Rādhā-ramaṇa dāsa

: There are many individuals on the team and they are
not working together.

Indulekhā dāsī

: Can we have friendship and good association with
ISKCON devotees who make no offenses to you? Can we
improve our relationship with them as a family? In
Amsterdam, my husband Madhukara and I want to do that.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Oh, yes.

Rādhā-ramaṇa dāsa

: In Holland, we are always changing temples and houses.
Is it wise to make a preaching center together?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Those who are favorable can be in your group, and
together you can do preaching and everything else.

Rādhā-ramaṇa dāsa

: Can we work together to have one good center?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Very good. All should be in their groups, but
Janmāṣṭamī, Rāma-navamī, Ekādaśī and other holidays
should be followed in one group.

Rāghava Paṇḍita dāsa

: If we make one big strong center, will you come?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Not this time. When I come [to Europe] another time, I
will try to come here.

[Satyavatī dāsī, Indulekhā dāsī’s young daughter, gives

                          164
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva her drawing.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Indulekhā dāsī] Your daughter?

Indulekhā dāsī:

Yes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [Looking first at the drawing and then to Satyavatī
dāsī] Very good. Excellent.

Śaśikalā dāsī

: Will we have the same gurudeva life after life?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Bhānumatī dāsī

: Gurudeva, I would like my family, friends, work
friends, and more people to come. I need help to invite
more people to come to our saṅga in Holland. Can you
please give blessings to let them come, to let us be the
tool to let them come to you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [Śrīla Gurudeva nods in the affirmative.]




July 7, 2010


Morning Walk

Brajanāth dāsa

: Prabhu is asking: how can I know that my relationship
with my gurudeva is growing?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I have told this so many times. [To Śrīpāda Padmanābha
Mahārāja] Tell him.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: Śrīla Gurudeva was recently asked a similar question
in Los Angeles, California. His answer was, “You will be
happy. If you are developing your relationship properly,
you will be happy.”

Devotee

: I received dīkṣā-mantra from you a year ago. What is

                          165
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

my service?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You can serve according to your skill and
qualification, by preaching, distributing my books,
reading my books – all these things.

Kamala-kānta dāsa

(from Germany): Śrīla Gurudeva, is there some special
significance in Romahaṣaṇa Sūta’s being killed with a
blade of grass?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Kuśa grass is very sharp, like a knife, and it was
readily available there.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Baladeva Prabhu took the blade of kuśa and simply
touched Romaharṣaṇa Sūta with the tip of its blade. In
this way, Romahaṣaṇa was actually killed by Baladeva
Prabhu’s desire.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Kuśa is pavitra (pure; very auspicious). It was for
all these reasons that Baladeva Prabhu killed him with
the blade of kuśa grass.

Prakāśātmā dāsa

: Why is parāṇa20 so important? Why is it so important
to break the fast within such a little time-span, which
is sometimes only ten or fifteen minutes? Moreover, how
were people able to do this before the days of watches?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Oh, yes. If they don’t know, there is nothing they can
do. But if they know, they must do it within the proper
time.21

Prakāśātmā dāsa

: Why is it so important?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: If you don’t follow, you lose the fruit of Ekādaśī.
This is mentioned in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa and other
scriptures. Ekādaśī is tomorrow here, and today in
America.

Śrīpāda Sajjana Mahārāja

: One day in Navadvīpa, we had a time period of eight
minutes in which to take parāṇa. I had a watch, and I
saw that the Bengalis were breaking their fast at
exactly the right time without watches.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

                            166
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: I have a question on guru-tattva. Yesterday you
explained that if a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī gives dīkṣā, the
result is zero. But it has been said that you previously
mentioned that if the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī who is giving
dīkṣā is himself taking śikṣā from a higher devotee,
this system might be okay.

My question is this: What is the need for a kaniṣṭha-
adhikārī to give dīkṣā if he can directly send that
person to the higher devotee, and he himself just helps
with instruction?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The kaniṣṭha-adhikārī should not give dīkṣā. He should
take the candidates to the uttama-adhikārī.

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Somebody said that you mentioned once before that this
system may be okay. I just wanted it confirmed.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: But it is better to take them to the uttama-adhikārī.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: What if there is no mahā-bhāgavata available in our
saṅga?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Madhyama.22

Śrīpāda Āśrama Mahārāja

: Madhyama; madhyama-madhyama.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Madhyama is available everywhere.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

Everywhere?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja] You yourself can
give dīkṣā.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: Why are you cheating me now?23

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Nemi Mahārāja, and you [to Śrīpāda Padmanābha
Mahārāja], and all. One day you will have to give dīkṣā
– today or tomorrow.

Sannyāsīs

                          167
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: Next life.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Better to start now.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja:

Double cheating now.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

They can all do it.

Balabhadra dāsa

: Gurudeva, how can I keep your presence with me, in my
heart, at every moment?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Oh, Nemi Mahārāja, please answer.

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: First of all, we should follow Śrīla Gurudeva’s
instructions. We should serve his mission and understand
sākṣād dharitvena samasta śāstrair. Gurudeva is like
Kṛṣṇa; he is within the heart. So, we can constantly
cultivate the sense that he is always with us, and we
are associating with him within our heart and serving
him within the heart.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Are you satisfied?

Balabhadra dāsa

: Yes. Thank you.

Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja

: Someone asked this question: The cows have vātsalya-
prema for Kṛṣṇa. Are they higher than the sakhās, who
have sakhya-prema?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If those cows are vātsalya, then it may be. But first
they should be vātsalya. They are unable to express
themselves by words. They can simply think, “I want
Kṛṣṇa to be my son. Then I will give Him my milk.”

Are there any more questions?

Devotee

: Gurudeva, since mādhurya-prema is higher than sakhya-
prema, how is it possible for somebody in sakhya-prema
to be completely happy?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

                          168
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: None of you have any mood at all. When bhāva-bhakti
comes, you will be able to see who you are and what is
your eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa. but that
realization is compared to seeing something that is
covered by glass. When you attain prema, you will be
able to see everything clearly.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Will the devotee be happy by his own mood even though
he knows that vātsalya-rasa and mādhurya-rasa are higher
than sakhya-rasa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He will realize his happiness when he reaches the
stage of bhāva.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Yes. But at that time will they think those in
mādhurya-rasa are higher, or will they be happy by their
own rasa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: First let bhāva come, then talk.




July 7, 2010


Darśana

After the walk

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: Śrīla Gurudeva, this is Dīna-dayāla Prabhu. He was
initiated by you thirteen years ago, and just now came
back. He is like Ananta Prabhu for communication, and he
is like Dilip, who was helping the members of your
society to communicate with each other.

So now he has agreed to help us form a new communication
sevā team to help the devotees to become leaders in
communication, to train others so that everyone will
feel encouraged to work together in harmony without
conflicts, and to bring each other up to our highest
potential of service to you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [To Dīna-dayāla dāsa] Oh, you can do it.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: We want to send a letter about this new sevā team to
the saṅga. We are wondering if you can say a few words
encouraging…

                           169
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You can say.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: Okay. You have already said so many things.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I have told everything in my classes. So, he should do
it.

Dīna-dayāla dāsa

: Śrīla Gurudeva, thank you so much for your mercy, and
I hope I can serve you as you desire.




July 8, 2010


Morning Walk

Manohara dāsa

(from Austria): I was teaching Transcendental Meditation
enthusiastically for thirty years. I want to teach Kṛṣṇa
consciousness in the same enthusiastic way, but I feel I
am a great rascal. The more I know about Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, the more I know how far away from dignity
I am. I feel I am lacking in love, and without love,
without bhāva (transcendental affection), this
theoretical knowledge, whatever I study, is not making
me successful. What can I do – what do you want me to do
– so that I can succeed and make my life successful?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Do you know what bhakti is?

Manohara dāsa

: I think I don’t know.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Then how can you know bhāva and other things?

First you should read my books, like Bhagavad-gītā and
Jaiva-dharma. Know something, and then teach. Otherwise,
you will not be able to preach properly and you will not
be able to progress in your own bhakti.

Manohara dāsa

: I have studied Jaiva-dharma and other books, but I
have no love in me.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

                          170
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: Not only studying. Some remembrance of verses is
needed for preaching. These sannyāsīs are ready to
preach, and they are preaching. Be ready like them, and
then preach.

Prakāśātmā dāsa

: Gurudeva, if a devotee reads Śārīraka-bhāṣya in order
to defeat Śaṅkarācārya’s māyāvāda philosophy, is there a
chance that he can lose his bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Have you read Govinda-bhāṣya [the commentary on
Vedānta-sūtra, written by Gauḍīya Vedāntācārya Śrīla
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu]?

Prakāśātmā dāsa:

Yes.

Śrīla Gurudeva

: First read Govinda-bhāṣya and then Śaṅkarācārya;
otherwise the effect will be opposite.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:




jīvera nistāra lāgi’ sūtra kaila vyāsa

māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile haya sarva-nāśa

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 6.169)


[Śrīla Vyāsadeva presented the Vedānta philosophy for
the deliverance of conditioned souls, but if one hears
the commentary of Śaṅkarācārya, everything is spoiled.*]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: First read Govinda-bhāṣya and then study Śārīraka-
bhāṣya – only for preaching, not for yourself.

Rāmanātha dāsa

: Is Gadādhara Paṇḍita fully Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā,
and what is the teaching for the aspiring bhakta in this
relationship?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He is Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He was watching the mood of
Kṛṣṇa to see, “How is He playing My role?”

Brajanāth dāsa

: You always say that he was in dāsya-bhāva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

                            171
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Yes.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: What Śrīman Mahāprabhu wanted, he followed completely.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes.

Bhakta-svarūpa dāsa

: I heard once that Śrīla Gour Govinda Mahārāja
explained that the madhyama-adhikārī who is the real
preacher is madhyama coming from uttama, not kaniṣṭha.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

That is right.

Bhakta-svarūpa dāsa

: So, is the madhyama who is giving dīkṣā coming only
from the uttama stage, or from the kaniṣṭha stage?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Do you have any doubt in him?

Bhakta-svarūpa dāsa

: No, no. I am giving his statement as an introduction
to my own question about dīkṣā.

Brajanāth dāsa

: His question is: Who can give dīkṣā – a madhyama who
is progressing from the kaniṣṭha stage, or a madhyama
who is actually uttama?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Both.

If you are not reading any books, how can you ask a
question?

Bhakta-svarūpa dāsa

: I am reading, Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You have no time to read.

Manohara dāsa

: Not knowing oneself, not knowing one’s soul, is it
that one has no basis for real devotion? Is this kind of
relationship with Kṛṣṇa not very superficial and
lacking?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

                            172
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: What you preach, you must know; otherwise you will
define bhakti and other subjects in a wrong way.

What is śraddhā?

Manohara dāsa:

Faith.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Padmanābha Mahārāja will tell.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: The definition of śraddhā is given in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.62):


‘śraddhā’-śabde—viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya

kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

Viśvāsa means “firm belief.” Sudṛḍha niścaya kṛṣṇa-
bhakti kaile means “completely convinced that if I
perform bhakti to Kṛṣṇa, then all of my other duties,
everything, will be accomplished by that.” Sarva-karma
kṛta haya – if someone has śraddhā, he will have firm
faith in bhakti to Kṛṣṇa, and he will be convinced that
his whole life is meant for that. That is śraddhā.

Manohara dāsa

: So, even not knowing myself, if I have śraddhā, it
will be a good start?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This applies to anything, including worldly matters.
If you have no śraddhā, then you cannot progress in
anything. First know all these subjects and then preach.

Manohara dāsa

: I feel like I have very little faith, but I also feel
like I should do some preaching. Although I feel weak to
preach, I feel I have been given so much. I see so many
people suffering, and I want to bring them to Gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: First know what I am telling, and then preach. Read,
learn something, and then preach.




July 9, 2010


Morning Walk


                          173
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Manohara dāsa

(from Austria): The priests want to find inner peace,
but knowing all the bad things which are going on in the
Church, they are shocked and have totally lost their
belief in the Church. But they still believe in the
truth. They want to find the truth again. So, what can
they do? I told them that you can tell them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Jesus Christ went to India at a young age, and there
[in Vṛndāvana especially] he heard about Kṛṣṇa. He saw
that in the temples everywhere, the people were
worshiping Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā. Then he went to Jagannātha
Purī, where he heard that everyone was remembering that
Deity [Kṛṣṇa] as Krooshna; it was simply a difference of
pronunciation. [Gradually, because of different
languages, Greek and Hebrew, this name became Kroosta,
then Krista, and finally Christ.]24

When Jesus returned to his own land, he pronounced the
name Christ, and he became known as the son of Christ –
not Christ, but the son of Christ. Thus, there is no
difference between a Christ-bhakta [or son] and a kṛṣṇa-
bhakta.

We are refined Christians, because we follow God’s
instructions totally. It is not written anywhere in the
Christian scriptures that God has no form. God created
man after His own image. If the Supreme Lord has no
form, then how can He create men and women after His
image? The Bible tells this, and we follow this
understanding.

The Bible says, “Thou shall not kill.” We don’t eat
eggs, fish, or meat, we don’t drink wine or any alcohol,
and we don’t smoke or take intoxicants. On the other
hand, so-called Christians kill even small calves. Take
the Pope, for example. I once went to Vatican City,
where I became very happy to see hundreds of newly born
calves. I asked some of the residents if they worshiped
those calves, and they replied, “No.” They said instead
that every day one calf is slaughtered for the Pope.

I told everyone with me at that time to leave that
place, because it is not a good place. And I also left
that place.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja also used to say, “We
are refined Christians.”

Prakāśātmā dāsa

: What do you think of those fallen priests, who have
been in so many scandals involving sexual child abuse?
What is their position?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Once, in the history of Christianity, there were some
wrong policies. At that time, Martin Luther King came
and refined [removed the pollution from] those policies.
But now Christianity is again…

                          174
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Polluted; contaminated.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You are also a priest. You should revolt.

Brajanāth dāsa:

Protest.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If you cannot, then at least you yourself can do
everything in a pure way.

Manohara dāsa

: In the Catholic Church, can they also chant the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mantra?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Very good. Will they allow you to do that?

Manohara dāsa

: Not in the official church. But we can do it
privately.

Prakāśātmā dāsa

: Or we can do it in the church when nobody is there.

Śrīpāda Tridaṇḍi Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu explained parakīya-
bhāva. But Śukadeva Gosvāmī and Jayadeva Gosvāmī
explained this before Him. So, what is the speciality of
Mahāprabhu’s explanation?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrīman Mahāprabhu told Rūpa Gosvāmī, “I am telling you
in brief. You should elaborate on My words, and write
books to clarify this.” Rūpa Gosvāmī has done this.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Neither Śukadeva Gosvāmī nor Jayadeva Gosvāmī nor
Vidyāpati gave the process to achieve that parakīya-
bhāva. Rūpa Gosvāmī explained it by the mercy of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, and he taught how to achieve it.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Jīva Gosvāmī learned from Rūpa Gosvāmī and others that
parakīya-bhāva had been revealed before Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. But it was by the teachings of Rūpa Gosvāmī
that Caitanya Mahāprabhu elaborated on its understanding
and gave the process for its attainment.


                            175
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017

What was he [Manohara dāsa] doing before coming to me?

Brajanātha dāsa

: Do you remember Maharṣi Mahesh Yogī? Transcendental
Meditation? They have courses and teachers everywhere in
the world.

For how many years did you teach Transcendental
Meditation?

Manohara dāsa

: For thirty years.

I am so thankful now that I can add bhakti to yoga, and
I can let go of yoga without bhakti. I am very grateful
for this, Gurudeva.

Prakāśātmā dāsa

: In this verse, vāsudeve bhagavati, bhakti yogaḥ
prayojitaḥ – it states that first bhakti comes, and then
jñāna (knowledge) and vairāgya (renunciation).


vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.7)


[By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of
Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one immediately acquires causeless
knowledge and detachment from the world.*]

If one has no vairāgya, does that mean there is no
bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Without bhakti, vairāgya is not complete.

Devotee

: What type of bhakti must be there – bhāva-bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Vairāgya begins when the aspiring devotee believes
that we are minute, infinitesimal, that Kṛṣṇa is the
doer, and that He is causing us to do. This faith will
come. That devotee can give up many things at the time
of śraddhā (faith). Then, more is given up in the stage
of niṣṭhā. After that, more so in the stage of ruci.
Then, when āsakti comes, it may be that – just as Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was living with his whole family at
first, but at the end he left them all – one will be
able to renounce all attachments.

                            176
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Devotee

: Does everyone have to give up his family at one point?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If you want to be pūrṇā, fully pure, you will have to
do it. Pure devotees have nothing to do with anything
beyond what Kṛṣṇa wants of them. Whatever they do is
simply to please Kṛṣṇa. Without this motive, you cannot
be fully renounced. Ultimately, the best thing is to
follow the gopīs and be rāgānuga. Rāgānuga will manifest
vairāgya, giving up everything for Kṛṣṇa.




* * *




1 Śrīla Gurudeva’s replies to this question may vary
according to the level of his audience’s advancement in
bhakti. In other words, according to the level of the
worshiper.



2 Definition of madhyama-adhikārī: an excerpt from Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 16.71–72, purport by
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja*:


Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura says that any
Vaiṣṇava who is constantly chanting the holy name of the
Lord should be considered to have attained the second
platform of Vaiṣṇavism. Such a devotee is superior to a
neophyte Vaiṣṇava who has just learned to chant the holy
name of the Lord. A neophyte devotee simply tries to
chant the holy name, whereas the advanced devotee is
accustomed to chanting and takes pleasure in it. Such an
advanced devotee is called madhyama-bhāgavata, which
indicates that he has attained the intermediate stage
between the neophyte and the perfect devotee... An
intermediate devotee is greatly attracted to chanting
the holy name, and by chanting he is elevated to the
platform of love. If one chants the holy name of the
Lord with great attachment, he can understand his
position as an eternal servant of the spiritual master,
other Vaiṣṇavas, and Kṛṣṇa Himself.

An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
lecture on July 30, 2000, in Moscow, Russia:


Madhyama-adhikārīs are of three categories: madhyama-
kaniṣṭha, madhyama-madhyama, and madhyama-uttama. The
madhyama-kaniṣṭha cannot act as guru. The madhyama-
madhyama and madhyama-uttama can, however, because they
are in the line of their guru, always chanting and

                          177
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

remembering the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa
with rasa and taste, and their anarthas have practically
disappeared. There remains only a very little scent of
anarthas, and there is no offense at all – no vaiṣṇava-
aparādha, nāma-aparādha, sevā-aparādha, or dhāma-
aparādha.



3 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
lecture on November 20, 2001, in Varṣāṇā, India:




I have read in Bhagavad-gītā (2.40), “Endeavours on the
path of bhakti-yoga are neither fruitless nor subject to
loss. Even a little progress frees one from great fear
in the form of this material world.” This verse is true
for one who is not committing vaiṣṇava-aparādha
(offenses to Vaiṣṇavas), śāstra-aparādha (offenses to
bona fide scripture), or tadīya-vastu-aparādha (offense
to that which belongs or is related to Kṛṣṇa, such as
tulasī, Yamunā, or the dhāma).



4 “Consider this analogy: If tiny, round mustard seeds
are dropped upon the sharp edge of the blade of a sword,
some seeds will fall to one side and some will fall to
the other. Like those mustard seeds that fall to one
side or the other, from the taṭasthā-śakti region the
jīvas are either elevated to the spiritual world or
degraded to this material world. After emanating from
the glance of Kāraṇodakśāyī Viṣṇu, if they look towards
Goloka Vṛndāvana, Yogamāyā at once helps them to go
there. On the other hand, those who look towards the
material world are attracted by Mahāmāyā, whereupon
Mahāmāyā drags them to this inert netherworld. Kṛṣṇa is
not at fault for this; it is the jīvās’ free will to
look here or there.

“Of course, no analogy can give a perfect understanding
of spiritual truth, but there are some similarities to
help us understand. The sharp edge of the knife
represents the taṭasthā region and the mustard seeds
represent the innumerable jīvas. Like the edge of the
sword, the taṭasthā region is not a place of rest. The
jīva cannot stay there; he has to quickly decide his
destination. What is not similar in this analogy is
that, unlike the jīvas, the mustard seeds are not
conscious and therefore they have no ability to choose”
(Journey of the Soul, Part 1, Chapter 4).



5 An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 16:


Bābājī

: Jīva is the instrumental cause, and when he performs
karma, Īśvara (the Supreme Lord) acts as the efficient
cause and arranges for the fruits of the karma that the

                          178
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

jīva is eligible to enjoy. Īśvara also arranges for the
future karma for which the jīva has become eligible. In
short, Īśvara awards fruits, while the jīva enjoys them.


Vrajanātha

: How many types of baddha-jīvas (conditioned souls) are
there?


Bābājī

: There are five kinds, namely those whose consciousness
is completely covered (ācchādita-cetana), those whose
consciousness is shrunken or contracted (saṅkucita-
cetana), those whose consciousness is budding slightly
(mukulita-cetana), those with developed consciousness
(vikasita-cetana), and those with fully developed
consciousness (pūrṇa-vikasita-cetana).


Vrajanātha

: Which jīvas have completely covered consciousness?


Bābājī

: These are jīvas with the bodies of trees, creepers,
grass, stone, and so on, who have forgotten service to
Kṛṣṇa, and are so engrossed in the material qualities of
māyā that they have no trace of their sentient nature.
There is only a slight indication of their sentience
through the six transformations. This is the lowest
stage of the jīva’s fall, and this fact is corroborated
by the epic stories of Ahalyā, Yamalārjuna, and Sapta-
tāla. One reaches this stage only because of some grave
offense, and one can only be delivered from it by
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy.


Vrajanātha

: Which jīvas have contracted consciousness?


Bābājī

: Beasts, birds, snakes, fish, aquatics, mosquitoes, and
various similar creatures have shrunken or contracted
consciousness. The consciousness of these jīvas is
apparent to some degree, unlike that of jīvas in the
previous group, whose consciousness is completely
covered.

For example, these jīvas perform activities such as
eating, sleeping, free movement, and quarrelling with
others for things that they consider their property.
They also show fear, and they become angry when they see
injustice. However, they have no knowledge of the
spiritual world. Even monkeys have some scientific
understanding in their mischievous minds, for they have
some idea of what will or will not happen in the future,

                          179
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

and they also have the quality of being grateful. Some
animals have good knowledge about various objects, too,
but despite all these attributes, they do not have a
propensity for inquiring about Bhagavān, so their
consciousness is contracted…


Vrajanātha

: Which jīvas have slightly budding consciousness
(mukulita-cetana)?


Bābājī

: Conditioned jīvas with human bodies fall into three
categories: those with slightly budding consciousness
(mukulita-cetana), those with developed consciousness
(vikasita-cetana), and those with fully developed
consciousness (pūrṇa-vikasita-cetana). Generally, the
human race can be divided into five groups: (1) immoral
atheists, (2) moral atheists, (3) moral theists, who
have both morals and faith in Īśvara, (4) those who are
engaged in sādhana-bhakti, and (5) those who are engaged
in bhāva-bhakti.

Those who are knowingly or unknowingly atheists are
either immoral or moral atheists. When a moral person
develops a little faith in Īśvara, he is called a moral
theist. Those who develop interest in sādhana-bhakti
according to the tenets of śāstra are called sādhana-
bhaktas, and those who have developed some unalloyed
love for Īśvara are called bhāva-bhaktas. Both immoral
and moral atheists have slightly budding consciousness,
moral theists and sādhana-bhaktas have developed
consciousness, and the bhāva-bhaktas have fully
developed consciousness.




6 Varṇa means “social order” and āśrama means “a place
of āśraya (spiritual shelter),” so varṇāśrama is a
shelter for mankind ensuring both material and spiritual
advancement. It is the Vedic system for the organization
of civilized society, which divides society into the
four varṇas, or orders, of (1) brahmaṇa – the
intellectual class (priests and teachers); (2) kṣatriya
– the administrator class (politicians and warriors);
(3) vaiśya – the merchant class (businessmen and
argriculturalists); and (4) śūdra – the working class
(artisans and laborers); and into the four āśramas, or
stages of life, of (1) brahmācārya – celibate student
life; (2) gṛhastha – household life; (3) vānaprastha –
retired from household life; (4) and sannyāsa –
renounced life. Each varṇa and each āśrama has its own
dharma, or principles of religious conduct, meant to
regulate the conditioned souls and give them a platform
to progress in bhakti.



7 Please see the books Discerning the True Sentiments of

                          180
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

the Soul and Prabandha Pañcakam – Five Essential Essays
for further information on this topic.



8 This is one of the many examples referred to in the
Editors’ Introduction, page ii: “In previous years,
Śrīla Gurudeva would give elaborate replies to the
questions he received during his walks and informal
meetings. But you will notice that in this 2010 book, he
generally gives short answers. This was one of the
specialties of his final manifest pastimes with us
mortal beings. He was entering more and more into deep,
internal, transcendental states of consciousness,
indicating that very soon his disappearance pastime
would take place. His brief answers also indirectly
indicated that in his books, lectures, and previous
walks and informal conversations, he had already said
and written everything he wanted to give the world. Now
we are able to approach him through those doors, ever-
increasingly.”

In these months, Śrīla Gurudeva was gradually preparing
his followers for the fact that soon he would be
entering nitya-līlā. As the months progressed, he showed
his disciples that he was less and less in external
consciousness and more exclusively absorbed in
transcendental līlā. Thus it sometimes seems that he
does not answer the question posed, but he is always in
fully knowledge and knows what the devotee needs to
hear.



9 An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 15:


Vrajanātha

: You said earlier that the cit world is eternal, and so
are the jīvas. If this is true, how can an eternal
entity possibly be created, manifested or produced? If
it is created at some point of time, it must have been
non-existent before that, so how can we accept that it
is eternal?


Bābājī

: The time and space that you experience in this
material world are completely different from time and
space in the spiritual world. Material time is divided
into three aspects: past, present, and future. However,
in the spiritual world there is only one undivided,
eternally present time. Every event of the spiritual
world is eternally present.

Whatever we say or describe in the material world is
under the jurisdiction of material time and space, so
when we say – “The jīvas were created,” “The spiritual
world was manifested,” or “There is no influence of māyā
in creating the form of the jīvas,” – material time is
bound to influence our language and our statements. This
is inevitable in our conditioned state, so we cannot

                          181
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

remove the influence of material time from our
descriptions of the atomic jīva and spiritual objects.
The conception of past, present, and future always
enters them in some way or another. Still, those who can
discriminate properly can understand the application of
the eternal present when they comprehend the purport of
the descriptions of the spiritual world. Bābā, be very
careful in this matter. Give up the inevitable baseness,
or the aspect of the description that is fit to be
rejected, and have spiritual realization.

All Vaiṣṇavas say that the jīva is an eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa, that his eternal nature is to serve Kṛṣṇa, and
that he is now bound by māyā, because he has forgotten
that eternal nature. However, everyone knows that the
jīva is an eternal entity, of which there are two types:
nitya-mukta and nitya-baddha. The subject has been
explained in this way only because the conditioned human
intellect being controlled by pramāda (inattentiveness)
is unable to comprehend a subject matter. Realized
sādhakas, though, experience transcendental truth
through their cit-samādhi. Our words always have some
material limitation, so whatever we say will have some
māyika defects. My dear son, you should always endeavor
to realize the pure truth. Logic and argument cannot
help at all in this regard, so it is futile to use them
to try to understand inconceivable subject matters.

I know that you will not be able to understand these
subjects in a moment, but as you cultivate these
transcendental moods within your heart, you will realize
cinmaya-bhāva more and more. In other words, all the
transcendental moods will manifest themselves in the
core of your purified heart. Your body is material, and
all the activities of your body are also material, but
the essence of your being is not material; you are an
atomic conscious entity. The more you know yourself, the
more you will be able to realize how your svarūpa is a
tattva superior to the world of māyā. Even if I tell
you, you will not realize it; you will not attain it
simply by hearing. Cultivate the practice of chanting
hari-nāma as much as possible. As you go on chanting
hari-nāma, these transcendental bhāvas will begin to
manifest in your heart automatically, and to the degree
that they do so, you will be able to realize the
transcendental world. Mind and speech both have their
origin in matter, and they cannot touch the
transcendental truth, even with the greatest endeavor.

The Vedas say in Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.9): “Yato vāco
nivartante aprāpya manasā saha – The speech and the mind
return from brahma, being unable to attain Him.” I
advise you not to inquire about this matter from anyone,
but to realize it yourself. I have just given you an
indication (abhāsa).




10 Adapted from Ācārya Kesarī, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja – His Life and
Teachings, Part Four, Pāñcarātrika-paramparā and
bhāgavata-paramparā:

                          182
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017




If the dīkṣā-guru is less qualified than the disciple,
then accepting dīkṣā mantras from him is like a
camouflage, or cheating, for the worldly audience. The
current of bhakti remains alive by śikṣā (teaching) of
the transcendental message by realized souls. When the
sincere disciple understands that his dīkṣā-guru is not
so qualified, he accepts śikṣā from a highly qualified
Vaiṣṇava. This is called śikṣā-paramparā, or bhāgavata-
paramparā. The bhāgavata-paramparā (which includes the
dīkṣā-paramparā when the dīkṣā-guru is also a highly
qualified Vaiṣṇava) is the authorized way to transmit
and receive transcendental knowledge.

Those who believed that the dīkṣā-guru paramparā is the
only authorized system were cheated by this behavior of
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. The Ṭhākura’s real purpose
was to teach sincere souls by his own example of
accepting śikṣā-paramparā. He accepted Śrīla Jagannātha
dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja as his śikṣā-guru, and thus
received all transcendental knowledge and bhajana from
him.

An excerpt from Śrī Guru and His Grace, Chapter 10, by
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja:




The highest truth of Kṛṣṇa consciousness comes down
through the channel of śikṣā-gurus, instructing
spiritual masters. Those who have the standard of
realization in the proper line have been accepted in the
list of our disciplic succession. It is not a dīkṣā-
guru-paramparā, a succession of formal initiating gurus.

Dīkṣā, or initiation, is more or less a formal thing;
the substantial thing is śikṣā, or spiritual
instruction. And if our śikṣā- and dīkṣā-gurus, or
instructing and initiating spiritual masters, are
congruent, then we are most fortunate. There are
different gradations of spiritual masters. In the
scriptures, the symptoms of the guru and the symptoms of
the disciple have been described; the guru must be
qualified in so many ways, and the disciple must also be
qualified. Then when they come in connection, the
desired result will be produced.



11 Excerpts on brahma-sāyujya and īśvara-sāyujya:

(1) An excerpt from a lecture by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja on December 12, 2006, in Vṛndāvana, India:


A lower class Vaiṣṇava may want four of the five kinds
of mukti: sāmīpya, sālokya, sārūpya, and sārṣṭi, but he
will never desire sāyujya under any condition. Why not?

                          183
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

In sāyujya-mukti a man becomes like a zero, like a
stone, like dry wood. That person has no identity – no
sense of ‘I am’. Our guru-mahārāja, Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, explained to us that
although it is advertised as blissful, sāyujya-mukti is
not blissful at all. It is like being stool; there is no
difference at all between sāyujya-mukti and stool.
Sāyujya is opposed to bhakti, and therefore even the
lowest class of devotee doesn’t desire it.

(2) An excerpt from Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā
6.269, purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja*:


brahme, éśvare sāyujya dui ta’ prakāra

brahma-sāyujya haite éśvara-sāyujya dhikkāra


[Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya continued, “There are two kinds
of sāyujya-mukti: merging into the Brahman effulgence
(brahma-sāyujya) and merging into the personal body of
the Lord (īśvara sāyujya). Merging into the Lord’s body
is even more abominable than merging into His
effulgence.”]


The followers of the Pātañjalī yoga system actually want
to merge into the body of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This indicates that they do not want to engage
in His service despite their knowledge of Him, and thus
their position is even more abominable than that of
those who want to merge into the Lord’s effulgence.
These yogīs meditate on the four-handed Viṣṇu form of
the Lord in order to merge into His body. […] The
followers of the Pātañjalī system therefore accept the
eternity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet,
according to them, […] they believe that in the
perfectional stage, the conception of puruṣa is
vanquished. According to their description, citi-śaktir
iti, they believe that when one becomes perfect, he
cannot remain a person. This yoga system is therefore
abominable because its final conception is impersonal.

(3) An excerpt from Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā
8.257, purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja*:


“And what is the destination of those who desire
liberation and those who desire sense gratification?”
Srī Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked. Rāmānanda Rāya replied,
“Those who attempt to merge into the existence of the
Supreme Lord will have to accept a body like that of a
tree. And those who are overly inclined toward sense
gratification will attain the bodies of demigods.”

PURPORT


Those who desire liberation by merging into the
existence of God do not desire sense gratification
within the material world. On the other hand, they have
no information about serving the lotus feet of the Lord.
Consequently, they are doomed to stand like trees for

                          184
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

many thousands of years. Although trees are living
entities, they are non-moving. The liberated soul who
merges into the existence of the Lord is no better than
the trees. Trees also stand in the Lord’s existence
because material energy and the Lord’s energy are the
same. Similarly, the brahma effulgence is also the
energy of the Supreme Lord. It is the same whether one
remains in the brahma effulgence or in the material
energy because in either there is no spiritual activity.
[…] The last destination of the Buddhist philosophers is
to become just like a stone, which is immovable and has
neither material nor spiritual activity.

(4) An excerpt from The Science of Self-Realization,
Chapter 8, by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja*:


The impersonalists and voidists may preach dry
philosophical treatises on ahaṁ brahmāsmi (“I am
spirit”) but ultimately who will be attracted? What is
the difference between someone who thinks, “I am a
stone,” and someone who thinks, “I am void?” Why should
we become stone, wood or void?

(5) An excerpt from Śrī Śrī Prapanna Jīvanāmṛtam,
Chapter 9, by Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja*:


When My dedicated pure devotee never accepts any of the
four kinds of positive liberation (sālokya, etc.), even
if they avail themselves to him by dint of his service
unto Me, then why will he ever wish for materialistic
enjoyment and ultimate emancipation in brahma (sāyujya-
mukti), which are very swiftly vanquished by the march
of time? By sāyujya-mukti, the soul’s eternal status
falls into the jaws of death. Thus, sense enjoyment and
monistic liberation hold no permanence.

(6) An excerpt from Sermons of the Guardian of Devotion,
Volume 1, Chapter 9, by Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara
Mahārāja:


If the māyāvādī can make you enter into the cell of
sāyujya-mukti, the liberation of merging with the
Absolute, you are finished. There is no calculable time
when you will be able to emerge from it. But if you are
[absorbed] in materialism, viṣaya, the recruiters may
come to you. You may get the chance of meeting a
preacher in this material world. But in sāyujya-mukti
you are nowhere. It is very difficult and rare to awaken
you from the deepest possible sleep. So that is more
dangerous, as half-truth is more dangerous than
falsehood.

(7) An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 17:


Jīvas who attempt to merge into the impersonal
effulgence during their period of sādhana attain
sāyujya-mukti when they are liberated. They merge into
His effulgence, and are thus completely destroyed in the
form of brahma-sāyujya.


                          185
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

(8) An excerpt from Ṭṛnād Api Sunīcena, Introduction, by
Śrīla Gour Govinda Svāmī:


Mahāprabhu has said that the māyāvādīs are the greatest
offenders at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa – māyāvādī kṛṣṇa
aparādhī – because the māyāvādī sannyāsīs are thinking
themselves as the Lord, one with the Lord. […] The
ultimate destination of such māyāvādī sannyāsīs is that
of sthāvara, they get the bodies of trees and mountains.
Such a destination.

(9) An excerpt from Heart and Halo, Chapter 6, by Śrīla
Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja:


So, “ignorance is bliss.” If there is no consciousness,
there is no question of pain. It is like the existence
of a stone. The extreme liberationists reach such a
stage as that of a fossil or a stone. They want peace,
so they are given a stone-like state of peace.

(10) An excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 18:


How is it possible to experience prīti in impersonal
liberation? Who is the personality who is supposed to
experience such bliss? If I lose my identity, who will
exist to experience brahma? The very concept of the
bliss of brahma is meaningless because whether there is
pleasure in brahma or not, the theory of impersonal
liberation does not admit that anyone actually exists in
the liberated state to enjoy such pleasure.



12 Some of Śrīla Gurudeva’s disciples chanted the
following mantra when he was performing his final
manifest pastimes:


oṁ ugram vīram mahā-viṣṇuṁ

jvalantaṁ sarvato mukham

nṛsiṁhaṁ bhīṣaṇaṁ bhadraṁ

mṛtyur mṛtyuṁ namāmy ahaṁ


May my head be protected by the moon-colored one, who is
the greatest among all beings. My obeisances unto the
ferocious and powerful, the great Viṣṇu, the fiery one,
whose faces are on all sides, the fearful one, Nṛsiṁha,
who causes the death of even death personified (or, who
can overcome death).



13 It was the Brahmo Samaj and similar groups’
distorted, westernized version of Hinduism regarding
descriptions of hell and other topics that Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura established as imaginary, not the
version of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He asserted in his books

                             186
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

like Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṁhitā (especially Chapter 2, Verse 25
and Chapter 10, Verse 3) and Notes on the Bhāgavata that
the version of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is supreme truth.
The following is an excerpt of the latter:




In the common-place books of the Hindu religion […] we
have descriptions of a local heaven and a local hell;
the Heaven as beautiful as anything on earth and the
Hell a ghastly as any picture of evil. Besides this
Heaven we have many more places where good souls are
sent up in the way of promotion! There are eighty-four
divisions of the Hell itself, some more dreadful than
the one Milton has described in his Paradise Lost. These
are certainly poetical and were originally created by
the rulers of the country in order to check the evil
deeds of ignorant people, who are not able to understand
the conclusions of philosophy. Indeed, in some of the
chapters we meet with descriptions of these hells and
heavens as well as accounts of curious tales, but we
have been warned somewhere in the book not to accept
them as real facts, but rather as inventions to overawe
the wicked and to improve the simple and the ignorant.

The religion of the Bhāgavata is free from such poetry.
The Bhāgavata certainly tells us of a state of reward
and punishment in the future according to deeds
[performed] in our present situation. All poetic
inventions, besides this spiritual fact, have been
described as statements borrowed from other works in the
way of preservation of old traditions in the book which
superseded them and put an end to the necessity of their
storage.



14 An excerpt from Back to Godhead Magazine #28-01, 1994
– Rational Mythology *:


The idea of religious imagery as a symbol for the
unthinkable Absolute sometimes turns out useful in the
modern age. Vivekananda was born in Calcutta in 1863 as
Narendranath Datta, and he grew up during the high noon
of British dominance in India. During this period,
European rationalism, based on the famous French
Enlightenment, made a strong impact on India. Reformers
like Rammohan Roy and Devendranath Tagore founded the
Brahmo Samaj in an effort to revise Hinduism and make it
compatible with modern Western thinking. This effort
required the solving of two problems: (1) the problem of
religious plurality, and (2) the problem of the clash
between modern science and old religious beliefs.

The old philosophy of pure monism, or advaita, was well
suited to solve these problems. First of all, if
religious imagery has only a symbolic meaning that
refers to something inconceivable, then many different
systems of symbols should work equally well. In this
way, all major religious systems can be reconciled. This
was Vivekananda’s idea, and he greatly stressed the

                          187
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

equality of all religions. Likewise, if religious
imagery is simply symbolic, then there is no question of
a conflict between religion and science. A religious
story that seems to conflict with established scientific
facts can simply be interpreted as a symbolic clue
pointing to the One beyond the grasp of the finite
scientific mind. Vivekananda also mentioned that the
stark simplicity of the impersonal brahma fits with the
simplicity sought by physicists in their hoped-for Grand
Unified Theory of nature.




15 Geru is a special stone, which when mixed with soil
produces the saffron color in cloth.



16 It is not that Śrīla Gurudeva is actually criticizing
Brahmājī here. He is absorbed in remembering the words
of the gopīs as they conversed with Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra
after a long period of separation. Kṛṣṇa had told them
that He is God, and in their mood of considering Him
only as their most beloved, they told Him the following:


“The gopīs said, ‘Brahmā was born from the lotus-navel
of Padmanābha Viṣṇu, so he is like that lotus flower.
His intelligence is quite dull, because he has come from
the stem of an inert lotus. How can demigods like Brahmā
know anything? They can pray to You and believe that You
are the Supreme Lord. They can believe that You can
create this entire universe in a second and then destroy
it. They can glorify You like this, but we have known
You from the beginning of Your birth, and we know You at
this very moment. These demigods and yogīs may pray to
You for salvation, or they can pray to You that Your
lotus feet may appear in their hearts. They should do
so, because they are as foolish as anything. We are not
like them, for we are very clever and intelligent’ ”
(The Origin of Ratha-yātrā, Chapter 6).



17 Here, Śrīla Gurudeva is pretending to be like us,
saying that he and we and the madhyama-madhyama guru may
have varying degrees of theoretical knowledge of one’s
particular relationship with Kṛṣṇa.



18 “Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes in his
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam commentary that a madhyama-adhikārī
cannot have real prema. But by thinking of how the gopīs
loved Kṛṣṇa, he may receive a shadow of their prema.
Thus he achieves the level of āsakti, attachment for
Kṛṣṇa” (Pinnacle of Devotion, from the chapter ‘The Role
of Śikṣā-guru’).



19 When Śrīla Gurudeva said ‘up to āsakti,’ he meant

                          188
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

that the guru must have already reached up to the stage
of āsakti. He must already be on the stage of āsakti.



20 Parāṇa is the breaking of the Ekādaśī fast at a
specific time on the Dvādaśī day.



21 All responsibility was with the spiritual leaders,
who would inform their followers when to perform parāṇa.
The usual starting time is just after sunrise. If any
special information was required, there would be a
system for informing the people in general.



22 An excerpt from Pinnacle of Devotion, from the
chapter “The Role of the Śikṣā-guru”:


Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura pays obeisances to Cintāmaṇi, who
had inspired him to take shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. What type
of guru was she? A vartma-pradarśaka-guru, one who says,
“Come with me to a realized Vaiṣṇava.” The vartma-
pradarśaka-guru shows the path. He may be kaniṣṭha, that
is alright; but the initiating guru should not be less
than a madhyama-adhikārī.

What are the symptoms of a madhyama-adhikārī? You need
to know these symptoms before accepting a dīkṣā- or
śikṣā-guru. If you do not see these symptoms, then do
not accept a person as guru. Otherwise, there will be so
many difficulties in your devotional life. If that guru
falls down, your life will be ruined and you will cry
bitterly.

The first symptom of the bona fide guru is this:


tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñasuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.21)


[Any person who is seriously desirous of achieving real
happiness must seek out a bona fide spiritual master and
take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of
a spiritual master is that he must have realized the
conclusion of the scriptures by deliberation and
arguments and thus be able to convince others of these
conclusions. Such great personalities, who have taken
complete shelter of the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside
all material considerations, are to be understood as
bona fide spiritual masters.*]

Though all symptoms should be there in full, two are

                          189
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

prominent. The first symptom is śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ
brahmaṇy – the guru has complete knowledge of the
scriptures. The second symptom is upaśamāśrayam – he is
detached from material desires. He is always so happy
serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa. If he is unhappy and feels that his
life has so many problems, then he is not qualified to
be guru. Haridāsa Ṭhākura was beaten in twenty-two
marketplaces, almost to the point of death, but he did
not consider this a problem. He kept chanting hare
kṛṣṇa, hare kṛṣṇa. Prahlāda Mahārāja was tortured by his
father [Hiraṇyakaśipu], yet he never felt he had a
problem. Rather, he stood on the head of all problems.

A guru who chants and performs the nine processes of
bhakti, and who has taken dīkṣā, but who laments that he
has so many problems – that his wife has cheated him,
his children are not with him, he cannot manage or make
money, or that he has no computer or no sufficient
material facility – should be rejected at once.

The third symptom of guru is that he is realized in
kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Without having this realization, because
he still has material desires, he is bound to fall.
Besides these three symptoms, a madhyama-adhikārī will
have four additional qualities. The uttama-adhikārī is
of course superior and offers a superior result in
bhakti, but such a guru is rare in this world. In the
absence of such an uttama-guru, the madhyama-adhikārī
can be accepted as a śikṣā- or dīkṣā-guru.

But one should see whether or not he has the following
four qualities:

prema – He has love and affection for Kṛṣṇa.

maitrī – He shows friendship towards and offers service
to the Vaiṣṇavas. He has three kinds of relations with
three kinds of Vaiṣṇavas: he honors and obeys with a
mood of friendship one who is more advanced than himself
in bhakti. He relates to equals as friends, and he is
also friendly to those whose bhakti is less developed.
So he has maitrī (friendship) with honor for superiors,
maitrī with mitra (friends on an equal level), and
maitrī with kṛpā (compassion) for subordinates.

kṛpā – He shows mercy to those persons who honor and
have faith in Vaiṣṇavas. Such a person’s faith may even
be worldly – in other words, they may have some material
sentiments in relation to the guru and the Deity. It may
be that they have more affection for the Deities than
for the devotees, and therefore they may not like to
meet with devotees and hear their hari-kathā. Such
persons may understand that they should obey the
scriptures, but they cannot act in the four ways that a
madhyama-adhikārī can act. Such persons may be ignorant,
but they want to learn how to advance in devotional
service.

upekṣā – He neglects offenders, persons who are against
the Vaiṣṇavas or who do not honor them. He is aware that
relating or associating with such persons destroys all
traces of bhakti.



                          190
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


We have thus discussed the three main qualities, as well
as four additional ones, which are found in a madhyama-
adhikārī who is qualified to be guru.




23 When asked by the editors of this book to explain
what he meant, Śrīpāda Śuddhādvaitī Mahārāja replied: “I
felt not qualified as a madhyama, so when Śrīla Gurudeva
told me straight to my face that I could give dīkṣā, I
thought he was cheating in the sense of testing me, to
see if I had guru-abhimāna, the false pride that I am
guru. Śrīla Gour Govinda Mahārāja taught that śrī guru
has two things: kṛpā (mercy) and vañcanā (cheating). And
when Śrīla Gurudeva said I would have to give initiation
sooner or later, I felt not qualified and that he was
cheating me, and expressed that feeling.”



24 Because the sound file was somewhat unclear, we added
a bit to Gurudeva’s reply from his book, The Way of
Love.




July 15, 2010


Darśana

[The beginning portion of the soundfile was not clearly
audible, and therefore we have substituted it (indented
and in square brackets) with the same information given
by Śrīla Gurudeva in his autobiography, called
Impressions of Bhakti.]

Newspaper reporter

: How did you come to this line of thought?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:



[About three years after I began my employment at the
police station, the chief superintendent was visited by
a party of about ten devotees from Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti in Navadvīpa. Among them were prapūjyā-caraṇa Śrī
Śrīmad Narottamānanda Brahmacārījī, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti-
kuśala Nṛsiṁha Mahārāja, and Śrī Rādhānātha dāsa [who
later became pūjyāpāda Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama
Mahārāja].

The speaker, pūjyāpāda Narottamānanda Brahmacārījī,
narrated the life history and glorified the character of
Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja in the superintendent’s house for
seven days. Although at that time I did not know Bengali
very well, I would sit through the lectures, and in

                          191
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

reciprocation with my faith pūjyāpāda Śrī Narottamānanda
Brahmacārījī became very affectionate towards me. After
each lecture he would leave aside all food and drink to
sit with me and speak hari-kathā in English throughout
the night.]

I did not know Bengali and the speaker, Narottamānanda
dāsa Brahmacārī, did not know Hindi.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Gurudeva’s mother tongue was Hindi and the speaker’s
mother tongue was Bengali, so they spoke in English.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: After listening to his hari-kathā for those seven days
and receiving his affection, I felt detachment from this
world. I bought japa beads and a bead-bag from the
market and began to chant one lākha [64 rounds] of the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra every day.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: This was during his job as a police officer.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:



[I wanted to leave my government position and go with
the devotee party, but I could not get permission
because of the chief superintendent’s and everyone
else’s affection for me. They would not let me go.

The superintendent asked me, “Why do you want to go? You
will soon be promoted.” I immediately thought of an
excuse to leave, and replied, “This is true, but I want
to start my own business, so there will be no loss in my
going.”

When I also told him that in the future I want to do
kṛṣṇa-bhajana, he asked, “Do your parents agree to
this?” I replied, with the understanding that Gurujī and
the Vaiṣṇavas were my actual parents, “Yes, they do.” I
then resigned and left that place, but I did not go
home. I went directly from there to Śrī Dhāma Navadvīpa
to meet my gurujī.]

I did not enter my house. I left it altogether, taking
with me only one pair of shoes and one loṭā, and I left
for Navadvīpa-dhāma by train. I did not write to any of
the maṭha devotees how or when I would be coming. Still,
my gurujī sent a brahmacārī to the railway station, at
midnight, and he called out, “Tewārījī, Tewārījī.”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Gurudeva’s surname was Tewārī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I approached that brahmacārī and said, “I am that
Tewārījī.” I asked him, “How did our gurujī know to send

                           192
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

you to get me?”

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: It was the middle of a dark night. The brahmacārī,
Sajjana-sevaka Brahmacārī, had come with a kerosene
lamp, because at that time there was no electricity in
Navadvīpa or in the Navadvīpa railway station.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Then, on the following Gaura Pūrṇimā [in 1947], I
received initiation.

Newspaper reporter

: In India there are many spiritual traditions. In
short, which one does Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu belong to?
If we listen to the many teachers in India, we see that
each one has his own truth. From an outsider’s point of
view, how can you say that yours is the highest truth?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If someone’s thoughts are in accordance with Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, if he is chanting the holy names of Kṛṣṇa –
Hare Kṛṣṇa – and if he follows the ideas of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, by these considerations you can know that he
is on the correct path. Otherwise, there are so many
groups whose members say, “We are right,” but they are
not right. I have decided the matter in this way.

Newspaper reporter

: According to some principles, all groups are
nevertheless bringing something good to the world.
Instead of fighting each other, isn’t it better to find
common points of view?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Not fighting. Gurudeva has just explained how we can
judge which spiritual organization is better. It is the
organization that is supported by Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the
spotless evidence, the spotless Purāṇa.

Newspaper Reporter

: Our newspaper is talking to the common people. Many of
them don’t know about Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Vyāsadeva wrote so many Purāṇas (ancient literatures)
– eighteen Upa Purāṇas and eighteen Saha Purāṇas. He
wrote 1008 Upaniṣads, and also Mahābhārata. He had first
written all the Vedas and then divided them into four
parts. After that, he composed a condensed form of the
Vedas in Vedānta-sūtra. Still, even after doing all
this, Vyāsadeva was not happy.

When Vyāsadeva’s guru Nārada Muni saw this, Nārada
explained to him that his unhappiness was due to having
not written about Kṛṣṇa being the Supreme Person and

                           193
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

about how Kṛṣṇa is controlled by the love of His
devotees. He was not satisfied because he had not
written about Kṛṣṇa being tied to the grinding mortar,
about Kṛṣṇa being controlled by the love of the gopīs,
about Kṛṣṇa telling those gopīs that He can never repay
them, and about all of the other pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and
His devotees.

Nārada instructed Vyāsa to enter into a trance of bhakti
so that he could see and write about all these things.
Vyāsadeva then meditated, entered a trance of devotion,
saw everything of Kṛṣṇa’s līlās, and wrote the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. Therein he describes the Bhāgavatam as the
spotless Purāṇa. This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the cream of
the Vedas. Whoever follows Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam will be
happy, and any organization that follows this Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam properly is a proper organization.

Newspaper reporter

: Can you tell about the first time you met Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda, and what he did around
the world?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I met him in 1946, when ISKCON hadn’t yet taken birth.
I served him then, and I have been serving since that
time, also. He used to write to me from New York, Los
Angeles, England, and from wherever he would travel. He
often sent me letters, and I sent him karatālas,
mṛdaṅgas, many Deities, many of his books, and also
Mathurā perā, a sweet that he liked so much.

Then, just before he left the vision of this world, he
called me from Mathurā. He wept, full with
transcendental sentiments, keeping my hands in his
hands, and said to me, “Very soon I am going from this
world. I want you to perform my samādhi1 rites by your
own hands.”

So many of his godbrothers were present, but he told me
to do it. He also told me, “I have said some wrong
things. I said to my disciples that the Gauḍīya Maṭha
devotees are sitting and taking prasādam, and doing
nothing else. I said this only to encourage my
disciples. I have brought them, but they are like
monkeys. Due to their lack of eligibility I could not
train them fully. Please care for them, and continue
their training.”

After his divine departure, my relationship with ISKCON
was very good for some years. Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja,
Keśava Bhārati, Girirāja Mahārāja, and others used to
come to hear from me. But, after some years, the GBC
held a meeting wherein they concluded, “If we don’t
restrict Mahārāja from coming to our temples, then all
of our disciples will go to him. Better to stop him
right now.”

After that meeting, at which time they stopped their
connection with me, I told them, “Very good. Now I will
‘jump,’ traveling throughout the world.” This is my
thirty-third world tour. I am preaching everywhere. The

                          194
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

ISKCON leaders tried to check me, but they could not do
it.

Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī

: Gurudeva, this is Praśānta Prabhu. He is a painter.
Śyāmarāṇī Dīdī is asking him to create the cover for
your Hindi translation of Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Good. You are Italian?

Kṛṣṇa-devī dāsī

: Yes, he is. Śyāmarāṇī Dīdī is asking him to paint the
pastime of Vasudeva entering the room where Yaśodā had
just given birth to two children, Yogamāyā and Kṛṣṇa.
Vasudeva is taking Yogamāyā and putting Kṛṣṇa in the
bed. Praśānta doesn’t know this pastime.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Vasudeva didn’t know there were two children lying
next to Mother Yaśodā. He didn’t see Kṛṣṇa there. He saw
only Yogamāyā. Because he was covered by Kṛṣṇa’s
yogamāyā potency, he could not understand. This cannot
be shown in the painting.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [Giving birthday blessings] May you be happy here and
in the transcendental world, and may kṛṣṇa-bhakti enter
your heart.

[To the reporter] Are you happy?

Newspaper reporter

: Happy. Thank you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: After Bhagavān dāsa left and became a gṛhastha, were
you initiated by anyone?

Newspaper reporter:

No.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: After a guru has fallen, the disciple should accept a
bona fide guru at once, otherwise his endeavors in
bhakti will come to nothing. Better to take initiation
again.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:

Sooner than later.

Newspaper reporter:


                            195
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Thank you.




* * *




1 “Samādhi is a Sanskrit word consisting of the two
syllables, sama-dhi. Sama means ‘the same’ and dhi means
‘intelligence.’ When the pure devotee takes samādhi, it
means that upon departing from this world he enters the
same level, position, and spiritual mood as the personal
associates of his worshipful Deity. He is serving in
that realm according to his own svarūpa (constitutional
form), with equal qualities, intelligence, and beauty as
those associates. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja’s
worshipful Deity is Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and he serves Her
under the guidance of Her personal associates, the
mañjarīs” (Gaura-vāṇī Pracāriṇe, Chapter 9).




August 1, 2010


Darśana

Devotee

: Today is my mother’s birthday, and it is also the
third birthday of my Deities.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Have you brought flowers?

[While throwing flower petals upon the head of the
mother] Maṅgalam bhavatū. Kalyānaṁ bhavatū. May all
auspiciousness come to you. May kṛṣṇa-bhakti enter into
your heart and grow day by day.

Devotee 1

: Although we have come to you for kṛṣṇa-kathā and
kṛṣṇa-prema, we see that by listening about these from
you, we are more enthusiastic towards you than to Kṛṣṇa.
What is the reason?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Ask these people who are here, and who have not gone
to kīrtana. Why are you asking me? Ask them why are they
here, and why they have not gone to kīrtana?

Devotee 1

[to the audience]: Mahārāja-jī is asking why you are all

                            196
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

still here and why you have not gone to the kīrtana.
Please tell.

Devotee 2

: For guru-prema.

Devotee 1

: Originally you had come for kṛṣṇa-kathā and kṛṣṇa-
prema, so why are you still remaining here?

Devotee 3

: Śrī guru-caraṇa-padma kevala bhakati-sadma. The lotus
feet of the spiritual master are the abode of pure
devotional service.

Devotee 1

: Only you can clarify this Mahārāja-jī.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: These devotees are saying śrī guru-caraṇa-padma kevala
bhakati-sadma. They are saying, “Gurujī will tell us
kṛṣṇa-kathā and also give us kṛṣṇa-prema. That is why we
should remain with Gurudeva.”

Devotee 1

: But I think that guru-kathā is more attractive than
kṛṣṇa-kathā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: All right then, so be it. Gurudeva will take your
attraction and place it at the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Without guru-bhakti and without performing viśrambheṇa-
sevā, service with deep love and affection at the lotus
feet of guru, one cannot progress in bhakti. Why? Guru
gives bhakti for the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and that
is why you first offer obeisances to him and serve him,
and then Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, bhakti will not increase.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: This is said in the scriptures:


prathaman tu guruṁ pūjyāṁ

tataś caiva mamārcanam

kurvan siddhim avāpnoti

hy anyathā niṣphalaṁ bhavet

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (4.344)


[Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “One must always worship one’s guru
first, and only then worship Me. If one follows this

                             197
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

process properly, one will naturally attain all
perfection. But if one neglects this process everything
will be fruitless.”]

Once, a devotee came to do bhajana of Bhagavān. Bhagavān
said, “Oh child, first you should worship your gurudeva.
Serve him, and then, taking his permission, you can
worship and serve Me. If you go through this process,
you will receive bhakti; otherwise everything will go to
waste.” This has been told in the śāstras.

Devotee

: Mahārāja-jī, you have told the process and given
reference from śāstra, but nobody knows these things,
and still they are attracted to gurudeva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This is because they are seeing guru in front of them
physically. They are not able to see Bhagavān in front
of them. So how can they serve Bhagavān? That is why one
should do guru-sevā, according to one’s capacity and
ability. Different processes or services have been
stated for women and men, but the aim is to develop
bhakti (devotion) at the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

The backbone of bhakti is guru-niṣṭhā. That is why in
the scriptures it is written, śrī guru-caraṇa-padma,
kevala – kevala (meaning “only”) – bhakati-sadma. Only
those who have guru-bhakti, devotion to the lotus feet
of guru, are able to attain perfection in bhakti.

Do you have any other questions?

Devotee

: How can I increase my taste in harināma. Mahārāja-jī,
I have been chanting harināma for so many years now, but
still I am not able to develop taste.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This happens due to some lacking in guru-sevā and
lacking in listening to hari-kathā from guru’s lotus
lips.

Devotee

: How can we rectify this problem?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: This can be solved only by doing harināma
continuously.

Devotee

: If we are not getting a taste in harināma, can it mean
that there is some problem in our guru?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: If guru is a true, bona fide guru, then there is no

                           198
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

question of a problem in him. On the other hand, if
while at the time of accepting a guru one accepts any
ordinary person, he cannot get bhakti.

Why have you come to me? There must be some taste
present.

Devotee

: Mahārāja-jī, what is guru-sevā?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You are asking me what is guru-sevā? You are doing
service to your son. What is this? Tell me.

Devotee

: This is love for the son.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Mothers love their sons. They show affection for them,
feed them, give them something to drink, and so on. In
this way, according to your capacity, you should perform
service to śrī guru.

Devotee

: What is the purpose, or goal, of life?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The goal of life is kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Without kṛṣṇa-bhakti
nobody can be happy in this world. That is why bhakti is
the aim and object of life. Guru gives this to you, and
that is why he is worshipful.

Devotee

: If a person wants to perform bhakti, but his family
members are not allowing him to do so, what should he
do?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Family members who don’t want to perform bhakti may
give obstacles to the family members who want to do it.
What can you do about it? Will you kill them, or what
will you do? If they don’t perform bhakti, leave them
alone, or leave them. Don’t force them.

Devotee

: How can we control our mind while performing harināma?
My mind is going here and there.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We should first try to understand what is harināma.
When Nāma-Bhagavān sees that a devotee is performing
harināma with honor, then automatically everything will
be controlled. Nāma will personally control your mind.
The Lord and His name are non-different. Whatever Kṛṣṇa

                          199
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

can do, His name can also do. In fact, the name of Kṛṣṇa
can do more than Kṛṣṇa Himself.

Devotee

: Gurudeva, you have told us that guru-sevā performed by
women is different from guru-sevā performed by men. Can
you please explain what the differences are?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: A boy can massage the feet of a guru while he is
sleeping, and he can also perform other personal
services. For females this is not allowed. There are
also many other things that are easily possible for
males but difficult for females. But there is no
difference in śraddhā, or faith. The amount of faith in
males towards guru is the same as in females. A father
especially loves his daughters more than his sons.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: [Jokingly] We can see that Daśaratha Mahārāja gave his
daughter in donation to his friend, and he kept Śrī
Rāmacandra to himself. This means that he loved his son
more than his daughter. This is different from what you
said. And Janaka Mahārāja married off his daughter to
Rāmacandra.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They loved their daughters. That is why they married
them to their husbands.

Now, all of you go to kīrtana.




August 2, 2010


Darśana

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: Mahārāja-jī, is guru-bhakti and kṛṣṇa-bhakti the same,
or different?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It is the same. Hari means “He who steals the heart.”
A person who sees Him even one time crosses over the
cycle of birth and death.

Devotee

: How can śraddhā (faith) and prema towards gurujī be
increased?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You have faith and love towards your wife. What is

                           200
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

your duty to her? You give her everything you have, and
she gives her heart to you.

Devotee

: What type of disciple will please you the most?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Bilvamaṇgala Ṭhākura was attracted to a prostitute
named Cintāmaṇi. In a hidden way, in the middle of the
night, gradually emptying his treasury, he would bring
so many nice things to her. She was a devotee, so she
told him, “You have given me everything and have not
kept anything for yourself. Can’t you do the same for
Kṛṣṇa?” In this way, she changed his heart.

Prostitutes generally want wealth. As long as you give
them wealth everything is okay, whereas after your money
is finished they will kick you out of their house. This
is not prema, but lust for money.

Only the gopīs have prema. [They have no lust for their
own enjoyment.]

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: In the stage of sādhana (spiritual practice) and in
the stage of siddha (spiritual perfection), will our
relation with gurudeva be eternal? How can we see
gurudeva in siddha-śarīra [his form in Goloka Vṛndāvana
as an associate of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa]?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We need to awaken our nitya-prema [our intrinsic love
for Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa].

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:




nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-prema sādhya kabhu naya

śravaṇādi śuddha-citte karaye udaya

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.107)


[Kṛṣṇa-prema is an eternally established reality. It is
not brought about by sādhana; rather it automatically
manifests itself in the heart purified by the
performance of the various limbs of bhakti such as
śravaṇa, kīrtana, and so on.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: This prema manifests through sādhana [meaning, as
stated in the above verse, the sādhana of śravaṇa,
kīrtana, and so on]. It does not come from outside.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja


                            201
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

: He is asking, “Now, even though we are only in the
stage of trying to follow sādhana-bhakti, we are seeing
you. So, how can we see you in your siddha form?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Everything is within the heart. It simply needs to
manifest. First comes sādhana, then bhāva, and in the
end śuddha-prema, pure prema, manifests. What are the
symptoms of bhāva? [Indicating to Śrīpāda Mādhava
Mahārāja to speak.]

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja:




śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā

prema-suryāṁśu-sāmyabhāk

rucibhiś citta-māsṛṇya-

kṛd āsau bhāva ucyate

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.1)


[Bhāva-bhakti is a special manifestation of śuddha-
sattva. In other words, the constitutional
characteristic of bhāva-bhakti is that it is a
phenomenon entirely constituted of śuddha-sattva. It is
like a ray of the sun of prema and it softens the heart
by various tastes.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No, not this verse.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: What do you want me to quote – about bhāva, or about
sādhana?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Attaining the stage of bhāva. What is happening in
bhāva? It is in the heart in a dormant position. When a
person performs sādhana, the prema in his heart becomes
manifest, and the initial stage of that prema is called
bhāva.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: This is the process of sādhana:


kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya-bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.2)



                            202
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

[When transcendental devotional service by which love
for Kṛṣṇa is attained is executed by the senses, it is
called sādhana-bhakti, or the regulative discharge of
devotional service. Such devotion eternally exists
within the heart of every living entity. The awakening
of this eternal devotion is the potentiality of
devotional service in practice.*]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained all the stages; no
one can comprehend the greatness of his explanations.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: Is the guru’s sādhana-svarūpa and nitya-svarūpa
eternal?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It depends on the guru’s level of bhakti. If he is at
the stage of purely meditating on Kṛṣṇa together with
His Vraja associates towards whom he has greed to
follow, then yes. On the other hand, if he is not at
this stage, he is not really guru.

Sañjaya dāsa

: Suppose a disciple has taken initiation but is not
interested in practising or endeavoring for bhakti.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Not all sādhakas are on the same level. Those who are
very new may not have taste in chanting harināma. They
simply keep and serve the Ṭhākurajī of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
at home. They are called kaniṣṭha, beginners. They don’t
understand philosophical truths. Later, when such
knowledge manifests, they will become qualified to enter
the stage of madhyama, to become an intermediate
devotee, and when they progress further, they will
advance to uttama, the topmost stage of devotion.

Sañjaya dāsa

: Does gurujī love all his disciples equally?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: The rays of the sun are sama-darśī; they offer
themselves equally to all, in the sense that they are
the same everywhere. But, if you close the windows of
your house, those rays cannot enter. The Supreme Lord is
unlimitedly more equally disposed to everyone than even
the rays of the sun. Yet, He seems to give up that equal
vision and take the side of the devotees.

He has nothing to take from anyone or give to anyone. As
much as one performs His bhajana, the closer one gets to
Him. If one does not perform bhajana, He will be far
away.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja


                           203
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

: His question is whether gurudeva is sama-darśī, not
the Supreme Lord.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He is equal to all, but to those who completely
surrender and serve him day and night, how can he see
and treat them the same as others? One who performs
bhajana, devotional service to Kṛṣṇa, in that way – how
can Kṛṣṇa be equal to him?

Kṛṣṇa broke His promise for Bhīṣma. During the battle at
Kurukṣetra, He promised that He would not lift a weapon.
At the same time, Bhīṣma took a vow: “If I cannot make
Kṛṣṇa lift a weapon, then I cannot be called the son of
Śāntanu!” Bhīṣma is a jñānī-bhakta (the pure devotee who
is aware that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and full of all opulence).

If we consider all these things while performing bhakti,
we can understand the nature of Kṛṣṇa’s reciprocation
with His devotees in accordance with their love for Him.


śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ purāṇam amalaṁ yad vaiṣṇavānām priyaṁ

yasmin pāramahaṁsyam ekam amalaṁ jñānaṁ paraṁ gīyate

tatra jñāna-virāga-bhakti-sahitaṁ naiṣkarmyam āviskṛtaṁ

tac chṛṇvan su-paṭhan vicāraṇa-paro bhaktiā vimucyen
naraḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.13.18)1


[Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the spotless Purāṇa. It is most
dear to the Vaiṣṇavas because it describes the pure and
supreme knowledge of the paramahaṁsas. This Bhāgavatam
reveals the means for becoming free from all material
work, together with the processes of transcendental
knowledge, renunciation, and devotion. Anyone who
seriously tries to understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, who
properly hears and chants it with devotion, becomes
completely liberated.*]

In order to properly practice bhakti, it is essential to
deliberate on the proper tattva siddhānta.


dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo ’tra paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ
satāṁ

vedyaṁ vāstavam atra vastu śivadaṁ tāpa-trayonmūlanam

śrīmad-bhāgavate mahā-muni-kṛte kiṁ vā parair īśvaraḥ

sadyo hṛdy avarudhyate ’tra kṛtibhiḥ śuśrūṣubhis tat-
kṣaṇāt

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.1.2)


[Completely rejecting all religious activities that are

                            204
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

materially motivated, this Bhāgavata Purāṇa propounds
the highest truth, which is understandable by those
devotees who are fully pure in heart. The highest truth
is reality distinguished from illusion for the welfare
of all. Such truth uproots the threefold miseries. This
beautiful Bhāgavatam, compiled by the great sage
Vyāsadeva [in his maturity], is sufficient in itself for
God realization. What is the need of any other
scripture? As soon as one attentively and submissively
hears the message of Bhāgavatam, by this culture of
knowledge the Supreme Lord is established within his
heart.*]

Devotee

: Can kṛṣṇa-bhakti come into my heart only from the
heart of a pure devotee?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

This is the only way.

Devotee

: Does guru-bhakti come by itself, or by the mercy of
guru?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Those who have guru-bhakti can give it. If one does
not have guru-bhakti, what does he know about bhakti? He
doesn’t know anything. If he knows kṛṣṇa-tattva and has
love for guru, he can then give bhakti to others.

May you all attain kṛṣṇa-bhakti.




August 3, 2010


Darśana

Sañjaya dāsa

: We received a letter saying that prema is non-
different from the Lord Himself, that it is independent,
and that it is transcendental and fulfills all desires.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Ordinary worldly love is sometimes breaking and
sometimes forming. Today that material love exists, and
tomorrow it will not. It is very rare that love towards
family and wife will last until the time of death; it is
very rare to see that type of love nowadays. But
spiritual love is permanent, independent, and can bestow
mercy by its own desire. Transcendental love, prema, is
like this.

Kṛṣṇa is the independent Supreme Lord, and His prema is
also like that. It is for this reason that bhakti is

                          205
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

known as ‘supremely independent.’ Pure bhaktas keep the
Supreme Lord under their control, and are thus in a
position to help the jīvas meet Him and serve Him in His
abode.

Sañjaya dāsa

: Yesterday I asked about how the jīva is the ‘rahasya’
of the Supreme Lord. It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.9.31):


jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me

yad vijñāna-samanvitam

sa-rahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca

gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā


[Knowledge of Me is non-dual, absolute, and highly
confidential. Although non-dual, it has four eternal
divisions: jñāna (knowledge of My own svarūpa or form),
vijñāna (realization of Me), rahasya (prema-bhakti unto
Me), and tad-aṅga-pradhāna (sādhana-bhakti, the means to
attain Me). The jīva cannot understand this with his
limited intelligence. He can only realise it by My
mercy. Jñāna is My svarūpa and vijñāna is one’s
relationship with Me through bhakti. The jīva is My
rahasya and the pradhāna is My jñāna-aṅga (all that is
accessory to My svarūpa). The eternal non-duality and
the eternal confidential difference between these four
principles is due to My inconceivable internal potency
(acintya-śakti).]

It is said in the translation that the jīva is the
rahasya of Bhagavān. How is jīva a rahasya?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Śrī Kṛṣṇa is telling Brahmā, “Jīva is My rahasya.” The
jīva is caitanya (living force). Jñāna, real knowledge,
is knowledge related to bhakti. Vijñāna (realized
knowledge) is actual realization of bhakti. And the jīva
is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rahasya. In this connection with this
verse, rahasya means that even though the jīva is
vibhinnāṁśa, Kṛṣṇa’s infinitesimal, separated part and
parcel, he is eligible to have that unlimited
transcendental love (prema). Prema is rahasya (extremely
mysterious and confidential), and therefore the jīva is
also rahasya.

Devotee

: You have said that transcendental prema is
independent. If it can manifest by the association of
devotees, then how can it be independent? Wouldn’t its
independence be diminished in that case?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: He is asking: it is said in Vedic scripture that prema
is independent, and at the same time it is said that it

                           206
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

is devotees who are giving bhakti and prema. For
example, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has given prema to some and
Mahāprabhu has given prema to some. So how can prema be
independent? It has become dependent on the devotees and
Mahāprabhu.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Who has given prema?

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Mahāprabhu. Emana kṛpālu nāhi śuni tribhuvane, kṛṣṇa-
premā haya yāṅra dūra daraśane.2

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, devotees give bhakti to others. Because they have
bhakti, they can give it to others. Bhakti is
independent. This means that it is not dependent on
jñāna (mental speculation) or any other process. Bhakti
goes beyond our intelligence. Only Rādhājī knows its
limit; not even Kṛṣṇa knows this.

Kṛṣṇa is the most beautiful, but He is enamored by the
beauty of Rādhājī. Kṛṣṇa gives happiness to everyone,
but upon seeing Rādhājī, His eyes become full of
pleasure. Kṛṣṇa has all qualities, but seeing Rādhājī,
all His desires are fulfilled. At the same time, Kṛṣṇa
says, “There is something inside Me that I Myself cannot
understand. Seeing Me, Rādhājī becomes completely
maddened. What is that?”

To realize this, Kṛṣṇa came in the form of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and sitting in Gambhīrā tasted what He
desired to taste.

Devotee

: What is greater: vapu-sevā (personal service to the
form of śrī guru) or vāṇī-sevā (service to his
instructions)?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Both are equal.

Devotee

: We are attracted towards vapu-sevā.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Vāṇī means following his instructions and vapu means
serving his body. Both are the same. Sometimes a person
can be cheated in vapu-sevā, but he cannot be cheated in
vāṇī-sevā. If one follows śrī guru’s instructions, he
will be benefitted and get auspiciousness. Engaging in
vapu-sevā, some foolish persons don’t do vāṇī-sevā
(service to guru’s instructions). It will take such
persons lifetimes to attain perfection. Therefore we
also need to do vāṇī-sevā.

Devotee

                           207
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


: What are the different ways of doing bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Are you studying something, or just asking out of
curiosity?

Devotee

: I am studying.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I have been speaking about these topics for so many
years, and I am tired. You can ask any of my disciples
about this.

Sañjaya dāsa

: Mahārāja-jī, in the discussion between Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Rāya Rāmānanda, it is said, “Nā so
ramaṇa, nā hāma ramaṇī...” 3

In what stage of prema is this experienced – sneha,
māna, praṇaya?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In the final, ultimate stage.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: This stage is called prema-vilāsa-vivarta.4

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In the prema between the two – lover and beloved –
neither one of Them can understand which of the two They
are. Prema becomes prominent, and prema is speaking.

Śrī Rādhā is telling Kṛṣṇa, “We did not send any
messengers. We met on our own, at which time love and
affection automatically came.” She continues, “Now, in
separation from You I am feeling so much distress. So
why is there separation between Us?” This is the highest
stage of prema.

Devotee

: How can a jīva understand if he is qualified to
perform rāgānuga-bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He will understand at the time he becomes qualified.
As much as he reaches any stage, he will understand his
qualification for it. He cannot understand beyond his
level.

Devotee

: So how can he understand whether he is qualified to
perform rāgānuga-bhakti?

                           208
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

First become qualified.

Devotee

: What is that qualification?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There are various qualifications. There is
qualification for kaniṣṭha, qualification for madhyama,
and qualification for uttama. Become qualified first,
and then ask.

Devotee

: When a devotee goes out to preach, how should his
behavior be?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Very pure. There should be no dark spot. It doesn’t
matter whether he is gṛhastha (a householder) or in the
renounced order. If a gṛhastha is with only one wife and
is not attracted or involved with other ladies, then he
is also considered to be a brahmacārī.

No more questions.




* * *




1 “Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is also full of such narrations
about the relationship between the Supreme Lord and His
devotees; therefore the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is very dear
to the devotees, as stated in the Bhāgavatam itself.
Śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ purāṇam amalaṁ yad vaiṣṇavānām priyaṁ.
In this narration there is nothing about material
activities, economic development, sense gratification or
liberation. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the only narration in
which the transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord and
His devotees is fully described. Thus the realised souls
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness take continual pleasure in
hearing such transcendental literatures, just as a young
boy and girl take pleasure in association” * (Bhagavad-
gītā 10.9, purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja).



2


There is no one as merciful as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
within all three worlds. Simply by seeing Him from a

                          209
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

distance, one is overwhelmed with love of Godhead. *

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 16.121)



3


Lamenting in separation, Śrīmatī Rādhikā says, “Alas,
before We ever met, We first experienced an initial
attachment to each other instigated by an exchange of
glances. In just a blink of the eyelid, without a
moment’s delay, an emotion named rāga (driving
attachment) immediately arose between Us. This
compelling love grew day by day, and in no time at all –
in just a few days – it developed so much that there was
no limit to it. That attachment flowed without stop and
continued to increase.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.193)




4 An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
commentary on Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda, verses 8.190–
192:


Prema-vilāsa is of two types. One is meeting (sambhoga)
and the other is separation (vipralambha). Without
separation, there is no joy or sustenance in meeting. In
the stage of adhirūḍha-mahābhāva, this condition of
bewilderment, or illusion (vivarta), causes feelings of
separation even within meeting. Meeting for the duration
of a day of Brahmā seems to last only for a moment. Even
though Śrī Kṛṣṇa is happy, one iota of difficulty for
Him still causes great unhappiness for the devotee.
Although the devotee is beyond illusion, when he is in
separation from Kṛṣṇa, he automatically forgets
everything and considers even a moment to be like
millions upon millions of years.

The words prema-vilāsa mean ‘the loving, playful
pastimes that are generated from prema,’ and vivarta
means “mistaking one thing for something else.” It also
means “opposite, bewildered, and completely ripened.”
During prema-vilāsa-vivarta there is cause for some
pastimes to flow in a seemingly contradictory manner.
This stage is most astonishing and is the ultimate
expression of loving exchanges. Thus we find the
statement, “The waves of the great ocean of Śrī Rādhā’s
compelling love now completely cover Śrī Kṛṣṇa with
their waters, because She actually identifies as Him.
Thus She defeats all other goddesses, including Pārvatī,
who being non-different from Lord Śiva is his wife;
Lakṣmī, who because of intimate friendship with Śrī
Nārāyaṇa reclines on His chest; Satyabhāmā, who because
of her great good fortune is like a lotus flower that
attracts the bumble-bee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mind; and also
Candrāvalī, who because of her sweetness is the life and
soul of Madhureśa (the Lord of all sweetness)” (Ujjvala-

                          210
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

nīlamaṇi 14.178).

Prema-vilāsa means “loving pastimes,” and vivarta
indicates prema-vaicittya, which is the topmost level of
prema. In this stage of the performance of loving
exchanges, the knowledge of the difference between the
lover and his beloved is annihilated. Everything else
apart from the joy of meeting, including their own
existence, is forgotten.

Their hearts and minds melt to such a degree that both
loves become one, and their loves do not recognize any
difference between each other. In this profusion of
prema, absorption in oneness reaches its highest stage.
The knowledge ‘I am the heroine (beloved) and you are
the hero (lover)’ becomes covered due to a delusion that
arises in the course of amorous exchanges. In this
stage, sometimes Śrī Rādhā mistakenly considers Herself
to be the hero (ramaṇa), and Śrī Kṛṣṇa thinks Himself to
be the heroine (ramaṇī). This is viparīta-bhāva, in
which roles are reversed.

When Madhumaṅgala says, “O Rādhā, Madhusūdana has gone
away,” Śrī Rādhā begins to lament in separation from
Kṛṣṇa, even though Kṛṣṇa is right next to Her. This is
prema-vilāsa-vivarta.




August 11, 2010


Morning Darśana

Yamunā dāsī

: The devotees in the Nanning temple want to have
Deities. Is it okay for them to have Deities?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

It’s okay.

Yamunā dāsī

: Gurudeva, we are inviting you to come to China next
year.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

I will come.

Yamunā dāsī

: Mukharā Dīdī is printing 10,000 copies of each of
these books – The Way of Love and Happiness in a Fool’s
Paradise. The Nanning group is making a website. Mukharā
will bring people to meet you in Kārtika.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Very good.

                          211
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


Vasanti dāsī

: Gurudeva, your painting of Veṇū-gīta was used by the
Kṛpālu group.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Kṛpālu used one of your paintings in his newspaper ad
[a large advertisement for their program in California].
We have told them that they are not allowed to use these
paintings without the proper copyright permission.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

You told them?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: They will send us $500 as a penalty, which we will
give you in Kārtika. They are now asking whether they
can use your different paintings if they pay each time.
On one hand you have said that his philosophy is poison,
but on the other hand, will people get sukṛti if they
see the picture?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

No.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Milk nourishes the body, but if a snake touches it, it
won’t be nourishing.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: They have no sampradāya. They are out of any
sampradāya. Sampradāya-vihīnā ye mantrās te viphalā
matāḥ.1 He took Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s sacred conceptions,
but he does not follow him.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: These are your two disciples, Madhurikā and Viśākhā. A
few months ago they started a new temple in Siberia for
preaching, distributing books, meeting people, and
organizing programs – like the Gaṅgāmātās. They are
asking for your blessings.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Very good. My blessings to you. You should go on
preaching.

[To Kamala dāsī of the Gaṅgāmātās] Do you know the
Russian language?

Kamala dāsī

: Maybe we can come and help. We are thinking to go to
other countries to do harināma with the devotees and to
inspire devotees to do book distribution.


                           212
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Yes, you can go.




August 11, 2010


Afternoon Darśana

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja

: A visitor is here, Śrīla Gurudeva. He is a completely
new person.

Guest

: Who am I?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord   Kṛṣṇa.
Your place is not here in the material world.   You came
here by mistake. By your good fortune you now   have
sādhu-saṅga, and therefore you will gradually   realize
your real identity. After many years you will   have
bhakti, and by the process of bhakti you will   go to
Goloka Vṛndāvana (the spiritual world).

Guest

: Whose mistake was it?

Śrīpāda Nemi Mahārāja:

His mistake?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes. You have committed so many mistakes that now you
are thinking, “This world is real. I am this body, and
everything I am seeing is true.” You will realize that
you are not this body, and that this world is not true.
‘Not true’ means “not permanent, not eternal.”

Devotee

: Thank you for coming to Russia.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Thank you for coming to this festival.

Devotee

: Can we hope that you will come again?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Oh, don’t expect this. It may be that I will come, but
it is a ninety-five percent chance that I won’t. It is

                          213
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

very difficult for me to travel in my advanced age. This
Russian program was set up long before, and therefore I
came.

Devotee

: Gurudeva, in Bhajana-rahasya Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura describes a method for chanting the holy names.
Is this the only way, or are there other ways?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: There is only one way. By that method we can practice
bhakti-yoga.

Śyāmarāṇī has a question?

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: Yes, Gurudeva, I do. I was just now giving class, and
one of the devotees quoted you as saying that Gaura-
Nitāī Deities can be worshiped in the mood of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, because Mahāprabhu is Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa combined.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Gurudeva never told this.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It is true that He [Śrīman Mahāprabhu] is Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa combined. He taught this by His own life’s
example. But, it is only after worshiping Him for some
time as Gaura that His worship will turn into Kṛṣṇa
worship.

First serve in dāsya-bhāva [perform worship in the mood
of an obedient servant] to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
Then, after some time, when that worship will be
completed, it will be transferred into kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: So, when the devotees are offering bhoga (foodstuffs)
to the Gaura-Nitāī Deities, they should not utter śrīṁ
klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ svāhā? How will they offer their
bhoga?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Idaṁ naivedyaṁ klīm gaurāya svāhā.2 Mahāprabhu is
Kṛṣṇa, so we utter the word klīṁ as His seed mantra [ka
stands for ‘Kṛṣṇa,’ la stands for ‘Rādhā,’ and īṁ stands
for ‘the living entity in Their service’]. But
Nityānanda Prabhu is not Kṛṣṇa, so for Him we utter oṁ
nityānandāya svāhā.3

Your whole body is made of questions.

Śyāmarāṇī dāsī

: Fortunately your whole body is made of answers, so I
am lucky.


                            214
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: Śrīla Gurudeva, one question: After the Ratha-yātrā
festival, when Mahāprabhu was speaking with Satyarāja
Khān and others, they were asking Him what they should
do as their devotional service. He told them to chant
harināma and serve Vaiṣṇavas. They asked the question,
“Who is a Vaiṣṇava?” in three consecutive years, and
Mahāprabhu answered in three consecutive years. In the
first year He answered that a Vaiṣṇava is one who chants
the name of Kṛṣṇa even once.

Some devotees are asking about this. In the fifth verse
of Upadeṣāmṛta it is stated, “Kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ
manasādriyeta – One should mentally honor any devotee
who chants the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa.” Who is this
person? Does this refer to someone who has taken dīkṣā
and is chanting regularly, or to just anyone?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Dīkṣā should be real dīkṣā, not ordinary dīkṣā. Now we
have been admitted in the ‘dīkṣā class,’ but the process
of dīkṣā may take much time. For one who has actually
received dīkṣā, divya-jñāna (realized transcendental
knowledge of Kṛṣṇa and one’s eternal relationship with
Him) comes at once. “Who is Kṛṣṇa? Who am I?” These
questions are solved, and all kinds of anarthas are
gone. This is dīkṣā. As far as you are concerned, you
are now admitted in the class of dīkṣā, and it may take
time to complete the dīkṣā process.

Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja

: Mahāprabhu was telling them, “You should serve
Vaiṣṇavas.” A Vaiṣṇava is someone who has chanted kṛṣṇa-
nāma once. What kind of chanting is this person
performing?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: In three years He described kaniṣṭha (the third-class
devotee), madhyama (the intermediate, or second-class
devotee), and uttama (the topmost, or first-class
devotee). He gave answers in three consecutive years,
and therefore we should consider that He was describing
the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī in the first year, the madhyama-
adhikārī in the second year, and then the uttama-
adhikārī in the third.

Each class of devotee has been further divided into so
many sub-divisions, and especially into three. For
example, regarding kaniṣṭha, there is kaniṣṭha-kaniṣṭha
(beginning beginner), kaniṣṭha-madhyama (intermediate
beginner), kaniṣṭha-uttama (advanced beginner). This
principle of beginner, intermediate, and advanced
applies for the madhyama and uttama as well.

Śukadeva Gosvāmī is an uttama-adhikārī, but Nārada Ṛṣi
is uttama-uttama-adhikārī.4 Nārada is the guru of all
sampradāyas. Although he has told various things about
his gradual spiritual development in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
in Satya-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga, and Kali-yuga, he was
actually never a conditioned soul. He showed these

                          215
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

activities externally, but in reality he is eternally
perfect.

Although Bharata Mahārāja had come to the stage of
bhāva-bhakti, he lost three births due to his attachment
to a baby deer. Bharata Mahārāja began from uttama-
kaniṣṭha,5 and in his next life, as a deer, he was more
advanced. And what happened in his third birth? In his
third birth, as Jaḍa Bharata, he completed his bhajana.

Sītā Ṭhākurāṇī dāsī

: Gurudeva, I have so many faults. How can I do any
service?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Don’t worry; these faults will gradually go away.




August 13, 2010


Darśana

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: These are friends of Līlāvatī. This is Līlāvatī and
all her friends from Moscow.

And this is Rahim.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Rahim.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: He is the managing director of the first festival site
where we wanted to go, but we had to move to another
place.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

These persons...

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: They are new – very new.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

From where?

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja:

From Moscow City.

This is Sulatā Didi, your daughter. Sulatā Didi is
preaching through astrology.


                             216
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Astrology?

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: Through astrology, she brings people to you. For this
festival, she brought fifteen people. Fifteen people
became devotees through astrology. First astrology, then
bhakti-yoga.

So she is asking for your blessings for successful
preaching. And also at the end of her life, to take her
to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

My blessings are with you.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: [Translating] Rahim begs for forgiveness, because the
festival in the first place failed. We had to shift to
another…

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

He has fixed that.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: Yes. Now everything will be fine. But this time we had
problems because of fires around Moscow. So many fires,
so that’s why...6

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Is the fire extinguished now?

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: The fire is extinguished. You came. No more smoke.
Nothing.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Nothing?

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: [Translating] Rahim wants to make a new festival for
you. But you will be in India from now on, so...

This is Hemadri and his wife Indurānī. And this is the
daughter of Indurānī Dīdī, Dāmodarī, and Hemādri
Prabhu’s son, Keśava. So this is the family. They did so
much labor for the festival to happen. So much endeavor.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: For the festival he has made good arrangements. No
complaints from anyone...

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

                             217
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: Some difficulties...7

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

The cooking is good.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: They have made so much endeavor, so much. In the
beginning there were some problems, but then things got
better. We changed to a different venue, and now
everything is okay. It became smooth.

Śrīla Gurudeva, Rahim wants to take harināma from you.
He was associated with ISKCON and has been a vegetarian
for twenty years – so no problem.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Will he come tomorrow?

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: Today. Tomorrow you are traveling. Tomorrow you are
flying. You go to the airport.

[Translating] This new person, Dimitri, is asking how to
be happy in this world.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: First we should know, “Who am I?” We are not this
body, but we are thinking, “I am this body and whatever
is related to the body is mine.” You are able to remain
in this body for at most one hundred years, and after
that, your body will be changed. But your soul will
always be the same; it is eternal.

Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord. He is very powerful, He can
do anything He likes, and He is the abode of all good
qualities. He is so merciful that, for our benefit, He
has manifested Himself as His names: hare kṛṣṇa, hare
kṛṣṇa. Whatever Kṛṣṇa can personally do, His names can
do the same. He is so merciful that He has invested all
His power, all His mercy, and all His qualities in His
names. This mercy and association will be there for
anyone who chants His names.

Any questions?

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: [Translating] Līlāvatī dāsī says that she is chanting
gāyatrī-mantra. She is asking: when will she be able to
see her gurudeva? When will gurudeva reveal himself in
the process of her chanting gāyatrī-mantra, and
especially guru-mantra?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: First comes sādhana-bhakti – actual sādhana-bhakti –
and then bhāva-bhakti. When you come to the position of
bhāva-bhakti, then you can realize your eternal

                          218
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

position, your jīva-svarūpa (the form of your own soul).

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: And also gurudeva’s form.

Līlāvatī dāsī

: Bless me for that, Gurudeva, so that soon it will be
possible.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Practice bhakti-yoga. Practice anyābhilāṣitā śūnyam
(freedom from all desires other than the desire to
please Kṛṣṇa). In this way, life after life, you can
gradually come to bhāva-bhakti. There are still some
anarthas in that stage, but they are few.8 Upon the
manifestation of prema, you can fully realize your form
and the form of your gurudeva.

Līlāvatī dāsī

: Bless me, Gurudeva, please. You said life after life.
Gurudeva, in this life it is not possible?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:

Many, many lives.

Līlāvatī dāsī

: No, Gurudeva! I don’t want to wait many, many lives.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Thousands of lives is very short.

Līlāvatī dāsī

: No! No! I take shelter of you.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: [Translating] This new person has had your darśana
today, and he is asking for blessings for himself and
his family for auspiciousness and good fortune.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, it will come. Try to come into the bhakti
process, and then you will be happy. When the time
comes, you will realize, “I am not a person from this
material world. I am an insignificant part of the
Supreme Lord.” When you realize this, even for a moment,
you will try to leave this world. At that time you will
think, “I don’t want to be in this world. I want to go
to transcendental Goloka Vṛndāvana – very soon, very
soon.”

Anything else?

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja


                           219
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

: [Translating] Last question, Śrīla Gurudeva. This
devotee is asking how to be a devotee if one is in a
female body.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You should see that although now you are in a female
body, transcendentally you are a soul, part and parcel
of Kṛṣṇa. When you go to Goloka Vṛndāvana, you will
forget all these things. This body is not reality.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: [Translating] She is thinking that she should meditate
more on Kṛṣṇa than on Rādhā. She thinks that although we
are supposed to meditate more on Rādhā, because she is
in a female body she should meditate more on Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No difficulty. Always think, “I am in very beautiful
Vṛndāvana. The Yamunā River is flowing with very good
water. On both sides of the Yamunā there are many
varieties of flowers.” There, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are
sitting on a golden throne, Rādhikā is placing betel-nut
into Kṛṣṇa’s mouth, Kṛṣṇa is smiling, and you, in your
transcendental form, are serving Them both. In this way,
by continually performing sādhana, your life will be
successful.

There is no harm in being a lady. Ladies are   like gopīs.
The soul is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Bhakti   does not
depend on whether you are a lady or male, or   anything
else. I have told you the process to realize   this.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: Śrīla Gurudeva kī jaya!




* * *




1 “If one does not follow the four recognized disciplic
successions, his mantra or initiation is useless” (Padma
Purāṇa).




2 “O Gaura, I offer myself to You. Please accept these
foodstuffs.”



3 Klīm is the seed mantra for Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
in Vṛndāvana, and oṁ is the seed mantra for all His

                            220
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

manifestations.



4 An excerpt from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Verse 3,
Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti:


Siddha-mahāpuruṣas, those who pursue the path of bhakti,
are of three types: (1) bhagavat-pārṣada-deha-prāpta
(those who have obtained perfected spiritual bodies as
eternal associates of the Lord), (2) nirdhūta-kaṣāya
(those who have thrown off all material impurities), and
(3) mūrcchita-kaṣāya (those in whom a trace of material
contamination still lies dormant).

Bhagavat-pārṣada-deha-prāpta: After giving up the gross
material body, those who have perfected themselves
through the practice of bhakti obtain sac-cid-ānanda
spiritual forms, which are just suitable for the service
of the Lord as associates (pārṣadas). Such persons are
the best of all uttama-bhāgavatas.

Nirdhūta-kaṣāya: Those who, although still residing
within the gross material body made of five elements,
have no trace of material desire (vāsanā) nor any
material impressions (saṁskāras) within their hearts are
called nirdhūta-kaṣāya (those who have thrown off all
material impurities). They belong to the intermediate
class of uttama-bhāgavatas.

Mūrcchita-kaṣāya: Those siddha-mahāpuruṣas pursuing the
path of bhakti, in whose hearts there remains a trace of
desire (vāsanā) and impressions (saṁskāras) based on the
material mode of goodness are known as mūrcchita-kaṣāya.
Due to influence of their bhakti-yoga, these desires and
impressions remain in a dormant or unconscious state. As
soon as there is a favorable opportunity, their
worshipful object, Śrī Bhagavān, somehow causes their
desire to be consumed and attracts them to His lotus
feet. Such elevated souls belong to the preliminary
stage (kaniṣṭha) of uttama-bhāgavatas.



Devarṣi Nārada is an example of the topmost uttama-
bhāgavata. Śukadeva Gosvāmī belongs to the intermediate
stage of uttama-bhāgavatas (nirdhūta-kaṣāya). Śrī Nārada
in his previous birth as the son of a maidservant is an
example of the preliminary stage of uttama-bhāgavatas
(mūrcchita-kaṣāya). The association and mercy of these
three kinds of mahā-bhāgavatas is the cause of the
production of śraddhā. By discussing the gradations of
the bhakti of different categories of devotees, one can
automatically understand the gradations of the effect of
their association.




5 Excerpts on the stages of madhyama-adhikārī and
uttama-adhikārī:


                          221
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

An excerpt from The Essence of All Advice, Chapter 11:
One cannot easily know the difference between kaniṣṭha,
madhyama, and uttama, and also uttama-kaniṣṭha, uttama-
madhyama, and uttama-uttama. And in these three, uttama
kaniṣṭha, uttama-madhyama, and uttama-uttama, there are
hundreds of thousands of gradations.




An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
lecture on July 30, 2000, in Moscow, Russia: What then
is the remedy for us? Who will help us? Only the
madhyama-adhikārī. Śrī gurudeva should actually be
acting in the stage of madhyama-adhikārī. “Prema-maitrī
kṛpopekṣā yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ” [Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
11.2.46]. Madhyama-adhikārīs are of three categories:
madhyama-kaniṣṭha, madhyama-madhyama, and madhyama-
uttama. The madhyama-kaniṣṭha cannot act as guru. The
madhyama-madhyama and madhyama-uttama can, however,
because they are in the line of their guru, always
chanting and remembering the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, chanting
Hare Kṛṣṇa with rasa and taste, and their anarthas have
practically disappeared.




An excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
lecture on May 20, 2004, in Badger, California: What and
who is uttama-uttama, uttama-madhyama, and uttama-
kaniṣṭha? You should understand the meaning of mahat
(“great” or “gigantic”).




An excerpt from Bhagavad-gītā (8.6), Sārārtha-varṣiṇī
Prakāśikā-vṛtti: Although Bharata Mahārāja was a bhakta
of high calibre and was situated on the platform of
bhāva, he was reborn as a young deer by the will of the
Lord to set an example for humanity.




6 Moscow was overwhelmed with an unusual and abnormal
heat wave. Numerous bush and forest fires had broken out
all around Moscow, causing poisonous smoggy air,
casualties, and deaths, and the airport was closed for
the two days prior to Śrīla Gurudeva’s planned arrival.
Russian government officials issued an edict: “state of
emergency due to fires.” Everything happened so suddenly
that several devotees and guests immediately left and
returned to their cities.

Some of the festival leaders contacted Śrīla Gurudeva’s
secretary, Brajanāth dāsa, to let Śrīla Gurudeva know
about the dangers, and Brajanāth dāsa informed them of
Śrīla Gurudeva’s reply: “Please do not be worried. I am
coming.” The several hundred devotees, who arrived a few
days before the festival was scheduled to begin, were
brought to ecstatic tears to learn that it would

                          222
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

actually take place.

However, due to the bushfires, the police would not
allow the devotees to hold the festival in the place
where they had spent many thousands of dollars
renovating for several weeks. Therefore, the organizers
arranged for the devotees and guests to sleep in forests
and hotels, while they themselves would be looking for a
new place. Finally, at the last minute, a connection was
made by the grace of Guru and Gaurāṅga, and the whole
festival along with several hundred devotees relocated
with all the festival paraphernalia.

Then, on August 8th, which was one day later than
planned because of Kṛṣṇa’s desire to still further
increase the love-filled anxiety and anticipation of the
devotees, Śrīla Gurudeva’s plane landed at the airport.



7 As the first site was shut down by the police, the new
site, beautifully located in the forest at an ethnic
retreat center, was brilliantly organized within two
days by the harmonious effort of all the organizers and
other devotees.

The new site had very simple facilities and no kitchen,
so the innovative devotees set up a kitchen within hours
and arranged accommodation for over seven hundred
devotees in rooms, tents, teepees, and pavilions.



8 An excerpt from Mādhurya-kādambinī, Shower 3*:


Now we shall talk further on the anarthas (unwanted
desires) that crop up in the execution of devotional
service. Unwanted desires tend to smother the natural
growth of the creeper of bhakti. At first glance,
unwanted desires look like offshoots from the bhakti-
latā (the creeper of devotion), but in reality they are
mundane desires for position, adoration, and opulence,
which color and taint the practitioner’s consciousness.
Thriving in this way, these anarthas arrest the growth
of the creeper of devotional service.

The four anarthas mentioned in the beginning of this
chapter can be mitigated in the five following ways: (i)
eka-deśa-varttinī (partially), (ii) bahu-deśa-varttinī
(substantially), (iii) prāyikī (almost completely), (iv)
pūrṇā (completely), and (v) ātyantikī (absolutely
thoroughly).

The many anarthas stemming from aparādhas (offenses) are
partially destroyed in the final stages of bhajana-kriyā
(rendering devotional service under the guidance of a
spiritual master). This is known as eka-deśa-varttinī.
When bhajana-kriyā gains maturity it turns to niṣṭhā, or
steadiness, in devotional activities. In this stage of
development the mitigation of anarthas is substantial
(bahu-deśa-varttinī). Thereafter, on the platform of
rati (attraction) the unwanted desires in the heart are
almost completely absolved (prāyikī). With the first

                          223
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

awakening of prema, or divine love, these anarthas are
completely removed (pūrṇā). Finally, the anarthas are
totally uprooted (ātyantikī) when the devotee receives
the mercy and shelter of the Lord’s lotus feet and is
directly engaged in His personal service.




August 14, 2010


Last Airport Darśana

Domodedomo Airport

[After introducing many the Russian devotees to Śrīla
Gurudeva and glorifying their services to him, Śrīpāda
Sādhu Mahārāja translated the devotees’ questions and
then introduced more:]

Snigdha dāsī

: I want to give my life to you, but I don’t know how.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You can do so by reading my books, distributing them,
and thinking, “I am in Vṛndāvana.”

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: Gurudeva, the organizers of the festival, Hemādri
Prabhu and Indurāṇī Dīdī, are asking for you to please
give some final words to the Russian devotees before you
leave, telling them how to achieve śuddha-bhakti.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I have told everything in my classes. There is nothing
more to tell. Now, remember what I told.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: [Translating] Abhirāma Prabhu is saying that Śrīla
Gurudeva gives everything, but sometimes there is no
qualification on our part to receive what he is giving.
How do we become qualified?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: He should thoroughly read my books and distribute my
books. And he will think, “I am in Vṛndāvana.”

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: This is Sajjana Prabhu. He has helped so much in
organizing the festival and supporting Moscow’s
preaching center. He goes to the market every day and
sells things, and in this way he is able to support your
preaching center.

This is Rādhā-ramaṇa; He lives in the Moscow preaching

                          224
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

center and is doing so much sevā. Śrīnidhi Prabhu also
helps so much. This is Jāhnavā dāsī from St. Petersburg.
She also wants to serve you.

This is Kṛṣṇā dāsī from Moscow. She wants to write a
book about the life and teachings of Rāya Rāmānanda,
including his discussion with Caitanya Mahāprabhu. It
would be based on your book Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: She can do that.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: [Translating] Annapūrṇā dāsī is saying that she has so
much impersonalism in her heart; she cannot imagine
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. How can she do that?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Read my books thoroughly and, while reading, think
that the very person who has written the book is
instructing you.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: [Translating] Jāhnavā dāsī has three years to finish
her studies, but she wants to come to India for half a
year. So, shall she finish her studies, or go to India
for half a year?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: First finish your studies.

Śrīpāda Sādhu Mahārāja

: [Translating] This is Vraja-mohana Brahmacārī from
Ukraine, on the left. He is asking how to serve you.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I have told everything.

[Devotees sing govinda-dāmodara-mādhaveti…]




August 31, 2010


Morning Walk

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: Śrī Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī is a very nice festival. It has
been said that we will be giving up eating and drinking,
and will fast till midnight. Why do we have to fast till
midnight?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

                            225
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt           5/8/2017


: Bhagavān, the Supreme Lord,     will be offered some
bhoga. His prasādam is such a     thing that even if it has
fallen from a dog’s mouth, or     it has come from a far
distant place, or it is stale     or melted, or in whatever
state it is given, one should     honor it at once. This is
the rule.


śuṣkaṁ paryuṣitaṁ vāpi

nītaṁ vā dūra-deśataḥ

prāpti-mātreṇa bhoktavyaṁ

nātra kāla-vicāraṇā

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 6.225)


[One should eat the mahā-prasādam of the Lord
immediately upon receiving it, even though it is dried
up, stale, or brought from a distant country. One should
consider neither time nor place.*]

There are other rules, such as listening to hari-kathā
and taking the Lord’s mahā-prasādam remnants water.
There is fasting for the appearance of śaktimān-tattva
(Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His āvataras). There is no fasting for
śakti-tattva (Rādhārāṇī).

In the life of Vaiṣṇavas there are two principles: (1)
akhila-bhoga-tyāga, renouncing all types of enjoyment
for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and (2) akhila-ceṣṭā-
parāyaṇa, undertaking all endeavors for the pleasure of
Kṛṣṇa. Both of these will melt Kṛṣṇa’s heart.

Pure Vaiṣṇavas have made some very strict rules for our
auspiciousness. We follow these rules and perform
harināma. This fasting is a very small thing. Most
people don’t follow any fasting on Śrī Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī.
Those who fast on this day benefit so much more than
those who do not.

Devotee

: Kṛṣṇa performs many types of pastimes, such as lifting
Girirāja Govardhana and killing demons, and people like
these types of pastimes. But they are not so attracted
towards butter stealing and cow-herding pastimes. How
can we explain to them the sweetness of these pastimes?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes are especially attractive
to the children, and others will be attracted to other
pastimes. Thus, there is sequence in the appreciation of
the pastimes. Everyone will not have taste for all the
pastimes. Śukadeva Gosvāmī was blissful in describing
all the pastimes. We also feel bliss in all the
pastimes. Yet, Kṛṣṇa’s topmost līlā is rāsa-līlā; there
is nothing greater than that. And, to nourish this rāsa-
līlā there is Veṇū-gīta, Gopī-gīta, Bhramara-gīta, and
Yugala-gīta, which are like the limbs of rāsa-līlā.

                            226
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017


Devotee

: Gurudeva, when we offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma to senior
Vaiṣṇavas, should we do this in front of the Vaiṣṇava,
or from a far distance?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You should offer praṇāma in front of the senior
Vaiṣṇavas. Kaniṣṭha devotees will first offer praṇāma,
and then the madhyama devotees will offer praṇāma.
Madhyama devotees will offer praṇāma to each other at
the same time.

Devotee

: Is feeding cows part of devotional service?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It is not against bhakti, but it is not a limb of
bhakti. Kṛṣṇa has also served cows. There is a system
called pañca-grāsa, wherein prasādam is divided into
five parts before eating. One part for animals, one for
cows, one for beggars, etc. Previously there were many
rules and regulations for society [householders].




August 31, 2010


Evening Walk

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: A person once approached Śrīla Gaura Kiśora dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja-jī and said, “Oh Mahārāja-jī please be
merciful to me. Without your mercy I cannot live.” Śrīla
Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī replied, “Wear ḍor and
kaupīna.1” That person never asked for mercy again.
Similarly, if I give you blessings to come with me and
fully engage in bhakti, will your wife be happy?

People do not want what is good for them. If that
devotee had taken ḍor-kaupīna, he would have really
become like Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. We want
to blow air from our mouths as we laugh, and at the same
time have the mouth full of air. Only one sword can fit
in a sheath – not two. Either there is devotion to the
Supreme Lord or desire for sense gratification; they
cannot co-exist.

Those who are renounced from birth like Śrīla Śukadeva
Gosvāmī are in a different category than ordinary
people. Some persons who live in the maṭha contemplate
that while others stay at home, working hard to enjoy
some comfort, they themselves are enjoying more
happiness in the maṭha. There is so much delicious
prasādam in the maṭha, and one easily gets nice clothes
– just by doing harināma – hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa

                          227
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017

kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare
hare. This may be so, but bhakti will not come by this
mentality.

Devotee

: She is scared to take dīkṣā, thinking that she may not
be able to maintain her vows.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Be scared all your life, and never cross the river.

Actually, there is no need to be afraid of taking dīkṣā.
Dīkṣā means divya-jñāna, transcendental knowledge.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

: Her situation at home is not fully favorable for
bhakti. She may need to cook eggs at home.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes, this is a problem. See if your situation can be
made favorable; otherwise, practice by mind.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: If one does not have natural detachment, but wants to
do bhakti, how can this happen?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Renunciation does not ‘come.’ Rather, it is natural
(svābhāvika). Vairāgya actually means “special rāga,” or
“freedom from envy and other faults.” When the stage of
anurāga (spontaneous attachment to Kṛṣṇa) manifests,
that is the stage of vairāgya.

Rohiṇī-nandana dāsa

: Is vairāgya essential for engaging in bhakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Bhakti is not different from vairāgya. Where there is
bhakti, vairāgya is automatically manifest as well.
Without bhakti, true vairāgya cannot exist. Rāga, or
attachment, is one, meaning that it can only go to one
place. If our attachment is towards Kṛṣṇa, vairāgya
automatically appears. If our attachment is not towards
Kṛṣṇa, then we are automatically attached to material
things.

Devotee

: Mahārāja-jī, by reading your books and by listening to
you speak, we realise some astonishing things.
Scriptures say that one can know spiritual topics only
if Kṛṣṇa allows them to be known. You must be Kṛṣṇa,
then, as only Kṛṣṇa Himself can allow others to know
Him.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

                           228
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


: Gurudeva is āśraya-kṛṣṇa (the abode of love for
Kṛṣṇa), not viṣaya-kṛṣṇa (the object of the love of His
devotees).2




* * *




1 Ḍor and kaupīna are two cloths that signify one’s
renunciation from material sense gratification.



2


sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair

uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ

kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

Gurvāṣṭakam (7)


Scriptures unanimously proclaim śrī guru to be sākṣāt-
hari, directly Śrī Hari. This is a fact jointly
corroborated by all saintly persons. Yet at the same
time, śrī guru is very dear to Bhagavān. I adore the
lotus feet of that śri gurudeva [who is inconceivably
one with and different from Bhagavān].




September 5, 2010


Darśana

[This is one of Śrīla Gurudeva’s last darśanas, spoken
on the roof of Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā. It
was given just before he left for New Delhi, for
Rādhāṣṭamī, and before he entered his pastime of illness
there.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Kaṁsa gave a seat to Akrūra and said, “There is no one
else who can help me apart from you. Please help me!”

Akrūra asked, “What can I do for you?”

Kaṁsa caught his hand and said, “Somehow, by any means –

                          229
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

by trick, by strength, by spending whatever time it
takes to convince Them – bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to the
wrestling arena that I have built near Raṅgeśvara
Mahādeva. There will be demonstrations of wrestling
ability by many strong heroes, and there will be other
events as well. So go to Vraja, and somehow bring Them
here to Mathurā.”

Akrūra thought, “Even though he is very cruel, today he
is speaking very sweetly. Anyway, whatever happens, at
least I will get the darśana of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. How
fortunate is this Earth planet, because in Vṛndāvana,
the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa runs barefoot behind the
cows. Kaṁsa doesn’t understand that he has grabbed a
poisonous snake, and has wrapped it around his neck like
a garland. He doesn’t know when that snake will bite
him.”

Thinking like this, Akrūra went to Vraja, where Nanda
Bābā welcomed him with great respect. That night, He
took Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to a secluded spot and told
Them, “Listen to me, Kṛṣṇa. Nanda and Yaśodā are not
Your real parents. Your birth parents are Devakī and
Vasudeva. The night You were born, Vasudeva took You
across the Yamunā and exchanged You for the daughter of
Yaśodā; so You are actually the son of Devakī. Kaṁsa has
chained Your parents by hands and feet in his prison
house, where they are suffering greatly. Sometimes he
kicks them with his feet and shouts, ‘Where is your
son?! Tell me now!’ They cannot tolerate their great
suffering, and certainly they will die.

“Do whatever You desire. Do You want Your parents to
die? Is that what You want? And even if You don’t think
they are Your parents, at least they are Your devotees.
It is Your duty to save them.”

Balarāma told Kṛṣṇa, “I know that Nanda and Yaśodā are
Our mother and father. Although Rohiṇī gave birth to Me,
it is Nanda and Yaśodā who maintained Me and protected
Me, just as eyelids protect the pupils of the eyes. Let
us go to Mathurā as the well-wishers of Vasudeva and
Devakī. We will finish Kaṁsa, and tomorrow or the day
after we will return.”

The words of Bhagavān are the Absolute Truth; they can
never be false. Whatever Lord Rāma or Lord Kṛṣṇa speak,
They will do. So Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā, where He killed
Kaṁsa and the demonic wrestlers, Cāṇūra and Mūṣṭika, and
where He established Ugrasena as the King. He was
engaged in this way for two days and nights.

Meanwhile, surrounded by their bullock carts on the bank
of the Yamuna, Nanda Maharaja and the cowherd men and
boys were anxiously awaiting the return of Kṛṣṇa and
Balarāma. They were constantly thinking in great
anxiety, “When will They come? Why have They not come?
Kaṁsa has been killed and Ugrasena has been made King,
but still They have not returned.”

It has been written in the Purāṇas, vṛndāvanaṁ
parityajya padam ekaṁ na gacchati. Kṛṣṇa says that He
never takes one foot out of Vraja. So He should have
stayed in Vraja. How could it be possible for Him to

                          230
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017

leave Vraja and go to Mathurā? Why did He go?

Here is a point worth considering: A person never leaves
that place which is most dear to Him. After finishing
his work elsewhere, he would immediately return to that
place. Vraja is most dear to Kṛṣṇa, and among the
Vrajavāsīs, the sakhās are most dear to Him. Even more
dear than the sakhās are Nanda and Yaśodā, and even more
dear than them are the gopīs, of whom Candrāvalī and
Rādhikā are the most dear. And, between Candrāvalī and
Rādhikā, Rādhikā’s devotion is topmost. There is no one
more dear to Kṛṣṇa than Her.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā also never leaves Vraja. So who went to
Kurukṣetra to meet with Śrī Kṛṣṇa there? That was
saṁyoginī Rādhā. She stayed there for two days and then
returned to Vraja. And who cried in separation from
Kṛṣṇa in Uddhava-kyārī, on the outskirts of Nandagaon?
That was viyoginī Rādhā.

The question comes: When Kṛṣṇa Himself promised the
Vrajavāsīs, “I will return the day after tomorrow,” did
He lie? His words can never be false. What happened
then? If He did not return after many, many years, how,
then, can His words be true?

Having realized the internal meaning behind the
statement in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,1 Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura wrote in his Bhāgavatam commentary,
“Brother, I am not satisfied by this statement. He must
have returned to Vraja.” Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura wrote
that if Kṛṣṇa could expand Himself into millions of
forms to dance with the gopīs in the rāsa-līlā, why
could He not perform a similar pastime here? He declared
that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma both manifested a second form of
Themselves. As one pair, the two brothers remained with
Vasudeva Mahārāja in Mathurā, and as another pair, They
were seen with Nanda Mahārāja, laughing and dancing as
They returned with him to Vraja.

When Kṛṣṇa sent Uddhava   to Nandagrāma in Vraja with His
message of consolation,   Uddhava thought, “I don’t know
anyone except Kṛṣṇa. He   is everything to me. How can I
live without Him for so   many days? That is impossible
for me.”

Kṛṣṇa assured him, “When you go there, to Vraja, you
will see that we are all there – Myself, the gopīs, and
all My friends. Every day the gopīs light ghee lamps,
and while churning yoghurt, they chant My names,
‘Govinda, Dāmodara, Mādhava.’ ” [Śrīla Gurudeva lead the
devotees present in singing this bhajana.] There are
many songs like this.

When Uddhava arrived in Vraja, he thought, “Where is
Kṛṣṇa? I left Him in Mathurā, but I see Him here with
all His sakhās. How is this possible? Just now all the
cowherd boys are returning with Kṛṣṇa from cow grazing.”

Then, after some time, everything became covered [and
Uddhava saw Vraja in separation from Kṛṣṇa].

Kṛṣṇa showed Uddhava that He came to Vraja, stayed in
Vraja, and has always been in Vraja. How is this

                            231
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

possible? In one prakoṣṭha (section) the Vrajavāsīs are
meeting with Kṛṣṇa, and in another prakoṣṭha they are
experiencing separation from Him. Both pastimes are
occurring simultaneously.

Are you understanding something?

[By this kathā, Śrīla Gurudeva is indicating to the
devotees in Mathurā and around the entire world that,
“In one form I am separating myself from you, but in
other form we will always be together.”]




* * *




1 The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam states that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma
stayed in Mathurā, after giving Their clothes ornaments
as presents to Nanda Bābā, who returned to Vraja alone.




September 16, 2010


Copyright Darśana

[On March 13 and May 29, 2009, some of the sevakas of
GVP (Gaudiya Vedanta Publications Inc., Śrīla Gurudeva’s
official publication house) had two long darśanas with
Śrīla Gurudeva about the copyrights to his English
books. Based on these conversations, the GVP sevakas
drafted a license, defining the various terms and
conditions that need to be fulfilled by GVP in order to
be given the responsibility of publishing and managing
Śrīla Gurudeva’s English books. In this darśana of
September 16, 2010, that license was presented to Śrīla
Gurudeva for his approval and signature. During the
conversation, Ānitā dāsī confirms with Śrīla Gurudeva
his previous statements by paraphrasing points from the
license. Brajanāth dāsa often repeats and/or explains
Ānitā’s words to Śrīla Gurudeva. For the convenience the
reader, we have added the images of the signed license
as Appendix 2 to this book.]

Ānitā dās

ī:

Do you remember we asked you many questions?

Brajanāth dāsa

: Mañju Dīdī [Śrīla Gurudeva’s disciple who is an
attorney, expert in intellectual property] asked you
many questions about this. Then we discussed it with

                          232
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

many devotees and they all want to approve this – that
anyone can print your books as long as they are not
changed.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Without corrections.

Ānitā dāsī

[presenting the license, Śrīla Gurudeva’s previous
directives]:

Without change; and as long as they give you credit as
the author, and credit to Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and
any other author.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I once heard it said that no one can print my books
without authority given by me. I first heard like this.
Is that what you have written [in the document to be
signed by me?]

Brajanāth dāsa

: No; you did not like that. We wrote that anyone who
prints your books should not change anything and should
give credit to you. If they don’t give credit to you, we
can make any legal suit if we want.

You said that your books are for everyone. There is no
ban. Anyone can print or distribute your books. You
mentioned that your guru mahārāja did not want any ban.
It should be for everyone.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: “Only my disciples can print my books, and no one else
will be allowed.” No, I don’t want that. Anyone can do
so, but without corrections.

Brajanāth dāsa

: Yes, without changing anything.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: It will be good if my books go everywhere.

Brajanāth dāsa

: If any publishing house in China wants to publish your
books, and they don’t change anything and they give
credit to you, it will be good for all. They may even
give some royalty, right?

Ānitā dāsī

[presenting license]: Anyone can print without making
changes. Then the books can go very far.

Brajanāth dāsa


                          233
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

: They can go very far, very fast, and very wide. We
want that.

Ānitā dāsī

[presenting license]: If they make any change, then we
can stop them.

[To Rāmacandra dāsa] Some of his old, old books were
published under the name Gaudiya Vedanta Samiti. But in
the future, for reprinting, we [the GVP] will change
that to “Gaudiya Vedanta Publications,” because they are
Gurudeva’s books.

[To Śrīla Gurudeva] This document also says that anyone
can translate [from the English or Hindi into the
world’s various languages], but they must give credit to
you.

[Rāmacandra dāsa translating Ānitā dāsī’s words into
Hindi]

Brajanāth dāsa

: And it must be authentic; not changing anything.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: [They should be] like my books.

Ānitā dāsī

[presenting license]: And they must give you the right
to print the book, and also GVP the right, including the
right to make any adjustments if needed. In the future,
if we [the GVP] reprint, and any correction is
necessary, we should ask you. If you are not present,
then an editorial committee can answer.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: Yes.

Ānitā dāsī

[presenting license]: Also, after consulting the
[directing] editor or translator who has worked on the
book, if there is any confusion, we can then consult
guru, sādhu, and śāstra.

[Rāmacandra dāsa translating Ānitā dāsī’s words into
Hindi]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: That is correct. [Regarding the Hindi books] One can
only make ordinary grammatical corrections. Corrections
regarding siddhānta must be checked by the [Hindi]
editorial board – Mādhava-priya and Amala-kṛṣṇa. There
are two or three people there, or you can ask me.1

Ānitā dāsī

[presenting license]: You approve the corrections first.

                          234
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


GVP agrees that they will always keep Your books
available.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I have told this to Mādhava-priya [regarding the Hindi
publications].

Rāmacandra dāsa

[speaking in Hindi]: You are speaking about the Hindi
books. The GVP [Gaudiya Vedanta Publications] that she
is referring to is the one for English books.

Ānitā dā

sī

: This is registered in America, and it is a license
only for the English books.

Rāmacandra dāsa

[speaking in Hindi]: She is specifically referring to
English books. In India we have registered an
organization called GVP that prints your books in Hindi.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: What did you do?

Rāmacandara dāsa

[speaking in Hindi]: For your Hindi books, we have
registered GVP in India.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: And for English books?

Rāmacandra dāsa

[speaking in Hindi]: Ānitā is doing that. The name
remains the same [GVP]. This has been registered in
India, and that has been registered in America.

Ānitā dāsī

[presenting license]: If GVP does not fulfill these
agreements, then they have six months to correct
themselves, and if they don’t, they can lose their
license. They cannot print the books anymore.

Rāmacandra dāsa

: What is their agreement?

Ānitā dās

ī

[presenting license]: GVP Inc. must keep the books in
print. GVP Inc. must make the books available for

                             235
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

anybody to reprint as long as there are no changes and
they give credit. GVP Inc. allows anyone to make
translations as long as the translation is accurate and
they give credit. GVP Inc. gets a license back [from the
translator]. GVP Inc. also manages if there is a need
for corrections in future editions. [Ānitā is referring
to the license that makes GVP Inc. responsible for
managing the English publications. GVP Inc. is
responsible for carrying out Śrīla Gurudeva’s various
instructions, which became the provisions of this
license. The full license had been included in this book
as Appendix 2.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You can consult him [pointing to Brajanāth dāsa] and
her [pointing to Sāvitrī Dīdī, who was filming this
darśana and who is also a lawyer].

Brajanāth dāsa

: We have been preparing this document with Mañju Dīdī
and Ānitā Dīdī for many months. Now we are ready for you
to sign it.

Rāmacandra dāsa:

By signing, Gurudeva is authorizing GVP to print under
these conditions. If they don’t follow their agreement,
they lose their license. Then he has right to take back
the power – not automatically.

Ānitā dāsī

[presenting license]: If Gurudeva and his heirs are
unhappy, they will give written notice, and then GVP has
six months to correct itself.

[Śrīla Gurudeva signs his name to the first page, and
initials BVN on the rest of the pages. Umā Dīdī and
Rāmacandra dāsa sign as witness, and Ānitā dāsī signs as
GVP representative.]




* * *




1 In the two 2009 copyright darśanas, Śrīla Gurudeva
discussed the English editorial committee. Although this
2010 darśana is about his English books, here he is
changing the subject and pointing to his Hindi books. By
this he is letting the devotees know that he wants the
same consideration in the publication and printing of
his Hindi books as with the English.




                          236
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


[From the beginning of 2010, Śrīla Gurudeva exhibited a
series of sickness pastimes, while gradually becoming
more and more absorbed in his internal bhajana. Wherever
he traveled, there was a unique sense of gravity and
apprehension that had not been there in previous years.
It seemed like he was giving hints, one after another,
that his manifest pastimes were soon coming to an end.

At end of August, 2010, after returning to India from
Russia, Śrīla Gurudeva started going deeper and deeper
into his bhajana, and thus, more serious symptoms of so-
called illness manifested externally. On the request of
his doctors and sevakas, Śrīla Gurudeva remained at Śrī
Ramaṇa Bihārī Gauḍīya Maṭha in New Delhi, undergoing
treatement there. During this time he hardly gave
darśana, and on the rare occasions that he did, the
conversations were short.

After celebrating Śrī Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī in New Delhi,
Śrīla Gurudeva went to Mathurā and Govardhana. However,
due to a lack of adequate medical facilities there, he
had to return to New Delhi within less than two weeks.

As Śrīla Gurudeva’s ill health increased, devotees from
around the world started arriving at the New Delhi
maṭha, hoping to catch a glimpse of their beloved
Gurudeva. His darśana had now become very rare. When the
month of Kārtika arrived, Śrīla Gurudeva requested most
of the devotees to go to Vṛndāvana for parikramā, while
he himself remained in New Delhi. Yet, upon his repeated
request, Śrīla Gurudeva was brought to Govardhana two
weeks later. The following two darśanas were recorded
during his stay there:]




November 13, 2010


Darśana

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: You should continue to print my books with the same
enthusiasm with which they are being printed now. After
I leave, also, you should continue to print those
editions that are finished [out of stock] in the same
manner.

Śrīpāda Mādhava Mahārāja

[In response to the words “After I leave”]: You mustn’t
speak like this. Don’t speak like this. You have to live
for a long time yet – many more years. There is so much
work pending, so you mustn’t speak like this. If you
speak like this, will everyone’s mind not become
disturbed? You mustn’t speak like this.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: No… [long pause]. The continuous progression of [the

                           237
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

printing of] our books should not break… [long pause]. I
have said… [long pause] already said, that it should
fully continue.




November 21, 2010


Darśana

[After not coming out of his room the entire Kārtika
month, Śrīla Gurudeva came onto the balcony of his
bhajana-kuṭīra on the last day of Vraja-maṇḍala
parikramā and spoke the following few words to the
thousands of longing devotees.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: I called you all from so many countries to join our
Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā. Eighteen buses.

Devotees:

Nineteen buses.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: We took nineteen buses and twenty-five cars, and
performed parikramā of the whole Vraja-maṇḍala. I
request you all to come again next year. And if
possible, you can come to Navadvīpa-dhāma parikramā.
This year we did well. All preparations were done by
Premānanda…

Brajanāth dāsa

: And Pradyumna Prabhu.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

: …and there were no complaints from anyone. Lodging was
good. My request is that you should come again, for
Navadvīpa parikramā.

[At the end of Kārtika, Śrīla Gurudeva was still
experiencing symptoms of bad health. His servants
desired to take him to a warmer climate, and thus they
brought him to Jagannātha Purī. It seemed like Śrīla
Gurudeva was doing well there, but then suddenly, at
3:00 in the morning on December 29, 2010, Śrīla
Gurudeva, by his own sweet desire, entered Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Ramaṇa-Bihārījī’s night pastimes in the Lord’s own
eternal abode, thus submerging all those who had taken
shelter at his lotus feet in an ocean of intense
separation from him. His lotus-like body was taken to
Navadvīpa-dhāma and put into samādhi there.

Although nothing can pacify the heart from the
separation felt in the absences of our beloved Śrīla
Gurudeva, devotees find some solace in taking refuge of
his books and instructions, where he is eternally

                          238
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

present, with the hope that one day they will be
reunited with that beautiful and unparralled personality
from the spiritual world.

A more detailed description of Śrīla Gurudeva’s final
manifest pastimes in this world has been added to this
book in Appendix 3.]




Appendix 1


How to Read Śrīla Gurudeva’s Books


[The following are two excerpts from the lectures of
Śrīla Gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja:]

Treating the Books as Our Śikṣā-Gurus

Lecture on June 4, 1998

(Los Angeles, California)

If my heart has accepted Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī as my śikṣā-
guru and I am accepting all his teachings, no one can
challenge this. My heart accepts this. If I am accepting
as my śikṣā-guru Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja,
there are none to challenge. This is the relation
between one’s heart and Gurudeva.

We should treat all the books of the Gosvāmīs as our
śikṣā-gurus. We should offer praṇāma to the books and
then read them. If we do this, we will realize that all
siddhānta is coming automatically in our heart. This is
the process of reading ‒ not reading, but serving ‒ the
books.

Never try to ‘eat’ prasādam. Once someone asked me,
“Will you eat anything?” I replied, “I have never eaten
anything in my entire life.” He then asked, “So, how are
you alive?” I said, “I have served prasādam.” Try to be
like this. Don’t ‘chant’ Hare Kṛṣṇa; try to serve Hare
Kṛṣṇa. Don’t ‘eat’ mahā-prasādam. Always try to serve.

When you are reading these books, don’t ‘read.’ Serve.
Offer praṇāma, place the book on your forehead and
heart, and pray, “O Prabhu, you are personally Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī. Please be merciful to me.” This is the
process of reading.

When you are reading the dialogue between Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Rāya Rāmānanda on the bank of the
Godāvarī, you can think, “I am on the bank of Godāvarī.
Rāya Rāmānanda and Mahāprabhu are sitting here. I am
also peacefully sitting with them, and hearing all their
topics. O Mahāprabhu, O Rāya Rāmānanda Prabhu, please be
merciful to me. Please sprinkle your mercy upon me so
that I can understand this high-class siddhānta.”
Without praying in this way, you will have doubts and

                            239
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

you will not be able to realize anything.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī never met personally
with Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, or Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī. He only met with Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
and Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. How then can he write in
Caitanya-caritāmṛta that they are all his śikṣā-gurus?
The answer is that everything Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī had in his heart was from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
and then he explained his heart’s realizations to
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja received
rasa-tattva from Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and all
siddhānta from Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī.

From where did that siddhānta come? Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī collected appropriate siddhānta from all the
scriptures, such as Veda, Upaniṣads, and Vedānta. From
that he made some notes, but the information was not
organized. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī put that information in
order, and thus everything is coming from them.

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī wrote many books, one of which is
Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
took the essence of all the topics therein and gave it
to Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī.

They realized all the knowledge they received, not like
us who think, “Kṛṣṇa is my śikṣā-guru, and Rūpa Gosvāmī
is śikṣā-guru, but I am not taking any essence from them
and I don’t follow them.” To follow a guru actually, by
heart, is the acceptance of śikṣā-guru. That is why
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī was able to write [in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 1.36–37]:


śrī-rūpa, sanātana, bhaṭṭa-raghunātha

śrī-jīva, gopāla-bhaṭṭa, dāsa-raghunātha


[My instructing spiritual masters are Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Bhaṭṭa Raghunātha, Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī, Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī.*]

ei chaya guru—śikṣā-guru ye āmāra

tāṅ’-sabāra pāda-padme koṭi namaskāra


[These six are my instructing spiritual masters, and
there-fore I offer millions of respectful obeisances
unto their lotus feet.*]

Depending on Books

Lecture on June 16, 2003

(Birmingham, U. K.)

Nowadays I see that devotees have so many problems, and
because of these problems, they cannot chant regularly.
Sometimes they are restless and upset, and thus they

                           240
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

give up worshiping Ṭhākurjī (the Deity), chanting,
remembering, and reading books. I have come to remind
you to not be like that; do not be weak. Your suffering
will increase by whatever you are doing to decrease it.
So, don’t be upset; rather try to chant more and read
more.

When reading the books of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja, you should think, “He is instructing me.” If
you are reading a book of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, think that
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is speaking to you. And if you are
reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, think that Śrīla Śukadeva
Gosvāmī and Śrīla Vyāsadeva are speaking to you. And
always pray to Lord Krsna and Śrī Gurudeva to sprinkle
their mercy upon you.




Appendix 2




Appendix 3


Śrīla Gurudeva’s Final Manifest Pastimes in this World


[The following are excerpts from the article called, “Oṁ
Viṣṇupāda Aṣtottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja Entered Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa-
Bihārījī’s Naiśa-līlā (Night Pastimes),” published in
Rays of The Harmonist #24, Kārtika 2011:]

Enacting the pastime of illness

In accordance with the unfolding of a divine plan, Śrīla
Gurudeva enacted his human-like pastime of illness from
the beginning of 2010. In a prelude to the more serious
illness that would occur later in the year, on two
occasions at the time of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma parikramā,
Śrīla Gurudeva did not come to preside over the evening
assembly. Great disappointment filled the hearts of the
attending devotees, who yearned to hear transcendental
kathā from his lotus mouth.

Even though he was noticeably weak during his American
and European tour, after he had returned to India and
celebrated Guru-pūrṇimā, Śrīla Gurudeva still planned to
fly to Dubai and Russia to participate in hari-kathā
festivals there. Some devotees expressed concern about
this. He had just returned from a world tour and had had
little time to rest. Further, he had just given darśana
to thousands of devotees at three Guru-pūrṇimā festivals
in India. For these reasons, the devotees felt he should
not travel again so soon. But Śrīla Gurudeva could not
be dissuaded from going and remained fixed in his
determination to fulfil his promise to the devotees in
Russia, who for years had been eagerly yearning for his
darśana, being unable to come to India due to their

                          241
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

financial constraints. Upon his return to India,
however, after the successful completion of those
festivals, he went directly from the airport to the
hospital.

Janmāṣṭamī – His Last Lecture in Delhi

On the request of his doctors, Śrīla Gurudeva stayed in
Delhi to regain his health. Therefore, for the first
time in fifty-six years, he was not in Mathurā or
Vṛndāvana for the celebrations of Jhulana-yātrā; his
annual three-day conference honoring Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
on his disappearance day; Śrī Baladeva Pūrṇimā; Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī; and Śrī Nandotsava. Words cannot
describe how he lamented not being able to be there.

Arrival in Mathurā and Govardhana

Śrīla Gurudeva completed his medical treatment just
after Śrī Nandotsava and immediately travelled to
Mathurā. After staying there for two days, he proceeded
to Govardhana.

A devotee in Mathurā told Śrīla Gurudeva that in his
absence, the Janmāṣṭamī festival seemed devoid of life.
He requested Śrīla Gurudeva to be present in Mathurā
every Janmāṣṭamī, just like he used to be. At this,
Śrīla Gurudeva became very grave. “A new era is about to
begin,” he responded. “Everything will be different from
now on.” With these words, Śrīla Gurudeva fell silent.

Further Manifestations of Illness

After a short stay in Govardhana, Śrīla Gurudeva again
exhibited manifestations of sickness. He expressed a
deep desire to stay in Vraja and to be able to celebrate
Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī in Mathurā, but because Govardhana lacks
adequate medical facilities, he had to return to Delhi.

As Gurudeva enacted his pastime of illness again and
again, the heartbreak his disciples and followers
experienced can only be known to them. Everyone simply
desired Śrīla Gurudeva’s speedy recovery, by one means
or another. Śrīla Gurudeva was scheduled to fly to
Malaysia on 19 September, but on the advice of his
doctors, his journey was cancelled. His servants hastily
consulted prominent doctors from India and abroad and
began to arrange the best possible treatment in Delhi.

Manifesting Transcendental Symptoms

During this period of ill health, Śrīla Gurudeva
remained absorbed in deep transcendental moods.
Sometimes he would utter indistinct words, and other
times he would chant his āhnika or stava-stutis
(devotional prayers) for hours on end. Only upon his
servants’ repeated efforts to offer him food or medicine
would he slowly return to external consciousness,
sometimes fully and sometimes only partially. Thus Śrīla
Gurudeva would constantly remain in an internal state
(antara-daśā).

Within Śrīla Gurudeva’s bhajana-kutīra, his servants
would from time to time sing his favorite kīrtanas, and

                          242
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

sometimes they would read to him from scripture.

One day Śrīla Gurudeva said, “I have collected all the
spices, but cannot find the ubar.” He uttered this over
and over. Each time, his servants asked him what this
spice was, but Śrīla Gurudeva simply softly uttered the
same word again and again. No one present had ever heard
of this transcendental spice.

The Arrival of Devotees for Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala Parikramā

Many devotees from India and abroad began to arrive for
the eighty-four krosa Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā, which is
performed during the month of Kārtika. But first, each
and every devotee anxiously went to Śrī Ramaṇa-Bihārī
Gauḍīya Maṭha to receive Śrīla Gurudeva’s darśana, and
only then did they proceed to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

Śrīla Gurudeva’s Instruction to Join Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala
Parikramā

The devotees were worried about Śrīla Gurudeva’s health
and some wanted to remain in Delhi to be near him.
However, once Kārtika started, he did not always
encourage this. On many mornings and evenings, he would
come to the screen door of his bhajana-kutīra, either to
sit for a few minutes or to stop briefly as he walked,
aided by his attendants. If he saw devotees waiting for
his darśana in the courtyard, often he would ask them
why they were there, and he would instruct them to go to
Vṛndāvana to participate in Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā.
“Your life will become successful by visiting these
pastime places,” he would say. “I am only unable to
attend parikramā because of my ill health, but I order
all of you to go and participate. Gradually, I am
improving and will try to join the parikramā as soon as
possible.”

Expressing the Desire to Reside in Govardhana during
Kārtika

One day, in the middle of Kārtika, Śrīla Gurudeva told
his servants that he now desired to go to Govardhana.
Upon hearing his request, they immediately made all
arrangements to take him there. On the morning of his
departure, the crowd of devotees in the Delhi temple was
so huge that it took half an hour for Śrīla Gurudeva to
travel in his wheelchair from the elevator exit to the
ambulance, a distance of about forty meters. Śrīla
Gurudeva held his palm upright, showering blessings upon
all. Dr. Ravindra Prakash of Delhi accompanied him on
his journey to Govardhana.

Residing at Govardhana in Kārtika

A thousand devotees gathered for Śrīla Gurudeva’s
darśana upon his arrival at Śrī Giridhārī Gauḍīya Maṭha.
During the remainder of his stay in Govardhana, his
health fluctuated from day to day and he remained in
internal consciousness (antara-daśā) most of the time.

Manifesting Transcendental Emotions

From time to time, Śrīla Gurudeva would manifest some of

                          243
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

the symptoms of ecstasy mentioned by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. Sometimes incessant tears
would flow from his eyes, sometimes froth would issue
from his lotus mouth, and sometimes he would hiccup
continually for hours on end. Occasionally, as if in
forgetfulness, he would ask, “Where am I?” or “Is it day
or night?” and sometimes he did not recall the names of
even his closest servants. Yet at other times, he would
exhibit his razor-sharp acuity and catch a servant’s
faulty pronunciation of devotees’ names, correcting him
by properly pronouncing them himself.

Sometimes, upon seeing the service attitude of the
devotees attending him, he would express his
appreciation of them, and at other times, he would
correct them and tell them how to perform their service.
Sometimes he would awaken from sleep and ask, “The
parikramā has gone to Nandagāon today?” or, “It is
Ekādaśī today?” This always astonished those serving
him, as they had not given him any information as to
what day it was, yet Śrīla Gurudeva had accurate
knowledge of what was happening.

Although it was of utmost importance to those attending
Śrīla Gurudeva to see to his dietary needs according to
the doctor’s instructions, still, he would sometimes
inquire, “Will you not give me anything to eat today?”
Needless to say, it was with great pleasure that they
would immediately offer something to him.

Arranging for Darśana of Śrīla Gurudeva

A particular predicament arose during Śrīla Gurudeva’s
stay at Govardhana: How could darśana be arranged for
all the devotees who had come for parikramā from India
and abroad? It was not possible to allow everyone inside
Śrīla Gurudeva’s bhajana-kutīra, but the devotees were
disconsolate that they could not take his darśana.
Initially, a system was put in place of allowing
devotees to cue up for darśana through the side-window.
But this did not prove to be successful; the line did
not flow smoothly and more often, did not even move at
all.

Everyone was bewildered as to how to deal with the
situation, until finally, someone made a wonderful
suggestion: “Why not put a large LCD screen in the
temple room? That way, all the devotees can easily take
Śrīla Gurudeva’s darśana at the same time.” This
proposal was happily welcomed by all, and an LCD screen
was quickly arranged. Now the devotees in the temple
could have darśana of Śrīla Gurudeva in his bhajana-
kutīra. A small television screen was also placed in his
bhajana-kutīra so he could also see them.

When Śrīla Gurudeva was not able to see the sannyāsīs on
his screen (because they were on stage, out of camera
range), he would inquire, “Where are the sannyāsīs? I
cannot see them.” The sannyāsīs happily honored his
request and assembled before the camera. Seeing all the
devotees taking his darśana from the temple room, Śrīla
Gurudeva would raise his hand to bless them. Sometimes,
when he was absorbed internally, even though his mere
presence or glance gave all blessings, his servants

                          244
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

would try to draw him into external consciousness to
interact with the devotees. These darśanas filled the
devotees with great bliss and they would loudly chant,
“Jaya Śrīla Gurudeva!” or “Gurudeva, tumhārī jaya jaya
ho!” Sometimes they would sing “Govinda Dāmodara
Mādhaveti,” while at other times, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-
mantra to the ‘Australian tune’. Singing and chanting in
this way, the devotees would often become overwhelmed
and begin to weep. For the duration of Śrīla Gurudeva’s
darśana, no one would move from their places but would
simply stare at the screen with unblinking eyes,
oblivious to all else.

The Predicament of Śrīla Gurudeva’s Servants

Although Śrīla Gurudeva’s darśana on the LCD screen was
well appreciated, how could it compare with directly
seeing him, even if only for a moment? Gradually,
devotees began to press for this. “Please make some
arrangements for direct darśana of Śrīla Gurudeva,” they
requested. “Taking his darśana on the screen does not
compare with this.” His personal servants endeavored to
accommodate the devotees as far as they could, but they
were in a painful quandary. How could they possibly
ensure Śrīla Gurudeva’s personal needs and also satisfy
everyone?

They next tried to implement a system of allowing
devotees to silently have darśana from the window while
Śrīla Gurudeva was sleeping, but once he unexpectedly
woke up and instructed his attendants to close the
curtains fully, without so much as a little opening in
them. “I do not want anyone to be upset by seeing me in
this condition,” he told them. The attendants had no
choice but to comply with Śrīla Gurudeva’s request, and
so had to perform their duties in a dimly lit room
throughout the day.

The Intense Desire of the Devotees for Direct Darśana

Seeing Śrīla Gurudeva’s deep internal absorption, his
attendants carefully served him in that state, but on
occasion, out of concern for his health, they would
gently awaken him to external consciousness and attempt
to bring him out of the room, saying, “O Śrīla Gurudeva,
the doctors suggest that you come out of the room for at
least a few minutes and that you sit in the fresh air
and meet with the devotees.”

Words cannot describe the condition of the devotees or
the enthusiasm and joy that filled their hearts when
they saw Śrīla Gurudeva come to the open door in his
wheelchair, or even sometimes walk there, his hands on
the shoulders of devotees on either side of him. On
these occasions, he would give his darśana for a few
minutes. From windows, from the roof, from the garden,
from the balcony, even hanging from pillars or however
they could, the devotees would position themselves so as
to receive darśana of Śrīla Gurudeva, as if wanting to
record these moments in their hearts forever. Some
devotees offered āratī to Śrīla Gurudeva with ghee
lamps, while others were content to perform āratī with
their eyes. Wherever Śrīla Gurudeva turned to look, the
devotees standing in that direction would consider

                          245
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

themselves most blessed. He gave darśana like this for
two or three days, after which he again entered full
internal consciousness.

The Vraja-maṇḍala Parikramā Performed by Śrīla Gurudeva

At this time, Śrīla Gurudeva performed an amazing līlā
for about three days. He was constantly immersed in some
type of deep ecstatic emotion. However, one day, he
repeatedly urged his personal servants, “Take me to
Vṛndāvana. I want to perform Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā.”
The sevakas tried to pacify him by informing him that
all the devotees were now at Govardhana, having arrived
there from Vṛndāvana, and he was in fact with the
parikramā party. Still he continued to insist that they
must take him to Vṛndāvana. They concluded that for him
to insist upon this, he must have a confidential reason,
so they told him, “Yes, Gurudeva, we will arrange for
you to go to Vṛndāvana.” Upon hearing this, he became
satisfied and rested for some time.

Sometime in the evening he would say, “Oh, today the
parikramā will go to Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira, Sevā-
kuñja, Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmsundara Mandira, and other nearby
places. I cannot go to them all, but I will certainly go
to Sevā-kuñja and Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara.” Or, “Today the
parikramā is going to Māna-sarovara.” It was as if he
were directly in Vṛndāvana, performing Vraja-maṇḍala
parikramā.

Upon rising the next morning, Śrīla Gurudeva exclaimed,
“Oh, this Paiṅṭhāgaon is so beautiful! Śrī Rādhājī’s
special glories (vaiśiṣṭya) were established here.” It
seemed that in his deep ecstatic state, in just one day
he had completed the twelve-day parikramā that is
performed from Vṛndāvana, and had now reached
Govardhana.

Śrīla Gurudeva then began to say “I must visit Dāna
Ghāṭī, the festival at the bank of Surabhi-kuṇḍa, Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, and the other pastime places.” Some
time later he said, “Today the parikramā is going to
Nandagāon and Varsānā. We will also go to Ṭer Kadamba,
Uddhava-kyārī and Ūñcāgaon.” In this way, also within a
day, he completed the eighteen-day parikramā that is
normally performed from Govardhana.

Every year, immediately after parikramā, Śrīla Gurudeva
would hold programs in Delhi and go to the dentist.
Having thus completed Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā, the next
morning he said to one of his servants, “Inform my
dentist in Delhi that we are coming there, and request
him to be ready because in the evening we have the
celebration at Śrī Ramaṇa-Bihārī Gauḍīya Maṭha. It is
essential that we reach the maṭha in time.” Wanting to
support Śrīla Gurudeva’s inner mood, although not
knowing the reality of that mood, the servant replied,
“Yes, I will contact him.”

Later as the servant assisted him in brushing his teeth,
Śrīla Gurudeva asked him for the dental floss and when
he could not find it, Śrīla Gurudeva concluded, “It must
have been packed with everything else in the car going
to Delhi. If you find it easily, bring it; otherwise

                          246
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

just leave it and in Delhi we will see what to do.”

Thus Śrīla Gurudeva revealed his personal Vraja-maṇḍala
parikramā-līlā, leaving his servants astonished and
grateful to have had a glimpse of his internal moods.

The Arrival of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī
Mahārāja’s Auspicious Disappearance Day

Some years before, Śrīla Gurudeva had stated, “Following
in the footsteps of my senior Godbrother prapūjya-caraṇa
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja, I want to take
shelter of the same tithi (exact day) to leave this
world.” These words caused much apprehension in the
hearts of all, and as the disappearance day of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja approached, the
devotees began to be increasingly anxious that his words
might come to pass. In a most earnest attempt to prevent
this, almost all the devotees who had come to Śrī Vraja-
maṇḍala parikramā and also devotees all over the world
began to pray intensely to Śrī Girirāja Govardhana, who
fulfils all desires. Many stayed awake the whole night
performing harināma-saṅkīrtana, some sang stava-stuti,
while some performed abhiśekha of Girirāja, and others
circumambulated Girirāja. To the devotees’ great relief,
though, in the morning it was reported that Śrīla
Gurudeva had slept peacefully that night.

Gurudeva’s Words of Benediction at the End of Kārtika

While in Govardhana, Śrīla Gurudeva’s health very slowly
improved, much to the joy of the devotees. On the full-
moon day at the end of Kārtika, he came out of his
bhajana-kutīra in a wheel-chair and spoke to all the
devotees assembled there: “Just as you have come to
participate in this year’s Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā, you
should all come every year. Within a few months, Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma parikramā will also take place, and all
of you must also participate in that parikramā. I will
meet all of you there.” These encouraging words caused
the devotees to resoundingly chant “Jaya Gurudeva, Jaya
Gurudeva!” their throats choked with happiness.

Return to Delhi after Kārtika

After Kārtika, Śrīla Gurudeva remained in Govardhana for
a few days. Then on the suggestion of Dr. Ray from the
Philippines and Dr. Ravindra Prakash from Delhi, Śrīla
Gurudeva was again taken to Śrī Ramaṇa-Bihārī Gauḍīya
Maṭha in Delhi. As before, there was a flux of devotees
and doctors moving in and out of the temple. One day,
Śrīla Gurudeva addressed the local doctor and the
doctors who had come from abroad, “You are all
endeavoring so hard for me,” he said. “For this I am
giving you my heartfelt gratitude.” When they heard
this, they replied, “Gurujī, it is our supreme fortune
that you have appointed us in your service.”

“Do Not Take Me Anywhere Except the Dhāma”

On the advice of Dr. Ray, Śrīla Gurudeva’s personal
servants approached him with a request that he travel to
Italy for further treatment. They informed him that all
arrangements had already been made. In response, Śrīla

                          247
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Gurudeva said, “I have no desire for this, but you can
think about it.” Soon after, though, he said in a very
grave tone, “Do not take me anywhere except the dhāma. I
do not want to go abroad. I want to leave my body in the
dhāma. Take me back to Govardhana.”

“But it is so cold in Govardhana,” they told him.

“Then take me to Navadvīpa,” he replied.

“But it is cold there, too,” they said.

“Then take me to Jagannātha Purī,” he said. “Śrīla
Bhakti Pramoda Purī Mahārāja also performed his
disappearance pastime in Jagannātha Purī-dhāma, and
later his servants brought him to Śrī Dhāma Māyāpura.
Take me to Jagannātha Purī, also, and if I leave my body
there, then take me to Govardhana or Navadvīpa, wherever
possible.”

When some servants tried once again to convince Śrīla
Gurudeva to go to Italy, he again gravely responded, “It
is better that we do not discuss anything more about
this. Arrange for me to go to Jagannātha Purī. I am not
ready to hear anything else. I am in the advanced stage
of my life now and want to depend totally on Bhagavān.”
Accordingly, his attendants dropped the idea of going
abroad and, following his instructions, began making
arrangements to go to Śrī Jagannātha Purī.

It was exactly four days after this conversation that
they started for Śrī Jagannātha Purī. The servants
encountered two obstacles: first, no plane tickets were
available right away; and second, tickets were only
available on a date that was not auspicious. The day
after giving his order to go to Purī, Śrīla Gurudeva
asked, “What is happening about our going to Purī?”

His servants answered, “We have not been able to obtain
tickets for tomorrow, and the day after is navamī, so we
will go on daśamī.”

Śrīla Gurudeva replied, “Let us go the day after
tomorrow.”

“But we have never travelled on navamī before,” they
responded, “because it is inauspicious to do so.”

Śrīla Gurudeva said, “We have never travelled on navamī
before. Let us travel this time and see what happens.”

We could not help but wonder what mysterious plan was
hidden in his decision. The trip was arranged on navamī,
according to Śrīla Gurudeva’s desire.

Absorbed in the Moods of Mahāprabhu while Residing in
the Abode of Separation (Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma)

On the November 30, Śrīla Gurudeva arrived at Jayaśrī-
Dāmodara Gauḍīya Maṭha, which is located at Cakra-tīrtha
in Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma. He was greeted by the
devotees there who welcomed him with much affection and
proper ceremony. As before, his attendants continued
serving him around the clock. From time to time, they

                          248
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

would chant kīrtana or read from śāstra to him in his
bhajana-kutīra. Whenever Śrīla Gurudeva saw any of them
sitting idle, he would say, “Do not be idle. Speak hari-
kathā to the other devotees. Speaking hari-kathā is a
limb of bhakti.”

One day, while looking across the wide beach toward the
ocean, Śrīla Gurudeva said softly, “Previously, whenever
I would come to Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma, I would
meditate on Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s bathing in the ocean
along with His associates. I would also meditate on the
words of Śrīman Mahāprabhu at the time of Śrīla Haridāsa
Ṭhākura’s disappearance from this world, after He had
bathed him in the ocean. Śrīman Mahāprabhu said that now
this ocean is a mahā-tīrtha (supreme holy place) because
it has become the caraṇāmṛta (foot-bathing water) of
Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura. So, I would bathe in the ocean
nearly every day. Now, also, I want to take bath with
this ocean water. Can you bring some water from the
ocean for me to bathe?” From that day onward, Śrīla
Gurudeva was bathed every day with water carried from
the ocean.

Each morning and evening, he would walk in the corridor
of the temple guest house, assisted by his servants who
supported him on either side, and he would sit on his
balcony to have darśana of that most holy of oceans.
Simultaneously, he would give darśana to the devotees
standing on the ground below. One day, as Śrīla Gurudeva
gazed at the ocean, he said, “This place is the very
spot to which Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu floated when He
was immersed in mahābhāva and His body assumed a form
like that of a turtle.” Most of the time, however, Śrīla
Gurudeva sat quietly. His deep absorption was most
apparent.

Another time, when he was looking at the ocean, he asked
his servant if he could count the ocean waves. “No.” the
servant answered, “the ocean waves are unending.” “My
heart is like that,” Śrīla Gurudeva told him. “It is
flowing with uncountable waves of moods for the service
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and also
with waves of affection for my disciples and followers.”

One thing was especially noticeable in Śrī Jagannātha
Purī-dhāma. If someone offered obeisances to Śrīla
Gurudeva, even from as far away as the shore of the
ocean, Śrīla Gurudeva would invariably raise his hand to
bless them. Furthermore, until the conclusion of his
manifest pastimes, he would fold his hands and offer
respects to any kind of prasāda that was brought to him.
Only then would he honor it. At times, Śrīla Gurudeva
was so deeply immersed in internal consciousness that
his servants had to endeavor for 30 to 45 minutes to get
him to accept just one spoonful of food. This occurrence
had repeated itself in Delhi, Govardhana, and then also,
Śrī Jagannātha Purī.

Attaining a Complexion Similar to Śrī Gaurahari’s

As soon as Śrīla Gurudeva arrived in Śrī Jagannātha
Purī, he manifested some noticeable transformations. One
was that the radiance emanating from his body increased
constantly and his complexion became more golden. This

                          249
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt        5/8/2017

caused us to consider that perhaps because he was in
deep meditation on his most worshipful Śrī Gaurahari and
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, he was attaining Their bodily
complexion.

In this way, the days passed.

On the morning of December 27, Śrīla Gurudeva went on to
his balcony as usual, and the devotees who had gathered
on the beach below performed guru-pūjā for the first
time. His personal attendants wanted him to return to
his room, but Śrīla Gurudeva waited until the āratī was
finished. He was then wheeled to the landing above the
lobby. All the devotees rushed to the lobby to see him
there. Again, his servant requested him to return to his
room, but Śrīla Gurudeva insisted on remaining where he
was. He looked intently at each and every devotee and
raised his hand, blessing them all.

The next day, 28 December, he remained in his room and
did not give darśana.

The Closing of His Pastimes (Antardhāna-līlā)

On the morning of 29 December, 2010, Śrīla Gurudeva woke
up very early, at about 2.00 a.m. His servant asked him,
“Śrīla Gurudeva, will you drink some water?” “Yes,” he
replied, and the servant helped him to sit up. Śrīla
Gurudeva said that first he wanted to use the washroom,
so the devotees assisted him and then helped him back to
sit on his bed. Śrīla Gurudeva began to drink the
glucose water while the servant held the glass, but
straight away he said, “I am not able to sit.”

The servant quickly helped Śrīla Gurudeva lay down.
Śrīla Gurudeva then asked him to help him turn over, and
as the servant did so, Śrīla Gurudeva took a deep breath
and his face seemed to change somewhat. Upon noticing
fluctuations in Śrīla Gurudeva’s pulse and oxygen intake
on the monitor, the servant immediately called for
Śrīpad Mādhava Mahārāja and Brajanātha Prabhu, and
within two to three minutes, other servants were also
summoned.

Yet despite this alarm, Śrīla Gurudeva seemed very
peaceful and as he gazed upon all present, it did not
seem at all that he was about to conclude his manifest
pastimes.

But then the monitor indicated a drop in pulse and
oxygen level and the devotees began to loudly chant
harināma. Śrīla Gurudeva’s tongue quivered as he chanted
harināma along with the devotees. A few minutes later,
just a minute before his departure, he closed his eyes,
and gradually his tongue also became still. According to
the clock on the wall, it was three in the morning. All
present were stunned and in a state of shock.

Devotees Gather in Śrīla Gurudeva’s Room

Gradually all the sannyāsīs, brahmacārīs, and other
devotees who were staying in the maṭha and outside guest
houses gathered in Śrīla Gurudeva’s room, and upon
seeing him, all began to lament. As per Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava

                          250
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

tradition, Śrīla Gurudeva was bathed with fresh water,
anointed with tilaka on the twelve parts of his body,
and dressed in new cloth. He was then seated in
padmāsana, or the lotus position. His body was soft and
looked so natural it seemed as if he would open his eyes
at any moment. Gradually, the winter sun rose and he
began to glow golden in its rays.

The devotees began singing one kīrtana after another:
Śrī Gurvaṣṭakam, Śrī Guru-paramparā, Je ānilo prema-
dhana, and Śrīla Gurudeva’s favorite bhajanas, like Śrī
Rūpa Mañjarī Pada, Dekhite Dekhite, Cintāmaṇi-maya,
Rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭa, Śrī Nandanāṣṭakam, Śrī Rādhā-kṛpa-
kaṭākṣa Stavarāja, Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam, the mahā-mantra
in the Australian tune that he was so fond of, and many
other kīrtanas.

As news of Śrīla Gurudeva’s departure from this world
spread, devotees from all over Śrī Jagannātha Purī,
especially the Gauḍīya maṭhas, began to arrive to take
his darśana for the last time. Devotees tearfully
offered āratī to Śrīla Gurudeva as they sang Śrī Guru-
caraṇa-padma.

Within a few moments, news of Śrīla Gurudeva’s entering
nitya-līlā spread throughout the entire planet,
anguishing thousands of devotees and plunging them into
the heartbreak of separation.

Divine Departure on the Appearance Day of Oṁ Viṣṇupāda
Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja

The day Śrīla Gurudeva departed from this world was the
appearance day of his senior godbrother, nitya-līlā
praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Gosvāmī Mahārāja. The devotees in Jaya-śrī Dāmodara
Gauḍīya Maṭha had made elaborate preparations for the
auspicious celebration and had invited all Sārasvata
Gauḍīya Maṭha Vaiṣṇavas for hari-guru-kathā, kīrtana,
and the honoring of Śrī Jagannātha mahā-prasāda. But
such a grand celebration did not take place that day.

The fact that Śrīla Gurudeva departed on the very day of
his senior godbrother’s auspicious appearance indicates
that even though he was not informed of when it would
be, he was quietly waiting for this day, just as Bhīṣma
Pitāmahā waited for the sun to move into the northern
hemisphere (uttarāyaṇa) to depart.

By this we can understand something of the intimate
relationship of those three pillars of the Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti, the three foremost disciples of Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja, Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja manifested his
pastime of disappearance on the exact date (tithi) that
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Gosvāmī Mahārāja departed
from this world, and Śrīla Gurudeva manifested his
disappearance on the exact date that marked the
appearance day of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī
Mahārāja.


                          251
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Concluding His Pastimes in the Abode of Separation (Śrī
Vipralambha-kṣetra)

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu spent His last eighteen years in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī in the association of Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda and Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, remaining absorbed
in relishing the emotions of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
vipralambha (mood of separation). Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda and
Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara would chant specific poetry from
Śrī Caṇḍīdāsa, Śrī Vidyāpati, and other Vaiṣṇava poets
in accordance with Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s moods in order to
nourish His emotions. Thus absorbed in relishing the
moods of vipralambha, Śrīman Mahāprabhu brought His
pastimes to an end by entering into Ṭoṭā Gopīnātha.
Absorbed in relishing similar moods of separation, Śrīla
Gurudeva also concluded his pastimes in this same abode
of vipralambha, Śrī Jagannātha Purī, at the very spot,
Cakra-tīrtha, where Lord Śrī Jagannātha made His
appearance.

Because Śrīla Gurudeva manifested his disappearance
pastime at Cakra-tīrtha, this tīrtha has now become
mahā-tīrtha, or great holy place, especially for Śrīla
Gurudeva’s followers. For Śrīla Gurudeva, the mahā-
bhāgavata rasika-jana, the name cakra (wheel or disc)
served as a constant uddīpana (stimuli) for cakravartī-
līlā, that is, rāsa-līlā. Thus absorbed at the time of
the rāsa-līlā pastimes, Śrīla Gurudeva entered that very
pastime.

Entering Naiśa-līlā (the Night Pastimes)

Our supremely worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva entered the
eternal pastimes (nitya-līlā) of Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa-
Bihārījī at three o’clock in the morning. Śrī Govinda-
līlāmṛta, by Śrīla Kṛṣṇa dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta, by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, describe Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s aṣṭa-kālīya-
līlā, or pastimes within the eight divisions of the day.
The yāma, or part of the day, from 10:48 p.m. to 3:36
a.m., lasting for four hours and forty-eight minutes, is
known as naiśa-līlā (night pastimes). Therefore, three
o’clock in the morning falls within Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s naiśa-līlā. This segment is the longest and most
confidential of the intimate nikuñja pastimes. A summary
of naiśa-līlā is as follows:

At night, when all of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s family members are
resting, He secretly leaves His palace in Śrī Nandagāma
and goes to the forest of Vṛndāvana, which at that time
is infused by a gentle breeze carrying the sweet
fragrance of forest flowers. Humming bees, intoxicated
by this aroma, lose their way and fly hither and
thither. Swans and herons, pierced by Cupid’s arrows,
wander the lakes, and birds fly in all four directions,
blissfully chirping, “Jaya jaya!” At this opportune
time, Śrī Kīrtidā’s darling daughter, Śrīmatī Rādhājī,
also comes secretly from her in-laws’ place in Yāvaṭa to
meet Her beloved at Their pre-appointed meeting place.

In Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweet meeting, They perform
rāsa-līlā-vihāra and other pastimes, such as wandering
throughout the forest and beholding the astonishing
scenery. They also describe each other’s beauty,

                          252
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

qualities, and sweetness; decorate each other with
forest flowers; dance, sing, and play musical
instruments; enjoy water-pastimes; drink intoxicating
beverages; and perform many other such līlās.

Upon witnessing these pastimes, which bewilder the
entire universe, the wives of the demigods, the heavenly
damsels, the wives of the Gandharvas, and others are
totally enchanted. They also sing praises of the divine
couple, chanting, “Jaya jaya!” as they shower flowers
from the sky and play the dundubhi drum and other
musical instruments.

Tired from the joyful play of rāsa-līlā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
the gopīs take rest. The mañjarīs bring varieties of
fruits and drinks for them. The sakhīs then perform the
līlā of drinking intoxicating beverages and engage in
even more confidential pastimes to enhance Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
bliss. After this they assist Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
water pastimes in the Yamunā. The mañjarīs bring the
Divine Couple to the shore and decorate Them. Then, the
Divine Couple rest in a forest bower.

At that time, some very intimate prāṇa-sakhīs take
Rādhā’s and Kṛṣṇa’s feet, which are supremely charming
and more delicate than fresh lotus petals, in their
laps, and massage them in a mood of deep affection,
while some other mañjarīs fan Them. Others bring
tāmbūla, a folded betel leaf filled with delicious,
aromatic ingredients. Relaxed by these services of the
maidservants, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa become free from Their
fatigue and sleep peacefully. Not even Śrīmatī Rādhājī’s
priya-narma-sakhīs have entrance into these intimate
services.

While Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa-Bihārījī rest peacefully,
their dear mañjarīs offer Them many items of worship,
such as pādya – tears of love bathing Their lotus feet;
incense – their fragrant breath; lamps – their effulgent
moon-like nails; flowers – their love-laden, intimate
glances, full of mamatā (love imbued with the mood that
‘you are mine’); and āratī – their life-airs saturated
with intense prema that has reached the stage of
mahābhāva; all mixed with the camphor of their smiles.

Summoned by the indication of his guru-rūpa-sakhī (his
gurudeva in sakhī form), Śrīla Gurudeva presented
himself in the service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa-Bihārījī
at that auspicious moment. Under the guidance of Śrī
Vinoda Mañjarī (Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja), Śrī Nayanamaṇi Mañjarī (Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda), and Śrī
Rūpa and Śrī Rati Mañjarīs, and in subordination to Śrī
Lalitā-devī, our Śrīla Gurudeva, in his eternal mañjarī
form as Śrī Ramaṇa Mañjarī, has entered the naiśa-līlā
of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa-Bihārījī and is situated there,
absorbed in serving Them in deep ecstasy throughout the
eight yāmas of the day.

Śrīla Gurudeva came to this planet on the order of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Śrīmatī Rādhikā to give us vraja-
bhakti as taught by Śrīman Mahāprabhu, and to provide us
the qualification necessary to enter these pastimes. He
never wanted to give anything less than this. He was

                          253
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

really bhuridā, the greatest donor, and mahā-mahā-
vadānyāya, greatly magnanimous to the superlative
degree. We are therefore boundlessly fortunate to have
come to his lotus feet.

The Journey from Śrī Purī-dhāma to Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma

To attain the eternal association of his most worshipful
gurupāda-padma and that of his two senior godbrothers,
Śrīla Gurudeva, seated in a lotus position (padmāsana)
in a car adorned with flowers, thus commenced his
journey from Śrī Jagannātha Purī to Śrī Navadvīpa. The
decorated car left at eight in the morning on the
auspicious kṛṣṇa-navamī and was followed by six other
vehicles full of devotees.

First, Śrīla Gurudeva went to Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura at
his samādhi in Svargadvāra and took his darśana. A
devotee brought water from the ocean where Śrīman
Mahāprabhu had bathed Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s
transcendental body at the time of his disappearance
from this world, and this water was sprinkled on Śrīla
Gurudeva’s transcendental body. From there, he performed
parikramā in the car around the periphery of Caṭaka-
parvata, Śrī Ṭoṭā Gopīnātha, Yameśvara Ṭoṭā, Śrī Siddha-
bakula, and Śrī Gambhīra. After performing parikramā of
Śrī Jagannātha-vallabha gardens, and Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda’s
birthplace, the car finally came to the Siṁhadvāra (lion
gate) of Śrī Jagannātha’s Temple, where devotees had
gathered, having collected Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s
prasādī-mālā, sandalwood paste, cloth, mahā-prasāda, and
other such items to offer to Śrīla Gurudeva. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu had offered the same items to Śrīla Haridāsa
Ṭhākura at the time of his samādhi. In this way, after
bidding farewell to Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His associates
in Śrī Jagannātha Purī, Śrīla Gurudeva commenced his
journey to Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma.

As the car drove through Bhubaneśvara, Jajapura, and
other places, many of Śrīla Gurudeva’s disciples and
followers came to receive his darśana, and with intense
emotion tearfully offered their puṣpāñjali at his lotus
feet. On reaching Baleśvara, some devotees offered Śrī
Kṣīracorā Gopīnātha’s prasādī garland and khīra to Śrīla
Gurudeva. This journey from Śrī Jagannātha Purī to Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma took fourteen hours.

The car carrying Śrīla Gurudeva’s transcendental form
arrived at Śrī Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma at around 10:30 in the evening. As it
neared the maṭha gate, the devotees who had gathered
there, numbering more than a thousand, surrounded the
car, sobbing bitterly and chanting “Jaya Śrīla
Gurudeva!” There are no words to describe their pain of
separation from him. Śrīla Gurudeva was brought into the
temple room and seated on the vyāsāsana in a lotus pose.
The devotees performed his āratī, singing Śrī guru-
caraṇa-padma.

Devotees in India and Also Overseas Journey to Śrī
Navadvīpa

Śrīla Gurudeva’s speciality was the pure transcendental

                          254
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

affection he showered upon all. Such affection, which
has no comparison in this world, was a tangible
experience of a truly spiritual, selfless loving
relationship. Therefore, when devotees within and
outside India heard of his entering nitya-līlā, their
hearts and minds raced to him. Everyone that could
possibly do so immediately stopped what they were doing
and hastily made arrangements to go to Śrī Navadvīpa to
receive his final darśana. Some devotees arrived before
Śrīla Gurudeva, and many others arrived throughout the
night.

For the duration of the night on the auspicious kṛṣṇa-
navamī, Śrīla Gurudeva’s transcendental body was placed
on the dais in the temple room. As devotees arrived,
having travelled by air, train, car, or however
possible, they were immediately able to have his
darśana. One by one, without restriction, they
prostrated themselves at Śrīla Gurudeva’s lotus feet,
offering their heartfelt srāddha-puṣpāñjali. Many sat in
the temple room throughout the whole night for this last
darśana, singing kīrtanas and bhajanas pertaining to
moods of separation.

Nagara-saṅkīrtana

The next day, 30 December, at 8 o’clock in the morning,
Śrīla Gurudeva was placed in a sitting position on a
palanquin decorated with flowers. Accompanied by
thousands of devotees singing saṅkīrtana, he proceeded
to the nearby Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha. An
unprecedented scene took place as the inhabitants of Śrī
Navadvīpa who resided on the path of the procession came
out of their homes to offer him praṇāma, even from a
distance. Some offered āratī and some cried out, “Jaya
Śrīla Gurudeva! Jaya Śrīla Gurudeva!”

In Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha, Śrīla Gurudeva took
darśana of his most worshipful gurupāda-padma, Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and his senior
Godbrother Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja,
as well as jagad-guru Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Vinoda-Bihārī, and Śrī Lakṣmī-Varāhadeva. In this
way, he announced that now he had come to join them in
Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma.

Śrīla Gurudeva’s Godbrothers and the devotees of Śrī
Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha then offered āratī to Śrīla
Gurudeva. Tears filled the eyes of nearly all at the
sight of Śrīla Gurudeva coming before his own gurudeva.
After taking darśana of his gurupāda-padma and offering
him praṇāma, Śrīla Gurudeva proceeded to the steps of
Pañca-veṇī, also known as Manipurī-ghaṭa, to have
darśana and offer his praṇāmas to beautiful Gaṅgājī,
just as he used to do during his manifest presence at
the time of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma parikramā. The
saṅkīrtana party accompanying Śrīla Gurudeva was so
large that all who saw it thought they were witnessing
the performance of his Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma parikramā.

Samādhi

Śrīla Gurudeva returned to Śrī Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya

                          255
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Maṭha at around 11 a.m. and the devotees reverentially
performed abhiśekha of his transcendental form with
pañcāmṛta, Gaṅgā water, rose water, aguru, fragrant
oils, and other substances. Tilaka was meticulously
applied in twelve places on his resplendent limbs, and
he was dressed in a new cloth. The samādhi-mantra was
then written on his chest with sandalwood paste.

At that time, devotees arriving from various places had
the good fortune to make arrangements for his large
bhoga offering as well as a beautiful āratī to him and
other ceremonies.

Śrīla Gurudeva entered samādhi in Koladvīpa next to his
bhajana-kutīra at Śrī Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha. The
followers and disciples of Śrīla Gurudeva who had
arrived from India and abroad, as well as the sannyāsīs,
brahmacārīs, and residents of Śrī Dhāma Navadvīpa, Śrī
Māyāpura, and Godruma, were witness to all the
ceremonies pertaining to samādhi. These were performed
in accordance with Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī’s
descriptions of how Śrīman Mahāprabhu placed Śrīla
Haridāsa Ṭhākura in samādhi. Śrīla Gurudeva was placed
in samādhi adorned with Lord Jagannātha’s prasādī cloth,
mahā-prasāda, dātuna (twig used as a toothbrush),
garland and sandalwood paste. The devotees also offered
him prasāda from Śrī Kṣīracorā Gopīnātha, along with
prasādī cloth and other items from Śrī Govindadevajī in
Jaipura.

With heartfelt faith, devotees who had arrived from all
corners of India and abroad observed and directly
participated in the samādhi ceremony. From the area
surrounding the samādhi site, from balconies, from
rooftops, and from all directions, they offered a shower
of flower petals. Overwhelmed in the mood of deep
separation, they sang Je ānilo prema-dhana and other
such kīrtanas. Gradually, as the thousands of devotees
present looked on, the samādhi was filled and covered
with the dust of that most sacred holy place (dhāma-
raja), and Vṛnda-devī (Tulasī) was placed on top.

In a tender expression of their love for Śrīla Gurudeva,
the devotees covered the small samādhi mound with
flowers, and offered ghee and oil lamps and an abundance
of fragrant incense. They sang kīrtana and
circumambulated Śrīla Gurudeva, they read the account in
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta of the departure of nāmācārya
Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura, and they sat close to the
samādhi, either in silence or softly chanting, as
memories of Śrīla Gurudeva flooded their minds.

After the ceremony, the devotees respectfully honored
Śrīla Gurudeva’s mahā-prasādam. The next day, a
temporary structure was erected on the site to serve as
a temple. Currently, all bhoga offerings, āratī, pūjā-
arcana, etc., are daily being performed to Śrīla
Gurudeva in his temporary samādhi in a regulated manner.



*****

In this way, Śrīla Gurudeva completed his last journey,

                          256
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

beginning from Govardhana in Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala to Purī-
dhāma in Śrī Kṣetra-maṇḍala, finally arriving at Śrī
Navadvīpa in Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala. Śrīla Gurudeva, the
present-day Vaiṣṇava-sārvabhauma, the topmost Vaiṣṇava,
of Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala, Śrī Kṣetra-maṇḍala, and Śrī Gauḍa-
maṇḍala, accepted samādhi for time eternal in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, which is non-different from Vraja. His
samādhi and bhajana-kutīra at Śrī Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya
Maṭha are located at the rāsa-sthalī that is situated at
the boundary of Śrī Kuliyā Hill, which is non-different
than Śrī Girirāja Govardhana.

The Meaning of Samādhi

Many years ago, Śrīla Gurudeva himself explained the
meaning of samādhi as follows: sama means “equal” and
dhi means “intelligence.” When a pure devotee departs
from this world, attaining a svarūpa like that of the
associates of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, he attains
intelligence, beauty, qualities, and so forth like
theirs. The worshipful deity of our paramparā is Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī. When our ācāryas enter samādhi, they attain
sama-dhi, meaning their intelligence becomes similar in
mood to that of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s
other intimate associates, under whose guidance they
perform direct service to the Divine Couple.




Glossary


A - B- C - D - E - G - H - I - J - K - L - M - N - P - R
- S - T - U - V - Y

A

ācārya

– preceptor, one who teaches by example. One who accepts
the confidential meanings of the scriptures and engages
others in proper behavior, personally following that
behavior himself.

adhirūḍha-mahābhāva

– the highest state of mahābhāva, found only in the
gopīs of Vraja. The mood in which all the anubhāvas
(actions which reveal spiritual emotions) that are
manifested in resolute mahābhāva attain special
characteristics that are even more astonishing than
those anubhāvas in their normal forms. There are two
types of adhirūḍha-bhāva: (1) modana and (2) mādana.

(1) The adhirūḍha in which all the sāttvika-bhāvas of
the nāyaka (hero) and nāyikā (heroine) are aroused to a
much greater extent than in a brightly burning (uddīpta)
condition is called modana. Modana does not occur
anywhere other than in Śrī Rādhā’s group. In some
special conditions of separation modana becomes mohana,
and as an effect of this helpless condition of
separation, all the sāttvika-bhāvas manifest in the

                          257
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

blazing (sūddīpta) condition.

(2) When mahābhāva increases even further, it attains an
extremely advanced condition. The paramount emotion in
which it becomes jubilant due to the simultaneous
manifestation of all types of transcendental emotions is
called mādana. This mādana-bhāva is eternally and
splendidly manifest only in Śrī Rādhā, and occurs only
at the time of meeting. It is also referred to as
mādanākhya-mahābhāva.

aiśvarya

– opulence, splendor, majesty, or supremacy; in regard
to bhakti, this refers to devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a
mood of awe and reverence rather than sweetness
(mādhurya), thus restricting the intimacy of exchange
between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His devotee.

anartha

– an-artha means “non-value;” unwanted desires,
activities, or habits that impede one’s advancement in
bhakti, or pure devotion for the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

anartha-nṛvrtti

– freedom from sinful activities; the elimination or
clearing of all unwanted desires from the heart. This is
the fourth stage in the development of the creeper of
devotion, which occurs by the influence of sādhu-saṅga
(association of pure devotees) and bhajana-kriyā
(execution of the limbs of bhakti).

anurāga

– an intensified stage of prema as defined in Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.146): “Although one regularly meets
with and is well-acquain-ted with the beloved, the ever-
fresh sentiment of intense attach-ment causes the
beloved to be newly experienced at every moment, as if
one has never before had any experience of such a
person.”

aparādha

– the word rādha means “to give pleasure” and the word
apa means “taking away.” Thus the word aparādha
signifies all activities that are displeasing to the
Lord and His devotees, like offenses committed against
the holy name, the Vaiṣṇavas, the guru, the scriptures,
the holy places, the Deity, and so on.

āratī

– the ceremony of offering articles to the Deity or śrī
guru, such as incense, lamp, flowers, and a fan,
accompanied by the chanting of devotional hymns and
bell-ringing.

āsakti

– deep attachment for the Lord and His associates. It
occurs when one’s liking for bhajana leads to a direct

                          258
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017

attachment for the person who is the object of bhajana.
It is the seventh stage in the development of the
creeper of devotion, and it is awakened upon the
maturing of one’s taste for bhajana.

āśrama

– (1) spiritual order; one of the four stages of life –
student (brahmacārī), married (gṛhastha), retired
(vanaprastha), or renounced (sannyāsa) – in which one
carries out corresponding socio-religious duties in the
system known as varṇāśrama; (2) a hermitage, usually in
the association of others, which is established to
facilitate spiritual practices.

B

bhāgavata-paramparā

– the succession of bona fide gurus rooted in receiving
and following transcendental instructions from their
predecessors.

bhajana

– performance of spiritual practices, especially the
process of hearing, chanting, and meditating upon the
holy name, form, qualities, and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

bhajana-kuṭīra

– a place where a devotee performs his bhajana.

bhakti

– the primary meaning of the word bhakti is ‘rendering
service.’ The performance of activities which are meant
to satisfy or please the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which
are performed in a favorable spirit saturated with love,
which are devoid of all desires other than the desire
for His benefit and pleasure, and which are not covered
by karma (fruitive activity) and jñāna (speculative
knowledge).

bhakti-yoga

– the path of spiritual realization through devotional
service to Lord Kṛṣṇa.

bhāva

– spiritual emotions or sentiments.

bhāva-bhakti

– the initial stage of perfection in devotion. A stage
of bhakti in which śuddha-sattva, the essence of the
Lord’s internal potency consisting of spiritual
knowledge and bliss, is transmitted into the heart of
the practicing devotee from the heart of the Lord’s
eternal associates.

It is like a ray of the sun of prema (pure love of God)
and it softens the heart by various tastes. It is the

                          259
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

first sprout of prema, and is also known as rati. In
bhāva-bhakti, a soul can somewhat realize love for Kṛṣṇa
as well as the way in which he can serve Him. After some
time, divine absorption and love for Him manifests, and
thus the soul attains the final stage called prema.

bhoga

– unoffered foodstuffs.

brahma

– the impersonal, all-pervading feature of the Lord,
which is devoid of attributes and qualities.

Brahmā

– creator of the material universe and presiding deity
over the quality of passion. Sometimes when there is no
suitable jīva (living entity) available, Viṣṇu Himself
takes the post of Brahmā; he is the ādi-guru of the
Brahma-Mādhva sampradāya, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s direct son and
śiṣya (disciple).

brahmacārī

– a celibate, unmarried student; the first āśrama or
stage of life in the varṇāśrama system.

brāhmaṇa

– the highest of the four varṇas (castes) in the Vedic
social system called varṇāśrama; one who is a member of
this varṇa, such as a priest or teacher of divine
knowledge.

C

caritra

– the activities or character of someone. In Vedic
literature, the word is often used in relation to godly
or saintly personalities (for example, rāma-caritra or
prahlāda-caritra), in which case it refers to the
teachings that can be learned from that personality’s
activities and character.

D

daṇḍa

– a stick carried by sannyāsīs, renunciates in the
fourth stage of life according to the Vedic social
system.

daṇḍavat praṇāma

– prostrated obeisances; literally, falling like a daṇḍa
(stick) to offer praṇāma (obeisances).

darśana

– seeing, meeting, visiting or beholding, especially in
regard to the Deity, a sacred place, or an exalted

                          260
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

Vaiṣṇava.

dāsya, dāsya-rasa

– the mood of being a servant.

dīkṣā

– initiation from a spiritual master; in the Bhakti-
sandarbha (Anuccheda 283) Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has defined
dīkṣā as follows: “Learned exponents of the Absolute
Truth declare that the process by which the spiritual
master imparts divine knowledge (divya-jñāna) to the
disciple and eradicates all sins is known as dīkṣā.” He
then explains divya-jñāna as “the transcendental
knowledge of the Lord’s form and one’s specific
relationship with the Lord contained within a mantra.”
This means at the time of initiation, the guru gives the
disciple a mantra which, in course of time, reveals the
particular form of the Lord who is the object of one’s
worship, and the disciple’s specific relationship with
the Lord in dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, or mādhurya.

dīkṣā-guru

– initiating spiritual master; one who gives a mantra in
accordance with the regulations of śāstra (scripture) to
a qualified candidate for the purpose of worshiping the
Lord and realizing Him through that mantra is known as a
dīkṣā-guru or mantra-guru.

dhotī

– a single, long piece of cloth, usually made of cotton,
traditionally worn by lndian men to cover the lower half
of the body.

Dvādaśī

– the twelfth day of the waxing or waning moon. When
Ekādaśī, the eleventh day of the waxing or waning moon,
begins on one solar day (sunrise to sunrise) and
finishes on the next solar day, that is after sunrise on
the next day, then this Ekādaśī is called viddha-
ekādaśī. In that case the ekādaśī-vrata (fasting from
grains and beans, and making special efforts to increase
the remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His associates) is
followed on Dvādaśi instead of Ekādaśī. This is called
Mahā-dvādaśī, and the vrata (vow) is called dvādaśī-
vrata.

E

Ekādaśī

– the eleventh day of the waxing or waning moon; the day
on which devotees fast from grains and beans and certain
other foodstuffs, and increase their remembrance of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and His associates.

G

gopa


                          261
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

– (1) a cowherd boy who serves Kṛṣṇa in a mood of
intimate friendship; (2) an elderly associate of Nanda
Mahārāja who serves Kṛṣṇa in a mood of paternal
affection.

gopī

– (1) one of the young cowherd maidens of Vraja, headed
by Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who serve Kṛṣṇa in a mood of amorous
love; (2) an elderly associate of Mother Yaśodā, who
serves Kṛṣṇa in a mood of parental affection.

gṛhastha

– a householder; one who is in family life. It is the
second āśrama, or stage of life, in the varṇāśrama
system.

gurukula

– the school of the spiritual master; a school of Vedic
learning.

gurukulī

– a student in the gurukula.

H

hari-kathā

– narrations of the holy name, form, qualities, and
pastimes of Śrī Hari (Kṛṣṇa) and His associates.

harināma

– the chanting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s holy names.

I

ISKCON

– International Society for Krsna Consciousness. ISKCON
was founded in 1966 in New York by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja for the purpose of spreading worldwide
the practice of bhakti-yoga (or devotion to the Divine
Couple Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa) according to the
precepts of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, as taught by Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself five hundred years ago when He appeared in this
world in His form of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Since the departure of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja from this mortal world in 1979, the management
of ISKCON has been overseen by a Governing Body
Commission (GBC), which had been formed earlier by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja in 1970 to encourage the
ISKCON members and to assist in the insurance that
spiritual regulative principles were practiced within
the ISKCON temples.

J

japa


                          262
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

– loud chanting or soft utterance of the holy names of
Kṛṣṇa to oneself; usually refers to the practice of
chanting harināma on tulasī beads.

jīva, jīvātmā

– the eternal, individual living entity, who in the
conditioned state of material existence assumes material
bodies of the innumerable species of life.

jñāna

– (1) knowledge in general; (2) knowledge which leads to
impersonal liberation; (3) transcendental knowledge of
one’s relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

K

kalpa

– one day in the life of Lord Brahmā; it is equivalent
to one thousand divya-yugas. Each divya-yuga is one
cycle of the Satya, Dvāpara, Tretā, and Kali-yugas,
altogether 4,320,000,000 years; also see yuga

.

kaniṣṭha, kaniṣṭha-adhikārī

– a novice devotee, or neophyte practi-tioner of bhakti.

karatālas

– small brass hand cymbals used in the performance of
devotional songs.

karma

– (1) any activity performed in the course of material
existence; (2) reward-seeking activities; pious
activities leading to material gain in this world or in
the heavenly planets after death; (3) fate; previous
actions which lead to inevitable reactions.

kathā

– (also referred to as hari-kathā or kṛṣṇa-kathā)
narrations of the holy name, form, qualities, and
pastimes of Śrī Hari, or Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

kīrtana

– one of the nine most important limbs of bhakti,
consisting of either: (1) congregational singing of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s holy names, usually accompanied by music; (2)
loud individual chanting of the holy name; or (3) oral
descriptions of the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names, forms,
qualities, associates, and pastimes.

kuñja

– a secluded forest grove; a natural, shady retreat with
a roof and walls formed by flowering trees, vines,
creepers, and other climbing plants.

                          263
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt         5/8/2017


L

līlā

– the divine and astonishing pastimes of the Lord and
His eternal associates, which grant all auspiciousness
for the jīva (living entity), which have no connection
with this mundane world, and which lie beyond the grasp
of the material senses and mind.

M

madana

– the most exalted love for Kṛṣṇa, which is only
experienced by Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Also see adhirūḍha-
mahābhāva

.

mādhurya, mādhurya-rasa

– the mood of conjugal love; transcendental amorous
love.

madhyama, madhyama-adhikārī

– a practitioner of bhakti who has reached the
intermediate stage of spiritual development.

mahā-bhāgavata

– the topmost devotee, who has attained perfection in
his devotion unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa; uttama-bhāgavata.

mahābhāva

– “the highest stage of prema, divine, transcendental
love. It follows the stages of sneha, māna, praṇaya,
rāga, and anurāga, and manifests when anurāga reaches a
special state of intensity.

“When anurāga reaches its highest limit and becomes
perceivable in the body, it is called bhāva. When the
bodily symptoms are not very distinct, however, the emo-
tional state is still called anurāga, not bhāva. When
bhāva ecstasy is intensified, it is called mahābhāva.
The symptoms of mahābhāva are visible only in the bodies
of eternal associates like the gopīs” * (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 6.13, purport by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja).

mahāmāyā-

– māyā is of two kinds: yogamāyā and mahāmāyā. Mahāmāyā
is a shadow expansion of yogamāyā. Yogamāyā manages the
spiritual worlds, causing its residents to consider
themselves in various human-like relationships with Lord
Kṛṣṇa; whereas mahāmāyā manages the material world and
bewilders the conditioned souls.

māla


                          264
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

– (1) a strand of wooden beads, usually made of the
tulasī plant, that is used like a rosary by Vaiṣṇavas
for counting their chanting of harināma; (2) a necklace
of small wooden beads, known as kaṇṭhi-mālā, worn on the
neck by Vaiṣṇavas to indicate their devotion to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and acceptance of dīkṣā.

māna

– that stage of prema in which sneha (deep affection)
reaches exultation, thus causing one to experience the
sweetness of the beloved in ever-new varieties; when the
heroine (nāyikā) assumes an outward demeanor of pique
which turns into transcendental sulkiness and
indignation arising out of jealous love. This sentiment
prevents the lover and beloved from meeting freely,
although they are together and are attracted to each
other. Māna gives rise to transient emotions like anger,
despondency, doubt, restlessness, pride, and jealousy.

“ ‘When the devotee’s self-conception of being extremely
dear to the Lord causes praṇaya to assume a crooked
appearance, and thus attain a surprising and unusual
state, it is known as māna. When māna is present, even
Śrī Bhagavān Himself becomes fearful out of love, due to
the praṇaya-kopa of His beloved.’

“The term praṇaya-kopa means ‘anger out of affection.’
When Kṛṣṇa’s beloved exhibits māna, He is compelled to
appease her, just to savor her loving sentiment of anger
aroused by their lovers’ quarrel. The words priyātva-
atiśaya-abhimāna literally mean ‘the egoism of being
very dear to Kṛṣṇa.’ Such a feeling causes the heroine
to think, ‘My love for Him is so great that it has no
limit. He is under the control of my prema’ […] Although
the lover and beloved are present together, although
they are deeply attached to one another, and although
their inner longing is to embrace, to behold each other,
and to exchange affectionate words, the sentiment that
prevents them from doing so is known as māna” (Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka, Verse Seven, Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya by Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura).

maṅgala-āratī

– daily pre-dawn ceremony worshiping the Deity of the
Lord; (for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas) daily ceremony before the
Deity of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, to wake up the Divine Couple
before dawn.

mañjarī

– (1) a bud of a flower; (2) a maidservant of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

maṭha

– a monastery; a temple of the Lord with an attached
āśrama for brahmacārīs and sannyāsīs.

māyā

– the illusion-generating potency that is responsible
for the manifestation of the material world, time, and

                          265
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

material activities.

Māyāvāda

– the doctrine of illusion and impersonalism; a theory
advocated by the impersonalist followers of
Śaṅkarācārya, which holds that the Lord’s form, this
material world, and the individual existence of the
living entities are māyā, or false.

māyāvādī

– one who advocates the doctrine of impersonalism.

modana

– see adhirūḍha-mahābhāva.

mṛdaṅga

– a double-headed clay drum which is used in the
performance of devotional songs (kīrtana).

mūrti

– a form of the Lord, usually referring to the Deity
form.

N

niṣṭhā

– firm faith; steadiness in one’s devotional practices.
It is the fifth stage in the development of the creeper
of devotion.

nitya-līlā

– eternal pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Goloka Vṛndāvana;
also see līlā

.

P

parama-gurudeva

– grand-spiritual master; the guru of one’s guru.

paramparā

– the system of transmission of divine knowledge from
guru to disciple through an unbroken chain of pure
spiritual masters.

parikramā

– circumambulation.

praṇāma

– an obeisance; respectful obeisances.

praṇaya

                             266
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


– “When prema is imbued with an exceptional feeling of
intimacy known as viśrambha, it is called praṇaya. When
praṇaya is present, there is a complete absence of awe
and reverence towards the beloved even in the midst of a
circumstances that would normally evoke such feelings
[…] Viśrambha is defined as the feeling of being
identical with the beloved. Such a feeling causes one to
consider one’s mind, life, intelligence, body, and
possessions to be one with the mind, life, intelligence,
body, and possessions of the beloved. The feeling of
oneness being referred to means that out of great love
one feels equally at ease with the beloved as one does
with oneself, and this feeling is mutually experienced”
(Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, Verse Seven, Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya by
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura).

prasādam

– literally means “mercy;” especially refers to the
remnants of food offered to the Deity; may also refer to
the remnants of other articles offered to the Deity,
such as incense, flowers, garlands, and clothing.

prema

– love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which is extremely concentrated,
which completely melts the heart, and which gives rise
to a deep sense of possessiveness in relation to Him.

pūjā

– offering of worship; worship of the Deity in the
temple or of respected personalities such as one’s guru,
by which different paraphernalia like incense, a lighted
ghee-lamp, and flowers are offered.

p

ūjārī

– the priest who offers pūjā to, or worships, the Deity
form of the Lord.

R

rāga

– (1) An intensified stage of prema in which an
unquenchable loving thirst (prema-mayī tṛṣṇā) for the
object of one’s affection (Śrī Kṛṣṇa) gives rise to
spontaneous and intense absorption in one’s beloved, so
much so that in the absence of the opportunity to please
the beloved, one is on the verge of giving up his life;
(2) When praṇaya is experienced in the heart as immense
pleasure. If by accepting some misery there is a chance
to meet with Kṛṣṇa, then that misery becomes a source of
great happiness. And, where happiness affords no
opportunity to meet with Kṛṣṇa, that happiness becomes
the source of great distress.

rāgānuga, rāgānuga-bhakti

– bhakti that follows in the wake of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal

                            267
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

associates in Vraja, whose hearts are permeated with
rāga, which is an unquenchable loving thirst for Kṛṣṇa
that gives rise to spontaneous and intense absorption.

rāgātmikā

– one in whose heart there naturally and eternally
exists a deep spontaneous desire to love and serve Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. This specifically refers to the eternal residents
of Vraja.

rasa

– (1) the spiritual transformation of the heart which
takes place when the perfectional state of love for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, known as rati, is converted into ‘liquid’
emotions by combining various types of transcendental
ecstasies; (2) taste, flavor.

rāsa-līlā

– Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dance-pastime with the vraja-gopīs, which
is a pure exchange of spiritual love between Kṛṣṇa and
the gopīs.

rati

– (1) attachment, fondness for; (2) a stage in the
development of bhakti which is synonymous with bhāva.

ruci

– taste; this is the sixth stage in the development of
the creeper of devotion. At this stage, with the
awakening of actual taste, one’s attraction to spiritual
matters such as hearing, chanting, and other devotional
practices exceeds one’s attraction to any type of
material activity.

rūpānuga

– “Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī are the most
exalted servitors of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Lord Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Those who adhere to their service
are known as rūpānuga devotees” * (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 8.246, purport by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja).

“We Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are known as rūpānuga. Rūpānuga
means the followers of Rūpa Gosvāmī. Why should we
become followers of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī? ‘śrī-caitanya-
mano-’bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhūtale – He wanted to
establish the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’ ” *
(Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. Lecture on Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 5.5.2, Hyderabad, April 13, 1975).

“Rūpānuga-bhaktas are only those who follow the same
manner and mood in which Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī serves Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa. Although Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī serves both Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa, she is more inclined towards Śrīmatī Rādhikā
– happy in the happiness of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
suffering like Her when She suffers. Internally, in
their constitutional forms, the rūpānuga-bhaktas serve
in the same mood as Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī, and externally

                          268
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017

they practice the same devotional activities as Rūpa
Gosvāmī” (Gaura-vāṇī Pracāriṇe, Chapter 7).

S

sad-guru

– a bona fide spiritual master; spiritual preceptor who
follows sat (the pure path of the sādhus as described
within scripture and as delivered through paramparā).

sādhaka

– practitioner; one who follows a spiritual discipline
to achieve the specific goal of bhāva-bhakti.

sādhana

– the process of devotional service; the method one
adopts in order to obtain one’s specific goal (sādhya).

sādhu

– a highly realized soul, who knows life’s aim.

sādhu-saṅga

– the association of advanced devotees.

sahajiyā

– the word sahaja comes from saha-ja, that is, that
which arises along with the ātmā. For the pure ātmā,
transcendental service to Kṛṣṇa is sahaja, or natural,
because it is intrinsic to the jīvātmā’s constitution.

The word sahajiyā is used for a specific group of
people, the prākṛta-sahajiyās, who understand the
transcendental pastimes (aprākṛta-līlā) of the
transcendental Supreme Lord to be prākṛta, or mundane,
like the affairs of ordinary men and women, and who
think that the aprākṛta-tattva (transcendental truth) is
attained by material practices. They consider the stages
of advanced devotion to be easily and cheaply achieved,
and thus sometimes imitate the external symptoms of
spiritual ecstasy associated with those stages.

sakhā

– a male friend, companion, or attendant; a gopa
(cowherd) friend.

sakhī

– a female friend, companion, or attendant; a gopī
friend.

sakhya, sakhya-rasa

– the mood of friendship.

śakti

– (1) power; potency; energy; (2) the Lord’s potencies,

                            269
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt          5/8/2017

which are innumerable. They are generally grouped into
three categories: antaraṅga-śakti, the internal potency;
taṭasthā-śakti, the mar-ginal potency; and bahiraṅgā-
śakti, the external potency; (3) the wife of Lord Śiva,
also known as Durgā, who presides over the material
energy.

samādhi

– (1) concentration of the mind; meditation or deep
trance, either on Paramātmā or upon Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes;
(2) Sama means “the same” and dhi means “intelligence.”
When the pure devotee takes samādhi, it means that upon
departing from this world he enters the same level,
position, and spiritual mood as the personal associates
of his worshipful Deity. He is serving in that realm
according to his own constitutional form (svarūpa), with
equal qualities, intelligence, and beauty as those
associates.

sampradāya

– a particular school of religious teaching; an
established doctrine transmitted from one teacher to
another; a line of disciplic succession.

sanātana-dharma

– man’s eternal constitutional position; the eternal
religion concerning the science of the soul.

saṅga

– (1) association; (2) a community of devotees.

sannyāsa

– the renounced order; the fourth āśrama, or stage of
life, in the Vedic social system called varṇāśrama-
dharma, which organizes society into four occupational
divisions (varṇas) and four stages of life (āśramas);
renounced ascetic life.

śānta, śānta-rasa

– the mood of tranquility and neutral admiration.

śāstra

– Vedic scripture.

sevā

– service, reverence, devotion to.

siddhānta

– conclusive truth; philosophical precept; authoritative
principle of the scriptures (śāstra).

śikṣā

– instructions received from a teacher; with reference
to bhakti, this specifically refers to instructions

                          270
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

received from a guru about bhakti.

śikṣā-guru

– the person from whom one receives instructions on how
to progress on the path of bhajana is known as śikṣā-
guru, or the instructing spiritual master.

sneha

– that stage in which prema, attaining a state of
excellence, intensifies one’s perception of the object
of love and melts the heart. When sneha is enkindled in
the heart, there is no quenching of the ever-new thirst
for seeing the beloved.

“Only that prema which melts the heart to an abundant
extent is called sneha. Due to the appearance of sneha,
even slight contact with the beloved gives rise to a
great profusion of tears. One never feels satiated in
beholding the beloved; and although Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
supremely competent, the devotee becomes apprehensive
that some harm may come to Him” (Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, Verse
Seven, Śrī Sanmodana-bhāṣya by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura).

śraddhā

– initial faith; faith in the statements of guru, sādhu,
and scriptures. Śraddhā is awakened when one has
accumulated devotional pious activities over many
births, or by the association and mercy of a
transcendental person who has dedicated his life to the
service of Lord Kṛṣṇa. It is the first stage in the
development of the creeper of devotion.

sukṛti

– piety, virtue; pious activity. Sukṛti is of two types:
eternal (nitya) and temporary (naimittika). The sukṛti
by which one obtains the association of elevated
devotees (sādhu-saṅga) and pure love of God (bhakti) is
nitya-sukṛti. It is eternal because it produces an
eternal fruit. The association of elevated devotees and
contact with acts of devotion are nitya-sukṛti as long
as they are performed accidentally or without pure faith
(śraddhā). When, after many lifetimes, this type of
sukṛti acquires strength, then faith (śraddhā) develops
toward sādhu-saṅga and one-pointed devotion to God
(ananya-bhakti).

The sukṛti by which one obtains material enjoyment and
impersonal liberation is naimittika-sukṛti. It is
temporary because it produces temporary results. Karma,
yoga, and jñāna are all naimittika-sukṛti. Naimittika-
sukṛti does not have the power to awaken faith in
transcendental objects, such as the Lord’s holy name,
mahā-prasādam, bhakti, and the Vaiṣṇavas.

svarūpa

– constitutional nature; the eternal constitutional
nature and identity of the self.


                          271
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

T

taṭasthā, taṭasthā-śakti

– literally: the taṭa (marginally) stha (situated) śakti
(energy); the marginal energy of the Supreme Lord Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in which the jīvas are situated. Although the
jīvas are part and parcel of the internal energy (cit-
śakti) of the Lord, they are subject to be overcome by
the Lord’s external energy, māyā, and be covered over.
Thus they are known as taṭasthā, or marginal.

tattva

– truth, reality, philosophical principle; the essence
or substance of anything.

tilaka

– clay markings worn on the forehead and other parts of
the body by Vaiṣṇavas, signifying their devotion to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu, and consecrating the body as the Lord’s
temple.

tulasī

– the sacred plant whose leaves and blossoms are used by
Vaiṣṇavas in the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; the wood is also
used for making chanting beads and neck beads; a partial
expansion of Vṛndā-devī.

U

uttama, uttama-adhikārī

– the topmost devotee, who is perfect in his or her
devotion unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

uttama-bhakti

– pure devotional service.

V

vaidhī, vaidhī-bhakti

– devotion prompted by the regulations of the
scriptures. When sādhana-bhakti is not inspired by
intense longing, but is instigated by the discipline of
scriptures, it is called vaidhī-bhakti.

Vaiṣṇava

– literally means one whose nature is ‘of Viṣṇu,’ in
other words, one in whose heart and mind only Viṣṇu or
Kṛṣṇa resides. Kṛṣṇa is the origin of all Viṣṇu forms.
Any devotee who worships Lord Kṛṣṇa or one of His
plenary manifestations (viṣṇu-tattva) can be called a
Vaiṣṇava.

vātsalya, vātsalya-rasa

– the mood of parental love and affection.


                             272
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017

vigraha

– a form of the Lord, usually referring to the Deity
form.

viṣṇu-tattva

– (1) primary expansions of the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
“A direct incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is called aṁśa or svāṁśa, whereas an incarnation
from aṁśa is called kalā. Among the kalās there are the
vibhinnāṁśa-jīvas, or living entities. These are counted
among the jīva-tattva. Those who come directly from Lord
Viṣṇu are called viṣṇu-tattva and are sometimes
designated as Mahāpuruṣa” * (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 5.15.6,
purport by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja);

“Viṣṇu-tattva is an unlimited expansion of different
transcendental forms of the Personality of Godhead, and
the supreme or original form of viṣṇu-tattva is Govinda,
or Lord Kṛṣṇa, the supreme cause of all causes” *
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.19, purport by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja);

(2) categorical knowledge of the unlimited expansions of
Viṣṇu.

vrata

– a vow undertaken for self-purification and spiritual
benefit.

vyāsa-pūjā

– the spiritual master is a representative of Śrīla
Vyāsadeva.

Y

yoga

– spiritual discipline to link one with the Supreme; to
stabilize the mind so that it is not disturbed by sense
objects.

yogamāyā

– the internal, spiritual potency of the Lord which
engages in arranging and enhancing the Lord’s pastimes;
the personification of that potency, namely Yogamāyā.

yuga

– one of the four ages are described in the Vedas: Kṛta
or Satya-yuga, Tretā-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga, and Kali-yuga.
These four yugas rotate, like calender months. The
duration of each yuga is different – they are said to be
respectively 1,728,000; 1,296,000; 864,000; and 432,000
years. The descending number represents a corresponding
physical and moral deterioration of mankind in each age.
The four yugas together comprise an aggregate of
4,320,000 years and constitute a mahā-yuga, or great
yuga.


                          273
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017




About Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


On the sacred and auspicious day of Maunī Amāvasyā,
1921, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
took his divine birth in a devout Vaiṣṇava family in
Tivārīpura, in the state of Bihar, India.

In February, 1946, he met his gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and his life of
complete and exemplary dedication to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism,
or the path of kṛṣṇa-bhakti in the line of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, began to manifest.

He accompanied his gurudeva on his extensive preaching
tours throughout India, actively assisting him in
propagating the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu for
the eternal benefit of the living entities in this
world. This included regularly hosting the thousands of
pilgrims attending the yearly circumambulation of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, the appear-ance place of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the appearance
place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

His gurudeva had instructed him to translate the
writings of prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas into Hindi, a
task he assiduously assumed throughout his entire life
and which resulted in the publication of nearly fifty
Hindi sacred texts. Later, most of these invaluable
masterpieces were translated into English and other
major languages of the world.

For many years, he traveled throughout India to spread
the message of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, and it was for this
end, also, that in 1996, he journeyed abroad. During the
next fourteen years, he circled the globe more than
thirty times. Whether he was in India or abroad, his
preaching always bore the distinctive characteristic of
boldly unmasking any misconception obscuring the
specific purposes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s advent,
in strict adherence to the desire of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda and in
perfect congruence with the conceptions of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s foremost follower.
Thus, in present times, in upholding the glorious tenets
of the Gauḍīya sampradāya, he performed the function of
a true ācārya.

At the age of ninety years, on December 29, 2010, he
concluded his pastimes in this world at Cakratīrtha, in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma. The following day, in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, Śrī Gaurasundara’s fully empowered
emissary, the very embodiment of His unique compassion,
was given samādhi. He will never cease to reside in his
divine instructions and in the hearts of those who are
devoted to him.




                          274
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017


English titles published by

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


Arcana-dīpikā • Beyond Nīrvāṇa • Bhagavad-gītā •
Bhajana-rahasya • Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindu-bindu • Bhakti-
rasāyana • Bhakti-tattva-viveka • Brahma-saṁhitā •
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Vol. 2.1) • Butter Thief • Caitanya
Mahāprabhu – The Original Form of Godhead • Camatkāra-
candrikā – A Moonbeam of Complete Astonishment •
Controlled by Love • Dāmodarāṣṭakam • Discerning the
True Sentiments of the Soul • Distinctive Contribution
of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī • Essence of All Advice • Essence of
Bhagavad-gītā • Eternal Function of the Soul • Fearless
Prince • Five Essential Essays • Gauḍīya Gītī-Guccha •
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism versus Sahajiyāism • Gaura-vāṇī
Pracāriṇe • Gift of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu • Gīta-
govinda • Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha • Gopī-gīta • Guru-
devatātmā • Happiness in a Fool’s Paradise • Harināma
Mahā-mantra • Harmony • Hidden Path of Devotion •
Impressions of Bhakti • Jaiva-dharma • Journey of the
Soul • Kṛṣṇa – the Lord of Sweetness • Letters From
America • Maharṣi Durvāsā and Śrī Durvāsā-āśrama •
Manaḥ-śikṣa • My Śikṣā-guru and Priya-bandhu •
Navadvīpa-dhāma Māhātmya • Navadvīpa-dhāma Parikramā •
Nectar of Govinda-līlā • Śrī Jagannātha Ratha-yātrā •
Our Eternal Nature • Our Gurus: One in Siddhanta, One at
Heart • Pinnacle of Devotion • Prabandhāvalī • Prema-
sampuṭa • Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā • Rāga-vartma-
candrikā • Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda • Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ
• Secrets of the Undiscovered Self • Secret Truths of
the Bhāgavatam • Shower of Love • Śikṣāṣṭaka • Śiva-
tattva • Ślokāmṛtam • Ślokāmṛtam-bindu • Soul of Book
Distribution • Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
– His Life and Teachings • Their Lasting Relation • To
Be Controlled by Love • True Conception of Guru-tattva •
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa • Upadeśāmṛta • Utkalikā-vallarī
• Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā • Veṇu-gīta • Śrī Vraja-
maṇḍala Parikramā • Walking with a Saint (2007, 2008,
2009, 2010) • Way of Love • Rays of the Harmonist
(periodical)




Gaudiya Vedanta Publications (GVP)


publishes, preserves and distributes the books of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. For more
information on the contents of these books, please
visit:




www.purebhakti.com

for news, updates, and free downloads of books, lectures
and bhajanas.

                          275
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017




www.purebhakti.tv

to watch and hear classes online, or get links and
scheduled updates for live webcasts




www.harikatha.com

to receive, by email, the lectures and videos of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja on his
world tours




If you are interested to know more about the books,
lectures, audio recordings, videos, teachings, and the
international society of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, please contact us at

connectwithussoon@gmail.com




or find a center in your area on

www.purebhakti.com/contact-us




YOUR COMMENTS AND FEEDBACK



We humbly invite our readers to submit any errors they
may find in this publication at

www.purebhakti.com/gvp




YOUR SUPPORT



If you would like to support GVP’s publication,
preservation and distribution of Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s books, you
can:

                             276
Walking-with-a-Saint-2010-_1Ed-2015_.txt       5/8/2017




sponsor the endowment fund of a printed book will assure
that when a book is first printed, there will always be
funding to keep that book in print. For more
information, please visit

www.mygvp.com




sponsor books for the GVP Book Distribution Program.
This program is a federally approved 501 c3 non-profit
religious organization that places Śrīla Gurudeva’s
books in stores, libraries, prisons, hospitals, and many
other locations. It makes the books available to all
people at no cost or low cost. For more information,
please visit

www.gvpbookdistribution.com




                          277
